<html><body><pre>
[Title 26 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - April 1, 1997 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]


          26


<R02>
          Internal Revenue

<R03>

[[Page i]]

          Part 1 (Secs. 1.0-1 TO 1.60)

          Revised as of April 1, 1997
          CONTAINING
          A CODIFICATION OF DOCUMENTS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY
          AND FUTURE EFFECT

          AS OF APRIL 1, 1997
          With Ancillaries
          Published by
          the Office of the Federal Register
          National Archives and Records
          Administration

          as a Special Edition of
          the Federal Register



[[Page   ii]]

                                      




                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                            WASHINGTON : 1997



               For sale by U.S. Government Printing Office
 Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328



[[Page iii]]



<R02>
                            Table of Contents

<R03>

                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................       v
  Title 26:
    Chapter I--Internal Revenue Service, Department of the 
        Treasury..............................................       5
  Findings Aids:
    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters..........................     523
    Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR........     539
    Table of OMB Control Numbers..............................     549
    List of CFR Sections Affected.............................     565

[[Page iv]]



      



                                                                                                                
                                  ----------------------------------------------------------                    
                                   Cite this Code:  CFR                                                         
                                                                                                                
                                   To cite the regulations in this volume use title, part                       
                                    and section number. Thus, 26 CFR 1.0-1 refers to title                      
                                    26, part 1, section 0-1.                                                    
                                                                                                                
                                  ----------------------------------------------------------                    
                                                                                                                


[[Page v]]

                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1
    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, April 1, 1997), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 1986, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, or 1973-1985, published in seven separate volumes. For 
the period beginning January 1, 1986, a ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Statutory 
Authorities and Agency Rules (Table I), and Acts Requiring Publication 
in the Federal Register (Table II). A list of CFR titles, chapters, and 
parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are 
also included in this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.
    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.
    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-523-5227 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC 20408.
SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call 202-512-1800, 
M-F, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or fax your order to 202-512-2233, 24 hours 
a day. For payment by check, write to the Superintendent of Documents, 
Attn: New Orders, P.O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. For GPO 
Customer Service call 202-512-1803.

                              Raymond A. Mosley,
                                    Director,
                          Office of the Federal Register.

April 1, 1997.



[[Page vii]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 26--Internal Revenue is composed of nineteen volumes. The 
contents of these volumes represent all current regulations issued by 
the Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury, as of April 1, 
1997. The first twelve volumes comprise part 1 (Subchapter A--Income 
Tax) and are arranged by sections as follows: Secs. 1.0-1-1.60; 
Secs. 1.61-1.169; Secs. 1.170-1.300; Secs. 1.301-1.400; Secs. 1.401-
1.440; Secs. 1.441-1.500; Secs. 1.501-1.640; Secs. 1.641-1.850; 
Secs. 1.851-1.907; Secs. 1.908-1.1000; Secs. 1.1001-1.1400 and 
Sec. 1.1401 to end. The thirteenth volume containing parts 2-29, 
includes the remainder of subchapter A and all of Subchapter B--Estate 
and Gift Taxes. The last six volumes contain parts 30-39 (Subchapter C--
Employment Taxes and Collection of Income Tax at Source); parts 40-49; 
parts 50-299 (Subchapter D--Miscellaneous Excise Taxes); parts 300-499 
(Subchapter F--Procedure and Administration); parts 500-599 (Subchapter 
G--Regulations under Tax Conventions); and part 600 to end (Subchapter 
H--Internal Revenue Practice).

    The OMB control numbers for Title 26 appear in Sec. 602.101 of this 
chapter. For the convenience of the user, Sec. 602.101 appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the volumes containing parts 1 to 599.

    For this volume, Carol Conroy was Chief Editor. The Code of Federal 
Regulations publication program is under the direction of Frances D. 
McDonald, assisted by Alomha S. Morris.

[[Page viii]]

<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>

 

[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                       TITLE 26--INTERNAL REVENUE


<R02>

            (This book contains Part 1, Secs. 1.0-1 to 1.60)

   -------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Part
chapter i--Internal Revenue Service, Department of the 
  Treasury..................................................           1

[[Page 3]]


<R02>
                  CHAPTER I--INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE,


<R03>


<R02>
                       DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY


<R03>

                      (Part 1, Secs. 1.0-1 to 1.60)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  Editorial Note: IRS published a document at 45 FR 6088, Jan. 25, 1980, 
deleting statutory sections from their regulations. In chapter I cross-
references to the deleted material have been changed to the 
corresponding sections of the IRS Code of 1954 or to the appropriate 
regulations sections. When either such change produced a redundancy, the 
cross-reference has been deleted. For further explanation, see 45 FR 
20795, March 31, 1980.

                        SUBCHAPTER A--INCOME TAX
Part                                                                Page
1               Income taxes................................           5

  Supplementary Publications: Internal Revenue Service Looseleaf 
Regulations System, Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Regulations, and Regulations 
Under Tax Conventions.

  Editorial Note: Treasury Decision 6091, 19 FR 5167, Aug. 17, 1954, 
provides in part as follows:

  Paragraph 1. All regulations (including all Treasury decisions) 
prescribed by, or under authority duly delegated by, the Secretary of 
the Treasury, or jointly by the Secretary and the Commissioner of 
Internal Revenue, or by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue with the 
approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, or jointly by the 
Commissioner of Internal Revenue and the Commissioner of Customs or the 
Commissioner of Narcotics with the approval of the Secretary of the 
Treasury, applicable under any provision of law in effect on the date of 
enactment of the Code, to the extent such provision of law is repealed 
by the Code, are hereby prescribed under and made applicable to the 
provisions of the Code corresponding to the provision of law so repealed 
insofar as any such regulation is not inconsistent with the Code. Such 
regulations shall become effective as regulations under the various 
provisions of the Code as of the dates the corresponding provisions of 
law are repealed by the Code, until superseded by regulations issued 
under the Code.
  Par. 2. With respect to any provision of the Code which depends for 
its application upon the promulgation of regulations or which is to be 
applied in such manner as may be prescribed by regulations, all 
instructions or rules in effect immediately prior to the enactment of 
the Code, to the extent such instructions or rules could be prescribed 
as regulations under authority of such provision of the Code, shall be 
applied as regulations under such provision insofar as such instructions 
or rules are not inconsistent with the Code. Such instructions or rules 
shall be applied as regulations under the applicable provision of the 
Code as of the date such provision takes effect.
  Par. 3. If any election made or other act done pursuant to any 
provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1939 or prior internal revenue 
laws would (except for the enactment of the Code) be effective for any 
period subsequent to such enactment, and if corresponding provisions are 
contained in the Code, such election or other act shall be given the 
same effect under the corresponding provisions of the Code to the extent 
not inconsistent therewith. The term ``act'' includes, but is not 
limited to, an allocation, identification, declaration, agreement, 
option, waiver, relinquishment, or renunciation.
  Par. 4. The limits of the various internal revenue districts have not 
been changed by the enactment of the Code. Furthermore, delegations of 
authority made pursuant to the provisions of Reorganization Plan No. 26 
of 1950 and Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1952 (as well as

[[Page 4]]

(4redelegations thereunder), including those governing the authority of 
the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, the Regional Commissioners of 
Internal Revenue, or the District Directors of Internal Revenue, are 
applicable to the provisions of the Code to the extent consistent 
therewith.

[[Page 5]]

(5

                        SUBCHAPTER A--INCOME TAX

                         PART 1--INCOME TAXES

Pt. 1
Sec.

                              1.0-1  Internal Revenue Code of 1954 and 
                              regulations.

                        Normal Taxes and Surtaxes

                     DETERMINATION OF TAX LIABILITY

                           Tax on Individuals

                              1.1-1  Income tax on individuals.
                              1.1-2  Limitation on tax.
                              1.1-3  Change in rates applicable to 
                              taxable year.
                              1.1(i)-1T  Questions and answers relating 
                              to the tax on unearned income certain 
                              minor children (temporary).
                              1.2-1  Tax in case of joint return of 
                              husband and wife or the return of a 
                              surviving spouse.
                              1.2-2  Definitions and special rules.
                              1.3-1  Application of optional tax.
                              1.4-1  Number of exemptions.
                              1.4-2  Elections.
                              1.4-3  Husband and wife filing separate 
                              returns.
                              1.4-4  Short taxable year caused by death.

                           Tax on Corporations

                              1.11-1  Tax on corporations.

                 Changes in Rates During a Taxable Year

                              1.21-1  Changes in rate during a taxable 
                              year.
                              1.23-1  Residential energy credit.
                              1.23-2  Definitions.
                              1.23-3  Special rules.
                              1.23-4  Performance and quality standards. 
                              [Reserved]
                              1.23-5  Certification procedures.
                              1.23-6  Procedure and criteria for 
                              additions to the approved list of energy-
                              conserving components or renewable energy 
                              sources.
                              1.25-1T  Credit for interest paid on 
                              certain home mortgages (temporary).
                              1.25-2T  Amount of credit (temporary).
                              1.25-3  Qualified mortgage credit 
                              certificate.
                              1.25-3T  Qualified mortgage credit 
                              certificate (temporary).
                              1.25-4T  Qualified mortgage credit 
                              certificate program (temporary).
                              1.25-5T  Limitation on aggregate amount of 
                              mortgage credit certificates (temporary).
                              1.25-6T  Form of qualified mortgage credit 
                              certificate (temporary).
                              1.25-7T  Public notice (temporary).
                              1.25-8T  Reporting requirements 
                              (temporary).
                              1.28-0  Credit for clinical testing 
                              expenses for certain drugs for rare 
                              diseases or conditions; table of contents.
                              1.28-1  Credit for clinical testing 
                              expenses for certain drugs for rare 
                              diseases or conditions.

                           Credits Against Tax

                            credits allowable

                              1.30-1  Definition of qualified electric 
                              vehicle and recapture of credit for 
                              qualified electric vehicle.

[[Page 6]]

                              (6
                              1.31-1  Credit for tax withheld on wages.
                              1.31-2  Credit for ``special refunds'' of 
                              employee social security tax.
                              1.32-2  Earned income credit for taxable 
                              years beginning after December 31, 1978.
                              1.34-1  Credit against tax and exclusion 
                              from gross income in case of dividends 
                              received by individuals.
                              1.34-2  Limitations on amount of credit.
                              1.34-3  Dividends to which the credit and 
                              exclusion apply.
                              1.34-4  Taxpayers not entitled to credit 
                              and exclusion.
                              1.34-5  Effective date; taxable years 
                              ending after July 31, 1954, subject to the 
                              Internal Revenue Code of 1939.
                              1.34-6  Dividends received after December 
                              31, 1964.
                              1.35-1  Partially tax-exempt interest 
                              received by individuals.
                              1.35-2  Taxpayers not entitled to credit.
                              1.37-1  General rules for the credit for 
                              the elderly.
                              1.37-2  Credit for individuals age 65 or 
                              over.
                              1.37-3  Credit for individuals under age 
                              65 who have public retirement system 
                              income.
                              1.38-1  Investment in certain depreciable 
                              property.
                              1.40-1  Questions and answers relating to 
                              the meaning of the term ``qualified 
                              mixture'' in section 40(b)(1).

             Taxable Years Beginning After December 31, 1986

                              1.41-0  Table of contents.
                              1.41-1  Introduction to regulations under 
                              section 41.
                              1.41-2  Qualified Research Expenses.
                              1.41-3  Base period research expense.
                              1.41-4  Qualified research for taxable 
                              years beginning after December 31, 1985. 
                              [Reserved]
                              1.41-5  Qualified research for taxable 
                              years beginning before January 1, 1986.
                              1.41-6  Basic research for taxable years 
                              beginning after December 31, 1985. 
                              [Reserved]
                              1.41-7  Basic research for taxable years 
                              beginning before January 1, 1986.
                              1.41-8  Aggregation of expenditures.
                              1.41-9  Special rules.

             Taxable Years Beginning Before January 1, 1987

                              1.41-0A Credit or deduction for political 
                              and newsletter fund contributions--scope 
                              and note.
                              1.41-1A  Same--definitions of certain 
                              items.
                              1.41-2A  Same--limitations and special 
                              rules.
                              1.41-3A  Same--unspent contributions.
                              1.41-4A  Same--procedure for electing a 
                              credit or deduction.
                              1.41-5A  Same--verifications.
                              1.41-6A  Same--taxation of certain 
                              organizations.
                              1.41-7A  Same--transitional rule for past 
                              contributions.
                              1.41-8A  Same--effective dates.
                              1.42-0  Table of contents.
                              1.42-1  [Reserved]
                              1.42-1T  Limitation on low-income housing 
                              credit allowed with respect to qualified 
                              low-income buildings receiving housing 
                              credit allocations from a State or local 
                              housing credit agency (temporary).
                              1.42-2  Waiver of requirement that an 
                              existing building eligible for the low-
                              income housing credit was last placed in 
                              service more than 10 years prior to 
                              acquisition by the taxpayer.
                              1.42-3  Treatment of buildings financed 
                              with proceeds from a loan under an 
                              Affordable Housing Program established 
                              pursuant to section 721 of the Financial 
                              Institutions Reform, Recovery, and 
                              Enforcement Act of 1989 (FIRREA).
                              1.42-4  Application of not-for-profit 
                              rules of section 183 to low-income housing 
                              credit activities.

[[Page 7]]

                              (7
                              1.42-5  Monitoring compliance with low-
                              income housing credit requirements.
                              1.42-6  Buildings qualifying for carryover 
                              allocations.
                              1.42-7  Substantially bond-financed 
                              buildings. [Reserved]
                              1.42-8  Election of appropriate percentage 
                              month.
                              1.42-9  For use by the general public.
                              1.42-10  Utility allowances.
                              1.42-11  Provision of services.
                              1.42-12  Effective dates and transitional 
                              rules.
                              1.42-13  Rules necessary and appropriate; 
                              housing credit agencies' correction of 
                              administrative errors and omissions.
                              1.42-14  Allocation rules for post-1989 
                              State housing credit ceiling amounts.
                              1.42-16T  Eligible basis reduced by 
                              federal grants (temporary).
                              1.42A-1  General tax credit for taxable 
                              years ending after December 31, 1975, and 
                              before January 1, 1979.
                              1.43-0  Table of contents.
                              1.43-1  The enhanced oil recovery credit--
                              general rules.
                              1.43-2  Qualified enhanced oil recovery 
                              project.
                              1.43-3  Certification.
                              1.43-4  Qualified enhanced oil recovery 
                              costs.
                              1.43-5  At-risk limitation.  [Reserved]
                              1.43-6  Election out of section 43.
                              1.43-7  Effective date of regulations.
                              1.44-1  Allowance of credit for purchase 
                              of new principal residence after March 12, 
                              1975, and before January 1, 1977.
                              1.44-2  Property to which credit for 
                              purchase of new principal residence 
                              applies.
                              1.44-3  Certificate by seller.
                              1.44-4  Recapture for certain 
                              dispositions.
                              1.44-5  Definitions.
                              1.44A-1  Expenses for household and 
                              dependent care services necessary for 
                              gainful employment.
                              1.44A-2  Limitations on amount creditable.
                              1.44A-3  Special rules applicable to 
                              married individuals.
                              1.44A-4  Other special rules relating to 
                              employment-related expenses.
                              1.44B-1  Credit for employment of certain 
                              new employees.

    rules for computing credit for investment in certain depreciable 
                                property

                              1.46-1  Determination of amount.
                              1.46-2  Carryback and carryover of unused 
                              credit.
                              1.46-3  Qualified investment.
                              1.46-4  Limitations with respect to 
                              certain persons.
                              1.46-5  Qualified progress expenditures.
                              1.46-6  Limitation in case of certain 
                              regulated companies.
                              1.46-7  Statutory provisions; plan 
                              requirements for taxpayers electing 
                              additional investment credit, etc.
                              1.46-8  Requirements for taxpayers 
                              electing additional one-percent investment 
                              credit (TRASOP'S).
                              1.46-9  Requirements for taxpayers 
                              electing an extra one-half percent 
                              additional investment credit.
                              1.46-10  [Reserved]
                              1.46-11  Commuter highway vehicles.
                              1.47-1  Recomputation of credit allowed by 
                              section 38.
                              1.47-2  ``Disposition'' and ``cessation''.
                              1.47-3  Exceptions to the application of 
                              Sec. 1.47-1.
                              1.47-4  Electing small business 
                              corporation.
                              1.47-5  Estates and trusts.
                              1.47-6  Partnerships.
                              1.48-1  Definition of section 38 property.
                              1.48-2  New section 38 property.
                              1.48-3  Used section 38 property.

[[Page 8]]

                              (8
                              1.48-4  Election of lessor of new section 
                              38 property to treat lessee as purchaser.
                              1.48-5  Electing small business 
                              corporations.
                              1.48-6  Estates and trusts.
                              1.48-9  Definition of energy property.
                              1.48-10  Single purpose agricultural or 
                              horticultural structures.
                              1.48-11  Qualified rehabilitated building; 
                              expenditures incurred before January 1, 
                              1982.
                              1.48-12  Qualified rehabilitated building; 
                              expenditures incurred after December 31, 
                              1981.
                              1.48-12T  Tax-exempt entity leasing 
                              (temporary).
                              1.50-1  Restoration of credit.

   rules for computing credit for expenses of work incentive programs

                              1.50A-1  Determination of amount.
                              1.50A-2  Carryback and carryover of unused 
                              credit.
                              1.50A-3  Recomputation of credit allowed 
                              by section 40.
                              1.50A-4  Exceptions to the application of 
                              Sec. 1.50A-3.
                              1.50A-5  Electing small business 
                              corporations.
                              1.50A-6  Estates and trusts.
                              1.50A-7  Partnerships.
                              1.50B-1  Definitions of WIN expenses and 
                              WIN employees.
                              1.50B-2  Electing small business 
                              corporations.
                              1.50B-3  Estates and trusts.
                              1.50B-4  Partnerships.
                              1.50B-5  Limitations with respect to 
                              certain persons.
                              1.51-1  Amount of credit.

                              Tax Surcharge

                              1.52-1  Trades or businesses that are 
                              under common control.
                              1.52-2  Adjustments for acquisitions and 
                              dispositions.
                              1.52-3  Limitations with respect to 
                              certain persons.
                              1.53-1  Limitation based on amount of tax.
                              1.53-2  Carryback and carryover of unused 
                              credit.
                              1.53-3  Separate rule for pass-through of 
                              jobs credit.
                              1.55-1  Alternative minimum taxable 
                              income.
                              1.56-0  Table of contents to Sec. 1.56-1, 
                              adjustment for book income of 
                              corporations.
                              1.56-1  Adjustment for the book income of 
                              corporations.

Regulations Applicable to Taxable Years Beginning in 1969 and Ending in 
                                  1970

                              1.56A-1  Imposition of tax.
                              1.56A-2  Deferral of tax liability in case 
                              of certain net operating losses.
                              1.56A-3  Effective date.
                              1.56A-4  Certain taxpayers.
                              1.56A-5  Tax carryovers.
                              1.56(g)-0  Table of contents.
                              1.56(g)-1  Adjusted current earnings.

                       Tax Preference Regulations

                              1.57-0  Scope.
                              1.57-1  Items of tax preference defined.
                              1.57-2--1.57-3  [Reserved]
                              1.57-4  Limitation on amounts treated as 
                              items of tax preference for taxable years 
                              beginning before January 1, 1976.
                              1.57-5  Records to be kept.
                              1.58-1  Minimum tax exemption.
                              1.58-2  General rules for conduit 
                              entities; partnerships and partners.
                              1.58-3  Estates and trusts.

[[Page 9]]

                              (9
                              1.58-3T  Treatment of non-alternative tax 
                              itemized deductions by trusts and estates 
                              and their beneficiaries in taxable years 
                              beginning after December 31, 1982 
                              (temporary).
                              1.58-4  Electing small business 
                              corporations.
                              1.58-5  Common trust funds.
                              1.58-6  Regulated investment companies; 
                              real estate investment trusts.
                              1.58-7  Tax preferences attributable to 
                              foreign sources; preferences other than 
                              capital gains and stock options.
                              1.58-8  Capital gains and stock options.
                              1.58-9  Application of the tax benefit 
                              rule to the minimum tax for taxable years 
                              beginning prior to 1987.
                              1.59--1.60  [Reserved]

  Authority: 26 U.S.C 7805, unless otherwise noted.

Sections 1.23-1--1.23-6 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 23;
Section 1.25-1T also issued under 26 U.S.C. 25.
Section 1.25-2T also issued under 26 U.S.C. 25.
Section 1.25-3 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 25.
Section 1.25-3T also issued under 26 U.S.C. 25.
Section 1.25-4T also issued under 26 U.S.C. 25.
Section 1.25-5T also issued under 26 U.S.C. 25.
Section 1.25-6T also issued under 26 U.S.C. 25.
Section 1.25-7T also issued under 26 U.S.C. 25.
Section 1.25-8T also issued under 26 U.S.C. 25.
Section 1.28-0 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 28(d)(5);
Section 1.28-1 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 28(d)(5);
Section 1.30-1 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 30(d)(2).
Sections 1.42-1T and 1.42-2T also issued under 26 U.S.C. 42(m);
Section 1.42-2 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 42(m);
Section 1.42-3 is also issued under 26 U.S.C. 42(n);
Section 1.42-4 is also issued under 26 U.S.C. 42(n);
Section 1.42-5 is also issued under 26 U.S.C. 42(n);
Sections 1.42-6, 1.42-8, 1.42-9, 1.42-10, 1.42-11, and 1.42-12, also 
  issued under 26 U.S.C. 42(n);
Section 1.42-13 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 42(n);
Section 1.42-14 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 42(n);
Section 1.42-16T also issued under 26 U.S.C. 42(n);
Sections 1.43-0 through 1.43-7 also issued under section 26 U.S.C. 43;
Section 1.46-5 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 46(d)(6) and 26 U.S.C. 
  47(a)(3)(C);
Section 1.46-6 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 46(f)(7);
Section 1.47-1 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 47(a);
Section 1.48-9 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 38(b) (as in effect before 
  the amendments made by subtitle F of the Tax Reform Act of 1984);
Sections 1.50A--1.50B also issued under 85 Stat. 553 (26 U.S.C. 40(b));
Section 1.52-1 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 52(b);
Section 1.56-1 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 56(f)(2)(H);
Section 1.56(g)-1 also issued under section 7611(g)(3) of the Omnibus 
  Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989 (Pub. L. 101-239, 103 Stat. 2373); 
  and
Section 1.58-9 is also issued under 26 U.S.C. 58(h).

  Source: T.D. 6500, 25 FR 11402, Nov. 26, 1960; 25 FR 14021, Dec. 21, 
1960, unless otherwise noted.

[[Page 11]]


<R05>
Sec. 1.0-1   Internal Revenue Code of 1954 and regulations.

    (a) Enactment of law. The Internal Revenue Code of 1954 which became 
law upon enactment of Public Law 591, 83d Congress, approved August 16, 
1954, provides in part as follows:

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled, That
    (a) Citation. (1) The provisions of this Act set forth under the 
heading ``Internal Revenue Title'' may be cited as the ``Internal 
Revenue Code of 1954''
    (2) The Internal Revenue Code enacted on February 10, 1939, as 
amended, may be cited as the ``Internal Revenue Code of 1939''.
    (b) Publication. This Act shall be published as volume 68A of the 
United States Statutes at Large, with a comprehensive table of contents 
and an appendix; but without an index or marginal references. The date 
of enactment, bill number, public law number, and chapter number, shall 
be printed as a headnote.
    (c) Cross reference. For saving provisions, effective date 
provisions, and other related provisions, see chapter 80 (sec. 7801 and 
following) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954.
    (d) Enactment of Internal Revenue Title into law. The Internal 
Revenue Title referred to in subsection (a)(1) is as follows:

                                * * * * *

In general, the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 are 
applicable with respect to taxable years beginning after December 31, 
1953, and ending after August 16, 1954. Certain provisions of that Code 
are deemed to be included in the Internal Revenue Code of 1939. See 
section 7851.
    (b) Scope of regulations. The regulations in this part deal with (1) 
the income taxes imposed under subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1954, and (2) certain administrative provisions contained in subtitle 
F of such Code relating to such taxes. In general, the applicability of 
such regulations is commensurate with the applicability of the 
respective provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 except that 
with respect to the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 
which are deemed to be included in the Internal Revenue Code of 1939, 
the regulations relating to such provisions are applicable to certain 
fiscal years and short taxable years which are subject to the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1939. Those provisions of the regulations which are 
applicable to taxable years subject to the Internal Revenue Code of 1939 
and the specific taxable years to which such provisions are so 
applicable are identified in each instance. The regulations in 26 CFR 
(1939) part 39 (Regulations 118) are continued in effect until 
superseded by the regulations in this part. See Treasury Decision 6091, 
approved August 16, 1954 (19 FR 5167, C.B. 1954-2, 47).


<R03>
Normal Taxes and Surtaxes--Table of Contents

<R05>


                     DETERMINATION OF TAX LIABILITY

                           Tax on Individuals


<R05>
Sec. 1.1-1  Income tax on individuals.

    (a) General rule. (1) Section 1 of the Code imposes an income tax on 
the income of every individual who is a citizen or resident of the 
United States and, to the extent provided by section 871(b) or 877(b), 
on the income of a nonresident alien individual. For optional tax in the 
case of taxpayers with adjusted gross income of less than $10,000 (less 
than $5,000 for taxable years beginning before January 1, 1970) see 
section 3. The tax imposed is upon taxable income (determined by 
subtracting the allowable deductions from gross income). The tax is 
determined in accordance with the table contained in section 1. See 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph for reference guides to the 
appropriate table for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 
1964, and before January 1, 1965, taxable years beginning after December 
31, 1964, and before January 1, 1971, and taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1970. In certain cases credits are allowed against the 
amount of the tax. See part IV (section 31 and following), subchapter A, 
chapter 1 of the Code. In general, the tax is payable upon the basis of 
returns rendered by persons liable therefor (subchapter A (sections 6001 
and following), chapter 61 of the Code) or at the source of the income 
by withholding. For the computation of tax in the case of a joint return 
of a husband and wife, or a return of a surviving spouse, for taxable 
years beginning before January 1, 1971, see section 2. The computation 
of tax in such a

[[Page 12]]

case for taxable years beginning after December 31, 1970, is determined 
in accordance with the table contained in section 1(a) as amended by the 
Tax Reform Act of 1969. For other rates of tax on individuals, see 
section 5(a). For the imposition of an additional tax for the calendar 
years 1968, 1969, and 1970, see section 51(a).
    (2)(i) For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 1964, the 
tax imposed upon a single individual, a head of a household, a married 
individual filing a separate return, and estates and trusts is the tax 
imposed by section 1 determined in accordance with the appropriate table 
contained in the following subsection of section 1:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                         Taxable years beginning
                                                                                           after Dec. 31, 1970  
                                       Taxable years beginning  Taxable years beginning    (references in this  
                                               in 1964           after 1964 but before    column are to the Code
                                                                          1971            as amended by the Tax 
                                                                                           Reform Act of 1969)  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Single individual....................  Sec. 1(a)(1)...........  Sec. 1(a)(2)...........  Sec. 1(c).             
Head of a household..................  Sec. 1(b)(1)...........  Sec. 1(b)(2)...........  Sec. 1(b).             
Married individual filing a separate   Sec. 1(a)(1)...........  Sec. 1(a)(2)...........  Sec. 1(d).             
 return.                                                                                                        
Estates and trusts...................  Sec. 1(a)(1)...........  Sec. 1(a)(2)...........  Sec. 1(d).             
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) For taxable years beginning after December 31, 1970, the tax 
imposed by section 1(d), as amended by the Tax Reform Act of 1969, shall 
apply to the income effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or 
business in the United States by a married alien individual who is a 
nonresident of the United States for all or part of the taxable year or 
by a foreign estate or trust. For such years the tax imposed by section 
1(c), as amended by such Act, shall apply to the income effectively 
connected with the conduct of a trade or business in the United States 
by an unmarried alien individual (other than a surviving spouse) who is 
a nonresident of the United States for all or part of the taxable year. 
See paragraph (b)(2) of Sec. 1.871-8.
    (3) The income tax imposed by section 1 upon any amount of taxable 
income is computed by adding to the income tax for the bracket in which 
that amount falls in the appropriate table in section 1 the income tax 
upon the excess of that amount over the bottom of the bracket at the 
rate indicated in such table.
    (4) The provisions of section 1 of the Code, as amended by the Tax 
Reform Act of 1969, and of this paragraph may be illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. A, an unmarried individual, had taxable income for the 
calendar year 1964 of $15,750. Accordingly, the tax upon such taxable 
income would be $4,507.50, computed as follows from the table in section 
1(a)(1):

Tax on $14,000 (from table).................................   $3,790.00
Tax on $1,750 (at 41 percent as determined from the table)..      717.50
                                                             -----------
    Total tax on $15,750....................................    4,507.50
                                                                        

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example (1), except the 
figures are for the calendar year 1965. The tax upon such taxable income 
would be $4,232.50, computed as follows from the table in section 
1(a)(2):

Tax on $14,000 (from table).................................   $3,550.00
Tax on $1,750 (at 39 percent as determined from the table)..      682.50
                                                             -----------
    Total tax on $15,750....................................    4,232.50
                                                                        

    Example 3. Assume the same facts as in example (1), except the 
figures are for the calendar year 1971. The tax upon such taxable income 
would be $3,752.50, computed as follows from the table in section 1(c), 
as amended:

Tax on $14,000 (from table).................................   $3,210.00
Tax on $1,750 (at 31 percent as determined from the table)..      542.50
                                                             -----------
    Total tax on $15,750....................................    3,752.50
                                                                        

    (b) Citizens or residents of the United States liable to tax. In 
general, all citizens of the United States, wherever resident, and all 
resident alien individuals are liable to the income taxes imposed by the 
Code whether the income is received from sources within or without the 
United States. Pursuant to section 876, a nonresident alien individual 
who is a bona fide resident of Puerto Rico during the entire taxable 
year is, except as provided in section 933 with respect to Puerto Rican 
source income, subject to taxation in the same manner as a resident 
alien individual.

[[Page 13]]

As to tax on nonresident alien individuals, see sections 871 and 877.
    (c) Who is a citizen. Every person born or naturalized in the United 
States and subject to its jurisdiction is a citizen. For other rules 
governing the acquisition of citizenship, see chapters 1 and 2 of title 
III of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1401-1459). For 
rules governing loss of citizenship, see sections 349 to 357, inclusive, 
of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1481-1489), Schneider v. Rusk, (1964) 377 U.S. 
163, and Rev. Rul. 70-506, C.B. 1970-2, 1. For rules pertaining to 
persons who are nationals but not citizens at birth, e.g., a person born 
in American Samoa, see section 308 of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1408). For 
special rules applicable to certain expatriates who have lost 
citizenship with a principal purpose of avoiding certain taxes, see 
section 877. A foreigner who has filed his declaration of intention of 
becoming a citizen but who has not yet been admitted to citizenship by a 
final order of a naturalization court is an alien.

[T.D. 6500, 25 FR 11402, Nov. 26, 1960, as amended by T.D. 7332, 39 FR 
44216, Dec. 23, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 1.1-2  Limitation on tax.

    (a) Taxable years ending before January 1, 1971. For taxable years 
ending before January 1, 1971, the tax imposed by section 1 (whether by 
subsection (a) or subsection (b) thereof) shall not exceed 87 percent of 
the taxable income for the taxable year. For purposes of determining 
this limitation the tax under section 1 (a) or (b) and the tax at the 
87-percent rate shall each be computed before the allowance of any 
credits against the tax. Where the alternative tax on capital gains is 
imposed under section 1201(b), the 87-percent limitation shall apply 
only to the partial tax computed on the taxable income reduced by 50 
percent of the excess of net long-term capital gains over net short-term 
capital losses. Where, for purposes of computations under the income 
averaging provisions, section 1201(b) is treated as imposing the 
alternative tax on capital gains computed under section 1304(e)(2), the 
87-percent limitation shall apply only to the tax equal to the tax 
imposed by section 1, reduced by the amount of the tax imposed by 
section 1 which is attributable to capital gain net income for the 
computation year.
    (b) Taxable years beginning after December 31, 1970. If, for any 
taxable year beginning after December 31, 1970, an individual has earned 
taxable income which exceeds his taxable income as defined by section 
1348, the tax imposed by section 1, as amended by the Tax Reform Act of 
1969, shall not exceed the sum computed under the provisions of section 
1348. For imposition of minimum tax for tax preferences see sections 56 
through 58.

[T.D. 7117, 36 FR 9397, May 25, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 1.1-3  Change in rates applicable to taxable year.

    For computation of the tax for a taxable year during which a change 
in the tax rates occurs, see section 21 and the regulations thereunder.

[T.D. 6500, 25 FR 11402, Nov. 26, 1960. Redesignated by T.D. 7117, 36 FR 
9397, May 25, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 1.1(i)-1T  Questions and answers relating to the tax on unearned income certain minor children (Temporary).

                               In General

    Q-1. To whom does section 1(i) apply?
    A-1. Section 1(i) applies to any child who is under 14 years of age 
at the close of the taxable year, who has at least one living parent at 
the close of the taxable year, and who recognizes over $1,000 of 
unearned income during the taxable year.
    Q-2. What is the effective date of section 1(i)?
    A-2. Section 1(i) applies to taxable years of the child beginning 
after December 31, 1986.

                           Computation of Tax

    Q-3. What is the amount of tax imposed by section 1 on a child to 
whom section 1(i) applies?
    A-3. In the case of a child to whom section 1(i) applies, the amount 
of tax imposed by section 1 equals the greater of (A) the tax imposed by 
section 1 without regard to section 1(i) or (B) the sum of the tax that 
would be imposed by section 1 if the child's taxable income was reduced 
by the child's net

[[Page 14]]

unearned income, plus the child's share of the allocable parental tax.
    Q-4. What is the allocable parental tax?
    A-4. The allocable parental tax is the excess of (A) the tax that 
would be imposed by section 1 on the sum of the parent's taxable income 
plus the net unearned income of all children of such parent to whom 
section 1(i) applies, over (B) the tax imposed by section 1 on the 
parent's taxable income. Thus, the allocable parental tax is not 
computed with reference to unearned income of a child over 14 or a child 
under 14 with less than $1,000 of unearned income. See A-10 through A-13 
for rules regarding the determination of the parent(s) whose taxable 
income is taken into account under section 1(i). See A-14 for rules 
regarding the determination of children of the parent whose net unearned 
income is taken into account under section 1(i).
    Q-5. What is the child's share of the allocable parental tax?
    A-5. The child's share of the allocable parental tax is an amount 
that bears the same ratio to the total allocable parental tax as the 
child's net unearned income bears to the total net unearned income of 
all children of such parent to whom section 1(i) applies. See A-14.

    Example 1. During 1988, D, and a 12 year old, receives $5,000 of 
unearned income and no earned income. D has no itemized deductions and 
is not eligible for a personal exemption. D's parents have two other 
children, E, a 15 year old, and F, a 10 year old. E has $10,000 of 
unearned income and F has $100 of unearned income. D's parents file a 
joint return for 1988 and report taxable income of $70,000. Neither D's 
nor his parent's taxable income is attributable to net capital gain. D's 
tax liability for 1988, determined without regard to section 1(i), is 
$675 on $4,500 of taxable income ($5,000 less $500 allowable standard 
deduction). In applying section 1(i), D's tax would be equal to the sum 
of (A) the tax that would be imposed on D's taxable income if it were 
reduced by any net unearned income, plus (B) D's share of the allocable 
parental tax. Only D's unearned income is taken into account in 
determining the allocable parental tax because E is over 14 and F has 
less than $1,000 of unearned income. See A-4. D's net unearned income is 
$4,000 ($4,500 taxable unearned income less $500). The tax imposed on 
D's taxable income as reduced by D's net unearned income is $75 
($500 x 15%). The allocable parental tax is $1,225, the excess of 
$16,957.50 (the tax on $74,000, the parent's taxable income plus D's net 
unearned income) over $15,732.50 (the tax on $70,000, the parent's 
taxable income). See A-4. Thus, D's tax under section 1(i)(1)(B) is 
$1,300 ($1,225+$75). Since this amount is greater than the amount of D's 
tax liability as determined without regard to section 1(i), the amount 
of tax imposed on D for 1988 is $1,300. See A-3.

    Example 2. H and W have 3 children, A, B, and C, who are all under 
14 years of age. For the taxable year 1988, H and W file a joint return 
and report taxable income of $129,750. The tax imposed by section 1 on H 
and W is $35,355. A has $5,000 of net unearned income and B and C each 
have $2,500 of net unearned income during 1988. The allocable parental 
tax imposed on A, B, and C's combined net unearned income of $10,000 is 
$3,300. This tax is the excess of $38,655, which is the tax imposed by 
section 1 on $139,750 ($129,750+10,000), over $35,355 (the tax imposed 
by section 1 on H and W's taxable income of $129,750). See A-4. Each 
child's share of the allocable parental tax is an amount that bears the 
same ratio to the total allocable parental tax as the child's net 
unearned income bears to the total net unearned income of A, B, and C. 
Thus, A's share of the allocable parental tax is $1,650 
(5,000<divide>10,000 x 3,300) and B and C's share of the tax is $825 
(2,500<divide>10,000 x 3,300) each. See A-5.

                    Definition of Net Unearned Income

    Q-6. What is net unearned income?
    A-6. Net unearned income is the excess of the portion of adjusted 
gross income for the taxable year that is not ``earned income'' as 
defined in section 911(d)(2) (income that is not attributable to wages, 
salaries, or other amounts received as compensation for personal 
services), over the sum of the standard deduction amount provided for 
under section 63 (c)(5)(A) ($500 for 1987 and 1988; adjusted for 
inflation thereafter), plus the greater of (A) $500 (adjusted for 
inflation after 1988) or (B) the amount of allowable itemized deductions 
that are directly connected with the production of unearned income. A 
child's net unearned income for any taxable year shall not exceed the 
child's taxable income for such year.

    Example 3. A is a child who is under 14 years of age at the end of 
the taxable year 1987. Both of A's parents are alive at this time. 
During 1987, A receives $3,000 of interest from a bank savings account 
and earns $1,000 from a paper route and performing odd jobs. A has no 
itemized deductions for 1987. A's standard deduction is $1,000, which is 
an

[[Page 15]]

amount equal to A's earned income for 1987. Of this amount, $500 is 
applied against A's unearned income and the remaining $500 is applied 
against A's earned income. Thus, A's $500 of taxable earned income 
($1,000 less the remaining $500 of the standard deduction) is taxed 
without regard to section 1 (i); A has $2,500 of taxable unearned income 
($3,000 gross unearned income less $500 of the standard deduction) of 
which $500 is taxed without regard to section 1(i). The remaining $2,000 
of taxable unearned income is A's net unearned income and is taxed under 
section 1(i).

    Example 4. B is a child who is subject to tax under section 1(i). B 
has $400 of earned income and $2,000 of unearned income. B has itemized 
deductions of $800 (net of the 2 percent of adjusted gross income (AGI) 
floor on miscellaneous itemized deductions under section 67) of which 
$200 are directly connected with the production of unearned income. The 
amount of itemized deductions that B may apply against unearned income 
is equal to the greater of $500 or the deductions directly connected 
with the production of unearned income. See A-6. Thus, $500 of B's 
itemized deductions are applied against the $2,000 of unearned income 
and the remaining $300 of deductions are applied against earned income. 
As a result, B has taxable earned income of $100 and taxable unearned 
income of $1,500. Of these amounts, all of the earned income and $500 of 
the unearned income are taxed without regard to section 1(i). The 
remaining $1,000 of unearned income is net unearned income and is taxed 
under section 1(i).

            Unearned Income Subject to tax Under Section 1(i)

    Q-7. Will a child be subject to tax under section 1(i) on net 
unearned income (as defined in section 1(i) (4) and A-6 of this section) 
that is attributable to property transferred to the child prior to 1987?
    A-7. Yes. The tax imposed by section 1(i) on a child's net unearned 
income applies to any net unearned income of the child for taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1986, regardless of when the underlying 
assets were transferred to the child.
    Q-8. Will a child be subject to tax under section 1(i) on net 
unearned income that is attributable to gifts from persons other than 
the child's parents or attributable to assets resulting from the child's 
earned income?
    A-8. Yes. The tax imposed by section 1(i) applies to all net 
unearned income of the child, regardless of the source of the assets 
that produced such income. Thus, the rules of section 1(i) apply to 
income attributable to gifts not only from the parents but also from any 
other source, such as the child's grandparents. Section 1(i) also 
applies to unearned income derived with respect to assets resulting from 
earned income of the child, such as interest earned on bank deposits.

    Example 5. A is a child who is under 14 years of age at the end of 
the taxable year beginning on January 1, 1987. Both of A's parents are 
alive at the end of the taxable year. During 1987, A receives $2,000 in 
interest from his bank account and $1,500 from a paper route. Some of 
the interest earned by A from the bank account is attributable to A's 
paper route earnings that were deposited in the account. The balance of 
the account is attributable to cash gifts from A's parents and 
grandparents and interest earned prior to 1987. Some cash gifts were 
received by A prior to 1987. A has no itemized deductions and is 
eligible to be claimed as a dependent on his parent's return. Therefore, 
for the taxable year 1987, A's standard deduction is $1,500, the amount 
of A's earned income. Of this standard deduction amount, $500 is 
allocated against unearned income and $1,000 is allocated against earned 
income. A's taxable unearned income is $1,500 of which $500 is taxed 
without regard to section 1(i). The remaining taxable unearned income of 
$1,000 is net unearned income and is taxed under section 1(i). The fact 
that some of A's unearned income is attributable to interest on 
principal created by earned income and gifts from persons other than A's 
parents or that some of the unearned income is attributable to property 
transferred to A prior to 1987, will not affect the tax treatment of 
this income under section 1(i). See A-8.

    Q-9. For purposes of section 1(i), does income which is not earned 
income (as defined in section 911(d)(2)) include social security 
benefits or pension benefits that are paid to the child?
    A-9. Yes. For purposes of section 1(i), earned income (as defined in 
section 911(d)(2)) does not include any social security or pension 
benefits paid to the child. Thus, such amounts are included in unearned 
income to the extent they are includible in the child's gross income.

              Determination of the Parent's Taxable Income

    Q-10. If a child's parents file a joint return, what is the taxable 
income that must be taken into account by the child in determining tax 
liability under section 1(i)?

[[Page 16]]

    A-10. In the case of parents who file a joint return, the parental 
taxable income to be taken into account in determining the tax liability 
of a child is the total taxable income shown on the joint return.
    Q-11. If a child's parents are married and file separate tax 
returns, which parent's taxable income must be taken into account by the 
child in determining tax liability under section 1(i)?
    A-11. For purposes of determining the tax liability of a child under 
section 1(i), where such child's parents are married and file separate 
tax returns, the parent whose taxable income is the greater of the two 
for the taxable year shall be taken into account.
    Q-12. If the parents of a child are divorced, legally separated, or 
treated as not married under section 7703(b), which parent's taxable 
income is taken into account in computing the child's tax liability?
    A-12. If the child's parents are divorced, legally separated, or 
treated as not married under section 7703(b), the taxable income of the 
custodial parent (within the meaning of section 152(e)) of the child is 
taken into account under section 1(i) in determining the child's tax 
liability.
    Q-13. If a parent whose taxable income must be taken into account in 
determining a child's tax liability under section 1(i) files a joint 
return with a spouse who is not a parent of the child, what taxable 
income must the child take into account?
    A-13. The amount of a parent's taxable income that a child must take 
into account for purposes of section 1(i) where the parent files a joint 
return with a spouse who is not a parent of the child is the total 
taxable income shown on such joint return.

                         Children of the Parent

    Q-14. In determining a child's share of the allocable parental tax, 
is the net unearned income of legally adopted children, children related 
to such child by half-blood, or children from a prior marriage of the 
spouse of such child's parent taken into account in addition to the 
natural children of such child's parent?
    A-14. Yes. In determining a child's share of the allocable parental 
tax, the net unearned income of all children subject to tax under 
section 1(i) and who use the same parent's taxable income as such child 
to determine their tax liability under section 1(i) must be taken into 
account. Such children are taken into account regardless of whether they 
are adopted by the parent, related to such child by half-blood, or are 
children from a prior marriage of the spouse of such child's parent.

        Rules Regarding Income From a Trust or Similar Instrument

    Q-15. Will the unearned income of a child who is subject to section 
1(i) that is attributable to gifts given to the child under the Uniform 
Gift to Minors Act (UGMA) be subject to tax under section 1(i)?
    A-15. Yes. A gift under the UGMA vests legal title to the property 
in the child although an adult custodian is given certain rights to deal 
with the property until the child attains majority. Any unearned income 
attributable to such a gift is the child's unearned income and is 
subject to tax under section 1(i), whether distributed to the child or 
not.
    Q-16. Will a child who is a beneficiary of a trust be required to 
take into account the income of a trust in determining the child's tax 
liability under section 1(i)?
    A-16. The income of a trust must be taken into account for purposes 
of determining the tax liability of a beneficiary who is subject to 
section 1(i) only to the extent it is included in the child's gross 
income for the taxable year under sections 652(a) or 662(a). Thus, 
income from a trust for the fiscal taxable year of a trust ending during 
1987, that is included in the gross income of a child who is subject to 
section 1(i) and who has a calendar taxable year, will be subject to tax 
under section 1(i) for the child's 1987 taxable year.

                         Subsequent Adjustments

    Q-17. What effect will a subsequent adjustment to a parent's taxable 
income have on the child's tax liability if such parent's taxable income 
was used to determine the child's tax liability under section 1(i) for 
the same taxable year?
    A-17. If the parent's taxable income is adjusted and if, for the 
same taxable year as the adjustment, the child paid tax determined under 
section 1(i) with

[[Page 17]]

reference to that parent's taxable income, then the child's tax 
liability under section 1(i) must be recomputed using the parent's 
taxable income as adjusted.
    Q-18. In the case where more than one child who is subject to 
section 1(i) uses the same parent's taxable income to determine their 
allocable parental tax, what effect will a subsequent adjustment to the 
net unearned income of one child have on the other child's share of the 
allocable parental tax?
    A-18. If, for the same taxable year, more than one child uses the 
same parent's taxable income to determine their share of the allocable 
parental tax and a subsequent adjustment is made to one or more of such 
children's net unearned income, each child's share of the allocable 
parental tax must be recomputed using the combined net unearned income 
of all such children as adjusted.
    Q-19. If a recomputation of a child's tax under section 1(i), as a 
result of an adjustment to the taxable income of the child's parents or 
another child's net unearned income, results in additional tax being 
imposed by section 1(i) on the child, is the child subject to interest 
and penalties on such additional tax?
    A-19. Any additional tax resulting from an adjustment to the taxable 
income of the child's parents or the net unearned income of another 
child shall be treated as an underpayment of tax and interest shall be 
imposed on such underpayment as provided in section 6601. However, the 
child shall not be liable for any penalties on the underpayment 
resulting from additional tax being imposed under section 1(i) due to 
such an adjustment.

    Example 6. D and M are the parents of C, a child under the age of 
14. D and M file a joint return for 1988 and report taxable income of 
$69,900. C has unearned income of $3,000 and no itemized deductions for 
1988. C properly reports a total tax liability of $635 for 1988. This 
amount is the sum of the allocable parental tax of $560 on C's net 
unearned income of $2,000 (the excess of $3,000 over the sum of $500 
standard deduction and the first $500 of taxable unearned income) plus 
$75 (the tax imposed on C's first $500 of taxable unearned income). See 
A-3. One year later, D and M's 1988 tax return is adjusted on audit by 
adding an additional $1,000 of taxable income. No adjustment is made to 
the amount reported as C's net unearned income for 1988. However, the 
adjustment to D and M's taxable income causes C's tax liability under 
section 1(i) for 1988 to be increased by $50 as a result of the phase-
out of the 15 percent rate bracket. See A-20. In addition to this 
further tax liability, C will be liable for interest on the $50. 
However, C will not have to pay any penalty on the delinquent amount.

                           Miscellaneous Rules

    Q-20. Does the phase-out of the parent's 15 percent rate bracket and 
personal exemptions under section 1(g), if applicable, have any effect 
on the calculation of the allocable parental tax imposed on a child's 
net unearned income under section 1(i)?
    A-20. Yes. Any phase-out of the parent's 15 percent rate bracket or 
personal exemptions under section 1(g) is given full effect in 
determining the tax that would be imposed on the sum of the parent's 
taxable income and the total net unearned income of all children of the 
parent. Thus, any additional tax on a child's net unearned income 
resulting from the phase-out of the 15 percent rate bracket and the 
personal exemptions is reflected in the tax liability of the child.
    Q-21. For purposes of calculating a parent's tax liability or the 
allocable parental tax imposed on a child, are other phase-outs, 
limitations, or floors on deductions or credits, such as the phase-out 
of the $25,000 passive loss allowance for rental real estate activities 
under section 469(i)(3) or the 2 percent of AGI floor on miscellaneous 
itemized deductions under section 67, affected by the addition of a 
child's net unearned income to the parent's taxable income?
    A-21. No. A child's net unearned income is not taken into account in 
computing any deduction or credit for purposes of determining the 
parent's tax liability or the child's allocable parental tax. Thus, for 
example, although the amounts allowable to the parent as a charitable 
contribution deduction, medical expense deduction, section 212 
deduction, or a miscellaneous itemized deduction are affected by the 
amount of the parent's adjusted gross income, the amount of these 
deductions that is allowed does not change as a result of the 
application of section 1(i) because the amount of the parent's adjusted 
gross income does not include the child's net unearned income. 
Similarly,

[[Page 18]]

the amount of itemized deductions that is allowed to a child does not 
change as a result of section 1(i) because section 1(i) only affects the 
amount of tax liability and not the child's adjusted gross income.
    Q-22. If a child is unable to obtain information concerning the tax 
return of the child's parents directly from such parents, how may the 
child obtain information from the parent's tax return which is necessary 
to determine the child's tax liability under section 1(i)?
    A-22. Under section 6103(e)(1)(A)(iv), a return of a parent shall, 
upon written request, be open to inspection or disclosure to a child of 
that individual (or the child's legal representative) to the extent 
necessary to comply with section 1(i). Thus, a child may request the 
Internal Revenue Service to disclose sufficient tax information about 
the parent to the child so that the child can properly file his or her 
return.

[T.D. 8158, 52 FR 33579, Sept. 4, 1987; 52 FR 36133, Sept. 25, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.2-1  Tax in case of joint return of husband and wife or the return of a surviving spouse.

    (a) Taxable year ending before January 1, 1971. (1) For taxable 
years ending before January 1, 1971, in the case of a joint return of 
husband and wife, or the return of a surviving spouse as defined in 
section 2(b), the tax imposed by section 1 shall be twice the tax that 
would be imposed if the taxable income were reduced by one-half. For 
rules relating to the filing of joint returns of husband and wife, see 
section 6013 and the regulations thereunder.
    (2) The method of computing, under section 2(a), the tax of husband 
and wife in the case of a joint return, or the tax of a surviving 
spouse, is as follows:
    (i) First, the taxable income is reduced by one-half. Second, the 
tax is determined as provided by section 1 by using the taxable income 
so reduced. Third, the tax so determined, which is the tax that would be 
determined if the taxable income were reduced by one-half, is then 
multiplied by two to produce the tax imposed in the case of the joint 
return or the return of a surviving spouse, subject, however, to the 
allowance of any credits against the tax under the provisions of 
sections 31 through 38 and the regulations thereunder.
    (ii) The limitation under section 1(c) of the tax to an amount not 
in excess of a specified percent of the taxable income for the taxable 
year is to be applied before the third step above, that is, the 
limitation to be applied upon the tax is determined as the applicable 
specified percent of one-half of the taxable income for the taxable year 
(such one-half of the taxable income being the actual aggregate taxable 
income of the spouses, or the total taxable income of the surviving 
spouse, as the case may be, reduced by one-half). For the percent 
applicable in determining the limitation of the tax under section 1(c), 
see Sec. 1.1-2(a). After such limitation is applied, then the tax so 
limited is multiplied by two as provided in section 2(a) (the third step 
above).
    (iii) The following computation illustrates the method of 
application of section 2(a) in the determination of the tax of a husband 
and wife filing a joint return for the calendar year 1965. If the 
combined gross income is $8,200, and the only deductions are the two 
exemptions of the taxpayers under section 151(b) and the standard 
deduction under section 141, the tax on the joint return for 1965, 
without regard to any credits against the tax, is $1,034.20 determined 
as follows:

1. Gross income.................................   $8,200.00            
2. Less:                                                                
    Standard deduction, section 141.............        $820  ..........
    Deduction for personal exemption, section                           
     151........................................       1,200    2,020.00
                                                 -----------------------
3. Taxable income...............................    6,180.00            
4. Taxable income reduced by one-half...........    3,090.00            
5. Tax computed by the tax table provided under                         
 section 1(a)(2) ($310 plus 19 percent of excess                        
 over $2,000)...................................      517.10            
6. Twice the tax in item 5......................    1,034.20            
                                                                        

    (b) Taxable years beginning after December 31, 1970. (1) For taxable 
years beginning after December 31, 1970, in the case of a joint return 
of husband and wife, or the return of a surviving spouse as defined in 
section 2(a) of the Code as amended by the Tax Reform Act of 1969, the 
tax shall be determined in accordance with the table contained in 
section 1(a) of the Code as so amended. For rules relating to the filing 
of

[[Page 19]]

joint returns of husband and wife see section 6013 as amended and the 
regulations thereunder.
    (2) The following computation illustrates the method of computing 
the tax of a husband and wife filing a joint return for calendar year 
1971. If the combined gross income is $8,200, and the only deductions 
are the two exemptions of the taxpayers under section 151(b), as 
amended, and the standard deduction under section 141, as amended, the 
tax on the joint return for 1971, without regard to any credits against 
the tax, is $968.46, determined as follows:

1. Gross income.................................   $8,200.00            
2. Less:                                                                
  Standard deduction, section 141...............   $1,066.00            
  Deduction for personal exemption, section 151.    1,300.00    2,366.00
                                                 -----------------------
3. Taxable income...............................    5,834.00            
4. Tax computed by the tax table provided under                         
 section 1(a) ($620 plus 19 percent of excess                           
 over $4,000)...................................      968.46            
                                                                        

    (3) The limitation under section 1348 with respect to the maximum 
rate of tax on earned income shall apply to a married individual only if 
such individual and his spouse file a joint return for the taxable year.
    (c) Death of a spouse. If a joint return of a husband and wife is 
filed under the provisions of section 6013 and if the husband and wife 
have different taxable years solely because of the death of either 
spouse, the taxable year of the deceased spouse covered by the joint 
return shall, for the purpose of the computation of the tax in respect 
of such joint return, be deemed to have ended on the date of the closing 
of the surviving spouse's taxable year.
    (d) Computation of optional tax. For computation of optional tax in 
the case of a joint return or the return of a surviving spouse, see 
section 3 and the regulations thereunder.
    (e) Change in rates. For treatment of taxable years during which a 
change in the tax rates occurs see section 21 and the regulations 
thereunder.

[T.D. 7117, 36 FR 9398, May 25, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 1.2-2  Definitions and special rules.

    (a) Surviving spouse. (1) If a taxpayer is eligible to file a joint 
return under the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 without regard to section 
6013(a) (3) thereof for the taxable year in which his spouse dies, his 
return for each of the next 2 taxable years following the year of the 
death of the spouse shall be treated as a joint return for all purposes 
if all three of the following requirements are satisfied:
    (i) He has not remarried before the close of the taxable year the 
return for which is sought to be treated as a joint return, and
    (ii) He maintains as his home a household which constitutes for the 
taxable year the principal place of abode as a member of such household 
of a person who is (whether by blood or adoption) a son, stepson, 
daughter, or stepdaughter of the taxpayer, and
    (iii) He is entitled for the taxable year to a deduction under 
section 151 (relating to deductions for dependents) with respect to such 
son, stepson, daughter, or stepdaughter.
    (2) See paragraphs (c)(1) and (d) of this section for rules for the 
determination of when the taxpayer maintains as his home a household 
which constitutes for the taxable year the principal place of abode, as 
a member of such household, of another person.
    (3) If the taxpayer does not qualify as a surviving spouse he may 
nevertheless qualify as a head of a household if he meets the 
requirements of Sec. 1.2-2(b).
    (4) The following example illustrates the provisions relating to a 
surviving spouse:

    Example:  Assume that the taxpayer meets the requirements of this 
paragraph for the years 1967 through 1971, and that the taxpayer, whose 
wife died during 1966 while married to him, remarried in 1968. In 1969, 
the taxpayer's second wife died while married to him, and he remained 
single thereafter. For 1967 the taxpayer will qualify as a surviving 
spouse, provided that neither the taxpayer nor the first wife was a 
nonresident alien at any time during 1966 and that she (immediately 
prior to her death) did not have a taxable year different from that of 
the taxpayer. For 1968 the taxpayer does not qualify as a surviving 
spouse because he remarried before the close of the taxable year. The 
taxpayer will qualify as a surviving spouse for 1970 and 1971, provided 
that neither the taxpayer nor the second wife was a nonresident alien at 
any time during 1969 and that she (immediately prior to her death) did 
not have a taxable year different from that of

[[Page 20]]

the taxpayer. On the other hand, if the taxpayer, in 1969, was divorced 
or legally separated from his second wife, the taxpayer will not qualify 
as a surviving spouse for 1970 or 1971, since he could not have filed a 
joint return for 1969 (the year in which his second wife died).

    (b) Head of household. (1) A taxpayer shall be considered the head 
of a household if, and only if, he is not married at the close of his 
taxable year, is not a surviving spouse (as defined in paragraph (a) of 
this section, and (i) maintains as his home a household which 
constitutes for such taxable year the principal place of abode, as a 
member of such household, of at least one of the individuals described 
in subparagraph (3), or (ii) maintains (whether or not as his home) a 
household which constitutes for such taxable year the principal place of 
abode of one of the individuals described in subparagraph (4).
    (2) Under no circumstances shall the same person be used to qualify 
more than one taxpayer as the head of a household for the same taxable 
year.
    (3) Any of the following persons may qualify the taxpayer as a head 
of a household:
    (i) A son, stepson, daughter, or stepdaughter of the taxpayer, or a 
descendant of a son or daughter of the taxpayer. For the purpose of 
determining whether any of the stated relationships exist, a legally 
adopted child of a person is considered a child of such person by blood. 
If any such person is not married at the close of the taxable year of 
the taxpayer, the taxpayer may qualify as the head of a household by 
reason of such person even though the taxpayer may not claim a deduction 
for such person under section 151, for example, because the taxpayer 
does not furnish more than half of the support of such person. However, 
if any such person is married at the close of the taxable year of the 
taxpayer, the taxpayer may qualify as the head of a household by reason 
of such person only if the taxpayer is entitled to a deduction for such 
person under section 151 and the regulations thereunder. In applying the 
preceding sentence there shall be disregarded any such person for whom a 
deduction is allowed under section 151 only by reason of section 152(c) 
(relating to persons covered by a multiple support agreement).
    (ii) Any other person who is a dependent of the taxpayer, if the 
taxpayer is entitled to a deduction for the taxable year for such person 
under section 151 and paragraphs (3) through (8) of section 152(a) and 
the regulations thereunder. Under section 151 the taxpayer may be 
entitled to a deduction for any of the following persons:
    (a) His brother, sister, stepbrother, or stepsister;
    (b) His father or mother, or an ancestor of either;
    (c) His stepfather or stepmother;
    (d) A son or a daughter of his brother or sister;
    (e) A brother or sister of his father or mother; or
    (f) His son-in-law, daughter-in-law, father-in-law, mother-in-law, 
brother- in-law, or sister-in-law;

if such person has a gross income of less than the amount determined 
pursuant to Sec. 1.151-2 applicable to the calendar year in which the 
taxable year of the taxpayer begins, if the taxpayer supplies more than 
one-half of the support of such person for such calendar year and if 
such person does not make a joint return with his spouse for the taxable 
year beginning in such calendar year. The taxpayer may not be considered 
to be a head of a household by reason of any person for whom a deduction 
is allowed under section 151 only by reason of sections 152 (a)(9), 152 
(a)(10), or 152(c) (relating to persons not related to the taxpayer, 
persons receiving institutional care, and persons covered by multiple 
support agreements).
    (4) The father or mother of the taxpayer may qualify the taxpayer as 
a head of a household, but only if the taxpayer is entitled to a 
deduction for the taxable year for such father or mother under section 
151 (determined without regard to section 152(c)). For example, an 
unmarried taxpayer who maintains a home for his widowed mother may not 
qualify as the head of a household by reason of his maintenance of a 
home for his mother if his mother has gross income equal to or in excess 
of the amount determined pursuant to Sec. 1.151-2 applicable to the 
calendar year in which the taxable year of the taxpayer begins, or if he 
does not furnish more than one-half of the support of his mother for 
such calendar

[[Page 21]]

year. For this purpose, a person who legally adopted the taxpayer is 
considered the father or mother of the taxpayer.
    (5) For the purpose of this paragraph, the status of the taxpayer 
shall be determined as of the close of the taxpayer's taxable year. A 
taxpayer shall be considered as not married if at the close of his 
taxable year he is legally separated from his spouse under a decree of 
divorce or separate maintenance, or if at any time during the taxable 
year the spouse to whom the taxpayer is married at the close of his 
taxable year was a nonresident alien. A taxpayer shall be considered 
married at the close of his taxable year if his spouse (other than a 
spouse who is a nonresident alien) dies during such year.
    (6) If the taxpayer is a nonresident alien during any part of the 
taxable year he may not qualify as a head of a household even though he 
may comply with the other provisions of this paragraph. See the 
regulations prescribed under section 871 for a definition of nonresident 
alien.
    (c) Household. (1) In order for a taxpayer to be considered as 
maintaining a household by reason of any individual described in 
paragraph (a)(1) or (b)(3) of this section, the household must actually 
constitute the home of the taxpayer for his taxable year. A physical 
change in the location of such home will not prevent a taxpayer from 
qualifying as a head of a household. Such home must also constitute the 
principal place of abode of at least one of the persons specified in 
such paragraph (a)(1) or (b)(3) of this section. It is not sufficient 
that the taxpayer maintain the household without being its occupant. The 
taxpayer and such other person must occupy the household for the entire 
taxable year of the taxpayer. However, the fact that such other person 
is born or dies within the taxable year will not prevent the taxpayer 
from qualifying as a head of household if the household constitutes the 
principal place of abode of such other person for the remaining or 
preceding part of such taxable year. The taxpayer and such other person 
will be considered as occupying the household for such entire taxable 
year notwithstanding temporary absences from the household due to 
special circumstances. A nonpermanent failure to occupy the common abode 
by reason of illness, education, business, vacation, military service, 
or a custody agreement under which a child or stepchild is absent for 
less than 6 months in the taxable year of the taxpayer, shall be 
considered temporary absence due to special circumstances. Such absence 
will not prevent the taxpayer from being considered as maintaining a 
household if (i) it is reasonable to assume that the taxpayer or such 
other person will return to the household, and (ii) the taxpayer 
continues to maintain such household or a substantially equivalent 
household in anticipation of such return.
    (2) In order for a taxpayer to be considered as maintaining a 
household by reason of any individual described in paragraph (b)(4) of 
this section, the household must actually constitute the principal place 
of abode of the taxpayer's dependent father or mother, or both of them. 
It is not, however, necessary for the purposes of such subparagraph for 
the taxpayer also to reside in such place of abode. A physical change in 
the location of such home will not prevent a taxpayer from qualifying as 
a head of a household. The father or mother of the taxpayer, however, 
must occupy the household for the entire taxable year of the taxpayer. 
They will be considered as occupying the household for such entire year 
notwithstanding temporary absences from the household due to special 
circumstances. For example, a nonpermanent failure to occupy the 
household by reason of illness or vacation shall be considered temporary 
absence due to special circumstances. Such absence will not prevent the 
taxpayer from qualifying as the head of a household if (i) it is 
reasonable to assume that such person will return to the household, and 
(ii) the taxpayer continues to maintain such household or a 
substantially equivalent household in anticipation of such return. 
However, the fact that the father or mother of the taxpayer dies within 
the year will not prevent the taxpayer from qualifying as a head of a 
household if the household constitutes the principal place of

[[Page 22]]

abode of the father or mother for the preceding part of such taxable 
year.
    (d) Cost of maintaining a household. A taxpayer shall be considered 
as maintaining a household only if he pays more than one-half the cost 
thereof for his taxable year. The cost of maintaining a household shall 
be the expenses incurred for the mutual benefit of the occupants thereof 
by reason of its operation as the principal place of abode of such 
occupants for such taxable year. The cost of maintaining a household 
shall not include expenses otherwise incurred. The expenses of 
maintaining a household include property taxes, mortgage interest, rent, 
utility charges, upkeep and repairs, property insurance, and food 
consumed on the premises. Such expenses do not include the cost of 
clothing, education, medical treatment, vacations, life insurance, and 
transportation. In addition, the cost of maintaining a household shall 
not include any amount which represents the value of services rendered 
in the household by the taxpayer or by a person qualifying the taxpayer 
as a head of a household or as a surviving spouse.
    (e) Certain married individuals living apart. For taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1969, an individual who is considered as 
not married under section 143(b) shall be considered as not married for 
purposes of determining whether he or she qualifies as a single 
individual, a married individual, a head of household or a surviving 
spouse under sections 1 and 2 of the Code.

[T.D. 7117, 36 FR 9398, May 25, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 1.3-1  Application of optional tax.

    (a) General rules. (1) For taxable years ending before January 1, 
1970, an individual whose adjusted gross income is less than $5,000 (or 
a husband and wife filing a joint return whose combined adjusted gross 
income is less than $5,000) may elect to pay the tax imposed by section 
3 in place of the tax imposed by section 1 (a) or (b). For taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1969 and before January 1, 1971 an 
individual whose adjusted gross income is less than $10,000 (or a 
husband and wife filing a joint return whose combined adjusted gross 
income is less than $10,000) may elect to pay the tax imposed by section 
3 as amended by the Tax Reform Act of 1969 in place of the tax imposed 
by section 1 (a) or (b). For taxable years beginning after December 31, 
1970 an individual whose adjusted gross income is less than $10,000 (or 
a husband and wife filing a joint return whose combined adjusted gross 
income is less than $10,000) may elect to pay the tax imposed by section 
3 as amended in place of the tax imposed by section 1 as amended. See 
Sec. 1.4-2 for the manner of making such election. A taxpayer may make 
such election regardless of the sources from which his income is derived 
and regardless of whether his income is computed by the cash method or 
the accrual method. See section 62 and the regulations thereunder for 
the determination of adjusted gross income. For the purpose of 
determining whether a taxpayer may elect to pay the tax under section 3, 
the amount of the adjusted gross income is controlling, without 
reference to the number of exemptions to which the taxpayer may be 
entitled. See section 4 and the regulations thereunder for additional 
rules applicable to section 3.
    (2) The following examples illustrate the rule that section 3 
applies only if the adjusted gross income is less than $10,000 ($5,000 
for taxable years ending before January 1, 1970).

    Example 1. A is employed at a salary of $9,200 for the calendar year 
1970. In the course of such employment, he incurred travel expenses of 
$1,500 for which he was reimbursed during the year. Such items 
constitute his sole income for 1970. In such case the gross income is 
$10,700 but the amount of $1,500 is deducted from gross income in the 
determination of adjusted gross income and thus A's adjusted gross 
income for 1970 is $9,200. Hence, the adjusted gross income being less 
than $10,000, he may elect to pay his tax for 1970 under section 3. 
Similarly, in the case of an individual engaged in trade or business 
(excluding from the term ``engaged in trade or business'' the 
performance of personal services as an employee), there may be deducted 
from gross income in ascertaining adjusted gross income those expenses 
directly relating to the carrying on of such trade or business.

    Example 2. If B has, as his only income for 1970, a salary of 
$11,600 and his spouse has no gross income, then B's adjusted gross 
income is $11,600 (not $11,600 reduced by exemptions of $1,250) and he 
is not for such year, entitled

[[Page 23]]

to pay his tax under section 3. If, however, B has for 1970 a salary of 
$13,000 and incident to his employment he incurs expenses in the amount 
of $3,400 for travel, meals, and lodging while away from home, for which 
he is not reimbursed, the adjusted gross income is $13,000 minus $3,400 
or $9,600. In such case his adjusted gross income being less than 
$10,000, B may elect to pay the tax under section 3. However, if B's 
wife has adjusted gross income of $400, the total adjusted gross income 
is $10,000. In such case, if B and his wife file a joint return, they 
may not elect to pay the optional tax since the combined adjusted gross 
income is not less than $10,000. B may nevertheless elect to pay the 
optional tax, but if he makes this election he must file a separate 
return and, since his wife has gross income, he may not claim an 
exemption for her in computing the optional tax.

    (b) Surviving spouse. The return of a surviving spouse is treated as 
a joint return for purposes of section 3. See section 2, and the 
regulations thereunder, with respect to the qualifications of a taxpayer 
as a surviving spouse. Accordingly, if the taxpayer qualifies as a 
surviving spouse and elects to pay the optional tax, he shall use the 
column in the tax table, appropriate to his number of exemptions, 
provided for cases in which a joint return is filed.
    (c) Use of tax table. (1) To determine the amount of the tax, the 
individual ascertains the amount of his adjusted gross income, refers to 
the appropriate table set forth in section 3 or the regulations 
thereunder, ascertains the income bracket into which such income falls, 
and, using the number of exemptions applicable to his case, finds the 
tax in the vertical column having at the top thereof a number 
corresponding to the number of exemptions to which the taxpayer is 
entitled.
    (2) Section 3(b) (relating to taxable years beginning after Dec. 31, 
1964 and ending before Jan. 1, 1970) contains 5 tables for use in 
computing the tax. Table I is to be used by a single person who is not a 
head of household. Table II is to be used by a head of household. Table 
III is to be used by married persons filing joint returns and by a 
surviving spouse. Table IV is to be used by married persons filing 
separate returns using the 10 percent standard deduction. Table V is to 
be used by married persons filing separate returns using the minimum 
standard deduction. For an explanation of the standard deduction see 
section 141 and the regulations thereunder.
    (3) 30 tables are provided for use in computing the tax under the 
Tax Reform Act of 1969. Tables I through XV apply for taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1969 and ending before January 1, 1971. 
Tables XVI through XXX apply for taxable years beginning after December 
31, 1970. The standard deduction for Tables I through XV, applicable to 
taxable years beginning in 1970, is 10 percent. The standard deduction 
for Tables XVI through XXX, applicable to taxable years beginning in 
1971, is 13 percent. For an explanation of the standard deduction and 
the low income allowance see section 141 as amended by the Tax Reform 
Act of 1969.
    (4) In the case of married persons filing separate returns who 
qualify to use the optional tax imposed by section 3, such persons shall 
use the tax imposed by the table for the applicable year in accordance 
with the rules prescribed by sections 4(c) and 141 and the regulations 
thereunder governing the use and application of the standard deduction 
and the low income allowance.
    (5) The tax shown in the tax tables set forth in section 3 or the 
regulations thereunder reflects full income splitting in the case of a 
joint return (including the return of a surviving spouse) and lesser 
income splitting in the case of a head of household. Therefore, it is 
possible for the tax shown in the tables relating to joint returns, or 
relating to a return of a head of a household, to be lower than that 
shown in the table for separate returns even though the amounts of 
adjusted gross income and the number of exemptions are the same.

[T.D. 7117, 36 FR 9420, May 25, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 1.4-1  Number of exemptions.

    (a) For the purpose of determining the optional tax imposed under 
section 3, the taxpayer shall use the number of exemptions allowable to 
him as deductions under section 151. See sections 151, 152, and 153, and 
the regulations thereunder. In general, one exemption is allowed for the 
taxpayer; one exemption for his spouse if a joint return is made, or if 
a separate return is made

[[Page 24]]

by the taxpayer and his spouse has no gross income for the calendar year 
in which the taxable year of the taxpayer begins and is not the 
dependent of another taxpayer for such calendar year; and one exemption 
for each dependent whose gross income for the calendar year in which the 
taxable year of the taxpayer begins is less than the applicable amount 
determined pursuant to Sec. 1.151-2. No exemption is allowed for any 
dependent who has made a joint return with his spouse for the taxable 
year beginning in the calendar year in which the taxable year of the 
taxpayer begins. The taxpayer may, in certain cases, be allowed an 
exemption for a dependent child of the taxpayer notwithstanding the fact 
that such child has gross income equal to or in excess of the amount 
determined pursuant to Sec. 1.151-2 applicable to the calendar year in 
which the taxable year of the taxpayer begins. The requirements for the 
allowance of such an exemption are set forth in paragraph (c) of 
Sec. 1.152-1. See paragraphs (c) and (d) of Sec. 1.151-1 with respect to 
additional exemptions for a taxpayer or spouse who has attained the age 
65 years and for a blind taxpayer or blind spouse
    (b) The application of this section may be illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. A, a married man whose duties as an employee require 
traveling away from his home, has as his sole gross income a salary of 
$5,600 for the calendar year 1954. His traveling expenses, including 
cost of meals and lodging, amount in such year to $750, and hence, his 
adjusted gross income is $4,850. His wife, B, has as her sole income 
interest in the amount of $85, and thus the aggregate adjusted gross 
income of A and B is $4,935. A has two dependent children neither of 
whom has any income. A and B file a joint return for 1954 on Form 1040. 
In such case four exemptions are allowable. The adjusted gross income 
falls within the tax bracket $4,900-4,950. By referring to such tax 
bracket in the tax table in section 3 and to the column headed ``4'' 
therein, the tax is found to be $407.

    Example 2.  C, a married man, has as his sole income in 1954 wages 
of $4,600, and has two dependent children neither of whom has any 
income. His wife, D, has adjusted gross income of $400. C files a 
separate return for 1954 and is entitled to claim three exemptions. C's 
income falls within the tax bracket $4,600-4,650 and hence, with three 
exemptions his tax is $480. No exemption is allowed with respect to 
since D has gross income and a joint return was not filed.

    Example 3.  D, a married man with no dependents, attains the age of 
65 on September 1, 1954. The aggregate adjusted gross income of D and 
his wife for 1954 is $4,840. D and his wife file a joint return for 1954 
and are entitled to three exemptions, one for each taxpayer and one 
additional exemption for D because of his age. Since the adjusted gross 
income of D and his wife falls within the tax bracket $4,800-4,850, the 
tax on a joint return is $509.

[T.D. 6500, 25 FR 11402, Nov. 26, 1960, as amended by T.D. 7114, 36 FR 
9018, May 18, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 1.4-2  Elections.

    (a) Making of election. The election to pay the optional tax imposed 
under section 3 shall be made by (1) filing a return on Form 1040A, or 
(2) filing a return on Form 1040 and electing in such return, in 
accordance with the provisions of section 144 and the regulations 
thereunder, to take the standard deduction provided by section 141.
    (b) Election under section 3 and election of standard deduction. 
Section 144 (a) and the regulations thereunder provide rules for 
treating an election to pay the tax under section 3 as an election to 
take the standard deduction, and for treating an election to take the 
standard deduction as an election to pay the tax under section 3. For 
example, if the taxpayer's return shows $5,000 or more of adjusted gross 
income and he elects to take the standard deduction, he will be deemed 
to have elected to pay the tax under section 3 if it is subsequently 
determined that his correct adjusted gross income is less than $5,000.
    (c) [Reserved]
    (d) Change of election. For rules relating to a change of election 
to pay, or not to pay, the optional tax imposed under section 3, see 
section 144 (b) and the regulations thereunder.

[T.D. 6500, 25 FR 11402, Nov. 26, 1960, as amended by T.D. 6581, 26 FR 
11677, Dec. 6, 1961; T.D. 7269, 38 FR 9295, April 13, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 1.4-3  Husband and wife filing separate returns.

    (a) In general. If the separate adjusted gross income of a husband 
is less than $5,000 and the separate adjusted gross income of his wife 
is less than $5,000,

[[Page 25]]

and if each is required to file a return, the husband and the wife must 
each elect to pay the optional tax imposed under section 3 or neither 
may so elect. If the separate adjusted gross income of each spouse is 
$5,000 or more, then neither spouse can elect to pay the optional tax 
imposed under section 3. If the adjusted gross income of one spouse is 
$5,000 or more and that of the other spouse is less than $5,000, the 
election to pay the optional tax imposed under section 3 may be 
exercised by the spouse having adjusted gross income of less than $5,000 
only if the spouse having adjusted gross income of $5,000 or more, in 
computing taxable income, uses the standard deduction provided by 
section 141. If the spouse having adjusted gross income of $5,000 or 
more does not use the standard deduction, then the spouse having 
adjusted gross income of less than $5,000 may not elect to pay the 
optional tax and must compute taxable income without regard to the 
standard deduction. Accordingly, if the spouse having adjusted gross 
income of $5,000 or more itemizes the deductions allowed by sections 161 
and 211 in computing taxable income, the spouse having adjusted gross 
income of less than $5,000 must also compute taxable income by itemizing 
the deductions allowed by sections 161 and 211, and must pay the tax 
imposed by section 1. For rules relative to the election to take the 
standard deduction by husband and wife, see part IV (section 141 and 
following), subchapter B, chapter 1 of the Code, and the regulations 
thereunder.
    (b) Taxable years beginning after December 31, 1963, and before 
January 1, 1970. (1) In the case of a husband and wife filing a separate 
return for a taxable year beginning after December 31, 1963, and before 
January 1, 1970, the optional tax imposed by section 3 shall be--
    (i) For taxable years beginning in 1964, the lesser of the tax shown 
in Table IV (relating to the 10-percent standard deduction for married 
persons filing separate returns) or Table V (relating to the minimum 
standard deduction for married persons filing separate returns) of 
section 3(a), and
    (ii) For a taxable year beginning after December 31, 1964, and 
before January 1, 1970, the lesser of the tax shown in Table IV 
(relating to the 10-percent standard deduction for married persons 
filing separate returns) or Table V (relating to minimum standard 
deduction for married persons filing separate returns) of section 3(b).
    (2) If the tax of one spouse is determined with regard to the 10-
percent standard deduction provided for in Table IV of section 3(a) or 
3(b) or if such spouse in computing taxable income uses the 10-percent 
standard deduction provided for in section 141(b), then the minimum 
standard deduction provided for in Table V of section 3(a) or 3(b) shall 
not apply in the case of the other spouse, if such spouse elects to pay 
the optional tax imposed under section (3). Thus, if a husband and wife 
compute their tax with reference to the standard deduction, one cannot 
elect to use the 10-percent standard deduction and the other elect to 
use the minimum standard deduction. However, an individual described in 
section 141(d)(2) may elect pursuant to such section and the regulations 
thereunder to pay the tax shown in Table V of section 3(a) or 3(b) in 
lieu of the tax shown in Table IV of section 3(a) or 3(b). See section 
141(d) and the regulations thereunder for rules relating to the standard 
deduction in the case of married individuals filing separate returns.
    (c) Taxable years beginning after December 31, 1969. (1) In the case 
of a husband and wife filing a separate return for a taxable year 
beginning after December 31, 1969, the optional tax imposed by section 3 
shall be the lesser of the tax shown in--
    (i) The table prescribed under section 3 applicable to such taxable 
year in the case of married persons filing separate returns which 
applies the percentage standard deduction, or
    (ii) The table prescribed under section 3 applicable to such taxable 
year in the case of married persons filing separate returns which 
applies the low income allowance.
    (2) If the tax of one spouse is determined by the table described in 
subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph or if such spouse in computing 
taxable income uses the percentage standard deduction provided for in 
section 141(b),

[[Page 26]]

then the table described in subparagraph (1)(ii) of this paragraph shall 
not apply in the case of the other spouse, if such other spouse elects 
to pay the optional tax imposed under section 3. Thus, if a husband and 
wife compute the tax with reference to the standard deduction, one 
cannot elect to use the percentage standard deduction and the other 
elect to use the low income allowance. A married individual described in 
section 141(d)(2) may elect pursuant to such section and the regulations 
thereunder to pay the tax shown in the table described by subparagraph 
(1)(ii) of this paragraph in lieu of the tax shown in the table 
described by subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph. See section 141(d) 
and the regulations thereunder for rules relating to the standard 
deduction in the case of married individuals filing separate returns.
    (d) Determination of marital status. For the purpose of applying the 
restrictions upon the right of a married person to elect to pay the tax 
under section 3, (1) the determination of marital status is made as of 
the close of the taxpayer's taxable year or, if his spouse died during 
such year, as of the date of death; (2) a person legally separated from 
his spouse under a decree of divorce or separate maintenance on the last 
day of his taxable year (or the date of death of his spouse, whichever 
is applicable) is not considered as married; and (3) with respect to 
taxable years beginning after December 31, 1969, a person, although 
considered as married within the meaning of section 143(a), is 
considered as not married if he lives apart from his spouse and 
satisfies the requirements set forth in section 143(b). See section 143 
and the regulations thereunder.

[T.D. 6792, 30 FR 529, Jan. 15, 1965, as amended by T.D. 7123, 36 FR 
11084, June 9, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 1.4-4  Short taxable year caused by death.

    An individual making a return for a period of less than 12 months on 
account of a change in his accounting period may not elect to pay the 
optional tax under section 3. However, the fact that the taxable year is 
less than 12 months does not prevent the determination of the tax for 
the taxable year under section 3 if the short taxable year results from 
the death of the taxpayer.

                           Tax on Corporations


<R05>
Sec. 1.11-1  Tax on corporations.

    (a) Every corporation, foreign or domestic, is liable to the tax 
imposed under section 11 except (1) corporations specifically excepted 
under such section from such tax; (2) corporations expressly exempt from 
all taxation under subtitle A of the Code (see section 501); and (3) 
corporations subject to tax under section 511(a). For taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1966, foreign corporations engaged in trade 
or business in the United States shall be taxable under section 11 only 
on their taxable income which is effectively connected with the conduct 
of a trade or business in the United States (see section 882(a)(1)). For 
definition of the terms ``corporations,'' ``domestic,'' and ``foreign,'' 
see section 7701(a) (3), (4), and (5), respectively. It is immaterial 
that a domestic corporation, and for taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1966, a foreign corporation engaged in trade or business in 
the United States, which is subject to the tax imposed by section 11 may 
derive no income from sources within the United States. The tax imposed 
by section 11 is payable upon the basis of the returns rendered by the 
corporations liable thereto, except that in some cases a tax is to be 
paid at the source of the income. See subchapter A (sections 6001 and 
following), chapter 61 of the Code, and section 1442.
    (b) The tax imposed by section 11 consists of a normal tax and a 
surtax. The normal tax and the surtax are both computed upon the taxable 
income of the corporation for the taxable year, that is, upon the gross 
income of the corporation minus the deductions allowed by chapter 1 of 
the Code. However, the deduction provided in section 242 for partially 
tax-exempt interest is not allowed in computing the taxable income 
subject to the surtax.
    (c) The normal tax is at the rate of 22 percent and is applied to 
the taxable income for the taxable year. However, in the case of a 
taxable year ending

[[Page 27]]

after December 31, 1974, and before January 1, 1976, the normal tax is 
at the rate of 20 percent of so much of the taxable income as does not 
exceed $25,000 and at the rate of 22 percent of so much of the taxable 
income as does exceed $25,000 and is applied to the taxable income for 
the taxable year.
    (d) The surtax is at the rate of 26 percent and is upon the taxable 
income (computed without regard to the deduction, if any, provided in 
section 242 for partially tax-exempt interest) in excess of $25,000. 
However, in the case of a taxable year ending after December 31, 1974, 
and before January 1, 1976, the surtax is upon the taxable income 
(computed as provided in the preceding sentence) in excess of $50,000. 
In certain circumstances the exemption from surtax may be disallowed in 
whole or in part. See sections 269, 1551, 1561, and 1564 and the 
regulations thereunder. For purposes of sections 244, 247, 804, 907, 922 
and Secs. 1.51-1 and 1.815-4, when the phrase ``the sum of the normal 
tax rate and the surtax rate for the taxable year'' is used in any such 
section, the normal tax rate for all taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1963, and ending before January 1, 1976, shall be 
considered to be 22 percent.
    (e) The computation of the tax on corporations imposed under section 
11 may be illustrated by the following example:
    Example. The X Corporation, a domestic corporation, has gross income 
of $86,000 for the calendar year 1964. The gross income includes 
interest of $5,000 on United States obligations for which a deduction 
under section 242 is allowable in determining taxable income subject to 
the normal tax. It has other deductions of $11,000. The tax of the X 
Corporation under section 11 for the calendar year is $28,400 ($15,400 
normal tax and $13,000 surtax) computed as follows:

                        Computation of Normal Tax                       
Gross income....................................     $86,000            
Deductions:                                                             
  Partially tax-exempt interest.................      $5,000  ..........
  Other.........................................      11,000      16,000
                                                 -----------------------
Taxable income..................................      70,000            
Normal tax (22 percent of $70,000)..............      15,400            
                          Computation of Surtax                         
Taxable income..................................      70,000            
Add: Amount of partially tax-exempt interest                            
 deducted in computing taxable income...........       5,000            
                                                 -------------          
Taxable income subject to surtax................      75,000            
Less: Exemption from surtax.....................      25,000            
                                                 -------------          
Excess of taxable income subject to surtax over                         
 exemption......................................      50,000            
Surtax (26 percent of $50,000)..................      13,000            
                                                                        

    (f) For special rules applicable to foreign corporations engaged in 
trade or business within the United States, see section 882 and the 
regulations thereunder. For additional tax on personal holding 
companies, see part II (section 541 and following), subchapter G, 
chapter 1 of the Code, and the regulations thereunder. For additional 
tax on corporations improperly accumulating surplus, see part I (section 
531 and following), subchapter G, chapter 1 of the Code, and the 
regulations thereunder. For treatment of China Trade Act corporations, 
see sections 941 and 942 and the regulations thereunder. For treatment 
of Western Hemisphere trade corporations, see sections 921 and 922 and 
the regulations thereunder. For treatment of capital gains and losses, 
see subchapter P (section 1201 and following), chapter 1 of the Code. 
For computation of the tax for a taxable year during which a change in 
the tax rates occurs, see section 21 and the regulations thereunder.
[T.D. 6500, 25 FR 11402, Nov. 26, 1960, as amended by T.D. 7293, 38 FR 
32792, Nov. 28, 1973; T.D. 74-13, 41 FR 12639, Mar. 26, 1976]

                 Changes in Rates During a Taxable Year


<R05>
Sec. 1.21-1  Changes in rate during a taxable year.

    (a) Section 21 applies to all taxpayers, including individuals and 
corporations. It provides a general rule applicable in any case where 
(1) any rate of tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code upon the taxpayer 
is increased or decreased, or any such tax is repealed, and (2) the 
taxable year includes the effective date of the change, except where 
that date is the first day of the taxable year. For example, the normal 
tax on corporations under section 11(b) was decreased from 30 percent to 
22 percent in the case of a taxable year beginning after December 31, 
1963. Accordingly, the tax for a taxable year of a corporation beginning 
on January 1, 1964, would be computed under section 11(b) at the new 
rate without regard to section 21. However, for any taxable

[[Page 28]]

year beginning before January 1, 1964, and ending on or after that date, 
the tax would be computed under section 21. For additional circumstances 
under which section 21 is not applicable, see paragraph (k) of this 
section.
    (b) In any case in which section 21 is applicable, a tentative tax 
shall be computed by applying to the taxable income for the entire 
taxable year the rate for the period within the taxable year before the 
effective date of change, and another tentative tax shall be computed by 
applying to the taxable income for the entire taxable year the rate for 
the period within the taxable year on or after such effective date. The 
tax imposed on the taxpayer is the sum of--
    (1) An amount which bears the same ratio to the tentative tax 
computed at the rate applicable to the period within the taxable year 
before the effective date of the change that the number of days in such 
period bears to the number of days in the taxable year, and
    (2) An amount which bears the same ratio to the tentative tax 
computed at the rate applicable to the period within the taxable year on 
and after the effective date of the change that the number of days in 
such period bears to the number of days in the taxable year.
    (c) If the rate of tax is changed for taxable years ``beginning 
after'' or ``ending after'' a certain date, the following day is 
considered the effective date of the change for purposes of section 21. 
If the rate is changed for taxable years ``beginning on or after'' a 
certain date, that date is considered the effective date of the change 
for purposes of section 21. This rule may be illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1.  Assume that the law provides that a change in a certain 
rate of tax shall be effective only with respect to taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1969. The effective date of change for 
purposes of section 21 is January 1, 1970, and section 21 must be 
applied to any taxable year which begins before and ends on or after 
January 1, 1970.

    Example 2.  Assume that the law provides that a change in a certain 
rate of tax shall be applicable only with respect to taxable years 
ending after December 31, 1970. For purposes of section 21, the 
effective date of change is January 1, 1971, and section 21 must be 
applied to any taxable year which begins before and ends on or after 
January 1, 1971.

    Example 3.  Assume that the law provides that a change in a certain 
rate of tax shall be effective only with respect to taxable years 
beginning on or after January 1, 1971. The effective date of change for 
purposes of section 21 is January 1, 1971, and section 21 must be 
applied to any taxable year which begins before and ends on or after 
January 1, 1971.

    (d) If a tax is repealed, the repeal will be treated as a change of 
rate for purposes of section 21, and the rate for the period after the 
repeal (for purposes of computing the tentative tax with respect to that 
period) will be considered zero. For example, the Tax Reform Act of 1969 
repealed section 1562, which imposed a 6 percent additional tax on 
controlled corporations electing multiple surtax exemptions, effective 
for taxable years beginning after December 31, 1974. For such controlled 
corporations having taxable years beginning in 1974 and ending in 1975, 
the rate for the period ending before January 1, 1975, would be 6 
percent; the rate for the period beginning after December 31, 1974, 
would be zero. However, subject to the rules stated in this section, 
section 21 does not apply to the imposition of a new tax. For example, 
if a new tax is imposed for taxable years beginning on or after July 1, 
1972, a computation under section 21 would not be required with respect 
to such new tax in the case of taxable years beginning before July 1, 
1972, and ending on or after that date. If the effective date of the 
imposition of a new tax and the effective date of a change in rate of 
such tax fall in the same taxable year, section 21 is not applicable in 
computing the taxpayer's liability for such tax for such year unless the 
new tax is expressly imposed upon the taxpayer for a portion of his 
taxable year prior to the change in rate.
    (e) If a husband and wife have different taxable years because of 
the death of either spouse, and if a joint return is filed with respect 
to the taxable year of each, then, for purposes of section 21, the joint 
return shall be treated as if the taxable years of both spouses ended on 
the date of the closing of the surviving spouse's taxable year. See 
section 6013 (c), relating to treatment of joint return after death of

[[Page 29]]

either spouse. Accordingly, if a change in the rate of tax is effective 
during the taxable year of the surviving spouse, the tentative taxes 
with respect to the joint return shall be computed on the basis of the 
number of days during which each rate of tax was in effect for the 
taxable year of the surviving spouse.
    (f) Section 21 applies whether or not the taxpayer has a taxable 
year of less than 12 months. Moreover, section 21 applies whether or not 
the taxable income for a taxable year of less than 12 months is required 
to be placed on an annual basis under section 443. If the taxable income 
is required to be computed under section 443(b) then the tentative taxes 
under section 21 are computed as provided in paragraph (1) or (2) of 
section 443(b) and are reduced as provided in those paragraphs. The 
tentative taxes so computed and reduced are then apportioned as provided 
in section 21(a)(2) to determine the tax for such taxable year as 
computed under section 21.
    (g) If a taxpayer has made the election under section 441(f) 
(relating to computation of taxable income on the basis of an annual 
accounting period varying from 52 to 53 weeks), the rules provided in 
section 441(f)(2) shall be applicable for purposes of determining 
whether section 21 applies to the taxable year of the taxpayer. Where a 
taxpayer has made the election under section 441(f) and where section 21 
applies to the taxable year of the taxpayer the computation under 
section 21(a)(2) shall be made upon the basis of the actual number of 
days in the taxable year and in each period thereof.
    (h)(1) Section 21 is applicable only if the rate of tax imposed by 
chapter 1 changes. Sections in which rates of tax are specified or 
incorporated by reference include the following: 1, 2, 3, 11, 511, 531, 
541, 821, 831, 871, 881, 1201, and 1348 (for taxable years beginning 
after December 31, 1970). Except as provided in subparagraph (3) of this 
paragraph, section 21 is not applicable with respect to changes in the 
law relating to deductions from gross income, exclusions from or 
inclusions in gross income, or other items taken into account in 
determining the amount or character of income subject to tax. Moreover, 
section 21 is not applicable with respect to changes in the law relating 
to credits against the tax or with respect to changes in the law 
relating to limitations on the amount of tax. Section 21 is applicable, 
however, to all those computations specified in the section providing 
the rate of tax which are implicit in determining the rate. For example, 
if one of the tax brackets in the tax tables under section 3 were to be 
changed, section 21 would be applicable to that change. Thus, if the 
bracket relating to ``at least $4,200 but not less than $4,250'' for 
heads of households should be changed to increase or decrease the last 
sum specified, with corresponding changes being made in subsequent 
brackets, section 21 would be applicable. The enactment of sections 1561 
and 1562 is considered a change in section 11(d) which constitutes a 
change in rate for the period ending after December 31, 1963. The 
amendment of section 1561 and the repeal of section 1562 by the Tax 
Reform Act of 1969 is considered a change in section 11(d) which 
constitutes a change in rate for the period ending after December 31, 
1974. The repeal of the 2 percent additional tax imposed under section 
1503 on corporations filing consolidated returns constitutes a change in 
rate for the period ending after December 31, 1963. The addition to the 
Code of section 1348 (relating to 50 percent maximum rate on earned 
income) is a change in rate to which section 21(a) is applicable. The 
amendment of section 11(d) by the Tax Reduction Act of 1975 which 
increases to $50,000 the surtax exemption for a taxable year ending 
during 1975 constitutes a change in rate for such portion of the taxable 
year (if less than the entire taxable year) as follows December 31, 
1974. Similarly, the return of the surtax exemption to $25,000 for a 
taxable year ending during 1976 constitutes a change in rate for such 
portion of the taxable year (if less than the entire taxable year) as 
follows December 31, 1975.
    (2) Ordinarily, both the old and the new rates are applied to the 
same amount of taxable income. However, where the rate of tax is itself 
taken

[[Page 30]]

into account in determining taxable income (for example, the special 
deduction for Western Hemisphere trade corporations under section 922), 
the taxable income used in determining the tentative tax employing the 
rate before the effective date of change shall be determined by 
reference to that rate of tax, and the taxable income for the purpose of 
determining the tentative tax employing the rate for the period on and 
after the effective date of the change shall be determined by reference 
to the new tax rate.
    (3) Section 21 is applicable with respect to changes in the law 
relating to the standard deduction for individuals provided in part IV 
of subchapter B and to the deduction for personal exemptions for 
individuals provided in part V of subchapter B.
    (i) If the rate of tax changes more than once during the taxable 
year, section 21 is applicable to each change in rate. For example, if 
the rate of normal tax changed for taxable years beginning on or after 
March 1, 1954, and changed again for taxable years beginning on or after 
June 1, 1954, section 21 requires computation of 3 tentative taxes for 
any taxable year which began before March 1, 1954, and ended on or after 
June 1, 1954: One tentative tax at the rate in effect before the March 1 
change; another tentative tax at the rate in effect from March 1 to May 
31; and a third tentative tax at the rate in effect from June 1 to the 
end of the taxable year. The proportion of each such tentative tax taken 
into account in determining the tax imposed on the taxpayer is computed 
by reference to the portion of the taxable year before March 1, 1954, by 
reference to the portion of the taxable year from March 1, 1954, through 
May 31, 1954, and by reference to the portion of the taxable year from 
June 1, 1954, to the end of the taxable year, respectively.
    (j)(1) If a change in the rate of one tax imposed by chapter 1 of 
the Code does not affect the amount of other taxes imposed by chapter 1 
of the Code the other taxes may be determined without regard to section 
21 and section 21 will be applied only to the tax for which a change in 
rate is made. However, if the change of rate of one tax does affect the 
amount of other taxes imposed under chapter 1 of the Code, then the 
computation of the taxes under chapter 1 of the Code so affected shall 
be made by applying section 21. For example, if section 1201 applies to 
an individual taxpayer for a taxable year containing the effective date 
of a change in a rate of tax provided in section 1, then under section 
21 the taxpayer must compute a tentative tax for each period for which a 
different rate of tax is effective under section 1. The tentative tax 
for each such period as computed under section 1201 will reflect the 
rate of tax provided by section 1 for such period.
    (2) In certain cases chapter 1 of the Code provides that the 
particular tax to be imposed upon the taxpayer shall be one of several 
taxes, the basis of selection being the tax that is greater or lesser. 
See, for example, sections 821 and 1201. If in any such case the rate of 
any one of these taxes changes, then the tentative taxes computed as 
provided by section 21 for each period shall be computed employing the 
tax selected in accordance with the general rule of selection for such a 
case, at the rate of tax in effect for such period. Thus, if a change in 
the rate of the alternative tax under section 1201 is such that the 
alternative tax under section 1201 is applicable if the old rate is used 
and is not applicable if the new rate is used, one tentative tax will 
consist of the alternative tax under section 1201 and the other 
tentative tax will consist of the tax imposed by the other applicable 
sections of chapter 1 of the Code. The two tentative taxes so computed 
are then prorated in accordance with section 21(a)(2) and the sum of the 
proportionate amounts is the tax imposed for the taxable year under 
chapter 1 of the Code. See the examples in paragraph (n) of this 
section.
    (k) Section 21 does not apply in the following situations:
    (1) The provisions of section 21 do not apply to the imposition of 
the tax surcharge by section 51. The proration rules of section 51(a) 
apply in the case of a taxable year ending on or after the effective 
date of the surcharge and beginning before July 1, 1970.
    (2) The provisions of section 21 do not apply to the imposition of 
the minimum tax for tax preferences by section

[[Page 31]]

56. The proration rules of section 301(c) of the Tax Reform Act of 1969 
(83 Stat. 586) apply in the case of a taxable year beginning in 1969 and 
ending in 1970.
    (l) In computing the number of days each rate of tax is in effect 
during the taxable year for purposes of section 21(a)(2), the effective 
date of the change in rate shall be counted in the period for which the 
new rate is in effect.
    (m) Any credits against tax, and any limitation in any credit 
against tax, shall be based upon the tax computed under section 21. For 
credits against tax, see part IV (section 31 and following), subchapter 
A, chapter 1 of the Code.
    (n) The application of section 21 may be illustrated by the 
following examples: (See also the examples in Sec. 1.1561-2A(a)(3).)

    Example 1.  A, a married taxpayer filing a joint return, reports his 
income on the basis of a fiscal year ending June 30. For his fiscal year 
ending June 30, 1970, A reports taxable income (exclusive of capital 
gains and losses) of $50,000 and net long-term capital gain (section 
1201 gain (net capital gain for taxable years beginning after December 
31, 1976)) of $75,000. The rate of tax on capital gains under section 
1201(b) relating to the alternative tax has been increased from 25 
percent to a maximum rate of 29\1/2\ percent with respect to gain in 
excess of $50,000 and the effective date of the change in rate is 
January 1, 1970. The income tax for the taxable year ended June 30, 
1970, would be computed under section 21 as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                              Tentative Tax                             
Taxable income exclusive of capital                                     
 gains and losses...................     $50,000                        
Long-term capital gain..............      75,000                        
                                     -------------                      
                                         125,000                        
Deduct 50% of long-term capital gain      37,500                        
                                     -------------                      
      Taxable income................      87,500                        
                                     =============                      
Tax under section 1 (1969 and 1970                                      
 rates).............................      37,690                        
                                     =============                      
           Alternative Tax Under Section 1201(b) (1969 Rates)           
Taxable income ($50,000+50% of                                          
 $75,000)...........................     $87,500                        
Less 50% of long-term capital gain..      37,500                        
                                     -------------                      
Taxable income exclusive of capital                                     
 gains..............................      50,000                        
                                     =============                      
Partial tax (tax on $50,000)........      17,060                        
Plus 25% of $75,000.................      18,750                        
                                     -------------                      
Alternative tax under section                                           
 1201(b) at 1969 rates..............      35,810                        
           Alternative Tax Under Section 1201(b) (1970 Rates)           
                                 step i                                 
Taxable income ($50,000 + 50% of                                        
 $75,000)...........................     $87,500                        
Deduct 50% of net section 1201 gain                                     
 (net capital gain for taxable years                                    
 beginning after December 31, 1976).      37,500                        
                                     ------------                       
                                          50,000                        
                                     ============                       
Tax on $50,000 (taxable income                                          
 exclusive of capital gains)........  ..........     $17,060            
                                 step ii                                
(a) Net section 1201 gain (net                                          
 capital gain for taxable years                                         
 beginning after December 31, 1976).      75,000                        
(b) Subsection (d) gain.............      50,000                        
25% of $50,000 (lesser of (a) or                                        
 (b))...............................  ..........      12,500            
                                step iii                                
(c) 29\1/2\% of $25,000 (excess of                                      
 (a) over (b))......................       7,375                        
                                     ============                       
(d) Ordinary income.................     $50,000                        
50% of net section 1201 gain (net                                       
 capital gain for taxable years                                         
 beginning after December 31, 1976).      37,500                        
                                     ------------                       
                                          87,500                        
                                     ============                       
Tax on $87,500......................     $37,690                        
Ordinary income.....................     $50,000                        
50% of subsection (d) gain..........      25,000                        
                                     ------------                       
                                          75,000                        
                                     ============                       
Tax on $75,000......................      30,470                        
                                     ------------                       
Difference..........................       7,220                        
                                     ============                       
Lesser of (c) or (d)................      $7,220                        
                                     -------------                      
Alternative tax (total of 3 steps)                                      
 at rates effective on and after                                        
 January 1, 1970....................      36,780                        
                                     =============                      
                                                                        


[[Page 32]]

Since the alternative tax is less than the tax imposed under section 1 
for both the period in 1969 and the period in 1970, the alternative tax 
applies for both periods. Thus, since the effective date of the change 
in the rate of tax on capital gains is January 1, 1970, the old rate of 
alternative tax is effective for 184 days of the taxable year and the 
new rate of alternative tax is effective for 181 days of the taxable 
year. The alternative taxes are apportioned as follows:

1969--184/365 of $35,810....................................  $18,052.16
1970--181/365 of $36,780....................................   18,238.85
                                                             -----------
                                                               36,291.01
Tax surcharge (See Sec.  1.51-1(d)(1)(i))...................    2,729.28
                                                             -----------
      Total tax for the taxable year........................   39,020.29
                                                                        

    Example 2.  B, a single individual not a head of a household, has a 
taxable year ending March 31. For the taxable year ending March 31, 
1971, B has adjusted gross income of $18,500. His computation of the tax 
imposed is as follows:

                           1970 Tentative Tax                           
Adjusted gross income...........................  $18,500.00            
  Less:                                                                 
    Standard deduction..........................   $1,000.00            
    Personal exemption..........................      625.00    1,625.00
                                                 -----------------------
Taxable income under 1970 deduction provisions..   16,875.00            
                                                 =============          
Tax on $16,875 (1970 rates):                                            
  Tax on first $16,000..........................    4,330.00            
  42 percent of $875............................      367.50            
                                                 ------------           
Tentative tax at rates and deduction provisions                         
 effective on or after January 1, 1970..........    4,697.50            
                                                 =============          
                                                                        
                           1971 Tentative Tax                           
Adjusted gross income...........................  $18,500.00            
  Less:                                                                 
    Standard deduction..........................      $1,500            
    Personal exemption..........................         650    2,150.00
                                                 -----------------------
Taxable income under 1971 deduction provisions..   16,350.00            
                                                 =============          
Tax on $16,350 (1971 rates):                                            
  Tax on first $16,000..........................       3,830            
  34 percent of $350............................         119            
                                                 ------------           
Tentative tax at rates and deduction provisions                         
 effective on or after Januray 1, 1971..........    3,949.00            
                                                 =============          
The 1970 and 1971 tentative taxes are                                   
 apportioned as follows:                                                
  1970--275/365 of $4,697.50....................    3,539.21            
  1971--90/365 of $3,949.00.....................      973.73            
                                                 -------------          
                                                    4,512.94            
Tax surcharge (see Sec.  1.51-1(d)(1)(i)).......       56.26            
                                                 -------------          
      Total tax for the taxable year............    4,569.20            
                                                 =============          
                                                                        

    Example 3.  H and W, husband and wife, have a foster child, C, who 
qualifies as a dependent under section 152(b)(2) for the period 
beginning after December 31, 1969. H and W file a joint return on the 
basis of a taxable year ending August 31. For the taxable year ending 
August 31, 1970, H and W have adjusted gross income of $12,500. Their 
computation of the tax imposed is as follows:

                           1969 Tentative Tax                           
Adjusted gross income...........................  $12,500.00            
  Less:                                                                 
        Standard deduction......................   $1,000.00            
        Personal exemption (2)..................    1,200.00    2,200.00
                                                 -----------------------
Taxable income under 1969 deduction provisions..   10,300.00            
                                                 =============          
Taxable income reduced by one-half..............  ..........    5,150.00
                                                             ===========
Tax on $5,150 (1969 rates):                                             
  Tax on first $4,000...........................     $690.00            
  22 percent of $1,150..........................      253.00      943.00
                                                 -----------------------
Twice the tax on $5,150.........................   $1,886.00            
                                                 ============           
Tentative tax at rates and deduction provisions                         
 effective on or after January 1, 1969..........    1,886.00            
                                                 =============          
                           1970 Tentative Tax                           
Adjusted gross income...........................  $12,500.00            
  Less:                                                                 
    Standard deduction..........................   $1,000.00            
    Personal exemption (3)......................    1,875.00    2,875.00
                                                 -----------------------
Taxable income under 1970 deduction provisions..   $9,625.00            
                                                 =============          
Tax on $9,625 (1970 rates):                                             
  Tax on first $8,000...........................   $1,380.00            
  22 percent of $1,625..........................      357.50            
                                                 ------------           
Tentative tax at rates and deduction provisions                         
 effective on or after January 1, 1970..........    1,737.50            
                                                 =============          
The 1969 and 1970 tentative taxes are                                   
 apportioned as follows:                                                
  1969--122/365 of $1,886.......................     $630.39            
  1970--243/365 of $1,737.50....................    1,156.75            
                                                 -------------          
                                                    1,787.14            
Tax surcharge (see Sec.  1.51-1(d)(1)(i)).......      104.05            
                                                 -------------          
  Total tax for the taxable year................    1,891.19            
                                                 =============          
                                                                        

    Example 4.  B, a single individual with one exemption, reports his 
income on the basis of a fiscal year ending June 30. For fiscal year 
ending June 30, 1971, B reports adjusted gross income of $250,000, 
consisting of earned net income of $240,000 and investment income of 
$10,000. In addition, on April 24, 1971, stock was transferred to B 
pursuant to his exercise of a qualified stock option, and the fair 
market value of such stock at that time exceeded the option price by 
$175,000. This $175,000 constitutes an item of tax preference

[[Page 33]]

described in section 57(a)(6). B claims itemized deductions in the 
amount of $34,000. By reason of section 1348, the maximum rate of tax on 
earned taxable income for a taxable year beginning after 1970 but before 
1972 is 60 percent. The income tax for the taxable year ending June 30, 
1971, would be computed under section 21 as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                           1970 Tentative Tax                           
Adjusted gross income...................     $250,000.00                
  Less:                                                                 
    Itemized deductions.................      $34,000.00                
    Personal exemption..................          625.00       34,625.00
                                         -------------------------------
Taxable income under 1970 deduction                                     
 provisions.............................      215,375.00                
                                         =================              
Tax on $215,375 (1970 rates)                                            
Tax on first $100,000...................      $55,490.00                
70 percent of $115,375..................       80,762.50                
                                         ----------------               
Tentative tax at rates and deduction                                    
 provisions effective on or after                                       
 January 1, 1970........................      136,252.50                
                                         =================              
Minimum tax:                                                            
  Total tax preference items............      175,000.00                
  Less:                                                                 
    Exemption...........................      $30,000.00                
    Income tax..........................      136,252.50      166,252.50
                                         -------------------------------
Subject to 10 percent tax...............        8,747.50                
                                         =================              
10 percent tax..........................          874.75                
                                         =================              
      Total tentative tax ($136,252.50 +                                
       $874.75).........................      137,127.25                
                                         =================              
                           1971 Tentative Tax                           
Adjusted gross income...................     $250,000.00                
  Less:                                                                 
    Itemized deductions.................      $34,000.00                
    Personal exemption..................          650.00       34,650.00
                                         -------------------------------
Taxable income under 1971 deduction                                     
 provisions.............................      215,350.00                
                                         =================              
(a) Tax on highest amount of taxable                                    
 income on which rate does not exceed 60                                
 percent ($50,000) (1971 rates).........       20,190.00                
(b) Earned taxable                                                      
  income:                                                               
  ($215,350 x                                                           
  $240,000/                                                             
  $250,000).............................     $206,736.00                
Less: Tax                                                               
  preference offset:                                                    
  ($175,000                                                             
-$30,000)...............................      145,000.00                
                                         -----------------              
                                               61,736.00                
                                         ================               
(c) 60% of the amount by which $61,736                                  
 exceeds $50,000........................        7,041.60                
(d) Tax on $215,350 (1971 rates)                                        
  Tax on first $100,000.................       53,090.00                
  70% of $115,350.......................       80,745.00                
                                         ----------------               
      Total.............................      133,835.00                
                                         ================               
(e) Tax on $61,736 (1971 rates)                                         
  Tax on first $60,000..................       26,390.00                
  64% of $1,736.........................        1,111.04                
                                         ----------------               
      Total.............................       27,501.04                
                                         ================               
(f) Excess of $133,835 over $27,501.04..      106,333.96                
                                         -----------------              
Tentative tax (total of Steps (a), (c),                                 
 and (f)) at rates and deduction                                        
 provisions effective on or after                                       
 January 1, 1971........................      133,565.56                
                                         =================              
Minimum tax:                                                            
  Total tax preference items............      175,000.00                
  Less:                                                                 
    Exemption...........................      $30,000.00                
    Income tax..........................      133,565.56      163,565.56
                                         -------------------------------
  Subject to 10 percent tax.............      $11,434.44                
                                         =================              
  10 percent tax........................        1,143.44                
                                         =================              
    Total tentative tax ($133,565.56 +                                  
     $1,143.44).........................      134,709.00                
                                         =================              
The 1970 and 1971 tentative taxes are                                   
 apportioned as follows:                                                
  1970--184/365 of $137,127.25..........       69,127.16                
  1971--181/365 of $134,709.............       66,800.90                
                                         =================              
    Total tax for the taxable year......      135,928.06                
                                         =================              
                                                                        

    Example 5.  The surtax exemption of corporation M (one of 4 
subsidiary corporations of W corporation), which files its income tax 
returns on the basis of a fiscal year ending March 31, 1964, is less 
than $25,000, by reason of section 1561 of the Code applicable to 
taxable years ending after December 31, 1963, and beginning before 
January 1, 1975. The taxable income of corporation M is $100,000, and 
the amount of the surtax exemption determined under the new rule for the 
1964 taxable year is $5,000 ($25,000<divide>5). M's income tax liability 
for the taxable year ending March 31, 1964, is computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                           1963 Tentative Tax                           
Taxable income..........................        $100,000                
                                         =================              
Normal tax on $100,000 (1963 rates) 30                                  
 percent of $100,000....................         $30,000                

[[Page 34]]

                                                                        
Surtax on $75,000 (1963 rates and                                       
 $25,000 surtax exemption) 22 percent of                                
 $75,000................................          16,500                
                                         -----------------              
      Total tentative tax at rates and                                  
       surtax exemption effective before                                
       January 1, 1964..................          46,500                
                                         =================              
                           1964 Tentative Tax                           
Taxable income..........................        $100,000                
                                         =================              
Normal tax on $100,000 (1964 rates) 22                                  
 percent of $100,000....................         $22,000                
Surtax on $95,000 (1964 rates and a                                     
 $5,000 surtax exemption) 28 percent of                                 
 $95,000................................          26,600                
                                         ----------------               
      Total tentative tax at rates and                                  
       surtax exemption effective after                                 
       January 1, 1964..................          48,600                
                                         =================              
The 1963 and 1964 tentative taxes are                                   
 apportioned as follows:                                                
  1963--275/366 of $46,500..............       34,938.52                
  1964--91/366 of $48,600...............       12,083.61                
                                         -----------------              
      Total tax for the taxable year....       47,022.13                
                                         =================              
     M has the same amount of taxable income in 1965. Its income tax    
   liability for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1965, is computed as  
                                follows:                                
                           1964 Tentative Tax                           
Taxable income..........................        $100,000                
                                         =================              
Normal tax on $100,000 (1964 rates) 22                                  
 percent of $100,000....................         $22,000                
Surtax on $95,000 (1964 rates and a                                     
 $5,000 surtax exemption) 28 percent of                                 
 $95,000................................          26,600                
                                         -----------------              
      Total tentative tax at the 1964                                   
       rates............................          48,600                
                                         =================              
                           1965 Tentative Tax                           
Taxable income..........................        $100,000                
                                         =================              
Normal tax on $100,000 (1965 rates) 22                                  
 percent of $100,000....................         $22,000                
Surtax on $95,000 (1965 rates and a                                     
 $5,000 surtax exemption) 26 percent of                                 
 $95,000................................          24,700                
                                         ----------------               
      Total tentative tax at the 1965                                   
       rates............................          46,700                
                                         =================              
The 1964 and 1965 tentative taxes are                                   
 apportioned as follows:                                                
  1964--275/365 of $48,600..............      $36,616.44                
  1965--90/365 of $46,700...............       11,515.07                
                                         -----------------              
      Total tax for the taxable year....       48,131.51                
                                         =================              
                                                                        

    Example 6.  Assume the same facts as in example (5), except that M 
elected the additional tax under section 1562 for its fiscal year ending 
March 31, 1964. M's tax liability is completed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                           1963 Tentative Tax                           
Taxable income..........................        $100,000                
                                         =================              
Normal tax on $100,000 (1963 rates) 30                                  
 percent of $100,000....................         $30,000                
Surtax on $75,000 (1963 rates and                                       
 $25,000 surtax exemption) 22 percent of                                
 $75,000................................          16,500                
                                         ----------------               
      Total tentative tax at rates and                                  
       surtax exemption effective before                                
       January 1, 1964..................          46,500                
                                         =================              
                           1964 Tentative Tax                           
Taxable income..........................        $100,000                
                                         =================              
Normal tax on $100,000 (1964 rates) 22                                  
 percent of $100,000....................         $22,000                
Surtax on $75,000 (1964 rates and                                       
 $25,000 surtax exemption) 28 percent of                                
 $75,000................................          21,000                
Additional tax on $25,000 6 percent of                                  
 $25,000................................           1,500                
                                         ----------------               
      Total tentative tax at rates and                                  
       surtax exemption effective on and                                
       after January 1, 1964............          44,500                
                                         =================              
The 1963 and 1964 tentative taxes are                                   
 apportioned as follows:                                                
  1963--275/366 of $46,500..............      $34,938.52                
  1964--91/366 of $44,500...............       11,064.21                
                                         -----------------              
      Total tax for the taxable year....       46,002.73                
                                         =================              
                                                                        

    Example 7.  Corporation N files its income tax returns on the basis 
of a fiscal year ending June 30. For its taxable year ending in 1976, 
the taxable income of N is $100,000. N's income tax liability is 
determined for the period July 1, 1975, through December 31, 1975, by 
taking into account two rates of normal tax under section 11(b)(2) (A) 
and (B) and the increase to $50,000 in the surtax exemption under 
section 11(d). For the period January 1, 1976, through June 30, 1976, 
N's income tax liability is determined by taking into account the single 
normal tax rate under section 11(b)(1) and the $25,000 surtax exemption

[[Page 35]]

under section 11(d). N's tax liability for the taxable year ending June 
30, 1976, is computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                           1975 Tentative Tax                           
Taxable income..........................        $100,000                
                                         =================              
  Normal tax on $100,000 (1975 rates) 20                                
   percent of $25,000...................          $5,000                
  22 percent of $75,000.................          16,500                
  Surtax on $50,000 (1975 rates and                                     
   $50,000 surtax exemption) 26 percent                                 
   of $50,000...........................          13,000                
                                         ----------------               
      Total tentative tax at rates and                                  
       surtax exemption effective on and                                
       after January 1, 1975............          34,500                
                                         =================              
                           1976 Tentative Tax                           
Taxable income..........................        $100,000                
                                         =================              
  Normal tax on $100,000 (1976 rates) 22                                
   percent of $100,000..................         $22,000                
  Surtax on $75,000 (1976 rates and                                     
   $25,000 surtax exemption) 26 percent                                 
   of $75,000...........................          19,500                
                                         ----------------               
      Total tentative tax at rates and                                  
       surtax exemption effective on and                                
       after January 1, 1976............          41,500                
                                         =================              
The 1975 and 1976 tentative taxes are                                   
 apportioned as follows:                                                
  1975--184/366 of $34,500..............         $17,344                
  1976--182/366 of $41,500..............          20,637                
                                         -----------------              
      Total tax for the taxable year....          37,981                
                                                                        

(Secs. 1561(a) (83 Stat. 599; 26 U.S.C. 1561(a)) of the Internal Revenue 
Code)
[T.D. 6500, 25 FR 11402, Nov. 26, 1960; 25 FR 14021, Dec. 31, 1960, as 
amended by T.D. 7164, 37 FR 4190, Feb. 29, 1972; T.D. 74-13, 41 FR 
12639, Mar. 26, 1976; T.D. 7528, 42 FR 64694, Dec. 28, 1977; T.D. 7728, 
45 FR 72651, Nov. 3, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 1.23-1  Residential energy credit.

    (a) General rule. Section 23 or former section 44C provides a 
residential energy credit against the tax imposed by chapter 1 of the 
Internal Revenue Code. The credit is an amount equal to the individual's 
qualified energy conservation expenditures (set out in paragraph (b)) 
plus the individual's qualified renewable energy source expenditures 
(set out in paragraph (c)) for the taxable year. However, the credit is 
subject to the limitations described in paragraph (d) and the special 
rules contained in Sec. 1.23-3. The credit is nonrefundable (that is, 
the credit may not exceed an individual's tax liability for the taxable 
year). However, any unused credit may be carried over to succeeding 
years to the extent permitted under paragraph (e). Renters as well as 
owners of a dwelling unit may qualify for the credit. See Sec. 1.23-3(h) 
for the rules relating to the allocation of the credit in the case of 
joint occupants of a dwelling unit.
    (b) Qualified energy conservation expenditures. In the case of any 
dwelling unit, the qualified energy conservation expenditures are 15 
percent of the energy conservation expenditures made by the taxpayer 
with respect to the dwelling unit during the taxable year, but not in 
excess of $2,000 of such expenditures. See Sec. 1.23-2(a) for the 
definition of energy conservation expenditures.
    (c) Qualified renewable energy source expenditures. In the case of 
taxable years beginning after December 31, 1979, the qualified renewable 
energy source expenditures are 40 percent of the renewable energy source 
expenditures made by the taxpayer during the taxable year (and before 
January 1, 1986) with respect to the dwelling units that do not exceed 
$10,000. In the case of taxable years beginning before January 1, 1980, 
the qualified renewable energy source expenditures are the renewable 
energy source expenditures made by the taxpayer with respect to the 
dwelling unit during the taxable year, but not in excess of--
    (1) 30 percent of the expenditures up to $2,000, plus
    (2) 20 percent of the expenditures over $2,000, but not more than 
$10,000.

See Sec. 1.23-2(b) for the definition of renewable energy source 
expenditures.
    (d) Limitations--(1) Minimum dollar amount. No residential energy 
credit shall be allowed with respect to any return (whether joint or 
separate) for any taxable year if the amount of the credit otherwise 
allowable (determined without regard to the tax liability limitation 
imposed by paragraph (d)(3) of this section) is less than $10.
    (2) Prior expenditures taken into account--(i) In general. For 
purposes of

[[Page 36]]

determining the credit for expenditures made during a taxable year, the 
taxpayer must reduce the maximum amount of allowable expenditures with 
respect to the dwelling until in computing qualified energy conservation 
expenditures (under paragraph (b)) or qualified renewable energy 
conservation expenditures (under paragraph (c)) by prior expenditures 
which were made by the taxpayer or by joint occupants (see Sec. 1.23-
3(h)) with respect to the same dwelling unit, and which were taken into 
account in computing the credit for prior taxable years. In the case of 
expenditures made during taxable years beginning before January 1, 1980, 
the reduction of the maximum amount under paragraph (c) must first be 
made with respect to the first $2,000 of expenditures (to which a 30 
percent rate applies) and then with respect to the next $8,000 of 
expenditures (to which a 20 percent rate applies). This reduction must 
be made if all or any part of the credit was allowed in or was carried 
over from a prior taxable year.
    (ii) Change of principal residence. A taxpayer is eligible for the 
maximum credit for qualifying expenditures made with respect to a new 
principal residence notwithstanding the allowance of a credit for 
qualifying expenditures made with respect to the taxpayer's previous 
principal residence. Furthermore, except in certain cases involving 
joint occupancy (see Sec. 1.23-3(h)), a taxpayer is eligible for the 
maximum credit notwithstanding the allowance of a credit to a prior 
owner of the taxpayer's new principal residence.
    (iii) Example. The rules with respect to the reduction for prior 
expenditures are illustrated by the following example:

    Example. In 1978, A has $1,000 of energy conservation expenditures 
and $5,000 of renewable energy source expenditures in connection with 
A's principal residence. A's residential energy credit for 1978 is 
$1,350, made up of $150 of qualified energy conservation expenditures 
(15 percent of $1,000) plus $1,200 of qualified renewable energy source 
expenditures (30 percent of the first $2,000 plus 20 percent of the next 
$3,000). In 1979 A has an additional $2,000 of energy conservation 
expenditures and $3,000 of renewable energy source expenditures in 
connection with the same principal residence. A's residential energy 
credit for 1979 is $750, made up of $150 of qualified energy 
conservation expenditures (15 percent of the new maximum $1,000, which 
was reduced from $2,000 by $1,000 of energy conservation expenditures 
taken into account in 1978) plus $600 of qualified renewable energy 
source expenditures (20 percent of $3,000, which reflects the reduction 
of the maximum allowable expenditures by the $5,000 of renewable energy 
source expenditures taken into account in 1978). The maximum residential 
energy credit allowable to A with respect to the same principal 
residence in subsequent years in which the credit is allowable is $400 
(20 percent of the new maximum of $2,000 for renewable energy source 
expenditures and none for energy conservation expenditures).

    (3) Effects of grants and subsidized energy financing--(i) In 
general. Qualified expenditures financed with Federal, State, or local 
grants shall be taken into account for purposes of computing the 
residential energy credit only if the amount of such grants is taxable 
as gross income to the taxpayer under section 61 (relating to the 
definition of gross income) and the regulations thereunder. In the case 
of taxable years beginning after December 31, 1980, qualified 
expenditures made from subsidized energy financing (as defined in 
Sec. 1.23-2(i)) shall not be taken into account (except as provided in 
the following sentence) for purposes of computing the residential energy 
credit. In addition, the taxpayer must reduce the maximum amount 
allowable expenditures (reduced as provided in paragraph (d)(2) of this 
section) with respect to the dwelling unit in computing qualified energy 
conservation expenditures (under paragraph (b) of this section) or 
qualified renewable energy source expenditures (under paragraph (c) of 
this section), whichever is appropriate, by an amount equal to the sum 
of--
    (A) The amount of expenditures from subsidized energy financing (as 
defined in Sec. 1.23-2(i)) that were made by the taxpayer during the 
taxable year or any prior taxable year beginning after December 31, 
1980, with respect to the same dwelling unit, and
    (B) The amount of any funds received by the taxpayer during the 
taxable year or any prior taxable year beginning after December 31, 
1980, as a Federal, State, or local government grant made in taxable 
years beginning after December 31, 1980, that were used to

[[Page 37]]

make qualified expenditures with respect to the same dwelling unit and 
that were not included in the gross income of the taxpayer.
    (ii) Example. The provisions of this paragraph (d)(3) may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. A had in 1979 made a renewable energy source expenditure of 
$2,000 in connection with A's residence for which he took the then 
allowed credit of $600. In 1981 A made additional renewable energy 
source expenditures of $9,000 with respect to which he received a loan 
of $5,000 from the Federal Solar-Energy and Energy Conservation Bank. 
Assume that the loan is subsidized energy financing. A computes the 
credit as follows: The initial maximum allowable dollar limit is $10,000 
which is reduced by the sum of the prior year expenditures of $2,000 and 
the subsidized energy financing loan of $5,000 leaving a dollar limit of 
$3,000 ($10,000-($2,000+$5,000)). The $5,000 portion of the $9,000 
funded by the subsidized energy financing loan is not allowed as a 
renewable energy source expenditure. The remaining expenditures in 1981 
are $4,000 ($9,000-$5,000). However, this amount exceeds the allowed 
maximum dollar limit of $3,000. Therefore, A's creditable expenses for 
1981 are only $3,000 on which the credit is $1,200 (40 percent of 
$3,000).

    (4) Tax liability limitation--(i) For taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1983. For taxable years beginning after December 31, 1983, 
the credit allowed by this section shall not exceed the amount of tax 
imposed by chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 for the 
taxable year, reduced by the sum of credits allowable under--
    (A) Section 21 (relating to expenses for household and dependent 
care services necessary for gainful employment),
    (B) Section 22 (relating to credit for the elderly and the 
permanently and totally disabled), and
    (C) Section 24 (relating to contributions to candidates for public 
office).

See section 26 (b) and (c) for certain taxes that are not treated as 
imposed by chapter 1.
    (ii) For taxable years beginning before January 1, 1984. For taxable 
years beginning before January 1, 1984, the credit allowed by this 
section shall not exceed the amount of the tax imposed by chapter 1 of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 for the taxable year, reduced by the 
sum of the credits allowable under--
    (A) Section 32 (relating to tax withheld at source on nonresident 
aliens and foreign corporations and on tax-free covenant bonds),
    (B) Section 33 (relating to the taxes of foreign countries and 
possessions of the United States),
    (C) Section 37 (relating to retirement income),
    (D) Section 38 (relating to investment in certain depreciable 
property),
    (E) Section 40 (relating to expenses of work incentive programs),
    (F) Section 41 (relating to contributions to candidates for public 
office),
    (G) Section 42 (relating to the general tax credit),
    (H) Section 44 (relating to purchase of new personal residence),
    (I) Section 44A (relating to expenses for household and dependent 
care services), and
    (J) Section 44B (relating to employment of certain new employees).
    (e) Carryforward of unused credit. If the credit allowable by this 
section exceeds the tax liability limitation imposed by section 23(b)(5) 
(or former section 44C(b)(5)) and paragraph (d)(4) of this section, the 
excess credit shall be carried forward to the succeeding taxable year 
and added to the credit allowable under this section for the succeeding 
taxable year. A carryforward that is not used in the succeeding year 
because it exceeds the tax liability limitation shall be carried forward 
to later taxable years until used, except that no excess credit may be 
carried forward to any taxable year beginning after December 31, 1987.

[T.D. 7717, 45 FR 57715, Aug. 29, 1980. Redesignated and amended by T.D. 
8146, 52 FR 26669, July 16, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.23-2  Definitions.

    For purposes of section 23 or former section 44C and regulations 
thereunder--
    (a) Energy conservation expenditures--(1) In general. The term 
``energy conservation expenditure'' means an expenditure made on or 
after April 20, 1977, and before January 1, 1986, by a taxpayer for 
insulation or any other energy-conserving component, or for

[[Page 38]]

labor costs allocable to the original installation of such insulation or 
other component, if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
    (i) The insulation (as defined in paragraph (c)) or other energy-
conserving component (as defined in paragraph (d)) is installed in or on 
a dwelling unit that is used as the taxpayer's principal residence when 
the installation is completed. See Sec. 1.23-3(e) for the definition of 
principal residence.
    (ii) The dwelling unit is located in the United States (as defined 
in section 7701(a)(9)).
    (iii) The construction of the dwelling unit was substantially 
completed before April 20, 1977. See Sec. 1.23-3(f) for the definition 
of the terms ``construction'' and ``substantially completed''. In the 
case of expenditures made with respect to the enlargement of a dwelling 
unit, the construction of the enlargement must have been substantially 
completed before April 20, 1977.
    (2) Examples. The application of this paragraph may be illustrated 
by the following examples:

    Example 1. In 1978, A spent $500 for the purchase and installation 
of new storm windows to replace old storm windows, $100 to reinstall old 
storm windows, and $150 to transfer a A's house insulation which had 
been installed in A's garage. Only the $500 spent for new storm windows 
qualifies as an energy conservation expenditure. The $100 spent to 
reinstall storm windows and the $150 spent to transfer insulation to A's 
house do not qualify since the only installation costs that qualify are 
those for the original installation of energy conservation property the 
original use of which commences with the taxpayer.

    Example 2. In June 1977, B purchased for B's principal residence a 
new house that was substantially completed before April 20, 1977. 
Pursuant to B's request the builder installed storm windows on May 1, 
1977, the cost of this option being included in the purchase price of 
the house. The portion of the purchase price of the residence allocable 
to the storm windows constitutes an energy conservation expenditure. 
However, no other part of the purchase price may be allocated to energy 
conservation property (insulation and other energy conserving 
components) installed before April 20, 1977. To qualify as an energy 
conservation expenditure, an expenditure must be made (i.e., 
installation of the energy conservation property must be completed) on 
or after April 20, 1977.

    (b) Renewable energy source expenditures. The term ``renewable 
energy source expenditures'' means an expenditure made on or after April 
20, 1977, and before January 1, 1986, by a taxpayer for renewable energy 
source property (as defined in paragraph (e)), or for labor costs 
properly allocable to the on-site preparation, assembly, or original 
installation such property, if both of the following conditions are 
satisfied:
    (1) The renewable energy source property is installed in connection 
with a dwelling unit that is used as the taxpayer's principal residence 
when the installation is completed. See Sec. 1.23-3(e).
    (2) The dwelling unit is located in the United States (as defined in 
section 7701(a)(9)).

Additionally, the term ``renewable energy source expenditures'' includes 
expenditures made after December 31, 1979, and before January 1, 1986, 
for an onsite well drilled for any geothermal deposit (as defined in 
paragraph (h)), or for labor costs properly allocable to onsite 
preparation, assembly, or original installation of such well, but only 
if the requirements of paragraphs (b) (1) and (2) of this section are 
met and the taxpayer has not elected under section 263(c) to deduct any 
portion of such expenditures or allocable labor costs.

Eligibility as a renewable energy source expenditure does not depend on 
the date of construction of the dwelling unit. Thus, such an expenditure 
may be made in connection with either a new or an existing dwelling 
unit. Renewable energy source expenditures need only be made in 
connection with a dwelling, rather than in or on a dwelling unit. For 
example, a solar collector that otherwise constitutes renewable energy 
source property is not ineligible merely because it is installed 
separately from the dwelling unit. The term ``renewable energy source 
expenditure'' does not include any expenditure allocable to a swimming 
pool even when used as an energy storage medium or to any other energy 
storage medium whose primary function is other than the storage of 
energy. It also does not include the cost of maintenance of an

[[Page 39]]

installed system or the cost of leasing renewable energy source 
property.
    (c) Insulation. The term ``insulation'' means any item that 
satisfies all of the following conditions:
    (1) The item is specifically and primarily designed to reduce, when 
installed in or on a dwelling or on a water heater, the heat loss or 
gain of such dwelling or water heater. To qualify as insulation the item 
must be installed between a conditioned area and a nonconditioned area 
(except when installed on a water heater, water pipe, or heating/cooling 
duct). Thus for example, awnings do not qualify as insulation. For 
purposes of this section the term ``conditioned area'' means an area 
that has been heated or cooled by conventional or renewable energy 
source means. Insulation includes materials made of fiberglass, rock 
wool, cellulose, urea based foam, urethane, vermiculite, perlite, 
polystyrene, and extruded polystyrene foam.
    (2) The original use of the item begins with the taxpayer.
    (3) The item can reasonably be expected to remain in operation at 
least 3 years.
    (4) The item meets the applicable performance and quality standards 
prescribed in Sec. 1.23-4 (if any) that are in effect at the time the 
taxpayer acquires the item. The term ``insulation'' shall not include 
items whose primary purpose is not insulation (e.g., whose function is 
primarily structural, decorative, or safety-related). For example, 
carpeting, drapes (including linings), shades, wood paneling, fireplace 
screens (including those made of glass), new or replacement walls 
(except for qualifying insulation therein) and exterior siding do not 
qualify although they may have been designed in part to have an 
insulating effect.
    (d) Other energy-conserving components. The term ``other energy-
conserving component'' means any item (other than insulation) that 
satisfies all of the following conditions:
    (1) The original use of the item begins with the taxpayer.
    (2) The item can reasonably be expected to remain in operation for 
at least 3 years.
    (3) The item meets the applicable performance and quality standards 
prescribed in Sec. 1.23-4 (if any) that are in effect at the time of the 
taxpayer's acquisition of the item.
    (4) The item is one of the following items:
    (i) A furnace replacement burner. The term ``furnace replacement 
burner'' means a device (for oil and gas-fired furnaces or boilers) that 
is designed to achieve a reduction in the amount of fuel consumed as a 
result of increased combustion efficiency. The burner must replace an 
existing burner. It does not qualify if it is acquired as a component 
of, or for use in, a new furnace or boiler.
    (ii) A device for modifying flue openings. The term ``device for 
modifying flue openings'' means an automatically operated damper that--
    (A) Is designed for installation in the flue, between the barometric 
damper or draft hood and the chimney, of a furnace; and
    (B) Conserves energy by substantially reducing the flow of 
conditioned air through the chimney when the furnace is not in 
operation. Conditioned air is air that has been heated or cooled by 
conventional or renewable energy source means.
    (iii) A furnace ignition system. The term ``furnace ignition 
system'' means an electrical or mechanical device, designed for 
installation in a gas-fired furnace or boiler that automatically ignites 
the gas burner. In order to qualify, the device must replace a gas pilot 
light. Furthermore, it does not qualify if it is acquired as a component 
of, or for use in, a new furnace or boiler.
    (iv) A storm or thermal window or door. The terms ``storm or thermal 
window'' and ``storm or thermal door'' mean the following:
    (A)(1) A window placed outside or inside an ordinary or prime 
window, creating an insulating air space.
    (2) A window with enhanced resistance to heat flow through the 
glazed area by multi-glazing.
    (3) A window that consists of glass or other glazing materials that 
have exceptional heat-absorbing or heat-reflecting properties. For 
purposes of this subdivision (iv), the term ``glazing material'' does 
not include films and coatings applied on the surface of a window.

[[Page 40]]

    (B)(1) A second door, installed outside or inside a prime exterior 
door, creating an insulating air space.
    (2) A door with enhanced resistance to heat flow through the glazed 
area by multi-glazing.
    (3) A prime exterior door that has an R-value (a measurement of the 
ability of insulation to resist the flow of heat) of at least 2 
throughout.

For purposes of this subdivision, ``multi-glazing'' is an arrangement in 
which two or more sheets of glazing material are affixed in a window or 
door frame to create one or more insulating air spaces. Multi-glazing 
can be achieved by installing a preassembled, sealed insulating glass 
unit or by affixing one or more additional sheets of glazing onto an 
existing window (or sash) or door. For purposes of this subdivision, a 
storm or thermal window or door does not include any film applied on or 
over the surface of a window or door.
    (v) Automatic energy-saving setback thermostat. The term ``automatic 
energy-saving setback thermostat'' means a device that is designed to 
reduce energy consumption by regulating the demand on the heating or 
cooling system in which it is installed, and uses--
    (A) A temperature control device for interior spaces incorporating 
more than one temperature control level, and
    (B) A clock or other automatic mechanism for switching from one 
control level to another.
    (vi) Caulking and weatherstripping. The term ``caulking'' means 
pliable materials used to fill small gaps at fixed joints on buildings 
to reduce the passage of air and moisture. Caulking includes, but is not 
limited to, materials commonly known as ``sealants'', ``putty'', and 
``glazing compounds''. The term ``weatherstripping'' means narrow strips 
of material placed over or in movable joints of windows and doors to 
reduce the passage of air and moisture.
    (vii) Energy usage display meter. The term ``energy usage display 
meter'' means a device the sole purpose of which is to display the cost 
(in money) of energy usage in the dwelling. It may show cost information 
for electricity usage, gas usage, oil usage, or any combination thereof. 
The device may measure energy usage of the whole dwelling, or individual 
appliances or systems on an instantaneous or cumulative basis.
    (viii) Components specified by the Secretary. The Secretary (or his 
delegate) may, in his discretion, after consultation with the Secretary 
of Energy and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (or their 
delegates), and any other appropriate Federal officers, specify by 
regulation other energy-conserving components for addition to the list 
of qualified items. See Sec. 1.23-6 for the procedures and criteria to 
be used in determining whether an item will be considered for addition 
to the list of qualified items by the Secretary.

The term ``other energy-conserving component'' is limited to items in a 
category specifically listed in section 44(c)(4)(A) (i) through (vii) or 
added by the Secretary.
    (e) Renewable energy source property--(1) In general. The term 
``renewable energy source property'' includes any solar energy property, 
wind energy property, geothermal energy property, or property referred 
to in subparagraph (2), which meets the following conditions:
    (i) The original use of the property begins with the taxpayer.
    (ii) The property can reasonably be expected to remain in operation 
for at least 5 years.
    (iii) The property meets the applicable performance and quality 
standards prescribed in Sec. 1.23-4 (if any) that are in effect at the 
time of the taxpayer's acquisition of the property.

Renewable energy source property does not include heating or cooling 
systems, nor systems to provide hot water or electricity, which serve to 
supplement renewable energy source equipment in heating, cooling, or 
providing hot water or electricity to a dwelling unit, and which employ 
a form of energy (such as oil or gas) other than solar, wind, or 
geothermal energy (or other forms of renewable energy provided in 
paragraph (e)(2) of this section. Thus, heat pumps or oil or gas 
furnaces, used in connection with renewable energy source property, are 
not eligible for the credit. In order to be eligible for the credit for 
renewable energy source

[[Page 41]]

property, the property (as well as labor costs properly allocable to 
onsite preparation, assembly or installation of equipment) must be 
clearly identifiable. See Sec. 1.23-3(l) for recordkeeping rules.
    (2) Renewable energy source specified by the Secretary. In addition 
to solar, wind, and geothermal energy property, renewable energy source 
property includes property that transmits or uses another renewable 
energy source that the Secretary (or his delegate) specifies by 
regulations, after consultation with the Secretary of Energy and the 
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (or their delegates), and any 
other appropriate Federal officers, to be of a kind that is appropriate 
for the purpose of heating or cooling the dwelling or providing hot 
water or (in the case of expenditures made after December 31, 1979) 
electricity for use within the dwelling. For purposes of this section, 
references to the transmission or use of energy include its collection 
and storage. See Sec. 1.23-6 for the procedures and criteria to be used 
in determining when another energy source will be considered for 
addition to the list of qualified renewable energy sources.
    (f) Solar energy property--(1) In general. The term ``solar energy 
property'' means equipment and materials of a solar energy system as 
defined in this paragraph (and parts solely related to the functioning 
of such equipment) which, when installed in connection with a dwelling, 
transmits or uses solar energy to heat or cool the dwelling or to 
provide hot water or (in the case of expenditures made after December 
31, 1979) electricity for use within the dwelling. For this purpose, 
solar energy is energy derived directly from sunlight (solar radiation). 
Property which uses, as an energy source, fuel or energy which is 
indirectly derived from sunlight (solar radiation), such as fossil fuel 
or wood or heat in underground water, is not considered solar energy 
property. Materials and components of ``passive solar systems'' as well 
as ``active solar systems'', or a combination of both types of systems 
may qualify as solar energy property.
    (2) Active solar system. An active solar system is based on the use 
of mechanically forced energy transfer, such as the use of fans or pumps 
to circulate solar generated energy, or thermal energy transfer, such as 
systems utilizing thermal siphon principles. Generally, this is 
accomplished through the use of equipment such as collectors (to absorb 
sunlight and create hot liquids or air), storage tanks (to store hot 
liquids), rockbeds (to store hot air), thermostats (to activate pumps or 
fans which circulate the hot liquids or air), and heat exchangers (to 
utilize hot liquids or air to heat air or water).
    (3) Passive solar system. A passive solar system is based on the use 
of conductive, convective, or radiant energy transfer. In order to 
qualify as a passive solar system, a solar system used for heating 
purposes must contain all of the following: a solar collection area, an 
absorber, a storage mass, a heat distribution method, and heat 
regulation devices. The term ``solar collection area'' means an expanse 
of transparent or translucent material, such as glass which is 
positioned in such a manner that the rays of the sun directly strike an 
absorber. The term ``absorber'' means a surface, such as a floor, that 
is exposed to the rays of the sun admitted through the solar collection 
area, which converts solar radiation into heat, and then transfers the 
heat to a storage mass. The term ``storage mass'' means material, such 
as masonry, that receives and holds heat from the absorber and later 
releases the heat to the interior of the dwelling. The storage mass must 
be of sufficient volume, depth, and thermal energy capacity to store and 
deliver adequate amounts of solar heat for the relative size of the 
dwelling. In addition, the storage mass must be located so that it is 
capable of distributing the stored heat directly to the habitable areas 
of the dwelling through a heat distribution method. The term ``heat 
distribution method'' means the release of radiant heating from the 
storage mass within the habitable areas of the dwelling, or convective 
heating from the storage mass through airflow paths provided by openings 
or by ducts in the storage mass, to habitable areas of the dwelling. The 
term ``heat regulations devices'' means shading or venting mechanisms 
(such as awnings or insulated drapes) to control the amount

[[Page 42]]

of solar heat admitted through the solar collection areas and nighttime 
insulation or its equivalent to control the amount of heat permitted to 
escape from the interior of the dwelling.
    (4) Components with dual function. To the extent that a passive or 
active solar system utilizes portions of the structure of a residence, 
only the materials and components whose sole purpose is to transmit or 
use solar radiation (and labor costs associated with installing such 
materials and components) are included within the term ``solar energy 
property''. Accordingly, materials and components that serve a dual 
purpose, e.g., they have a significant structural function or are 
structural components of the dwelling (and labor costs associated with 
installing such materials and components) are not included within the 
term ``solar energy property''. For example, roof ponds that form part 
of a roof (including additional structural components to support the 
roof), windows (including clerestories and skylights), and greenhouses 
do not qualify as solar energy property. However, with respect to 
expenditures made after December 31, 1979, a solar collector panel 
installed as a roof or portion thereof (including additional structural 
components to support the roof attributable to the collector) does not 
fail to qualify as solar energy property solely because it constitutes a 
structural component of the dwelling on which it is installed. For this 
purpose, the term ``solar collector panel'' does not include a skylight 
or other type of window. In the case of a trombe wall (a south facing 
wall composed of a mass wall and exterior glazing), the mass wall (and 
labor costs associated with installing the mass wall) will not qualify. 
However, the exterior (non-window) glazing will qualify. Any shading, 
venting and heat distribution mechanisms or storage systems that do not 
have a dual function will also qualify.
    (g) Wind energy property. The term ``wind energy property'' means 
equipment (and parts solely related to the functioning of such 
equipment) which, when installed in connection with a dwelling, 
transmits or uses wind energy to produce energy in a useful form for 
personal residential purposes. Examples of equipment using wind energy 
to produce energy in a useful form are windmills, wind-driven 
generators, power conditioning and storage devices that use wind to 
generate electricity or mechanical forms of energy. Devices that use 
wind merely to ventilate do not qualify as wind energy property.
    (h) Geothermal energy property. The term ``geothermal energy 
property'' means equipment (and parts solely related to the functioning 
of such equipment) necessary to transmit or use energy from a geothermal 
deposit to heat or cool a dwelling or provide hot water for use within 
the dwelling. With respect to expenditures made after December 31, 1979, 
the term ``geothermal energy property'' also means equipment (and parts 
solely related to the functioning of such equipment) necessary to 
transmit or use energy from a geothermal deposit to produce electricity 
for use within the dwelling. Equipment such as a pipe that serves both a 
geothermal function (by transmitting hot geothermal water within a 
dwelling) and a non-geothermal function (by transmitting hot water from 
a water heater within a dwelling) does not qualify as geothermal 
property. A geothermal deposit is a geothermal reservoir consisting of 
natural heat which is from an underground source and is stored in rocks 
or in an aqueous liquid or vapor (whether or not under pressure), having 
a temperature exceeding 50 degrees Celsius as measured at the wellhead 
or, in the case of a natural hot spring (where no well is drilled), at 
the intake to the distribution system.
    (i) Subsidized energy financing--(1) In general. The term 
``subsidized energy financing'' means financing (e.g., a loan) made 
directly or indirectly (such as in association with, or through the 
facilities of, a bank or other lender) during a taxable year beginning 
after December 31, 1980, under a Federal, State, or local program, a 
principal purpose of which is to provide subsidized financing for 
projects designed to conserve or produce energy. For purposes of this 
paragraph (i), financing is made when funds that constitute subsidized 
energy financing are disbursed. Subsidized energy financing includes 
financing under

[[Page 43]]

a Federal, State, or local program having two or more principal purposes 
(provided that at least one of the principal purposes is to provide 
subsidized financing for projects designed to conserve or produce 
energy), but only to the extent that the financing--
    (i) Is to be used for energy production or conservation purposes, or
    (ii) Is provided out of funds designated specifically for energy 
production or conservation.

Loan proceeds meet the use test of paragraph (i)(l)(i) of this section 
only to the extent that the loan application, the loan instrument, or 
any other loan-related documents indicate that the funds are intended 
for such use. However, loan proceeds designated for the purchase either 
of property that contains ``insulation'' or any ``other energy-
conserving component'' or of ``renewable energy source property'' as 
defined in paragraphs (c), (d), and (e), respectively, of this section 
meet the test of paragraph (i)(l)(i) of this section. Financing is 
subsidized if the interest rate or other terms of the financing 
(including any special tax treatment) provided to the taxpayer in 
connection with the program or used to raise funds for the program are 
more favorable than the terms generally available commercially. In 
addition, financing is subsidized if the principal obligation of the 
financing provided to the taxpayer is reduced by funds provided under 
the program. The source from which the funds for the program are derived 
is not a factor to be taken into account in determining whether the 
financing is subsidized. If a public utility disburses funds for the 
financing of energy conservation or renewable energy source property 
under a program that obtains the funds through sales to the utility's 
ratepayers, the program is not considered to be a Federal, State or 
local program even though the utility is a governmental agency, and, 
thus, the funds are not subsidized energy financing. Subsidized energy 
financing does not include a grant includible in gross income under 
section 61, nontaxable grants, a credit against State or local taxes 
made directly to the taxpayer claiming the credit provided for in 
section 23, or a loan guarantee made directly to the taxpayer claiming 
the credit provided for in section 23.
    (2) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph (i) may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. State A has a farm and home loan program. The program is 
used to provide low interest mortgage loans. In 1984 State A's 
legislature enacted statutory amendments to its farm and home loan 
program in an effort to encourage energy conservation-type measures. Low 
interest loans for such improvements were made available to qualified 
purchasers and owners under the farm and home loan program. The energy 
conservation measures subsidized by the program include energy 
conserving components and renewable energy source devices. State A's tax 
exempt bonds are the source of funds for loans under the program. 
Although the 1984 legislation authorizing loans for energy conserving 
components and renewable energy source improvements did not diminish the 
original purpose of the farm and home loan program, the 1984 legislation 
added another principal purpose to the program. Therefore, State A's 
program which has two principal purposes, one of which is the 
conservation or production of energy, is considered as providing 
subsidized energy financing for purposes of section 23 (c)(10) of the 
Code, to the extent that financing is provided by State A out of funds 
designated specifically for energy production or conservation. State A's 
program will also be considered as providing subsidized energy financing 
to the extent that the loan proceeds are to be used for energy 
production or conservation purposes. Loan proceeds meet the use test of 
the preceding sentence only to the extent that loan application, the 
loan instruments, or any other loan-related documents indicate that the 
funds are intended for such use.

    Example 2. The United States Department of Energy disburses funds to 
State B that the Department received from settlements from alleged 
petroleum pricing and allocation violations. State B establishes a 
program under which B will use the funds to make loans at below market 
interest rates directly to qualified applicants for the purchase of 
renewable energy source property. B's loans are subsidized energy 
financing.

    Example 3. State C establishes a program under which C will make 
loans at below market interest rates directly to qualified applicants 
for the purchases of renewable energy source property. The program is 
funded with money that State C was able to borrow after it obtained a 
loan guarantee from a Federal agency. C's loans provided under the 
program are subsidized energy financing.

    Example 4. Company D is an electric utility that is a Federal 
agency. D purchases its

[[Page 44]]

electricity from another federal agency, transmits the electricity over 
its own distribution system, and sells the electricity to numerous local 
public utilities that in turn sell the electricity to their customers. D 
wishes to start a program under which D will make loans at below market 
interest rates directly to customers of the local utilities for the 
purchase of renewable energy source property from D. The local public 
utility will act as the collection agent for repayment of the loans. The 
loans will be repayable over a period of time not in excess of 15 years. 
Under law, D must cover its full costs through its own revenues derived 
from the sale of power and other services. While D may borrow by sale of 
bonds to the United States Treasury, D must borrow at rates comparable 
to the rates prevailing in the market for similar bonds. Thus, the 
subsidized loans made under D's program will be financed by the profits 
from the sale of electricity to consumers and not by the federal 
government. D's program, which is substantially the same as that carried 
out by private (investor-owned) utilities, is not considered to be a 
Federal, State or local governmental program. Therefore, D's loans are 
not subsidized energy financing.

    Example 5. The Solar Energy and Energy Conservation Bank (Bank) 
disburses funds to State E. E disburses a portion of the funds to 
Financial Institution F. Both the Bank and State E make these 
disbursements under a program the principal purpose of which is to 
provide subsidized financing for projects designed to conserve or 
produce energy. F uses the funds to reduce a portion of the principal 
obligation on loans it issues to finance energy conservation or solar 
energy expenditures. Taxpayer G borrows $3,000 from F in order to 
purchase a solar water heating system. F uses $500 of the funds it 
received from the Bank to reduce the principal obligation of the loan to 
G to $2,500. The amount of subsidized energy financing to G is $3,000.

    Example 6. State H allows a tax credit to Financial Institution J 
under a program the principal purpose of which is to provide loans at 
below market interest rates directly to qualified applicants for the 
purchase of renewable energy source property. J receives a credit each 
year in the amount of the excess of the interest that would have been 
paid at private market rates over the actual interest paid on such 
loans. The State H tax credit arrangement is an interest subsidy. Thus, 
any low-interest loans made pursuant to this credit arrangement are 
subsidized energy financing.

[T.D. 7717, 45 FR 57716, Aug. 29, 1980. Redesignated and amended by T.D. 
8146, 52 FR 26670, July 16, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.23-3  Special rules.

    (a) When expenditures are treated as made--(1) Timeliness of an 
expenditure for the energy credit. In general, for the purpose of 
determining whether an expenditure qualifies as being timely for the 
residential energy credit under section 23 or former section 44C (i.e., 
is made after April 19, 1977, and before January 1, 1986), the 
expenditure is treated as made when original installation of the item is 
completed. Thus, solely for that purpose, the time of payment or accrual 
is irrelevant.
    (2) Special rule for renewable energy source expenditures in the 
case of construction or reconstruction of a dwelling. In the case of 
renewable energy source expenditures in connection with the construction 
or reconstruction of a dwelling that becomes the taxpayer's new 
principal residence, the expenditures are to be treated as made (for the 
purpose of determining the timeliness of an expenditure for the 
residential energy credit) when the taxpayer commences use of the 
dwelling as his or her principal residence following its construction or 
reconstruction. The term ``reconstruction'' means the replacement of 
most of a dwelling's major structural components such as floors, walls, 
and ceiling. When a taxpayer reoccupies a reconstructed dwelling that 
was the taxpayer's principal residence prior to reconstruction, a 
renewable energy source expenditure is considered made when the original 
installation of the renewable energy source property is completed.
    (3) Taxable year in which credit is allowable. For the purpose of 
determining the taxable year in which the credit for an expenditure is 
allowable (once it has qualified as timely under subparagraph (1) or 
(2)), an expenditure is treated as made on the later of (i) the date on 
which it qualifies as timely; or (ii) the date on which it is paid or 
incurred by the taxpayer.
    (b) Expenditures in 1977. No credit under section 23 or former 
section 44C shall be allowed for any taxable year beginning before 1978. 
However, the amount of any credit under section 23 or former section 44C 
for the taxpayer's first taxable year beginning after December 31, 1977, 
shall take into account

[[Page 45]]

qualified energy conservation expenditures and qualified renewable 
energy source expenditures made during the period beginning April 20, 
1977, and ending on the last day of such first taxable year.
    (c) Cross reference.  For rules relating to expenditures financed 
with Federal, State, or local government grants or subsidized financing 
see paragraph (d)(3) of Sec. 1.23-1 and paragraph (i) of Sec. 1.23-2.
    (d) Expenditures qualifying both as energy conservation expenditures 
and renewable source expenditures. In the case of an expenditure which 
meets both the definition of an energy conservation expenditure (as 
defined in Sec. 1.23-2(a)) and a renewable energy source expenditure (as 
defined in Sec. 1.23-2(b)), the taxpayer may claim either a credit under 
Sec. 1.23-1(b) (relating to qualified energy conservation expenditures) 
or Sec. 1.23-1(c) (relating to qualified renewable energy source 
expenditures) but may not claim both credits with respect to the same 
expenditure.
    (e) Principal residence. For purposes of section 23 or former 
section 44C the determination of whether a dwelling unit is the 
taxpayer's principal residence shall be made under principles similar to 
those applicable to section 1034 and the regulations thereunder 
(relating to sale or exchange of a principal residence) except that 
ownership of the dwelling unit is not required. In making this 
determination, the period for which a dwelling is treated as a 
taxpayer's principal residence includes the 30-day period ending on the 
first day on which the dwelling unit would (but for this sentence) be 
treated as being used as the taxpayer's principal residence under 
principles similar to those applicable to section 1034. Thus, 
installation that are completed within that 30-day period may be 
eligible for the credit although, in the absence of the 30-day rule, the 
date of habitation of the dwelling unit by the taxpayer would mark the 
beginning of the taxpayer's use of the unit as a principal residence.
    (f) Construction substantially completed. Construction of a dwelling 
unit is substantially completed when construction has progressed to the 
point where the unit could be put to use as a personal residence, even 
though comparatively minor items remain to be finished or performed in 
order to conform to the plans or specifications of the completed 
building. For this purpose, construction includes reconstruction as 
defined in paragraph (a)(2). This rule may be illustrated by the 
following example:

    Example. On January 1, 1979, A purchases a dwelling that is to 
become A's principal residence. The dwelling unit was originally 
constructed in 1950. A spends $50,000 to reconstruct the dwelling by 
replacing most of the dwelling's major structural components such as 
floors, walls, and ceilings. Included in the cost is $3,000 attributable 
to energy-conserving components. Reconstruction is substantially 
completed on April 1, 1979, and A moves into the reconstructed residence 
on May 1, 1979. Since construction includes reconstruction, A's 
reconstructed residence is not considered substantially completed before 
April 20, 1977. Thus, amounts spent with respect to A's reconstructed 
residence for energy-conserving components do not qualify as energy 
conservation expenditures.

    (g) Residential use of property. To be eligible for the residential 
energy credit, expenditures must be made for personal residential 
purposes. If at least 80 percent of the use of a component or item of 
property is for personal residential purposes, the entire amount of the 
energy conservation expenditure or the renewable energy source 
expenditure is taken into account in computing the credit under this 
section. If less than 80 percent of the use of a component or item of 
property is for personal residential purposes, the amount of an 
expenditure taken into account is the amount that bears the same ratio 
to the amount of the expenditure as the amount of personal residential 
use of the component or item bears to its total use. For purposes of 
this paragraph, use of a component or an item of property with respect 
to a swimming pool is not a use for a personal residential purpose. The 
rules with respect to residential use of property are illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. In 1978 A makes an expenditure of $3,000 for the 
installation of storm windows of which 50 percent is on the portion of 
A's dwelling used as the principal family residence and 50 percent is on 
the portion of the dwelling used as an office. A has made no other 
energy conservation expenditures for the residence. The allowable energy 
conservation expenditure is $1,500 (50 percent of

[[Page 46]]

$3,000), the portion attributable to residential use. Therefore, the 
residential energy credit is $225 (the qualified conservation 
expenditure of 15 percent of $1.500).

    Example 2. During 1979, B makes $10,000 of renewable energy source 
expenditures on solar energy property for B's principal residence. 
Approximately 60 percent of the use of the solar energy property will be 
for heating B's swimming pool; the other 40 percent will be for heating 
the dwelling unit. B had not previously made renewable energy source 
expenditures with respect to the residence. Since use for a swimming 
pool is not considered a residential use, less than 80 percent of the 
use of B's solar energy property is considered used for personal 
residential purposes. Therefore, only $4,000 (40 percent of $10,000), 
the proportionate part of B's expenditures representing personal 
residential use, is treated as a renewable energy source expenditure. B 
is allowed a $1,000 residential energy credit (30 percent of $2,000 plus 
20 percent of $2,000) for 1979.

    (h) Joint occupancy--(1) In general. If two or more individuals 
jointly occupied and used a dwelling unit as their principal residence 
during any portion of a calendar year--
    (i) The amount of the credit allowable under section 23 or former 
section 44C by reason of energy conservation expenditures or by reason 
of renewable energy source expenditures shall be determined by treating 
all of the joint occupants as one taxpayer whose taxable year is such 
calendar year; and
    (ii) The credit under section 23 or former section 44C allowable to 
each joint occupant for the taxable year with which or in which such 
calendar year ends shall be an amount which bears the same ratio to the 
amount determined under paragraph (h)(1)(i) of this section as the 
amount of energy conservation expenditures or renewable energy source 
expenditures made by that occupant bears to the total amount of each 
type of such expenditures made by all joint occupants during such 
calendar year.

The provisions of this subparagraph may be illustrated by the following 
example:

    Example. A, a calendar year taxpayer, and B, a June 1 fiscal year 
taxpayer, make energy conservation exenditures of $2,000 (A making 
expenditures of $500 and B making expenditures of $1,500) on their 
principal and jointly occupied residence in 1978. A and B have not 
previously make energy conservation expenditures with respect to this 
residence. Of the $300 credit (15 percent of $2,000), $75 will be 
allocated to A ($500/$2,000  x $300) and $225 to B ($1,500/$2,000  
x 300). A will claim the allocable share of the credit on A's 1978 tax 
return and B will claim the allocable share of the credit on B's tax 
return for the fiscal year ending May 31, 1979.

    (2) Minimum credit. The fact that one joint occupant may be unable 
to claim all or part of the credit under section 23 of former section 
44C because of insufficient tax liability or because that occupant's 
allowable credit does not exceed the $10 minimum credit (as set forth in 
paragraph (d)(1) of Sec. 1.23-1) shall have no effect upon the 
computation of the amount of the allowable credits for the other joint 
occupants.
    (3) Prior expenditures. Because joint occupants are treated as one 
taxpayer for purposes of determining the residential energy credit, the 
maximum amount of energy conservation expenditures or renewable energy 
source expenditures must be reduced by the total amount of such 
expenditures made in connection with the dwelling unit during prior 
calendar years in which any one of the residents of the unit during the 
current calendar year was a resident (whether made by the current 
resident or by an individual previously occupying the dwelling with the 
current resident). However, the preceding sentence shall not apply to 
prior expenditures no part of which was taken into account in computing 
the credits under section 23 of former section 44C for such years. Prior 
years' expenditures are not to be allocated among joint occupants to 
take into account the specific expenditures of each of the occupants in 
prior years.
    (4) The rules of this paragraph may be illustrated by the following 
examples:

    Example 1. Assume A and B have together made prior years' energy 
conservation expenditures of $1,600 (A having made $1,200 of 
expenditures and B having made $400) on their principal and jointly 
occupied residence. In the current year, each makes energy conservation 
expenditures of $300 with respect to the same residence. The maximum 
qualified expenditure with respect to the residence is reduced by the 
$1,600 of prior expenditures made by A and B. Therefore, only $400 of 
the $600 current expenditures are eligible as energy conservation 
expenditures. The resulting residential energy credit is $60

[[Page 47]]

(15 percent of $400) of which $30 apiece will be allocated to A and B 
($300/$600  x  $60). The fact that A had previously computed the credit 
in prior years with respect to $1,200 of the total $1,600 of 
expenditures is irrelevant to the apportionment of the credit in the 
current year.

    Example 2. In 1978, spouses C and D make $10,000 of renewable energy 
source expenditures with respect to their principal residence, half of 
which is paid by each spouse. No prior renewable energy source 
expenditures have been taken into account with respect to that residence 
by either C or D. C and D file separate returns for the calendar year. 
Under the joint occupancy rule, the maximum allowable renewable energy 
source credit with respect to C and D's principal residence is $2,200 
(30 percent of the first $2,000, and 20 percent of the next $8,000 of 
expenditures). Half of this amount or $1,100, will be allowed to each 
spouse. If either spouse makes renewable energy source expenditures with 
respect to the same principal residence in future years, none of those 
expenditures would be qualified renewable energy source expenditures for 
which a credit can be claimed. That is, not more than $2,200 may be 
taken in the aggregate by C and D as a renewable energy source credit 
with respect to their principal residence.

    Example 3. In 1978, E and F make energy conservation expenditures of 
$1,500 on their principal and jointly occupied residence. In 1979, E 
moves away and G becomes the other joint occupant of the residence. F 
and G make energy conservation expenditures of $1,000 in 1979. In 1980 F 
moves away and H moves in with G. G and H make energy conservation 
expenditures of $500. The maximum qualified expenditure made by F and G 
with respect to the residence is reduced by the $1,500 of prior 
expenditures made in 1978 by E and F. The maximum qualified expenditures 
made by G and H with respect to the residence is reduced only by the 
expenditures in prior years in connection with the residence during 
which either G or H was a joint occupant. Accordingly, the maximum 
qualified expenditures made by G and H with respect to the residence is 
reduced only by the $1,000 of prior expenditures made in 1979 by F and 
G.

    (i) Condominiums and cooperative housing corporations. An individual 
who is a tenant stockholder in a cooperative housing corporation (as 
defined in section 216) or who is a member of a condominium management 
association with respect to a condominium which he or she owns shall be 
treated as having made a proportionate share of the energy conservation 
expenditures or renewable energy source expenditures of such corporation 
or association. The cooperative stockholder's allocable share of the 
expenditures is to be the same as his or her proportionate share of the 
cooperative's total outstanding stock (including any stock held by the 
corporation). However, in the case where only certain cooperative 
stockholders are assessed for the expenditures made by the cooperative 
housing corporation, only those cooperative stockholders that are 
assessed shall be treated as having made a share of the expenditures of 
such corporation. In such case, the cooperative stockholder's share of 
the expenditures is the amount that the stockholder is assessed. The 
allocable share of a condominium management association member's energy 
conservation of renewable energy source expenditures is the amount that 
the member is assessed (or would be assessed in the case where 
expenditures are from general funds) by the association as a result of 
such expenditures. The residential energy credit for a qualified 
expenditure is allowable for the year in which the association or 
corporation has completed original installation of the item (or has paid 
or incurred the expenditure, if later). For purposes of this paragraph, 
the term ``condominium management association'' means an organization 
meeting the requirements of section 528(c)(1) of the Code (other than 
subparagraph (E) of that section), with respect to a condominium project 
substantially all the units of which are used as residences.
    (j) Joint ownership of energy conservation property or renewable 
energy source property--(1) In general.  Energy conservation property 
renewable energy source property include property which is jointly owned 
by the taxpayer and another person (or persons) and installed in 
connection with two or more dwelling units. For example, the fact that a 
windmill, solar collector, or geothermal well and distribution system is 
owned by two or more individuals does not preclude its qualification as 
renewable energy source property. The amount of the credit allowable 
under section 23 shall be computed separately with respect to the amount 
of the expenditures made by each individual,

[[Page 48]]

subject to the limitations of $2,000 imposed by section 23(b)(1) and 
$10,000 imposed by section 23(b)(2), per dwelling units of jointly owned 
property. For example, in 1982, A, B, and C purchased as joint owners 
renewable energy source property that serviced two houses. One of the 
houses is jointly owned and occupied by A and B and the other is owned 
and occupied by C alone. The renewable energy source property cost 
$30,000 of which A paid $9,000, B paid $6,000, and C paid $15,000. A and 
B must share the $4,000 credit (40% of $10,000 maximum) with respect to 
the expenditures for the jointly owned house. Therefore, A is allowed a 
$2,400 credit ($4,000 times $9,000 divided by $9,000 plus $6,000) and B 
is allowed a $1,600 credit ($4,000 times $6,000 divided by $9,000 plus 
$6,000) with respect to the expenditures attributable to the jointly 
owned house. C is entitled to a credit of $4,000 with respect to the 
expenditures attributable to the other house.
    (2) Example. The application of this subparagraph may be illustrated 
by the following example:

    Example. A, B, and C each has a separate principal residence. They 
agree to finance jointly the construction of a solar collector, each 
providing one-third of the costs and taking one-third of the output of 
the collector. Each will separately pay for the costs of connecting the 
solar collector with his or her principal residence. Provided the solar 
collector and connection equipment otherwise qualify as renewable energy 
source property, A, B, and C will each be considered to have made 
renewable energy source expenditures equal to one-third of the cost of 
the collector plus his or her separate connection costs. Such 
expenditures will be subject to the limitations and other rules 
separately applicable to A, B, and C with respect to each principal 
residence, such as those with respect to the $10 minimum (Sec. 1.23-
1(d)(1)), prior expenditures (Sec. 1.23-1(d)(2)), residential use 
(paragraph (g) of this section), and joint occupancy (paragraph (h) of 
this section).

    (k) Basic adjustments. If a credit is allowed under section 23 or 
former section 44C for any expenditure with respect to any property, the 
increase in the basis of that property which would (but for this 
paragraph) result from such expenditure shall be reduced by the amount 
of the credit allowed.
    (l) Recordkeeping--(1) In general. No residential energy credit is 
allowable unless the taxpayer maintains the records described in 
paragraph (l)(2) of this section. The records shall be retained so long 
as the contents thereof may become material in the administration of any 
internal revenue law.
    (2) Records. The taxpayer must maintain records that clearly 
identify the energy-conserving components and renewable energy source 
property with respect to which a residential energy credit is claimed, 
and substantiate their cost to the taxpayer, any labor costs properly 
allocable to them paid for by the taxpayer, and the method used for 
allocating such labor costs.

[T.D. 7717, 45 FR 57719, Aug. 29, 1980. Redesignated and amended by T.D. 
8146, 52 FR 26672, July 16, 1987]
Sec. 1.23-4  Performance and quality standards. [Reserved]

[T.D. 7717, 45 FR 57721, Aug. 29, 1980. Redesignated by T.D. 8146, 52 FR 
26672, July 16, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.23-5  Certification procedures.

    (a) Certification that an item meets the definition of an energy-
conserving component or renewable energy source property. Upon the 
request of a manufacturer of an item pursuant to paragraph (b) of this 
section which is supported by proof that the item is entitled to be 
certified, the Assistant Commissioner (Technical) shall certify (or 
shall notify the manufacturer that the request is denied) that:
    (1) The item meets the definition of insulation (see Sec. 1.23-
2(c)(1)).
    (2) The item meets the definition of an other energy-conserving 
component specified in section 23(c)(4) or former section 44C(c)(4) see 
(Sec. 1.23-2(d)(4)).
    (3) The item meets the definition of solar energy property (see 
Sec. 1.23-2(f)), wind energy property (see Sec. 1.23-2(g)), or 
geothermal energy property (see Sec. 1.23-2(h)).
    (4) The item meets the definition of a category of energy-conserving 
component that has been added to the list of approved items pursuant to 
paragraph (d)(4)(viii) of Sec. 1.23-2.
    (5) The item meets the definition of renewable energy source 
property that transmits or uses a renewable energy source that has been 
added to the list of approved renewable energy sources pursuant to 
paragraph (e)(2) of Sec. 1.23-2.

[[Page 49]]

    (b) Procedure--(1) In general. A manufacturer of an item desiring to 
apply under paragraph (a) shall submit the application to the 
Commissioner of Internal Revenue, Attention: Associate Chief Counsel 
(Technical), CC:C:E, 1111 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20224. 
Upon being advised by the National Office, orally or in writing, that an 
adverse decision is contemplated a manufacturer may request a 
conference. The conference must be held within 21 calendar days from the 
date of that advice. Procedures for requesting an extension of the 21-
day period and notifying the manufacturer of the Service's decision on 
that request are the same as those applicable to conferences on ruling 
requests by taxpayers (see section 9.05 of Rev. Proc. 80-20).
    (2) Contents of application. The application shall include a 
description of the item (including appropriate design drawings and 
specifications) and an explanation of the purpose and function of the 
item. There shall accompany the application a declaration in the 
following form: ``Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have 
examined this application, including accompanying documents and, to the 
best of my knowledge and belief, the facts presented in support of the 
application are true, correct, and complete.'' The statement must be 
signed by the person or persons making the application.
    (c) Effect of certification under paragraph (a). Certifications 
granted under paragraph (a)(1), (2), or (3) will be applied 
retroactively to April 20, 1977. However, certifications granted under 
paragraph (a) (4) or (5) will be applied retroactively only to the date 
the applicable energy-conserving component or renewable energy source 
was added by Treasury decision to the list of qualifying components or 
sources. Certification of an item under this section means that the 
applicable definitional requirement of Sec. 1.23-2 is considered 
satisfied in the case of any person claiming a residential energy credit 
with respect to such item. However, it does not relieve manufacturers of 
the need to establish that their items conform to performance and 
quality standards (if any) provided under Sec. 1.23-4 and that their 
items can reasonably be expected to remain in operation at least 3 
years, in the case of insulation and other energy-conserving components, 
or at least 5 years, in the case of renewable energy source property.

[T.D. 7717, 45 FR 57721, Aug. 29, 1980. Redesignated and amended by T.D. 
8146, 52 FR 26672, July 16, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.23-6  Procedure and criteria for additions to the approved list of energy-conserving components or renewable energy sources.

    (a) Procedures for additions to the list of energy-conserving 
components or renewable energy sources--(1) In general. A manufacturer 
of an item (or a group of manufacturers) desiring to apply for addition 
to the approved list of energy-conserving components or renewable energy 
sources pursuant to paragraph (d)(4)(viii) or (e)(2) of Sec. 1.23-2 
shall submit an application to the Internal Revenue Service, Attention: 
Associate Chief Counsel (Technical), CC:C:E, 1111 Constitution Avenue, 
NW., Washington, DC 20224. The term ``manufacturer'' includes a person 
who assembles an item or a system from components manufactured by other 
persons. The application shall provide the information required under 
paragraph (b) of this section. An application may request that more than 
one item be added to the approved list. It will be the responsibility of 
the Office of the Associate Chief Counsel (Technical) upon receipt of 
the application to determine whether all the information required under 
paragraph (b) of this section has been furnished with the application. 
If an application lacks essential information, the applicant will be 
advised of the additional information required. If the information (or a 
reasonable explanation of the reason why the information cannot be made 
available) is not forthcoming within 30 days of the date of that advice, 
the application will be closed and the applicant will be so informed. 
Any resubmission of information beyond the 30-day period will be treated 
as a new application. If the Office of the Associate Chief Counsel 
(Technical) already is considering an application with respect to the 
same or a similar item, it may consolidate applications. The Office of 
the Associate Chief Counsel will make

[[Page 50]]

a report and recommendation to the ad hoc advisory board as to whether 
each item that is the subject to an application should be added in 
accordance with the manufacturer's request to the approved list of 
energy-conserving components or renewable energy sources in light of the 
applicable criteria provided in paragraph (c) and the standards for 
Secretarial determination provided in paragraph (d) of this section. In 
making this recommendation, the Office of the Associate Chief Counsel 
shall consult with the Secretary of Energy and the Secretary of Housing 
and Urban Development (or their delegates) and any other appropriate 
Federal officers to obtain their views concerning the item in question. 
In addition, the Office of the Associate Chief Counsel may request from 
the manufacturer clarification of information submitted with the 
application. The Office of the Associate Chief Counsel shall report its 
recommendation and forward the application to the ad hoc advisory board 
for further consideration.
    (2) Ad hoc advisory board. The Commissioner of Internal Revenue and 
the Assistant Secretary (Tax Policy) shall establish an ad hoc advisory 
board to consider applications and recommendations forwarded by the 
Office of the Associate Chief Counsel (Technical). If a finding in favor 
of addition of any item is made, the board shall report its 
recommendation and forward the application to the Commissioner for 
further consideration. If the item is approved by the Commissioner, the 
application will be forwarded to the Secretary (or his delegate) for 
further consideration. The application will be closed with respect to an 
item if the board, the Commissioner, or the Secretary (or his delegate) 
determines that, under the applicable criteria or the standards for 
Secretarial determination, the item should not be added to the list of 
energy-conserving components or renewable energy sources.
    (3) Action on application. (i) A final decision to grant or deny any 
application filed under paragraph (a)(1) shall be made within 1 year 
after the application and all information required to be filed with such 
request under paragraph (b) have been received by the Office of the 
Associate Chief Counsel (Technical). The applicant manufacturer shall be 
notified in writing of the final decision. In the event of a favorable 
determination, a regulation will be issued in accordance with the 
procedures contained in Sec. 601.601 to include the item as an energy-
conserving component or as a renewable energy source. A final decision 
to grant approval of an application is made when a Treasury decision 
adding the item (that is subject of the application) as an energy-
conserving component or as a renewable energy source is published in the 
Federal Register.
    (ii) The applicant manufacturer shall be entitled to a conference 
and be so notified anytime an adverse action is contemplated by the 
Office of the Associate Chief Counsel, the ad hoc advisory board, the 
Commissioner of Internal Revenue, or the Secretary (or his delegate) and 
no conference was previously conducted. Upon being advised in writing 
that an adverse recommendation or decision as to any item that is the 
subject of an application is contemplated, a manufacturer may request a 
conference. The conference must be held within 21 calendar days from the 
mailing of that advice. Procedures for requesting an extension of the 
21-day period and notifying the manufacturer of the recommendation or 
decision with respect to that request are the same as those applicable 
to conferences on ruling requests by taxpayers. The applicant is 
entitled to only one conference. There is no right to another conference 
when a favorable recommendation or decision is reversed at a higher 
level.
    (iii) A report of any application which has been denied during the 
preceding month and the reasons for the denial shall be published each 
month.
    (b) Contents of application. The application by the manufacturer 
shall include the following information:
    (1) A description of the item and the generic class to which it 
belongs, including any features relating to safe installation and use of 
the item. This description shall include appropriate design drawings and 
technical specifications (or representative drawings and specifications 
when application by a group of manufacturers).

[[Page 51]]

    (2) An explanation of the purpose, function, and each recommended 
use of the item.
    (3) An estimate (and explanation of the estimation methods employed 
and the assumptions made) of the total number of units that would be 
sold for each recommended use during the first 4 years following the 
addition of the item to the approved list and of the total number that 
would be sold for each recommended use during that period in the absence 
of addition. If the item is sold in more than one size, the estimate 
shall indicate the projected sales for each size. This estimate shall 
reflect total industry sales of the item. Past industry sales 
information for each recommended use for the previous two years shall 
also be provided.
    (4) Whether sufficient capacity is available to increase production 
to meet any increase in demand for the item, or for associated fuels and 
materials, caused by such addition. This determination shall be based on 
industry-wide data and not just the manufacturing capability of the 
applicant. If the applicant has the exclusive right to manufacture the 
item, this information shall also be provided in the application.
    (5) An estimate (including estimation methods and assumptions) of 
the energy in Btu's of oil and natural gas used directly or indirectly 
per unit by the applicant in the manufacture of the item and other items 
necessary for its use, the type of energy source (e.g., oil, natural 
gas, coal, electricity), and the extent of its use in the manufacturing 
process of the item. The applicant must also provide a list of the major 
components of the item and their composition and weight.
    (6) Test data and experience data (where experience data is 
available) to substantiate for each recommended use the energy savings 
in Btu's that are claimed will be achieved by one unit during a period 
of one year. The data shall be obtained by controlled tests in which, if 
possible, the addition of the item is the only variable. If the item may 
be sold in various configurations, data shall be provided with respect 
to energy savings from each configuration with significantly different 
energy use characteristics. Test methods are to conform to recognized 
industry or government standards. This determination shall take into 
account the seasonal use of the item. If the energy savings of the item 
varies with climatic conditions, data shall be provided with respect to 
each climate zone. The applicant may use the Department of Energy's 
climatic zones for heating and cooling (see Sec. 450.35 of 10 CFR part 
450 (1980)).
    (7) The impact of increased demand on the price of the item and the 
energy source used by the item.
    (8) The energy source which will be replaced or conserved by the 
item, and, in the case of a request for addition to the approved list of 
renewable energy sources, data establishing that the energy source is 
inexhaustible.
    (9) Data to show the total estimated savings of energy in Btu's 
attributable to reduced consumption of oil or natural gas whether 
directly or indirectly from use of the item, including assumptions 
underlying this estimate. If the consumption of both oil and natural gas 
will be reduced, data to show the energy savings in Btu's attributable 
to each shall be provided. The estimate is to be based on energy savings 
in Btu's per unit determined under paragraph (b)(6) of this section for 
the first four years of the useful life of the item and is to take into 
account only the additional units of the item estimated to be placed in 
service as a result of the addition using data obtained under paragraph 
(b)(3) of this section. If the item will result in reduction of oil or 
natural gas consumption by replacing an item which uses such an energy 
source, the application shall indicate the item replaced and the extent 
to which this reduction will occur.
    (10) Geographical information if required under paragraph (b)(6) of 
this section to show the climatic zones of the country where the item is 
expected to be used, including an estimate of the total number of 
additional units to be placed in service during the first 4 years 
following the addition of the item in the area as a result of the 
addition of the item to the list of qualifying items.
    (11) The retail cost of the item (or items if the item is sold in 
more than one size) including all installation

[[Page 52]]

costs necessary for safe and effective use.
    (12) Whether the item is designed for residential use.
    (13) The estimated useful life of the item and associated equipment 
necessary for its use.
    (14) The type and amount of waste and emissions in weight per unit 
of energy saved resulting from use of the item.
    (15) If the item might reasonably be suspected of presenting any 
health or safety hazard, test data to show that the item does not 
present such hazard.

With respect to applications for addition to the approved list of 
renewable energy sources, the term ``item'' as used in this paragraph 
refers to the property which uses the energy source and not the energy 
source itself. The application should clearly indicate whether the 
request is for addition to the approved list of energy-conserving 
components or renewable energy sources, identify the provisions for 
which data is being submitted, and present the data in the order 
requested. The tests required under this paragraph may be conducted by 
independent laboratories but the underlying data must be submitted along 
with the test results. There shall accompany the request a declaration 
in the following form: ``Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I 
have examined this application, including accompanying documents, and, 
to the best of my knowledge and belief, the facts presented in support 
of the application are true, correct and complete.'' The statement must 
be signed by the person or persons making the application. The 
declaration shall not be made by the taxpayer's representative.
    (c) Criteria for additions--(1) Additions to the approved list of 
energy-conserving components. For an item to be considered for addition 
to the approved list of energy-conserving components, the manufacturer 
must show that the item increases the energy efficiency of a dwelling. 
For an item to be considered as increasing the energy efficiency of a 
dwelling, all of the following criteria must be met:
    (i) The use of the item must improve the energy efficiency of the 
dwelling structure, structural components of the dwelling, hot water 
heating, or heating or cooling systems.
    (ii) The use of the item must result, directly or indirectly, in a 
significant reduction in the consumption of oil or natural gas.
    (iii) The increase in energy efficiency must be established by test 
data and in accordance with accepted testing standards.
    (iv) The item must not present a safety, fire, environmental, or 
health hazard when properly installed.
    (2) Additions to the approved list of renewable energy sources. For 
an energy source to be considered for addition to the approved list of 
renewable energy sources, the manufacturer must show that the following 
criteria are met:
    (i) As in the case of solar, wind, and geothermal energy, the energy 
source must be an inexhaustible energy supply. Accordingly, wood and 
agricultural products and by-products are not considered renewable 
energy sources. Similarly, no exhaustible or depletable energy source 
(such as sources that are depletable under 611) will be considered.
    (ii) The energy source must be capable of being used for heating or 
cooling a residential dwelling or providing hot water or electricity for 
use in such a dwelling.
    (iii) A practical working device, machine, or mechanism, etc., must 
exist and be commercially available to use such renewable energy source.
    (iv) The use of the renewable energy source must not present a 
significant safety, fire, environmental, or health hazard.
    (d) Standards for Secretarial determination--(1) In general. The 
Secretary will not make any addition to the approved list of energy-
conserving components or renewable energy sources unless the Secretary 
determines that--
    (i) There will be a reduction in the total consumption of oil or 
natural gas as a result of the addition, and that reduction is 
sufficient to justify any resulting decrease in Federal revenues.
    (ii) The addition will not result in an increased use of any item 
which is known to be, or reasonably suspected to be, environmentally 
hazardous or a threat to public health or safety, and

[[Page 53]]

    (iii) Available Federal subsidies do not make the addition 
unnecessary or inappropriate (in the light of the most advantageous 
allocation of economic resources).
    (2) Factors taken into account. In making any determination under 
paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this section, the Secretary will--
    (i) Make an estimate of the amount by which the addition will reduce 
oil and natural gas consumption, and
    (ii) Determine whether the addition compares favorably, on the basis 
of the reduction in oil and natural gas consumption per dollar of cost 
to the Federal Government (including revenue loss), with other Federal 
programs in existence or being proposed.
    (3) Factors taken into account in making estimates. In making any 
estimate under subparagraph (2)(i), the Secretary will take into account 
(among other factors)--
    (i) The extent to which the use of any item will be increased as a 
result of the addition,
    (ii) Whether sufficient capacity is available to increase production 
to meet any increase in demand for the item or associated fuels and 
materials caused by the addition,
    (iii) The amount of oil and natural gas used directly or indirectly 
in the manufacture of the item and other items necessary for its use,
    (iv) The estimated useful life of the item, and
    (v) The extent additional use of the item leads, directly or 
indirectly, to the reduced use of oil or natural gas. Indirect uses of 
oil or natural gas include use of electricity derived from oil or 
natural gas.
    (e) Effective date of addition to approved lists. In the case of 
additions to the approved list of energy-conserving components or 
renewable energy sources, the credit allowable by Sec. 1.23-1 shall 
apply with respect to expenditures which are made on or after the date a 
Treasury decision amending the regulations pursuant to the application 
is published in the Federal Register. However, the Secretary may 
prescribe by regulations that expenditures for additions made on or 
after the date referred to in the preceding sentence and before the 
close of the taxable year in which such date occurs shall be taken into 
account in the following taxable year. Additions to the list will be 
subject to the performance and quality standards (if any) provided under 
Sec. 1.23-4 which are in effect at the time of the addition. 
Furthermore, any addition made to the approved list will be subject to 
reevaluation by the Secretary for the purpose of determining whether the 
item still meets the requisite criteria and standards for addition to 
the list. If it is determined by the Secretary that an item no longer 
meets the requisite criteria, the Secretary will amend the regulations 
to delete the item from the approved list. Removal of an item from the 
list will be prospective from the date a Treasury decision amending the 
regulations is published in the Federal Register.

(Secs. 44C and 7805 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (92 Stat. 3175, 
26 U.S.C. 44C; 68A Stat. 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805). The amendments to the 
Statement of Procedural Rules are issued under the authority contained 
in 5 U.S.C. 301 and 552)

[T.D. 7861, 47 FR 56331, Dec. 16, 1982. Redesignated and amended by T.D. 
8146, 52 FR 26673, July 16, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.25-1T  Credit for interest paid on certain home mortgages (Temporary).

    (a) In general. Section 25 permits States and political subdivisions 
to elect to issue mortgage credit certificates in lieu of qualified 
mortgage bonds. An individual who holds a qualified mortgage credit 
certificate (as defined in Sec. 1.25-3T) is entitled to a credit against 
his Federal income taxes. The amount of the credit depends upon (1) the 
amount of mortgage interest paid or accrued during the year and (2) the 
applicable certificate credit rate. See Sec. 1.25-2T. The amount of the 
deduction under section 163 for interest paid or accrued during any 
taxable year is reduced by the amount of the credit allowable under 
section 25 for such year. See Sec. 1.163-6T. The holder of a qualified 
mortgage credit certificate may be entitled to additional withholding 
allowances. See section 3402 (m) and the regulations thereunder.
    (b) Definitions. For purposes of Secs. 1.25-2T through 1.25-8T and 
this section, the following definitions apply:

[[Page 54]]

    (1) Mortgage. The term ``mortgage'' includes deeds of trust, 
conditional sales contracts, pledges, agreements to hold title in 
escrow, and any other form of owner financing.
    (2) State. (i) The term ``State'' includes a possession of the 
United States and the District of Columbia.
    (ii) Mortgage credit certificates issued by or on behalf of any 
State or political subdivision (``governmental unit'') by constituted 
authorities empowered to issue such certificates are the certificates of 
such governmental unit.
    (3) Qualified home improvement loan. The term ``qualified home 
improvement loan'' has the meaning given that term under section 103A 
(1)(6) and the regulations thereunder.
    (4) Qualified rehabilitation loan. The term ``qualified 
rehabilitation loan'' has the meaning given that term under section 103A 
(1)(7)(A) and the regulations thereunder.
    (5) Single-family and owner-occupied residences. The terms ``single-
family'' and ``owner-occupied'' have the meaning given those terms under 
section 103A (1)(9) and the regulations thereunder.
    (6) Constitutional home rule city. The term ``constitutional home 
rule city'' means, with respect to any calendar year, any political 
subdivision of a State which, under a State constitution which was 
adopted in 1970 and effective on July 1, 1971, had home rule powers on 
the 1st day of the calendar year.
    (7) Targeted area residence. The term ``targeted area residence'' 
has the meaning given that term under section 103A (k) and the 
regulations thereunder.
    (8) Acquisition cost. The term ``acquisition cost'' has the meaning 
given that term under section 103A (1)(5) and the regulations 
thereunder.
    (9) Average area purchase price. The term ``average area purchase 
price'' has the meaning given that term under subparagraphs (2), (3), 
and (4) of section 103A (f) and the regulations thereunder. For purposes 
of this paragraph (b)(9), all determinations of average area purchase 
price shall be made with respect to residences as that term is defined 
in section 103A and the regulations thereunder.
    (10) Total proceeds. The ``total proceeds'' of an issue is the sum 
of the products determined by multiplying--
    (i) The certified indebtedness amount of each mortgage credit 
certificate issued pursuant to such issue, by
    (ii) The certificate credit rate specified in such certificate.

Each qualified mortgage credit certificate program shall be treated as a 
separate issue of mortgage credit certificates.
    (11) Residence. The term ``residence'' includes stock held by a 
tenant-stockholder in a cooperative housing corporation (as those terms 
are defined in section 216(b) (1) and (2)). It does not include property 
such as an appliance, a piece of furniture, a radio, etc., which, under 
applicable local law, is not a fixture. The term also includes any 
manufactured home which has a minimum of 400 square feet of living space 
and a minimum width in excess of 102 inches and which is of a kind 
customarily used at a fixed location. The preceding sentence shall not 
apply for purposes of determining the average area purchase price for 
single-family residences, nor shall it apply for purposes of determining 
the State ceiling amount. The term ``residence'' does not, however, 
include recreational vehicles, campers, and other similar vehicles.
    (12) Related person. The term ``related person'' has the meaning 
given that term under section 103(b)(6)(C)(i) and Sec. 1.103-10(e)(1).
    (13) Date of issue. A mortgage credit certificate is considered 
issued on the date on which a closing agreement is signed with respect 
to the certified indebtedness amount.
    (c) Affidavits. For purposes of Secs. 1.25-1T through 1.25-8T, an 
affidavit filed in connection with the requirements of Secs. 1.25-1T 
through 1.25-8T shall be made under penalties of perjury. Applicants for 
mortgage credit certificates who are required by a lender or the issuer 
to sign affidavits must be informed that any fraudulent statement will 
result in (1) the revocation of the individual's mortgage credit 
certificate, and (2) a $10,000 penalty under section 6709. Other persons 
required by a lender or

[[Page 55]]

an issuer to provide affidavits must receive similar notice. A person 
may not rely on an affidavit where that person knows or has reason to 
know that the information contained in the affidavit is false.

[T.D. 8023, 50 FR 19346, May 8, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.25-2T  Amount of credit (Temporary).

    (a) In general. Except as otherwise provided, the amount of the 
credit allowable for any taxable year to an individual who holds a 
qualified mortgage credit certificate is equal to the product of the 
certificate credit rate (as defined in paragraph (b)) and the amount of 
the interest paid or accrued by the taxpayer during the taxable year on 
the certified indebtedness amount (as defined in paragraph (c)).
    (b) Certificate credit rate--(1) In general. For purposes of 
Secs. 1.25-1T through 1.25-8T, the term ``certificate credit rate'' 
means the rate specified by the issuer on the mortgage credit 
certificate. The certificate credit rate shall not be less than 10 
percent nor more than 50 percent.
    (2) Limitation in certain States. (i) In the case of a State which--
    (A) Has a State ceiling for the calendar year in which an election 
is made that exceeds 20 percent of the average annual aggregate 
principal amount of mortgages executed during the immediately preceding 
3 calendar years for single-family owner-occupied residences located 
within the jurisdiction of such State, or
    (B) Issued qualified mortgage bonds in an aggregate amount less than 
$150 million for calendar year 1983.

the certificate credit rate for any mortgage credit certificate issued 
under such program shall not exceed 20 percent unless the issuing 
authority submits a plan to the Commissioner to ensure that the weighted 
average of the certificate credit rates in such mortgage credit 
certificate program does not exceed 20 percent and the Commissioner 
approves such plan. For purposes of determining the average annual 
aggregate principal amount of mortgages executed during the immediately 
preceding 3 calendar years for single-family owner-occupied residences 
located within the jurisdiction of such State, an issuer may rely upon 
the amount published by the Treasury Department for such calendar years. 
An issuer may rely on a different amount from that safe-harbor 
limitation where the issuer has made a more accurate and comprehensive 
determination of that amount. The weighted average of the certificate 
credit rates in a mortgage credit certificate program is determined by 
dividing the sum of the products obtained by multiplying the certificate 
credit rate of each certificate by the certified indebtedness amount 
with respect to that certificate by the sum of the certified 
indebtedness amounts of the certificates issued. See section 103A(g) and 
the regulations thereunder for the definition of the term ``State 
ceiling''.
    (ii) The following example illustrates the application of this 
paragraph (b)(2):

    Example. City Z issues four qualified mortgage credit certificates 
pursuant to its qualified mortgage credit certificate program. H 
receives a certificate with a certificate credit rate of 30 percent and 
a certified indebtedness amount of $50,000. I receives a certificate 
with a certificate credit rate of 25 percent and a certified 
indebtedness amount of $100,000. J and K each receive certificates with 
certificate credit rates of 10 percent; their certified indebtedness 
amounts are $50,000 and $100,000, respectively. The weighted average of 
the certificate credit rates is determined by dividing the sum of the 
products obtained by multiplying the certificate credit rate of each 
certificate by the certified indebtedness amount with respect to that 
certificate ((.3 x $50,000) + (.25 x $100,000) + (.1 x $50,000) + 
(.1 x $100,000)) by the sum of the certified indebtedness amounts of the 
certificates issued ($50,000+$100,000+$50,000+$100,000). Thus, the 
weighted average of the certificate credit rates is 18.33 percent 
($55,000/$300,000).

    (c) Certified indebtedness amount--(1) In general. The term 
``certified indebtedness amount'' means the amount of indebtedness which 
is--
    (i) Incurred by the taxpayer--
    (A) To acquire his principal residence, Sec. 1.25-2T(c)(1)(i),
    (B) As a qualified home improvement loan, or
    (C) As a qualified rehabilitation loan, and
    (ii) Specified in the mortgage credit certificate.

[[Page 56]]

    (2) Example. The following example illustrates the application of 
this paragraph:

    Example. On March 1, 1986, State X, pursuant to its qualified 
mortgage credit certificate program, provides a mortgage credit 
certificate to B. State X specifies that the maximum amount of the 
mortgage loan for which B may claim a credit is $65,000. On March 15, B 
purchases for $67,000 a single-family dwelling for use as his principal 
residence. B obtains from Bank M a mortgage loan for $60,000. State X, 
or Bank M acting on behalf of State X, indicates on B's mortgage credit 
certificate that the certified indebtedness amount of B's loan is 
$60,000. B may claim a credit under section 25 (e) based on this amount.

    (d) Limitation on credit--(1) Limitation where certificate credit 
rate exceeds 20 percent. (i) If the certificate credit rate of any 
mortgage credit certificate exceeds 20 percent, the amount of the credit 
allowed to the taxpayer by section 25(a)(1) for any year shall not 
exceed $2,000. Any amount denied under this paragraph (d)(1) may not be 
carried forward under section 25(e)(1) and paragraph (d)(2) of this 
section.
    (ii) If two or more persons hold interests in any residence, the 
limitation of paragraph (d)(1)(i) shall be allocated among such persons 
in proporation to their respective interests in the residence.
    (2) Carryforward of unused credit. (i) If the credit allowable under 
section 25 (a) and Sec. 1.25-2T for any taxable year exceeds the 
applicable tax limit for that year, the excess (the ``unused credit'') 
will be a carryover to each of the 3 succeeding taxable years and, 
subject to the limitations of paragraph (d)(2)(ii), will be added to the 
credit allowable by section 25 (a) and Sec. 1.25-2T for that succeeding 
year.
    (ii) The amount of the unused credit for any taxable year (the 
``unused credit year'') which may be taken into account under this 
paragraph (d)(2) for any subsequent taxable year may not exceed the 
amount by which the applicable tax limit for that subsequent taxable 
year exceeds the sum of (A) the amount of the credit allowable under 
section 25 (a) and Sec. 1.25-1T for the current taxable year, and (B) 
the sum of the unused credits which, by reason of this paragraph (d)(2), 
are carried to that subsequent taxable year and are attributable to 
taxable years before the unused credit year. Thus, if by reason of this 
paragraph (d)(2), unused credits from 2 prior taxable years are carried 
forward to a subsequent taxable year, the unused credit from the earlier 
of those 2 prior years must be taken into account before the unused 
credit from the later of those 2 years is taken into account.
    (iii) For purposes of this paragraph (d)(2) the term ``applicable 
tax limit'' means the limitation imposed by section 26 (a) for the 
taxable year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable for that year 
under section 21, relating to expenses for household and dependent care 
services necessary for gainful employment, section 22, relating to the 
credit for the elderly and the permanently disabled, section 23, 
relating to the residential energy credit, and section 24, relating to 
contributions to candidates for public office. The limitation imposed by 
section 26 (a) for any taxable year is equal to the taxpayer's tax 
liability (as defined in section 26 (b)) for that year.
    (iv) The following examples illustrate the application of this 
paragraph (d)(2):

    Example 1. (i) B, a calendar year taxpayer, holds a qualified 
mortgage credit certificate. For 1986 B's applicable tax limit (i.e., 
tax liability) is $1,100. The amount of the credit under section 25 (a) 
and Sec. 1.25-2T for 1986 is $1,700. For 1986 B is not entitled to any 
of the credits described in sections 21 through 24. Under Sec. 1.25-2T 
(d)(2), B's unused credit for 1986 is $600, and B is entitled to carry 
forward that amount to the 3 succeeding years.
    (ii) For 1987 B's applicable tax limit is $1,500, the amount of the 
credit under section 25 (a) and Sec. 1.25-2T is $1,700, and the unused 
credit is $200. For 1988 B's applicable tax limit is $2,000, the amount 
of the credit under section 25 (a) and Sec. 1.25-2T is $1,300, and there 
is no unused credit. For 1987 and 1988 B is not entitled to any of the 
credits described in sections 21 through 24. No portion of the unused 
credit for 1986 my be used in 1987. For 1988 B is entitled to claim a 
credit of $2,000 under section 25 (a) and Sec. 1.25-2T, consisting of a 
$1,300 credit for 1988, the $600 unused credit for 1986, and $100 of the 
$200 unused credit for 1987. In addition, B may carry forward the 
remaining unused credit for 1987 ($100) to 1989 and 1990.

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example (1) except that for 
1988 B is entitled to a credit of $400 under section 23. B's applicable 
tax limit for 1988 is $1,600 ($2,000 less $400). For 1988 B is entitled 
to claim a credit

[[Page 57]]

of $1,600 under section 25 (a) and Sec. 1.25-2T, consisting of a $1,300 
credit for 1988 and $300 of the unused credit for 1986. In addition, B 
may carry forward the remaining unused credits of $300 for 1986 to 1989 
and of $200 for 1987 to 1989 and 1990.

[T.D. 8023, 50 FR 19346, May 8, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.25-3  Qualified mortgage credit certificate.

    (a) through (g)(1)(ii) [Reserved] For further guidance, see 
Sec. 1.25-3T(a) through (g)(1)(ii).
    (g)(1)(iii) Reissued certificate exception. See paragraph (p) of 
this section for rules regarding the exception in the case of 
refinancing existing mortgages.
    (g)(2) through (o) [Reserved] For further guidance, see Sec. 1.25-
3T(g)(2) through (o).
    (p) Reissued certificates for certain refinancings--(1) In general. 
If the issuer of a qualified mortgage credit certificate reissues a 
certificate in place of an existing mortgage credit certificate to the 
holder of that existing certificate, the reissued certificate is treated 
as satisfying the requirements of this section. The period for which the 
reissued certificate is in effect begins with the date of the 
refinancing (that is, the date on which interest begins accruing on the 
refinancing loan).
    (2) Meaning of existing certificate. For purposes of this paragraph 
(p), a mortgage credit certificate is an existing certificate only if it 
satisfies the requirements of this section. An existing certificate may 
be the original certificate, a certificate issued to a transferee under 
Sec. 1.25-3T(h)(2)(ii), or a certificate previously reissued under this 
paragraph (p).
    (3) Limitations on reissued certificate. An issuer may reissue a 
mortgage credit certificate only if all of the following requirements 
are satisfied:
    (i) The reissued certificate is issued to the holder of an existing 
certificate with respect to the same property to which the existing 
certificate relates.
    (ii) The reissued certificate entirely replaces the existing 
certificate (that is, the holder cannot retain the existing certificate 
with respect to any portion of the outstanding balance of the certified 
mortgage indebtedness specified on the existing certificate).
    (iii) The certified mortgage indebtedness specified on the reissued 
certificate does not exceed the remaining outstanding balance of the 
certified mortgage indebtedness specified on the existing certificate.
    (iv) The reissued certificate does not increase the certificate 
credit rate specified in the existing certificate.
    (v) The reissued certificate does not result in an increase in the 
tax credit that would otherwise have been allowable to the holder under 
the existing certificate for any taxable year. The holder of a reissued 
certificate determines the amount of tax credit that would otherwise 
have been allowable by multiplying the interest that was scheduled to 
have been paid on the refinanced loan by the certificate rate of the 
existing certificate. In the case of a series of refinancings, the tax 
credit that would otherwise have been allowable is determined from the 
amount of interest that was scheduled to have been paid on the original 
loan and the certificate rate of the original certificate.
    (A) In the case of a refinanced loan that is a fixed interest rate 
loan, the interest that was scheduled to be paid on the refinanced loan 
is determined using the scheduled interest method described in paragraph 
(p)(3)(v)(C) of this section.
    (B) In the case of a refinanced loan that is not a fixed interest 
rate loan, the interest that was scheduled to be paid on the refinanced 
loan is determined using either the scheduled interest method described 
in paragraph (p)(3)(v)(C) of this section or the hypothetical interest 
method described in paragraph (p)(3)(v)(D) of this section.
    (C) The scheduled interest method determines the amount of interest 
for each taxable year that was scheduled to have been paid in the 
taxable year based on the terms of the refinanced loan including any 
changes in the interest rate that would have been required by the terms 
of the refinanced loan and any payments of principal that would have 
been required by the terms of the refinanced loan (other than repayments 
required as a result of any refinancing of the loan).
    (D) The hypothetical interest method (which is available only for 
refinanced loans that are not fixed interest rate

[[Page 58]]

loans) determines the amount of interest treated as having been 
scheduled to be paid for a taxable year by constructing an amortization 
schedule for a hypothetical self-amortizing loan with level payments. 
The hypothetical loan must have a principal amount equal to the 
remaining outstanding balance of the certified mortgage indebtedness 
specified on the existing certificate, a maturity equal to that of the 
refinanced loan, and interest equal to the annual percentage rate (APR) 
of the refinancing loan that is required to be calculated for the 
Federal Truth in Lending Act.
    (E) A holder must consistently apply the scheduled interest method 
or the hypothetical interest method for all taxable years beginning with 
the first taxable year the tax credit is claimed by the holder based 
upon the reissued certificate.
    (4) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
paragraph (p)(3)(v) of this section:

    Example 1. A holder of an existing certificate that meets the 
requirements of this section seeks to refinance the mortgage on the 
property to which the existing certificate relates. The final payment on 
the holder's existing mortgage is due on December 31, 2000; the final 
payment on the new mortgage would not be due until January 31, 2004. The 
holder requests that the issuer provide to the holder a reissued 
mortgage credit certificate in place of the existing certificate. The 
requested certificate would have the same certificate credit rate as the 
existing certificate. For each calendar year through the year 2000, the 
credit that would be allowable to the holder with respect to the new 
mortgage under the requested certificate would not exceed the credit 
allowable for that year under the existing certificate. The requested 
certificate, however, would allow the holder credits for the years 2001 
through 2004, years for which, due to the earlier scheduled retirement 
of the existing mortgage, no credit would be allowable under the 
existing certificate. Under paragraph (p)(3)(v) of this section, the 
issuer may not reissue the certificate as requested because, under the 
existing certificate, no credit would be allowable for the years 2001 
through 2004. The issuer may, however, provide a reissued certificate 
that limits the amount of the credit allowable in each year to the 
amount allowable under the existing certificate. Because the existing 
certificate would allow no credit after December 31, 2000, the reissued 
certificate could expire on December 31, 2000.
    Example 2. (a) The facts are the same as Example 1 except that the 
existing mortgage loan has a variable rate of interest and the 
refinancing loan will have a fixed rate of interest. To determine 
whether the limit under paragraph (p)(3)(v) of this section is met for 
any taxable year, the holder must calculate the amount of credit that 
otherwise would have been allowable absent the refinancing. This 
requires a determination of the amount of interest that would have been 
payable on the refinanced loan for the taxable year. The holder may 
determine this amount by--
    (1) Applying the terms of the refinanced loan, including the 
variable interest rate or rates, for the taxable year as though the 
refinanced loan continued to exist; or
    (2) Obtaining the amount of interest, and calculating the amount of 
credit that would have been available, from the schedule of equal 
payments that fully amortize a hypothetical loan with the principal 
amount equal to the remaining outstanding balance of the certified 
mortgage indebtedness specified on the existing certificate, the 
interest equal to the annual percentage rate (APR) of the refinancing 
loan, and the maturity equal to that of the refinanced loan.
    (b) The holder must apply the same method for each taxable year the 
tax credit is claimed based upon the reissued mortgage credit 
certificate.

    (5) Coordination with Section 143(m)(3). A refinancing loan 
underlying a reissued mortgage credit certificate that replaces a 
mortgage credit certificate issued on or before December 31, 1990, is 
not a federally subsidized indebtedness for the purposes of section 
143(m)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.

[T.D. 8692, 61 FR 66214, Dec. 17, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1.25-3T  Qualified mortgage credit certificate (Temporary).

    (a) Definition of qualified mortgage credit certificate. For 
purposes of Secs. 1.25-1T through 1.25-8T, the term ``qualified mortgage 
credit certificate'' means a certificate that meets all of the 
requirements of this section.
    (b) Qualified mortgage credit certificate program. A certificate 
meets the requirements of this paragraph if it is issued under a 
qualified mortgage credit certificate program (as defined in Sec. 1.25-
4T).
    (c) Required form and information. A certificate meets the 
requirements of this paragraph if it is in the form specified in 
Sec. 1.25-6T and if all the information required by the form is 
specified on the form.

[[Page 59]]

    (d) Residence requirement--(1) In general. A certificate meets the 
requirements of this paragraph only if it is provided in connection with 
the acquisition, qualified rehabilitation, or qualified home improvement 
of a residence, that is--
    (i) A single-family residence (as defined in Sec. 1.25-1T(b)(5)) 
which, at the time the financing on the residence is executed or 
assumed, can reasonably be expected by the issuer to become (or, in the 
case of a qualified home improvement loan, to continue to be) the 
principal residence (as defined in section 1034 and the regulations 
thereunder) of the holder of the certificate within a reasonable time 
after the financing is executed or assumed, and
    (ii) Located within the jurisdiction of the governmental unit 
issuing the certificate.

See section 103a(d) and the regulations thereunder for further 
definitions and requirements.
    (2) Certification procedure. The requirements of this paragraph will 
be met if the issuer or its agent obtains from the holder of the 
certificate an affidavit stating his intent to use (or, in the case of a 
qualified home improvement loan, that he is currently using and intends 
to continue to use) the residence as his principal residence within a 
reasonable time (e.g., 60 days) after the mortgage credit certificate is 
issued and stating that the holder will notify the issuer of the 
mortgage credit certificate if the residence ceases to be his principal 
residence. The affidavit must also state facts that are sufficient for 
the issuer or his agent to determine whether the residence is located 
within the jurisdiction of the issuer that issued the mortgage credit 
certificate.
    (e) 3-year requirement--(1) In general. A certificate meets the 
requirements of this paragraph only if the holder of the certificate had 
no present ownership interest in a principal residence at any time 
during the 3-year period prior to the date on which the mortgage on the 
residence in connection with which the certificate is provided is 
executed. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the holder's interest 
in the residence with respect to which the certificate is being provided 
shall not be taken into account. See section 103A(e) and the regulations 
thereunder for further definitions and requirements.
    (2) Exceptions. Paragraph (e)(1) shall not apply with respect to--
    (i) Any certificate provided with respect to a targeted area 
residence (as defined in Sec. 1.25-1T(b)(7)),
    (ii) Any qualified home improvement loan (as defined in Sec. 1.25-
1T(b)(3)), and
    (iii) Any qualified rehabilitation loan (as defined in Sec. 1.25-
1T(b)(4)).
    (3) Certification procedure. The requirements of paragraph (e)(1) 
will be met if the issuer or its agent obtains from the holder of the 
certificate an affidavit stating that he had no present ownership 
interest in a principal residence at any time during the 3-year period 
prior to the date of which the certificate is issued and the issuer or 
its agent obtains from the applicant copies of the applicant's Federal 
tax returns for the preceding 3 years and examines each statement to 
determine whether the applicant has claimed a deduction for taxes on 
property which was the applicant's principal residence pursuant to 
section 164(a)(1) or a deduction pursuant to section 163 for interest 
paid on a mortgage secured by property which was the applicant's 
principal residence. Where the mortgage is executed during the period 
between January 1 and February 15 and the applicant has not yet filed 
has Federal income tax return with the Internal Revenue Service, the 
issuer may, with respect to such year, rely on an affidavit of the 
applicant that the applicant is not entitled to claim deductions for 
taxes or interest on indebtedness with respect to property constituting 
his principal residence for the preceding calendar year. In the 
alternative, when applicable, the holder may provide an affidavit 
stating that one of the exceptions provided in paragraph (e)(2) applies.
    (4) Special rule. An issuer may submit a plan to the Commissioner 
for distributing certificates, in an amount not to exceed 10 percent of 
the proceeds of the issue, to individuals who do not meet the 
requirements of this paragraph. Such plan must describe a procedure for 
ensuring that no more than 10 percent of the proceeds of a such issue 
will be used to provide certificates to such

[[Page 60]]

individuals. If the Commissioner approves the issuer's plan, 
certificates issued in accordance with the terms of the plan to holders 
who do not meet the 3-year requirement do not fail to satisfy the 
requirements of this paragraph.
    (f) Purchase price requirement--(1) In general. A certificate meets 
the requirements of this paragraph only if the acquisition cost (as 
defined in Sec. 1.25-1T(b)(8)) of the residence, other than a targeted 
area residence, in connection with which the certificate is provided 
does not exceed 110 percent of the average area purchase price (as 
defined in Sec. 1.25-1T(b)(9)) applicable to that residence. In the case 
of a targeted area residence (as defined in Sec. 1.251T(b)(7)) the 
acquisition cost may not exceed 120 percent of the average area purchase 
price applicable to such residence. See section 1093A(f) and the 
regulations thereunder for further definitions and requirements.
    (2) Certification procedure. The requirements of paragraph (f)(1) 
will be met if the issuer or its agent obtains affidavits executed by 
the seller and the buyer that state these requirements have been met. 
Such affidavits must include an itemized list of--
    (i) Any payments made by the buyer (or a related person) or for the 
benefit of the buyer,
    (ii) If the residence is incomplete, an estimate of the reasonable 
cost of completing the residence, and
    (iii) If the residence is purchased subject to a ground rent, the 
capitalized value of the ground rent.

The issuer or his agent must examine such affidavits and determine 
whether, on the basis of information contained therein, the purchase 
price requirement is met.
    (g) New mortgage requirement--(1) In general. (i) A certificate 
meets the requirements of this paragraph only if the certificate is not 
issued in connection with the acquisition or replacement of an existing 
mortgage. Except in the case of a qualified home improvement loan, the 
certificate must be issued to an individual who did not have a mortgage 
(whether or not paid off) on the residence with respect to which the 
certificate is issued at any time prior to the execution of the 
mortgage.
    (ii) Exceptions. For purposes of this paragraph, a certificate used 
in connection with the replacement of--
    (A) Construction period loans,
    (B) Bridge loans or similar temporary initial financing, and
    (C) In the case of a qualified rehabilitation loan, an existing 
mortgage,

shall not be treated as being used to acquire or replace an existing 
mortgage. Generally, temporary initial financing is any financing which 
has a term of 24 months or less. See section 103A(j)(1) and the 
regulations thereunder for examples illustrating the application of 
these requirements.
    (2) Certification procedure. The requirements of paragraph (g)(1) 
will be met if the issuer or its agent obtains from the holder of the 
certificate an affidavit stating that the mortage being acquired in 
connection with the certificate will not be used to acquire or replace 
an existing mortgage (other than one that falls within the exceptions 
described in paragraph (g)(1)(ii)).
    (h) Transfer of mortgage credit certificates--(1) In general. A 
certificate meets the requirements of this paragraph only if it is (i) 
not transferable or (ii) transferable only with the approval of the 
issuer.
    (2) Transfer procedure. A certificate that is transferred with the 
approval of the issuer is a qualified mortgage credit certificate in the 
hands of the transferee only if each of the following requirements is 
met:
    (i) The transferee assumed liability for the remaining balance of 
the certified indebtedness amount in connection with the acquisition of 
the residence from the transferor,
    (ii) The issuer issues a new certificate to the transferee, and
    (iii) The new certificate meets each of the requirements of 
paragraphs (d), (e), (f), and (i) of this section based on the facts as 
they exist at the time of the transfer as if the mortgage credit 
certificate were being issued for the first time. For example, the 
purchase price requirement is to be determined by reference to the 
average area purchase price at the time of the assumption and not when 
the mortgage credit certificate was originally issued.

[[Page 61]]

    (3) Statement on certificate. The requirements of paragraph (h)(1) 
will be met if the mortgage credit certificate states that the 
certificate may not be transferred or states that the certificate may 
not be transferred unless the issuer issues a new certificate in place 
of the original certificate.
    (i) Prohibited mortgages--(1) In general. A certificate meets the 
requirements of this paragraph only if it is issued in connection with 
the acquisition of a residence none of the financing of which is 
provided from the proceeds of--
    (i) A qualified mortgage bond (as defined under section 103A(c)(1) 
and the regulations thereunder), or
    (ii) A qualified veterans' mortgage bond (as defined under section 
103A(c)(3) and the regulations thereunder).

Thus, for example, if a mortgagor has a mortgage on his principal 
residence that was obtained from the proceeds of a qualified mortgage 
bond, a mortgage credit certificate issued to such mortgagor in 
connection with a qualified home improvement loan with respect to such 
residence is not a qualified mortgage credit certificate. If, however, 
the financing provided from the proceeds of the qualified mortgage bond 
had been paid off in full, the certificate would be a qualified mortgage 
credit certificate (assuming all the requirements of this paragraph are 
met).
    (2) Certification procedure. The requirements of paragraph (i)(1) 
will be met if the issuer or its agent obtains from the holder of the 
certificate an affidavit stating that no portion of the financing of the 
residence in connection with which the certificate is issued is provided 
from the proceeds of a qualified mortgage bond or a qualified veterans' 
mortgage bond.
    (j) Particular lenders--(1) In general. Except as otherwise provided 
in paragraph (j)(2), a certificate meets the requirements of this 
paragraph only if the certificate is not limited to indebtedness 
incurred from particular lenders. A certificate is limited to 
indebtedness from particular lenders if the issuer, directly or 
indirectly, prohibits the holder of a certificate from obtaining 
financing from one or more lenders or requires the holder of a 
certificate to obtain financing from one or more lenders. For purposes 
of this paragraph, a lender is any person, including an issuer of 
mortgage credit certificates, that provides financing for the 
acquisition, qualified rehabilitation, or qualified home improvement of 
a residence.
    (2) Exception. A mortgage credit certificate that is limited to 
indebtedness incurred from particular lenders will not cease to meet the 
requirements of this paragraph if the Commissioner approves the basis 
for such limitation. The Commissioner may approve the basis for such 
limitation if the issuer establishes to the satisfaction of the 
Commissioner that it will result in a significant economic benefit to 
the holders of mortgage credit certificates (e.g., substantially lower 
financing costs) compared to the result without such limitation.
    (3) Taxable bonds. The requirements of this paragraph do not prevent 
an issuer of mortgage credit certificates from issuing mortgage subsidy 
bonds (other than obligations described in section 103 (a)) the proceeds 
of which are to be used to provide mortgages to holders of mortgage 
credit certificates provided that the holders of such certificates are 
not required to obtain financing from the proceeds of the bond issue. 
See Sec. 1.25-4T (h) with respect to permissible fees.
    (4) Lists of participating lenders. The requirements of this 
paragraph do not prohibit an issuer from maintaining a list of lenders 
that have stated that they will make loans to qualified holders of 
mortgage credit certificates, provided that (i) the issuer solicits such 
statements in a public notice similar to the notice described in 
Sec. 1.25-7T, (ii) lenders are provided a reasonable period of time in 
which to express their interest in being included in such a list, and 
(iii) holders of mortgage credit certificates are not required to obtain 
financing from the lenders on the list. If an issuer maintains such a 
list, it must update the list at least annually.
    (5) Certification procedure. The requirements of this paragraph will 
be met if (i) the issuer or its agent obtains from the holder of the 
certificate an affidavit stating that the certificate was

[[Page 62]]

not limited to indebtedness incurred from particular lenders or (ii) the 
issuer obtains a ruling from the Commissioner under paragraph (j)(2).
    (6) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
this paragraph:

    Example 1. Under its mortgage credit certificate program, County Z 
distributes all the certificates to be issued to a group of 60 
participating lenders. Residents of County Z may obtain mortgage credit 
certificates only from the participating lenders and only in connection 
with the acquisition of mortgage financing from that lender or one of 
the other participating lenders. Certificates issued under this program 
do not meet the requirements of this paragraph since the certificates 
are limited to indebtedness incurred from particular lenders. The 
certificates, therefore, are not qualified mortgage credit certificates.

    Example 2. In connection with its mortgage credit certificate 
program, County Y arranges with Bank P for a line of credit to be used 
to provide mortgage financing to holders of mortgage credit 
certificates. County Y, pursuant to paragraph (j)(4), maintains a list 
of lenders participating in the mortgage credit certificate program. 
County Y distributes the certificates directly to applicants. Holders of 
the certificates are not required to obtain mortgage financing through 
the line of credit or through a lender on the list of participating 
lenders. Certificates issued pursuant to County Y's program satisfy the 
requirements of this paragraph.

    (k) Developer certification--(1) In general. A mortgage credit 
certificate that is allocated by the issuer to any particular 
development meets the requirements of this paragraph only if the 
developer provides a certification to the purchaser of the residence and 
the issuer stating that the purchase price of that residence is not 
higher than the price would be if the issuer had not allocated mortgage 
credit certificates to the development. The certification must be made 
by the developer if a natural person or, if not, by a duly authorized 
official of the developer.
    (2) Certification procedure. The requirements of this paragraph will 
be met if the issuer or its agent obtains from the holder of the 
certificate an affidavit stating that he has received from the developer 
the certification described in this paragraph.
    (l) Expiration--(1) In general. A certificate meets the requirements 
of this paragraph if the certified indebtedness amount is incurred prior 
to the close of the second calender year following the calendar year for 
which the issuer elected not to issue qualified mortgage bonds under 
Sec. 1.25-4T with respect to that issue of mortgage credit certificates. 
Thus, for example, if on October 1, 1984, an issuing authority elects 
under Sec. 1.25-4T not to issue qualified mortgage bonds, a mortgage 
credit certificate provided under that program does not meet the 
requirements of this paragraph unless the indebtedness is incurred on or 
before December 31, 1986.
    (2) Issuer-imposed expiration dates. An issuer of mortgage credit 
certificates may provide that a certificate shall expire if the holder 
of the certificate does not incure certified indebtedness by a date that 
is prior to the expiration date provided in paragraph (l)(1). A 
certificate that expires prior to the date provided in paragraph (l)(1) 
may be reissued provided that the requirements of this paragraph are 
met.
    (m) Revocation. A certificate meets the requirements of this 
paragraph only if it has not been revoked. Thus, the credit provided by 
section 25 and Sec. 1.25-1T does not apply to interest paid or accrued 
following the revocation of a certificate. A certificate is treated as 
revoked when the residence to which the certificate relates ceases to be 
the holder's principal residence. An issuer may revoke a mortgage credit 
certificate if the certificate does not meet all the requirements of 
Sec. 1.25-3T (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), and (n). The 
certificate is revoked by the issure's notifying the holder of the 
certificate and the Internal Revenue Service that the certificate is 
revoked. The notice to the Internal Revenue Service shall be made as 
part of the report requred by Sec. 1.25-8T (b)(2).
    (n) Interest paid to related person--(1) In general. A certificate 
does not meet the requirements of this paragraph if interest on the 
certified indebtedness amount is paid to a person who is a related 
person to the holder of the certificate.
    (2) Certification procedure. The requirements of this paragraph will 
be met if the issuer or its agent obtains from the holder of the 
certificate an affidavit stating that a related person

[[Page 63]]

does not have, and is not expected to have, an interest as a creditor in 
the certified indebtedness amount.
    (o) Fraud. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a 
mortgage credit certificate does not meet the requirements of this 
section and, therefore, the certificate is not a qualified mortgage 
credit certificate for any calendar year, if the holder of the 
certificate provides a certification or any other information to the 
lender providing the mortgage or to the issuer of the certificate 
containing a material misstatement and such misstatement is due to 
fraud. In determining whether any misstatement is due to fraud, the 
rules generally applicable to underpayments of tax due to fraud 
(including rules relating to the statute of limitations) shall apply. 
See Sec. 1.6709-1T with respect to the penalty for filing negligent or 
fraudulent statements.

[T.D. 8023, 50 FR 19348, May 8, 1985, as amended at T.D. 8502, 58 FR 
67689, Dec. 22, 1993; T.D. 8692, 61 FR 66215, Dec. 17, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1.25-4T  Qualified mortgage credit certificate program (Temporary).

    (a) In general--(1) Definition of qualified mortgage credit 
certificate program. For purposes of Secs. 1.25-1T through 1.25-8T, the 
term ``qualified mortgage credit certificate program'' means a program 
to issue qualified mortgage credit certificates which meets all of the 
requirements of paragraphs (b) through (i) of this section.
    (2) Requirements are a minimum. Except as otherwise provided in this 
section, the requirements of this section are minimum requirements. 
Issuers may establish more stringent criteria for participation in a 
qualified mortgage credit certificate program. Thus, for example, an 
issuer may target 30 percent of the proceeds of an issue of mortgage 
credit certificates to targeted areas. Further, issuers may establish 
additional eligibility criteria for participation in a qualified 
mortgage credit certificate program. Thus, for example, issuers may 
impose an income limitation designed to ensure that only those 
individuals who could not otherwise purchase a residence will benefit 
from the credit.
    (3) Except as otherwise provided in this section and Sec. 1.25-3T, 
issuers may use mortgage credit certificates in connection with other 
Federal, State, and local programs provided that such use complies with 
the requirements of Sec. 1.25-3T(j). Thus, for example, a mortgage 
credit certificate may be issued in connection with the qualified 
rehabilitation of a residence part of the cost of which will be paid 
from the proceeds of a State grant.
    (b) Establishment of program. A program meets the requirements of 
this paragraph only if it is established by a State or political 
subdivision thereof for any calendar year for which it has the authority 
to issue qualified mortgage bonds.
    (c) Election not to issue qualified mortgage bonds--(1) In general. 
A program meets the requirements of this paragraph only if the issuer 
elects, in the time and manner specified in this paragraph, not to issue 
an amount of qualified mortgage bonds that it may otherwise issue during 
the calendar year under section 103A and the regulations thereunder.
    (2) Manner of making election. On or before the earlier of the date 
of distribution of mortgage credit certificates under a program or 
December 31, 1987, the issuer must file an election not to issue an 
amount of qualified mortgage bonds. The election (and the certification 
(or affidavit) described in paragraph (d)) shall be filed with the 
Internal Revenue Service Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19255. The 
election should be titled ``Mortgage Credit Certificate Election'' and 
must include--
    (i) The name, address, and TIN of the issuer,
    (ii) The issuer's applicable limit, as defined in section 103A (g) 
and the regulations thereunder,
    (iii) The aggregate amount of qualified mortgage bonds issued by the 
issuing authority during the calendar year,
    (iv) The amount of the issuer's applicable limit that it has 
surrendered to other issuers during the calendar year,
    (v) The date and amount of any previous elections under this 
paragraph for the calendar year, and
    (vi) The amount of qualfied mortgage bonds that the issuer elects 
not to issue.

[[Page 64]]

    (3) Revocation of election. Any election made under this paragraph 
may be revoked, in whole or in part, at any time during the calendar 
year in which the election was made. The revocation, however, may not be 
made with respect to any part of the nonissued bond amount that has been 
used to issue mortgage credit certificates pursuant to the election. The 
revocation shall be filed with the Internal Revenue Service Center, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19255. The revocation should be titled 
``Revocation of Mortgage Credit Certificate Election'' and must 
include--
    (i) The name, address, and TIN of the issuer,
    (ii) The nonissued bond amount as originally elected, and
    (iii) The portion of the nonissued bond amount with respect to which 
the election is being revoked.
    (4) Special rule. If at the time that an issuer makes an election 
under this paragraph it does not know its applicable limit, the issuer 
may elect not to use all of its remaining authority to issue qualified 
mortgage bonds; this form of election will be treated as meeting the 
requirements of paragraph (c)(2) if, prior to the later of the end of 
the calendar year and December 31, 1985, the issuer amends its election 
so as to indicate the exact amount of qualified mortgage bond authority 
that it elected not to issue.
    (5) Limitation on nonissued bond amount. The amount of qualified 
mortgage bonds which an issuer elects not to issue may not exceed the 
issuer's applicable limit (as determined under section 103A (g) and the 
regulations thereunder). For example, a governmental unit that, pursuant 
to section 103A (g)(3), may issue $10 million of qualified mortgage 
bonds that elects to trade in $11 million in qualified mortgage bond 
authority has not met the requirements of this paragraph, and mortgage 
credit certificates issued pursuant to such election are not qualified 
mortgage credit certificates.
    (d) State certification requirement--(1) In general. A program meets 
the requirements of this paragraph only if the State official designated 
by law (or, where there is no State official, the Governor) certifies, 
based on facts and circumstances as of the date on which the 
certification is requested, following a request for such certification, 
that the issue meets the requirements of section 103A(g) (relating to 
volume limitation) and the regulations thereunder. A copy of the State 
certification must be attached to the issuer's election not to issue 
qualified mortgage bonds, except that, in the case of elections made 
during calendar year 1984, the certification may be filed with the 
Service prior to July 8, 1985 provided that mortgage credit certificates 
may not be distributed until the certification is filed. In the case of 
any constitutional home rule city, the certification shall be made by 
the chief executive officer of the city.
    (2) Certification procedure. The official making the certification 
described in this paragraph (d) need not perform an independent 
investigation to determine whether the issuer has met the requirements 
of section 103A(g). In determining the aggregate amount of qualified 
mortgage bonds previously issued by that issuer during the calendar year 
the official may rely on copies of prior elections under paragraph (c) 
of this section made by the issuer for that year, together with an 
affidavit executed by an official of the issuer who is responsible for 
issuing bonds stating that the issuer has not, to date, issued any other 
issues of qualified mortgage bonds during the calendar year and stating 
the amount, if any, of the issuer's applicable limit that it has 
surrendered to other issuers during the calendar year; for any calendar 
year prior to 1985, the official may rely on an affidavit executed by a 
duly authorized official of the issuer who states the aggregate amount 
of qualified mortgage bonds issued by the issuer during the year. In 
determining the aggregate amount of qualified mortgage bonds that the 
issuer has previously elected not to issue during that calendar year, 
the official may rely on copies of any elections not to issue qualified 
mortgage bonds filed by the issuer for that calendar year, together with 
an affidavit executed by an official of the issuer responsible for 
issuing mortgage credit certificates stating that the issuer has not, to 
date, made any other elections not to issue qualified mortgage bonds.

[[Page 65]]

If, based on such information, the certifying official determines that 
the issuer has not, as of the date on which the certification is 
provided, exceeded its applicable limit for the year, the official may 
certify that the issue meets the requirements of section 103A(g). The 
fact that the certification described in this paragraph (d) is provided 
does not ensure that the issuer has met the requirements of section 
103A(g) and the regulations thereunder, nor does it preclude the 
application of the penalty for over-issuance of mortgage credit 
certificates if such over-issuance actually occurs. See Sec. 1.25-5T.
    (3) Special rule. If within 30 days after the issuer files a proper 
request for the certification described in this paragraph (d) the issuer 
has not received from the State official designated by law (or, if there 
is no State official, the Governor) certification that the issue meets 
the requirements of section 103A(g) or, in the alternative, a statement 
that the issue does not meet such requirements, the issuer may submit, 
in lieu of the certification required by this paragraph (d), an 
affidavit executed by an officer of the issuer responsible for issuing 
mortgage credit certificates stating that--
    (i) The issue meets the requirements of section 103A(g) and the 
regulations thereunder,
    (ii) At least 30 days before the execution of the affidavit the 
issuer filed a proper request for the certification described in this 
paragraph (d), and
    (iii) The State official designated by law (or, if there is no State 
official, the Governor) has not provided the certification described in 
this paragraph (d) or a statement that the issue does not meet such 
requirements.

For purposes of this paragraph, a request for certification is proper if 
the request includes the reports and affidavits described in paragraph 
(d)(2).
    (e) Information reporting requirement--(1) Reports. With respect to 
mortgage credit certificates issued after September 30, 1985, a program 
meets the requirements of this paragraph only if the issuer submits a 
report containing the information concerning the holders of certificates 
issued during the preceding reporting period required by this paragraph. 
The report must be filed for each reporting period in which certificates 
(other than transferred certificates) are issued under the program. The 
issuer is not responsible for false information provided by a holder if 
the issuer did not know or have reason to know that the information was 
false. The report must be filed on the form prescribed by the Internal 
Revenue Service. If no form is prescribed, or if the form prescribed is 
not readily available, the issuer may use its own form provided that 
such form is in the format set forth in this paragraph and contains the 
information required by this paragraph. The report must be titled 
``Mortgage Credit Certificate Information Report'' and must include the 
name, address, and TIN of the issuer, the reporting period for which the 
information is provided, and the following tables containing information 
concerning the holders of certificates issued during the reporting 
period for which the report is filed:
    (i) A table titled ``Number of Mortgage Credit Certificates by 
Income and Acquisition Cost'' showing the number of mortgage credit 
certificates issued (other than those issued in connection with 
qualified home improvement and rehabilitation loans) according to the 
annualized gross income of the holders (categorized in the following 
intervals of income:

    $0-$9,999;
    $10,000-$19,999;
    $20,000-$29,999;
    $30,000-$39,999;
    $40,000-$49,999;
    $50,000-$74,999; and
    $75,000 or more)

and according to the acquisition cost of the residences acquired in 
connection with the mortgage credit certificates (categorized in the 
following intervals of acquisition cost:

    $0-$19,999;
    $20,000-$39,999;
    $40,000-$59,999;
    $60,000-$79,999;
    $80,000-$99,999;
    $100,000-$119,999;
    $120,000-$149,999;
    $150,000-$199,999; and
    $200,000 or more).

For each interval of income and acquisition cost the table must also be 
categorized according to--

[[Page 66]]

    (A) The aggregate amount of fees charged to holders to cover any 
administrative costs incurred by the issuer in issuing mortgage credit 
certificates, and
    (B) The number of holders that--
    (1) Did not have a present ownership interest in a principal 
residence at any time during the 3-year period ending on the date the 
mortgage credit certificate is executed (i.e., satisfied the 3-year 
requirement) and purchased residences in targeted areas,
    (2) Satisfied the 3-year requirement and purchased residences not 
located in targeted areas,
    (3) Did have a present ownership interest in a principal residence 
at any time during the 3-year period ending on the date the mortgage 
credit certificate is executed (i.e., did not satisfy the 3-year 
requirement) and purchased residences in targeted areas, and
    (4) Did not satisfy the 3-year requirement and purchased residences 
not located in targeted areas.
    (ii) A table titled ``Volume of Mortgage Credit Certificates by 
Income and Acquisition Cost'' containing data on--
    (A) The total of the certified indebtedness amounts of the 
certificates issued (other than those issued in connection with 
qualified home improvement and rehabilitation loans);
    (B) The sum of the products of the certified indebtedness amount and 
the certificate credit rate for each certificate (other than those 
issued in connection with qualified home improvement and rehabilitation 
loans) according to annualized gross income (categorized in the same 
intervals of income as the preceding table) and according to the 
acquisition cost of the residences acquired in connection with mortgage 
credit certificates (categorized in the same intervals of acquisition 
cost as the preceding table); and
    (C) For each interval of income and acquisition cost, the 
information described in paragraph (e)(1)(ii) (A) and (B) categorized 
according to the holders that--
    (1) Satisfied the 3-year requirement and purchased residences in 
targeted areas,
    (2) Satisfied the 3-year requirement and purchased residences not 
located in targeted areas,
    (3) Did not satisfy the 3-year requirement and purchased residences 
in targeted areas, and
    (4) Did not satisfy the 3-year requirement and purchased residences 
not located in targeted areas.
    (iii) A table titled ``Mortgage Credit Certificates for Qualified 
Home Improvement and Rehabilitation Loans'' showing the number of 
mortgage credit certificates issued in connection with qualified home 
improvement loans and qualified rehabilitation loans, the total of the 
certified indebtedness amount with respect to such certificates, and the 
sum of the products of the certified indebtedness amount and the 
certificate credit rate for each certificate; the information contained 
in the table must also be categorized according to whether the 
residences with respect to which the certificates were provided are 
located in targeted areas.
    (2) Format. If no form is prescribed by the Internal Revenue 
Service, or if the prescribed form is not readily available, the issuer 
must submit the report in the format specified in this paragraph (e)(2). 
The specified format of the report is the following:

             Mortgage Credit Certificate Information Report

Name of issuer:
Address of issuer:
TIN of issuer:
Reporting period:

                      Number of Mortgage Credit Certificates by Income and Acquisition Cost                     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Satisfied            Not satisfied             
  3-year requirement: Annualized gross monthly income of  ----------------------------------------------  Totals
                        borrowers                          Nontargeted  Targeted  Nontargeted  Targeted    fees 
                                                               area       area        area       area           
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$0 to $9,999.............................................                                                       
$10,000 to $19,999.......................................                                                       
$20,000 to $29,999.......................................                                                       
$30,000 to $39,999.......................................                                                       
$40,000 to $49,999.......................................                                                       
$50,000 to $74,999.......................................                                                       
$75,000 or more..........................................                                                       
                                                          ------------------------------------------------------
    Total................................................                                                       
                                                                                                                

[[Page 67]]

                                                                                                                
                     Acquisition Cost                                                                           
                                                                                                                
0 to $19,999.............................................                                                       
$20,000 to $39,999.......................................                                                       
$40,000 to $59,999.......................................                                                       
$60,000 to $79,999.......................................                                                       
$80,000 to $99,999.......................................                                                       
$100,000 to $119,999.....................................                                                       
$120,000 to $149,999.....................................                                                       
$150,000 to $199,999.....................................                                                       
$200,000 or more.........................................                                                       
                                                          ------------------------------------------------------
    Total................................................                                                       
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 68]]


                                                              Volume of Mortgage Credit Certificates by Income and Acouisition Cost                                                             
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Holders satisfying the 3-year requirement                   3-year requirement not satisfied                       Totals          
                                                     -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           Nontargeted area              Targeted area             Nontargeted area              Targeted area                                  
                                                     ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------               Total sum of
                                                                       Sum of                      Sum of                      Sum of                      Sum of     Total of the   products of
     Annualized gross monthly income of holders       Total of the   products of  Total of the   products of  Total of the   products of  Total of the   products of    certified     certified 
                                                        certified     certified     certified     certified     certified     certified     certified     certified   indebtedness  indebtedness
                                                      indebtedness  indebtedness  indebtedness  indebtedness  indebtedness  indebtedness  indebtedness  indebtedness     amounts     amounts and
                                                         amounts     amounts and     amounts     amounts and     amounts     amounts and     amounts     amounts and                credit rates
                                                                    credit rates                credit rates                credit rates                credit rates                            
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$0 to $9,999........................................                                                                                                                                            
$10,000 to $19,999..................................                                                                                                                                            
$20,000 to $29,999..................................                                                                                                                                            
$30,000 to $39,999..................................                                                                                                                                            
$40,000 to $49,999..................................                                                                                                                                            
$50,000 to $74,999..................................                                                                                                                                            
$75,000 to more.....................................                                                                                                                                            
                                                     -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Total...........................................                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                
                  Acquisition Cost                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                
$0 to $19,999.......................................                                                                                                                                            
$20,000 to $39,999..................................                                                                                                                                            
$40,000 to $59,999..................................                                                                                                                                            
$60,000 to $79,999..................................                                                                                                                                            
$80,000 to $99,999..................................                                                                                                                                            
$100,000 to $119,999................................                                                                                                                                            
$120,000 to $149,999................................                                                                                                                                            
$150,000 to $199,999................................                                                                                                                                            
$200,000 or more....................................                                                                                                                                            
                                                     -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Total...........................................                                                                                                                                            
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 69]]


     Mortgage Credit Certificates for Qualified Home Improvement and    
                          Rehabilitation Loans                          
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                          Nontargeted  Targeted         
                                              area       area     Totals
------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Home Improvement Loans                                         
                                                                        
Number of mortgage credit certificates..                                
Total of the certified indebtedness                                     
 amounts................................                                
Product of certified indebtedness                                       
 amounts and credit rates...............                                
                                                                        
          Rehabilitation Loans                                          
                                                                        
Number of mortgage credit certificates..                                
Total of the certified indebtedness                                     
 amounts................................                                
Product of certified indebtedness                                       
 amounts and credit rates...............                                
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (3) Definitions and special rules. (i) For purposes of this 
paragraph the term ``annualized gross income'' means the borrower's 
gross monthly income multiplied by 12. Gross monthly income is the sum 
of monthly gross pay, any additional income from investments, pensions, 
Veterans Administration (VA) compensation, part-time employment, 
bonuses, dividends, interest, current overtime pay, net rental income, 
etc., and other income (such as alimony and child support, if the 
borrower chooses to disclose such income). Information with respect to 
gross monthly income may be obtained from available loan documents, 
e.g., the sum of lines 23D and 23E on the Application for VA or FmHA 
Home Loan Guaranty or for HUD/FHA Insured Mortgage (VA Form 26-1802a, 
HUD 92900, Jan. 1982), or the total line from the Gross Monthly Income 
section of FHLMC Residential Loan Application form (FHLMC 65 Rev. 8/78).
    (ii) For purposes of this paragraph, the term ``reporting period'' 
means each one year period beginning July 1 and ending June 30, except 
that issuers need not provide data with respect to the period prior to 
October 1, 1985.
    (iii) For purposes of this paragraph, verification of information 
concerning a holder's gross monthly income by utilizing other available 
information concerning the holder's income (e.g., Federal income tax 
returns) is not required. In determining whether the holder of a 
mortgage credit certificate acquiring a residence in a targeted area 
satisfies the 3-year requirement, the issuer may rely on a statement 
signed by the holder.
    (4) Time for filing. The report required by this paragraph shall be 
filed not later than the 15th day of the second calendar month after the 
close of the reporting period. The Commissioner may grant an extension 
of time for the filing of a report required by this paragraph if there 
is reasonable cause for the failure to file such report in a timely 
fashion. The report may be filed at any time before such date but must 
be complete based on facts and reasonable expectations as of the date 
the report is filed. The report need not be amended to reflect 
information learned subsequent to the date of filing, or to reflect 
changed circumstances with respect to any holder.
    (5) Place for filing. The report required by this paragraph is to be 
filed at the Internal Revenue Service Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
19255.
    (f) Policy statement. A program established pursuant to an election 
under paragraph (c) made after 1984 meets the requirements of this 
paragraph only if the applicable elected representative of the 
governmental unit--
    (1) Which is the issuer, or
    (2) On whose behalf the certificates were issued,

has published (after a public hearing following reasonable public 
notice) a policy statement described in Sec. 1.103A-2(1) by the last day 
of the year preceding the year in which the election under paragraph (c) 
is made, and a copy of such report has been submitted to the 
Commissioner on or before such last day. See Sec. 1.103A-2(1) for 
further definitions and requirements.
    (g) Targeted areas requirement--(1) In general. A program meets the 
requirements of this paragraph only if--
    (i) The portion of the total proceeds of the issue specified in 
paragraph (g)(2) is made available to provide mortgage credit 
certificates in connection with owner financing of targeted area 
residents for at least 1 year after the date on which mortgage credit 
certificates are first made available with respect to targeted area 
residences, and
    (ii) The issuer attempts with reasonable diligence to place such 
proceeds with qualified persons.


[[Page 70]]


Mortgage credit certificates are considered first made available with 
respect to targeted area residences on the date on which the issuer 
first begins to accept applications for mortgage credit certificates 
provided under that issue.
    (2) Specified portion. (i) The specified portion of the total 
proceeds of an issue is the lesser of--
    (A) 20 percent of the total proceeds, or
    (B) 8 percent of the average annual aggregate principal amount of 
mortgages executed during the immediately preceding 3 calendar years for 
single-family, owner-occupied residences in targeted areas within the 
jurisdiction of the issuing authority.

For purposes of computing the required portion of the total proceeds 
specified in paragraph (g)(2)(i)(B) where such provision is applicable, 
an issuer may rely upon the safe-harbor formula provided in the 
regulations under section 103A(h).
    (ii) See Sec. 1.25-1T(b)(10)(ii) for the definition of ``total 
proceeds''.
    (h) Fees--(1) In general. A program meets the requirements of this 
paragraph only if each applicant is required to pay, directly or 
indirectly, no fee other than those fees permitted under this paragraph.
    (2) Permissible fees. Applicants may be required to pay the 
following fees provided that they are reasonable:
    (i) Points, origination fees, servicing fees, and other fees in 
amounts that are customarily charged with respect to mortgages not 
provided in connection with mortgage credit certificates,
    (ii) Application fees, survey fees, credit report fees, insurance 
fees, or similar settlement or financing costs to the extent such 
amounts do not exceed the amounts charged in the area in cases where 
mortgages are not provided in connection with mortgage credit 
certificates. For example, amounts charged for FHA, VA, or similar 
private mortgage insurance on an individual's mortgage are permissible 
so long as such amounts do not exceed the amounts charged in the area 
with respect to a similar mortgage that is not provided in connection 
with a mortgage credit certificate, and
    (iii) Other fees that, taking into account all the facts and 
circumstances, are reasonably necessary to cover any administrative 
costs incurred by the issuer or its agent in issuing mortgage credit 
certificates.
    (i) Qualified mortgage credit certificate. A program meets the 
requirements of this paragraph only if each mortgage credit certificate 
issued under the program meets each of the requirements of paragraphs 
(c) through (o) of Sec. 1.25-3T.
    (j) Good faith compliance efforts--(1) Eligibility requirements. (i) 
A program under which each of the mortgage credit certificates issued 
does not meet each of the requirements of paragraphs (c) through (o) of 
Sec. 1.25-3T shall be treated as meeting the requirements of paragraph 
(i) of this section if each of the requirements of this paragraph (j)(1) 
is satisfied. A mortgage credit certificate program meets the 
requirements of this paragraph (j)(1) only if each of the following 
provisions is met:
    (A) The issuer in good faith attempted to issue mortgage credit 
certificates only to individuals meeting each of the requirements of 
paragraphs (c) through (o) of Sec. 1.25-3T. Good faith requires that 
agreements with lenders and agents and other relevant instruments 
contain restrictions that permit the approval of mortgage credit 
certificates only in accordance with the requirements of paragraphs (c) 
through (o) of Sec. 1.25-3T. In addition, the issuer must establish 
reasonable procedures to ensure compliance with those requirements. 
Reasonable procedures include reasonable investigations by the issuer to 
determine whether individuals satisfy the requirements of paragraphs (c) 
through (o) of Sec. 1.25-3T.
    (B) 95 percent or more of the total proceeds of the issue were 
devoted to individuals with respect to whom, at the time that the 
certificate was issued, all the requirements of paragraphs (c) through 
(o) of Sec. 1.25-3T were met. If a holder of a mortgage credit 
certificate fails to meet more than one of these requirements, the 
amount of the certificate (i.e., the certificate credit rate multiplied 
by the certified indebtedness amount) issued to that individual will be 
taken into account only once in determining whether the

[[Page 71]]

95-percent requirement is met. However, all of the defects in that 
individual's certificate must be corrected pursuant to paragraph 
(j)(1)(i)(C).
    (C) Any failure to meet the requirements of paragraphs (c) through 
(o) of Sec. 1.25-3T is corrected within a reasonable period after that 
failure is discovered. For example, if an individual fails to meet one 
or more of such requirements those failures can be corrected by revoking 
that individual's certificate.
    (ii) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
this paragraph (j)(1):

    Example 1. County X only distributes mortgage credit certificates to 
individuals who have contracted to purchase a principal residence. 
County X requires that applicants for mortgage credit certificates 
present the following information:
    (i) An affidavit stating that the applicant intends to use the 
residence in connection with which the mortgage credit certificate is 
issued as his principal residence within a reasonable time after the 
certificate is issued by County X, that the applicant will notify the 
County if the residence ceases to be his principal residence, and facts 
that are sufficient for County X to determine whether the residence is 
located within the jurisdiction of County X,
    (ii) An affidavit stating that the applicant had no present 
ownership interest in a principal residence at any time during the 3-
year period prior to the date on which the certificate is issued,
    (iii) Copies of the applicant's Federal tax returns for the 
preceding 3 years,
    (iv) Affidavits from the seller of the residence with respect to 
which the certificate is issued and the applicant stating the purchase 
price of the residence, including an itemized list of (A) payments made 
by or for the benefit of the applicant, (B) if the residence is 
incomplete, an estimate of the reasonable cost of completing the 
residence, and (C) if the residence is subject to a ground rent, the 
capitalized value of the ground rent,
    (v) An affidavit executed by the applicant stating that the mortgage 
being acquired in connection with the certificate will not be used to 
acquire or replace an existing mortgage,
    (vi) An affidavit executed by the applicant stating that no portion 
of the financing for the residence in connection with which the 
certificate is issued is provided from the proceeds of a qualified 
mortgage bond or qualified veterans' mortgage bond and that no portion 
of the mortgage for the residence is provided by a person related to the 
applicant (as defined in Sec. 1.25-3T(n)),
    (vii) An affidavit executed by the applicant stating that the 
certificate was not limited to indebtedness incurred from particular 
lenders, and
    (viii) In the case of a mortgate credit certificate allocated for 
use in connection with a particular development, and affidavit executed 
by the applicant stating that the applicant received from the developer 
a certification stating that the price of the residence with respect to 
which the certificate was issued is no higher than it would be without 
the use of a mortgage credit certificate.

County X examines the information submitted by the applicant to 
determine whether the requirements of paragraphs (c), (d), (e), (f), 
(g), (i), (j), (k), and (n) of Sec. 1.25-3T are met. County X determines 
that the certificate has not expired. The mortgage credit certificates 
issued by County X are in the form prescribed by Sec. 1.25-6T and County 
X provides all the required information and statements. After 
determining that the applicant meets all these requirements County X 
issues a mortgage credit certificate to the applicant. This procedure 
for issuing mortgage credit certificates is sufficient evidence of the 
good faith of County X to meet the requirements of Sec. 1.25-
4T(j)(1)(i)(A).

    Example 2. County W distributes preliminary mortgage credit 
certificates to individuals who have not entered into contracts to 
purchase a principal residence. County W issues preliminary certificates 
in the form prescribed by Sec. 1.25-6T to those applicants that have 
submitted statements that they (i) intend to purchase a single-family 
residence located within the jurisdiction of County W which they will 
occupy as a principal residence, (ii) have had no present ownership 
interest in a principal residence within the preceding 3-year period, 
and (iii) will not use the certificate in connection with the 
acquisition or replacement of an existing mortgage. The certificates 
contain a maximum purchase price, the certificate credit rate, and a 
statement that the certificate will expire if the applicant does not 
enter into a closing agreement with respect to a loan within 6 months 
from the date of preliminary issuance. Holders of these certificates may 
apply for a mortgage loan from any lender. When the holder of the 
certificate applies for a loan the lender requires that he submit the 
following:
    (i) An affidavit stating that the applicant intends to use the 
residence in connection with which the mortgage credit certificate is 
issued as his principal residence within a reasonable time after the 
certificate is issued by County W, that the applicant will notify the 
County if the residence ceases to be his principal residence, and facts 
that are

[[Page 72]]

sufficient for County W to determine whether the residence is located 
within the jurisdication of County W,
    (ii) An affidavit stating that the applicant had no present 
ownership interest in a principal residence at any time during the 3-
year period prior to the date on which the certificate is issued,
    (iii) Copies of the applicant's Federal tax returns for the 
preceding 3 years,
    (iv) Affidavits from the seller of the residence with respect to 
which the certificate is issued and the applicant stating the purchase 
price of the residence, including an itemized list of (A) payments made 
by or for the benefit of the applicant, (B) if the residence is 
incomplete, an estimate of the reasonable cost of completing the 
residence, and (C) if the residence is subject to a ground rent, the 
capitalized value of the ground rent,
    (v) An affidavit executed by the applicant stating that the mortgage 
being acquired in connection with the certificate will not be used to 
acquire or replace an existing mortgage,
    (vi) An affidavit executed by the applicant stating that no portion 
of the financing for the residence in connection with which the 
certificate is issued in provided from the proceeds of a qualified 
mortgage bond or qualified veterans' mortgage bond and that no portion 
of the mortgage for the residence is provided by a person related to the 
applicant (as defined in Sec. 1.25-3T(n)),
    (vii) An affidavit executed by the applicant stating that the 
certificate was not limited to indebtedness incurred from particular 
lenders, and
    (viii) In the case of a mortgage credit certificate allocated for 
use in connection with a particular development, an affidavit executed 
by the applicant stating that the applicant received from the developer 
a certification stating that the price of the residence with respect to 
which the certificate was issued is no higher than it would be without 
the use of a mortgage credit certificate.

The lender then submits those affidavits, together with its statement as 
to the amount of the indebtedness incurred, to County W. After 
determining that the requirements of paragraphs (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), 
(i), (j), (k) and (n) of Sec. 1.25-3T are met and determining that the 
certificate has not expired, County W completes the mortgage credit 
certificate. This procedure for issuing mortgage credit certificates is 
sufficient evidence of the good faith of County W to meet the 
requirements of Sec. 1.25-4T(j)(1)(i)(A).

    (2) Program requirements. (i) A mortgage credit certificate program 
which fails to meet one or more of the requirements of paragraphs (b) 
through (h) of this section shall be treated as meeting such 
requirements if the requirements of this paragraph (j)(2) are satisfied. 
A mortgage credit certificate program meets the requirements of this 
paragraph (j)(2) only if each of the following provisions is met:
    (A) The issuer in good faith attempted to meet all of the 
requirements of paragraphs (b) through (h) of this section. This good 
faith requirement will be met if all reasonable steps are taken by the 
issuer to ensure that the program complies with these requirements.
    (B) Any failure to meet such requirements is due to inadvertent 
error, e.g., mathematical error, after taking reasonable steps to comply 
with such requirements.
    (ii) The following example illustrate the application of this 
paragraph (j)(2):

    Example. City X issues an issue of mortgage credit certificates. 
However, despite taking all reasonable steps to determine accurately the 
size of the applicable limit, as provided in section 103A (g)(3) and the 
regulations thereunder, the limit is exceeded because the amount of the 
mortgages, originated in the area during the past 3 years is incorrectly 
computed as a result of mathematical error. Such facts are sufficient 
evidence of the good faith of the issuer to meet the requirements of 
paragraph (j)(2).

[T.D. 8023, 50 FR 19350, May 8, 1985, as amended by T.D. 8048, 50 FR 
35538, Sept. 3, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.25-5T  Limitation on aggregate amount of mortgage credit certificates (Temporary).

    (a) In general. If the aggregate amount of qualified mortgage credit 
certificates (as defined in paragraph (b)) issued by an issuer under a 
qualified mortgage credit certificate program exceeds 20 percent of the 
nonissued bond amount (as defined in paragraph (c)), the provisions of 
paragraph (d) shall apply.
    (b) Aggregate amount of mortgage credit certificates--(1) In 
general. The aggregate amount of qualified mortgage credit certificates 
issued under a qualified mortgage credit certificate program is the sum 
of the products determined by multiplying--
    (i) The certified indebtedness amount of each qualified mortgage 
credit certificate issued under that program, by
    (ii) The certificate credit rate with respect to such certificate.

[[Page 73]]

    (2) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
this paragraph (b):

    Example 1. For 1986 City Q has a nonissued bond amount of $100 
million. After making a proper election, Q issues 2,000 qualified 
mortgage credit certificates each with a certificate credit rate of 20 
percent and a certified indebtedness amount of $50,000. The aggregate 
amount of qualified mortgage credit certificates is $20 million (2,000 x 
(.2 x $50,000)). Since this amount does not exceed 20 percent of the 
nonissued bond amount (.2 x $100 million = $20 million), Q has complied 
with the limitation on the aggregate amount of mortgage credit 
certificates, provided that it does not issue any additional 
certificates.

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example (1) except that 
instead of issuing all its certificates at the 20 percent rate, Q issues 
(i) qualified mortgage credit certificates with a certificate credit 
rate of 10 percent and an aggregate principal amount of $25 million, 
(ii) qualified mortgage credit certificates with a certificate credit 
rate of 40 percent and an aggregate principal amount of $25 million, and 
(iii) qualified mortgage credit certificates with a certificate credit 
rate of 30 percent and an aggregate principal amount of $25 million. The 
aggregate amount of qualified mortgage credit certificates is $20 
million ((10 percent of $25 million) plus (40 percent of $25 million) 
plus (30 percent of $25 million)). Q has complied with the limitation on 
the aggregate amount of qualified mortgage credit certificates, provided 
that it does not issue any additional certificates pursuant to the same 
program.

    (c) Nonissued bond amount. The term ``nonissued bond amount'' means, 
with respect to any qualified mortgage credit certificate program, the 
amount of qualified mortgage bonds (as defined in section 103A(c)(1) and 
the regulations thereunder) which the issuer is otherwise authorized to 
issue and elects not to issue under section 25(c)(2) and Sec. 1.25-
4T(b). The amount of qualified mortgage bonds which an issuing authority 
is authorized to issue is determined under section 103A(g) and the 
regulations thereunder; such determination shall take into account any 
prior elections by the issuer not to issue qualified mortgage bonds, the 
amount of any reduction in the State ceiling under paragraph (d) of this 
section, and the aggregate amount of qualified mortgage bonds issued by 
the issuer prior to its election not to issue qualified mortgage bonds.
    (d) Noncompliance with limitation on aggregate amount of mortgage 
credit certificates--(1) In general. If the provisions of this paragraph 
apply, the State ceiling under section 103A(g)(4) and the regulations 
thereunder for the calendar year following the calendar year in which 
the Commissioner determines the correction amount for the State in which 
the issuer which exceeded the limitation on the aggregate amount of 
mortgage credit certificates is located shall be reduced by 1.25 times 
the correction amount with respect to such failure.
    (2) Correction amount. (i) The term ``correction amount'' means an 
amount equal to the excess credit amount divided by .20.
    (ii) The term ``excess credit amount'' means the excess of--
    (A) The credit amount for any mortgage credit certificate program, 
over
    (B) The amount which would have been the credit amount for such 
program had such program met the requirements of section 25(d)(2) and 
paragraph (a) of this section.
    (iii) The term ``credit amount'' means the sum of the products 
determined by multiplying--
    (A) The certified indebtedness amount of each qualified mortgage 
credit certificate issued under the program, by
    (B) The certificate credit rate with respect to such certificate.
    (3) Example. The following example illustrates the application of 
this paragraph:

    Example. For 1987 City R has a nonissued bond amount of $100 
million. City R issues all of its mortgage credit certificates with a 
certificate credit rate of 20 percent. City R issues certificates with 
an aggregate certified indebtedness amount of $120 million. The 
aggregate amount of mortgage credit certificates issued by City R is $24 
million, which exceeds 20 percent of the nonissued bond amount. The 
State ceiling for the calendar year following the calendar year in which 
the Commissioner determines the correction amount is reduced by $25 
million (the correction amount multiplied by 1.25). The correction 
amount is determined as follows: The credit amount is $24 million   
(.2 x $120 million); the amount which would have been the credit amount 
for the program had it met the requirements of section 25(d)(2) is $20 
million (.2 x $100 million); the excess credit

[[Page 74]]

amount is $4 million ($24 million--$20 million); therefore, the 
correction amount is $20 million ($4 million/.2).

    (4) Cross-references. See section 103A(g)(4) and the regulations 
thereunder with respect to the reduction of the applicable State 
ceiling.

[T.D. 8023, 50 FR 19353, May 8, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.25-6T  Form of qualified mortgage credit certificate (Temporary).

    (a) In general. Qualified mortgage credit certificates are to be 
issued on the form prescribed by the Internal Revenue Service. If no 
form is prescribed by the Internal Revenue Service, or if the form 
prescribed by the Internal Revenue Service is not readily available, the 
issuer may use its own form provided that such form contains the 
information required by this section. Each mortgage credit certificate 
must be issued in a form such that there are at least three copies of 
the form. One copy of the certificate shall be retained by the issuer; 
one copy shall be retained by the lender; and one copy shall be 
forwarded to the State official who issued the certification required by 
Sec. 1.25-4T(d), unless that State official has stated in writing that 
he does not want to receive such copies.
    (b) Required information. Each qualified mortgage credit certificate 
must include the following information:
    (1) The name, address, and TIN of the issuer,
    (2) The date of the issuer's election not to issue qualified 
mortgage bonds pursuant to which the certificate is being issued,
    (3) The number assigned to the certificate,
    (4) The name, address, and TIN of the holder of the certificate,
    (5) The certificate credit rate,
    (6) The certified indebtness amount,
    (7) The acquisition cost of the residence being acquired in 
connection with the certificate,
    (8) The average area purchase price applicable to the residence,
    (9) Whether the certificate meets the requirements of Sec. 1.25-
3T(d), relating to residence requirement,
    (10) Whether the certificate meets the requirements of Sec. 1.25-
3T(e), relating to 3-year requirement,
    (11) Whether the certificate meets the requirements of Sec. 1.25-
3T(g), relating to new mortgage requirement,
    (12) Whether the certificate meets the requirements of Sec. 1.25-
3T(i), relating to prohibited mortgages,
    (13) Whether the certificate meets the requirements of Sec. 1.25-
3T(j), relating to particular lenders,
    (14) Whether the certificate meets the requirements of Sec. 1.25-
3T(k), relating to allocations to particular developments,
    (15) Whether the certificate meets the requirements of Sec. 1.25-
3T(n), relating to interest paid to related persons,
    (16) Whether the residence in connection with which the certificate 
is issued is a targeted area residence,
    (17) The date on which a closing agreement is signed with respect to 
the certified indebtness amount,
    (18) The expiration date of the certificate,
    (19) A statement that the certificate is not transferable or a 
statement that the certificate may be transferred only if the issuer 
issues a new certificate, and
    (20) A statement, signed under penalties of perjury by an authorized 
official of the issuer or its agent, that such person has made the 
determinations specified in paragraph (b) (9) through (16).

[T.D. 8023, 50 FR 19354, May 8, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.25-7T  Public notice (Temporary).

    (a) In general. At least 90 days prior to the issuance of any 
mortgage credit certificate under a qualified mortgage credit 
certificate program, the issuer shall provide reasonable public notice 
of--
    (1) The eligibility requirements for such certificate,
    (2) The methods by which such certificates are to be issued, and
    (3) The other information required by this section.
    (b) Reasonable public notice--(1) In general. Reasonable public 
notice means published notice which is reasonably designed to inform 
individuals who would be eligible to receive mortgage credit 
certificates of the proposed issuance. Reasonable public notice may be 
provided through newspapers of general circulation.

[[Page 75]]

    (2) Contents of notice. The public notice required by paragraph (a) 
must include a brief description of the principal residence requirement, 
3-year requirement, purchase price requirement, and new mortgage 
requirement. The notice must also provide a brief description of the 
methods by which the certificates are to be issued and the address and 
telephone number for obtaining further information.

[T.D. 8023, 50 FR 19354, May 8, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.25-8T  Reporting requirements (Temporary).

    (a) Lender--(1) In general. Each person who makes a loan that is a 
certified indebtedness amount with respect to any mortgage credit 
certificate must file the report described in paragraph (a)(2) and must 
retain on its books and records the information described in paragraph 
(a)(3). The report described in paragraph (a)(2) is an annual report and 
must be filed on or before January 31 of the year following the calendar 
year to which the report relates. See section 6709(c) and the 
regulations thereunder for the applicable penalties with respect to 
failure to file reports.
    (2) Information required. The report shall be submitted on Form 8329 
and shall contain the information required therein. A separate Form 8329 
shall be filed for each issue of mortgage credit certificates with 
respect to which the lender made mortgage loans during the preceding 
calendar year. Thus, for example, if during 1986 Bank M makes three 
mortgage loans which are certified indebtedness amounts with respect to 
State Z's January 15, 1986, issue of mortgage credit certificates, and 
two mortgage loans which are certified indebtedness amounts with respect 
to State Z's April 15, 1986, issue of mortgage credit certificates, and 
fifty mortgage loans which are certified indebtedness amounts with 
respect to County X's December 31, 1985, issue of mortgage credit 
certificates, Bank M must file three separate reports for calendar year 
1986. The lender must submit the Form 8329 with the information required 
therein, including--
    (i) The name, address, and TIN of the issuer of the mortgage credit 
certificates,
    (ii) The date on which the election not to issue qualified mortgage 
bonds with respect to that mortgage credit certificate was made,
    (iii) The name, address, and TIN of the lender, and
    (iv) The sum of the products determined by multiplying--
    (A) The certified indebtedness amount of each mortgage credit 
certificate issued under such program, by
    (B) The certificate credit rate with respect to such certificate.
    (3) Recordkeeping requirements. Each person who makes a loan that is 
a certified indebtedness amount with respect to any mortgage credit 
certificate must retain the information specified in this paragraph 
(a)(3) on its books and records for 6 years following the year in which 
the loan was made. With respect to each loan the lender must retain the 
following information:
    (i) The name, address, and TIN of each holder of a qualified 
mortgage credit certificate with respect to which a loan is made,
    (ii) The name, address, and TIN of the issuer of such certificate, 
and
    (iii) The date the loan for the certified indebtedness amount is 
closed, the certified indebtedness amount, and the certificate credit 
rate of such certificate.
    (b) Issuers--(1) In general. Each issuer of mortgage credit 
certificates shall file the report described in paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section.
    (2) Quarterly reports. (i) Each issuer which elects to issue 
mortgage credit certificates shall file reports on Form 8330. These 
reports shall be filed on a quarterly basis, beginning with the quarter 
in which the election is made, and are due on the following dates: April 
30 (for the quarter ending March 31), July 31 (for the quarter ending 
June 30), October 31 (for the quarter ending September 30), and January 
31 (for the quarter ending December 31). For elections made prior to May 
8, 1985, the first report need not be filed until July 31, 1985. An 
issuer shall file a separate report for each issue of mortgage credit 
certificates. In the quarter in which the last qualified mortgage credit 
certificate that may be issued under a program is issued, the issuer 
must state that fact on the report to be filed

[[Page 76]]

for that quarter; the issuer is not required to file any subsequent 
reports with respect to that program. See section 6709(c) for the 
penalties with respect to failure to file a report.
    (ii) The report shall be submitted on Form 8330 and shall contain 
the information required therein, including--
    (A) The name, address, and TIN of the issuer of the mortgage credit 
certificates,
    (B) The date of the issuer's election not to issue qualified 
mortgage bonds with respect to the mortgage credit certificate program 
and the nonissued bond amount of the program,
    (C) The sum of the products determined by multiplying--
    (1) The certified indebtedness amount of each qualified mortgage 
credit certificate issued under that program during the calendar 
quarter, by
    (2) The certificate credit rate with respect to such certificate, 
and
    (D) A listing of the name, address, and TIN of each holder of a 
qualified mortgage credit certificate which has been revoked during the 
calendar quarter.
    (c) Extensions of time for filing reports. The Commissioner may 
grant an extension of time for the filing of a report required by this 
section if there is reasonable cause for the failure to file such report 
in a timely fashion.
    (d) Place for filing. The reports required by this section are to be 
filed at the Internal Revenue Service Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
19225.
    (e) Cross reference. See section 6709 and the regulations thereunder 
with respect to the penalty for failure to file a report required by 
this section.

[T.D. 8023, 50 FR 19354, May 8, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.28-0  Credit for clinical testing expenses for certain drugs for rare diseases or conditions; table of contents.

    In order to facilitate use of Sec. 1.28-1, this section lists the 
paragraphs, subparagraphs, and subdivisions contained in Sec. 1.28-1.

    (a) General rule.
    (b) Qualified clinical testing expenses.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Modification of section 41(b).
    (3) Exclusion for amounts funded by another person.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Clinical testing in which taxpayer retains no rights.
    (iii) Clinical testing in which taxpayer retains substantial rights.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Drug by drug determination.
    (iv) Funding for qualified clinical testing expenses determinable 
only in subsequent taxable years.
    (4) Special rule governing the application of section 41(b) beyond 
its expiration date.
    (c) Clinical testing.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Definition of ``human clinical testing''.
    (3) Definition of ``carried out under'' section 505(i).
    (d) Definition and special rules.
    (1) Definition of ``rare disease or condition''.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Cost of developing and making available the designated drug.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Exclusion of costs funded by another person.
    (C) Computation of cost.
    (D) Allocation of common costs. Costs for developing and making 
available the designated drug for both the disease or condition for 
which it is designated and one or more other diseases or conditions.
    (iii) Recovery from sales.
    (iv) Recordkeeping requirements.
    (2) Tax liability limitation.
    (i) Taxable years beginning after December 31, 1986.
    (ii) Taxable years beginning before January 1, 1987, and after 
December 31, 1983.
    (iii) Taxable years beginning before January 1, 1984.
    (3) Special limitations on foreign testing.
    (i) Clinical testing conducted outside the United States--In 
general.
    (ii) Insufficient testing population in the United States.
    (A) In general.
    (B) ``Insufficient testing population''.
    (C) ``Unrelated to the taxpayer''.
    (4) Special limitations for certain corporations.
    (i) Corporations to which section 936 applies.
    (ii) Corporations to which section 934(b) applies.
    (5) Aggregation of expenditures.
    (i) Controlled group of corporations: organizations under common 
control.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Definition of controlled group of corporations.
    (C) Definition of organization.
    (D) Determination of common control.
    (ii) Tax accounting periods used.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Special rule where the timing of clinical testing is 
manipulated.

[[Page 77]]

    (iii) Membership during taxable year in more than one group.
    (iv) Intra-group transactions.
    (A) In general.
    (B) In-house research expenses.
    (C) Contract research expenses.
    (D) Lease payments.
    (E) Payments for supplies.
    (6) Allocations.
    (i) Pass-through in the case of an S corporation
    (ii) Pass-through in the case of an estate or a trust.
    (iii) Pass-through in the case of a partnership.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Certain partnership non-business expenditures.
    (C) Apportionment.
    (iv) Year in which taken into account.
    (v) Credit allowed subject to limitation.
    (7) Manner of making an election.

[T.D. 8232, 53 FR 38710, Oct. 3, 1988; 53 FR 40879, Oct. 19, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 1.28-1  Credit for clinical testing expenses for certain drugs for rare diseases or conditions.

    (a) General rule. Section 28 provides a credit against the tax 
imposed by chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code. The amount of the 
credit is equal to 50 percent of the qualified clinical testing expenses 
(as defined in paragraph (b) of this section) for the taxable year. The 
credit applies to qualified clinical testing expenses paid or incurred 
by the taxpayer after December 31, 1982, and before January 1, 1991. The 
credit may not exceed the taxpayer's tax liability for the taxable year 
(as determined under paragraph (d)(2) of this section).
    (b) Qualified clinical testing expenses--(1) In general. Except as 
otherwise provided in paragraph (b)(3) of this section, the term 
``qualified clinical testing expenses'' means the amounts which are paid 
or incurred during the taxable year which would constitute ``qualified 
research expenses'' within the meaning of section 41(b) (relating to the 
credit for increasing research activities) as modified by section 
28(b)(1)(B) and paragraph (b)(2) of this section. For example, amounts 
paid or incurred for the acquisition of depreciable property used in the 
conduct of clinical testing (as defined in paragraph (c) of this 
section) are not qualified clinical testing expenses.
    (2) Modification of section 41(b). For purposes of paragraph (b)(1) 
of this section, section 41(b) is modified by substituting ``clinical 
testing'' for ``qualified research'' each place it appears in paragraph 
(2) of section 41(b) (relating to in-house research expenses) and 
paragraph (3) of section 41(b) (relating to contract research expenses). 
In addition, ``100 percent'' is substituted for ``65 percent'' in 
paragraph (3)(A) of section 41(b).
    (3) Exclusion for amounts funded by another person--(i) In general. 
The term ``qualified clinical testing expenses'' shall not include any 
amount which would otherwise constitute qualified clinical testing 
expenses, to the extent such amount is funded by a grant, contract, or 
otherwise by another person (or any governmental entity). The 
determination of the extent to which an amount is funded shall be made 
in light of all the facts and circumstances. For a special rule 
regarding funding between commonly controlled businesses, see paragraph 
(d)(5)(iv) of Sec. 1.28-1.
    (ii) Clinical testing in which taxpayer retains no rights. If a 
taxpayer conducting clinical testing with respect to the designated drug 
for another person retains no substantial rights in the clinical testing 
under the agreement providing for the clinical testing the taxpayer's 
clinical testing expenses are treated as fully funded for purposes of 
section 28(b)(1)(C). Thus, for example, if the taxpayer incurs clinical 
testing expenses under an agreement that confers on another person the 
exclusive right to exploit the results of the clinical testing, those 
expenses do not constitute qualified clinical testing expenses because 
they are fully funded under this paragraph (b)(3)(ii). Incidental 
benefits to the taxpayer from the conduct of the clinical testing (for 
example, increased experience in the field of human clinical testing) do 
not constitute substantial rights in the clinical testing.
    (iii) Clinical testing in which taxpayer retains substantial 
rights--(A) In general. If a taxpayer conducting clinical testing with 
respect to the designated drug for another person retains substantial 
rights in the clinical testing under the agreement providing for the 
clinical testing, the clinical testing expenses are funded to the extent 
of the payments (and fair market value of any

[[Page 78]]

property at the time of transfer) to which the taxpayer becomes entitled 
by conducting the clinical testing. The taxpayer shall reduce the amount 
paid or incurred by the taxpayer for the clinical testing expenses that 
would, but for section 28(b)(1)(C) constitute qualified clinical testing 
expenses of the taxpayer by the amount of the funding determined under 
the preceding sentence. Rights retained in the clinical testing are not 
treated as property for purposes of this paragraph (b)(3)(iii)(A). If 
the property that is transferred to the taxpayer is to be consumed in 
the clinical testing (for example, supplies), the taxpayer should 
exclude the value of that property from both the payments received and 
the expenses paid or incurred for the clinical testing.
    (B) Drug by drug determination. The provisions of this paragraph 
(b)(3) shall be applied separately to each designated drug tested by the 
taxpayer.
    (iv) Funding for qualified clinical testing expenses determinable 
only in subsequent taxable years. If, at the time the taxpayer files its 
return for a taxable year, it is impossible to determine to what extent 
some or all of the qualified clinical testing expenses may be funded, 
the taxpayer shall treat the clinical testing expenses as fully funded 
for purposes of that return. When the amount of funding for qualified 
clinical testing expenses is finally determined, the taxpayer should 
amend the return and any interim returns to reflect the amount of 
funding for qualified clinical testing expenses.
    (4) Special rule governing the application of section 41(b) beyond 
its expiration date. For purposes of section 28 and this section, 
section 41(b), as amended, and the regulations thereunder shall be 
deemed to remain in effect after December 31, 1988.
    (c) Clinical testing--(1) In general. The term ``clinical testing'' 
means any human clinical testing which--
    (i) Is carried out under an exemption under section 505(i) of the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355(i)) and the 
regulations relating thereto (21 CFR part 312) for the purpose of 
testing a drug for a rare disease or condition as defined in paragraph 
(d)(1) of this section,
    (ii) Occurs after the date the drug is designated as a drug for a 
rare disease or condition under section 526 of the Federal Food, Drug, 
and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 360bb),
    (iii) Occurs before the date on which an application for the 
designated drug is approved under section 505(b) of the Federal Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355(b)) or, if the drug is a 
biological product (other than a radioactive biological product intended 
for human use), before the date on which a license for such drug is 
issued under section 351 of the Public Health Services Act (42 U.S.C. 
262), and
    (iv) Is conducted by or on behalf of the taxpayer to whom the 
designation under section 526 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act applies.

Human clinical testing shall be taken into account under this paragraph 
(c)(1) only to the extent that the testing relates to the use of a drug 
for the rare disease or condition for which the drug was designated 
under section 526 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. For 
purposes of paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section the testing under 
section 505(i) exemption procedures (21 CFR part 312) of a biological 
product (other than a radioactive biological product intended for human 
use) pursuant to 21 CFR Sec. 601.21 is deemed to be carried out under an 
exemption under section 505(i) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act.
    (2) Definition of ``human clinical testing.'' Testing is considered 
to be human clinical testing only to the extent that it uses human 
subjects to determine the effect of the designated drug on humans and is 
necessary for the designated drug either to be approved under section 
505(b) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and the regulations 
thereunder (21 CFR part 314), or if the designated drug is a biological 
product (other than a radioactive biological product intended for human 
use), to be licensed under section 351 of the Public Health Services Act 
and the regulations thereunder (21 CFR part 601). For purposes of this 
paragraph (c)(2), a human subject is an individual who is a participant 
in research, either as a recipient of the drug or as a control. A 
subject may be either a healthy individual or a patient.

[[Page 79]]

    (3) Definition of ``carried out under'' section 505(i). Human 
clinical testing is not carried out under section 505(i) of the Federal 
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and the regulations thereunder (21 CFR part 
312) unless the primary purpose of the human clinical testing is to 
ascertain the data necessary to qualify the designated drug for sale in 
the United States, and not to ascertain data unrelated or only 
incidentally related to that needed to qualify the designated drug. 
Whether or not this primary purpose test is met shall be determined in 
light of all of the facts and circumstances.
    (d) Definition and special rules--(1) Definition of ``rare disease 
or condition''--(i) In general. The term ``rare disease or condition'' 
means any disease or condition which--
    (A) Afflicts 200,000 or fewer persons in the United States, or
    (B) Afflicts more than 200,000 persons in the United States but for 
which there is no reasonable expectation that the cost of developing and 
making available in the United States (as defined in section 7701(a)(9)) 
a drug for such disease or condition will be recovered from sales in the 
United States (as so defined) of such drug.

Determinations under paragraph (d)(1)(i)(B) of this section with respect 
to any drug shall be made on the basis of the facts and circumstances as 
of the date such drug is designated under section 526 of the Federal 
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. Examples of diseases or conditions which 
in 1987 afflicted 200,000 or fewer persons in the United States are 
Duchenne dystrophy, one of the muscular dystrophies; Huntington's 
disease, a hereditary chorea; myoclonus; Tourette's syndrome; and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS or Lou Gehrig's disease).
    (ii) Cost of developing and making available the designated drug--
(A) In general. Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph 
(d)(1)(ii), the taxpayer's computation of the cost of developing and 
making available in the United States the designated drug shall include 
only the costs that the taxpayer (or any person whose right to make 
sales of the drug is directly or indirectly derived from the taxpayer, 
e.g., a licensee or transferee) has incurred or reasonably expects to 
incur in developing and making available in the United States the 
designated drug for the disease or condition for which it is designated. 
For example, if, prior to designation under section 526, the taxpayer 
incurred costs of $125,000 to test the drug for the rare disease or 
condition for which it is subsequently designated and incurred $500,000 
to test the same drug for other diseases, and if, on the date of 
designation, the taxpayer expects to incur costs of $1.2 million to test 
the drug for the rare disease or condition for which it is designated, 
the taxpayer shall include in its cost computation both the $125,000 
incurred prior to designation and the $1.2 million expected to be 
incurred after designation to test the drug for the rare disease or 
condition for which it is designated. The taxpayer shall not include the 
$500,000 incurred to test the drug for other diseases.
    (B) Exclusion of costs funded by another person. In computing the 
cost of developing and making available in the United States the 
designated drug, the taxpayer shall not include any cost incurred or 
expected to be incurred by the taxpayer to the extent that the cost is 
funded or is reasonably expected to be funded (determined under the 
principles of paragraph (b)(3)) by a grant, contract, or otherwise by 
another person (or any governmental entity).
    (C) Computation of cost. The cost computation shall use only 
reasonable costs incurred after the first indication of an orphan 
application for the designated drug. Such costs shall include the costs 
of obtaining data needed, and of meetings to be held, in connection with 
a request for FDA assistance under section 525 of the Federal, Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 360aa) or a request for orphan 
designation under section 526 of that Act; costs of determining 
patentability of the drug; costs of screening, animal and clinical 
studies; costs associated with preparation of a Notice of Claimed 
Investigational Exemption for a New Drug (IND) and a New Drug 
Application (NDA); costs of possible distribution of drug under a 
``treatment'' protocol; costs of development of a dosage

[[Page 80]]

form; manufacturing costs; distribution costs; promotion costs; costs to 
maintain required records and reports; and costs of the taxpayer in 
acquiring the right to market a drug from the owner of that right prior 
to designation. The taxpayer shall also include general overhead, 
depreciation costs and premiums for insurance against liability losses 
to the extent that the taxpayer can demonstrate that these costs are 
properly allocable to the designated drug under the established 
standards of financial accounting and reporting of research and 
development costs.
    (D) Allocation of common costs. Costs for developing and making 
available the designated drug for both the disease or condition for 
which it is designated and one or more other diseases or conditions. In 
the case where the costs incurred or expected to be incurred in 
developing and making available the designated drug for the disease or 
condition for which it is designated are also incurred or expected to be 
incurred in developing and making available in the United States the 
same drug for one or more other diseases or conditions (whether or not 
they are also designated or expected to be designated), the costs shall 
be allocated between the cost of developing and making available the 
designated drug for the disease or condition for which the drug is 
designated and the cost of developing and making available the 
designated drug for the other diseases or conditions. The amount of the 
common costs to be allocated to the cost of developing and making 
available the designated drug for the disease or condition for which it 
is designated is determined by multiplying the common costs by a 
fraction the numerator of which is the sum of the expected amount of 
sales in the United States of the designated drug for the disease or 
condition for which the drug is designated and the denominator of which 
is the total expected amount of sales in the United States of the 
designated drug. For example, if prior to designation, the taxpayer 
incurs (among other costs) costs of $100,000 in testing the designated 
drug for its toxic effect on animals (without reference to any disease 
or condition), and if the taxpayer expects to recover $500,000 from 
sales in the United States of the designated drug for disease X, the 
disease for which the drug is designated, and further expects to recover 
another $1.5 million from the sales in the United States of the 
designated drug for disease Y, the taxpayer must allocate a 
proportionate amount of the common costs of $100,000 to the cost of 
developing and making available the designated drug for both disease X 
and disease Y. Since the ratio of the expected amount of sales in the 
United States of the designated drug for disease X to the total of both 
the expected amount of sales in the United States of the designated drug 
for disease X and the expected amount of sales in the United States of 
the designated drug for disease Y is $500,000/$2,000,000, 25% of the 
common costs of $100,000 (i.e., $25,000) is allocated to the cost of 
developing and making available the designated drug for disease X.
    (iii) Recovery from sales. In determining whether the taxpayer's 
cost described in paragraph (d)(1)(ii) of this section will be recovered 
from sales in the United States of the designated drug for the disease 
or condition for which the drug is designated, the taxpayer shall 
include anticipated sales by the taxpayer or any person whose right to 
make such sales is directly or indirectly derived from the taxpayer 
(such as a licensee or transferee). The anticipated sales shall be based 
upon the size of the anticipated patient population for which the 
designated drug would be useful, including the following factors: the 
degree of effectiveness and safety of the designated drug, if known: the 
projected fraction of the anticipated patient population expected to be 
given the designated drug and to continue to take it; other available 
agents and other types of therapy; the likelihood that superior agents 
will become available within a few years; and the number of years during 
which the designated drug would be exclusively available, e.g., under a 
patent.
    (iv) Recordkeeping requirements. The taxpayer shall keep records 
sufficient to substantiate the cost and sales estimates made pursuant to 
this paragraph (d)(1). The records required by this paragraph (d)(1)(iv) 
shall be retained so

[[Page 81]]

long as the contents thereof may become material in the administration 
of section 28.
    (2) Tax liability limitation--(i) Taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1986. The credit allowed by section 28 shall not exceed the 
excess (if any) of--
    (A) The taxpayer's regular tax liability for the taxable year (as 
defined in section 26(b)), reduced by the sum of the credits allowable 
under--
    (1) Section 21 (relating to expenses for household and dependent 
care services necessary for gainful employment),
    (2) Section 22 (relating to the elderly and permanently and totally 
disabled),
    (3) Section 23 (relating to residential energy),
    (4) Section 25 (relating to interest on certain home mortgages), and
    (5) Section 27 (relating to taxes on foreign countries and 
possessions of the United States), over
    (B) The tentative minimum tax for the taxable year (as determined 
under section 55(b)(1)).
    (ii) Taxable years beginning before January 1, 1987, and after 
December 31, 1983. The credit allowed by section 28 shall not exceed the 
taxpayer's tax liability for the taxable year (as defined in section 26 
(b) prior to its amendment by the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (Pub. L. 99-
514)), reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under--
    (A) Section 21 (relating to expenses for household dependent care 
services necessary for gainful employment),
    (B) Section 22 (relating to the elderly and permanently and totally 
disabled),
    (C) Section 23 (relating to residential energy),
    (D) Section 24 (relating to contributions to candidates for public 
office),
    (E) Section 25 (relating to interest on certain home mortgages), and
    (F) Section 27 (relating to the taxes on foreign countries and 
possessions of the United States).
    (iii) Taxable years beginning before January 1, 1984. The credit 
allowed by section 28 shall not exceed the amount of the tax imposed by 
chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code for the taxable year, reduced by 
the sum of the credits allowable under the following sections as 
designated prior to the enactment of the Tax Reform Act of 1984 (Pub. 
Law 98-369):
    (A) Section 32 (relating to tax withheld at source on nonresident 
aliens and foreign corporations and on tax-free convenant bonds),
    (B) Sections 33 (relating to taxes of foreign countries and 
possessions of the United States),
    (C) Section 37 (relating to the retirement income),
    (D) Section 38 (relating to investment in certain depreciable 
property),
    (E) Section 40 (relating to expenses of work incentive programs).
    (F) Section 41 (relating to contributions to candidates for public 
office).
    (G) Section 44 (relating to purchase of new principal residence).
    (H) Section 44A (relating to expenses for household and dependent 
care services necessary for gainful employment).
    (I) Section 44B (relating to employment of certain new employees).
    (J) Section 44C (relating to residential energy).
    (K) Section 44D (relating to producing fuel from a nonconventional 
source).
    (L) Section 44E (relating to alcohol used as fuel).
    (M) Section 44F (relating to increasing research activities), and
    (N) Section 44G (relating to employee stock ownership).

The term ``tax imposed by chapter 1'' as used in this paragraph 
(d)(2)(iii) does not include any tax treated as not imposed by chapter 1 
of the Internal Revenue Code under the last sentence of section 53(a).
    (3) Special limitations on foreign testing--(i) Clinical testing 
conducted outside of the United States--In general. Except as otherwise 
provided in this paragraph (d)(3), expenses paid or incurred with 
respect to clinical testing conducted outside the United States (as 
defined in section 7701(a)(9)) are not eligible for credit under this 
section. Thus, for example, wages paid an employee clinical investigator 
for clinical testing conducted in medical facilities in the United 
States and Mexico generally must be apportioned between the clinical 
testing conducted within the United States and the clinical testing 
conducted outside the United States, and

[[Page 82]]

only the wages apportioned to the clinical testing conducted within the 
United States are qualified clinical testing expenses.
    (ii) Insufficient testing population in the United States--(A) In 
general. If clinical testing is conducted outside of the United States 
because there is an insufficient testing population in the United 
States, and if the clinical testing is conducted by a United States 
person (as defined in section 7701(a)(30)) or is conducted by any other 
person unrelated to the taxpayer to whom the designation under section 
526 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act applies, then the 
expenses paid or incurred for clinical testing conducted outside of the 
United States are eligible for the credit provided by section 28.
    (B) ``Insufficient testing population.'' The testing population in 
the United States is insufficient if there are not within the United 
States the number of available and appropriate human subjects needed to 
produce reliable data from the clinical investigation.
    (C) ``Unrelated to the taxpayer.'' For the purpose of determining 
whether a person is unrelated to the taxpayer to whom the designation 
under section 526 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and the 
regulations thereunder applies, the rules of section 613A(d)(3) shall 
apply except that the number ``5'' in section 613A(d)(3) (A), (B), and 
(C) shall be deleted and the number ``10'' inserted in lieu thereof.
    (4) Special limitations for certain corporations--(i) Corporations 
to which section 936 applies. Expenses paid or incurred for clinical 
testing conducted either inside or outside the United States by a 
corporation to which section 936 (relating to Puerto Rico and 
possessions tax credit) applies are not eligible for the credit under 
section 28.
    (ii) Corporations to which section 934(b) applies. For taxable years 
beginning before January 1, 1987, expenses paid or incurred for clinical 
testing conducted either inside or outside the United States by a 
corporation to which section 934(b) (relating to the limitation on 
reduction in income tax liability incurred to the Virgin Islands), as in 
effect prior to its amendment by the Tax Reform Act of 1986, applies are 
not eligible for the credit under section 28. For taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1986, see section 1277(c)(1) of the Tax 
Reform Act of 1986 (100 Stat. 2600) which makes the rule set forth in 
the preceding sentence inapplicable with respect to corporations created 
or organized in the Virgin Islands only if (and so long as) an 
implementing agreement described in that section is in effect between 
the United States and the Virgin Islands.
    (5) Aggregation of expenditures--(i) Controlled group of 
corporations; organizations under common control--(A) In general. In 
determining the amount of the credit allowable with respect to an 
organization that at the end of its taxable year is a member of a 
controlled group of corporations or a member of a group of organizations 
under common control, all members of the group are treated as a single 
taxpayer and the credit (if any) allowable to the member is determined 
on the basis of its proportionate share of the qualified clinical 
testing expenses of the aggregated group.
    (B) Definition of controlled group of corporations. For purposes of 
this section, the term ``controlled group of corporations'' shall have 
the meaning given to the term by section 41(f)(5).
    (C) Definition of organization. For purposes of this section, an 
organization is a sole proprietorship, a partnership, a trust, an 
estate, or a corporation, that is carrying on a trade or business 
(within the meaning of section 162). For purposes of this section, any 
corporation that is a member of a commonly controlled group shall be 
deemed to be carrying on a trade or business if any other member of that 
group is carrying on any trade or business.
    (D) Determination of common control. Whether organizations are under 
common control shall be determined under the principles set forth in 
paragraphs (b) through (g) of 26 CFR 1.52-1.
    (ii) Tax accounting periods used--(A) In general. The credit 
allowable to a member of a controlled group of corporations or a group 
of organizations under common control is that member's share of the 
aggregate credit computed as of the end of such member's taxable year.

[[Page 83]]

    (B) Special rule where the timing of clinical testing is 
manipulated. If the timing of clinical testing by members using 
different tax accounting periods is manipulated to generate a credit in 
excess of the amount that would be allowable if all members of the group 
used the same tax accounting period, the district director may require 
all members of the group to calculate the credit in the current taxable 
year and all future years by using the ``conformed years'' method. Each 
member computing a credit under the ``conformed years'' method shall 
compute the credit as if all members of the group had the same taxable 
year as the computing member.
    (iii) Membership during taxable year in more than one group. An 
organization may be a member of only one group for a taxable year. If, 
without application of this paragraph (d)(5)(iii), an organization would 
be a member of more than one group at the end of its taxable year, the 
organization shall be treated as a member of the group in which it was 
included for its preceding taxable year. If the organization was not 
included for its preceding taxable year in any group in which it could 
be included as of the end of its taxable year, the organization shall 
designate in its timely filed return the group in which it is being 
included. If the return for a taxable year is due before May 1, 1985, 
the organization may designate its group membership through an amended 
return for that year filed on or before April 30, 1985. If the 
organization does not so designate, then the district director with 
audit jurisdiction of the return will determine the group in which the 
business is to be included.
    (iv) Intra-group transactions-- (A) In general. Because all members 
of a group under common control are treated as a single taxpayer for 
purposes of determining the credit, transactions between members of the 
group are generally disregarded.
    (B) In-house research expenses. If one member of a group conducts 
clinical testing on behalf of another member, the member conducting the 
clinical testing shall include in its qualified clinical testing 
expenses any in-house research expenses for that work and shall not 
treat any amount received or accrued from the other member as funding 
the clinical testing. Conversely, the member for whom the clinical 
testing is conducted shall not treat any part of any amount paid or 
incurred as a contract research expense. For purposes of determining 
whether the in-house research for that work is clinical testing, the 
member performing the clinical testing shall be treated as carrying on 
any trade or business carried on by the member on whose behalf the 
clinical testing is performed.
    (C) Contract research expenses. If a member of a group pays or 
incurs contract research expenses to a person outside the group in 
carrying on the member's trade or business, that member shall include 
those expenses as qualified clinical testing expenses. However, if the 
expenses are not paid or incurred in carrying on any trade or business 
of that member, those expenses may be taken into account as contract 
research expenses by another member of the group provided that the other 
member--
    (1) Reimburses the member paying or incurring the expenses, and
    (2) Carries on a trade or business to which the clinical testing 
relates.
    (D) Lease payments. Amounts paid or incurred to another member of 
the group for the lease of personal property owned by a person outside 
the group shall be taken into account as in-house research expenses for 
purposes of section 28 only to the extent of the lesser of--
    (1) The amount paid or incurred to the other member, or
    (2) The amount of the lease expense paid to a person outside the 
group.
    The amount paid or incurred to another member of the group for the 
lease of personal property owned by a member of the group is not taken 
into account for purposes of section 28.
    (E) Payment for supplies. Amounts paid or incurred to another member 
of the group for supplies shall be taken into account as in-house 
research expenses for purposes of section 28 only to the extent of the 
lesser of--
    (1) The amount paid or incurred to the other member, or
    (2) The amount of the other member's basis in the supplies.

[[Page 84]]

    (6) Allocations--(i) Pass-through in the case of an S corporation. 
In the case of an S corporation (as defined in section 1361), the amount 
of the credit for qualified clinical testing expenses computed for the 
corporation for any taxable year shall be allocated among the persons 
who are shareholders of the corporation during the taxable year 
according to the provisions of section 1366 and section 1377.
    (ii) Pass-through in the case of an estate or a trust. In the case 
of an estate or a trust, the amount of the credit for qualified clinical 
testing expenses computed for the estate or trust for any taxable year 
shall be apportioned between the estate or trust and the beneficiaries 
on the basis of the income of the estate or trust allocable to each.
    (iii) Pass-through in the case of a partnership--(A) In general. In 
the case of a partnership, the credit for qualified clinical testing 
expenses computed for the partnership for any taxable year shall be 
apportioned among the persons who are partners during the taxable year 
in accordance with section 704 and the regulations thereunder.
    (B) Certain partnership non-business expenditures. A partner's share 
of an in-house research expense or contract research expense paid or 
incurred by a partnership other than in carrying on a trade or business 
of the partnership constitutes a qualified clinical testing expense of 
the partner if--
    (1) The partner is entitled to make independent use of the result of 
the clinical testing, and
    (2) The clinical testing expense paid or incurred in carrying on the 
clinical testing would have been paid or incurred by the partner in 
carrying on a trade or business of the partner if the partner had 
carried on the clinical testing that was in fact carried on by the 
partnership.
    (C) Apportionment. Qualified clinical testing expenses to which 
paragraph (d)(6)(iii)(B) of this section applies shall be apportioned 
among the persons who are partners during the taxable year in accordance 
with section 704 and the regulations thereunder. For purposes of section 
28, these expenses shall be treated as paid or incurred directly by the 
partners rather than by the partnership. Thus, the partnership shall 
disregard these expenses in computing the credit to be apportioned under 
paragraph (d)(6)(iii)(A) of this section, and each partner shall 
aggregate the portion of these expenses allocated to the partner with 
other qualified clinical testing expenses of the partner in making the 
computations under section 28.
    (iv) Year in which taken into account. An amount apportioned to a 
person under paragraph (d)(6) of this section shall be taken into 
account by the person in the taxable year of such person in which or 
with which the taxable year of the corporation, estate, trust, or 
partnership (as the case may be) ends.
    (v) Credit allowed subject to limitation. Any person to whom any 
amount has been apportioned under paragraph (d)(6)(i), (ii), or (iii) of 
this section is allowed, subject to the limitation provided in section 
28(d)(2), a credit for that amount.
    (7) Manner of making an election. To make an election to have 
section 28 apply for its taxable year, the taxpayer shall file Form 6765 
(Credit for Increasing Research Activities (or for claiming the orphan 
drugs credit)) containing all the information required by that form.

[T.D. 8232, 53 FR 38711, Oct. 3, 1988; 53 FR 40879, Oct. 19, 1988; 53 FR 
41013, Oct. 19, 1988]

                           Credits Against Tax

                            credits allowable


<R05>
Sec. 1.30-1  Definition of qualified electric vehicle and recapture of credit for qualified electric vehicle.

    (a) Definition of qualified electric vehicle. A qualified electric 
vehicle is a motor vehicle that meets the requirements of section 30(c). 
Accordingly, a qualified electric vehicle does not include any motor 
vehicle that has ever been used (for either personal or business use) as 
a non-electric vehicle.
    (b) Recapture of credit for qualified electric vehicle--(1) In 
general--(i) Addition to tax. If a recapture event occurs with respect 
to a taxpayer's qualified electric vehicle, the taxpayer must add the 
recapture amount to the amount of tax due in the taxable year in which

[[Page 85]]

the recapture event occurs. The recapture amount is not treated as 
income tax imposed on the taxpayer by chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue 
Code for purposes of computing the alternative minimum tax or 
determining the amount of any other allowable credits for the taxable 
year in which the recapture event occurs.
    (ii) Reduction of carryover. If a recapture event occurs with 
respect to a taxpayer's qualified electric vehicle, and if a portion of 
the section 30 credit for the cost of that vehicle was disallowed under 
section 30(b)(3)(B) and consequently added to the taxpayer's minimum tax 
credit pursuant to section 53(d)(1)(B)(iii), the taxpayer must reduce 
its minimum tax credit carryover by an amount equal to the portion of 
any minimum tax credit carryover attributable to the disallowed section 
30 credit, multiplied by the recapture percentage for the taxable year 
of recapture. Similarly, the taxpayer must reduce any other credit 
carryover amounts (such as under section 469) by the portion of the 
carryover attributable to section 30, multiplied by the recapture 
percentage.
    (2) Recapture event--(i) In general. A recapture event occurs if, 
within 3 full years from the date a qualified electric vehicle is placed 
in service, the vehicle ceases to be a qualified electric vehicle. A 
vehicle ceases to be a qualified electric vehicle if--
    (A) The vehicle is modified so that it is no longer primarily 
powered by electricity;
    (B) The vehicle is used in a manner described in section 50(b); or
    (C) The taxpayer receiving the credit under section 30 sells or 
disposes of the vehicle and knows or has reason to know that the vehicle 
will be used in a manner described in paragraph (b)(2)(i)(A) or (B) of 
this section.
    (ii) Exception for disposition. Except as provided in paragraph 
(b)(2)(i)(C) of this section, a sale or other disposition (including a 
disposition by reason of an accident or other casualty) of a qualified 
electric vehicle is not a recapture event.
    (3) Recapture amount. The recapture amount is equal to the recapture 
percentage times the decrease in the credits allowed under section 30 
for all prior taxable years that would have resulted solely from 
reducing to zero the cost taken into account under section 30 with 
respect to such vehicle, including any credits allowed attributable to 
section 30 (such as under sections 53 and 469).
    (4) Recapture date. The recapture date is the actual date of the 
recapture event unless a recapture event described in paragraph 
(b)(2)(i)(B) of this section occurs, in which case the recapture date is 
the first day of the recapture year.
    (5) Recapture percentage. For purposes of this section, the 
recapture percentage is--
    (i) 100, if the recapture date is within the first full year after 
the date the vehicle is placed in service;
    (ii) 66 \2/3\, if the recapture date is within the second full year 
after the date the vehicle is placed in service; or
    (iii) 33 \1/3\, if the recapture date is within the third full year 
after the date the vehicle is placed in service.
    (6) Basis adjustment. As of the first day of the taxable year in 
which the recapture event occurs, the basis of the qualified electric 
vehicle is increased by the recapture amount and the carryover 
reductions taken into account under paragraphs (b)(1)(i) and (ii) of 
this section, respectively. For a vehicle that is of a character that is 
subject to an allowance for depreciation, this increase in basis is 
recoverable over the remaining recovery period for the vehicle beginning 
as of the first day of the taxable year of recapture.
    (7) Application of section 1245 for sales and other dispositions. 
For purposes of section 1245, the amount of the credit allowable under 
section 30(a) with respect to any qualified electric vehicle that is (or 
has been) of a character subject to an allowance for depreciation is 
treated as a deduction allowed for depreciation under section 167. 
Therefore, upon a sale or other disposition of a depreciable qualified 
electric vehicle, section 1245 will apply to any gain recognized to the 
extent the basis of the depreciable vehicle was reduced under section 
30(d)(1) net of any basis increase described in paragraph (b)(6) of this 
section.

[[Page 86]]

    (8) Examples. The following examples illustrate the provisions of 
this section:

    Example 1. A, a calendar-year taxpayer, purchases and places in 
service for personal use on January 1, 1995, a qualified electric 
vehicle costing $25,000. On A's 1995 federal income tax return, A claims 
a credit of $2,500. On January 2, 1996, A sells the vehicle to an 
unrelated third party who subsequently converts the vehicle into a non-
electric vehicle on October 15, 1996. There is no recapture upon the 
sale of the vehicle by A provided A did not know or have reason to know 
that the purchaser intended to convert the vehicle to non-electric use.
    Example 2. B, a calendar-year taxpayer, purchases and places in 
service for personal use on October 11, 1994, a qualified electric 
vehicle costing $20,000. On B's 1994 federal income tax return, B claims 
a credit of $2,000, which reduces B's tax by $2,000. The basis of the 
vehicle is reduced to $18,000 ($20,000-$2,000). On March 8, 1996, B 
sells the vehicle to a tax-exempt entity. Because B knowingly sold the 
vehicle to a tax-exempt entity described in section 50(b) in the second 
full year from the date the vehicle was placed in service, B must 
recapture $1,333 ($2,000 x 66 \2/3\ percent). This recapture amount 
increases B's tax by $1,333 on B's 1996 federal income tax return and is 
added to the basis of the vehicle as of January 1, 1996, the beginning 
of the taxable year in which the recapture event occurred.
    Example 3. X, a calendar-year taxpayer, purchases and places in 
service for business use on January 1, 1994, a qualified electric 
vehicle costing $30,000. On X's 1994 federal income tax return, X claims 
a credit of $3,000, which reduces X's tax by $3,000. The basis of the 
vehicle is reduced to $27,000 ($30,000-$3,000) prior to any adjustments 
for depreciation. On March 8, 1995, X converts the qualified electric 
vehicle into a gasoline-propelled vehicle. Because X modified the 
vehicle so that it is no longer primarily powered by electricity in the 
second full year from the date the vehicle was placed in service, X must 
recapture $2,000 ($3,000  x  66\2/3\ percent). This recapture amount 
increases X's tax by $2,000 on X's 1995 federal income tax return. The 
recapture amount of $2,000 is added to the basis of the vehicle as of 
January 1, 1995, the beginning of the taxable year of recapture, and to 
the extent the property remains depreciable, the adjusted basis is 
recoverable over the remaining recovery period.
    Example 4. The facts are the same as in Example 3. In 1996, X sells 
the vehicle for $31,000, recognizing a gain from this sale. Under 
paragraph (b)(7) of this section, section 1245 will apply to any gain 
recognized on the sale of a depreciable vehicle to the extent the basis 
of the vehicle was reduced by the section 30 credit net of any basis 
increase from recapture of the section 30 credit. Accordingly, the gain 
from the sale of the vehicle is subject to section 1245 to the extent of 
the depreciation allowance for the vehicle plus the credit allowed under 
section 30 ($3,000), less the previous recapture amount ($2,000). Any 
remaining amount of gain may be subject to other applicable provisions 
of the Internal Revenue Code.

    (c) Effective date. This section is effective on October 14, 1994. 
If the recapture date is before the effective date of this section, a 
taxpayer may use any reasonable method to recapture the benefit of any 
credit allowable under section 30(a) consistent with section 30 and its 
legislative history. For this purpose, the recapture date is defined in 
paragraph (b)(4) of this section.

[60 FR 39649, Aug. 3, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 1.31-1   Credit for tax withheld on wages.

    (a) The tax deducted and withheld at the source upon wages under 
chapter 24 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (or in the case of 
amounts withheld in 1954, under subchapter D, chapter 9 of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1939) is allowable as a credit against the tax imposed 
by Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, upon the recipient 
of the income. If the tax has actually been withheld at the source, 
credit or refund shall be made to the recipient of the income even 
though such tax has not been paid over to the Government by the 
employer. For the purpose of the credit, the recipient of the income is 
the person subject to tax imposed under Subtitle A upon the wages from 
which the tax was withheld. For instance, if a husband and wife 
domiciled in a State recognized as a community property State for 
Federal tax purposes make separate returns, each reporting for income 
tax purposes one- half of the wages received by the husband, each spouse 
is entitled to one-half of the credit allowable for the tax withheld at 
source with respect to such wages.
    (b) The tax withheld during any calendar year shall be allowed as a 
credit against the tax imposed by Subtitle A for the taxable year of the 
recipient of the income which begins in that calendar year. If such 
recipient has more than one taxable year beginning in

[[Page 87]]

that calendar year, the credit shall be allowed against the tax for the 
last taxable year so beginning.


<R05>
Sec. 1.31-2   Credit for ``special refunds'' of employee social security tax.

    (a) In general. (1) In the case of an employee receiving wages from 
more than one employer during the calendar year, amounts may be deducted 
and withheld as employee social security tax with respect to more than 
$3,600 of wages received during the calendar year 1954, and with respect 
to more than $4,200 of wages received during a calendar year after 1954. 
For example, employee social security tax may be deducted and withheld 
on $5,000 of wages received by an employee during a particular calendar 
year if the employee is paid wages in such year in the amount of $3,000 
by one employer and in the amount of $2,000 by another employer. Section 
6413(c) (as amended by section 202 of the Social Security Amendments of 
1954 (68 Stat. 1089)), permits, under certain conditions, a so-called 
``special refund'' of the amount of employee social security tax 
deducted and withheld with respect to wages paid to an employee in a 
calendar year after 1954 in excess of $4,200 ($3,600 for the calendar 
year 1954) by reason of the employee receiving wages from more than one 
employer during the calendar year. For provisions relating to the 
imposition of the employee tax and the limitation on wages, see with 
respect to the calendar year 1954, sections 1400 and 1426(a)(1) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1939 and, with respect to calendar years after 
1954, sections 3101 and 3121(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, 
as amended by sections 208(b) and 204(a), respectively, of the Social 
Security Amendments of 1954 (68 Stat. 1094, 1091).
    (2) An employee who is entitled to a special refund of employee tax 
with respect to wages received during a calendar year and who is also 
required to file an income tax return for such calendar year (or for his 
last taxable year beginning in such calendar year) may obtain the 
benefits of such special refund only by claiming credit for such special 
refund in the same manner as if such special refund were an amount 
deducted and withheld as income tax at the source. For provisions for 
claiming special refunds for 1955 and subsequent years in the case of 
employees not required to file income tax returns, see section 6413(c) 
and the regulations thereunder. For provisions relating to such refunds 
for 1954, see 26 CFR (1939) 408.802 (regulations 128).
    (3) The amount of the special refund allowed as a credit shall be 
considered as an amount deducted and withheld as income tax at the 
source under chapter 24 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (or, in the 
case of a special refund for 1954, subchapter D, chapter 9 of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1939). If the amount of such special refund 
when added to amounts deducted and withheld as income tax exceeds the 
taxes imposed by subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, the 
amount of the excess constitutes an overpayment of income tax under 
Subtitle A, and interest on such overpayment is allowed to the extent 
provided under section 6611 upon an overpayment of income tax resulting 
from a credit for income tax withheld at source. See section 6401(b).
    (b) Federal and State employees and employees of certain foreign 
corporations. The provisions of this section shall apply to the amount 
of a special refund allowable to an employee of a Federal agency or a 
wholly owned instrumentality of the United States, to the amount of a 
special refund allowable to an employee of any State or political 
subdivision thereof (or any instrumentality of any one or more of the 
foregoing), and to the amount of a special refund allowable to employees 
of certain foreign corporations. See, with respect to such special 
refunds for 1954, section 1401(d)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1939, and with respect to such special refunds for 1955 and subsequent 
years, section 6413(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as 
amended by section 202 of the Social Security amendments of 1954.


<R05>
Sec. 1.32-2  Earned income credit for taxable years beginning after December 31, 1978.

    (a) Allowance of credit. For taxable years beginning after December 
31,

[[Page 88]]

1978, subject to the limitations of paragraph (b) of this section, an 
eligible individual (as defined in paragraph (c)(1) of this section) is 
allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by subtitle A of the Code 
for the taxable year, an amount equal to 10 percent of the first $5,000 
of earned income (as defined in paragraph (c)(2) of this section) for 
the taxable year. For earlier taxable years beginning before January 1, 
1979, see Sec. 1.43-1.
    (b) Limitations--(1) Amount of credit. The amount of the credit 
allowed by section 43 and paragraph (a) of this section for the taxable 
year must not exceed the excess, if any, of $500 over 12.5 percent of 
that amount of the adjusted gross income (or, if greater, the earned 
income) of the taxpayer for the taxable year which exceeds $6,000. For 
the meaning of the term ``earned income,'' see paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section. Adjusted gross income is determined under section 62 and the 
regulations thereunder. If an individual has adjusted gross income or 
earned income of $10,000 or more, the individual is not entitled to the 
credit.
    (2) Married individuals. No credit is allowed by section 43 and 
paragraph (a) of this section in the case of an eligible individual who 
is married (within the meaning of section 143 and the regulations 
thereunder) unless the individual and spouse file a single return 
jointly (a joint return) for the taxable year (see section 6013 and the 
regulations thereunder relating to joint returns of income tax by 
husband and wife). The requirements of the preceding sentence do not 
apply to an eligible individual who is not considered as married under 
section 143(b) and the regulations thereunder (relating to certain 
married individuals living apart).
    (3) Length of taxable year. No credit is allowed by section 43 and 
paragraph (a) of this section in the case of a taxable year covering a 
period of less than 12 months. However, the rule of the preceding 
sentence does not apply to a taxable year closed by reason of the death 
of the eligible individual.
    (c) Definitions--(1) Eligible individual. For purposes of this 
section, an eligible individual is an individual who meets the following 
requirements of this paragraph (c)(1).
    (i) For the taxable year the individual must meet any one of the 
following three requirements set forth, respectively, in (A), (B), and 
(C) of this subdivision (i).
    (A) The individual must be married (within the meaning of section 
143 and the regulations thereunder) and be entitled to a deduction under 
section 151 for a child (within the meaning of section 151(e)(3) and the 
regulations thereunder). The child must have the same principal place of 
abode (as defined in Sec. 1.2-2(c)) as the individual and that principal 
place of abode must be in the United States for the entire taxable year.
    (B) The individual must qualify as a surviving spouse (as determined 
under section 2(a) and the regulations thereunder). Thus, the spouse of 
the individual must have died within the period of the 2 taxable years 
immediately preceding the individual's taxable year. Also, the 
individual must have furnished over half the cost of maintaining as the 
individual's home a household in the United States for the entire 
taxable year which is the principal place of abode of a child of the 
individual who qualifies as a dependent for whom the individual is 
entitled to a deduction under section 151.
    (C) The individual must qualify as a head of household (as 
determined under section 2(b) and the regulations thereunder but without 
regard to section 2(b)(1)(A)(ii) and (B) and the regulations, 
thereunder). Thus, the individual cannot be married as of the close of 
the taxable year and also cannot qualify as a surviving spouse under 
section 2(a). Also, the individual must have furnished over half the 
cost of maintaining as the individual's home a household in the United 
States for the entire taxable year which is the principal place of abode 
of a child or descendant of the individual who is unmarried or who 
qualifies as a dependent for whom the individual is entitled to a 
deduction under section 151.
    (ii) For the entire taxable year, the individual must not be 
entitled to exclude any amount from gross income under section 911 
(relating to earned income by individuals in certain camps outside the 
United States) or section

[[Page 89]]

931 and the regulations thereunder (relating to income from sources 
within the possessions of the United States).
    (iii) The rules of this paragraph (c)(1) are illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. A, who is married and a member of the United States Armed 
Forces, maintains his household outside the United States for part of 
the taxable year. A is not an eligible individual. However, if A 
maintains his household inside the United States for the entire taxable 
year and is only temporarily absent therefrom by reason of military 
service and if the household is his principal place of abode and the 
principal place of abode of his child who receives over half of his 
support from the taxpayer for the calendar year in which the taxable 
year of the taxpayer begins and who either has less than $1,000 of gross 
income for the calendar year in which the individual's taxable year 
begins or who has not attained the age of 19 at the close of the 
calendar year in which the individual's taxable year begins or is a 
student, then the individual is an eligible individual if he meets the 
requirements of subdivision (ii) of this paragraph.

    Example 2. B's wife died in 1975 and B has not remarried. For his 
entire taxable year beginning January 1, 1979, B maintains his household 
inside the United States. The household is, for the entire taxable year, 
B's principal place of abode and the principal place of abode of B's 
unmarried grandchild whose natural parents are deceased. Thus B 
qualifies as a head of household (as determined under section 2(b) 
without regard to subparagraphs (A)(ii) and (B) of section 2(b)(1)). In 
these circumstances, regardless of whether B provides sufficient support 
to claim the grandchild as a dependent, B is an eligible individual if 
he meets the requirements of subdivision (ii) of this paragraph.

    Example 3. C is married and maintains his household inside the 
United States for the entire taxable year. The household is his 
principal place of abode and, for the entire year, is also the principal 
place of abode of a 12 year old child whose natural parents are deceased 
and who is placed with C by a State agency to provide the child with 
foster care. C receives compensation from the State agency to cover all 
of the cost of maintaining the child in his home. The child is in C's 
care and is cared for as C's own child. In these circumstances, the 
child is C's foster child, but C is not able to claim the child as a 
dependent since C did not provide half the child's support for the year. 
C is not eligible for the earned income credit.

    Example 4. Assume the same facts as in example (3) except that C 
receives no compensation from the State agency, and C provides over half 
the child's support and is able to claim the child as a dependent. C is 
an eligible individual if he meets the requirements of subdivision (ii) 
of this paragraph.

    Example 5. D's husband died in 1974 and D has not remarried. For the 
entire taxable year beginning January 1, 1979, D maintains her household 
inside the United States. The household is D's principal place of abode 
and, for the entire taxable year, is also the principal place of abode 
of D's unmarried son. D cares for her son in all respects except that 
her parents provide over half of the son's support. D qualifies as a 
head of household (as determined under section 2(b) without regard to 
subparagraph (A)(ii) and (B) of section 2(b)(1)). D is an eligible 
individual if D meets the requirements of subdivision (ii) of this 
paragraph.

    Example 6. Assume the same facts as in example 5 except that D is 
married. Since D cannot qualify as a head of household, and D's son 
cannot be claimed as D's dependent, D is not an eligible individual.

    (2) Earned income. For purposes of this section, earned income 
means--
    (i) Wages, salaries, tips, other employee compensation, and
    (iii) Net earnings from self-employment (within the meaning of 
section 1402(a) and the regulations thereunder).

Earned income includes compensation excluded from gross income, such as 
disability income excluded under section 105(d), the rental value of a 
parsonage excluded under section 107, and the value of meals and lodging 
furnished for the convenience of the employer excluded under section 
119. Earned income is computed without regard to any community property 
laws which may otherwise be applicable. Earned income is reduced by any 
net loss in earnings from self-employment. Earned income does not 
include amounts received as a pension, an annuity, unemployment 
compensation, or workmen's compensation, or an amount to which section 
871(a) and the regulations thereunder apply (relating to income of 
nonresident alien individuals not connected with United States 
business).
    (d) Examples. The application of this section is illustrated by the 
following examples. For purposes of these examples, assume that the 
eligible individual does not receive a pension, an annuity, or an amount 
to which section 871(a), 911, or 931 applies.


[[Page 90]]


    Example 1. A and B (married individuals) maintain a household inside 
the United States which is their principal place of abode and the 
principal place of abode of their two children who are 12 and 14 years 
old. A and B are calendar year taxpayers and, for 1979, they file a 
joint return. A and B have a total earned income of $7,600 (computed 
without regard to any community property laws) and have adjusted gross 
income of less than $7,600. The earned income credit of $300 is 
determined as follows:

Basic credit (10 percent of $5,000 under                                
 paragraph (a) of this section)...........  ........  ........      $500
Initial limitation amount.................  ........      $500  ........
Less: Reduction under paragraph (b)(1) of                               
 this section:                                                          
Earned income for taxable year............    $7,600  ........  ........
Less......................................    $6,000  ........  ........
                                           ----------                   
Excess over $6,000........................     1,600  ........  ........
                                           ==========                   
12\1/2\ percent of excess ($1,600)........  ........      $200  ........
                                                               ---------
Maximum credit (if less than basic credit)  ........  ........      $300
                                                                        


    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example 1 except that A and B 
have earned income of $4,000 and adjusted gross income of $7,000. The 
earned income credit of $375 is determined as follows:

Basic credit (10 percent of $4,000 under                                
 paragraph (a) of this section)...........  ........  ........      $400
Initial limitation amount.................  ........      $500  ........
Less: Reduction under paragraph (b)(1) of                               
 this section:                                                          
Adjusted gross income for taxable year....    $7,000  ........  ........
Less......................................     6,000  ........  ........
                                           ----------                   
Excess over $6,000........................     1,000  ........  ........
                                           ==========                   
12\1/2\ percent of excess ($1,000)........  ........       125  ........
                                                               ---------
Maximum credit (if less than basic credit)  ........  ........       375
                                                                        

    (e) Coordination of credit with advance payments--(1) Recapture of 
excess advance payments. If any advance payment of earned income credit 
under section 3507 is made to an individual by an employer during any 
calendar year, then the total amount of these advance payments to the 
individual in that calendar year is treated as an additional amount of 
tax imposed (by chapter 1 of the Code) upon the individual on the tax 
return for the individual's last taxable year beginning in that calendar 
year.
    (2) Reconciliation of payments advanced and credit allowed. Any 
additional amount of tax under paragraph (e)(1) of this section is not 
treated as a tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code for purposes of 
determining the amount of any credit (other than the earned income 
credit) allowable under subpart A, part IV, subchapter A, chapter 1 of 
the Code.

[T.D. 7683, 45 FR 16175, Mar. 13, 1980. Redesignated by T.D. 8448, 57 FR 
54923, Nov. 23, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 1.34-1   Credit against tax and exclusion from gross income in case of dividends received by individuals.

    (a) In general. (1) Section 34 provides a credit against the income 
tax of an individual for certain dividends received after July 31, 1954, 
and on or before December 31, 1964. The credit, subject to the 
limitations provided in section 34(b), is equal to 4 percent of the 
dividends received before January 1, 1964, and 2 percent of the 
dividends received during the calendar year 1964. The credit is 
allowable with respect to dividends received in any taxable year ending 
after July 31, 1954, but applies only to dividends received on or before 
December 31, 1964. The credit applies only to dividends which are 
received from domestic corporations and which are included in the gross 
income of the taxpayer. Section 116 provides for the exclusion from 
gross income of the first $100 ($50 for dividends received in taxable 
years beginning before January 1, 1964) of certain dividends received by 
an individual. See Sec. 1.116-1. In determining which dividends are 
entitled to the credit against income tax provided by section 34, the 
exclusion from gross income provided in section 116 is applied to the 
first dividends received in the taxable year. Since the exclusion 
applies to dividends received at any time during a taxable year ending 
after July 31, 1954, dividends received before August 1, 1954, may be 
taken into account in determining the exclusion from gross income under 
section 116 but do not constitute dividends for which a credit is 
allowed.
    (2) The application of section 34 (without regard to the limitations 
provided in section 34(b)) may be illustrated by the following example:


[[Page 91]]


    Example. A, an individual who makes his return on the basis of the 
calendar year, receives in the year 1954 the following dividends: $100 
on March 1, $100 on June 1, $100 on September 1, and $100 on December 1. 
$50 of the dividends received by A on March 1, 1954, is excluded from 
gross income under section 116. The balance of the dividends received in 
1954, amounting to $350, is includible in the gross income of A. Subject 
to the limitation in section 34(b) a credit of $8 is allowed under 
section 34 (4 percent of $200, the amount of the dividends received 
after July 31, 1954, that is, $100 received on September 1, 1954, and 
$100 received on December 1, 1954).

    (b) Tax credit. The credit is used to reduce the tax imposed by 
Subtitle A of the Code, including the alternative tax under section 1201 
in the case of capital gains and the self-employment tax under chapter 2 
of the Code; however, it may not be used by the taxpayer as a credit 
against penalties, additions to the tax, or interest on delinquent 
taxes.
    (c) Joint return of husband and wife. (1) In the case of a joint 
return the credit is determined on the basis of the dividends received 
by both the husband and wife after taking into account the exclusion 
allowed by section 116. See Sec. 1.116-1. The credit is allowable in the 
case of a joint return on account of the dividends received by each 
spouse without regard to whether the spouse would be liable for the tax 
imposed by Subtitle A if the joint return had not been filed. However, 
the limitations on amount of credit in section 34(b) are determined by 
reference to the tax and the credit under section 33 required to be 
shown on the joint return and to the combined taxable income of husband 
and wife. For this purpose, it makes no difference whether the tax, the 
credit, or the taxable income is attributable to one or the other 
spouse. If both the husband and wife are entitled to the credit, their 
combined credit shall not exceed the amount so computed.
    (2) The application of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. H and W, husband and wife, make a joint return for the 
calendar year 1954. The only dividend received by either of them during 
the year is a dividend received by H on September 1 in the amount of 
$400. Subject to the limitations of section 34(b), the credit amounts to 
$14 (4 percent of $350, the dividends included in gross income after 
allowance of the exclusion of $50 under section 116).

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example (1) except that W 
also received a dividend on September 1 of $30. Since this dividend 
(being less than the maximum amount allowable as an exclusion under 
section 116(a)) is excluded from W's gross income, it does not affect 
the computation of the tax credit and the tax credit is the same as in 
example (1).

    Example 3. H and W, husband and wife, make a joint return for the 
calendar year 1954. H and W each received a $400 dividend on September 
1, 1954, and these were the only dividends received by them in 1954. 
Since H and W may each exclude $50 of the dividends received by them, 
$700 of dividend income is included in gross income. Subject to the 
limitations in section 34(b), the credit against the tax of H and W 
amounts to $28 (4 percent of $700).

    (d) Individuals receiving dividends. Where two or more persons hold 
stock as tenants in common, as joint tenants, or as tenants by the 
entirety, the dividends received with respect to such stock shall be 
considered as being received by each tenant to the extent that he is 
entitled under local law to a share of such dividends. Where dividends 
constitute community property under local law each spouse shall be 
considered as receiving one-half of such dividends.
    (e) Time dividends are received. In cases where it is necessary to 
determine the time of receipt of dividends, the rules established to 
determine in which taxable year dividends must be included in gross 
income apply, including the rules relating to constructive receipt. See 
section 451 and regulations thereunder.

[T.D. 6500, 25 FR 11402, Nov. 26, 1960, as amended by T.D. 6777, 29 FR 
17806, Dec. 16, 1964]


<R05>
Sec. 1.34-2   Limitations on amount of credit.

    (a) Under section 34(b) the credit may not exceed the lesser of 
either--
    (1) The amount of the tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code for the 
taxable year reduced by the foreign tax credit allowable under section 
33, or
    (2) Whichever of the following is applicable:
    (i) In the case of a taxable year ending before January 1, 1955, or 
beginning

[[Page 92]]

after December 31, 1963, 2 percent of the taxable income for such 
taxable year;
    (ii) In the case of a taxable year ending after December 31, 1954, 
and beginning before January 1, 1964, 4 percent of the taxable income 
for such taxable year. In the case of a taxpayer who computes his tax 
under section 3 or who uses the standard deduction provided by section 
141, the taxable income for the taxable year is the adjusted gross 
income for the taxable year reduced by the standard deduction prescribed 
in section 141 and the deductions for personal exemptions provided in 
section 151. Where the alternative tax on capital gains is imposed under 
section 1201(b), the taxable income for such taxable year is the taxable 
income as defined in section 63, which includes 50 percent of the excess 
of net long-term capital gain over net short-term capital loss.
    (b) The application of the limitations in paragraph (a) of this 
section may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. Assume the following facts in the case of an individual 
whose taxable year is the calendar year:

                                  1954

    Computation of tax liability without regard to the dividend received 
credit:

(1) Gross income............................................      $7,500
(2) Deductions..............................................       2,900
(3) Taxable income..........................................       4,600
(4) Income tax liability....................................         996
(5) Foreign tax credit......................................          16
(6) Income tax liability minus foreign tax credit...........         980
                                                                        

    Computation of limitation under section 34(b)(1):

(7) Dividends for which credit is allowable.................      $2,500
(8) Dividends received credit under section 34(a); (2,500 x             
 0.04)......................................................         100
(9) Dividends received credit, as limited by section                    
 34(b)(1); (item (6) or item (8) whichever is lesser).......         100
                                                                        

    Computation of limitation under section 34(b)(2):

(10) Taxable income.........................................      $4,600
(11) Dividends received credit under section 34(b)(2);                  
 (4,600 x 0.02).............................................          92
                                                                        

    Dividends received credit allowable:

Item (6), item (9), or item (11), whichever is lesser.......         $92
                                                                        

                                  1955

    Computation of tax liability without regard to the dividend received 
credit:

(12) Gross income...........................................      $7,500
(13) Deductions.............................................       2,900
(14) Taxable income.........................................       4,600
(15) Income tax liability...................................         996
(16) Foreign tax credit.....................................         816
(17) Income tax liability minus foreign tax credit..........         180
                                                                        

    Computation of limitation under section 34(b)(1):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(18) Dividends for which credit is allowable................      $2,500
(19) Dividends received credit under section 34(a); (2,500 x            
 0.04)......................................................         100
(20) Dividends received credit as limited by section                    
 34(b)(1); (item (17) or item (19) whichever is lesser).....         100
                                                                        

    Computation of limitation under section 34(b)(2):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(21) Taxable income.........................................      $4,600
(22) Dividends received credit under section 34(b)(2);                  
 (4,600 x 0.04).............................................         184
                                                                        

    Dividends received credit allowable:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Item (17), item (19), or item (22), whichever is lesser.....        $100
                                                                        

[T.D. 6500, 25 FR 11402, Nov. 26, 1960, as amended by T.D. 6777, 29 FR 
17807, Dec. 16, 1964]


<R05>
Sec. 1.34-3   Dividends to which the credit and exclusion apply.

    (a) General rule. The credit under section 34 and the exclusion 
under section 116 apply only to distributions of property defined as 
dividends by section 316. Thus, the credit and the exclusion are not 
allowed with respect to patronage dividends paid by either exempt or 
taxable farm cooperatives. Nor are they allowed for distributions to 
nonstockholding policyholders by an insurance company having shares of 
stock or for any distribution by a mutual insurance company. See 
paragraph (b) of this section for an additional restriction with respect 
to stock life insurance companies. The credit and the exclusion are, 
however, allowed with respect to dividends paid on capital stock by 
nonexempt cooperatives and with respect to dividends paid on capital 
stock by building and loan associations. However, see paragraph (b) of 
this section with respect to so-called dividends paid by building and 
loan associations ineligible for the credit and the exclusion. The 
credit and the exclusion are allowed with respect to distributions from 
any organization taxed

[[Page 93]]

as a corporation if the distribution falls within the definition of a 
dividend in section 316.
     (b) Dividends from certain corporations. (1) Section 34 (c) and (d) 
contains further restrictions on the type of distributions which are 
treated as dividends for purposes of the credit and exclusion. Thus, no 
credit or exclusion is applicable with respect to dividends received 
from a corporation organized under the China Trade Act, 1922; from stock 
life insurance companies before January 1, 1959, in taxable years ending 
before such date; from corporations which during their taxable year of 
the distribution or their preceding taxable year were corporations to 
which section 931 applies (relating to income from sources within 
possessions of the United States); from corporations which during the 
taxable year of the distribution or the preceding taxable year are 
corporations exempt from tax either under section 501, relating to 
charitable, etc., organizations, or under section 521, relating to 
farmers' cooperative associations.
    (2) So-called dividends paid by mutual savings banks, cooperative 
banks, and building and loan associations which are allowed as a 
deduction under section 591 are ineligible for the credit and exclusion.
    (3) For special rules as to the limitation on the amount of 
dividends for which a credit and exclusion are allowable in the case of 
dividends paid by a regulated investment company, see section 854 and 
the regulations thereunder.
    (4) See section 857(c) and paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.857-4 for special 
rules which deny a credit under section 34 and exclusion under section 
116 in the case of dividends received from a real estate investment 
trust with respect to a taxable year for which such trust is taxable 
under part II, subchapter M, chapter 1 of the Code.

[T.D. 6500, 25 FR 11402, Nov. 26, 1960, as amended by T.D. 6598, 27 FR 
4092, Apr. 28, 1962; T.D. 6625, 27 FR 12541, Dec. 19, 1962]


<R05>
Sec. 1.34-4   Taxpayers not entitled to credit and exclusion.

    (a) The credit or exclusion is not available to nonresident aliens 
with respect to whom a tax is imposed for the taxable year under section 
871(a). If the taxpayer elects under section 6014 to have the Government 
compute his tax, the credit is not taken into account in such 
computation although the taxpayer is allowed the exclusion under section 
116.
    (b) For treatment of dividends received by estates or trusts, and 
the allocation of such dividends between an estate or trust and the 
beneficiary thereof, see sections 642, 652, and 662 and the regulations 
thereunder. 3
    (c) For treatment of dividends received by a partnership see section 
702 and the regulations thereunder.
    (d) For treatment of dividends received by a common trust fund, see 
section 584 and the regulations thereunder.


<R05>
Sec. 1.34-5   Effective date; taxable years ending after July 31, 1954, subject to the Internal Revenue Code of 1939.

    Pursuant to section 7851(a)(1)(C), the regulations prescribed in 
Secs. 1.34-1 to 1.34-4, inclusive, shall also apply to taxable years 
beginning before January 1, 1954, and ending after July 31, 1954, and to 
taxable years beginning after December 31, 1953, and ending after July 
31, 1954, but before August 17, 1954, though such years are subject to 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1939.


<R05>
Sec. 1.34-6   Dividends received after December 31, 1964.

    In the case of dividends received after December 31, 1964, section 
34 and the regulations issued thereunder do not apply.

[T.D. 6777, 29 FR 17807, Dec. 16, 1964]


<R05>
Sec. 1.35-1   Partially tax-exempt interest received by individuals.

    (a) The credit against tax under section 35 shall be allowed only to 
individuals and if the requirements of both paragraphs (1) and (2) of 
section 35(a) are met. Where the alternative tax on capital gains is 
imposed under section 1201(b), the taxable income for such taxable year 
is the taxable income as defined in section 63, which includes 50 
percent of the excess of net long-term capital gain over net short-term 
capital loss.

[[Page 94]]

    (b) For the treatment of partially tax-exempt interest in the case 
of amounts not allocable to any beneficiary of an estate or trust, see 
section 642(a)(1), and for treatment of amounts allocable to a 
beneficiary, see sections 652 and 662. For treatment of partially tax-
exempt interest received by a partnership, see section 702(a)(7). For 
treatment of such interest received by a common trust fund, see section 
584(c)(2).
    (c) The application of section 35 may be illustrated by the 
following example:

    Example. In his taxable year, 1955, A received $4,500 of partially 
tax-exempt interest. A's taxable income is $4,000 upon which the tax 
prior to any credits against tax is $840. His foreign tax credit under 
section 33 is $610, and his dividends received credit under section 34 
is $120. A's credit under section 35 for partially tax-exempt interest 
is $110, determined as follows:

                              Section 35(a)                             
                                                                        
Partially tax-exempt interest................................     $4,500
Credit computed under section 35(a); 3 percent of $4,500.....        135
                            Section 35(b)(1)                            
Tax imposed by chapter 1.....................................        840
Less:                                                                   
  Credit allowed under section 33.................       $610           
  Credit allowed under section 34.................        120           
                                                     --------       $730
                                                              ----------
Limitation on credit under section 35(b)(1)..................        110
                                                                        
                            Section 35(b)(2)                            
                                                                        
Taxable income...............................................      4,000
Limitation on credit under section 35(b)(2); 3 percent of               
 $4,000......................................................        120
                                                                        

Since of the three figures ($135, $110, and $120), the lesser is $110, 
A's credit under section 35 is limited to $110.


<R05>
Sec. 1.35-2   Taxpayers not entitled to credit.

    For taxable years beginning after December 31, 1957, no credit shall 
be allowed under section 35 to a nonresident alien individual with 
respect to whom a tax is imposed for such taxable year under section 
871(a).


<R05>
Sec. 1.37-1  General rules for the credit for the elderly.

    (a) In general. In the case of an individual, section 37 provides a 
credit against the tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1954. This section and Secs. 1.37-2 and 1.37-3 provide guidance in 
the computation of the credit for the elderly provided under section 37 
for taxable years beginning after 1975. For rules relating to the 
computation of the retirement income credit provided under section 37 
for taxable years beginning before 1976, see 26 CFR 1.37-1 through 1.37-
5 (Rev. as of April 1, 1980). Note that section 403 of the Tax Reduction 
and Simplification Act of 1977 provides that a taxpayer may elect to 
compute the credit under section 37 for the taxpayer's first taxable 
year beginning in 1976 in accordance with the rules applicable to 
taxable years beginning before 1976.
    (b) Limitation on the amount of the credit. The credit allowed by 
section 37 for a taxable year shall not exceed the tax imposed by 
chapter 1 of the Code for the taxable year (reduced, in the case of a 
taxable year beginning before 1979, by the general tax credit allowed by 
section 42).
    (c) Married couples must file joint returns. If the taxpayer is 
married at the close of the taxable year, the credit provided by section 
37 shall be allowed only if the taxpayer and the taxpayer's spouse file 
a joint return for the taxable year. The preceding sentence shall not 
apply in the case of a husband and wife who are not members of the same 
household at any time during the taxable year. For the determination of 
marital status, see Secs. 143 and 1.143-1.
    (d) Nonresident aliens ineligible. No credit is allowed under 
section 37 to any individual for any taxable year during which that 
individual is at any time a nonresident alien unless the individual is 
treated, by reason of an election under section 6013 (g) or (h), as a 
resident of the United States for that taxable year.

[T.D. 7743, 45 FR 84049, Dec. 22, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 1.37-2  Credit for individuals age 65 or over.

    (a) In general. This section illustrates the computation of the 
credit for the elderly in the case of an individual who has attained the 
age of 65 before the close of the taxable year. This section shall not 
apply to an individual for any taxable year for which the individual 
makes the election described in section 37(e)(2) and paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 1.37-3.
    (b) Computation of credit. The credit for the elderly for an 
individual to whom this section applies equals 15

[[Page 95]]

percent of the individual's ``section 37 amount'' for the taxable year. 
An individual's ``section 37 amount'' for a taxable year is the initial 
amount determined under section 37(b)(2), reduced as provided in section 
37(b)(3) and (c)(1).
    (c) Examples. The computation of the credit for the elderly for 
individuals to whom this section applies may be illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. A, a single individual who is 67 years old, has adjusted 
gross income of $8,000 for the calendar year 1977. A also receives 
social security payments of $1,450 during 1977. A does not itemize 
deductions. A's credit for the elderly is $120, computed as follows:

Initial amount under section 37(b)(2).........................    $2,500
Reductions required by section 37 (b)(3) and (c)(1):                    
    Social security payments........................    $1,450          
    One-half the excess of adjusted gross income                        
     over $7,500....................................       250     1,700
                                                     ----------         
Section 37 amount.............................................       800
                                                     ===========        
15 pct. of $800...............................................      $120
                                                                        

A's tax from the tax tables, which reflect the allowance of the general 
tax credit, is $662. Accordingly, the limitation of section 37(c)(2) and 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.37-1 does not reduce A's credit for the elderly.

    Example 2. H and W, who have both attained the age of 65, file a 
joint return for calendar year 1977. For that year H and W have adjusted 
gross income of $8,120; H also receives a railroad retirement pension of 
$1,550, and W receives social security payments of $1,200. H and W do 
not itemize deductions. The credit for the elderly allowed to H and W 
for 1977 is $139, computed as follows:

Initial amount under section 37(b)(2).........................    $3,750
Reductions required by section 37 (b)(3):                               
    Railroad retirement pension.....................    $1,550          
    Social Security payments........................     1,200     2,750
                                                     ----------         
Section 37 amount.............................................     1,000
                                                     ===========        
15 pct. of $1,000.............................................       150
Limitation based upon amount of tax (derived from table                 
 reflecting allowance of general tax credit)..................      $139
                                                                        

Since the adjusted gross income of H and W is not greater than $10,000, 
no reduction of the initial amount is required under section 37 (c)(1).

[T.D. 7743, 45 FR 84050, Dec. 22, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 1.37-3  Credit for individuals under age 65 who have public retirement system income.

    (a) In general. This section provides rules for the computation of 
the credit for the elderly under section 37(e) in the case of an 
individual who has not attained the age of 65 before the close of the 
taxable year and whose gross income for the taxable year includes 
retirement income within the meaning of paragraph (d)(1)(ii) of this 
section (i.e., under a public retirement system). If such an individual 
is married within the meaning of section 143 at the close of the taxable 
year and the spouse of the individual has attained the age of 65 before 
the close of the taxable year, this section shall apply to the 
individual for the taxable year only if both spouses make the election 
described in paragraph (b) of this section. If both spouses make the 
election described in paragraph (b) of this section for the taxable 
year, the credit of each spouse shall be determined under the rules of 
this section. See paragraph (f)(2) of this section for a limitation on 
the effects of community property laws in making determinations and 
computations under section 37(e) and this section.
    (b) Election by certain married taxpayers. If a married individual 
under age 65 at the close of the taxable year has retirement income and 
the spouse of that individual has attained the age of 65 before the 
close of the taxable year, both spouses may elect to compute the credit 
provided by section 37 under the rules of section 37(e) and this 
section. The spouses shall signify the election on the return (or 
amended return) for the taxable year in the manner prescribed in the 
instructions accompanying the return. The election may be made at any 
time before the expiration of the period of limitation for filing claim 
for credit or return for the taxable year. The election may be revoked 
without the consent of the Commissioner at any time before the 
expiration of that period by filing an amended return.
    (c) Computation of credit. The credit of an individual under section 
37(e) and this section equals 15 percent of the individual's credit base 
for the taxable

[[Page 96]]

year. The credit base of an individual for a taxable year is the lesser 
of--
    (1) The retirement income of the individual for the taxable year, or
    (2) The amount determined under section 37(e)(5), as modified by 
section 37(e) (6) and (7).
    (d) Retirement income--(1) General rule--(i) For individuals 65 or 
over. Section 37(e)(4)(A) enumerates the kinds of income which may be 
treated as the retirement income of an individual who has attained the 
age of 65 before the close of the taxable year. They include income from 
pensions and annuities, interest, rents, dividends, certain bonds 
received under a qualified bond purchase plan, and certain individual 
retirement accounts or annuities.
    (ii) For individuals under 65. In the case of an individual who has 
not attained the age of 65 before the close of the taxable year, 
retirement income consists only of income from pensions and annuities 
(including disability annuity payments) under a public retirement system 
which arises from services performed by that individual or by a present 
or former spouse of that individual. The term ``public retirement 
system'' means a pension, annuity, or retirement, or similar fund or 
system established by the United States, a State, a possession of the 
United States, any political subdivision of any of the foregoing, or the 
District of Columbia.
    (2) Rents. For purposes of section 37(e)(4)(A)(iii), income from 
rents shall be the gross amount received, not reduced by depreciation or 
other expenses, except that beneficiaries of a trust or estate shall 
treat as retirement income only their proportionate shares, of the 
taxable rents of the trust or estate. In the case of an amount received 
for board and lodging, only the portion of the amount received for 
lodging is income from rents.
    (3) Disability annuity payments received by individual under age 65. 
Disability annuity payments received under a public retirement system by 
an individual under age 65 at the close of the taxable year shall not be 
treated as retirement income unless the payments are for periods after 
the date on which the individual reached minimum retirement age, that 
is, the age at which the individual would be eligible to receive a 
pension or annuity without regard to disability, and any of the 
following conditions is satisfied--
    (i) The individual is precluded from seeking the benefits of section 
105(d) (relating to certain disability payments) for that taxable year 
by reason of an irrevocable election;
    (ii) The individual was not permanently and totally disabled at the 
time of retirement (and was not permanently and totally disabled either 
on January 1, 1976, or on January 1, 1977, if the individual retired 
before the later date on disability or under circumstances which 
entitled the individual to retire on disability); or
    (iii) The payments are for periods after the individual reached 
mandatory retirement age.

For purposes of this paragraph, disability annuity payments include 
payments to an individual who retired on partial or temporary 
disability.
    (4) Compensation of personal services rendered during taxable year. 
Retirement income does not include any amount representing compensation 
for personal services rendered during the taxable year. For this 
purpose, amounts received as a pension shall not be treated as 
representing compensation for personal services rendered during the 
taxable year if the period of service during the taxable year is not 
substantial when compared with the total years of service. For example, 
an individual on the calendar year basis retires on November 30 after 5 
years of service and receives a pension during the remainder of his 
taxable year. The pension is not treated as representing compensation 
for personal services rendered during such taxable year merely because 
it is paid by reason of the services of the individual for a period of 5 
years which includes a portion of the taxable year.
    (5) Amounts not includible in gross income. Retirement income does 
not include any amount not includible in the gross income of the 
individual for the taxable year. For example, if a portion of an annuity 
is excluded from gross income under section 72, relating to annuities, 
that portion of the annuity is not retirement income; similarly, the 
portion of dividend income excluded

[[Page 97]]

from gross income under section 116, relating to the partial exclusion 
of dividends received by individuals is not retirement income.
    (e) Earned income--(1) In general. The term ``earned income'' in 
section 37(e)(5)(B) generally has the same meaning as in section 911(b), 
except that earned income does not include any amount received as a 
pension or annuity. See section 911(b) and the regulations thereunder. 
Section 911(b) provides, in general, that earned income includes wages, 
salaries, professional fees, and other amounts received as compensation 
for personal services rendered.
    (2) Earned income from self-employment. For purposes of section 
37(e)(5)(B), the earned income of a taxpayer from self-employment in a 
trade or business shall not exceed--
    (i) The taxpayer's share of the net profits from the trade or 
business if capital is not a material income-producing factor in that 
trade or business; or
    (ii) Thirty percent of the taxpayer's share of the net profits from 
the trade or business if capital is a material income-producing factor 
in that trade or business.

For other rules relating to the determination of earned income from 
self-employment in a trade or business, see section 911(b) and the 
regulations thereunder.
    (3) Disability annuity payments received by individuals under age 
65. Disability annuity payments received under a public retirement 
system by an individual under age 65 at the close of the taxable year 
shall be treated as earned income for purposes of section 37(e)(5)(B) 
unless the payments are treated as retirement income under paragraph 
(d)(3) of this section.
    (f) Computation of credit under section 37(e) in the case of joint 
returns--(1) In general. In the case of a joint return of husband and 
wife, the credit base of each spouse under section 37(e) is computed 
separately. The spouses then combine their credit bases and compute a 
single credit. The limitation in section 37(c)(2) and paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 1.37-1 on the amount of the credit is determined by reference to 
the joint tax liability of the spouses. Thus, regardless of whether a 
spouse would be liable for the tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code if 
the joint return had not been filed, the credit base of that spouse is 
taken into account in computing the credit.
    (2) Community property laws. For taxable years beginning after 1977, 
married individuals filing joint returns shall disregard community 
property laws in making any determination or computation required under 
section 37(e) or this section. Each item of income is attributed in full 
to the spouse whose income it would have been in the absence of 
community property laws. Thus, if a 67-year old individual files a joint 
return with a 62-year old spouse for 1979 and the only income of the 
couple is from a public pension of the older spouse, that public pension 
is attributed in full to the older spouse for purposes of section 37(e) 
even though the applicable community property law may treat one-half of 
the pension as the income of the 62-year old spouse. Since the younger 
spouse consequently has no retirement income within the meaning of 
paragraph (d) of this section, the couple may not make the election 
described in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (g) Examples. The computation of the credit for the elderly under 
section 37(e) and this section is illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. B, who is 62 years old and single, receives a fully 
taxable pension of $2,400 from a public retirement system during 1977. B 
performed the services giving rise to the pension. During that year, B 
also earns $2,650 from a part-time job. B receives no tax-exempt pension 
or annuity in 1977. Subject to the limitation of section 37(c)(2) and 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.37-1, B's credit for the elderly for 1977 under 
section 37(e) is $195, computed as follows:

Maximum retirement income level under section 37(e)(5)......      $2,500
Earned income offset under section                                      
 37(e)(5)(B)(ii):                                                       
    Earned income in excess of $1,700...........        $950  ..........
    One-half of earned income in excess of                              
     $1,200, but not in excess of $1,700........         250       1,200
                                                 ------------           
Amount determined under section 37(e)(5)....................       1,300
                                                 =============          
Retirement income...........................................       2,400
                                                 =============          

[[Page 98]]

                                                                        
Credit for the elderly (15 pct. of $1,300)..................         195
                                                                        

    Example 2. During 1978 H, who is 67 years old, has earnings of 
$1,300 and retirement income (rents, interest, etc.) of $6,000. H also 
receives social security payments totalling $1,400. During 1978 W, who 
is 63 years old, earns $1,600 and receives a fully taxable pension of 
$1,400 from a public retirement system that constitutes retirement 
income. W performed the services giving rise to the pension. H and W 
file a joint return for 1978 and elect to compute the credit for the 
elderly under section 37(e). Under the applicable law these items of 
income are community income, and both spouses share equally in each 
item. Because H and W are filing a joint return, they disregard 
community property laws in computing their credit under section 37(e). 
The couple allocates $1,600 of the $3,750 referred to in section 
37(e)(6) to W and $2,150 to H. Subject to the limitation of section 
37(c)(2) and paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.37-1, their credit for the elderly 
is $315, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Credit base of H:                                                       
  Amount allocated to H under section 37(e)(6)..............      $2,150
  Reductions required by section 37(e)(5):                              
      Social Security payments..................      $1,400  ..........
      One-half of excess of earnings over $1,200          50       1,450
                                                 ------------           
  Amount determined under section 37(e)(5)..................         700
                                                 =============          
  Retirement income.........................................       6,000
                                                 =============          
  Credit base of H..........................................         700
Credit base of W:                                                       
  Amount allocated to W under section 37(e)(6)..............      $1,600
  Reduction required by section 37(e)(5)(B):                            
      One-half of excess of earnings over $1,200............        $200
                                                 -------------          
      Amount determined under section 37(e)(5)..............       1,400
                                                 =============          
  Retirement income.........................................       1,400
                                                 =============          
  Credit base of W..........................................       1,400
                                                 =============          
  Computation of credit:                                                
      Credit base of H......................................         700
      Credit base of W......................................       1,400
                                                 -------------          
      Combined credit base..................................       2,100
                                                 =============          
  Credit for the elderly (15 pct. of $2,100)................         315
                                                                        

    Example 3. (a) Assume the same facts as in example (2) of this 
paragraph, except that H and W live apart at all times during 1978 and 
file separate returns. Under these circumstances, H and W must give 
effect to the applicable community property law in determining their 
credits under section 37(e). Thus, each spouse must take into account 
one-half of each item of income.
    (b) Subject to the limitation of section 37(c)(2) and paragraph (b) 
of Sec. 1.37-1, H's credit for the elderly is $157.50, computed as 
follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Maximum retirement income level under section 37(e)(7)......      $1,875
Reductions required by section 37(e)(5):                                
    Social security payments....................        $700  ..........
    One-half of excess of earnings over $1,200                          
     (taking into account one-half of combined                          
     earnings of $2,900)........................         125         825
                                                 ------------           
Amount determined under section 37(e)(5)....................       1,050
                                                 =============          
Retirement income...........................................       3,700
                                                 =============          
Credit of H (15 pct. of $1,050).............................      157.50
                                                                        

    (c) Subject to the limitation of section 37(c)(2) and paragraph (b) 
of Sec. 1.37-1, W's credit for the elderly is computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Maximum retirement income level under section                           
 37(e)(7).......................................      $1,875            
Reductions required by section 37(e)(5):                                
    Social security payments....................        $700  ..........
    One-half of excess of earnings over $1,200..         125         825
                                                 ------------           
Amount determined under section 37(e)(5)........       1,050            
                                                 =============          
Retirement income (limited to W's share of                              
 public pension)................................         700            
                                                 =============          
Credit of W (15 pct. of $700)...................         105            
                                                                        


[T.D. 7743, 45 FR 84050, Dec. 22, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 1.38-1  Investment in certain depreciable property.

    Regulations under sections 46 through 50 are prescribed under the 
authority granted the Secretary by section 38(b) to prescribe 
regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of section 38 
and subpart B, part IV, subchapter A, chapter 1 of the Code.

[44 FR 20417, Apr. 5, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 1.40-1  Questions and answers relating to the meaning of the term ``qualified mixture'' in section 40(b)(1).

    Q-1. What is a ``qualified mixture'' within the meaning of section 
40(b)(1)?
    A-1. A ``qualified mixture'' is a mixture of alcohol and gasoline or 
of alcohol and special fuel which (1) is sold by the taxpayer producing 
such mixture

[[Page 99]]

to any person for use as a fuel, or (2) is used as a fuel by the 
taxpayer producing such mixture.
    Q-2. Must alcohol be present in a product in order for that product 
to be considered a mixture of alcohol and either gasoline or a special 
fuel?
    A-2. No. A product is considered to be a mixture of alcohol and 
gasoline or of alcohol and a special fuel if the product is derived from 
alcohol and either gasoline or a special fuel even if the alcohol is 
chemically transformed in producing the product so that the alcohol is 
no longer present as a separate chemical in the final product, provided 
that there is no significant loss in the energy content of the alcohol. 
Thus, a product may be considered to be ``mixture of alcohol and 
gasoline or of alcohol and a special fuel'' within the meaning of 
section 40(b)(1)(B) if such product is produced in a chemical reaction 
between alcohol and either gasoline or a special fuel. Similarly a 
product may be considered to be a ``mixture of alcohol and gasoline or 
of alcohol and a special fuel'' if such product is produced by blending 
a chemical compound derived from alcohol with either gasoline or a 
special fuel.
    Thus, for example, a blend of gasoline and ethyl tertiary butyl 
ether (ETBE), a compound derived from ethanol (a qualified alcohol), in 
a chemical reaction in which there is no significant loss in the energy 
content of the ethanol, is considered for purposes of section 
40(b)(1)(B) to be a mixture of gasoline and the ethanol used to produce 
the ETBE, even though the ethanol is chemically transformed in the 
production of ETBE and is not present in the final product.

[T.D. 8291, 55 FR 8948, Mar. 9, 1990]

             Taxable Years Beginning After December 31, 1986

    Source: Sections 1.41-0--1.41-9 appear by T.D. 8251, 54 FR 21204, 
May 17, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1.41-0  Table of contents.

    This section lists the paragraphs contained in Secs. 1.41-0 through 
1.41-9.

Sec. 1.41-0  Table of Contents.
Sec. 1.41-1  Introduction to regulations under section 41.

                Sec. 1.41-2  Qualified Research Expenses

    (a) Trade or business requirement.
    (1) In general.
    (2) New business.
    (3) Research performed for others.
    (i) Taxpayer not entitled to results.
    (ii) Taxpayer entitled to results.
    (4) Partnerships.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Special rule for certain partnerships and joint ventures.
    (b) Supplies and personal property used in the conduct of qualified 
research.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Certain utility charges.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Extraordinary expenditures.
    (3) Right to use personal property.
    (4) Use of personal property in taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1985.
    (c) Qualified services.
    (1) Engaging in qualified research.
    (2) Direct supervision.
    (3) Direct support.
    (d) Wages paid for qualified services.
    (1) In general.
    (2) ``Substantially all.''
    (e) Contract research expenses.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Performance of qualified research.
    (3) ``On behalf of.''
    (4) Prepaid amounts.
    (5) Examples.

                Sec. 1.41-3  Base period research expense

    (a) Number of years in base period.
    (b) New taxpayers.
    (c) Definition of base period research expenses.
    (d) Special rules for short taxable years.
    (1) Short determination year.
    (2) Short base period year.
    (3) Years overlapping the effective dates of section 41 (section 
44F).
    (i) Determination years.
    (ii) Base period years.
    (4) Number of months in a short taxable year.
    (e) Examples.

   Sec. 1.41-4  Qualified research for taxable years beginning after 
                      December 31, 1985. [Reserved]

   Sec. 1.41-5  Qualified research for taxable years beginning before 
                             January 1, 1986

    (a) General rule.
    (b) Activities outside the United States.
    (1) In-house research.
    (2) Contract research.
    (c) Social sciences arts or humanities.
    (d) Research funded by any grant, contract, or otherwise.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Research in which taxpayer retains no rights.
    (3) Research in which the taxpayer retains substantial rights.

[[Page 100]]

    (i) In general.
    (ii) Pro rata allocation.
    (iii) Project-by-project determination.
    (4) Independent research and development under the Federal 
Acquisition Regulations System and similar provisions.
    (5) Funding determinable only in subsequent taxable year.
    (6) Examples.

 Sec. 1.41-6  Basic research for taxable years beginning after December 
                          31, 1985. [Reserved]

 Sec. 1.41-7  Basic research for taxable years beginning before January 
                                 1, 1986

    (a) In general.
    (b) Trade or business requirement.
    (c) Prepaid amounts.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Transfers of property.
    (d) Written research agreement.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Agreement between a corporation and a qualified organization 
after June 30, 1983.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Transfers of property.
    (3) Agreement between a qualified fund and a qualified educational 
organization after June 30, 1983.
    (e) Exclusions.
    (1) Research conducted outside the United States.
    (2) Research in the social sciences or humanities.
    (f) Procedure for making an election to be treated as a qualified 
fund.

                Sec. 1.41-8  Aggregation of expenditures.

    (a) Controlled group of corporations; trade or businesses under 
common control.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Definition of trade or business.
    (3) Determination of common control.
    (4) Examples.
    (b) Minimum base period research expenses.
    (c) Tax accounting periods used.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Special rule where timing of research is manipulated.
    (d) Membership during taxable year in more than one group.
    (e) Intra-group transactions.
    (1) In general.
    (2) In-house research expenses.
    (3) Contract research expenses.
    (4) Lease Payments.
    (5) Payment for supplies.

                       Sec. 1.41-9  Special rules.

    (a) Allocations.
    (1) Corporation making an election under subchapter S.
    (i) Pass-through, for taxable years beginning after December 31, 
1982, in the case of an S corporation.
    (ii) Pass-through, for taxable years beginning before January 1, 
1983, in the case of a subchapter S corporation.
    (2) Pass-through in the case of an estate or trust.
    (3) Pass-through in the case of a partnership.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Certain expenditures by joint ventures.
    (4) Year in which taken into account.
    (5) Credit allowed subject to limitation.
    (b) Adjustments for certain acquisitions and dispositions--Meaning 
of terms.
    (c) Special rule for pass-through of credit.
    (d) Carryback and carryover of unused credits.


<R05>
Sec. 1.41-1  Introduction to regulations under section 41.

    Sections 1.41-2 through 1.41-9 deal only with certain provisions of 
section 41. The following table identifies the provisions of section 41 
that are dealt with, and lists each with the section of the regulations 
in which it is covered:


------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Section of the regulations               Section of the Code    
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.41-2....................................  41(b)(1)                    
                                            41(b)(2)(A)(ii)             
                                            41(b)(2)(A)(iii)            
                                            41(b)(2)(B)                 
                                            41(b)(3)                    
1.41-3....................................  41(c)(2)                    
                                            41(f)(4)                    
1.41-5....................................  41(d)                       
1.41-7....................................  41(e)                       
1.41-8....................................  41(f)(1)                    
1.41-9....................................  41(f)(2)                    
                                            41(f)(3)                    
                                            41(g)                       
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sections 1.41-4 and 1.41-6 deal with the definition of qualified 
research and basic research for taxable years beginning after December 
31, 1985. Section 1.41-3 also deals with the special rule in section 
221(d)(2) of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 relating to taxable 
years overlapping the effective dates of section 41. Section 41 was 
formerly designated sections 30 and 44F. The regulations refer to these 
sections as section 41 for conformity purposes. Of course, whether 
section 41, 30 or 44F applies to a particular expenditure depends upon 
when the expenditure was paid or incurred.


<R05>
Sec. 1.41-2  Qualified Research Expenses.

    (a) Trade or business requirement--(1) In general. An in-house 
research expense of the taxpayer or a contract research expense of the 
taxpayer is a

[[Page 101]]

qualified research expense only if the expense is paid or incurred by 
the taxpayer in carrying on a trade or business of the taxpayer. The 
phrase ``in carrying on a trade or business'' has the same meaning for 
purposes of section 41(b)(1) as it has for purposes of section 162; 
thus, expenses paid or incurred in connection with a trade or business 
within the meaning of section 174(a) (relating to the deduction for 
research and experimental expenses) are not necessarily paid or incurred 
in carrying on a trade or business for purposes of section 41. A 
research expense must relate to a particular trade or business being 
carried on by the taxpayer at the time the expense is paid or incurred 
in order to be a qualified research expense. For purposes of section 41, 
a contract research expense of the taxpayer is not a qualified research 
expense if the product or result of the research is intended to be 
transferred to another in return for license or royalty payments and the 
taxpayer does not use the product of the research in the taxpayer's 
trade or business.
    (2) New business. Expenses paid or incurred prior to commencing a 
new business (as distinguished from expanding an existing business) may 
be paid or incurred in connection with a trade or business but are not 
paid or incurred in carrying on a trade or business. Thus, research 
expenses paid or incurred by a taxpayer in developing a product the sale 
of which would constitute a new trade or business for the taxpayer are 
not paid or incurred in carrying on a trade or business.
    (3) Research performed for others--(i) Taxpayer not entitled to 
results. If the taxpayer performs research on behalf of another person 
and retains no substantial rights in the research, that research shall 
not be taken into account by the taxpayer for purposes of section 41. 
See Sec. 1.41-5(d)(2).
    (ii) Taxpayer entitled to results. If the taxpayer in carrying on a 
trade or business performs research on behalf of other persons but 
retains substantial rights in the research, the taxpayer shall take 
otherwise qualified expenses for that research into account for purposes 
of section 41 to the extent provided in Sec. 1.41-5(d)(3).
    (4) Partnerships--(i) In general. An in-house research expense or a 
contract research expense paid or incurred by a partnership is a 
qualified research expense of the partnership if the expense is paid or 
incurred by the partnership in carrying on a trade or business of the 
partnership, determined at the partnership level without regard to the 
trade or business of any partner.
    (ii) Special rule for certain partnerships and joint ventures. (A) 
If a partnership or a joint venture (taxable as a partnership) is not 
carrying on the trade or business to which the research relates, then 
the general rule in paragraph (a)(4)(i) of this section would not allow 
any of such expenditures to qualify as qualified research expenses.
    (B) Notwithstanding paragraph (a)(4)(ii)(A) of this section, if all 
the partners or venturers are entitled to make independent use of the 
results of the research, this paragraph (a)(4)(ii) may allow a portion 
of such expenditures to be treated as qualified research expenditures by 
certain partners or venturers.
    (C) First, in order to determine the amount of credit that may be 
claimed by certain partners or venturers, the amount of qualified 
research expenditures of the partnership or joint venture is determined 
(assuming for this purpose that the partnership or joint venture is 
carrying on the trade or business to which the research relates).
    (D) Second, this amount is reduced by the proportionate share of 
such expenses allocable to those partners or venturers who would not be 
able to claim such expenses as qualified research expenditures if they 
had paid or incurred such expenses directly. For this purpose such 
partners' or venturers' proportionate share of such expenses shall be 
determined on the basis of such partners' or venturers' share of 
partnership items of income or gain (excluding gain allocated under 
section 704(c)) which results in the largest proportionate share. Where 
a partner's or venturer's share of partnership items of income or gain 
(excluding gain allocated under section 704(c)) may vary during the 
period such partner or venturer is a partner or venturer in such 
partnership or joint venture, such

[[Page 102]]

share shall be the highest share such partner or venturer may receive.
    (E) Third, the remaining amount of qualified research expenses is 
allocated among those partners or venturers who would have been entitled 
to claim a credit for such expenses if they had paid or incurred the 
research expenses in their own trade or business, in the relative 
proportions that such partners or venturers share deductions for 
expenses under section 174 for the taxable year that such expenses are 
paid or incurred.
    (F) For purposes of section 41, research expenditures to which this 
paragraph (a)(4)(ii) applies shall be treated as paid or incurred 
directly by such partners or venturers. See Sec. 1.41-9(a)(3)(ii) for 
special rules regarding these expenses.
    (iii) The following examples illustrate the application of the 
principles contained in paragraph (a)(4)(ii) of this section.

    Example 1. A joint venture (taxable as a partnership) is formed by 
corporations A, B, and C to develop and market a supercomputer. A and B 
are in the business of developing computers, and each has a 30 percent 
distributive share of each item of income, gain, loss, deduction, credit 
and basis of the joint venture. C, which is an investment banking firm, 
has a 40 percent distributive share of each item of income, gain, loss, 
deduction, credit and basis of the joint venture. The joint venture 
agreement provides that A's, B's and C's distributive shares will not 
vary during the life of the joint venture, liquidation proceeds are to 
be distributed in accordance with the partners' capital account 
balances, and any partner with a deficit in its capital account 
following the distribution of liquidation proceeds is required to 
restore the amount of such deficit to the joint venture. Assume in Year 
1 that the joint venture incurs $100x of ``qualified research 
expenses.'' Assume further that the joint venture cannot claim the 
research credit for such expenses because it is not carrying on the 
trade or business to which the research relates. In addition A, B, and C 
are all entitled to make independent use of the results of the research. 
First, the amount of qualified research expenses of the joint venture is 
$l00x. Second, this amount is reduced by the proportionate share of such 
expenses allocable to C, the venturer which would not have been able to 
claim such expenses as qualified research expenditures if it had paid or 
incurred them directly, C's proportionate share of such expenses is $40x 
(40% of $100x). The reduced amount is $60x. Third, the remaining $60x of 
qualified research expenses is allocated between A and B in the relative 
proportions that A and B share deductions for expenses under section 
174. A is entitled to treat $30x ((30%/(30%+30%)) $60x) as a qualified 
research expense. B is also entitled to treat $30x ((30%/(30%+30%)) 
$60x) as a qualified research expense.

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example (1) except that the 
joint venture agreement provides that during the first 2 years of the 
joint venture, A and B are each allocated 10 percent of each item of 
income, gain, loss, deduction, credit and basis, and C is allocated 80 
percent of each item of income, gain, loss, deduction, credit and basis. 
Thereafter the allocations are the same as in example (1). Assume for 
purposes of this example that such allocations have substantial economic 
effect for purposes of section 704 (b). C's highest share of such items 
during the life of the joint venture is 80 percent. Therefore C's 
proportionate share of the joint venture's qualified research expenses 
is $80x (80% of $100x). The reduced amount of qualified research 
expenses is $20x ($100x-$80x). A is entitled to treat $10x ((10%/
(10%+10%)) $20x) as a qualified research expense in Year 1. B is also 
entitled to treat $10x ((10%/(10%+10%)) $20x) as a qualified research 
expense in Year 1.

    (b) Supplies and personal property used in the conduct of qualified 
research--(1) In general. Supplies and personal property (except to the 
extent provided in paragraph (b)(4) of this section) are used in the 
conduct of qualified research if they are used in the performance of 
qualified services (as defined in section 41(b)(2)(B), but without 
regard to the last sentence thereof) by an employee of the taxpayer (or 
by a person acting in a capacity similar to that of an employee of the 
taxpayer; see example (6) of Sec. 1.41-2(e)(5)). Expenditures for 
supplies or for the use of personal property that are indirect research 
expenditures or general and administrative expenses do not qualify as 
inhouse research expenses.
    (2) Certain utility charges--(i) In general. In general, amounts 
paid or incurred for utilities such as water, electricity, and natural 
gas used in the building in which qualified research is performed are 
treated as expenditures for general and administrative expenses.
    (ii) Extraordinary expenditures. To the extent the taxpayer can 
establish that the special character of the qualified

[[Page 103]]

research required additional extraordinary expenditures for utilities, 
the additional expenditures shall be treated as amounts paid or incurred 
for supplies used in the conduct of qualified research. For example, 
amounts paid for electricity used for general laboratory lighting are 
treated as general and administrative expenses, but amounts paid for 
electricity used in operating high energy equipment for qualified 
research (such as laser or nuclear research) may be treated as 
expenditures for supplies used in the conduct of qualified research to 
the extent the taxpayer can establish that the special character of the 
research required an extraordinary additional expenditure for 
electricity.
    (3) Right to use personal property. The determination of whether an 
amount is paid to or incurred for another person for the right to use 
personal property in the conduct of qualified research shall be made 
without regard to the characterization of the transaction as a lease 
under section 168(f)(8) (as that section read before it was repealed by 
the Tax Reform Act of 1986). See Sec. 5c.168(f)(8)-1(b).
    (4) Use of personal property in taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1985. For taxable years beginning after December 31, 1985, 
amounts paid or incurred for the use of personal property are not 
qualified research expenses, except for any amount paid or incurred to 
another person for the right to use (time-sharing) computers in the 
conduct of qualified research. The computer must be owned and operated 
by someone other than the taxpayer, located off the taxpayer's premises, 
and the taxpayer must not be the primary user of the computer.
    (c) Qualified services--(1) Engaging in qualified research. The term 
``engaging in qualified research'' as used in section 41(b)(2)(B) means 
the actual conduct of qualified research (as in the case of a scientist 
conducting laboratory experiments).
    (2) Direct supervision. The term ``direct supervision'' as used in 
section 41(b)(2)(B) means the immediate supervision (first-line 
management) of qualified research (as in the case of a research 
scientist who directly supervises laboratory experiments, but who may 
not actually perform experiments). ``Direct supervision'' does not 
include supervision by a higher-level manager to whom first-line 
managers report, even if that manager is a qualified research scientist.
    (3) Direct support. The term ``direct support'' as used in section 
41(b)(2)(B) means services in the direct support of either--
    (i) Persons engaging in actual conduct of qualified research, or
    (ii) Persons who are directly supervising persons engaging in the 
actual conduct of qualified research. For example, direct support of 
research includes the services of a secretary for typing reports 
describing laboratory results derived from qualified research, of a 
laboratory worker for cleaning equipment used in qualified research, of 
a clerk for compiling research data, and of a machinist for machining a 
part of an experimental model used in qualified research. Direct support 
of research activities does not include general administrative services, 
or other services only indirectly of benefit to research activities. For 
example, services of payroll personnel in preparing salary checks of 
laboratory scientists, of an accountant for accounting for research 
expenses, of a janitor for general cleaning of a research laboratory, or 
of officers engaged in supervising financial or personnel matters do not 
qualify as direct support of research. This is true whether general 
administrative personnel are part of the research department or in a 
separate department. Direct support does not include supervision. 
Supervisory services constitute ``qualified services'' only to the 
extent provided in paragraph (c)(2) of this section.
    (d) Wages paid for qualified services--(1) In general. Wages paid to 
or incurred for an employee constitute in-house research expenses only 
to the extent the wages were paid or incurred for qualified services 
performed by the employee. If an employee has performed both qualified 
services and nonqualified services, only the amount of wages allocated 
to the performance of qualified services constitutes an in-house 
research expense. In the absence of another method of allocation that 
the taxpayer can demonstrate to be

[[Page 104]]

more appropriate, the amount of in-house research expense shall be 
determined by multiplying the total amount of wages paid to or incurred 
for the employee during the taxable year by the ratio of the total time 
actually spent by the employee in the performance of qualified services 
for the taxpayer to the total time spent by the employee in the 
performance of all services for the taxpayer during the taxable year.
    (2) ``Substantially all.'' Notwithstanding paragraph (d)(1) of this 
section, if substantially all of the services performed by an employee 
for the taxpayer during the taxable year consist of services meeting the 
requirements of section 41(b)(2)(B) (i) or (ii), then the term 
``qualified services'' means all of the services performed by the 
employee for the taxpayer during the taxable year. Services meeting the 
requirements of section 41(b)(2)(B) (i) or (ii) constitute substantially 
all of the services performed by the employee during a taxable year only 
if the wages allocated (on the basis used for purposes of paragraph 
(d)(1) of this section) to services meeting the requirements of section 
41(b)(2)(B) (i) or (ii) constitute at least 80 percent of the wages paid 
to or incurred by the taxpayer for the employee during the taxable year.
    (e) Contract research expenses--(1) In general. A contract research 
expense is 65 percent of any expense paid or incurred in carrying on a 
trade or business to any person other than an employee of the taxpayer 
for the performance on behalf of the taxpayer of--
    (i) Qualified research as defined in Sec. 1.41-5, or
    (ii) Services which, if performed by employees of the taxpayer, 
would constitute qualified services within the meaning of section 
41(b)(2)(B).

Where the contract calls for services other than services described in 
this paragraph (e)(1), only 65 percent of the portion of the amount paid 
or incurred that is attributable to the services described in this 
paragraph (e)(1) is a contract research expense.
    (2) Performance of qualified research. An expense is paid or 
incurred for the performance of qualified research only to the extent 
that it is paid or incurred pursuant to an agreement that--
    (i) Is entered into prior to the performance of the qualified 
research,
    (ii) Provides that research be performed on behalf of the taxpayer, 
and
    (iii) Requires the taxpayer to bear the expense even if the research 
is not successful.

If an expense is paid or incurred pursuant to an agreement under which 
payment is contingent on the success of the research, then the expense 
is considered paid for the product or result rather than the performance 
of the research, and the payment is not a contract research expense. The 
previous sentence applies only to that portion of a payment which is 
contingent on the success of the research.
    (3) ``On behalf of.'' Qualified research is performed on behalf of 
the taxpayer if the taxpayer has a right to the research results. 
Qualified research can be performed on behalf of the taxpayer 
notwithstanding the fact that the taxpayer does not have exclusive 
rights to the results.
    (4) Prepaid amounts. Notwithstanding paragraph (e)(1) of this 
section, if any contract research expense paid or incurred during any 
taxable year is attributable to qualified research to be conducted after 
the close of such taxable year, the expense so attributable shall be 
treated for purposes of section 41(b)(1)(B) as paid or incurred during 
the period during which the qualified research is conducted.
    (5) Examples. The following examples illustrate provisions contained 
in paragraphs (e) (1) through (4) of this section.

    Example 1. A, a cash-method taxpayer using the calendar year as the 
taxable year, enters into a contract with B Corporation under which B is 
to perform qualified research on behalf of A. The contract requires A to 
pay B $300x, regardless of the success of the research. In 1982, B 
performs all of the research, and A makes full payment of $300x under 
the contract. Accordingly, during the taxable year 1982, $195x (65 
percent of the payment of $300x) constitutes a contract research expense 
of A.

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example (1), except that B 
performs 50 percent of the research in 1983. Of the $195x of contract 
research expense paid in 1982, paragraph (e)(4) of this section provides 
that

[[Page 105]]

$97.5x (50 percent of $195x) is a contract research expense for 1982 and 
the remaining $97.5x is contract research expense for 1983.

    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example (1), except that 
instead of calling for a flat payment of $300x, the contract requires A 
to reimburse B for all expenses plus pay B $l00x. B incurs expenses 
attributable to the research as follows:

Labor..........................................................     $90x
Supplies.......................................................      20x
Depreciation on equipment......................................      50x
Overhead.......................................................      40x
                                                                --------
                                                                        
      Total....................................................     200x
                                                                        

Under this agreement A pays B $300x during 1982. Accordingly, during 
taxable year 1982, $195x (65 percent of $300x) of the payment 
constitutes a contract research expense of A.

    Example 4. The facts are the same as in example (3), except that A 
agrees to reimburse B for all expenses and agrees to pay B an additional 
amount of $100x, but the additional $100x is payable only if the 
research is successful. The research is successful and A pays B $300x 
during 1982. Paragraph (e)(2) of this section provides that the 
contingent portion of the payment is not an expense incurred for the 
performance of qualified research. Thus, for taxable year 1982, $130x 
(65 percent of the payment of $200x) constitutes a contract research 
expense of A.

    Example 5. C conducts in-house qualified research in carrying on a 
trade or business. In addition, C pays D Corporation, a provider of 
computer services, $100x to develop software to be used in analyzing the 
results C derives from its research. Because the software services, if 
performed by an employee of C, would constitute qualified services, $65x 
of the $100x constitutes a contract research expense of C.

    Example 6. C conducts in-house qualified research in carrying on C's 
trade or business. In addition, C contracts with E Corporation, a 
provider of temporary secretarial services, for the services of a 
secretary for a week. The secretary spends the entire week typing 
reports describing laboratory results derived from C's qualified 
research. C pays E $400 for the secretarial service, none of which 
constitutes wages within the meaning of section 41(b)(2)(D). These 
services, if performed by employees of C, would constitute qualified 
services within the meaning of section 41(b)(2)(B). Thus, pursuant to 
paragraph (e)(1) of this section, $260 (65 percent of $400) constitutes 
a contract research expense of C.

    Example 7. C conducts in-house qualified research in carrying on C's 
trade or business. In addition, C pays F, an outside accountant, $100x 
to keep C's books and records pertaining to the research project. The 
activity carried on by the accountant does not constitute qualified 
research as defined in section 41(d). The services performed by the 
accountant, if performed by an employee of C, would not constitute 
qualified services (as defined in section 41(b)(2)(B)). Thus, under 
paragraph (e)(1) of this section, no portion of the $100x constitutes a 
contract research expense.


<R05>
Sec. 1.41-3   Base period research expense.

    (a) Number of years in base period. The term ``base period'' 
generally means the 3 taxable years immediately preceding the year for 
which a credit is being determined (``determination year''). However, if 
the first taxable year of the taxpayer ending after June 30, 1981, ends 
in 1981 or 1982, then with respect to that taxable year the term ``base 
period'' means the immediately preceding taxable year. If the second 
taxable year of the taxpayer ending after June 30, 1981, ends in 1982 or 
1983, then with respect to that taxable year the term ``base period'' 
means the 2 immediately preceding taxable years.
    (b) New taxpayers. If, with respect to any determination year, the 
taxpayer has not been in existence for the number of preceding taxable 
years that are included under paragraph (a) of this section in the base 
period for that year, then for purposes of paragraph (c)(1) of this 
section (relating to the determination of average qualified research 
expenses during the base period), the taxpayer shall be treated as--
    (1) Having been in existence for that number of additional 12-month 
taxable years that is necessary to complete the base period specified in 
paragraph (a) of this section, and
    (2) Having had qualified research expenses of zero in each of those 
additional years.
    (c) Definition of base period research expenses. For any 
determination year, the term ``base period research expenses'' means the 
greater of--
    (1) The average qualified research expenses for taxable years during 
the base period, or
    (2) Fifty percent of the qualified research expenses for the 
determination year.
    (d) Special rules for short taxable years--(1) Short determination 
year. If

[[Page 106]]

the determination year for which a research credit is being taken is a 
short taxable year, the amount taken into account under paragraph (c)(1) 
of this section shall be modified by multiplying that amount by the 
number of months in the short taxable year and dividing the result by 
12.
    (2) Short base period year. For purposes of paragraph (c)(1) of this 
section, if a year in the base period is a short taxable year, the 
qualified research expenses paid or incurred in the short taxable year 
are deemed to be equal to the qualified research expenses actually paid 
or incurred in that year multiplied by 12 and divided by the number of 
months in that year.
    (3) Years overlapping the effective dates of section 41 (section 
44F)--(i) Determination years. If a determination year includes months 
before July 1981, the determination year is deemed to be a short taxable 
year including only the months after June 1981. Accordingly, paragraph 
(d)(1) of this section is applied for purposes of determining the base 
period expenses for such year. See section 221(d)(2) of the Economic 
Recovery Tax Act of 1981.
    (ii) Base period years. No adjustment is required in the case of a 
base period year merely because it overlaps June 30, 1981.
    (4) Number of months in a short taxable year. The number of months 
in a short taxable year is equal to the number of whole calendar months 
contained in the year plus fractions for any partially included months. 
The fraction for a partially included month is equal to the number of 
days in the month that are included in the short taxable year divided by 
the total number of days in that month. Thus, if a short taxable year 
begins on January 1, 1982, and ends on June 9, 1982, it consists of 5 
and 9/30 months.
    (e) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
this section.

    Example 1. X Corp., an accrual-method taxpayer using the calendar 
year as its taxable year, is organized and begins carrying on a trade or 
business during 1979 and subsequently incurs qualified research expenses 
as follows:

1979...........................................................     $10x
1980...........................................................     150x
1/1/81-6/30/81.................................................      90x
7/1/81-12/31/81................................................     110x
1982...........................................................     250x
1983...........................................................     450x
                                                                        

    (i) Determination year 1981. For determination year 1981, the base 
period consists of the immediately preceding taxable year, calendar year 
1980. Because the determination year includes months before July 1981, 
paragraph (d)(3)(i) of this section requires that the determination year 
be treated as a short taxable year. Thus, for purposes of paragraph 
(c)(1) of this section, as modified by paragraph (d)(1) of this section, 
the average qualified research expenses for taxable years during the 
base period are $75x ($150x, the average qualified research expenses for 
the base period, multiplied by 6, the number of months in the 
determination year after June 30, 1981, and divided by 12). Because this 
amount is greater than the amount determined under paragraph (c)(2) of 
this section (50 percent of the determination year's qualified research 
expense of $110x, or $55x), the amount of base period research expenses 
is $75x. The credit for determination year 1981 is equal to 25 percent 
of the excess of $110x (the qualified research expenditures incurred 
during the determination year including only expenditures accrued on or 
after July 1, 1981, through the end of the determination year) over $75x 
(the base period research expenses).
    (ii) Determination year 1982. For determination year 1982, the base 
period consists of the 2 immediately preceding taxable years, 1980 and 
1981. The amount determined under paragraph (c)(1) of this section (the 
average qualified research expenses for taxable years during the base 
period) is $175x (($150x+$90x+$110x)/2). This amount is greater than the 
amount determined under paragraph (c)(2) of this section, (50 percent of 
$250x, or $125x). Accordingly, the amount of base period research 
expenses is $175x. The credit for determination year 1982 is equal to 25 
percent of the excess of $250x (the qualified research expenses incurred 
during the determination year) over $175x (the base period research 
expenses).
    (iii) Determination year 1983. For determination year 1983, the base 
period consists of the 3 immediately preceding taxable years 1980, 1981 
and 1982. The amount determined under paragraph (c)(1) of this section 
(the average qualified research expenses for taxable years during the 
base period) is $200x (($150x+$200x+$250x)/3). The amount determined 
under paragraph (c)(2) of this section is $225x (50 percent of the $450x 
of qualified research expenses in 1983). Accordingly, the amount of base 
period research expenses is $225x. The credit for determination year 
1983 is equal to 25 percent of the excess of $450x (the qualified 
research expenses incurred

[[Page 107]]

during the determination year) over $225x (the base period research 
expenses).

    Examp1e 2. Y, an accrual-basis corporation using the calendar year 
as its taxable year comes into existence and begins carrying on a trade 
or business on July 1, 1983. Y incurs qualified research expenses as 
follows:

7/1/83--12/31/83...............................................     $80x
1984...........................................................     200x
1985...........................................................     200x
                                                                        

    (i) Determination year 1983. For determination year 1983, the base 
period consists of the 3 immediately preceding taxable years: 1980, 1981 
and 1982. Although Y was not in existence during 1980, 1981 and 1982, Y 
is treated under paragraph (b) of this section as having been in 
existence during those years with qualified research expenses of zero. 
Thus, the amount determined under paragraph (c)(1) of this section (the 
average qualified research expenses for taxable years during the base 
period) is $0x (($0x+$0x+$0x)/3). The amount determined under paragraph 
(c)(2) of this section is $40x (50 percent of $80x). Accordingly, the 
amount of base period research expenses is $40x. The credit for 
determination year 1983 is equal to 25 percent of the excess of $80x 
(the qualified research expenses incurred during the determination year) 
over $40x (the base period research expenses).
    (ii) Determination year 1984. For determination year 1984, the base 
period consists of the 3 immediately preceding taxable years: 1981, 
1982, and 1983. Under paragraph (b) of this section, Y is treated as 
having been in existence during years 1981 and 1982 with qualified 
research expenses of zero. Because July 1 through December 31, 1983 is a 
short taxable year, paragraph (d)(2) of this section requires that the 
qualified research expenses for that year be adjusted to $160x for 
purposes of determining the average qualified research expenses during 
the base period. The $160x results from the actual qualified research 
expenses for that year ($80x) multiplied by 12 and divided by 6 (the 
number of months in the short taxable year). Accordingly, the amount 
determined under paragraph (c)(1) of this section (the average qualified 
research expenses for taxable years during the base period) is $53\1/3\x 
(($0x+$0x+$160x)/3). The amount determined under paragraph (c)(2) of 
this section is $100x (50 percent of $200x). The amount of base period 
research expenses is $100x. The credit for determination year 1984 is 
equal to 25 percent of the excess of $200x (the qualified research 
expenses incurred during the determination year) over $100x (the base 
period research expenses).
    (iii) Determination year 1985. For determination year 1985, the base 
period consists of the 3 immediately preceding taxable years: 1982, 
1983, and 1984. Pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section, Y is treated 
as having been in existence during 1982 with qualified research expenses 
of zero. Because July 1 through December 31, 1982, is a short taxable 
year, paragraph (d)(2) of this section requires that the qualified 
research expense for that year be adjusted to $160x for purposes of 
determining the average qualified research expenses for taxable years 
during the base period. This $160x is the actual qualified research 
expense for that year ($80x) multiplied by 12 and divided by 6 (the 
number of months in the short taxable year). Accordingly, the amount 
determined under paragraph (c)(1) of this section (the average qualified 
research expenses for taxable years during the base period) is $120x 
(($0x+$160x+$200x)/3). The amount determined under paragraph (c)(2) of 
this section is $100x (50 percent of $200x). The amount of base period 
research expenses is $120x. The credit for determination year 1985 is 
equal to 25 percent of the excess of $200x (the qualified research 
expenses incurred during the determination year) over $120x (the base 
period research expenses).
Sec. 1.41-4  Qualified research for taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1985. [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1.41-5  Qualified research for taxable years beginning before January 1, 1986.

    (a) General rule. Except as otherwise provided in section 30(d) (as 
that section read before amendment by the Tax Reform Act of 1986) and in 
this section, the term ``qualified research'' means research, 
expenditures for which would be research and experimental expenditures 
within the meaning of section 174. Expenditures that are ineligible for 
the section 174 deduction elections are not expenditures for qualified 
research. For example, expenditures for the acquisition of land or 
depreciable property used in research, and mineral exploration costs 
described in section 174(d), are not expenditures for qualified 
research.
    (b) Activities outside the United States--(1) In-house research. In-
house research conducted outside the United States (as defined in 
section 7701(a)(9)) cannot constitute qualified research. Thus, wages 
paid to an employee scientist for services performed in a laboratory in 
the United States and in a test station in Antarctica must be 
apportioned between the services performed within the United States and 
the services performed outside the United States, and only the wages 
apportioned to the services conducted

[[Page 108]]

within the United States are qualified research expenses unless the 80 
percent rule of Sec. 1.41-2(d)(2) applies.
    (2) Contract research. If contract research is performed partly 
within the United States and partly without, only 65 percent of the 
portion of the contract amount that is attributable to the research 
performed within the United States can qualify as contract research 
expense (even if 80 percent or more of the contract amount was for 
research performed in the United States).
    (c) Social sciences or humanities. Qualified research does not 
include research in the social sciences or humanities. For purposes of 
section 30(d)(2) (as that section read before amendment by the Tax 
Reform Act of 1986) and of this section, the phrase ``research in the 
social sciences or humanities'' encompasses all areas of research other 
than research in a field of laboratory science (such as physics or 
biochemistry), engineering or technology. Examples of research in the 
social sciences or humanities include the development of a new life 
insurance contract, a new economic model or theory, a new accounting 
procedure or a new cookbook.
    (d) Research funded by any grant, contract, or otherwise--(1) In 
general. Research does not constitute qualified research to the extent 
it is funded by any grant, contract, or otherwise by another person 
(including any governmental entity). All agreements (not only research 
contracts) entered into between the taxpayer performing the research and 
other persons shall be considered in determining the extent to which the 
research is funded. Amounts payable under any agreement that are 
contingent on the success of the research and thus considered to be paid 
for the product or result of the research (see Sec. 1.41-2(e)(2)) are 
not treated as funding. For special rules regarding funding between 
commonly controlled businesses, see Sec. 1.41-8(e).
    (2) Research in which taxpayer retains no rights. If a taxpayer 
performing research for another person retains no substantial rights in 
research under the agreement providing for the research, the research is 
treated as fully funded for purposes of section 41(d)(4)(H), and no 
expenses paid or incurred by the taxpayer in performing the research are 
qualified research expenses. For example, if the taxpayer performs 
research under an agreement that confers on another person the exclusive 
right to exploit the results of the research, the taxpayer is not 
performing qualified research because the research is treated as fully 
funded under this paragraph (d)(2). Incidental benefits to the taxpayer 
from performance of the research (for example, increased experience in a 
field of research) do not constitute substantial rights in the research. 
If a taxpayer performing research for another person retains no 
substantial rights in the research and if the payments to the researcher 
are contingent upon the success of the research, neither the performer 
nor the person paying for the research is entitled to treat any portion 
of the expenditures as qualified research expenditures.
    (3) Research in which the taxpayer retains substantial rights--(i) 
In general. If a taxpayer performing research for another person retains 
substantial rights in the research under the agreement providing for the 
research, the research is funded to the extent of the payments (and fair 
market value of any property) to which the taxpayer becomes entitled by 
performing the research. A taxpayer does not retain substantial rights 
in the research if the taxpayer must pay for the right to use the 
results of the research. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph 
(d)(3)(ii) of this section, the taxpayer shall reduce the amount paid or 
incurred by the taxpayer for the research that would, but for section 
41(d)(4)(H), constitute qualified research expenses of the taxpayer by 
the amount of funding determined under the preceding sentence.
    (ii) Pro rata allocation. If the taxpayer can establish to the 
satisfaction of the district director--
    (A) The total amount of research expenses,
    (B) That the total amount of research expenses exceed the funding, 
and
    (C) That the otherwise qualified research expenses (that is, the 
expenses which would be qualified research expenses if there were no 
funding) exceed

[[Page 109]]

65 percent of the funding, then the taxpayer may allocate the funding 
pro rata to nonqualified and otherwise qualified research expenses, 
rather than allocating it 100 percent to otherwise qualified research 
expenses (as provided in paragraph (d)(3)(i) of this section). In no 
event, however, shall less than 65 percent of the funding be applied 
against the otherwise qualified research expenses.
    (iii) Project-by-project determination. The provisions of this 
paragraph (d)(3) shall be applied separately to each research project 
undertaken by the taxpayer.
    (4) Independent research and development under the Federal 
Acquisition Regulations System and similar provisions. The Federal 
Acquisition Regulations System and similar rules and regulations 
relating to contracts (fixed price, cost plus, etc.) with government 
entities provide for allocation of certain ``independent research and 
development costs'' and ``bid and proposal costs'' of a contractor to 
contracts entered into with that contractor. In general, any 
``independent research and development costs'' and ``bid and proposal 
costs'' paid to a taxpayer by reason of such a contract shall not be 
treated as funding the underlying research activities except to the 
extent the ``independent research and development costs'' and ``bid and 
proposal costs'' are properly severable from the contract. See 
Sec. 1.451-3(e); see also section 804(d)(2) of the Tax Reform Act of 
1986.
    (5) Funding determinable only in subsequent taxable year. If at the 
time the taxpayer files its return for a taxable year, it is impossible 
to determine to what extent particular research performed by the 
taxpayer during that year may be funded, then the taxpayer shall treat 
the research as completely funded for purposes of completing that 
return. When the amount of funding is finally determined, the taxpayer 
should amend the return and any interim returns to reflect the proper 
amount of funding.
    (6) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
the principles contained in this paragraph.

    Example 1. A enters into a contract with B Corporation, a cash-
method taxpayer using the calendar year as its taxable year, under which 
B is to perform research that would, but for section 41(d)(3)(H), be 
qualified research of B. The agreement calls for A to pay B $120x, 
regardless of the outcome of the research. In 1982, A makes full payment 
of $120x under the contract, B performs all the research, and B pays all 
the expenses connected with the research, as follows:

In-house research expenses.....................................    $100x
Outside research:                                                       
  (Amount B paid to third parties for research, 65 percent of           
   which ($26x) is treated as a contract research expense of B)      40x
Overhead and other expenses....................................      10x
                                                                --------
    Total......................................................     150x
                                                                        

    If B has no rights to the research, B is fully funded. 
Alternatively, assume that B retains the right to use the results of the 
research in carrying on B's business. Of B's otherwise qualified 
research expenses of $126x + $26x), $120x is treated as funded by A. 
Thus $6x ($126x - $120x) is treated as a qualified research expense of 
B. However, if B establishes the facts required under paragraph (d)(3) 
of this section, B can allocate the funding pro rata to nonqualified and 
otherwise qualified research expenses. Thus $100.8x ($120x ($126x/
$150x)) would be allocated to otherwise qualified research expenses. B's 
qualified research expenses would be $25.2x ($126x - $100.8x). For 
purposes of the following examples (2), (3) and (4) assume that B 
retains substantial rights to use the results of the research in 
carrying on B's business.

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example (1) (assuming that B 
retains the right to use the results of the research in carrying on B's 
business) except that, although A makes full payment of $120x during 
1982, B does not perform the research or pay the associated expenses 
until 1983. The computations are unchanged. However, B's qualified 
research expenses determined in example (1) are qualified research 
expenses during 1983.

    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example (1) (assuming that B 
retains the right to use the results of the research in carrying on B's 
business) except that, although B performs the research and pays the 
associated expenses during 1982, A does not pay the $120x until 1983. 
The computations are unchanged and the amount determined in example (1) 
is a qualified research expense of B during 1982.

    Example 4. The facts are the same as in example (1) (assuming that B 
retains the right to use the results of the research in carrying on B's 
business) except that, instead of agreeing to pay B $120x, A agrees to 
pay $100x regardless of the outcome and an additional $20x only if B's 
research produces a

[[Page 110]]

useful product. B's research produces a useful product and A pays B 
$120x during 1982. The $20x payment that is conditional on the success 
of the research is not treated as funding. Assuming that B establishes 
to the satisfaction of the district director the actual research 
expenses, B can allocate the funding to nonqualified and otherwise 
qualified research expenses. Thus $84x ($100x ($126x/$150x)) would be 
allocated to otherwise qualified research expenses. B's qualified 
research expenses would be $42x ($126x - $84x).

    Example 5. C enters into a contract with D, a cash-method taxpayer 
using the calendar year as its taxable year, under which D is to perform 
research in which both C and D will have substantial rights. C agrees to 
reimburse D for 80 percent of D's expenses for the research. D performs 
part of the research in 1982 and the rest in 1983. At the time that D 
files its return for 1982, D is unable to determine the extent to which 
the research is funded under the provisions of this paragraph. Under 
these circumstances, D may not treat any of the expenses paid by D for 
this research during 1982 as qualified research expenses on its 1982 
return. When the project is complete and D can determine the extent of 
funding, D should file an amended return for 1982 to take into account 
any qualified research expense for 1982.


<R05>
Sec. 1.41-6  Basic research for taxable years beginning after December 31, 1985. [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1.41-7  Basic research for taxable years beginning before January 1, 1986.

    (a) In general. The amount expended for basic research within the 
meaning of section 30(e) (before amended by the Tax Reform Act of 1986) 
equals the sum of money plus the taxpayer's basis in tangible property 
(other than land) transferred for use in the performance of basic 
research.
    (b) Trade or business requirement. Any amount treated as a contract 
research expense under section 30(e) (before amendment by the Tax Reform 
Act of 1986) shall be deemed to have been paid or incurred in carrying 
on a trade or business, if the corporation that paid or incurred the 
expenses is actually engaged in carrying on some trade or business.
    (c) Prepaid amounts--(1) In general. If any basic research expense 
paid or incurred during any taxable year is attributable to research to 
be conducted after the close of such taxable year, the expense so 
attributable shall be treated for purposes of section 30(b)(1)(B) 
(before amendment by the Tax Reform Act of 1986) as paid or incurred 
during the period in which the basic research is conducted.
    (2) Transfers of property. In the case of transfers of property to 
be used in the performance of basic research, the research in which that 
property is to be used shall be considered to be conducted ratably over 
a period beginning on the day the property is first so used and 
continuing for the number of years provided with respect to property of 
that class under section 168(c)(2) (before amendment by the Tax Reform 
Act of 1986). For example, if an item of property which is 3-year 
property under section 168(c) is transferred to a university for basic 
research on January 12, 1983, and is first so used by the university on 
March 1, 1983, then the research in which that property is used is 
considered to be conducted ratably from March 1, 1983, through February 
28, 1986.
    (d) Written research agreement--(1) In general. A written research 
agreement must be entered into prior to the performance of the basic 
research.
    (2) Agreement between a corporation and a qualified organization 
after June 30, 1983--(i) In general. A written research agreement 
between a corporation and a qualified organization (including a 
qualified fund) entered into after June 30, 1983, shall provide that the 
organization shall inform the corporation within 60 days after the close 
of each taxable year of the corporation what amount of funds provided by 
the corporation pursuant to the agreement was expended on basic research 
during the taxable year of the corporation. In determining amounts 
expended on basic research, the qualified organization shall take into 
account the exclusions specified in section 30(e)(3) (before amendment 
by the Tax Reform Act of 1986) and in paragraph (e) of this section.
    (ii) Transfers of property. In the case of transfers of property to 
be used in basic research, the agreement shall provide that 
substantially all use of the property is to be for basic research, as 
defined in section 30(e)(3) (before amendment by the Tax Reform Act of 
1986).

[[Page 111]]

    (3) Agreement between a qualified fund and a qualified educational 
organization after June 30, 1983. A written research agreement between a 
qualified fund and a qualified educational organization (see section 
30(e)(4)(B)(iii) (before amendment by the Tax Reform Act of 1986)) 
entered into after June 30, 1983, shall provide that the qualified 
educational organization shall furnish sufficient information to the 
qualified fund to enable the qualified fund to comply with the written 
research agreements it has entered into with grantor corporations, 
including the requirement set forth in paragraph (d)(2) of this section.
    (e) Exclusions--(1) Research conducted outside the United States. If 
a taxpayer pays or incurs an amount for basic research to be performed 
partly within the United States and partly without, only 65 percent of 
the portion of the amount attributable to research performed within the 
United States can be treated as a contract research expense (even if 80 
percent or more of the contract amount was for basic research performed 
in the United States).
    (2) Research in the social sciences or humanities. Basic research 
does not include research in the social sciences or humanities, within 
the meaning of Sec. 1.41-5(c).
    (f) Procedure for making an election to be treated as a qualified 
fund. In order to make an election to be treated as a qualified fund 
within the meaning of section 30(e)(4)(B)(iii) (before amendment by the 
Tax Reform Act of 1986) or as an organization described in section 
41(e)(6)(D), the organization shall file with the Internal Revenue 
Service center with which it files its annual return a statement that--
    (1) Sets out the name, address, and taxpayer identification number 
of the electing organization (the ``taxpayer'') and of the organization 
that established and maintains the electing organization (the 
``controlling organization''),
    (2) Identifies the election as an election under section 41(e)(6)(D) 
of the Code,
    (3) Affirms that the controlling organization and the taxpayer are 
section 501(c)(3) organizations,
    (4) Provides that the taxpayer elects to be treated as a private 
foundation for all Code purposes other than section 4940,
    (5) Affirms that the taxpayer satisfies the requirement of section 
41(e)(6)(D)(iii), and
    (6) Specifies the date on which the election is to become effective.

If an election to be treated as a qualified fund is filed before 
February 1, 1982, the election may be made effective as of any date 
after June 30, 1981, and before January 1, 1986. If an election is filed 
on or after February 1, 1982, the election may be made effective as of 
any date on or after the date on which the election is filed.


<R05>
Sec. 1.41-8  Aggregation of expenditures.

    (a) Controlled group of corporations; trades or businesses under 
common control--(1) In general. In determining the amount of research 
credit allowed with respect to a trade or business that at the end of 
its taxable year is a member of a controlled group of corporations or a 
member of a group of trades or businesses under common control, all 
members of the group are treated as a single taxpayer and the credit (if 
any) allowed to the member is determined on the basis of its 
proportionate share (if any) of the increase in qualified research 
expenses of the aggregated group.
    (2) Definition of trade or business. For purposes of this section, a 
trade or business is a sole proprietorship, a partnership, a trust, an 
estate, or a corporation that is carrying on a trade or business (within 
the meaning of section 162). For purposes of this section, any 
corporation that is a member of a commonly controlled group shall be 
deemed to be carrying on a trade or business if any other member of that 
group is carrying on any trade or business.
    (3) Determination of common control. For rules for determining 
whether trades or businesses are under common control, see paragraphs 
(b) through (g) of Sec. 1.52-1 except that the words ``singly or'' in 
Sec. 1.52-1(d)(1)(i) shall be treated as deleted.
    (4) Examples. The following examples illustrate provisions of this 
paragraph.


[[Page 112]]


    Example 1. (i) Facts. A controlled group of four corporations (all 
of which are calendar-year taxpayers) had qualified research expenses 
(``research expenses'') during the base period and taxable year as 
follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                        Base period   Taxable           
              Corporation                (average)      year     Change 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A.....................................          $60        $40     ($20)
B.....................................           10         15         5
C.....................................           30         70        40
D.....................................           15         25        10
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Total credit. Because the research expenses of the four 
corporations are treated as if made by one taxpayer, the total amount of 
incremental expenses eligible for the credit is $35 ($55 increase 
attributable to B, C, and D less $20 decrease attributable to A). The 
total amount of credit allowable to members of the group is 20% of the 
incremental amount or $7.00.
    (iii) Allocation of credit. No amount of credit is allocated to A 
since A's research expenses did not increase in the taxable year. The 
$7.00 credit is allocated to B, C, and D, the members of the group that 
increased their research expenses. This allocation is made on the basis 
of the ratio of each corporation's increase in its research expenses to 
the sum of increases in those expenses. Inasmuch as the total increase 
made by those members of the group whose research expenses rose (B, C, 
and D) was $55, B's share of the $7.00 credit is 5/55; C's share is 40/
55; and D's share is 10/55.

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example (1) except that A 
had zero research expenses in the taxable year. Thus, the controlled 
group had a decrease rather than an increase in aggregate research 
expenses. Accordingly, no amount of credit is allowable to any member of 
the group even though B, C, and D actually increased their research 
expenses in comparison with their own base period expenses.

    (b) Minimum base period research expenses. For purposes of this 
section, the rule in section 41(c)(3) (pertaining to minimum base period 
research expenses) shall be applied only to the aggregate amount of base 
period research expenses. See the treatment of corporation C in example 
(1) of paragraph (a)(4) of this section.
    (c) Tax accounting periods used--(1) In general. The credit 
allowable to a member of a controlled group of corporations or of a 
group of trades or businesses under common control is that member's 
share of the aggregate credit computed as of the end of such member's 
taxable year. In computing the aggregate credit in the case of a group 
whose members have different taxable years, a member shall generally 
treat the taxable year of another member that ends with or within the 
determination year of the computing member as the determination year of 
that other member. The base period research expenses taken into account 
with respect to a determination year of another member shall be the base 
period research expenses determined for that year under Sec. 1.41-3, 
except that Sec. 1.41-3(c)(2) shall be applied only at the aggregate 
level.
    (2) Special rule where timing of research is manipulated. If the 
timing of research by members using different tax accounting periods is 
manipulated to generate a credit in excess of the amount that would be 
allowable if all members of the group used the same tax accounting 
period, the district director may require each member of the group to 
calculate the credit in the current taxable year and all future years as 
if all members of the group had the same taxable year and base period as 
the computing member.
    (d) Membership during taxable year in more than one group. A trade 
or business may be a member of only one group for a taxable year. If, 
without application of this paragraph, a business would be a member of 
more than one group at the end of its taxable year, the business shall 
be treated as a member of the group in which it was included for its 
preceding taxable year. If the business was not included for its 
preceding taxable year in any group in which it could be included as of 
the end of its taxable year, the business shall designate in its timely 
filed (including extensions) return the group in which it is being 
included. If the return for a taxable year is due before July 1, 1983, 
the business may designate its group membership through an amended 
return for that year filed on or before June 30, 1983. If the business 
does not so designate, then the district director with audit 
jurisdiction of the return will determine the group in which the 
business is to be included.
    (e) Intra-group transactions--(1) In general. Because all members of 
a group under common control are treated as a single taxpayer for 
purposes of determining the research credit, transfers

[[Page 113]]

between members of the group are generally disregarded.
    (2) In-house research expenses. If one member of a group performs 
qualified research on behalf of another member, the member performing 
the research shall include in its qualified research expenses any in-
house research expenses for that work and shall not treat any amount 
received or accrued as funding the research. Conversely, the member for 
whom the research is performed shall not treat any part of any amount 
paid or incurred as a contract research expense. For purposes of 
determining whether the in-house research for that work is qualified 
research, the member performing the research shall be treated as 
carrying on any trade or business carried on by the member on whose 
behalf the research is performed.
    (3) Contract research expenses. If a member of a group pays or 
incurs contract research expenses to a person outside the group in 
carrying on the member's trade or business, that member shall include 
those expenses as qualified research expenses. However, if the expenses 
are not paid or incurred in carrying on any trade or business of that 
member, those expenses may be taken into account as contract research 
expenses by another member of the group provided that the other member--
    (i) Reimburses the member paying or incurring the expenses, and
    (ii) Carries on a trade or business to which the research relates.
    (4) Lease Payments. The amount paid or incurred to another member of 
the group for the lease of personal property owned by a member of the 
group is not taken into account for purposes of section 41. Amounts paid 
or incurred to another member of the group for the lease of personal 
property owned by a person outside the group shall be taken into account 
as in-house research expenses for purposes of section 41 only to the 
extent of the lesser of--
    (i) The amount paid or incurred to the other member, or
    (ii) The amount of the lease expenses paid to the person outside the 
group.
    (5) Payment for supplies. Amounts paid or incurred to another member 
of the group for supplies shall be taken into account as in-house 
research expenses for purposes of section 41 only to the extent of the 
lesser of--
    (i) The amount paid or incurred to the other member, or
    (ii) The amount of the other member's basis in the supplies.


<R05>
Sec. 1.41-9  Special rules.

    (a) Allocations--(1) Corporation making an election under subchapter 
S--(i) Pass-through, for taxable years beginning after December 31, 
1982, in the case of an S corporation. In the case of an S corporation 
(as defined in section 1361) the amount of research credit computed for 
the corporation shall be allocated to the shareholders according to the 
provisions of section 1366 and section 1377.
    (ii) Pass-through, for taxable years beginning before January 1, 
1983, in the case of a subchapter S corporation. In the case of an 
electing small business corporation (as defined in section 1371 as that 
section read before the amendments made by the subchapter S Revision Act 
of 1982), the amount of the research credit computed for the corporation 
for any taxable year shall be apportioned pro rata among the persons who 
are shareholders of the corporation on the last day of the corporation's 
taxable year.
    (2) Pass-through in the case of an estate or trust. In the case of 
an estate or trust, the amount of the research credit computed for the 
estate or trust for any taxable year shall be apportioned among the 
estate or trust and the beneficiaries on the basis of the income of the 
estate or trust allocable to each.
    (3) Pass-through in the case of a partnership--(i) In general. In 
the case of a partnership, the research credit computed for the 
partnership for any taxable year shall be apportioned among the persons 
who are partners during the taxable year in accordance with section 704 
and the regulations thereunder. See, for example, Sec. 1.704-
1(b)(4)(ii). Because the research credit is an expenditure-based credit, 
the credit is to be allocated among the partners in the same proportion 
as section 174 expenditures are allocated for the year.
    (ii) Certain expenditures by joint ventures. Research expenses to 
which

[[Page 114]]

Sec. 1.41-2(a)(4)(ii) applies shall be apportioned among the persons who 
are partners during the taxable year in accordance with the provisions 
of that section. For purposes of section 41, these expenses shall be 
treated as paid or incurred directly by the partners rather than by the 
partnership. Thus, the partnership shall disregard these expenses in 
computing the credit to be apportioned under paragraph (a)(3)(i) of this 
section, and in making the computations under section 41 each partner 
shall aggregate its distributive share of these expenses with other 
research expenses of the partner. The limitation on the amount of the 
credit set out in section 41(g) and in paragraph (c) of this section 
shall not apply because the credit is computed by the partner, not the 
partnership.
    (4) Year in which taken into account. An amount apportioned to a 
person under this paragraph shall be taken into account by the person in 
the taxable year of such person which or within which the taxable year 
of the corporation, estate, trust, or partnership (as the case may be) 
ends.
    (5) Credit allowed subject to limitation. The credit allowable to 
any person to whom any amount has been apportioned under paragraph 
(a)(1), (2) or (3)(i) of this section is subject to section 41(g) and 
sections 38 and 39 of the Code, if applicable.
    (b) Adjustments for certain acquisitions and dispositions--Meaning 
of terms. For the meaning of ``acquisition,'' ``separate unit,'' and 
``major portion,'' see paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.52-2. An ``acquisition'' 
includes an incorporation or a liquidation.
    (c) Special rule for pass-through of credit. The special rule 
contained in section 41(g) for the pass-through of the credit in the 
case of an individual who owns an interest in an unincorporated trade or 
business, is a partner in a partnership, is a beneficiary of an estate 
or trust, or is a shareholder in an S corporation shall be applied in 
accordance with the principles set forth in Sec. 1.53-3.
    (d) Carryback and carryover of unused credits. The taxpayer to whom 
the credit is passed through under paragraph (c) of this section shall 
not be prevented from applying the unused portion in a carryback or 
carryover year merely because the entity that earned the credit changes 
its form of conducting business.

             Taxable Years Beginning Before January 1, 1987


<R05>
Sec. 1.41-0A  Credit or deduction for political and newsletter fund contributions--scope and note.

    Section 41 allows a limited credit against the income tax for 
political and newsletter fund contributions. Section 218 allows a 
limited deduction for contributions. The Revenue Act of 1978, however, 
increases the maximum annual credit under section 41 and repeals section 
218. These changes are effective for political and newsletter fund 
contributions payment of which is made in taxable years of the 
contributor beginning after December 31, 1978. Sections 1.41-1A through 
1.41-8A apply to both sections 41 and 218.

[T.D. 7603, 44 FR 18222, Mar. 27, 1979. Redesignated and amended by T.D. 
8251, 54 FR 21204, May 17, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1.41-1A  Same--definitions of certain items.

    (a) Campaign committee. A ``campaign committee'' is any group 
described in section 41(c)(1)(B). Thus, to be a campaign committee a 
group must be organized and operated exclusively to further the 
nomination or election of one or more candidates. That means it may not, 
except as otherwise provided in Sec. 1.41-3A(a), spend any money for any 
other purpose. Therefore, a group that engages in any general political, 
educational, or legislative activities is not a campaign committee. Such 
a group may, however, organize a separate campaign committee exclusively 
to further the nomination or election of one or more candidates.
    (b) Candidate. A ``candidate'' is an individual described in section 
41 (c)(2). A candidate remains a candidate until enough money has been 
raised to pay the debts incurred in a previous campaign for elective 
public office. For example, A, a candidate for Senator from State X in 
1977, is elected to that office in 1978. A sustains a campaign debt with 
respect to A's Senatorial campaign. A remains a candidate solely for

[[Page 115]]

the purpose of soliciting contributions to extinguish the campaign debt.
    (c) Elective public office. An ``elective public office'' is any 
governmental position for which one must be directly chosen by the 
casting of votes by the general public or the Electoral College. It does 
not, however, include any office or position in any national, state, or 
local political party or similar organization, or membership in the 
Electoral College.
    (d) Furthering a candidacy. Expenditures further a candidacy within 
the meaning of section 41(c)(1) (A) and (B) if they are directly related 
to, and are intended to support, a candidate's campaign for elective 
public office. Examples include payments for--
    (1) Researching and polling campaign issues;
    (2) Trips in connection with campaigning by the candidate or persons 
acting on his or her behalf;
    (3) Raising funds; and
    (4) Campaign-related debts left over from a previous political 
campaign.
    (e) Meets the qualifications. An individual ``meets the 
qualifications prescribed by law'' to hold an elective public office if 
the individual can be reasonably expected to meet those qualifications 
on or before the date the office is to be filled.
    (f) Newsletter fund contribution. The term ``newsletter fund 
contribution'' means a contribution of money or gift of money directly 
to a fund described in section 527(g) (relating to the treatment of 
newsletter funds as political organizations).
    (g) Political contribution. A ``political contribution'' is a 
contribution of money or gift of money directly to a person described in 
section 41(c)(1). A political contribution is not limited to that 
portion of the contribution or gift that is eligible as a credit under 
section 41(b) or deduction under section 218(b).
    (h) Publicly announces. An individual ``publicly announces'' that he 
or she is a candidate by making a positive statement available for media 
distribution that he or she is seeking nomination or election to a 
specific elective public office. An example is a news release or other 
statement by an individual intended for distribution via television, 
radio, newspapers, or magazines within the geographic area associated 
with the elective public office being sought which states that he or she 
seeks nomination or election to the office. Incumbency in an office does 
not constitute a public announcement that one is seeking reelection to 
that office. Furthermore, if because of death or any other reason an 
individual does not make a public announcement, the individual is not a 
candidate even though the individual was about to make a public 
announcement.

[T.D. 7603, 44 FR 18222, Mar. 27, 1979. Redesignated and amended by T.D. 
8251, 54 FR 21204, May 17, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1.41-2A  Same--limitations and special rules.

    (a) When payment must be made. A taxpayer may elect the credit under 
section 41 or the deduction under section 218 only if a political or 
newsletter fund contribution is actually paid within the taxable year 
for which the taxpayer claims the credit or deduction. The method of 
accounting the taxpayer uses and the date the contribution is pledged 
are irrelevant. Where a partnership makes a political or newsletter fund 
contribution, each partner is considered as having paid his or her 
distributive share of the political or newsletter fund contribution.
    (b) Campaign committee supporting more than one individual. A 
section 41 credit or section 218 deduction may be available for a 
contribution of money to a campaign committee that supports, or intends 
to support, more than one candidate if at least one individual it 
supports is a candidate for the calendar year in which the contribution 
is made. However, if a taxpayer indicates at the time the contribution 
is made that it is for a specific individual, and that individual is not 
a candidate for the calendar year in which the contribution is made, no 
credit or deduction is available.
    (c) Examples. The provisions of this section are illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. B, an individual, makes a contribution of money in 1977 
to the Good Government Committee, which is a campaign committee. The 
Good Government Committee supports C and D in 1977. C is a candidate

[[Page 116]]

for 1977. D is not a candidate for 1977. B may elect the credit under 
section 41 or deduction under section 218 for the contribution in 1977.

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example (1), except that B 
earmarks the contribution solely to further the candidacy of D. B may 
not elect the credit under section 41 or deduction under section 218 for 
the 1977 contribution.

[T.D. 7603, 44 FR 18223, Mar. 27, 1979. Redesignated by T.D. 8251, 54 FR 
21204, May 17, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1.41-3A  Same--unspent contributions.

    (a) General rule. Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this 
section, all unspent political contributions must be used within a 
reasonable period of time to make a deposit or contribution described in 
section 527 (d).
    (b) Special rules--(1) Candidates. An individual who was a candidate 
may retain unspent political contributions in reasonable anticipation of 
using them solely to support his or her future candidacy for any 
Federal, State, or local elective public office.
    (2) Campaign committee. A campaign committee may retain unspent 
political contributions in reasonable anticipation of using them to 
support the future candidacy of any individual for any Federal, State, 
or local elective public office.

[T.D. 7603, 44 FR 18223, Mar. 27, 1979. Redesignated by T.D. 8251, 54 FR 
21204, May 17, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1.41-4A  Same--procedure for electing a credit or deduction.

    (a) Scope note. This section prescribes procedures for making the 
election under sections 41 and 218 to take either a credit or deduction 
for political and newsletter contributions.
    (b) How to elect. A taxpayer elects the credit or deduction by 
making the appropriate entries on his or her income tax return for the 
taxable year in which the contribution is made.
    (c) Changing or revoking one's election. The election may be changed 
or revoked. Thus, a taxpayer may change an election from credit to 
deduction or vice versa. In addition, if a taxpayer elects a credit or 
deduction for a particular taxable year to which, it later turns out, he 
or she is not entitled, the taxpayer must pay any additional tax that is 
due as a result. A taxpayer may change or revoke the election by use of 
an amended return.

[T.D. 7603, 44 FR 18223, Mar. 27, 1979. Redesignated by T.D. 8251, 54 FR 
21204, May 17, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1.41-5A  Same--verifications.

    This section prescribes rules under sections 41(b)(3) and 218(b)(2) 
to tell a taxpayer how to verify political and newsletter fund 
contributions for which a credit or deduction is claimed. A taxpayer 
must have a written receipt to substantiate any claim that a 
contribution was made. A cancelled check, the payee of which is a person 
or fund described in section 41(c) (1) or (5), ordinarily meets this 
requirement. However, in appropriate cases, the Internal Revenue Service 
may require a taxpayer to furnish additional proof that the payee was a 
person or fund described in section 41(c) (1) or (5), or that the 
purpose of the payment was to make a political or newsletter fund 
contribution.

[T.D. 7603, 44 FR 18223, Mar. 27, 1979. Redesignated by T.D. 8251, 54 FR 
21204, May 17, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1.41-6A  Same--taxation of certain organizations.

    See section 527 and the regulations thereunder for the tax treatment 
of a person or fund described in section 41(c) (1) or (5) that is 
treated as a section 527(e)(1) political organization.

[T.D. 7603, 44 FR 18223, Mar. 27, 1979. Redesignated by T.D. 8251, 54 FR 
21204, May 17, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1.41-7A  Same--transitional rule for past contributions.

    A credit or deduction for a political contribution the payment of 
which was made before January 1, 1980 will be allowed if it meets the 
requirements for a credit or deduction under the notice of proposed 
rulemaking published on September 19, 1972 (37 FR 19140).

[T.D. 7603, 44 FR 18223, Mar. 27, 1979. Redesignated by T.D. 8251, 54 FR 
21204, May 17, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1.41-8A  Same--effective dates.

    (a) Political contributions. Except as otherwise provided, these 
regulations apply to political contributions made in taxable years of 
the contributor beginning after December 31, 1971.
    (b) Newsletter fund contributions. These regulations apply to 
newsletter

[[Page 117]]

fund contributions made in taxable years of the contributor beginning 
after December 31, 1974.

[T.D. 7603, 44 FR 18223, Mar. 27, 1979. Redesignated by T.D. 8251, 54 FR 
21204, May 17, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1.42-0  Table of contents.

    This section lists the paragraphs contained in Secs. 1.42-1 and 
1.42-2.

    Sec. 1.42-1  [Reserved]
    Sec. 1.42-2  Waiver of requirement that an existing building 
eligible for the low-income housing credit was last placed in service 
more than 10 years prior to acquisition by the taxpayer.

(a) Low-income housing credit for existing building
(b) Waiver of 10-year holding period requirement
(c) Waiver requirements
    (1) Federally-assisted building
    (2) Federal mortgage funds at risk
    (3) Statement by the Department of Housing and Urban Development or 
the Farmers' Home Administration
    (4) No prior credit allowed
(d) Application for waiver
    (1) Time and manner
    (2) Information required
    (3) Other rules
    (4) Effective date of waiver
    (5) Attachment to return
(e) Effective date of regulations

[T.D. 8302, 55 FR 21189, May 23, 1990]
Sec. 1.42-1  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1.42-1T   Limitation on low-income housing credit allowed with respect to qualified low-income buildings receiving housing credit allocations from a State 
          or local housing credit agency (temporary).

    (a) In general--(1) Determination of amount of low-income housing 
credit. Section 42 provides that, for purposes of section 38, a low-
income housing credit is determined for a building in an amount equal to 
the applicable percentage of the qualified basis of the qualified low-
income building. In general, the credit may be claimed annually for a 
10-year credit period, beginning with the taxable year in which the 
building is placed in service or, at the election of the taxpayer, the 
succeeding taxable year. If, after the first year of the credit period, 
the qualified basis of a building is increased in excess of the 
qualified basis upon which the credit was initially determined, the 
allowable credit with respect to such additional qualified basis is 
determined using a credit percentage equal to two-thirds of the 
applicable percentage for the initial qualified basis. The credit for 
additions to qualified basis is generally allowable for the remaining 
years in the 15-year compliance period which begins with the first 
taxable year of the credit period for the building. In general, the low-
income housing credit is available with respect to buildings placed in 
service after December 31, 1986, in taxable years ending after that 
date. See section 42 for the definitions of ``qualified low-income 
building'', ``applicable percentage'', ``qualified basis'', ``credit 
period'', ``compliance period'', and for other rules relating to 
determination of the amount of the low-income housing credit.
    (2) Limitation on low-income housing credit allowed. Generally, the 
low-income housing credit determined under section 42 is allowed and may 
be claimed for any taxable year if, and to the extent that, the owner of 
a qualified low-income building receives a housing credit allocation 
from a State or local housing credit agency. The aggregate amount of 
housing credit allocations that may be made in any calendar year by all 
housing credit agencies within a State is limited by a State housing 
credit ceiling, or volume cap, described in paragraph (b) of this 
section. The authority to make housing credit allocations within the 
State housing credit ceiling may be apportioned among the State and 
local housing credit agencies, under the rules prescribed in paragraph 
(c) of this section. Upon apportionment of the State housing credit 
volume cap, each State or local housing credit agency receives an 
aggregate housing credit dollar amount that may be used to make housing 
credit allocations among qualified low-income buildings located within 
an agency's geographic jurisdiction. The rules governing the making of 
housing credit allocations by any state or local housing credit agency 
are provided in paragraph (d) of this section. Housing credit 
allocations are required to be taken into account by

[[Page 118]]

owners of qualified low-income buildings under the rules prescribed in 
paragraph (e) of this section. Exceptions to the requirement that a 
qualified low-income building receive a housing credit allocation from a 
State or local housing credit agency are provided in paragraph (f) of 
this section. Rules regarding termination of the authority of State and 
local housing credit agencies to make housing credit allocations after 
December 31, 1989, are specified in paragraph (g) of this section. Rules 
concerning information reporting by State and local housing credit 
agencies and owners of qualified low-income buildings are provided in 
paragraph (h) of this section. Special statutory transitional rules are 
incorporated into this section of the regulations as described in 
paragraph (i) of this section.
    (b) The State housing credit ceiling. The aggregate amount of 
housing credit allocations that may be made in any calendar year by all 
State and local housing credit agencies within a State may not exceed 
the State's housing credit ceiling for such calendar year. The State 
housing credit ceiling for each State for any calendar year is equal to 
$1.25 multiplied by the State's population. A State's population for any 
calendar year is determined by reference to the most recent census 
estimate (whether final or provisional) of the resident population of 
the State released by the Bureau of the Census before the beginning of 
the calendar year for which the State's housing credit ceiling is set. 
Unless otherwise prescribed by applicable revenue procedure, 
determinations of population are based on the most recent estimates of 
population contained in the Bureau of the Census publication, ``Current 
Population Reports, Series P-25: Population Estimates and Projections, 
Estimates of the Population of States''. For purposes of this section, 
the District of Columbia and United States possessions are treated as 
States.
    (c) Apportionment of State housing credit ceiling among State and 
local housing credit agencies--(1) In general. A State's housing credit 
ceiling for any calendar year is apportioned among the State and local 
housing credit agencies within such State under the rules prescribed in 
this paragraph. A ``State housing credit agency'' is any State agency 
specifically authorized by gubernatorial act or State statute to make 
housing credit allocations on behalf of the State and to carry out the 
provisions of section 42(h). A ``local housing credit agency'' is any 
agency of a political subdivision of the State that is specifically 
authorized by a State enabling act to make housing credit allocations on 
behalf of the State or political subdivision and to carry out the 
provisions of section 42(h). A ``State enabling act'' is any 
gubernatorial act, State statute, or State housing credit agency 
regulation (if authorized by gubernatorial act or State statute). A 
State enabling act enacted on or before October 22, 1986, the date of 
enactment of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, shall be given effect for 
purposes of this paragraph if such State enabling act expressly carries 
out the provisions of section 42(h).
    (2) Primary apportionment. Except as otherwise provided in 
paragraphs (c) (3) and (4) of this section, a State's housing credit 
ceiling is apportioned in its entirety to the State housing credit 
agency. Such an apportionment is the ``primary apportionment'' of a 
State's housing credit ceiling. There shall be no primary apportionment 
of the State housing credit ceiling and no grants of housing credit 
allocations in such State until a State housing credit agency is 
authorized by gubernatorial act or State statute. If a State has more 
than one State housing credit agency, such agencies shall be treated as 
a single agency for purposes of the primary apportionment. In such a 
case, the State housing credit ceiling may be divided among the multiple 
State housing credit agencies pursuant to gubernatorial act or State 
statute.
    (3) States with 1 or more constitutional home rule cities--(i) In 
general. Notwithstanding paragraph (c)(2) of this section, in any State 
with 1 or more constitutional home rule cities, a portion of the State 
housing credit ceiling is apportioned to each constitutional home rule 
city. In such a State, except as provided in paragraph (c)(4) of this 
section, the remainder of the State housing credit ceiling is 
apportioned to the State housing credit agency under paragraph (c)(2) of 
this section. See

[[Page 119]]

paragraph (c)(3)(iii) of this section. The term ``constitutional home 
rule city'' means, with respect to any calendar year, any political 
subdivision of a State that, under a State constitution that was adopted 
in 1970 and effective on July 1, 1971, had home rule powers on the first 
day of the calendar year.
    (ii) Amount of apportionment to a constitutional home rule city. The 
amount of the State housing credit ceiling apportioned to a 
constitutional home rule city for any calendar year is an amount that 
bears the same ratio to the State housing credit ceiling for that year 
as the population of the constitutional home rule city bears to the 
population of the entire State. The population of any constitutional 
home rule city for any calendar year is determined by reference to the 
most recent census estimate (whether final or provisional) of the 
resident population of the constitutional home rule city released by the 
Bureau of the Census before the beginning of the calendar year for which 
the State housing credit ceiling is apportioned. However, determinations 
of the population of a constitutional home rule city may not be based on 
Bureau of the Census estimates that do not contain estimates for all of 
the constitutional home rule cities within the State. If no Bureau of 
the Census estimate is available for all such constitutional home rule 
cities, the most recent decennial census of population shall be relied 
on. Unless otherwise prescribed by applicable revenue procedure, 
determinations of population for constitutional home rule cities are 
based on estimates of population contained in the Bureau of the Census 
publication, ``Current Population Reports, Series P-26: Local Population 
Estimates''.
    (iii) Effect of apportionments to constitutional home rule cities on 
apportionments to other housing credit agencies. The aggregate amounts 
of the State housing credit ceiling apportioned to constitutional home 
rule cities under this paragraph (c)(3) reduce the State housing credit 
ceiling available for apportionment under paragraph (c) (2) or (4) of 
this section. Unless otherwise provided in a State constitutional 
amendment or by law changing the home rule provisions adopted in a 
manner provided by the State constitution, the power of the governor or 
State legislature to apportion the State housing credit ceiling among 
local housing credit agencies under paragraph (c)(4) of this section 
shall not be construed as allowing any reduction of the portion of the 
State housing credit ceiling apportioned to a constitutional home rule 
city under this paragraph (c)(3). However, any constitutional home rule 
city may agree to a reduction in its apportionment of the State housing 
credit ceiling under this paragraph (c)(3), in which case the amount of 
the State housing credit ceiling not apportioned to the constitutional 
home rule city shall be available for apportionment under paragraph (c) 
(2) or (4) of this section.
    (iv) Treatment of governmental authority within constitutional home 
rule city. For purposes of determining which agency within a 
constitutional home rule city receives the apportionment of the State 
housing credit ceiling under this paragraph (c)(3), the rules of this 
paragraph (c) shall be applied by treating the constitutional home rule 
city as a ``State'', the chief executive officer of a constitutional 
home rule city as a ``governor'', and a city council as a ``State 
legislature''. A constitutional home rule city is also treated as a 
``State'' for purposes of the set-aside requirement for housing credit 
allocations to projects involving a qualified nonprofit organization. 
See paragraph (c)(5) of this section for rules governing set-aside 
requirements. In this connection, a constitutional home rule city may 
agree with the State housing credit agency to exchange an apportionment 
set aside for projects involving a qualified nonprofit organization for 
an apportionment that is not so restricted. In such a case, the 
authorizing gubernatorial act, State statute, or State housing credit 
agency regulation (if authorized by gubernatorial act or State statute) 
must ensure that the set-aside apportionment transferred to the State 
housing credit agency be used for the purposes described in paragraph 
(c)(5) of this section.
    (4) Apportionment to local housing credit agencies--(i) In general. 
In lieu of the

[[Page 120]]

primary apportionment under paragraph (c)(2) of this section, all or a 
portion of the State housing credit ceiling may be apportioned among 
housing credit agencies of governmental subdivisions. Apportionments of 
the State housing credit ceiling to local housing credit agencies must 
be made pursuant to a State enabling act as defined in paragraph (c)(1) 
of this section. Apportionments of the State housing credit ceiling may 
be made to housing credit agencies of constitutional home rule cities 
under this paragraph (c)(4), in addition to apportionments made under 
paragraph (c)(3) of this section. Apportionments of the State housing 
credit ceiling under this paragraph (c)(4) need not be based on the 
population of political subdivisions and may, but are not required to, 
give balanced consideration to the low-income housing needs of the 
entire State.
    (ii) Change in apportionments during a calendar year. The 
apportionment of the State housing credit ceiling among State and local 
housing credit agencies under this paragraph (c)(4) may be changed after 
the beginning of a calendar year, pursuant to a State enabling act. No 
change in apportionments shall retroactively reduce the housing credit 
allocations made by any agency during such year. Any change in the 
apportionment of the State housing credit ceiling under this paragraph 
(c)(4) that occurs during a calendar year is effective only to the 
extent housing credit agencies have not previously made housing credit 
allocations during such year from their original apportionments of the 
State housing credit ceiling for such year. To the extent apportionments 
of the State housing credit ceiling to local housing credit agencies 
made pursuant to this paragraph (c)(4) for any calendar year are not 
used by such local agencies before a certain date (e.g., November 1) to 
make housing credit allocations in such year, the amount of unused 
apportionments may revert back to the State housing credit agency for 
reapportionment. Such reversion must be specifically authorized by the 
State enabling act.
    (iii) Exchanges of apportionments. Any State or local housing credit 
agency that receives an apportionment of the State housing credit 
ceiling for any calendar year under this paragraph (c)(4) may exchange 
part or all of such apportionment with another State or local housing 
credit agency to the extent no housing credit allocations have been made 
in such year from the exchanged portions. Such exchanges must be made 
with another housing credit agency in the same State and must be 
consistent with the State enabling act. If an apportionment set aside 
for projects involving a qualified nonprofit organization is transferred 
or exchanged, the transferee housing credit agency shall be required to 
use the set-aside apportionment for the purposes described in paragraph 
(c)(5) of this section.
    (iv) Written records of apportionments. All apportionments, 
exchanges of apportionments, and reapportionments of the State housing 
credit ceiling which are authorized by this paragraph (c)(4) must be 
evidenced in the written records maintained by each State and local 
housing credit agency.
    (5) Set-aside apportionments for projects involving a qualified 
nonprofit organization--(i) In general. Ten percent of the State housing 
credit ceiling for a calendar year must be set aside exclusively for 
projects involving a qualified nonprofit organization (as defined in 
paragraph (c)(5)(ii) of this section). Thus, at least 10 percent of 
apportionments of the State housing credit ceiling under paragraphs (c) 
(2) and (3) of this section must be used only to make housing credit 
allocations to buildings that are part of projects involving a qualified 
nonprofit organization. In the case of apportionments of the State 
housing credit ceiling under paragraph (c)(4) of this section, the State 
enabling act must ensure that the apportionment of at least 10 percent 
of the State housing credit ceiling be used exclusively to make housing 
credit allocations to buildings that are part of projects involving a 
qualified nonprofit organization. The State enabling act shall prescribe 
which housing credit agencies in the State receive apportionments that 
must be set aside for making housing credit allocations to buildings 
that are part of projects involving a qualified nonprofit organization. 
These set-aside apportionments

[[Page 121]]

may be distributed disproportionately among the State or local housing 
credit agencies receiving apportionments under paragraph (c)(4) of this 
section. The 10-percent set-aside requirement of this paragraph (c)(4) 
is a minimum requirement, and the State enabling act may set aside more 
than 10 percent of the State housing credit ceiling for apportionment to 
housing credit agencies for exclusive use in making housing credit 
allocations to buildings that are part of projects involving a qualified 
nonprofit organization.
    (ii) Projects involving a qualified nonprofit organization. The term 
``projects involving a qualified nonprofit organization'' means projects 
with respect to which a qualified nonprofit organization is to 
materially participate (within the meaning of section 469(h)) in the 
development and continuing operation of the project throughout the 15-
year compliance period. The term ``qualified nonprofit organization'' 
means any organization that is described in section 501(c) (3) or (4), 
is exempt from tax under section 501(a), and includes as one of its 
exempt purposes the fostering of low-income housing.
    (6) Expiration of unused apportionments. Apportionments of the State 
housing credit ceiling under this paragraph (c) for any calendar year 
may be used by housing credit agencies to make housing credit 
allocations only in such calendar year. Any part of an apportionment of 
the State housing credit ceiling for any calendar year that is not used 
for housing credit allocations in such year expires as of the end of 
such year and does not carry over to any other year. However, any part 
of an apportionment for 1989 that is not used to make a housing credit 
allocation in 1989 may be carried over to 1990 and used to make a 
housing credit allocation to a qualified low-income building described 
in section 42(n)(2)(B). See paragraph (g)(2) of this section.
    (d) Housing credit allocations made by State and local housing 
credit agencies--(1) In general. This paragraph governs State and local 
housing credit agencies in making housing credit allocations to 
qualified low-income buildings. The amount of the apportionment of the 
State housing credit ceiling for any calendar year received by any State 
or local housing credit agency under paragraph (c) of this section 
constitutes the agency's aggregate housing credit dollar amount for such 
year. The aggregate amount of housing credit allocations made in any 
calendar year by a State or local housing credit agency may not exceed 
such agency's aggregate housing credit dollar amount for such year. A 
State or local housing credit agency may make housing credit allocations 
only to qualified low-income buildings located within the agency's 
geographic jurisdiction.
    (2) Amount of a housing credit allocation. In making a housing 
credit allocation, a State or local housing credit agency must specify a 
credit percentage, not to exceed the building's applicable percentage 
determined under section 42(b), and a qualified basis amount. The amount 
of the housing credit allocation for any building is the product of the 
specified credit percentage and the specified qualified basis amount. In 
specifying the credit percentage and qualified basis amount, the State 
or local housing credit agency shall not take account of the first-year 
conventions described in section 42(f) (2)(A) and (3)(B). A State or 
local housing credit agency may adopt rules or regulations governing 
conditions for specification of less than the maximum credit percentage 
and qualified basis amount allowable under section 42 (b) and (c), 
respectively. For example, an agency may specify a credit percentage and 
a qualified basis amount of less than the maximum credit percentage and 
qualified basis amount allowable under section 42 (b) and (c), 
respectively, when the financing and rental assistance from all sources 
for the project of which the building is a part is sufficient to provide 
the continuing operation of the building without the maximum credit 
amount allowable under section 42.
    (3) Counting housing credit allocations against an agency's 
aggregate housing credit dollar amount. The aggregate amount of housing 
credit allocations made in any calendar year by a State or local housing 
credit agency may not

[[Page 122]]

exceed such agency's aggregate housing credit dollar amount (i.e., the 
agency's apportionment of the State housing credit ceiling for such 
year). This limitation on the aggregate dollar amount of housing credit 
allocations shall be computed separately for set-aside apportionments 
received pursuant to paragraph (c)(5) of this section. Housing credit 
allocations count against an agency's aggregate housing credit dollar 
amount without regard to the amount of credit allowable to or claimed by 
an owner of a building in the taxable year in which the allocation is 
made or in any subsequent year. Thus, housing credit allocations (which 
are computed without regard to the first-year conventions as provided in 
paragraph (d)(2) of this section) count in full against an agency's 
aggregate housing credit dollar amount, even though the first-year 
conventions described in section 42(f) (2)(A) and (3)(B) may reduce the 
amount of credit claimed by a taxpayer in the first year in which a 
credit is allowable. See also paragraph (e)(2) of this section. Housing 
credit allocations count against an agency's aggregate housing credit 
dollar amount only in the calendar year in which made and not in 
subsequent taxable years in the credit period or compliance period 
during which a taxpayer may claim a credit based on the original housing 
credit allocation. Since the aggregate amount of housing credit 
allocations made in any calendar year by a State or local housing credit 
agency may not exceed such agency's aggregate housing credit dollar 
amount, an agency shall at all times during a calendar year maintain a 
record of its cumulative allocations made during such year and its 
remaining unused aggregate housing credit dollar amount.
    (4) Rules for when applications for housing credit allocations 
exceed an agency's aggregate housing credit dollar amount. A State or 
local housing credit agency may adopt rules or regulations governing the 
awarding of housing credit allocations when an agency expects that 
applicants during a calendar year will seek aggregate allocations in 
excess of the agency's aggregate housing credit dollar amount. The State 
enabling act may provide uniform standards for the awarding of housing 
credit allocations when there is actual or anticipated excess demand 
from applicants in any calendar year.
    (5) Reduced or additional housing credit allocations--(i) In 
general. A State or local housing credit agency may not reduce or 
rescind a housing credit allocation made to a qualified low-income 
building in the manner prescribed in paragraph (d)(8) of this section. 
Thus, a housing credit agency may not reduce or rescind a housing credit 
allocation made to a qualified low-income building which is acquired by 
a new owner who is entitled to a carryover of the allowable credit for 
such building under section 42(d)(7). A housing credit agency may make 
additional housing credit allocations to a building in any year in the 
building's compliance period, whether or not there are additions to 
qualified basis for which an increased credit is allowable under section 
42(f)(3). Each additional housing credit allocation made to a building 
is treated as a separate allocation and is subject to the rules and 
requirements of this section. However, in the case of an additional 
housing credit allocation made with respect to additions to qualified 
basis for which an increased credit is allowable under section 42(f)(3), 
the amount of the allocation that counts against the agency's aggregate 
housing credit dollar amount shall be computed as if the specified 
credit percentage were unreduced in the manner prescribed in section 
42(f)(3)(A) and the specified qualified basis amount were unreduced by 
the first-year convention prescribed in section 42(f)(3)(B).
    (ii) Examples. The rules of paragraph (d)(5)(i) of this section may 
be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. For 1987, the County L Housing Credit Agency has an 
aggregate housing credit dollar amount of $2 million. D, an individual, 
places in service on July 1, 1987, a new qualified low-income building. 
As of the close of each month in 1987 in which the building is in 
service, the building consists of 100 residential rental units, of which 
20 units are both rent-restricted and occupied by individuals whose 
income is 50 percent or less of area median gross income. The total 
floor space of the residential rental units is 120,000 square feet, and 
the total floor space of the low-income units is 20,000 square feet. Tne 
building is not Federally subsidized within

[[Page 123]]

the meaning of section 42(i)(2). As of the end of 1987, the building has 
eligible basis under section 42(d) of $1 million. Thus, the qualified 
basis of the building determined without regard to the first-year 
convention provided in section 42(f) is $166,666.67 (i.e., $1 million 
eligible basis times \1/6\, the floor space fraction which is required 
to be used instead of the larger unit fraction). However, the amount of 
the low-income housing credit determined for 1987 under section 42 
reflects the first-year convention provided in section 42(f)(2). Since 
the building has the same floor space and unit fractions as of the close 
of each of the six months in 1987 during which it is in service, upon 
applying the first-year convention in section 42(f)(2), the qualified 
basis of the building in 1987 is $83,333.33 (i.e., $1 million eligible 
basis times \1/12\, the fraction determined under section 42(f)(2)(A)). 
Under paragraph (d)(2) of this section, the County L Housing Credit 
Agency may make a housing credit allocation by specifying a credit 
percentage, not to exceed 9 percent, and a qualified basis amount, which 
may be greater or less than the qualified basis of the building in 1987 
as determined under section 42(c), without regard to the first-year 
convention provided in section 42(f)(2). If the County L Housing Credit 
Agency specifies a credit percentage of 8 percent and a qualified basis 
amount of $100,000, the amount of the housing credit allocation is 
$8,000. Under paragraph (d)(3) of this section, the County L Housing 
Credit Agency's aggregate housing credit dollar amount for 1987 is 
reduced by $8,000, notwithstanding that D is entitled to claim less than 
$8,000 of the credit in 1987 under the rules in paragraph (e) of this 
section. Under paragraph (e)(2) of this section, in 1987 D is entitled 
to claim only $4,000 of the credit, determined by applying the first-
year convention of \6/12\ to the specified qualified basis amount 
contained in the housing credit allocation (i.e., .08 x $100,000 x (\6/
12\)).

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1 except that on 
July 1, 1988, the number of occupied low-income units increases to 50 
units and the floor space of the occupied low-income units increases to 
48,000 square feet. These occupancy fractions remain unchanged as of the 
close of each month remaining in 1988. Under section 42(c), the 
qualified basis of the building in 1988, without regard to the first-
year convention in section 42(f)(3)(B), is $400,000 (i.e., $1 million 
eligible basis times .4, the floor space fraction which is required to 
be used instead of the larger unit fraction). D's 1987 housing credit 
allocation from the County L Housing Credit Agency remains effective in 
1988 and entitles D to a credit of $8,000 (i.e., .08, the specified 
credit percentage, times $100,000, the specified qualified basis 
amount). With respect to the additional $300,000 of qualified basis 
which the 1987 housing credit allocation does not cover, D must apply to 
the County L Housing Credit Agency for an additional housing credit 
allocation. Assume that the County L Housing Credit Agency has a 
sufficient aggregate housing credit dollar amount for 1988 to make a 
housing credit allocation to D in 1988 by specifying a credit percentage 
of 9 percent and a qualified basis amount of $300,000. The amount of the 
housing credit allocation that counts against the County L Housing 
Credit Agency's aggregate housing credit dollar amount is $27,000 (i.e., 
the amount counted (.09 times $300,000) is unreduced in the manner 
prescribed in section 42(f)(3) (A) and (B)). Since D's qualified basis 
in 1987 was $166,666.67, D is entitled to claim a credit in 1988 with 
respect to such basis of $14,000 (i.e., .08 x $100,000, the 1987 credit 
alllocation, +.09 x $66,666.67, the 1988 credit allocation). In 
addition, D is entitled to claim a credit in 1988 and subsequent years 
in the 15-year compliance period with respect to the additional 
$233,333.33 of qualified basis covered by the 1988 housing credit 
allocation. However, the allowable credit for 1988 with respect to this 
amount of additional qualified basis is subject to reductions prescribed 
in section 42(f)(3) (A) and (B). Thus, D is entitled in 1988 to a credit 
at a 6-percent rate applied to $116,666.67 of additional qualified 
basis, which is reduced to reflect the first-year convention. D's total 
allowable low-income housing credit in 1988 is $21,000 (i.e., $14,000 
with respect to original qualified basis + $7,000 with respect to 1988 
additions to qualified basis). If the County L Housing Credit Agency had 
specified an 8-percent credit percentage in 1988 with respect to the 
qualified basis not covered by the 1987 housing credit allocation to D, 
D's allowable credit with respect to the $233,333.33 of additions to 
qualified basis would not exceed, in 1988 and subsequent years, an 
amount determined by applying a specified credit percentage of 5.33 
percent (i.e., two-thirds of 8 percent). In 1988, D's specified 
qualified basis amount would be adjusted for the first-year convention.

    (6) No carryover of unused aggregate housing credit dollar amount. 
Any portion of a State or local housing credit agency's aggregate 
housing credit dollar amount for any calendar year that is not used to 
make a housing credit allocation in such year may not be carried over to 
any other year, except as provided in paragraph (g) of this section. An 
agency may not permit owners of qualified low-income buildings to 
transfer housing credit allocations to other buildings. However, an 
agency may provide a procedure whereby owners may return to the agency, 
prior to the end of the calendar year in which

[[Page 124]]

housing credit allocations are made, unusable portions of such 
allocations. In such a case, an owner's housing credit allocation is 
deemed reduced by the amount of the allocation returned to the agency, 
and the agency may reallocate such amount to other qualified low-income 
buildings prior to the end of the year.
    (7) Effect of housing credit allocations in excess of an agency's 
aggregate housing credit dollar amount. In the event that a State or 
local housing credit agency makes housing credit allocations in excess 
of its aggregate housing credit dollar amount for any calendar year, the 
allocations shall be deemed reduced (to the extent of such excess) for 
buildings in the reverse order in which such allocations were made 
during such year.
    (8) Time and manner for making housing credit allocations--(i) Time. 
Housing credit allocations are effective for the calendar year in which 
made in the manner prescribed in paragraph (d)(8)(ii) of this section. A 
State or local housing credit agency may not make a housing credit 
allocation to a qualified low-income building prior to the calendar year 
in which such building is placed in service. An agency may adopt its own 
procedures for receiving applications for housing credit allocations 
from owners of qualified low-income buildings. An agency may provide a 
procedure for making, in advance of a building's being placed in 
service, a binding commitment (e.g., by contract, inducement, 
resolution, or other means) to make a housing credit allocation in the 
calendar year in which a qualified low-income building is placed in 
service or in a subsequent calendar year. Any advance commitment shall 
not constitute a housing credit allocation for purposes of this section.
    (ii) Manner. Housing credit allocations are deemed made when part I 
of IRS Form 8609, Low-Income Housing Credit Allocation Certification, is 
completed and signed by an authorized official of the housing credit 
agency and mailed to the owner of the qualified low-income building. A 
copy of all completed (as to part I) Form 8609 allocations along with a 
single completed Form 8610, Annual Low-Income Housing Credit Agencies 
Report, must also be mailed to the Internal Revenue Service not later 
than the 28th day of the second calendar month after the close of the 
calendar year in which the housing credit was allocated to the qualified 
low-income building. Housing credit allocations to a qualified low-
income building must be made on Form 8609 and must include--
    (A) The address of the building;
    (B) The name, address, and taxpayer identification number of the 
housing credit agency making the housing credit allocation;
    (C) The name, address, and taxpayer identification number of the 
owner of the qualified low-income building;
    (D) The date of the allocation of housing credit;
    (E) The housing credit dollar amount allocated to the building on 
such date;
    (F) The specified maximum applicable credit percentage allocated to 
the building on such date;
    (G) The specified maximum qualified basis amount;
    (H) The percentage of the aggregate basis financed by tax-exempt 
bonds taken into account for purposes of the volume cap under section 
146;
    (I) A certification under penalties of perjury by an authorized 
State or local housing credit agency official that the allocation is 
made in compliance with the requirements of section 42(h); and
    (J) Any additional information that may be required by Form 8609 or 
by an applicable revenue procedure.

See paragraph (h) of this section for additional rules concerning filing 
of forms.
    (iii) Certification. The certifying official for the State or local 
housing credit agency need not perform an independent investigation of 
the qualified low-income building in order to certify on part I of Form 
8609 that the housing credit allocation meets the requirements of 
section 42(h). For example, the certifying official may rely on 
information contained in an application for a low-income housing credit 
allocation submitted by the building owner which sets forth facts 
necessary to determine that the building is eligible for the low-income 
housing credit under section 42.
    (iv) Fee. A State or local housing credit agency may charge building

[[Page 125]]

owners applying for housing credit allocations a reasonable fee to cover 
the agency's administrative expenses for processing applications.
    (v) No continuing agency responsibility. The State or local housing 
credit agency need not monitor or investigate the continued compliance 
of a qualified low-income building with the requirements of section 42 
throughout the applicable compliance period.
    (e) Housing credit allocation taken into account by owner of a 
qualified low-income building--(1) Time and manner for taking housing 
credit allocation into account. An owner of a qualified low-income 
building may not claim a low-income housing credit determined under 
section 42 in any year in excess of an effective housing credit 
allocation received from a State or local housing credit agency. A 
housing credit allocation made to a qualified low-income building is 
effective with respect to any owner of the building beginning with the 
owner's taxable year in which the housing credit allocation is received. 
A housing credit allocation is deemed received in a taxable year, except 
as modified in the succeeding sentence, if that allocation is made (in 
the manner described in paragraph (d)(8) of this section) not later than 
the earlier of (i) the 60th day after the close of the taxable year, or 
(ii) the close of the calendar year in which such taxable year ends. A 
housing credit allocation is deemed received in a taxable year ending in 
1987, if such allocation is made (in the manner described in paragraph 
(d)(8) of this section) on or before December 31, 1987. A housing credit 
allocation is not effective for any taxable year if received in a 
calendar year which ends prior to when the qualified low-income building 
is placed in service. A housing credit allocation made to a qualified 
low-income building remains effective for all taxable years in the 
compliance period. A taxpayer is required to complete the Form 8609 on 
which a housing credit agency made the applicable housing credit 
allocation and submit a copy of such Form 8609 with its Federal income 
tax return for each year in the compliance period. Failure to comply 
with the requirement of the preceding sentence with respect to any 
taxable year after the first taxable year in the credit period shall be 
treated as a mathematical or clerical error for purposes of the 
provisions of section 6213 (b)(1) and (g)(2).
    (2) First-year convention limitation on housing credit allocation 
taken into account. For purposes of the limitation that the allowable 
low-income housing credit may not exceed the effective housing credit 
allocation received from a State or local housing credit agency, as 
provided in paragraph (e)(1) of this section, the amount of the 
effective housing credit allocation shall be adjusted by applying the 
first-year convention provided in section 42(f)(2)(A) and (3)(B) and the 
percentage credit reduction provided in section 42(f)(3)(A). Under 
paragraphs (d) (2) and (5) of this section, the State or local housing 
credit agency must specify the credit percentage and qualified basis 
amount, the product of which is the amount of the housing credit 
allocation, without taking account of the first-year convention 
described in section 42(f)(2)(A) and (3)(B) or the percentage credit 
reduction prescribed in section 42(f)(3)(A). However, for purposes of 
the limitation on the amount of the allowable low-income housing credit, 
as provided in paragraph (e)(1) of this section, in a taxable year in 
which the first-year convention applies to the amount of credit 
determined under section 42(a), the specified qualified basis amount 
shall be adjusted by the first-year convention fraction which is equal 
to the number of full months (during the first taxable year) in which 
the building was in service divided by 12. In addition, for purposes of 
the limitation on the amount of the allowable low-income housing credit, 
as provided in paragraph (e)(1) of this section, in a taxable year in 
which the reduction in credit percentage applies to additions to 
qualified basis, as prescribed in section 42(f)(3), the specified credit 
percentage shall be reduced by one-third. See examples in paragraphs 
(d)(5)(ii) and (e)(3)(ii) of this section.
    (3) Use of excess housing credit allocation for increases in 
qualified basis--(i) In general. If the housing credit allocation made 
to a qualified low-income building exceeds the amount of credit 
allowable with respect to such building in any taxable year (without 
regard to

[[Page 126]]

the first-year conventions under section 42(f)), such excess is not 
transferable to another qualified low-income building. However, if in a 
subsequent year there are increases in the qualified basis for which an 
increased credit is allowable under section 42(f)(3) at a reduced credit 
percentage, the original housing credit allocation (including the 
specified credit percentage and qualified basis amount) would be 
effective with respect to such increased credit.
    (ii) Example. The provisions of this paragraph (e)(3) may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. In 1987, a newly-constructed qualified low-income building 
receives a housing credit allocation of $90,000 based on a specified 
credit percentage of 9 percent and a specified qualified basis amount of 
$1,000,000. The building is placed in service in 1987, but the qualified 
basis in such year is only $800,000, resulting in an allowable credit in 
1987 (determined without regard to the first-year conventions) of 
$72,000. In 1988, the qualified basis is increased to $1,100,000, 
resulting in an additional credit allowable under section 42(f)(3) 
(without regard to the first-year conventions) of $18,000 (i.e., 
$300,000  x  .06, or \2/3\ of .09). The unused portion of the 1987 
housing credit allocation ($18,000) is effective in 1988 and in each 
subsequent year in the compliance period only with respect to the 
specified qualified basis for the 1987 housing credit allocation 
($1,000,000). Thus, the owner is allowed to claim a credit in 1988 and 
in each subsequent year (without regard to the first-year conventions), 
based on the effective housing credit allocation from 1987, of $84,000 
(i.e., $72,000 + ($200,000  x  .06)). The owner of the qualified low-
income building must obtain a new housing credit allocation in 1988 with 
respect to the additional $100,000 of qualified basis in order to claim 
a credit on such basis in 1988 and in each subsequent year. If the 
applicable first-year convention under section 42(f)(3)(B) entitled the 
owner in 1988 to only \1/2\ of the otherwise applicable credit for the 
additions to qualified basis, under paragraph (e)(2) of this section the 
owner is allowed to claim a credit in 1988, based on the effective 
housing credit allocation from 1987, of $78,000 (i.e., $72,000 + 
($200,000  x  .06  x  .5)).

    (4) Separate housing credit allocations for new buildings and 
increases in qualified basis. Separate housing credit allocations must 
be received for each building with respect to which a housing credit may 
be claimed. Rehabilitation expenditures with respect to a qualified low-
income building are treated as a separate new building under section 
42(e) and must receive a separate housing credit allocation. Increases 
in qualified basis in a qualified low-income building are not generally 
treated as a new building for purposes of section 42. To the extent that 
a prior housing credit allocation received with respect to a qualified 
low-income building does not allow an increased credit with respect to 
an increase in the qualified basis of such building, an additional 
housing credit allocation must be received in order to claim a credit 
with respect to that portion of increase in qualified basis. See 
paragraph (e)(3) of this section. The amount of credit allowable with 
respect to an increase in qualified basis is subject to the credit 
percentage limitation of section 42(f)(3)(A) and the first-year 
convention of section 42(f)(3)(B). See paragraph (d)(5) of this section 
for a rule requiring that the State or local housing credit agency count 
a housing credit allocation made with respect to an increase in 
qualified basis as if the specified credit percentage were unreduced in 
the manner prescribed in section 42(f)(3) and the specified basis amount 
were unreduced by the first-year convention prescribed in section 
42(f)(3)(B).
    (5) Acquisition of building for which a prior housing credit 
allocation has been made. If a carryover credit would be allowable to an 
acquirer of a qualified low-income building under section 42(d)(7), such 
acquirer need not obtain a new housing credit allocation with respect to 
such building. Under section 42(d)(7), the acquirer would be entitled to 
claim only such credits as would have been allowable to the prior owner 
of the building.
    (6) Multiple housing credit allocations. A qualified low-income 
building may receive multiple housing credit allocations from different 
housing credit agencies having overlapping jurisdictions. A qualified 
low-income building that receives a housing credit allocation set aside 
exclusively for projects involving a qualified nonprofit organization 
may also receive a housing credit allocation from a housing credit 
agency's aggregate housing credit dollar amount that is not so set 
aside.

[[Page 127]]

    (f) Exception to housing credit allocation requirement--(1) Tax-
exempt bond financing--(i) In general. No housing credit allocation is 
required in order to claim a credit under section 42 with respect to 
that portion of the eligible basis (as defined in section 42(d)) of a 
qualified low-income building that is financed with the proceeds of an 
obligation described in section 103(a) (``tax-exempt bond'') which is 
taken into account for purposes of the volume cap under section 146. In 
addition, no housing credit allocation is required in order to claim a 
credit under section 42 with respect to the entire qualified basis (as 
defined in section 42(c)) of a qualified low-income building if 70 
percent or more of the aggregate basis of the building and the land on 
which the building is located is financed with the proceeds of tax-
exempt bonds which are taken into account for purposes of the volume cap 
under section 146. For purposes of this paragraph, ``land on which the 
building is located'' includes only land that is functionally related 
and subordinate to the qualified low-income building. See Sec. 1.103-
8(b)(4)(iii) for the meaning of the term ``functionally related and 
subordinate''. For purposes of this paragraph, the basis of the land 
shall be determined using principles that are consistent with the rules 
contained in section 42(d).
    (ii) Determining use of bond proceeds. For purposes of determining 
the portion of proceeds of an issue of tax-exempt bonds used to finance 
(A) the eligible basis of a qualified low-income building, and (B) the 
aggregate basis of the building and the land on which the building is 
located, the proceeds of the issue must be allocated in the bond 
indenture or a related document (as defined in Sec. 1.103-13(b)(8)) in a 
manner consistent with the method used to allocate the net proceeds of 
the issue for purposes of determining whether 95 percent or more of the 
net proceeds of the issue are to be used for the exempt purpose of the 
issue. If the issuer is not consistent in making this allocation 
throughout the bond indenture and related documents, or if neither the 
bond indenture nor a related document provides an allocation, the 
proceeds of the issue will be allocated on a pro rata basis to all of 
the property financed by the issue, based on the relative cost of the 
property.
    (iii) Example. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated 
by the following example:

    Example. In 1987, County K assigns $500,000 of its volume cap for 
private activity bonds under section 146 to a $500,000 issue of exempt 
facility bonds to provide a qualified residential rental project to be 
owned by A, an individual. The aggregate basis of the building and the 
land on which the building is located is $700,000. Under the terms of 
the bond indenture, the net proceeds of the issue are to be used to 
finance $490,000 of the eligible basis of the building. More than 70 
percent of the aggregate basis of the qualified low-income building and 
the land on which the building is located is financed with the proceeds 
of tax-exempt bonds to which a portion of the volume cap under section 
146 was allocated. Accordingly, A may claim a credit under section 42 
without regard to whether any housing credit dollar amount was allocated 
to that building. If, instead, the aggregate basis of the building and 
land were $800,000, A would be able to claim the credit under section 42 
without receiving a housing credit allocation for the building only to 
the extent that the credit was attributable to eligible basis of the 
building financed with tax-exempt bonds.

    (g) Termination of authority to make housing credit allocation--(1) 
In general. No State or local housing credit agency shall receive an 
apportionment of a State housing credit ceiling for calendar years after 
1989. Consequently, no housing credit allocations may be made after 
1989, except as provided in paragraph (g)(2) of this section. Housing 
credit allocations made prior to January 1, 1990, remain effective after 
such date.
    (2) Carryover of unused 1989 apportionment. Any State or local 
housing credit agency that has an unused portion of its apportionment of 
the State housing credit ceiling for 1989 from which housing credit 
allocations have not been made in 1989 may carry over such unused 
portion into 1990. Such carryover portion of the 1989 apportionment 
shall be treated as the agency's apportionment for 1990. From this 1990 
apportionment, the State or local housing credit agency may make housing 
credit allocations only to a qualified low-income building meeting the 
following requirements:

[[Page 128]]

    (i) The building must be constructed, reconstructed, or 
rehabilitated by the taxpayer seeking the allocation;
    (ii) More than 10 percent of the reasonably anticipated cost of such 
construction, reconstruction, or rehabilitation must have been incurred 
as of January 1, 1989; and
    (iii) The building must be placed in service before January 1, 1991.
    (3) Expiration of exception for tax-exempt bond financed projects. 
The exception to the requirement that a housing credit allocation be 
received with respect to any portion of the eligible basis of a 
qualified low-income building, as provided in paragraph (f) of this 
section, shall not apply to any building placed in service after 1989, 
unless such building is described in paragraphs (g)(2) (i), (ii), and 
(iii) of this section.
    (h) Filing of forms and special rules--(1) Completed form. For 
purposes of this section, a form shall be treated as completed if the 
State or local housing credit agency or the building owner has made a 
good faith effort to complete the form in accordance with the form and 
the instructions for the form.
    (2) Manner of filing. A completed Form 8586, Low-Income Housing 
Credit, shall be filed with the owner's Federal income tax return for 
each taxable year the owner of a qualified low-income building is 
claiming the low-income housing credit during the 10-year credit period. 
A completed Form 8609 (or copy thereof) shall be filed with the owner's 
Federal income tax return for each of the 15 taxable years in the 
compliance period. If a housing credit allocation is not required to be 
received by an owner under paragraph (f) of this section, the owner 
shall obtain a blank copy of Form 8609 and fill in the address of the 
building and the name and address of the owner in part I. Part II of 
Form 8609 shall be completed by the owner of the qualified low-income 
building only for the first year the low-income housing credit is 
claimed by the building owner. Part III of Form 8609 (Statement of 
Qualification) shall be completed by the owner of the qualified low-
income building for each year of the 15-year compliance period.
    (3) Revised or renumbered forms. If any form is revised or 
renumbered, any reference in this section to the form shall be treated 
as a reference to the revised or renumbered form.
    (i) Transitional rules. The transitional rules contained in section 
252(f)(1) of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 are incorporated into this 
section of the regulations for purposes of determining whether a 
qualified low-income building is entitled to receive a housing credit 
allocation or is excepted from the requirement that a housing credit 
allocation be received. Housing credit allocations made to qualified 
low-income buildings described in section 252(f)(1) shall not count 
against the State or local housing credit agency's aggregate housing 
credit dollar amount. The transitional rules contained in section 
252(f)(2) of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 are incorporated into this 
section of the regulations for purposes of determining amounts available 
to certain State or local housing credit agencies for the making of 
housing credit allocations to certain qualified low-income housing 
projects. Amounts available to housing credit agencies under section 
252(f)(2) shall be treated as special apportionments unavailable for 
housing credit allocations to qualified low-income buildings not 
described in section 252(f)(2). Housing credit allocations made from the 
special apportionments shall not count against the State or local credit 
agency's aggregate housing credit dollar amount. The set-aside 
requirements shall not apply to these special apportionments. The 
transitional rules contained in section 252(f)(3) of the Tax Reform Act 
1986 are incorporated in this section of the regulations for purposes of 
determining the amount of housing credit allocations received by certain 
qualified low-income buildings. Housing credit allocations deemed 
received under section 252(f)(3) shall not count against the State or 
local housing credit agency's aggregate housing credit dollar amount.

[T.D. 8144, 52 FR 23433, June 22, 1987; 52 FR 24583, July 1, 1987]

[[Page 129]]


<R05>
Sec. 1.42-2  Waiver of requirement that an existing building eligible for the low-income housing credit was last placed in service more than 10 years prior to 
          acquisition by the taxpayer.

    (a) Low-income housing credit for existing building. Section 42 
provides that, for purposes of section 38, new and existing qualified 
low-income buildings are eligible for a low-income housing credit. The 
eligibility rules for new and existing buildings differ. Under section 
42(d)(2), an existing building may be eligible for the low-income 
housing credit based upon the acquisition cost and amounts chargeable to 
capital account (to the extent properly included in eligible basis) if--
    (1) The taxpayer acquires the building by purchase (as defined in 
section 179(d)(2), as applicable under section 42(d)(2)(D)(iii)(I)),
    (2) There is a period of at least 10 years between the date of the 
building's acquisition by the taxpayer and the later of--(i) The date 
the building was last placed in service, or
    (ii) The date of the most recent nonqualified substantial 
improvement of the building, and
    (3) The building was not previously placed in service by the 
taxpayer, or by a person who was a related person (as defined in section 
42(d)(2)(D)(iii)(II)) with respect to the taxpayer as of the time the 
building was last previously placed in service.
    (b) Waiver of 10-year holding period requirement. Section 42(d)(6) 
provides that a taxpayer may apply for a waiver of the 10-year holding 
period requirement specified in paragraph (a)(2) of this section. The 
Internal Revenue Service will grant a waiver only if--
    (1) The existing building satisfies all of the requirements in 
paragraph (c) of this section, and
    (2) The taxpayer makes an application in conformity with the 
requirements in paragraph (d) of this section.
    (c) Waiver requirements--(1) Federally-assisted building. To satisfy 
the requirement of this paragraph, a building must be a Federally-
assisted building. The term ``Federally assisted building'' means any 
building which is substantially assisted, financed, or operated under 
section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, section 221(d)(3) or 
236 of the National Housing Act, or section 515 of the Housing Act of 
1949, as such acts were in effect on October 22, 1986.
    (2) Federal mortgage funds at risk. To satisfy the requirement of 
this paragraph, Federal mortgage funds must be at risk with respect to a 
mortgage that is secured by the building or a project of which the 
building is a part. For purposes of this paragraph, Federal mortgage 
funds are at risk if, in the event of a default by the mortgagor on the 
mortgage secured by the building or the project of which the building is 
a part--
    (i) The mortgage could be assigned to the Department of Housing and 
Urban Development or the Farmers' Home Administration, or
    (ii) There could arise a claim against a Federal mortgage insurance 
fund (or such Department or Administration).
    (3) Statement by the Department of Housing and Urban Development or 
the Farmers' Home Administration. (i) To satisfy the requirement of this 
paragraph, a letter or other written statement must be made or received 
and approved by the national office of the Department of Housing and 
Urban Development or the Farmers' Home Administration (``the Federal 
agency''). This letter or statement shall include the following:
    (A) A statement that, as of the earlier of the time of the 
taxpayer's acquisition of the building or the taxpayer's application for 
a waiver, the building is a Federally-assisted building within the 
meaning of paragraph (c)(1) of this section and identifies the source of 
Federal assistance;
    (B) A statement that a waiver of the 10-year holding period 
requirement is necessary to avert Federal mortgage funds being at risk 
within the meaning of paragraph (c)(2) of this section; and
    (C) A statement that the Federal agency has taken a Federal agency 
action as described in paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of this section.
    (ii) The following specified Federal agency actions shall be the 
only means of satisfying the requirement of this paragraph:

[[Page 130]]

    (A) The Federal agency intends to accept an assignment of a mortgage 
secured by the building or the project of which the building is a part, 
and such assignment requires payments by the agency or a mortgage 
insurance fund maintained by the agency to the prior mortgagee;
    (B) The Federal agency or a mortgage insurance fund maintained by 
the agency intends to accept, as a consequence of foreclosure 
proceedings or otherwise, conveyance of the building or the project of 
which the building is a part;
    (C) The Federal agency or a mortgage insurance fund maintained by 
the agency intends, as a consequence of default, to take possession of, 
hold title to, or otherwise assume ownership of the building or the 
project of which the building is a part; or
    (D) The Federal agency has designated the building or the project of 
which the building is a part as a troubled building or project. A 
designation of a troubled building or project must satisfy the following 
requirements:
    (1) Designation of troubled status must be based on a review by the 
Federal agency of the financial condition of the building or project and 
on a determination by the Federal agency of a history of financial 
distress or mortgage defaults;
    (2) Designation of troubled status must be made or received and 
approved by the national office of the Federal agency; and
    (3) Federal agency regulations or procedures must provide that, in 
the event of transfer of the ownership of a designated troubled building 
or project, the building or project may be subject to continued review 
by the Federal agency. Each Federal agency may prescribe its own 
standards and procedures for designating a troubled building or project 
so long as such standards are consistent with the requirements of this 
paragraph (c)(3)(ii)(D).
    (4) No prior credit allowed. The requirement of this paragraph is 
satisfied only if no prior owner was allowed a low-income housing credit 
under section 42 for the building.
    (d) Application for waiver--(1) Time and manner. In order to receive 
a waiver of the 10-year holding period requirement specified in 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section, a taxpayer must file an application 
(including the applicable user fee) that complies with the requirements 
of this paragraph (d) and Rev. Proc. 90-1, 1990-1 I.R.B. 8 (or any 
subsequent applicable revenue procedure). The application must be filed 
by a taxpayer who has acquired the building by purchase or who has a 
binding contract to purchase the building. Such binding contract may be 
conditioned upon the granting of a waiver under this section. The 
application may be filed at any time after a binding contract has been 
entered into, but no later than 12 months after the taxpayer's 
acquisition of the building. An application for a waiver of the 10-year 
holding period requirement must not contain a request for a ruling on 
any other issue arising under section 42 or other sections of the 
Internal Revenue Code. An application for a waiver of the 10-year 
holding period requirement must be mailed or delivered to the address 
listed in section 3.01 of Rev. Proc. 90-1 (or any subsequent applicable 
revenue procedure).
    (2) Information required. An application for a waiver of the 10-year 
holding period requirement must contain the following information:
    (i) The taxpayer's name, address and taxpayer identification number;
    (ii) The name (if any) and address of the acquired building and the 
project (if any) of which it is a part;
    (iii) The date of acquisition or the date of the binding contract 
for acquisition of the building by the taxpayer and the expected date of 
acquisition, the amount of consideration paid or to be paid for the 
acquisition (including the value of any liabilities assumed by the 
taxpayer), and the taxpayer's certification that such acquisition is by 
purchase (as defined in section 179(d)(2), as applicable under section 
42 (d)(2)(D)(iii)(I));
    (iv) The identity of the person from whom the building is acquired, 
and whether such person is a Federal agency, a mortgagee holding title 
to the building, or the mortgagor or prior owner;
    (v) The date the building was last placed in service and the date of 
the

[[Page 131]]

most recent (if any) nonqualified substantial improvement of the 
building (as defined in section 42 (d)(2)(D)(i));
    (vi) The taxpayer's certification that the building was not 
previously placed in service by the taxpayer, or by a person who was a 
related person (as defined in section 42(d)(2)(D)(iii)(II)) with respect 
to the taxpayer as of the time the building was last placed in service;
    (vii) The amount and disposition (e.g., discharge, assignment, 
assumption, or refinance) of the outstanding mortgage at the time of 
acquisition and the identities of the mortgagee and mortgagor;
    (viii) The taxpayer's certification that no prior owner was allowed 
a low-income housing credit under section 42 for the building (made to 
the best of the taxpayer's knowledge, with no documentation from other 
persons needed to be submitted); and
    (ix) The statement from the Federal agency required by paragraph 
(c)(3)(i) of this section.
    (3) Other rules. (i) In the event that an acquired building will be 
owned by more than one taxpayer, a single application for waiver may be 
filed by one taxpayer on behalf of the co-owners if the application 
contains the names, addresses and taxpayer identification numbers of the 
other owners. A general partner or a designated limited partner may file 
an application for waiver on behalf of a partnership.
    (ii) In the event that multiple Federally-assisted buildings in a 
project are being acquired by the taxpayer, a single application for 
waiver with respect to such buildings may be filed if the application 
contains the required information set out for the address of each 
Federally-assisted building involved.
    (iii) In the event that specific Federally-assisted buildings are 
being acquired by the taxpayer in a project consisting of multiple 
buildings that may or may not be Federally-assisted, a single 
application for waiver with respect to the Federally-assisted buildings 
being acquired may be filed if the application contains the required 
information set out for the address of each Federally-assisted building 
being acquired.
    (4) Effective date of waiver. A waiver will be effective when 
granted in writing by the Internal Revenue Service after submission of a 
completed application for waiver filed under this paragraph (d).
    (5) Attachment to return. A waiver letter granted by the Internal 
Revenue Service shall be filed with the taxpayer's Federal income tax 
return for the first taxable year the low-income housing credit is 
claimed by the taxpayer.
    (e) Effective date of regulations. The provisions of Sec. 1.42-2 are 
effective for buildings placed in service by the taxpayer after December 
31, 1986.

[T.D. 8302, 55 FR 21189, May 23, 1990; 55 FR 25973, June 26, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 1.42-3  Treatment of buildings financed with proceeds from a loan under an Affordable Housing Program established pursuant to section 721 of the Financial 
          Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 
          (FIRREA).

    (a) Treatment under sections 42(i) and 42(b). A below market loan 
funded in whole or in part with funds from an Affordable Housing Program 
established under section 721 of FIRREA is not, solely by reason of the 
Affordable Housing Program funds, a below market Federal loan as defined 
in section 42(i)(2)(D). Thus, any building with respect to which the 
proceeds of the loan are used during the tax year is not, solely by 
reason of the Affordable Housing Program funds, treated as a federally 
subsidized building for that tax year and subsequent tax years for 
purposes of determining the applicable percentage for the building under 
section 42(b).
    (b) Effective date. The rules set forth in paragraph (a) of this 
section are effective for loans made after August 8, 1989.

[56 FR 48734, Sept. 26, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 1.42-4  Application of not-for-profit rules of section 183 to low-income housing credit activities.

    (a) Inapplicability to section 42. In the case of a qualified low-
income building with respect to which the low-income housing credit 
under section 42 is allowable, section 183 does not apply to disallow 
losses, deductions, or credits

[[Page 132]]

attributable to the ownership and operation of the building.
    (b) Limitation. Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this section, 
losses, deductions, or credits attributable to the ownership and 
operation of a qualified low-income building with respect to which the 
low-income housing credit under section 42 is allowable may be limited 
or disallowed under other provisions of the Code or principles of tax 
law. See, e.g., sections 38(c), 163(d), 465, 469; Knetsch v. United 
States, 364 U.S. 361 (1960), 1961-1 C.B. 34 (``sham'' or ``economic 
substance'' analysis); and Frank Lyon Co. v. Commissioner, 435 U.S. 561 
(1978), 1978-1 C.B. 46 (``ownership'' analysis).
    (c) Effective date. The rules set forth in paragraphs (a) and (b) of 
this section are effective with respect to buildings placed in service 
after December 31, 1986.

[T.D. 8420, 57 FR 24729, June 11, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 1.42-5  Monitoring compliance with low-income housing credit requirements.

    (a) Compliance monitoring requirement--(1) In general. Under section 
42(m)(1)(B)(iii), an allocation plan is not qualified unless it contains 
a procedure that the State or local housing credit agency (``Agency'') 
(or an agent of, or other private contractor hired by, the Agency) will 
follow in monitoring for noncompliance with the provisions of section 42 
and in notifying the Internal Revenue Service of any noncompliance of 
which the Agency becomes aware. These regulations only address 
compliance monitoring procedures required of Agencies. The regulations 
do not address forms and other records that may be required by the 
Service on examination or audit. For example, if a building is sold or 
otherwise transferred by the owner, the transferee should obtain from 
the transferor information related to the first year of the credit 
period so that the transferee can substantiate credits claimed.
    (2) Requirements for a monitoring procedure--(i) In general. A 
procedure for monitoring for noncompliance under section 
42(m)(1)(B)(iii) must include--
    (A) The recordkeeping and record retention provisions of paragraph 
(b) of this section;
    (B) The certification and review provisions of paragraph (c) of this 
section;
    (C) The inspection provision of paragraph (d) of this section; and
    (D) The notification-of-noncompliance provisions of paragraph (e) of 
this section.
    (ii) Order and form. A monitoring procedure will meet the 
requirements of section 42 (m)(1)(B)(iii) if it contains the substance 
of these provisions. The particular order and form of the provisions in 
the allocation plan is not material. A monitoring procedure may contain 
additional provisions or requirements.
    (b) Recordkeeping and record retention provisions--(1) Recordkeeping 
provision. Under the recordkeeping provision, the owner of a low-income 
housing project must be required to keep records for each qualified low-
income building in the project that show for each year in the compliance 
period--
    (i) The total number of residential rental units in the building 
(including the number of bedrooms and the size in square feet of each 
residential rental unit);
    (ii) The percentage of residential rental units in the building that 
are low-income units;
    (iii) The rent charged on each residential rental unit in the 
building (including any utility allowances);
    (iv) The number of occupants in each low-income unit, but only if 
rent is determined by the number of occupants in each unit under section 
42(g)(2) (as in effect before the amendments made by the Revenue 
Reconciliation Act of 1989);
    (v) The low-income unit vacancies in the building and information 
that shows when, and to whom, the next available units were rented;
    (vi) The annual income certification of each low-income tenant per 
unit. For an exception to this requirement, see section 42(g)(8)(B) 
(which provides a special rule for a 100 percent low-income building);
    (vii) Documentation to support each low-income tenant's income 
certification (for example, a copy of the tenant's federal income tax 
return, Forms

[[Page 133]]

W-2, or verifications of income from third parties such as employers or 
state agencies paying unemployment compensation). For an exception to 
this requirement, see section 42(g)(8)(B) (which provides a special rule 
for a 100 percent low-income building). Tenant income is calculated in a 
manner consistent with the determination of annual income under section 
8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (``Section 8''), not in 
accordance with the determination of gross income for federal income tax 
liability. In the case of a tenant receiving housing assistance payments 
under Section 8, the documentation requirement of this paragraph 
(b)(1)(vii) is satisfied if the public housing authority provides a 
statement to the building owner declaring that the tenant's income does 
not exceed the applicable income limit under section 42 (g);
    (viii) The eligible basis and qualified basis of the building at the 
end of the first year of the credit period; and
    (ix) The character and use of the nonresidential portion of the 
building included in the building's eligible basis under section 42 (d) 
(e.g., tenant facilities that are available on a comparable basis to all 
tenants and for which no separate fee is charged for use of the 
facilities, or facilities reasonably required by the project).
    (2) Record retention provision. Under the record retention 
provision, the owner of a low-income housing project must be required to 
retain the records described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section for at 
least 6 years after the due date (with extensions) for filing the 
federal income tax return for that year. The records for the first year 
of the credit period, however, must be retained for at least 6 years 
beyond the due date (with extensions) for filing the federal income tax 
return for the last year of the compliance period of the building.
    (c) Certification and review provisions--(1) Certification. Under 
the certification provision, the owner of a low-income housing project 
must be required to certify at least annually to the Agency that, for 
the preceding 12-month period--
    (i) The project met the requirements of:
    (A) The 20-50 test under section 42 (g)(1)(A), the 40-60 test under 
section 42 (g)(1)(B), or the 25-60 test under sections 42 (g)(4) and 142 
(d)(6) for New York City, whichever minimum set-aside test was 
applicable to the project; and
    (B) If applicable to the project, the 15-40 test under sections 
42(g)(4) and 142 (d)(4)(B) for ``deep rent skewed'' projects;
    (ii) There was no change in the applicable fraction (as defined in 
section 42(c)(1)(B)) of any building in the project, or that there was a 
change, and a description of the change;
    (iii) The owner has received an annual income certification from 
each low-income tenant, and documentation to support that certification; 
or, in the case of a tenant receiving Section 8 housing assistance 
payments, the statement from a public housing authority described in 
paragraph (b)(1)(vii) of this section. For an exception to this 
requirement, see section 42(g)(8)(B) (which provides a special rule for 
a 100 percent low-income building);
    (iv) Each low-income unit in the project was rent-restricted under 
section 42(g)(2);
    (v) All units in the project were for use by the general public and 
used on a nontransient basis (except for transitional housing for the 
homeless provided under section 42 (i)(3)(B)(iii));
    (vi) Each building in the project was suitable for occupancy, taking 
into account local health, safety, and building codes;
    (vii) There was no change in the eligible basis (as defined in 
section 42(d)) of any building in the project, or if there was a change, 
the nature of the change (e.g., a common area has become commercial 
space, or a fee is now charged for a tenant facility formerly provided 
without charge);
    (viii) All tenant facilities included in the eligible basis under 
section 42(d) of any building in the project, such as swimming pools, 
other recreational facilities, and parking areas, were provided on a 
comparable basis without charge to all tenants in the building;
    (ix) If a low-income unit in the project became vacant during the 
year, that reasonable attempts were or are

[[Page 134]]

being made to rent that unit or the next available unit of comparable or 
smaller size to tenants having a qualifying income before any units in 
the project were or will be rented to tenants not having a qualifying 
income;
    (x) If the income of tenants of a low-income unit in the project 
increased above the limit allowed in section 42(g)(2)(D)(ii), the next 
available unit of comparable or smaller size in the project was or will 
be rented to tenants having a qualifying income; and
    (xi) An extended low-income housing commitment as described in 
section 42(h)(6) was in effect (for buildings subject to section 
7108(c)(1) of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1989).
    (2) Review. The review provision must--
    (i) Require that the Agency review the certifications submitted 
under paragraph (c)(1) of this section for compliance with the 
requirements of section 42;
    (ii) Contain at least one of the following requirements:
    (A) The owners of at least 50 percent of all low-income housing 
projects in the Agency's jurisdiction must submit to the Agency for 
compliance review a copy of the annual income certification, the 
documentation the owner has received to support that certification, and 
the rent record for each low-income tenant in at least 20 percent of the 
low-income units in their projects;
    (B) The Agency must inspect at least 20 percent of low-income 
housing projects each year and must inspect the low-income 
certification, the documentation the owner has received to support that 
certification, and the rent record for each low-income tenant in at 
least 20 percent of the low-income units in those projects; or
    (C) The owners of all low-income housing projects must submit to the 
Agency each year information on tenant income and rent for each low-
income unit, in the form and manner designated by the Agency, and the 
owners of at least 20 percent of the projects must submit to the Agency 
for compliance review a copy of the annual income certification, the 
documentation the owner has received to support that certification, and 
the rent record for each low-income tenant in at least 20 percent of the 
low-income units in their projects; and
    (iii) Require that the Agency determine which tenants' records are 
to be inspected or submitted by the owners for review. If a monitoring 
procedure includes the review provision described in paragraph 
(c)(2)(ii)(B) of this section, the records to be inspected must be 
chosen in a manner that will not give owners of low-income housing 
projects advance notice that their records for a particular year will or 
will not be inspected. However, an Agency may give an owner reasonable 
notice that an inspection will occur so that the owner may assemble 
records (for example, 30 days notice of inspection). See paragraph (d) 
of this section for the inspection provision that is required to be 
included in all monitoring procedures.
    (3) Frequency and form of certification. A monitoring procedure must 
require that the certifications and reviews of paragraph (c)(1) and (2) 
of this section be made at least annually covering each year of the 15-
year compliance period under section 42(i)(1). The certifications must 
be made under penalty of perjury. A monitoring procedure may require 
certifications and reviews more frequently than on a 12-month basis, 
provided that all months within each 12-month period are subject to 
certification.
    (4) Exception for certain buildings--(i) In general. The review 
requirements under paragraph (c)(2)(ii) (A), (B), and (C) of this 
section may provide that owners are not required to submit, and the 
Agency is not required to review, the tenant income certifications, 
supporting documentation, and rent records for buildings financed by the 
Farmers Home Administration (FmHA) under the section 515 program, or 
buildings of which 50 percent or more of the aggregate basis (taking 
into account the building and the land) is financed with the proceeds of 
obligations the interest on which is exempt from tax under section 103 
(tax-exempt bonds). In order for a monitoring procedure to except these 
buildings, the Agency must meet the requirements of paragraph (c)(4)(ii) 
of this section.

[[Page 135]]

    (ii) Agreement and review. The Agency must enter into an agreement 
with the FmHA or tax-exempt bond issuer. Under the agreement, the FmHA 
or tax-exempt bond issuer must agree to provide information concerning 
the income and rent of the tenants in the building to the Agency. The 
Agency may assume the accuracy of the information provided by FmHA or 
the tax-exempt bond issuer without verification. The Agency must review 
the information and determine that the income limitation and rent 
restriction of section 42 (g)(1) and (2) are met. However, if the 
information provided by the FmHA or tax-exempt bond issuer is not 
sufficient for the Agency to make this determination, the Agency must 
request the necessary additional income or rent information from the 
owner of the buildings. For example, because FmHA determines tenant 
eligibility based on its definition of ``adjusted annual income,'' 
rather than ``annual income'' as defined under Section 8, the Agency may 
have to calculate the tenant's income for section 42 purposes and may 
need to request additional income information from the owner.
    (iii) Example. The exception permitted under paragraph (c)(4)(i) and 
(ii) of this section is illustrated by the following example.

    Example. An Agency chooses the review requirement of paragraph 
(c)(2)(ii)(A) of this section and some of the buildings selected for 
review are buildings financed by the FmHA. The Agency has entered into 
an agreement described in paragraph (c)(4)(ii) of this section with the 
FmHA with respect to those buildings. In reviewing the FmHA-financed 
buildings, the Agency obtains the tenant income and rent information 
from the FmHA for 20 percent of the low-income units in each of those 
buildings. The Agency calculates the tenant income and rent to determine 
whether the tenants meet the income and rent limitation of section 42 
(g)(1) and (2). In order to make this determination, the Agency may need 
to request additional income or rent information from the owners of the 
FmHA buildings if the information provided by the FmHA is not 
sufficient.

    (d) Inspection provision. Under the inspection provision, the Agency 
must have the right to perform an on-site inspection of any low-income 
housing project at least through the end of the compliance period of the 
buildings in the project. The inspection provision of this paragraph (d) 
is separate from any review of low-income certifications, supporting 
documents, and rent records under paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this section.
    (e) Notification-of-noncompliance provision--(1) In general. Under 
the notification-of-noncompliance provisions, the Agency must be 
required to give the notice described in paragraph (e)(2) of this 
section to the owner of a low-income housing project and the notice 
described in paragraph (e)(3) of this section to the Service.
    (2) Notice to owner. The Agency must be required to provide prompt 
written notice to the owner of a low-income housing project if the 
Agency does not receive the certification described in paragraph (c)(1) 
of this section, or does not receive or is not permitted to inspect the 
tenant income certifications, supporting documentation, and rent records 
described in paragraph (c)(2)(ii)(A), (B), or (C) of this section 
(whichever is applicable), or discovers by inspection, review, or in 
some other manner, that the project is not in compliance with the 
provisions of section 42.
    (3) Notice to Internal Revenue Service--(i) In general. The Agency 
must be required to file Form 8823, ``Low-Income Housing Credit Agencies 
Report of Noncompliance,'' with the Service no later than 45 days after 
the end of the correction period (as described in paragraph (e)(4) of 
this section, including extensions permitted under that paragraph) and 
no earlier than the end of the correction period, whether or not the 
noncompliance or failure to certify is corrected. The Agency must 
explain on Form 8823 the nature of the noncompliance or failure to 
certify and indicate whether the owner has corrected the noncompliance 
or failure to certify. Any change in either the applicable fraction or 
eligible basis under paragraph (c)(1)(ii) and (vii) of this section, 
respectively, that results in a decrease in the qualified basis of the 
project under section 42 (c)(1)(A) is noncompliance that must be 
reported to the Service under this paragraph (e)(3). If an Agency 
reports on Form 8823 that a building is entirely out of

[[Page 136]]

compliance and will not be in compliance at any time in the future, the 
Agency need not file Form 8823 in subsequent years to report that 
building's noncompliance.
    (ii) Agency retention of records. An Agency must retain records of 
noncompliance or failure to certify for 6 years beyond the Agency's 
filing of the respective Form 8823. In all other cases, the Agency must 
retain the certifications and records described in paragraph (c) of this 
section for 3 years from the end of the calendar year the Agency 
receives the certifications and records.
    (4) Correction period. The correction period shall be that period 
specified in the monitoring procedure during which an owner must supply 
any missing certifications and bring the project into compliance with 
the provisions of section 42. The correction period is not to exceed 90 
days from the date of the notice to the owner described in paragraph 
(e)(2) of this section. An Agency may extend the correction period for 
up to 6 months, but only if the Agency determines there is good cause 
for granting the extension.
    (f) Delegation of Authority--(1) Agencies permitted to delegate 
compliance monitoring functions--(i) In general. An Agency may retain an 
agent or other private contractor (``Authorized Delegate'') to perform 
compliance monitoring. The Authorized Delegate must be unrelated to the 
owner of any building that the Authorized Delegate monitors. The 
Authorized Delegate may be delegated all of the functions of the Agency, 
except for the responsibility of notifying the Service under paragraph 
(e)(3) of this section. For example, the Authorized Delegate may be 
delegated the responsibility of reviewing tenant certifications and 
documentation under paragraph (c) (1) and (2) of this section, the right 
to inspect buildings and records as described in paragraph (d) of this 
section, and the responsibility of notifying building owners of lack of 
certification or noncompliance under paragraph (e)(2) of this section. 
The Authorized Delegate must notify the Agency of any noncompliance or 
failure to certify.
    (ii) Limitations. An Agency that delegates compliance monitoring to 
an Authorized Delegate under paragraph (f)(1)(i) of this section must 
use reasonable diligence to ensure that the Authorized Delegate properly 
performs the delegated monitoring functions. Delegation by an Agency of 
compliance monitoring functions to an Authorized Delegate does not 
relieve the Agency of its obligation to notify the Service of any 
noncompliance of which the Agency becomes aware.
    (2) Agencies permitted to delegate compliance monitoring functions 
to another Agency. An Agency may delegate all or some of its compliance 
monitoring responsibilities for a building to another Agency within the 
State. This delegation may include the responsibility of notifying the 
Service under paragraph (e)(3) of this section.
    (g) Liability. Compliance with the requirements of section 42 is the 
responsibility of the owner of the building for which the credit is 
allowable. The Agency's obligation to monitor for compliance with the 
requirements of section 42 does not make the Agency liable for an 
owner's noncompliance.
    (h) Effective date. Allocation plans must comply with these 
regulations by June 30, 1993. The requirement of section 42 
(m)(1)(B)(iii) that allocation plans contain a procedure for monitoring 
for noncompliance becomes effective on January 1, 1992, and applies to 
buildings for which a low-income housing credit is, or has been, 
allowable at any time. Thus, allocation plans must comply with section 
42(m)(1)(B)(iii) prior to June 30, 1993, the effective date of these 
regulations. An allocation plan that complies with these regulations, 
with the notice of proposed rulemaking published in the Federal Register 
on December 27, 1991, or with a reasonable interpretation of section 
42(m)(1)(B)(iii) will satisfy the requirements of section 
42(m)(1)(B)(iii) for periods before June 30, 1993. Section 
42(m)(1)(B)(iii) and these regulations do not require monitoring for 
whether a building or project is in compliance with the requirements of 
section 42 prior to January 1, 1992. However, if an Agency becomes aware 
of noncompliance that occurred prior to January 1,

[[Page 137]]

1992, the Agency is required to notify the Service of that 
noncompliance.

[T.D.8430, 57 FR 40121, Sept. 2, 1992; 57 FR 57280, Dec. 3, 1992; 58 FR 
7748, Feb. 9, 1993; T.D. 8563, 59 FR 50163, Oct. 3, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1.42-6  Buildings qualifying for carryover allocations.

    (a) Carryover allocations. A carryover allocation is an allocation 
that meets the requirements of section 42(h)(1) (E) or (F). If the 
requirements of section 42(h)(1) (E) or (F) that are required to be 
satisfied by the close of the calendar year are not satisfied, the 
allocation is treated as if it had not been made. For example, if the 
taxpayer's basis in the project as of the close of the calendar year of 
allocation is not more than 10 percent of the taxpayer's reasonably 
expected basis in the project as of the close of the second calendar 
year following the year of allocation, the carryover allocation is not 
valid and is treated as if it had not been made.
    (b) Carryover-allocation basis--(1) In general. Subject to the 
limitations of paragraph (b)(2) of this section, a taxpayer's basis in a 
project for purposes of section 42(h)(1) (E)(ii) or (F) (carryover-
allocation basis) is the taxpayer's adjusted basis in land or 
depreciable property that is reasonably expected to be part of the 
project, whether or not these amounts are includible in eligible basis 
under section 42(d). Thus, for example, if the project is to include 
property that is not residential rental property, such as commercial 
space, the basis attributable to the commercial space, although not 
includible in eligible basis, is includible in carryover-allocation 
basis. The adjusted basis of land and depreciable property is determined 
under sections 1012 and 1016, and generally includes the direct and 
indirect costs of acquiring, constructing, and rehabilitating the 
property. Costs otherwise includible in carryover-allocation basis are 
not excluded by reason of having been incurred prior to the calendar 
year in which the carryover allocation is made.
    (2) Limitations--For purposes of determining carryover-allocation 
basis under paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the following limitations 
apply.
    (i) Taxpayer must have basis in land or depreciable property related 
to the project. A taxpayer has carryover-allocation basis to the extent 
that it has basis in land or depreciable property and the land or 
depreciable property is reasonably expected to be part of the project 
for which the carryover allocation is made. This basis includes all 
items that are properly capitalizable with respect to the land or 
depreciable property. For example, a nonrefundable downpayment for, or 
an amount paid to acquire an option to purchase, land or depreciable 
property may be included in carryover-allocation basis if properly 
capitalizable into the basis of land or depreciable property that is 
reasonably expected to be part of a project.
    (ii) High cost areas. Any increase in eligible basis that may result 
under section 42(d)(5)(C) from a building's location in a qualified 
census tract or difficult development area is not taken into account in 
determining carryover-allocation basis or reasonably expected basis.
    (iii) Amounts not treated as paid or incurred. An amount is not 
includible in carryover-allocation basis unless it is treated as paid or 
incurred under the method of accounting used by the taxpayer. For 
example, a cash method taxpayer cannot include construction costs in 
carryover-allocation basis unless the costs have been paid, and an 
accrual method taxpayer cannot include construction costs in carryover- 
allocation basis unless they have been properly accrued. See paragraph 
(b)(2)(iv) of this section for a special rule for fees.
    (iv) Fees. A fee is includible in carryover-allocation basis only to 
the extent the requirements of paragraph (b)(2)(iii) of this section are 
met and--
    (A) The fee is reasonable;
    (B) The taxpayer is legally obligated to pay the fee;
    (C) The fee is capitalizable as part of the taxpayer's basis in land 
or depreciable property that is reasonably expected to be part of the 
project;
    (D) The fee is not paid (or to be paid) by the taxpayer to itself; 
and
    (E) If the fee is paid (or to be paid) by the taxpayer to a related 
person, and the taxpayer uses the cash method of accounting, the 
taxpayer could properly accrue the fee under the accrual

[[Page 138]]

method of accounting (considering, for example, the rules of section 
461(h)). A person is a related person if the person bears a relationship 
to the taxpayer specified in sections 267(b) or 707(b)(1), or if the 
person and the taxpayer are engaged in trades or businesses under common 
control (within the meaning of subsections (a) and (b) of section 52).
    (3) Reasonably expected basis. Rules similar to the rules of 
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section apply in determining the 
taxpayer's reasonably expected basis in a project (land and depreciable 
basis) as of the close of the second calendar year following the 
calendar year of the allocation.
    (4) Examples. The following examples illustrate the rules of 
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.

    Example 1. (i) Facts. C, an accrual-method taxpayer, receives a 
carryover allocation from Agency, the state housing credit agency, in 
September of 1993. As of that date, C has not begun construction of the 
low-income housing building C plans to build. However, C has owned the 
land on which C plans to build the building since 1985. C's basis in the 
land is $100,000. C reasonably expects that by the end of 1995, C's 
basis in the project of which the building is to be a part will be 
$2,000,000. C also expects that because the project is located in a 
qualified census tract, C will be able to increase its basis in the 
project to $2,600,000. Before the close of 1993, C incurs $150,000 of 
costs for architects' fees and site preparation. C properly accrues 
these costs under its method of accounting and capitalizes the costs.
    (ii) Determination of carryover-allocation basis. C's $100,000 basis 
in the land is includible in carryover-allocation basis even though C 
has owned the land since 1985. The $150,000 of costs C has incurred for 
architects' fees and site preparation are also includible in carryover-
allocation basis. The expected increase in basis due to the project's 
location in a qualified census tract is not taken into account in 
determining C's carryover-allocation basis. Accordingly, C's carryover-
allocation basis in the project of which the building is a part is 
$250,000.
    (iii) Determination of whether building is qualified. C's reasonably 
expected basis in the project at the close of the second calendar year 
following the calendar year of allocation is $2,000,000. The expected 
increase in eligible basis due to the project's location in a qualified 
census tract is not taken into account in determining this amount. 
Because C's carryover-allocation basis is more than 10 percent of C's 
reasonably expected basis in the project of which the building is a 
part, the building for which C received the carryover allocation is a 
qualified building for purposes of section 42(h)(1)(E)(ii) and paragraph 
(a) of this section.
    Example 2. (i) Facts. D, an accrual-method taxpayer, receives a 
carryover allocation from Agency, the state housing credit agency, on 
September 11, 1993. As of that date, D has not begun construction of the 
low-income housing building D plans to build and D does not have basis 
in the land on which D plans to build the building. In 1993, D incurs 
some costs related to the planned building, including architects' fees. 
However, at the close of 1993, these costs do not exceed 10 percent of 
D's reasonably expected basis in the project.
    (ii) Determination of whether building is qualified. Because D's 
carryover-allocation basis is not more than 10 percent of D's reasonably 
expected basis in the project of which the building is a part, the 
building for which D received a carryover allocation is not a qualified 
building for purposes of section 42(h)(1)(E)(ii) and paragraph (a) of 
this section. The carryover allocation to D is not valid, and is treated 
as if it had not been made.

    (c) Verification of basis by Agency--(1) Verification requirement. 
An Agency that makes a carryover allocation to a taxpayer must verify 
that, as of the close of the calendar year of allocation, the taxpayer 
has incurred more than 10 percent of the reasonably expected basis in 
the project (land and depreciable basis).
    (2) Manner of verification. An Agency may verify that a taxpayer has 
incurred more than 10 percent of its reasonably expected basis in a 
project by obtaining a certification from the taxpayer, in writing and 
under penalty of perjury, that the taxpayer has incurred by the close of 
the calendar year of the allocation more than 10 percent of the 
reasonably expected basis in the project. The certification must be 
accompanied by supporting documentation that the Agency must review. 
Supporting documentation may include, for example, copies of checks or 
other records of payments. Alternatively, an Agency may verify that the 
taxpayer has incurred adequate basis by requiring that the taxpayer 
obtain from an attorney or certified public accountant a written 
certification to the Agency, that the attorney or accountant has 
examined all eligible costs incurred with respect to the project and 
that, based upon this examination, it is the attorney's or accountant's 
belief that

[[Page 139]]

the taxpayer has incurred more than 10 percent of its reasonably 
expected basis in the project by the close of the calendar year of the 
allocation.
    (3) Time of verification. An Agency may require that the basis 
certification be submitted to or received by the Agency prior to the 
close of the calendar year of allocation or within a reasonable time 
after the close of the calendar year of allocation. The Agency will need 
to verify basis in order to accurately complete the Form 8610, Annual 
Low-Income Housing Credit Agencies Report, for the calendar year. If 
certification is not timely made, or supporting documentation is 
lacking, inadequate, or does not actually support the certification, the 
Agency should notify the taxpayer and try to get adequate documentation. 
If the Agency cannot verify before the Form 8610 is filed that the 
taxpayer has satisfied the basis requirement for a carryover allocation, 
the allocation is treated as if it had not been made and the carryover 
allocation document should not be filed with the Form 8610.
    (d) Requirements for making carryover allocations--(1) In general. 
Generally, an allocation is made when an Agency issues the Form 8609, 
Low-Income Housing Credit Allocation Certification, for a building. See 
Sec. 1.42-1T(d)(8)(ii). An Agency does not issue the Form 8609 for a 
building until the building is placed in service. However, in cases 
where allocations of credit are made pursuant to section 42(h)(1)(E) 
(relating to carryover allocations for buildings) or section 42(h)(1)(F) 
(relating to carryover allocations for multiple-building projects), Form 
8609 is not used as the allocating document because the buildings are 
not yet in service. When an allocation is made pursuant to section 
42(h)(1) (E) or (F), the allocating document is the document meeting the 
requirements of paragraph (d)(2) of this section. In addition, when an 
allocation is made pursuant to section 42(h)(1)(F), the requirements of 
paragraph (d)(3) of this section must be met for the allocation to be 
valid. An allocation pursuant to section 42(h)(1) (E) or (F) reduces the 
state housing credit ceiling for the year in which the allocation is 
made, whether or not the Form 8609 is also issued in that year.
    (2) Requirements for allocation. An allocation pursuant to section 
42(h)(1) (E) or (F) is made when an allocation document containing the 
following information is completed, signed, and dated by an authorized 
official of the Agency--
    (i) The address of each building in the project, or if none exists, 
a specific description of the location of each building;
    (ii) The name, address, and taxpayer identification number of the 
taxpayer receiving the allocation;
    (iii) The name and address of the Agency;
    (iv) The taxpayer identification number of the Agency;
    (v) The date of the allocation;
    (vi) The housing credit dollar amount allocated to the building or 
project, as applicable;
    (vii) The taxpayer's reasonably expected basis in the project (land 
and depreciable basis) as of the close of the second calendar year 
following the calendar year in which the allocation is made;
    (viii) The taxpayer's basis in the project (land and depreciable 
basis) as of the close of the calendar year in which the allocation is 
made and the percentage that basis bears to the reasonably expected 
basis in the project (land and depreciable basis) as of the close of the 
second following calendar year;
    (ix) The date that each building in the project is expected to be 
placed in service; and
    (x) The Building Identification Number (B.I.N.) to be assigned to 
each building in the project. The B.I.N. must reflect the year an 
allocation is first made to the building, regardless of the year that 
the building is placed in service. This B.I.N. must be used for all 
allocations of credit for the building. For example, rehabilitation 
expenditures treated as a separate new building under section 42(e) 
should not have a separate B.I.N. if the building to which the 
rehabilitation expenditures are made has a B.I.N. In this case, the 
B.I.N. used for the rehabilitation expenditures shall be the B.I.N. 
previously assigned to the building, although the rehabilitation 
expenditures must have a separate Form 8609 for the

[[Page 140]]

allocation. Similarly, a newly constructed building that receives an 
allocation of credit in different calendar years must have a separate 
Form 8609 for each allocation. The B.I.N. assigned to the building for 
the first allocation must be used for the subsequent allocation.
    (3) Special rules for project-based allocations--(i) In general. An 
allocation pursuant to section 42(h)(1)(F) (a project-based allocation) 
must meet the requirements of this section as well as the requirements 
of section 42(h)(1)(F), including the minimum basis requirement of 
section 42(h)(1)(E)(ii).
    (ii) Requirement of section 42(h)(1)(F)(i)(III). An allocation 
satisfies the requirement of section 42(h)(1)(F)(i)(III) if the Form 
8609 that is issued for each building that is placed in service in the 
project states the portion of the project-based allocation that is 
applied to that building.
    (4) Recordkeeping requirements--(i) Taxpayer. When an allocation is 
made pursuant to section 42(h)(1) (E) or (F), the taxpayer must retain a 
copy of the allocation document and file an additional copy with the 
Form 8609 that is issued to the taxpayer for a building after the 
building is placed in service. The taxpayer need only file a copy of the 
allocation document with the Form 8609 for the building for the first 
year the credit is claimed. However, the Form 8609 must be filed for the 
first taxable year in which the credit is claimed and for each taxable 
year thereafter throughout the compliance period, whether or not a 
credit is claimed for the taxable year.
    (ii) Agency. The Agency must retain a copy of the allocation 
document and file the original with the Agency's Form 8610 that accounts 
for the year the allocation is made. The Agency must also retain a copy 
of the Form 8609 that is issued to the taxpayer and file the original 
with the Agency's Form 8610 that reflects the year the form is issued.
    (5) Separate procedure for election of appropriate percentage month. 
If a taxpayer receives an allocation under section 42(h)(1) (E) or (F) 
and wishes to elect under section 42(b)(2)(A)(ii) to use the appropriate 
percentage for a month other than the month in which a building is 
placed in service, the requirements specified in Sec. 1.42-8 must be met 
for the election to be effective.
    (e) Special rules. The following rules apply for purposes of this 
section.
    (1) Treatment of partnerships and other flow-through entities. With 
respect to taxpayers that own projects through partnerships or other 
flow-through entities (e.g., S corporations, estates, or trusts), 
carryover-allocation basis is determined at the entity level using the 
rules provided by this section. In addition, the entity is responsible 
for providing to the Agency the certification and documentation required 
under the basis verification requirement in paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (2) Transferees. If land or depreciable property that is expected to 
be part of a project is transferred after a carryover allocation has 
been made for a building that is reasonably expected to be part of the 
project, but before the close of the calendar year of the allocation, 
the transferee's carryover-allocation basis is determined under the 
principles of this section and section 42(d)(7). See also Rev. Rul. 91-
38, 1991-2 C.B. 3 (see Sec. 601.601(d)(2)(ii)(b) of this chapter). In 
addition, the transferee is treated as the taxpayer for purposes of the 
basis verification requirement of this section, and therefore, is 
responsible for providing to the Agency the required certifications and 
documentation.

[T.D. 8520, 59 FR 10069, Mar. 3, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1.42-7  Substantially bond-financed buildings. [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1.42-8  Election of appropriate percentage month.

    (a) Election under section 42(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I) to use the appropriate 
percentage for the month of a binding agreement--(1) In general. For 
purposes of section 42(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I), an agreement between a taxpayer 
and an Agency as to the housing credit dollar amount to be allocated to 
a building is considered binding if it--
    (i) Is in writing;
    (ii) Is binding under state law on the Agency, the taxpayer, and all 
successors in interest;

[[Page 141]]

    (iii) Specifies the type(s) of building(s) to which the housing 
credit dollar amount applies (i.e., a newly constructed or existing 
building, or substantial rehabilitation treated as a separate new 
building under section 42(e));
    (iv) Specifies the housing credit dollar amount to be allocated to 
the building(s); and
    (v) Is dated and signed by the taxpayer and the Agency during the 
month in which the requirements of paragraphs (a)(1) (i) through (iv) of 
this section are met.
    (2) Effect on state housing credit ceiling. Generally, a binding 
agreement described in paragraph (a)(1) of this section is an agreement 
by the Agency to allocate credit to the taxpayer at a future date. The 
binding agreement may include a reservation of credit or a binding 
commitment (under section 42(h)(1)(C)) to allocate credit in a future 
taxable year. A reservation or a binding commitment to allocate credit 
in a future year has no effect on the state housing credit ceiling until 
the year the Agency actually makes an allocation. However, if the 
binding agreement is also a carryover allocation under section 42(h)(1) 
(E) or (F), the state housing credit ceiling is reduced by the amount 
allocated by the Agency to the taxpayer in the year the carryover 
allocation is made. For a binding agreement to be a valid carryover 
allocation, the requirements of paragraph (a)(1) of this section and 
Sec. 1.42-6 must be met.
    (3) Time and manner of making election. An election under section 
42(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I) may be made either as part of the binding agreement 
under paragraph (a)(1) of this section to allocate a specific housing 
credit dollar amount or in a separate document that references the 
binding agreement. In either case, the election must--
    (i) Be in writing;
    (ii) Reference section 42(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I);
    (iii) Be signed by the taxpayer;
    (iv) If it is in a separate document, reference the binding 
agreement that meets the requirements of paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section; and
    (v) Be notarized by the 5th day following the end of the month in 
which the binding agreement was made.
    (4) Multiple agreements--(i) Rescinded agreements. A taxpayer may 
not make an election under section 42(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I) for a building if 
an election has previously been made for the building for a different 
month. For example, assume a taxpayer entered into a binding agreement 
for allocation of a specific housing credit dollar amount to a building 
and made the election under section 42(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I) to apply the 
appropriate percentage for the month of the binding agreement. If the 
binding agreement subsequently is rescinded under state law, and the 
taxpayer enters into a new binding agreement for allocation of a 
specific housing credit dollar amount to the building, the taxpayer must 
apply to the building the appropriate percentage for the elected month 
of the rescinded binding agreement. However, if no prior election was 
made with respect to the rescinded binding agreement, the taxpayer may 
elect the appropriate percentage for the month of the new binding 
agreement.
    (ii) Increases in credit. The election under section 
42(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I), once made, applies to any increase in the credit 
amount allocated for a building, whether the increase occurs in the same 
or in a subsequent year. However, in the case of a binding agreement (or 
carryover allocation that is treated as a binding agreement) to allocate 
a credit amount under section 42(e)(1) for substantial rehabilitation 
treated as a separate new building, a taxpayer may make the election 
under section 42(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I) notwithstanding that a prior election 
under section 42(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I) is in effect for a prior allocation of 
credit for a substantial rehabilitation that was previously placed in 
service under section 42(e).
    (5) Amount allocated. The housing credit dollar amount eventually 
allocated to a building may be more or less than the amount specified in 
the binding agreement. Depending on the Agency's determination pursuant 
to section 42(m)(2) as to the financial feasibility of the building (or 
project), the Agency may allocate a greater housing credit dollar amount 
to the building (provided that the Agency has additional housing

[[Page 142]]

credit dollar amounts available to allocate for the calendar year of the 
allocation) or the Agency may allocate a lesser housing credit dollar 
amount. Under section 42(h)(7)(D), in allocating a housing credit dollar 
amount, the Agency must specify the applicable percentage and maximum 
qualified basis of the building. The applicable percentage may be less, 
but not greater than, the appropriate percentage for the month the 
building is placed in service, or the month elected by the taxpayer 
under section 42(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I). Whether the appropriate percentage is 
the appropriate percentage for the 70-percent present value credit or 
the 30-percent present value credit is determined under section 42(i)(2) 
when the building is placed in service.
    (6) Procedures--(i) Taxpayer. The taxpayer must give the original 
notarized election statement to the Agency before the close of the 5th 
calendar day following the end of the month in which the binding 
agreement is made. The taxpayer must retain a copy of the binding 
agreement and the election statement and must file an additional copy of 
each with the taxpayer's Form 8609, Low-Income Housing Credit Allocation 
Certification, for the first taxable year in which credit is claimed for 
the building.
    (ii) Agency. The Agency must file with the Internal Revenue Service 
the original of the binding agreement and the election statement with 
the Agency's Form 8610, Annual Low-Income Housing Credit Agencies 
Report, that accounts for the year the allocation is actually made. The 
Agency must also retain a copy of the binding agreement and the election 
statement.
    (7) Examples. The following examples illustrate the provisions of 
this section. In each example, X is the taxpayer, Agency is the state 
housing credit agency, and the carryover allocations meet the 
requirements of Sec. 1.42-6 and are otherwise valid.

    Example 1. (i) In August 1993, X and Agency enter into an agreement 
that Agency will allocate $100,000 of housing credit dollar amount for 
the low-income housing building X is constructing. The agreement is 
binding and meets all the requirements of paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section. The agreement is a reservation of credit, not an allocation, 
and therefore, has no effect on the state housing credit ceiling. On or 
before September 5, 1993, X signs and has notarized a written election 
statement that meets the requirements of paragraph (a)(3) of this 
section. The applicable percentage for the building is the appropriate 
percentage for the month of August 1993.
    (ii) Agency makes a carryover allocation of $100,000 of housing 
credit dollar amount for the building on October 2, 1993. The carryover 
allocation reduces Agency's state housing credit ceiling for 1993. Due 
to unexpectedly high construction costs, when X places the building in 
service in July 1994, the product of the building's qualified basis and 
the applicable percentage for the building (the appropriate percentage 
for the month of August 1993) is $150,000, rather than $100,000. 
Notwithstanding that only $100,000 of credit was allocated for the 
building in 1993, Agency may allocate an additional $50,000 of housing 
credit dollar amount for the building from its state housing credit 
ceiling for 1994. The appropriate percentage for the month of August 
1993 is the applicable percentage for the building for the entire 
$150,000 of credit allocated for the building, even though separate 
allocations were made in 1993 and 1994. Because allocations were made 
for the building in two separate calendar years, Agency must issue two 
Forms 8609 to X. One Form 8609 must reflect the $100,000 allocation made 
in 1993, and the other Form 8609 must reflect the $50,000 allocation 
made in 1994.
    (iii) X gives the original notarized statement to Agency on or 
before September 5, 1993, and retains a copy of the binding agreement, 
election statement, and carryover allocation document. X files a copy of 
the binding agreement, election statement, and carryover allocation 
document with X's Form 8609 for the first taxable year in which X claims 
credit for the building.
    (iv) Agency files the original of the binding agreement, election 
statement, and 1993 carryover allocation document with its 1993 Form 
8610. Agency retains a copy of the binding agreement, election 
statement, and carryover allocation document. After the building is 
placed in service in 1994, Agency issues to X a copy of the Form 8609 
reflecting the 1993 carryover allocation of $100,000 and files the 
original of that form with its 1994 Form 8610. Agency also files the 
original of the 1994 Form 8609 reflecting the $50,000 allocation with 
its 1994 Form 8610 and issues to X a copy of the 1994 Form 8609. Agency 
retains copies of the Forms 8609 that are issued to X.
    Example 2. (i) In September 1993, X and Agency enter into an 
agreement that Agency will allocate $70,000 of housing credit dollar 
amount for rehabilitation expenditures that X is incurring and that X 
will treat as a new low-income housing building under section 42(e)(1). 
The agreement is binding and meets

[[Page 143]]

all the requirements of paragraph (a)(1) of this section. The agreement 
is a reservation of credit, not an allocation, and therefore, has no 
effect on Agency's state housing credit ceiling. On or before October 5, 
1993, X signs and has notarized a written election statement that meets 
the requirements of paragraph (a)(3) of this section. The applicable 
percentage for the building is the appropriate percentage for the month 
of September 1993. Agency makes a carryover allocation of $70,000 of 
housing credit dollar amount for the building on November 15, 1993. The 
carryover allocation reduces by $70,000 Agency's state housing credit 
ceiling for 1993.
    (ii) In October 1994, X and Agency enter into another binding 
agreement meeting the requirements of paragraph (a)(1) of this section. 
Under the agreement, Agency will allocate $50,000 of housing credit 
dollar amount for additional rehabilitation expenditures by X that 
qualify as a second separate new building under section 42(e)(1). On or 
before November 5, 1994, X signs and has notarized a written election 
statement meeting the requirements of paragraph (a)(3) of this section. 
On December 1, 1994, X receives a carryover allocation under section 
42(h)(1)(E) for $50,000. The carryover allocation reduces by $50,000 
Agency's state housing credit ceiling for 1994. The applicable 
percentage for the rehabilitation expenditures treated as the second 
separate new building is the appropriate percentage for the month of 
October 1994, not September 1993. The appropriate percentage for the 
month of September 1993 still applies to the allocation of $70,000 for 
the rehabilitation expenditures treated as the first separate new 
building. Because allocations were made for the building in two separate 
calendar years, Agency must issue two Forms 8609 to X. One Form 8609 
must reflect the $70,000 allocation made in 1993, and the other Form 
8609 must reflect the $50,000 allocation made in 1994.
    (iii) X gives the first original notarized statement to Agency on or 
before October 5, 1993, and retains a copy of the first binding 
agreement, election statement, and carryover allocation document issued 
in 1993. X gives the second original notarized statement to Agency on or 
before November 5, 1994, and retains a copy of the second binding 
agreement, election statement, and carryover allocation document issued 
in 1994. X files a copy of the binding agreements, election statements, 
and carryover allocation documents with X's Forms 8609 for the first 
taxable year in which X claims credit for the buildings.
    (iv) Agency retains a copy of the binding agreements, election 
statements, and carryover allocation documents. Agency files the 
original of the first binding agreement, election statement, and 1993 
carryover allocation document with its 1993 Form 8610. Agency files the 
original of the second binding agreement, election statement, and 1994 
carryover allocation document with its 1994 Form 8610. After X notifies 
Agency of the date each building is placed in service, the Agency will 
issue copies of the respective Forms 8609 to X, and file the originals 
of those forms with the Agency's Form 8610 that reflects the year each 
form is issued. The Agency also retains copies of the Forms 8609.

    (b) Election under section 42(b)(2)(A)(ii)(II) to use the 
appropriate percentage for the month tax-exempt bonds are issued--(1) 
Time and manner of making election. In the case of any building to which 
section 42(h)(4)(B) applies, an election under section 
42(b)(2)(A)(ii)(II) to use the appropriate percentage for the month tax-
exempt bonds are issued must--
    (i) Be in writing;
    (ii) Reference section 42(b)(2)(A)(ii)(II);
    (iii) Specify the percentage of the aggregate basis of the building 
and the land on which the building is located that is financed with the 
proceeds of obligations described in section 42(h)(4)(A) (tax-exempt 
bonds);
    (iv) State the month in which the tax-exempt bonds are issued;
    (v) State that the month in which the tax-exempt bonds are issued is 
the month elected for the appropriate percentage to be used for the 
building;
    (vi) Be signed by the taxpayer; and
    (vii) Be notarized by the 5th day following the end of the month in 
which the bonds are issued.
    (2) Bonds issued in more than one month. If a building described in 
section 42(h)(4)(B) (substantially bond-financed building) is financed 
with tax-exempt bonds issued in more than one month, the taxpayer may 
elect the appropriate percentage for any month in which the bonds are 
issued. Once the election is made, the appropriate percentage elected 
applies for the building even if all bonds are not issued in that month. 
The requirements of this paragraph (b), including the time limitation 
contained in paragraph (b)(1)(vii) of this section, must also be met.
    (3) Limitations on appropriate percentage. Under section 
42(m)(2)(D), the credit allowable for a substantially bond- financed 
building is limited to the amount necessary to assure the project's 
feasibility. Accordingly, in

[[Page 144]]

making the determination under section 42(m)(2), an Agency may use an 
applicable percentage that is less, but not greater than, the 
appropriate percentage for the month the building is placed in service, 
or the month elected by the taxpayer under section 42(b)(2)(A)(ii)(II).
    (4) Procedures--(i) Taxpayer. The taxpayer must provide the original 
notarized election statement to the Agency before the close of the 5th 
calendar day following the end of the month in which the bonds are 
issued. If an authority other than the Agency issues the tax-exempt 
bonds, the taxpayer must also give the Agency a signed statement from 
the issuing authority that certifies the information described in 
paragraphs (b)(1)(iii) and (iv) of this section. The taxpayer must file 
a copy of the election statement with the taxpayer's Form 8609 for the 
first taxable year in which credit is claimed for the building. The 
taxpayer must also retain a copy of the election statement.
    (ii) Agency. The Agency must file with the Internal Revenue Service 
the original of the election statement and the corresponding Form 8609 
for the building with the Agency's Form 8610 that reflects the year the 
Form 8609 is issued. The Agency must also retain a copy of the election 
statement and the Form 8609.

[T.D. 8520, 59 FR 10071, Mar. 3, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1.42-9  For use by the general public.

    (a) General rule. If a residential rental unit in a building is not 
for use by the general public, the unit is not eligible for a section 42 
credit. A residential rental unit is for use by the general public if 
the unit is rented in a manner consistent with housing policy governing 
non-discrimination, as evidenced by rules or regulations of the 
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) (24 CFR subtitle A and 
chapters I through XX). See HUD Handbook 4350.3 (or its successor). A 
copy of HUD Handbook 4350.3 may be requested by writing to: HUD, 
Directives Distribution Section, room B-100, 451 7th Street, SW., 
Washington, DC 20410.
    (b) Limitations. Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this section, if a 
residential rental unit is provided only for a member of a social 
organization or provided by an employer for its employees, the unit is 
not for use by the general public and is not eligible for credit under 
section 42. In addition, any residential rental unit that is part of a 
hospital, nursing home, sanitarium, lifecare facility, trailer park, or 
intermediate care facility for the mentally and physically handicapped 
is not for use by the general public and is not eligible for credit 
under section 42.
    (c) Treatment of units not for use by the general public. The costs 
attributable to a residential rental unit that is not for use by the 
general public are not excludable from eligible basis by reason of the 
unit's ineligibility for the credit under this section. However, in 
calculating the applicable fraction, the unit is treated as a 
residential rental unit that is not a low-income unit.

[T.D. 8520, 59 FR 10073, Mar. 3, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1.42-10  Utility allowances.

    (a) Inclusion of utility allowances in gross rent. If the cost of 
any utilities (other than telephone) for a residential rental unit are 
paid directly by the tenant(s), the gross rent for that unit includes 
the applicable utility allowance determined under this section. This 
section only applies for purposes of determining gross rent under 
section 42(g)(2)(B)(ii) as to rent-restricted units.
    (b) Applicable utility allowances--(1) FmHA-assisted buildings. If a 
building receives assistance from the Farmers Home Administration (FmHA-
assisted building), the applicable utility allowance for all rent-
restricted units in the building is the utility allowance determined 
under the method prescribed by the Farmers Home Administration (FmHA) 
for the building. For example, if a building receives assistance under 
FmHA's section 515 program (whether or not the building or its tenants 
also receive other state or federal assistance), the applicable utility 
allowance for all rent-restricted units in the building is determined 
using Exhibit A-6 of 7 CFR part 1944, subpart E (or a successor method 
of determining utility allowances).

[[Page 145]]

    (2) Buildings with FmHA assisted tenants. If any tenant in a 
building receives FmHA rental assistance payments (FmHA tenant 
assistance), the applicable utility allowance for all rent-restricted 
units in the building (including any units occupied by tenants receiving 
HUD rental assistance payments) is the applicable FmHA utility 
allowance.
    (3) HUD-regulated buildings. If neither a building nor any tenant in 
the building receives FmHA housing assistance, and the rents and utility 
allowances of the building are reviewed by HUD on an annual basis (HUD-
regulated building), the applicable utility allowance for all rent-
restricted units in the building is the applicable HUD utility 
allowance.
    (4) Other buildings. If a building is neither an FmHA-assisted nor a 
HUD-regulated building, and no tenant in the building receives FmHA 
tenant assistance, the applicable utility allowance for rent-restricted 
units in the building is determined under the following methods.
    (i) Tenants receiving HUD rental assistance. The applicable utility 
allowance for any rent-restricted units occupied by tenants receiving 
HUD rental assistance payments (HUD tenant assistance) is the applicable 
Public Housing Authority (PHA) utility allowance established for the 
Section 8 Existing Housing Program.
    (ii) Other tenants--(A) General rule. If none of the rules of 
paragraphs (b)(1), (2), (3), and (4)(i) of this section apply to any 
rent-restricted units in a building, the appropriate utility allowance 
for the units is the applicable PHA utility allowance. However, if a 
local utility company estimate is obtained for any unit in the building 
in accordance with paragraph (b)(4)(ii)(B) of this section, that 
estimate becomes the appropriate utility allowance for all rent-
restricted units of similar size and construction in the building. This 
local utility company estimate procedure is not available for and does 
not apply to units to which the rules of paragraphs (b) (1), (2), (3), 
or (4)(i) of this section apply.
    (B) Utility company estimate. Any interested party (including a low-
income tenant, a building owner, or an Agency) may obtain a local 
utility company estimate for a unit. The estimate is obtained when the 
interested party receives, in writing, information from a local utility 
company providing the estimated cost of that utility for a unit of 
similar size and construction for the geographic area in which the 
building containing the unit is located. The local utility company 
estimate may be obtained by an interested party at any time during the 
building's extended use period (see section 42(h)(6)(D)) or, if the 
building does not have an extended use period, during the building's 
compliance period (see section 42(i)(1)). Unless the parties agree 
otherwise, costs incurred in obtaining the estimate are borne by the 
initiating party. The interested party that obtains the local utility 
company estimate (the initiating party) must retain the original of the 
utility company estimate and must furnish a copy of the local utility 
company estimate to the owner of the building (where the initiating 
party is not the owner), and the Agency that allocated credit to the 
building (where the initiating party is not the Agency). The owner of 
the building must make available copies of the utility company estimate 
to the tenants in the building.
    (c) Changes in applicable utility allowance. If at any time during 
the building's extended use period (or, if the building does not have an 
extended use period, the building's compliance period), the applicable 
utility allowance for a unit changes, the new utility allowance must be 
used to compute gross rents of rent-restricted units due 90 days after 
the change. For example, if rent must be lowered because a local utility 
company estimate is obtained that shows a higher utility cost than the 
otherwise applicable PHA utility allowance, the lower rent must be in 
effect for rent due more than 90 days after the date of the local 
utility company estimate.

[T.D. 8520, 59 FR 10073, Mar. 3, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1.42-11  Provision of services.

    (a) General rule. The furnishing to tenants of services other than 
housing (whether or not the services are significant) does not prevent 
the units occupied by the tenants from qualifying as residential rental 
property eligible for

[[Page 146]]

credit under section 42. However, any charges to low-income tenants for 
services that are not optional generally must be included in gross rent 
for purposes of section 42(g).
    (b) Services that are optional--(1) General rule. A service is 
optional if payment for the service is not required as a condition of 
occupancy. For example, for a qualified low-income building with a 
common dining facility, the cost of meals is not included in gross rent 
for purposes of section 42(g)(2)(A) if payment for the meals in the 
facility is not required as a condition of occupancy and a practical 
alternative exists for tenants to obtain meals other than from the 
dining facility.
    (2) Continual or frequent services. If continual or frequent 
nursing, medical, or psychiatric services are provided, it is presumed 
that the services are not optional and the building is ineligible for 
the credit, as is the case with a hospital, nursing home, sanitarium, 
lifecare facility, or intermediate care facility for the mentally and 
physically handicapped. See also Sec. 1.42-9(b).
    (3) Required services--(i) General rule. The cost of services that 
are required as a condition of occupancy must be included in gross rent 
even if federal or state law requires that the services be offered to 
tenants by building owners.
    (ii) Exceptions--(A) Supportive services. Section 42(g)(2)(B)(iii) 
provides an exception for certain fees paid for supportive services. For 
purposes of section 42(g)(2)(B)(iii), a supportive service is any 
service provided under a planned program of services designed to enable 
residents of a residential rental property to remain independent and 
avoid placement in a hospital, nursing home, or intermediate care 
facility for the mentally or physically handicapped. For a building 
described in section 42(i)(3)(B)(iii) (relating to transitional housing 
for the homeless), a supportive service includes any service provided to 
assist tenants in locating and retaining permanent housing.
    (B) Specific project exception. Gross rent does not include the cost 
of mandatory meals in any federally-assisted project for the elderly and 
handicapped (in existence on or before January 9, 1989) that is 
authorized by 24 CFR 278 to provide a mandatory meals program.

[T.D. 8520, 59 FR 10074, Mar. 3, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1.42-12  Effective dates and transitional rules.

    (a) Effective date. The rules set forth in Secs. 1.42-6 and 1.42-8 
through 1.42-12 are effective May 2, 1994. However, binding agreements, 
election statements, and carryover allocation documents entered into 
before May 2, 1994, that follow the guidance set forth in Notice 89-1, 
1989-1 C.B. 620 (see Sec. 601.601(d)(2)(ii)(b) of this chapter) need not 
be changed to conform to the rules set forth in Secs. 1.42-6 and 1.42-8 
through 1.42-12.
    (b) Prior periods. Notice 89-1, 1989-1 C.B. 620 and Notice 89-6, 
1989-1 C.B. 625 (see Sec. 601.601(d)(2)(ii)(b) of this chapter) may be 
applied for periods prior to May 2, 1994.

[T.D. 8520, 59 FR 10074, Mar. 3, 1994; 59 FR 15501, Apr. 1, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1.42-13  Rules necessary and appropriate; housing credit agencies' correction of administrative errors and omissions.

    (a) Publication of guidance. Under section 42(n), the Secretary has 
authority to prescribe regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to 
carry out the purposes of section 42. The Secretary may also provide 
guidance through various publications in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. 
(See Sec. 601.601(d)(2)(ii)(b) of this chapter.)
    (b) Correcting administrative errors and omissions--(1) In general. 
An Agency may correct an administrative error or omission with respect 
to allocations and recordkeeping, as described in paragraph (b)(2) of 
this section, within a reasonable period after the Agency discovers the 
administrative error or omission. Whether a correction is made within a 
reasonable period depends on the facts and circumstances of each 
situation. Except as provided in paragraph (b)(3)(iii) of this section, 
an Agency need not obtain the prior approval of the Secretary to correct 
an administrative error or omission, if the correction is made in 
accordance with paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section. The administrative 
errors and omissions to which this paragraph (b) applies are strictly 
limited to those described in

[[Page 147]]

paragraph (b)(2) of this section, and, thus, do not include, for 
example, any misinterpretation of the applicable rules and regulations 
under section 42. Accordingly, an Agency's allocation of a particular 
calendar year's low-income housing credit dollar amount made after the 
close of that calendar year, or the use of an incorrect population 
amount in calculating a State's housing credit ceiling for a calendar 
year are not administrative errors that can be corrected under this 
paragraph (b).
    (2) Administrative errors and omissions described. An administrative 
error or omission is a mistake that results in a document that 
inaccurately reflects the intent of the Agency at the time the document 
is originally completed or, if the mistake affects a taxpayer, a 
document that inaccurately reflects the intent of the Agency and the 
affected taxpayer at the time the document is originally completed. 
Administrative errors and omissions described in this paragraph (b)(2) 
include the following--
    (i) A mathematical error;
    (ii) An entry on a document that is inconsistent with another entry 
on the same or another document regarding the same property, or 
taxpayer;
    (iii) A failure in tracking the housing credit dollar amount an 
Agency has allocated (or that remains to be allocated) in the current 
calendar year (e.g., a failure to include in its State housing credit 
ceiling a previously allocated credit dollar amount that has been 
returned by a taxpayer);
    (iv) An omission of information that is required on a document; and
    (v) Any other type of error or omission identified by guidance 
published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin (see 
Sec. 601.601(d)(2)(ii)(b) of this chapter) as an administrative error or 
omission covered by this paragraph (b).
    (3) Procedures for correcting administrative errors or omissions--
(i) In general. An Agency's correction of an administrative error or 
omission, as described in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, must amend 
the document so that the corrected document reflects the original intent 
of the Agency, or the Agency and the affected taxpayer, and complies 
with applicable rules and regulations under section 42.
    (ii) Specific procedures. If a document corrects a document 
containing an administrative error or omission that has not yet been 
filed with the Internal Revenue Service, the Agency, or the Agency and 
the affected taxpayer, should complete and file the corrected document 
as the original. When a document containing an administrative error or 
omission has already been filed with the Service, the Agency, or the 
Agency and the affected taxpayer, should refile a copy of the document 
containing the administrative error or omission, and prominently and 
clearly note the correction thereon or on an attached new document. The 
Agency should indicate at the top of the document(s) that the correction 
is being made under Sec. 1.42-13 of the Income Tax Regulations.
    (iii) Secretary's prior approval required. An Agency must obtain the 
Secretary's prior approval to correct an administrative error or 
omission, as described in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, if the 
correction is not made before the close of the calendar year of the 
error or omission and the correction--
    (A) Is a numerical change to the housing credit dollar amount 
allocated for the building or project;
    (B) Affects the determination of any component of the State's 
housing credit ceiling under section 42(h)(3)(C); or
    (C) Affects the State's unused housing credit carryover that is 
assigned to the Secretary under section 42(h)(3)(D).
    (iv) Requesting the Secretary's approval. To obtain the Secretary's 
approval under paragraph (b)(3)(iii) of this section, an Agency must 
submit a request for the Secretary's approval within a reasonable period 
after discovering the administrative error or omission, and must agree 
to any conditions that may be required by the Secretary under paragraph 
(b)(3)(v) of this section. When requesting the Secretary's approval, the 
Agency, or the Agency and the affected taxpayer, must file an 
application that complies with the requirements of this paragraph 
(b)(3)(iv). For further information on the application procedure see 
Rev. Proc. 93-1, 1993-1 I.R.B. 10 (or any subsequent applicable revenue 
procedure). (See

[[Page 148]]

Sec. 601.601(d)(2)(ii)(b) of this chapter.) The application requesting 
the Secretary's approval must contain the following information--
    (A) The name, address, and identification number of each affected 
taxpayer;
    (B) The Building Identification Number (B.I.N.) and address of each 
building or project affected by the administrative error or omission;
    (C) A statement explaining the administrative error or omission and 
the intent of the Agency, or of the Agency and the affected taxpayer, 
when the document was originally completed;
    (D) Copies of any supporting documentation;
    (E) A statement explaining the effect, if any, that a correction of 
the administrative error or omission would have on the housing credit 
dollar amount allocated for any building or project; and
    (F) A statement explaining the effect, if any, that a correction of 
the administrative error or omission would have on the determination of 
the components of the State's housing credit ceiling under section 
42(h)(3)(C) or on the State's unused housing credit carryover that is 
assigned to the Secretary under section 42(h)(3)(D).
    (v) Agreement to conditions. To obtain the Secretary's approval 
under paragraph (b)(3)(iii) of this section, an Agency, or the Agency 
and the affected taxpayer, must agree to the conditions the Secretary 
considers appropriate.
    (c) Examples. The following examples illustrate the scope of this 
section:

    Example 1. Individual B applied to Agency X for a reservation of a 
low-income housing credit dollar amount for a building that is part of a 
low-income housing project. When applying for the low-income housing 
credit dollar amount, B informed Agency X that B intended to form 
Partnership Y to finance the project. After receiving the reservation 
letter and prior to receiving an allocation, B formed Partnership Y and 
sold partnership interests to a number of limited partners. B 
contributed the low-income housing project to Partnership Y in exchange 
for a partnership interest. B and Partnership Y informed Agency X of the 
ownership change. When actually allocating the housing credit dollar 
amount, Agency X sent Partnership Y a document listing B, rather than 
Partnership Y, as the building's owner. Partnership Y promptly notified 
Agency X of the error. After reviewing related documents, Agency X 
determined that it had incorrectly listed B as the building's owner on 
the allocation document. Since the parties originally intended that 
Partnership Y would receive the allocation as the owner of the building, 
Agency X may correct the error without obtaining the Secretary's 
approval, and insert Partnership Y as the building's owner on the 
allocation document.
    Example 2. Agency Y allocated a lower low-income housing credit 
dollar amount for a low-income housing building than Agency Y originally 
intended. After the close of the calendar year of the allocation, B, the 
building's owner, discovered the error and promptly notified Agency Y. 
Agency Y reviewed relevant documents and agreed that an error had 
occurred. Agency Y and B must apply, as provided in paragraph (b)(3)(iv) 
of this section, for the Secretary's approval before Agency Y may 
correct the error.

    (d) Effective date. This section is effective February 24, 1994. 
However, an Agency may elect to apply these regulations to 
administrative errors or omissions that occurred before the publication 
of these regulations. Any reasonable method used by a State or local 
housing credit agency to correct an administrative error or omission 
prior to February 24, 1994, will be considered proper, provided that the 
method is consistent with the rules of section 42.

[T.D. 8521, 59 FR 8861, Feb. 24, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1.42-14  Allocation rules for post-1989 State housing credit ceiling amounts.

    (a) In general. The State housing credit ceiling for a State for any 
calendar year after 1989 is comprised of four components. The four 
components are--
    (1) $1.25 multiplied by the State population (the population 
component);
    (2) The unused State housing credit ceiling, if any, of the State 
for the preceding calendar year (the unused carryforward component);
    (3) The amount of State housing credit ceiling returned in the 
calendar year (the returned credit component); plus
    (4) The amount, if any, allocated to the State by the Secretary 
under section 42(h)(3)(D) from a national pool of unused credit (the 
national pool component).

[[Page 149]]

    (b) The population component. The population component of the State 
housing credit ceiling of a State for any calendar year is determined 
pursuant to section 146(j). Thus, a State's population for any calendar 
year is determined by reference to the most recent census estimate, 
whether final or provisional, of the resident population of the State 
released by the Bureau of the Census before the beginning of the 
calendar year for which the State's housing credit ceiling is set. 
Unless otherwise prescribed by applicable revenue procedure, 
determinations of population are based on the most recent estimates of 
population contained in the Bureau of the Census publication, Current 
Population Report, Series P-25; Population Estimates and Projections, 
Estimates of the Population of States. For convenience, the Internal 
Revenue Service publishes the population estimates annually in the 
Internal Revenue Bulletin. (See Sec. 601.601(d)(2)(ii)(b)).
    (c) The unused carryforward component. The unused carryforward 
component of the State housing credit ceiling of a State for any 
calendar year is the excess, if any, of the sum of the population and 
returned credit components, over the aggregate housing credit dollar 
amount allocated for the year. Any credit amounts attributable to the 
national pool component of the State housing credit ceiling that remain 
unallocated at the close of a calendar year are not carried forward to 
the succeeding calendar year; instead, the credit expires and cannot be 
reallocated by any Agency.
    (d) The returned credit component--(1) In general. The returned 
credit component of the State housing credit ceiling of a State for any 
calendar year equals the housing credit dollar amount returned during 
the calendar year that was validly allocated within the State in a prior 
calendar year to any project that does not become a qualified low-income 
housing project within the period required by section 42, or as required 
by the terms of the allocation. The returned credit component also 
includes credit allocated in a prior calendar year that is returned as a 
result of the cancellation of an allocation by mutual consent or by an 
Agency's determination that the amount allocated is not necessary for 
the financial feasibility of the project. For purposes of this section, 
credit is allocated within a State if it is allocated from the State's 
housing credit ceiling by an Agency of the State or of a constitutional 
home rule city in the State.
    (2) Limitations and special rules. The following limitations and 
special rules apply for purposes of this paragraph (d).
    (i) General limitations. Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
paragraph (d), returned credit does not include any credit that was--
    (A) Allocated prior to calendar year 1990;
    (B) Allowable under section 42(h)(4) (relating to the portion of 
credit attributable to eligible basis financed by certain tax-exempt 
bonds under section 103); or
    (C) Allocated during the same calendar year that it is received back 
by the Agency.
    (ii) Credit period limitation. Notwithstanding any other provision 
of this paragraph (d), an allocation of credit may not be returned any 
later than 180 days following the close of the first taxable year of the 
credit period for the building that received the allocation. After this 
date, credit that might otherwise be returned expires, and cannot be 
returned to or reallocated by any Agency.
    (iii) Three-month rule for returned credit. An Agency may, in its 
discretion, treat any portion of credit that is returned from a project 
after September 30 of a calendar year and that is not reallocated by the 
close of the calendar year as returned on January 1 of the succeeding 
calendar year. In this case, the returned credit becomes part of the 
returned credit component of the State housing credit ceiling for the 
succeeding calendar year. Any portion of credit that is returned from a 
project after September 30 of a calendar year that is reallocated by the 
close of the calendar year is treated as part of the returned credit 
component of the State housing credit ceiling for the calendar year that 
the credit was returned.
    (iv) Returns of credit. Subject to the limitations of paragraphs 
(d)(2) (i) and (ii) of this section, credit is returned to the Agency in 
the following instances

[[Page 150]]

in the manner described in paragraph (d)(3) of this section.
    (A) Building not qualified within required time period. If a 
building is not a qualified building within the time period required by 
section 42, it loses its credit allocation and the credit is returned. 
For example, a building is not qualified within the required time period 
if it is not placed in service within the period required by section 42 
or if the project of which the building is a part fails to meet the 
minimum set-aside requirements of section 42(g)(1) by the close of the 
first year of the credit period.
    (B) Noncompliance with terms of the allocation. If a building does 
not comply with the terms of its allocation, it loses the credit 
allocation and the credit is returned. The terms of an allocation are 
the written conditions agreed to by the Agency and the allocation 
recipient in the allocation document.
    (C) Mutual consent. If the Agency and the allocation recipient 
cancel an allocation of an amount of credit by mutual consent, that 
amount of credit is returned.
    (D) Amount not necessary for financial feasibility. If an Agency 
determines under section 42(m)(2) that an amount of credit allocated to 
a project is not necessary for the financial feasibility of the project 
and its viability as a qualified low-income housing project throughout 
the credit period, that amount of credit is returned.
    (3) Manner of returning credit--(i) Taxpayer notification. After an 
Agency determines that a building or project no longer qualifies under 
paragraph (d)(2)(iv)(A), (B), or (D) of this section for all or part of 
the allocation it received, the Agency must provide written notification 
to the allocation recipient, or its successor in interest, that all or 
part of the allocation is no longer valid. The notification must also 
state the amount of the allocation that is no longer valid. The date of 
the notification is the date the credit is returned to the Agency. If an 
allocation is cancelled by mutual consent under paragraph (d)(2)(iv)(C) 
of this section, there must be a written agreement signed by the Agency, 
and the allocation recipient, or its successor in interest, indicating 
the amount of the allocation that is returned to the Agency. The 
effective date of the agreement is the date the credit is returned to 
the Agency.
    (ii) Internal Revenue Service notification. If a credit is returned 
within 180 days following the close of the first taxable year of a 
building's credit period as provided in paragraph (d)(2)(ii) of this 
section, and a Form 8609, Low-Income Housing Credit Allocation 
Certification, has been issued for the building, the Agency must notify 
the Internal Revenue Service that the credit has been returned. If only 
part of the credit has been returned, this notification requirement is 
satisfied when the Agency attaches to an amended Form 8610, Annual Low- 
Income Housing Credit Agencies Report, the original of an amended Form 
8609 reflecting the correct amount of credit attributed to the building 
together with an explanation for the filing of the amended Forms. The 
Agency must send a copy of the amended Form 8609 to the taxpayer that 
owns the building. If the building is not issued an amended Form 8609 
because all of the credit allocated to the building is returned, 
notification to the Internal Revenue Service is satisfied by following 
the requirements prescribed in Sec. 1.42-5(e)(3) for filing a Form 8823, 
Low-Income Housing Credit Agencies Report of Noncompliance.
    (e) The national pool component. The national pool component of the 
State housing credit ceiling of a State for any calendar year is the 
portion of the National Pool allocated to the State by the Secretary for 
the calendar year. The national pool component for any calendar year is 
zero unless a State is a qualified State. (See paragraph (i) of this 
section for rules regarding the National Pool and the description of a 
qualified State.) Credit from the national pool component of a State 
housing credit ceiling must be allocated prior to the close of the 
calendar year or the credit expires and cannot be reallocated by any 
Agency. A national pool component credit that is allocated during a 
calendar year and returned after the close of the calendar year may 
qualify as part of the returned credit component of the State housing

[[Page 151]]

credit ceiling for the calendar year that the credit is returned.
    (f) When the State housing credit ceiling is determined. For 
purposes of accounting for the State housing credit ceiling on Form 8610 
and for purposes of determining the set-aside apportionment for projects 
involving qualified nonprofit organizations described in section 
42(h)(5) and Sec. 1.42-1T(c)(5), the State housing credit ceiling for 
any calendar year is determined at the close of the calendar year.
    (g) Stacking order. Under section 42(h)(3)(C), credit is treated as 
allocated from the various components of the State housing credit 
ceiling in the following order. The first credit allocated for any 
calendar year is treated as credit from the sum of the population and 
returned credit components of the State housing credit ceiling. Once all 
of the credit in these components has been allocated, the next credit 
allocated is treated as credit from the unused carryforward component of 
the State housing credit ceiling. Finally, after all of the credit from 
the population component, returned credit component, and unused 
carryforward component has been allocated, any further credit allocated 
is treated as credit from the national pool component.
    (h) Nonprofit set-aside--(1) Determination of set-aside. Under 
section 42(h)(5) and Sec. 1.42-1T(c)(5), at least 10 percent of a State 
housing credit ceiling in any calendar year must be set aside 
exclusively for projects involving qualified nonprofit organizations 
(the nonprofit set-aside). However, credit allocated from the nonprofit 
set-aside in a calendar year and returned in a subsequent calendar year 
does not retain its nonprofit set-aside character. The credit becomes 
part of the returned credit component of the State housing credit 
ceiling for the calendar year that the credit is returned and must be 
included in determining the nonprofit set-aside of the State housing 
credit ceiling for that calendar year. Similarly, credit amounts that 
are not allocated from the nonprofit set-aside in a calendar year and 
are returned in a subsequent calendar year become part of the returned 
credit component of the State housing credit ceiling for that year and 
are also included in determining the set-aside for that year.
    (2) Allocation rules. An Agency may allocate credit from any 
component of the State housing credit ceiling as part of the nonprofit 
set-aside and need not reserve 10 percent of each component for the 
nonprofit set-aside. Thus, an Agency may satisfy the nonprofit set-aside 
requirement of section 42(h)(5) and Sec. 1.42-1T(c)(5) in any calendar 
year by setting aside for allocation an amount equal to at least 10 
percent of the total State housing credit ceiling for the calendar year.
    (i) National Pool--(1) In general. The unused housing credit 
carryover of a State for any calendar year is assigned to the Secretary 
for inclusion in a national pool of unused housing credit carryovers 
(National Pool) that is reallocated among qualified States the 
succeeding calendar year. The assignment to the Secretary is made on 
Form 8610.
    (2) Unused housing credit carryover. The unused housing credit 
carryover of a State for any calendar year is the excess, if any, of the 
unused carryforward component of the State housing credit ceiling for 
the calendar year over the excess, if any, of--
    (i) The total housing credit dollar amount allocated for the year; 
over
    (ii) The sum of the population and returned credit components of the 
State housing credit ceiling for the year.
    (3) Qualified State--(i) In general. The term qualified State means, 
with respect to any calendar year, any State that has allocated its 
entire State housing credit ceiling for the preceding calendar year and 
for which a request is made by the State, not later than May 1 of the 
calendar year, to receive an allocation of credit from the National Pool 
for that calendar year. Except as provided in paragraph (i)(3)(ii) of 
this section, a State is not a qualified State in a calendar year if 
there remains any unallocated credit in its State housing credit ceiling 
at the close of the preceding calendar year that was apportioned to any 
Agency within the State for the calendar year.
    (ii) Exceptions--(A) De minimis amount. If the amount remaining 
unallocated at the close of a calendar year is only a de minimis amount 
of

[[Page 152]]

credit, the State is a qualified State eligible to participate in the 
National Pool. For that purpose, a credit amount is de minimis if it 
does not exceed 1 percent of the aggregate State housing credit ceiling 
of the State for the calendar year.
    (B) Other circumstances. Pursuant to the authority under section 
42(n), the Internal Revenue Service may determine that a State is a 
qualified State eligible to participate in the National Pool even though 
the State's unallocated credit is in excess of the 1 percent safe harbor 
set forth in paragraph (A) of this section. The Internal Revenue Service 
will make this determination based on all the facts and circumstances, 
weighing heavily the interests of the States who would otherwise qualify 
for the National Pool. The Internal Revenue Service will generally grant 
relief under this paragraph only where a State's unallocated credit is 
not substantial.
    (iii) Time and manner for making request. For further guidance as to 
the time and manner for making a request of housing credit dollar 
amounts from the National Pool by a qualified State, see Rev. Proc. 92-
31, 1992-1 C.B. 775. (See 601.601(d)(2)(ii)(b)).
    (4) Formula for determining the National Pool. The amount allocated 
to a qualified State in any calendar year is an amount that bears the 
same ratio to the aggregate unused housing credit carryovers of all 
States for the preceding calendar year as that State's population for 
the calendar year bears to the population of all qualified States for 
the calendar year.
    (j) Coordination between Agencies. The Agency responsible for filing 
Form 8610 on behalf of all Agencies within a State and making any 
request on behalf of the State for credit from the National Pool (the 
Filing Agency) must coordinate with each Agency within the State to 
ensure that the various requirements of this section are complied with. 
For example, the Filing Agency of a State must ensure that all Agencies 
within the State that were apportioned a credit amount for the calendar 
year have allocated all of their respective credit amounts for the 
calendar year before the Filing Agency can make a request on behalf of 
the State for a distribution of credit from the National Pool.
    (k) Examples. (1) The operation of the rules of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples. Unless otherwise stated in an 
example, Agency A is the sole Agency authorized to make allocations of 
housing credit dollar amounts in State M, all of Agency A's allocations 
are valid, and for calendar year 1994 Agency A has available for 
allocation a State housing credit ceiling consisting of the following 
housing credit dollar amounts:

A. Population component........................................     $100
B. Unused carryforward component...............................       50
C. Returned credit component...................................       10
D. National pool component.....................................        0
                                                                --------
      Total....................................................      160
                                                                        

    (2) In addition, the $10 of returned credit component was returned 
before October 1, 1994.

    Example 1--(i) Additional facts. By the close of 1994, Agency A had 
allocated $80 of the State M housing credit ceiling. Of the $80 
allocated, $16 was allocated to projects involving qualified nonprofit 
organizations.
    (ii) Application of stacking rules. The first credit allocated is 
treated as allocated from the population and returned credit components 
of the State housing credit ceiling, to the extent of those components. 
In this case, the $80 of credit allocated is less than the sum of the 
population and returned credit components. The excess of the sum of the 
population and returned credit components over the total amount 
allocated for the calendar year ($110-80=$30) becomes the unused 
carryforward component of State M's 1995 State housing credit ceiling. 
Because Agency A did not allocate credit in excess of the sum of the 
population and returned credit components, no credit is treated as 
allocated from State M's $50 unused carryforward component in 1994. 
Because none of this component may be carried forward, all $50 is 
assigned to the Secretary for inclusion in the National Pool. Under 
paragraph (i)(3) of this section, State M does not qualify for credit 
from the National Pool for the 1995 calendar year.
    (iii) Nonprofit set-aside. Agency A allocated exactly the amount of 
credit to projects involving qualified nonprofit organizations as 
necessary to meet the nonprofit set-aside requirement ($16, 10% of the 
$160 ceiling).
    Example 2--(i) Additional facts. By the close of 1994, Agency A had 
allocated $130 of the State M housing credit ceiling. Of the $130 
allocated, $20 was allocated to projects involving qualified nonprofit 
organizations.

[[Page 153]]

    (ii) Application of stacking rules. The first $110 of credit 
allocated is treated as allocated from the population and returned 
credit components. In this case, because all of the population and 
returned credit components are allocated, no amount is included in State 
M's 1995 State housing credit ceiling as an unused carryforward 
component. The next $20 of credit allocated is treated as allocated from 
the $50 unused carryforward component. The $30 remaining in the unused 
carryforward component is assigned to the Secretary for inclusion in the 
National Pool for the 1995 calendar year. Under paragraph (i)(3) of this 
section, State M does not qualify for credit from the National Pool for 
the 1995 calendar year.
    (iii) Nonprofit set-aside. Agency A allocated $4 more credit to 
projects involving qualified nonprofit organizations than necessary to 
meet the nonprofit set-aside requirement. This does not reduce the 
application of the 10% nonprofit set-aside requirement to the State M 
housing credit ceiling for the succeeding year.
    Example 3--(i) Additional fact. None of the applications for credit 
that Agency A received for 1994 are for projects involving qualified 
nonprofit organizations.
    (ii) Nonprofit set-aside. Because at least 10% of the State housing 
credit ceiling must be set aside for projects involving a qualified 
nonprofit organization, Agency A can allocate only $144 of the $160 
State housing credit ceiling for calendar year 1994 ($160-16=$144). If 
Agency A allocates $144 of credit, the credit is treated as allocated 
$110 from the population and returned credit components and $34 from the 
unused carryforward component. The $16 of unallocated credit that is set 
aside for projects involving qualified nonprofit organizations is 
treated as the balance of the unused carryforward component, and is 
assigned to the Secretary for inclusion in the National Pool. Under 
paragraph (i)(3) of this section, State M does not qualify for credit 
from the National Pool for the 1995 calendar year.
    Example 4--(i) Additional facts. The $10 of returned credit 
component was returned prior to October 1, 1994. However, a $40 credit 
that had been allocated in calendar year 1993 to a project involving a 
qualified nonprofit organization was returned to the Agency by a mutual 
consent agreement dated November 15, 1994. By the close of 1994, Agency 
A had allocated $160 of the State M housing credit ceiling, including 
$16 of credit to projects involving qualified nonprofit organizations.
    (ii) Effect of three-month rule. Under the three-month rule of 
paragraph (d)(2)(iii) of this section, Agency A may treat all or part of 
the $40 of previously allocated credit as returned on January 1, 1995. 
If Agency A treats all of the $40 amount as having been returned in 
calendar year 1995, the State M housing credit ceiling for 1994 is $160. 
This entire amount, including the $16 nonprofit set-aside, has been 
allocated in 1994. Under paragraph (i)(3) of this section, State M 
qualifies for the National Pool for the 1995 calendar year.
    (iii) If three-month rule not used. If Agency A treats all of the 
$40 of previously allocated credit as returned in calendar year 1994, 
the State housing credit ceiling for the 1994 calendar year will be $200 
of which $50 will be attributable to the returned credit component 
($10+$40=$50). Because credit amounts allocated in a prior calendar year 
that are returned in a subsequent calendar year do not retain their 
nonprofit character, the nonprofit set-aside for calendar year 1994 is 
$20 (10% of $200). The $160 that Agency A allocated during 1994 is first 
treated as allocated from the population and returned credit components, 
which total $150. The next $10 of credit allocated is treated as 
allocated from the unused carryforward component. The $40 of unallocated 
credit from the unused carryforward component includes the $4 of 
unallocated nonprofit set-aside. The entire $40 of credit from the 
carryforward component is assigned to the Secretary for inclusion in the 
National Pool for the 1995 calendar year. State M does not qualify for 
credit from the National Pool for the 1995 calendar year.
    Example 5--(i) (A) Additional facts. For calendar year 1994, Agency 
A has a State housing credit ceiling that consists of the following 
housing credit dollar amounts:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
A. Population component........................................     $100
B. Unused carryforward component...............................        0
C. Returned credit component...................................       20
D. National pool component.....................................       10
                                                                --------
      Total....................................................      130
Minimum nonprofit set-aside....................................       13
Ceiling amount not set-aside...................................      117
                                                                        

    In addition, the $20 of returned credit component was returned 
before October 1, 1994. By the close of 1994, Agency A had allocated 
$100 of the State housing credit ceiling.
    (ii) Application of stacking rules. The $20 excess of the sum of the 
population component and the returned credit component over the total 
amount allocated for the calendar year ($120-100=$20) becomes the unused 
carryforward component of the State housing credit ceiling for the 1995 
calendar year. The $10 of unallocated credit from the national pool 
component expires and cannot be reallocated. This amount is neither 
carried over to 1995 by State M nor assigned to the Secretary for 
inclusion in the National Pool. Under paragraph (i)(3) of this section, 
State M does not qualify for credit from the National Pool for the 1995 
calendar year.


[[Page 154]]


    (l) Effective date. The rules set forth in Sec. 1.42-14 are 
effective January 1, 1994.

[T.D. 8563, 59 FR 50163, Oct. 3, 1994; 60 FR 3345, Jan. 17, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 1.42-16T  Eligible basis reduced by federal grants (temporary).

    (a) In general. If, during any taxable year of the compliance period 
(described in section 42(i)(1)), a grant is made with respect to any 
building or the operation thereof and any portion of the grant is funded 
with federal funds (whether or not includible in gross income), the 
eligible basis of the building for the taxable year and all succeeding 
taxable years is reduced by the portion of the grant that is so funded.
    (b) Grants do not include certain rental assistance payments. A 
federal rental assistance payment made to a building owner on behalf or 
in respect of a tenant is not a grant made with respect to a building or 
its operation if the payment is made pursuant to--
    (1) Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937;
    (2) A qualifying program of rental assistance administered under 
section 9 of the United States Housing Act of 1937; or
    (3) A program or method of rental assistance as the Secretary may 
designate through the Federal Register or in the Internal Revenue 
Bulletin (see Sec. 601.601(d)(2) of this chapter).
    (c) Qualifying rental assistance program. For purposes of paragraph 
(b)(2) of this section, payments are made pursuant to a qualifying 
rental assistance program administered under section 9 of the United 
State Housing Act of 1937 to the extent that the payments--
    (1) Are made to a building owner pursuant to a contract with a 
public housing authority with respect to units the owner has agreed to 
maintain as public housing units (PH-units) in the building;
    (2) Are made with respect to units occupied by public housing 
tenants, provided that, for this purpose, units may be considered 
occupied during periods of short term vacancy (not to exceed 60 days); 
and
    (3) Do not exceed the difference between the rents received from a 
building's PH-unit tenants and a pro rata portion of the building's 
actual operating costs that are reasonably allocable to the PH-units 
(based on square footage, number of bedrooms, or similar objective 
criteria), and provided that, for this purpose, operating costs do not 
include any development costs of a building (including developer's fees) 
or the principal or interest of any debt incurred with respect to any 
part of the building.
    (d) Effective date. This section is effective January 27, 1997.

[T.D. 8713, 62 FR 3793, Jan. 27, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 1.42A-1  General tax credit for taxable years ending after December 31, 1975, and before January 1, 1979.

    (a)(1) Allowance of credit for taxable years ending after December 
31, 1975, and beginning before January 1, 1977. Subject to the special 
rules of paragraphs (b)(1), (c) and (d) and the limitation of paragraph 
(e)(1) of this section, an individual is allowed as a credit against the 
tax imposed by chapter 1 for the taxable year in the case of taxable 
years ending after December 31, 1975, and beginning before January 1, 
1977, an amount equal to the greater of--
    (i) 2 percent of so much of the individual's taxable income as does 
not exceed $9,000, or
    (ii) $35 multiplied by the total number of deductions for personal 
exemptions to which the individual is entitled for the taxable year 
under section 151 (b) and (e) and the regulations thereunder (relating 
to allowance of deductions for personal exemptions with respect to the 
individual, the individual's spouse, and dependents).

For purposes of applying subdivision (ii) of this paragraph (a)(1), the 
total number of deductions for personal exemptions shall not include any 
additional exemptions to which the individual or his spouse may be 
entitled based upon age of 65 or more or blindness under section 151 (c) 
or (d) and the regulations thereunder.y
    (2) Allowance of credit for taxable years beginning after December 
31, 1976, and ending before January 1, 1979.  Subject to the special 
rules of paragraphs (b)(2), (c) and (d) and the limitation of paragraph 
(e)(2) of this section, an individual is allowed as a credit against the

[[Page 155]]

tax imposed by section 1, or against the tax imposed in lieu of the tax 
imposed by section 1, for the taxable year in the case of taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1976, and ending before January 1, 1979, an 
amount equal to the greater of--
    (i) 2 percent of so much of the individual's taxable income for the 
taxable year, reduced by the zero bracket amount determined under 
section 63 (d), as does not exceed $9,000, or
    (ii) $35 multiplied by the total number of deductions for personal 
exemptions to which the individual is entitled for the taxable year 
under section 151 and the regulations thereunder (relating to allowance 
of deductions for personal exemptions).
    (b) Married individuals filing separate returns--(1) For taxable 
years ending after December 31, 1975, and beginning before January 1, 
1977. In the case of taxable years ending after December 31, 1975, and 
beginning before January 1, 1977, a married individual who files a 
separate return for the taxable year is allowed as a credit for the 
taxable year an amount equal to either--
    (i) 2 percent of so much of the individual's taxable income as does 
not exceed $4,500, or
    (ii) $35 multiplied by the total number of deductions for personal 
exemptions to which the individual is entitled for the taxable year 
under section 151 (b) and (e) and the regulations thereunder, but only 
if both the individual and the individual's spouse elect to have the 
credit determined in the manner described in this subdivision (ii) for 
their corresponding taxable years. The elections shall be made by both 
married individuals separately calculating and claiming the credit in 
the manner and amount described in this subdivision (ii) on their 
separate returns for their corresponding taxable years. The rules of 
section 142 (a) and the regulations thereunder (relating to individuals 
not eligible for the standard deduction) in effect for taxable years 
beginning before January 1, 1977, apply to determine whether the taxable 
years of the individual and the individual's spouse correspond to each 
other. For purposes of applying this subdivision (ii), the total number 
of deductions for personal exemptions shall not include any additional 
exemptions to which the individual may be entitled based upon age of 65 
or more or blindness under section 151 (c) or (d) and the regulations 
thereunder.
    (2) For taxable years beginning after December 31, 1976, and ending 
before January 1, 1979. In the case of taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1976, and ending before January 1, 1979, a married 
individual who files a separate return for the taxable year shall 
determine the amount of the credit for the taxable year under section 
42(a)(2) and Sec. 1.42A-1(a)(2)(ii).
    (3) Determination of marital status. For purposes of this paragraph, 
the determination of marital status shall be made as provided by section 
143 and the regulations thereunder (relating to the determination of 
marital status).
    (c) Return for short period on change of annual accounting period. 
In computing the credit provided by section 42 and this section for a 
period of less than 12 months (hereinafter referred to as a ``short 
period''), where income is to be annualized under section 443(b)(1) in 
order to determine the tax--
    (1) The credit allowed by paragraphs (a) (1)(i) and (2)(i) of this 
section shall be computed based upon the amount of the taxable income 
annualized under the rules of section 443(b)(1) and Sec. 1.443-1(b)(1), 
or
    (2)(i) The credit allowed by paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section 
shall be computed based upon the total number of deductions for personal 
exemptions to which the individual is entitled for the short period 
under section 151 (b) and (e) and the regulations thereunder (relating 
to allowance of deductions for personal exemptions with respect to the 
individual, the individual's spouse, and dependents), and
    (ii) The credit allowed by paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section 
shall be computed based upon the total number of deductions for personal 
exemptions to which the individual is entitled for the short period 
under section 151 and the regulations thereunder (relating to allowance 
of deductions for personal exemptions).

As so computed, the credit allowed by section 42 and this section shall 
be allowed against the tax computed on the

[[Page 156]]

basis of the annualized taxable income. See Sec. 1.443-1(b)(1)(vi).
    (d) Certain persons not eligible--(1) Estates and trusts. The credit 
provided by section 42 and this section shall not be allowed in the case 
of any estate or trust. Thus, the credit shall not be allowed to an 
estate of an individual in bankruptcy or to an estate of a deceased 
individual. However, in the case of a deceased individual, the credit 
shall be allowed on the decedent's final return filed by his executor or 
other representative. Also, the credit provided by section 42 and this 
section shall be allowed in the case of a return filed by an estate of 
an infant, incompetent, or an individual under a disability.
    (2) Nonresident alien individuals. The credit provided by section 42 
and this section shall not be allowed in the case of any nonresident 
alien individual. As used in this subparagraph, the term ``nonresident 
alien individual'' has the meaning provided by Sec. 1.871-2. See, 
however, section 6013(g) for election to treat nonresident alien 
individual as resident of the United States. The credit shall be allowed 
to an alien individual who is a resident of the United States for part 
of the taxable year. See Sec. 1.871-2(b) for rules relating to the 
determination of residence of an alien individual. For purposes of 
paragraphs (a) (1)(i) and (2)(i) of this section, the credit allowed 
shall be computed by taking into account only that portion of the 
individual's taxable income which is attributable to the period of his 
residence in the United States. For purposes of paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of 
this section, the credit allowed shall be computed by taking into 
account only the total number of deductions for personal exemptions to 
which the individual is entitled under section 151 (b) and (e) for the 
period of his residence in the United States. For purposes of paragraph 
(a)(2)(ii) of this section, the credit allowed shall be computed by 
taking into account only the total number of deductions for personal 
exemptions to which the individual is entitled under section 151 for the 
period of his residence in the United States. See Sec. 1.871-13 for 
rules relating to changes of residence status during a taxable year.
    (e) Limitation--(1) For taxable years ending after December 31, 
1975, and beginning before January 1, 1977. For taxable years ending 
after December 31, 1975, and beginning before January 1, 1977, the 
credit allowed by section 42 and this section shall not exceed the 
amount of tax imposed by chapter 1 for the taxable year. In the case of 
an alien individual who is a resident of the United States for a part of 
the taxable year, the credit allowed by section 42 and this section 
shall not exceed the amount of tax imposed by chapter 1 for that portion 
of the taxable year during which the alien individual was a resident of 
the United States. See Sec. 1.871-13.
    (2) For taxable years beginning after December 31, 1976, and ending 
before January 1, 1979. For taxable years beginning after December 31, 
1976, and ending before January 1, 1979, the credit allowed by section 
42 and this section shall not exceed the amount of tax imposed by 
section 1, or the amount of tax imposed in lieu of the tax imposed by 
section 1, for the taxable year. In the case of an alien individual who 
is a resident of the United States for a part of the taxable year, the 
credit allowed by section 42 and this section shall not exceed the 
amount of tax imposed by section 1, or the amount of tax imposed in lieu 
of the tax imposed by section 1, for that portion of the taxable year 
during which the alien individual was a resident of the United States. 
See Sec. 1.871-13.
    (f) Application with other credits. In determining the credits 
allowed under--
    (1) Section 33 (relating to foreign tax credit),
    (2) Section 37 (relating to credit for the elderly),
    (3) Section 38 (relating to investment in certain depreciable 
property),
    (4) Section 40 (relating to expenses of work incentive programs), 
and
    (5) Section 41 (relating to contributions to candidates for public 
office),

the tax imposed for the taxable year shall first be reduced (before any 
other reduction) by the credit allowed by section 42 and this section 
for the taxable year.
    (g) Income tax tables to reflect credit. The tables prescribed under 
section 3

[[Page 157]]

shall reflect the credit allowed by section 42 and this section.
    (h) Effective dates. The credit allowed by section 42 and this 
section applies only for taxable years ending after December 31, 1975, 
and before January 1, 1979.

[T.D. 7547, 43 FR 19653, May 8, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 1.43-0  Table of contents.

    This section lists the captions contained in Secs. 1.43-0 through 
1.43-7.

      Sec. 1.43-1  The enhanced oil recovery credit--general rules.

(a) Claiming the credit.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Examples.
(b) Amount of the credit.
(c) Phase-out of the credit as crude oil prices increase.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Inflation adjustment.
    (3) Examples.
(d) Reduction of associated deductions.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Certain deductions by an integrated oil company.
(e) Basis adjustment.
(f) Passthrough entity basis adjustment.
    (1) Partners' interests in a partnership.
    (2) Shareholders' stock in an S corporation.
(g) Examples.

          Sec. 1.43-2  Qualified enhanced oil recovery project.

(a) Qualified enhanced oil recovery project.
(b) More than insignificant increase.
(c) First injection of liquids, gases, or other matter.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Example.
(d) Significant expansion exception.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Substantially unaffected reservoir volume.
    (3) Terminated projects.
    (4) Change in tertiary recovery method.
    (5) Examples.
(e) Qualified tertiary recovery methods.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Tertiary recovery methods that qualify.
    (3) Recovery methods that do not qualify.
    (4) Examples.

                       Sec. 1.43-3  Certification.

(a) Petroleum engineer's certification of a project.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Timing of certification.
    (3) Content of certification.
(b) Operator's continued certification of a project.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Timing of certification.
    (3) Content of certification.
(c) Notice of project termination.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Timing of notice.
    (3) Content of notice.
(d) Failure to submit certification.
(e) Effective date.

           Sec. 1.43-4  Qualified enhanced oil recovery costs.

(a) Qualifying costs.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Costs paid or incurred for an asset which is used to implement 
more than one qualified enhanced oil recovery project or for other 
activities.
(b) Costs defined.
    (1) Qualified tertiary injectant expenses.
    (2) Intangible drilling and development costs.
    (3) Tangible property costs.
    (4) Examples.
(c) Primary purpose.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Tertiary injectant costs.
    (3) Intangible drilling and development costs.
    (4) Tangible property costs.
    (5) Offshore drilling platforms.
    (6) Examples.
(d) Costs paid or incurred prior to first injection.
    (1) In general.
    (2) First injection after filing of return for taxable year costs 
are allowable.
    (3) First injection more than 36 months after close of taxable year 
costs are paid or incurred.
    (4) Injections in volumes less than the volumes specified in the 
project plan.
    (5) Examples.
(e) Other rules.
    (1) Anti-abuse rule.
    (2) Costs paid or incurred to acquire a project.
    (3) Examples.

               Sec. 1.43-5  At-risk limitation. [Reserved]

                Sec. 1.43-6  Election out of section 43.

(a) Election to have the credit not apply.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Time for making the election.
    (3) Manner of making the election.
(b) Election by partnerships and S corporations.

               Sec. 1.43-7  Effective date of regulations.

[T.D. 8448, 57 FR 54923, Nov. 23, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 1.43-1  The enhanced oil recovery credit--general rules.

    (a) Claiming the credit--(1) In general. The enhanced oil recovery 
credit (the

[[Page 158]]

``credit'') is a component of the section 38 general business credit. A 
taxpayer that owns an operating mineral interest (as defined in 
Sec. 1.614-2(b)) in a property may claim the credit for qualified 
enhanced oil recovery costs (as described in Sec. 1.43-4) paid or 
incurred by the taxpayer in connection with a qualified enhanced oil 
recovery project (as described in Sec. 1.43-2) undertaken with respect 
to the property. A taxpayer that does not own an operating mineral 
interest in a property may not claim the credit. To the extent a credit 
included in the current year business credit under section 38(b) is 
unused under section 38, the credit is carried back or forward under the 
section 39 business credit carryback and carryforward rules.
    (2) Examples. The following examples illustrate the principles of 
this paragraph (a).

    Example 1. Credit for operating mineral interest owner. In 1992, A, 
the owner of an operating mineral interest in a property, begins a 
qualified enhanced oil recovery project using cyclic steam. B, who owns 
no interest in the property, purchases and places in service a steam 
generator. B sells A steam, which A uses as a tertiary injectant 
described in section 193. Because A owns an operating mineral interest 
in the property with respect to which the project is undertaken, A may 
claim a credit for the cost of the steam. Although B owns the steam 
generator used to produce steam for the project, B may not claim a 
credit for B's costs because B does not own an operating mineral 
interest in the property.
    Example 2. Credit for operating mineral interest owner. C and D are 
partners in CD, a partnership that owns an operating mineral interest in 
a property. In 1992, CD begins a qualified enhanced oil recovery project 
using cyclic steam. D purchases a steam generator and sells steam to CD. 
Because CD owns an operating mineral interest in the property with 
respect to which the project is undertaken, CD may claim a credit for 
the cost of the steam. Although D owns the steam generator used to 
produce steam for the project, D may not claim a credit for the costs of 
the steam generator because D paid these costs in a capacity other than 
that of an operating mineral interest owner.


    (b) Amount of the credit. A taxpayer's credit is an amount equal to 
15 percent of the taxpayer's qualified enhanced oil recovery costs for 
the taxable year, reduced by the phase-out amount, if any, determined 
under paragraph (c) of this section.
    (c) Phase-out of the credit as crude oil prices increase--(1) In 
general. The amount of the credit (determined without regard to this 
paragraph (c)) for any taxable year is reduced by an amount which bears 
the same ratio to the amount of the credit (determined without regard to 
this paragraph (c)) as--
    (i) The amount by which the reference price determined under section 
29(d)(2)(C) for the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar 
year in which the taxable year begins exceeds $28 (as adjusted under 
paragraph (c)(2) of this section); bears to
    (ii) $6.
    (2) Inflation adjustment--(i) In general. For any taxable year 
beginning in a calendar year after 1991, an amount equal to $28 
multiplied by the inflation adjustment factor is substituted for the $28 
amount under paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section.
    (ii) Inflation adjustment factor. For purposes of this paragraph 
(c), the inflation adjustment factor for any calendar year is a 
fraction, the numerator of which is the GNP implicit price deflator for 
the preceding calendar year and the denominator of which is the GNP 
implicit price deflator for 1990. The ``GNP implicit price deflator'' is 
the first revision of the implicit price deflator for the gross national 
product as computed and published by the Secretary of Commerce. As early 
as practicable, the inflation adjustment factor for each calendar year 
will be published by the Internal Revenue Service in the Internal 
Revenue Bulletin.
    (3) Examples. The following examples illustrate the principles of 
this paragraph (c).


    Example 1. Reference price exceeds $28. In 1992, E, the owner of an 
operating mineral interest in a property, incurs $100 of qualified 
enhanced oil recovery costs. The reference price for 1991 determined 
under section 29(d)(2)(C) is $30 and the inflation adjustment factor for 
1992 is 1. E's credit for 1992 determined without regard to the phase-
out for crude oil price increases is $15 ($100  x  15%). In determining 
E's credit, the credit is reduced by $5 ($15  x  ($30 - ($28  x  1))/6). 
Accordingly, E's credit for 1992 is $10 ($15 - $5).


[[Page 159]]


    Example 2. Inflation adjustment. In 1993, F, the owner of an 
operating mineral interest in a property, incurs $100 of qualified 
enhanced oil recovery costs. The 1992 reference price is $34, and the 
1993 inflation adjustment factor is 1.10. F's credit for 1993 determined 
without regard to the phase-out for crude oil price increases is $15 
($100  x  15%). In determining F's credit, $30.80 (1.10  x  $28) is 
substituted for $28, and the credit is reduced by $8 ($15  x  ($34 - 
$30.80)/6). Accordingly, F's credit for 1993 is $7 ($15 - $8).


    (d) Reduction of associated deductions--(1) In general. Any 
deduction allowable under chapter 1 for an expenditure taken into 
account in computing the amount of the credit determined under paragraph 
(b) of this section is reduced by the amount of the credit attributable 
to the expenditure.
    (2) Certain deductions by an integrated oil company. For purposes of 
determining the intangible drilling and development costs that an 
integrated oil company must capitalize under section 291(b), the amount 
allowable as a deduction under section 263(c) is the deduction allowable 
after paragraph (d)(1) of this section is applied. See Sec. 1.43-4(b)(2) 
(extent to which integrated oil company intangible drilling and 
development costs are qualified enhanced oil recovery costs).
    (e) Basis adjustment. For purposes of subtitle A, the increase in 
the basis of property which would (but for this paragraph (e)) result 
from an expenditure with respect to the property is reduced by the 
amount of the credit determined under paragraph (b) of this section 
attributable to the expenditure.
    (f) Passthrough entity basis adjustment--(1) Partners' interests in 
a partnership. To the extent a partnership expenditure is not deductible 
under paragraph (d)(1) of this section or does not increase the basis of 
property under paragraph (e) of this section, the expenditure is treated 
as an expenditure described in section 705(a)(2)(B) (concerning 
decreases to basis of partnership interests). Thus, the adjusted bases 
of the partners' interests in the partnership are decreased (but not 
below zero).
    (2) Shareholders' stock in an S corporation. To the extent an S 
corporation expenditure is not deductible under paragraph (d)(1) of this 
section or does not increase the basis of property under paragraph (e) 
of this section, the expenditure is treated as an expenditure described 
in section 1367(a)(2)(D) (concerning decreases to basis of S corporation 
stock). Thus, the bases of the shareholders' S corporation stock are 
decreased (but not below zero).
    (g) Examples. The following examples illustrate the principles of 
paragraphs (d) through (f) of this section.

    Example 1. Deductions reduced for credit amount. In 1992, G, the 
owner of an operating mineral interest in a property, incurs $100 of 
intangible drilling and development costs in connection with a qualified 
enhanced oil recovery project undertaken with respect to the property. G 
elects under section 263(c) to deduct these intangible drilling and 
development costs. The amount of the credit determined under paragraph 
(b) of this section attributable to the $100 of intangible drilling and 
development costs is $15 ($100  x  15%). Therefore, G's otherwise 
allowable deduction of $100 for the intangible drilling and development 
costs is reduced by $15. Accordingly, in 1992, G may deduct under 
section 263(c) only $85 ($100 - $15) for these costs.

    Example 2. Integrated oil company deduction reduced. The facts are 
the same as in Example 1, except that G is an integrated oil company. As 
in Example 1, the amount of the credit determined under paragraph (b) of 
this section attributable to the $100 of intangible drilling and 
development costs is $15, and G's allowable deduction under section 
263(c) is $85. Because G is an integrated oil company, G must capitalize 
25.50 ($85  x  30%) under section 291(b). Therefore, in 1992, G may 
deduct under section 263(c) only $59.50 ($85 - $25.50) for these 
intangible drilling and development costs.

    Example 3. Basis of property reduced. In 1992, H, the owner of an 
operating mineral interest in a property, pays $100 to purchase tangible 
property that is an integral part of a qualified enhanced oil recovery 
project undertaken with respect to the property. The amount of the 
credit determined under paragraph (b) of this section attributable to 
the $100 is $15 ($100  x  15%). Therefore, for purposes of subtitle A, 
H's basis in the tangible property is $85 ($100 - $15).

    Example 4. Basis of interest in passthrough entity reduced. In 1992, 
I is a $50% partner in IJ, a partnership that owns an operating mineral 
interest in a property. IJ pays $200 to purchase tangible property that 
is an integral part of a qualified enhanced oil recovery project 
undertaken with respect to the property. The amount of the credit 
determined under paragraph (b) of this section attributable to the $200 
is $30 ($200  x  15%). Therefore, for purposes of subtitle A, IJ's

[[Page 160]]

basis in the tangible property is $170 ($200 - $30). Under paragraph (f) 
of this section, the amount of the purchase price that does not increase 
the basis of the property ($30) is treated as an expenditure described 
in section 705(a)(2)(B). Therefore, I's basis in the partnership 
interest is reduced by $15 (I's allocable share of the section 
705(a)(2)(B) expenditure ($30  x  50%)).

[T.D. 8448, 57 FR 54923, Nov. 23, 1992; 58 FR 7987, Feb. 11, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 1.43-2  Qualified enhanced oil recovery project.

    (a) Qualified enhanced oil recovery project. A ``qualified enhanced 
oil recovery project'' is any project that meets all of the following 
requirements--
    (1) The project involves the application (in accordance with sound 
engineering principles) of one or more qualified tertiary recovery 
methods (as described in paragraph (e) of this section) that is 
reasonably expected to result in more than an insignificant increase in 
the amount of crude oil that ultimately will be recovered;
    (2) The project is located within the United States (within the 
meaning of section 638(1));
    (3) The first injection of liquids, gases, or other matter for the 
project (as described in paragraph (c) of this section) occurs after 
December 31, 1990; and
    (4) The project is certified under Sec. 1.43-3.
    (b) More than insignificant increase. For purposes of paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section, all the facts and circumstances determine 
whether the application of a tertiary recovery method can reasonably be 
expected to result in more than an insignificant increase in the amount 
of crude oil that ultimately will be recovered. Certain information 
submitted as part of a project certification is relevant to this 
determination. See Sec. 1.43-3(a)(3)(i)(D). In no event is the 
application of a recovery method that merely accelerates the recovery of 
crude oil considered an application of one or more qualified tertiary 
recovery methods that can reasonably be expected to result in more than 
an insignificant increase in the amount of crude oil that ultimately 
will be recovered.
    (c) First injection of liquids, gases, or other matter--(1) In 
general. The ``first injection of liquids, gases, or other matter'' 
generally occurs on the date a tertiary injectant is first injected into 
the reservoir. The ``first injection of liquids, gases, or other 
matter'' does not include--
    (i) The injection into the reservoir of any liquids, gases, or other 
matter for the purpose of pretreating or preflushing the reservoir to 
enhance the efficiency of the tertiary recovery method; or
    (ii) Test or experimental injections.
    (2) Example. The following example illustrates the principles of 
this paragraph (c).

    Example. Injections to pretreat the reservoir. In 1989, A, the owner 
of an operating mineral interest in a property, began injecting water 
into the reservoir for the purpose of elevating reservoir pressure to 
obtain miscibility pressure to prepare for the injection of miscible gas 
in connection with an enhanced oil recovery project. In 1992, A obtains 
miscibility pressure in the reservoir and begins injecting miscible gas 
into the reservoir. The injection of miscible gas, rather than the 
injection of water, is the first injection of liquids, gases, or other 
matter into the reservoir for purposes of determining whether the first 
injection of liquids, gases, or other matter occurs after December 31, 
1990.

    (d) Significant expansion exception--(1) In general. If a project 
for which the first injection of liquids, gases, or other matter (within 
the meaning of paragraph (c)(1) of this section) occurred before January 
1, 1991, is significantly expanded after December 31, 1990, the 
expansion is treated as a separate project for which the first injection 
of liquids, gases, or other matter occurs after December 31, 1990.
    (2) Substantially unaffected reservoir volume. A project is 
considered significantly expanded if the injection of liquids, gases, or 
other matter after December 31, 1990, is reasonably expected to result 
in more than an insignificant increase in the amount of crude oil that 
ultimately will be recovered from reservoir volume that was 
substantially unaffected by the injection of liquids, gases, or other 
matter before January 1, 1991.
    (3) Terminated projects. Except as otherwise provided in this 
paragraph

[[Page 161]]

(d)(3), a project is considered significantly expanded if each qualified 
tertiary recovery method implemented in the project prior to January 1, 
1991, terminated more than 36 months before implementing an enhanced oil 
recovery project that commences after December 31, 1990. Notwithstanding 
the provisions of the preceding sentence, if a project implemented prior 
to January 1, 1991, is terminated for less than 36 months before 
implementing an enhanced oil recovery project that commences after 
December 31, 1990, a taxpayer may request permission to treat the 
project that commences after December 31, 1990, as a significant 
expansion. Permission will not be granted if the Internal Revenue 
Service determines that a project was terminated to make an otherwise 
nonqualifying project eligible for the credit. For purposes of section 
43, a qualified tertiary recovery method terminates at the point in time 
when the method no longer results in more than an insignificant increase 
in the amount of crude oil that ultimately will be recovered. All the 
facts and circumstances determine whether a tertiary recovery method has 
terminated. Among the factors considered is the project plan, the unit 
plan of development, or other similar plan. A tertiary recovery method 
is not necessarily terminated merely because the injection of the 
tertiary injectant has ceased. For purposes of this paragraph (d)(1), a 
project is implemented when costs that will be taken into account in 
determining the credit with respect to the project are paid or incurred.
    (4) Change in tertiary recovery method. If the application of a 
tertiary recovery method or methods with respect to an enhanced oil 
recovery project for which the first injection of liquids, gases, or 
other matter occurred before January 1, 1991, has not been terminated 
for more than 36 months, a taxpayer may request a private letter ruling 
from the Internal Revenue Service whether the application of a different 
tertiary recovery method or methods after December 31, 1990, that does 
not affect reservoir volume substantially unaffected by the previous 
tertiary recovery method or methods, is treated as a significant 
expansion. All the facts and circumstances determine whether a change in 
tertiary recovery method is treated as a significant expansion. Among 
the factors considered are whether the change in tertiary recovery 
method is in accordance with sound engineering principles and whether 
the change in method will result in more than an insignificant increase 
in the amount of crude oil that would be recovered using the previous 
method. A more intensive application of a tertiary recovery method after 
December 31, 1990, is not treated as a significant expansion.
    (5) Examples. The following examples illustrate the principles of 
this paragraph (d).

    Example 1. Substantially unaffected reservoir volume. In January 
1988, B, the owner of an operating mineral interest in a property, began 
injecting steam into the reservoir in connection with a cyclic steam 
enhanced oil recovery project. The project affected only a portion of 
the reservoir volume. In 1992, B begins cyclic steam injections with 
respect to reservoir volume that was substantially unaffected by the 
previous cyclic steam project. Because the injection of steam into the 
reservoir in 1992 affects reservoir volume that was substantially 
unaffected by the previous cyclic steam injection, the cyclic steam 
injection in 1992 is treated as a separate project for which the first 
injection of liquids, gases, or other matter occurs after December 31, 
1990.
    Example 2. Tertiary recovery method terminated more than 36 months. 
In 1982, C, the owner of an operating mineral interest in a property, 
implemented a tertiary recovery project using cyclic steam injection as 
a method for the recovery of crude oil. The project was certified as a 
tertiary recovery project for purposes of the windfall profit tax. In 
May 1988, the application of the cyclic steam tertiary recovery method 
terminated. In July 1992, C begins drilling injection wells as part of a 
project to apply the steam drive tertiary recovery method with respect 
to the same project area affected by the cyclic steam method. C begins 
steam injections in September 1992. Because C commences an enhanced oil 
recovery project more than 36 months after the previous tertiary 
recovery method was terminated, the project is treated as a separate 
project for which the first injection of liquids, gases, or other matter 
occurs after December 31, 1990.
    Example 3. Change in tertiary recovery method affecting 
substantially unaffected reservoir volume. In 1984, D, the owner of an 
operating mineral interest in a property, implemented a tertiary 
recovery project using cyclic steam as a method for the recovery of 
crude

[[Page 162]]

oil. The project was certified as a tertiary recovery project for 
purposes of the windfall profit tax. D continued the cyclic steam 
injection until 1992, when the tertiary recovery method was changed from 
cyclic steam injection to steam drive. The steam drive affects reservoir 
volume that was substantially unaffected by the cyclic steam injection. 
Because the steam drive affects reservoir volume that was substantially 
unaffected by the cyclic steam injection, the steam drive is treated as 
a separate project for which the first injection of liquids, gases, or 
other matter occurs after December 31, 1990.
    Example 4. Change in tertiary recovery method not affecting 
substantially unaffected reservoir volume. In 1988, E, the owner of an 
operating mineral interest in a property, undertook an immiscible 
nitrogen enhanced oil recovery project that resulted in more than an 
insignificant increase in the ultimate recovery of crude oil from the 
property. E continued the immiscible nitrogen project until 1992, when 
the project was converted from immiscible nitrogen displacement to 
miscible nitrogen displacement by increasing the injection of nitrogen 
to increase reservoir pressure. The miscible nitrogen displacement 
affects the same reservoir volume that was affected by the immiscible 
nitrogen displacement. Because the miscible nitrogen displacement does 
not affect reservoir volume that was substantially unaffected by the 
immiscible nitrogen displacement nor was the immiscible nitrogen 
displacement project terminated for more than 36 months before the 
miscible nitrogen displacement project was implemented, E must obtain a 
ruling whether the change from immiscible nitrogen displacement to 
miscible nitrogen displacement is treated as a separate project for 
which the first injection of liquids, gases, or other matter occurs 
after December 31, 1990. If E does not receive a ruling, the miscible 
nitrogen displacement project is not a qualified project.
    Example 5. More intensive application of a tertiary recovery method. 
In 1989, F, the owner of an operating mineral interest in a property, 
undertook an immiscible carbon dioxide displacement enhanced oil 
recovery project. F began injecting carbon dioxide into the reservoir 
under immiscible conditions. The injection of carbon dioxide under 
immiscible conditions resulted in more than an insignificant increase in 
the ultimate recovery of crude oil from the property. F continues to 
inject the same amount of carbon dioxide into the reservoir until 1992, 
when new engineering studies indicate that an increase in the amount of 
carbon dioxide injected is reasonably expected to result in a more than 
insignificant increase in the amount of crude oil that would be 
recovered from the property as a result of the previous injection of 
carbon dioxide. The increase in the amount of carbon dioxide injected 
affects the same reservoir volume that was affected by the previous 
injection of carbon dioxide. Because the additional carbon dioxide 
injected in 1992 does not affect reservoir volume that was substantially 
unaffected by the previous injection of carbon dioxide and the previous 
immiscible carbon dioxide displacement method was not terminated for 
more than 36 months before additional carbon dioxide was injected, the 
increase in the amount of carbon dioxide injected into the reservoir is 
not a significant expansion. Therefore, it is not a separate project for 
which the first injection of liquids, gases, or other matter occurs 
after December 31, 1990.

    (e) Qualified tertiary recovery methods--(1) In general. For 
purposes of paragraph (a)(1) of this section, a ``qualified tertiary 
recovery method'' is any one or any combination of the tertiary recovery 
methods described in paragraph (e)(2) of this section. To account for 
advances in enhanced oil recovery technology, the Internal Revenue 
Service may by revenue ruling prescribe that a method not described in 
paragraph (e)(2) of this section is a ``qualified tertiary recovery 
method.'' In addition, a taxpayer may request a private letter ruling 
that a method not described in paragraph (e)(2) of this section or in a 
revenue ruling is a qualified tertiary recovery method. Generally, the 
methods identified in revenue rulings or private letter rulings will be 
limited to those methods that involve the displacement of oil from the 
reservoir rock by means of modifying the properties of the fluids in the 
reservoir or providing the energy and drive mechanism to force the oil 
to flow to a production well. The recovery methods described in 
paragraph (e)(3) of this section are not ``qualified tertiary recovery 
methods.''
    (2) Tertiary recovery methods that qualify--(i) Thermal recovery 
methods--(A) Steam drive injection. The continuous injection of steam 
into one set of wells (injection wells) or other injection source to 
effect oil displacement toward and production from a second set of wells 
(production wells);
    (B) Cyclic steam injection--The alternating injection of steam and 
production of oil with condensed steam from the same well or wells; and

[[Page 163]]

    (C) In situ combustion. The combustion of oil or fuel in the 
reservoir sustained by injection of air, oxygen-enriched air, oxygen, or 
supplemental fuel supplied from the surface to displace unburned oil 
toward producing wells. This process may include the concurrent, 
alternating, or subsequent injection of water.
    (ii) Gas Flood recovery methods--(A) Miscible fluid displacement. 
The injection of gas (e.g., natural gas, enriched natural gas, a 
liquified petroleum slug driven by natural gas, carbon dioxide, 
nitrogen, or flue gas) or alcohol into the reservoir at pressure levels 
such that the gas or alcohol and reservoir oil are miscible;
    (B) Carbon dioxide augmented waterflooding. The injection of 
carbonated water, or water and carbon dioxide, to increase waterflood 
efficiency;
    (C) Immiscible carbon dioxide displacement. The injection of carbon 
dioxide into an oil reservoir to effect oil displacement under 
conditions in which miscibility with reservoir oil is not obtained. This 
process may include the concurrent, alternating, or subsequent injection 
of water; and
    (D) Immiscible nonhydrocarbon gas displacement. The injection of 
nonhydrocarbon gas (e.g., nitrogen) into an oil reservoir, under 
conditions in which miscibility with reservoir oil is not obtained, to 
obtain a chemical or physical reaction (other than pressure) between the 
oil and the injected gas or between the oil and other reservoir fluids. 
This process may include the concurrent, alternating, or subsequent 
injection of water.
    (iii) Chemical flood recovery methods--(A) Microemulsion flooding. 
The injection of a surfactant system (e.g.,  a surfactant, hydrocarbon, 
cosurfactant, electrolyte, and water) to enhance the displacement of oil 
toward producing wells; and
    (B) Caustic flooding--The injection of water that has been made 
chemically basic by the addition of alkali metal hydroxides, silicates, 
or other chemicals.
    (iv) Mobility control recovery method--Polymer augmented 
waterflooding. The injection of polymeric additives with water to 
improve the areal and vertical sweep efficiency of the reservoir by 
increasing the viscosity and decreasing the mobility of the water 
injected. Polymer augmented waterflooding does not include the injection 
of polymers for the purpose of modifying the injection profile of the 
wellbore or the relative permeability of various layers of the 
reservoir, rather than modifying the water-oil mobility ratio.
    (3) Recovery methods that do not qualify. The term ``qualified 
tertiary recovery method'' does not include--
    (i) Waterflooding--The injection of water into an oil reservoir to 
displace oil from the reservoir rock and into the bore of the producing 
well;
    (ii) Cyclic gas injection--The increase or maintenance of pressure 
by injection of hydrocarbon gas into the reservoir from which it was 
originally produced;
    (iii) Horizontal drilling--The drilling of horizontal, rather than 
vertical, wells to penetrate hydrocarbon bearing formations;
    (iv) Gravity drainage--The production of oil by gravity flow from 
drainholes that are drilled from a shaft or tunnel dug within or below 
the oil bearing zones; and
    (v) Other methods--Any recovery method not specifically designated 
as a qualified tertiary recovery method in either paragraph (e)(2) of 
this section or in a revenue ruling or private letter ruling described 
in paragraph (e)(1) of this section.
    (4) Examples. The following examples illustrate the principles of 
this paragraph (e).

    Example 1. Polymer augmented waterflooding. In 1992 G, the owner of 
an operating mineral interest in a property, begins a waterflood project 
with respect to the property. To reduce the relative permeability in 
certain areas of the reservoir and minimize water coning, G injects 
polymers to plug thief zones and improve the areal and vertical sweep 
efficiency of the reservoir. The injection of polymers into the 
reservoir does not modify the water-oil mobility ratio. Accordingly, the 
injection of polymers into the reservoir in connection with the 
waterflood project does not constitute polymer augmented waterflooding 
and the project is not a qualified enhanced oil recovery project.
    Example 2. Polymer augmented waterflooding. In 1993 H, the owner of 
an operating mineral interest in a property, begins a caustic flooding 
project with respect to the property. Engineering studies indicate that 
the relative

[[Page 164]]

permeability of various layers of the reservoir may result in the loss 
of the injectant to thief zones, thereby reducing the areal and vertical 
sweep efficiency of the reservoir. As part of the caustic flooding 
project, H injects polymers to plug the thief zones and improve the 
areal and vertical sweep efficiency of the reservoir. Because the 
polymers are injected into the reservoir to improve the effectiveness of 
the caustic flooding project, the project is a qualified enhanced oil 
recovery project.

[T.D. 8448, 57 FR 54925, Nov. 23, 1992; 58 FR 6678, Feb. 1, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 1.43-3  Certification

    (a) Petroleum engineer's certification of a project--(1) In general. 
A petroleum engineer must certify, under penalties of perjury, that an 
enhanced oil recovery project meets the requirements of section 
43(c)(2)(A). A petroleum engineer's certification must be submitted for 
each project. The petroleum engineer certifying a project must be duly 
registered or certified in any State.
    (2) Timing of certification. The operator of an enhanced oil 
recovery project or any other operating mineral interest owner 
designated by the operator (``designated owner'') must submit a 
petroleum engineer's certification to the Internal Revenue Service 
Center, Austin, Texas, or such other place as may be designated by 
revenue procedure or other published guidance, not later than the last 
date prescribed by law (including extensions) for filing the operator's 
or designated owner's federal income tax return for the first taxable 
year for which the enhanced oil recovery credit (the ``credit'') is 
allowable. The operator may designate any other operating mineral 
interest owner (the ``designated owner'') to file the petroleum 
engineer's certification.
    (3) Content of certification--(i) In general. A petroleum engineer's 
certification must contain the following information--
    (A) The name and taxpayer identification number of the operator or 
the designated owner submitting the certification;
    (B) A statement identifying the project, including its geographic 
location;
    (C) A statement that the project involves a tertiary recovery method 
(as defined in section 43(c)(2)(A)(i)) and a description of the process 
used, including--
    (1) A description of the implementation and operation of the project 
sufficient to establish that it is implemented and operated in 
accordance with sound engineering practices;
    (2) If the project involves the application of a tertiary recovery 
method approved in a private letter ruling described in paragraph (e)(1) 
of Sec. 1.43-2, a copy of the private letter ruling, and
    (3) The date on which the first injection of liquids, gases, or 
other matter occurred or is expected to occur.
    (D) A statement that the application of a qualified tertiary 
recovery method or methods is expected to result in more than an 
insignificant increase in the amount of crude oil that ultimately will 
be recovered, including--
    (1) Data on crude oil reserve estimates covering the project area 
with and without the enhanced oil recovery process,
    (2) Production history prior to implementation of the project and 
estimates of production after implementation of the project, and
    (3) An adequate delineation of the reservoir, or portion of the 
reservoir, from which the ultimate recovery of crude oil is expected to 
be increased as a result of the implementation and operation of the 
project; and
    (E) A statement that the petroleum engineer believes that the 
project is a qualified enhanced oil recovery project within the meaning 
of section 43(c)(2)(A).
    (ii) Additional information for significantly expanded projects. The 
petroleum engineer's certification for a project that is significantly 
expanded must in addition contain--
    (A) If the expansion affects reservoir volume that was substantially 
unaffected by a previously implemented project, an adequate delineation 
of the reservoir volume affected by the previously implemented project;
    (B) If the expansion involves the implementation of an enhanced oil 
recovery project more than 36 months after the termination of a 
qualified tertiary recovery method that was applied before January 1, 
1991, the date on which the previous tertiary recovery method terminated 
and an explanation of the

[[Page 165]]

data or assumptions relied upon to determine the termination date;
    (C) If the expansion involves the implementation of an enhanced oil 
recovery project less than 36 months after the termination of a 
qualified tertiary recovery method that was applied before January 1, 
1991, a copy of a private letter ruling from the Internal Revenue 
Service that the project implemented after December 31, 1990 is treated 
as a significant expansion; or
    (D) If the expansion involves the application after December 31, 
1990, of a tertiary recovery method or methods that do not affect 
reservoir volume that was substantially unaffected by the application of 
a different tertiary recovery method or methods before January 1, 1991, 
a copy of a private letter ruling from the Internal Revenue Service that 
the change in tertiary recovery method is treated as a significant 
expansion.
    (b) Operator's continued certification of a project--(1) In general. 
For each taxable year following the taxable year for which the petroleum 
engineer's certification is submitted, the operator or designated owner 
must certify, under penalties of perjury, that an enhanced oil recovery 
project continues to be implemented substantially in accordance with the 
petroleum engineer's certification submitted for the project. An 
operator's certification must be submitted for each project.
    (2) Timing of certification. The operator or designated owner of an 
enhanced oil recovery project must submit an operator's certification to 
the Internal Revenue Service Center, Austin, Texas, or such other place 
as may be designated by revenue procedure or other published guidance, 
not later than the last date prescribed by law (including extensions) 
for filing the operator's or designated owner's federal income tax 
return for any taxable year after the taxable year for which the 
petroleum engineer's certification is filed.
    (3) Content of certification. An operator's certification must 
contain the following information--
    (i) The name and taxpayer identification number of the operator or 
the designated owner submitting the certification;
    (ii) A statement identifying the project including its geographic 
location and the date on which the petroleum engineer's certification 
was filed;
    (iii) A statement that the project continues to be implemented 
substantially in accordance with the petroleum engineer's certification 
(as described in paragraph (a) of this section) submitted for the 
project; and
    (iv) A description of any significant change or anticipated change 
in the information submitted under paragraph (a)(3) of this section, 
including a change in the date on which the first injection of liquids, 
gases, or other matter occurred or is expected to occur.
    (c) Notice of project termination--(1) In general. If the 
application of a tertiary recovery method is terminated, the operator or 
designated owner must submit a notice of project termination to the 
Internal Revenue Service.
    (2) Timing of notice. The operator or designated owner of an 
enhanced oil recovery project must submit the notice of project 
termination to the Internal Revenue Service Center, Austin, Texas, or 
such other place as may be designated by revenue procedure or other 
published guidance, not later than the last date prescribed by law 
(including extensions) for filing the operator's or designated owner's 
federal income tax return for the taxable year in which the project 
terminates.
    (3) Content of notice. A notice of project termination must contain 
the following information--
    (i) The name and taxpayer identification number of the operator or 
the designated owner submitting the notice;
    (ii) A statement identifying the project including its geographic 
location and the date on which the petroleum engineer's certification 
was filed; and
    (iii) The date on which the application of the tertiary recovery 
method was terminated.
    (d) Failure to submit certification. If a petroleum engineer's 
certification (as described in paragraph (a) of this section) or an 
operator's certification (as described in paragraph (b) of this section) 
is not submitted in the time or manner prescribed by this section, the

[[Page 166]]

credit will be allowed only after the appropriate certifications are 
submitted.

[T.D. 8384, 56 FR 67177, Dec. 30, 1991; 57 FR 6074, Feb. 20, 1992; 57 FR 
6353, Feb. 24, 1992. Redesignated and amended by T.D. 8448, 57 FR 54927, 
Nov. 23, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 1.43-4  Qualified enhanced oil recovery costs.

    (a) Qualifying costs--(1) In general. Except as provided in 
paragraph (e) of this section, amounts paid or incurred in any taxable 
year beginning after December 31, 1990, that are qualified tertiary 
injectant expenses (as described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section), 
intangible drilling and development costs (as described in paragraph 
(b)(2) of this section), and tangible property costs (as described in 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section) are ``qualified enhanced oil recovery 
costs'' if the amounts are paid or incurred with respect to an asset 
which is used for the primary purpose (as described in paragraph (c) of 
this section) of implementing an enhanced oil recovery project. Any 
amount paid or incurred in any taxable year beginning before January 1, 
1991, in connection with an enhanced oil recovery project is not a 
qualified enhanced oil recovery cost.
    (2) Costs paid or incurred for an asset which is used to implement 
more than one qualified enhanced oil recovery project or for other 
activities. Any cost paid or incurred during the taxable year for an 
asset which is used to implement more than one qualified enhanced oil 
recovery project is allocated among the projects in determining the 
qualified enhanced oil recovery costs for each qualified project for the 
taxable year. Similarly, any cost paid or incurred during the taxable 
year for an asset which is used to implement a qualified enhanced oil 
recovery project and which is also used for other activities (for 
example, an enhanced oil recovery project that is not a qualified 
enhanced oil recovery project) is allocated among the qualified enhanced 
oil recovery project and the other activities to determine the qualified 
enhanced oil recovery costs for the taxable year. See Sec. 1.613-5(a). 
Any cost paid or incurred for an asset which is used to implement a 
qualified enhanced oil recovery project and which is also used for other 
activities is not required to be allocated under this paragraph (a)(2) 
if the use of the property for nonqualifying activities is de minimis 
(e.g., not greater than 10%). Costs are allocated under this paragraph 
(a)(2) only if the asset with respect to which the costs are paid or 
incurred is used for the primary purpose of implementing an enhanced oil 
recovery project. See paragraph (c) of this section. Any reasonable 
allocation method may be used. A method that allocates costs based on 
the anticipated use in a project or activity is a reasonable method.
    (b) Costs defined--(1) Qualified tertiary injectant expenses. For 
purposes of this section, ``qualified tertiary injectant expenses'' 
means any costs that are paid or incurred in connection with a qualified 
enhanced oil recovery project and that are deductible under section 193 
for the taxable year. See section 193 and Sec. 1.193-1. Qualified 
tertiary injectant expenses are taken into account in determining the 
credit with respect to the taxable year in which the tertiary injectant 
expenses are deductible under section 193.
    (2) Intangible drilling and development costs. For purposes of this 
section, ``intangible drilling and development costs'' means any 
intangible drilling and development costs that are paid or incurred in 
connection with a qualified enhanced oil recovery project and for which 
the taxpayer may make an election under section 263(c) for the taxable 
year. Intangible drilling and development costs are taken into account 
in determining the credit with respect to the taxable year in which the 
taxpayer may deduct the intangible drilling and development costs under 
section 263(c). For purposes of this paragraph (b)(2), the amount of the 
intangible drilling and development costs for which an integrated oil 
company may make an election under section 263(c) is determined without 
regard to section 291(b).
    (3) Tangible property costs--(i) In general. For purposes of this 
section, ``tangible property costs'' means an amount paid or incurred 
during a taxable year for tangible property that is an integral part of 
a qualified enhanced oil recovery project and that is depreciable or 
amortizable under chapter 1. An amount paid or incurred for tangible

[[Page 167]]

property is taken into account in determining the credit with respect to 
the taxable year in which the cost is paid or incurred.
    (ii) Integral part. For purposes of this paragraph (b), tangible 
property is an integral part of a qualified enhanced oil recovery 
project if the property is used directly in the project and is essential 
to the completeness of the project. All the facts and circumstances 
determine whether tangible property is used directly in a qualified 
enhanced oil recovery project and is essential to the completeness of 
the project. Generally, property used to acquire or produce the tertiary 
injectant or property used to transport the tertiary injectant to a 
project site is property that is an integral part of the project.
    (4) Examples. The following examples illustrate the principles of 
this paragraph (b). Assume for each of these examples that the qualified 
enhanced oil recovery costs are paid or incurred with respect to an 
asset which is used for the primary purpose of implementing an enhanced 
oil recovery project.

    Example 1. Qualified costs--in general. (i) In 1992, X, a 
corporation, acquires an operating mineral interest in a property and 
undertakes a cyclic steam enhanced oil recovery project with respect to 
the property. X pays a fee to acquire a permit to drill and hires a 
contractor to drill six wells. As part of the project implementation, X 
constructs a building to serve as an office on the property and 
purchases equipment, including downhole equipment (e.g., casing, tubing, 
packers, and sucker rods), pumping units, a steam generator, and 
equipment to remove gas and water from the oil after it is produced. X 
constructs roads to transport the equipment to the wellsites and incurs 
costs for clearing and draining the ground in preparation for the 
drilling of the wells. X purchases cars and trucks to provide 
transportation for monitoring the wellsites. In addition, X contracts 
with Y for the delivery of water to produce steam to be injected in 
connection with the cyclic steam project, and purchases storage tanks to 
store the water.
    (ii) The leasehold acquisition costs are not qualified enhanced oil 
recovery costs. However, the costs of the permit to drill are intangible 
drilling and development costs that are qualified costs. The costs 
associated with hiring the contractor to drill, constructing roads, and 
clearing and draining the ground are intangible drilling and development 
costs that are qualified enhanced oil recovery costs. The downhole 
equipment, the pumping units, the steam generator, and the equipment to 
remove the gas and water from the oil after it is produced are used 
directly in the project and are essential to the completeness of the 
project. Therefore, this equipment is an integral part of the project 
and the costs of the equipment are qualified enhanced oil recovery 
costs. Although the building that X constructs as an office and the cars 
and trucks X purchases to provide transportation for monitoring the 
wellsites are used directly in the project, they are not essential to 
the completeness of the project. Therefore, the building and the cars 
and trucks are not an integral part of the project and their costs are 
not qualified enhanced oil recovery costs. The cost of the water X 
purchases from Y is a tertiary injectant expense that is a qualified 
enhanced oil recovery cost. The storage tanks X acquires to store the 
water are required to provide a proximate source of water for the 
production of steam. Therefore, the water storage tank are an integral 
part of the project and the costs of the water storage tanks are 
qualified enhanced oil recovery costs.
    Example 2. Diluent storage tanks. In 1992, A, the owner of an 
operating mineral interest, undertakes a qualified enhanced oil recovery 
project with respect to the property. A acquires diluent to be used in 
connection with the project. A stores the diluent in a storage tank that 
A acquires for that purpose. The storage tank provides a proximate 
source of diluent to be used in the tertiary recovery method. Therefore, 
the storage tank is used directly in the project and is essential to the 
completeness of the project. Accordingly, the storage tanks is an 
integral part of the project and the cost of the storage tank is a 
qualified enhanced oil recovery cost.
    Example 3. Oil storage tanks. In 1992, Z, a corporation and the 
owner of an operating mineral interest in a property, undertakes a 
qualified enhanced oil recovery project with respect to the property. Z 
acquires storage tanks that Z will use solely to store the crude oil 
that is produced from the enhanced oil recovery project. The storage 
tanks are not used directly in the project and are not essential to the 
completeness of the project. Therefore, the storage tanks are not an 
integral part of the enhanced oil recovery project and the costs of the 
storage tanks are not qualified enhanced oil recovery costs.
    Example 4. Oil refinery. B, the owner of an operating mineral 
interest in a property, undertakes a qualified enhanced oil recovery 
project with respect to the property. Located on B's property is an oil 
refinery where B will refine the crude oil produced from the project. 
The refinery is not used directly in

[[Page 168]]

the project and is not essential to the completeness of the project. 
Therefore, the refinery is not an integral part of the enhanced oil 
recovery project.
    Example 5. Gas processing plant. C, the owner of an operating 
mineral interest in a property, undertakes a qualified enhanced oil 
recovery project with respect to the property. A gas processing plant 
where C will process gas produced in the project is located on C's 
property. The gas processing plant is not used directly in the project 
and is not essential to the completeness of the project. Therefore, the 
gas processing plant is not an integral part of the enhanced oil 
recovery project.
    Example 6. Gas processing equipment. The facts are the same as in 
Example 5 except that C uses a portion of the gas processing plant to 
separate and recycle the tertiary injectant. The gas processing 
equipment used to separate and recycle the tertiary injectant is used 
directly in the project and is essential to the completeness of the 
project. Therefore, the gas processing equipment used to separate and 
recycle the tertiary injectant is an integral part of the enhanced oil 
recovery project and the costs of this equipment are qualified enhanced 
oil recovery costs.
    Example 7. Steam generator costs allocated. In 1988, D, the owner of 
an operating mineral interest in a property, undertook a steam drive 
project with respect to the property. In 1992, D decides to undertake a 
steam drive project with respect to reservoir volume that was 
substantially unaffected by the 1988 project. The 1992 project is a 
significant expansion that is a qualified enhanced oil recovery project. 
D purchases a new steam generator with sufficient capacity to provide 
steam for both the 1988 project and the 1992 project. The steam 
generator is used directly in the 1992 project and is essential to the 
completeness of the 1992 project. Accordingly, the steam generator is an 
integral part of the 1992 project. Because the steam generator is also 
used to provide steam for the 1988 project, D must allocate the cost of 
the steam generator to the 1988 project and the 1992 project. Only the 
portion of the cost of the steam generator that is allocable to the 1992 
project is a qualified enhanced oil recovery cost.
    Example 8. Carbon dioxide pipeline. In 1992, E, the owner of an 
operating mineral interest in a property, undertakes an immiscible 
carbon dioxide displacement project with respect to the property. E 
constructs a pipeline to convey carbon dioxide to the project site. E 
contracts with F, a producer of carbon dioxide, to purchase carbon 
dioxide to be injected into injection wells in E's enhanced oil recovery 
project. The cost of the carbon dioxide is a tertiary injectant expense 
that is a qualified enhanced oil recovery cost. The pipeline is used by 
E to transport the tertiary injectant, that is, the carbon dioxide to 
the project site. Therefore, the pipeline is an integral part of the 
project. Accordingly, the cost of the pipeline is a qualified enhanced 
oil recovery cost.
    Example 9. Water source wells. In 1992, G the owner of an operating 
mineral interest in a property, undertakes a polymer augmented 
waterflood project with respect to the property. G drills water wells to 
provide water for injection in connection with the project. The costs of 
drilling the water wells are intangible drilling and development costs 
that are paid or incurred in connection with the project. Therefore, the 
costs of drilling the water wells are qualified enhanced oil recovery 
costs.
    Example 10. Leased equipment. In 1992, H, the owner of an operating 
mineral interest in a property undertakes a steam drive project with 
respect to the property. H contracts with I, a driller, to drill 
injection wells in connection with the project. H also leases a steam 
generator to provide steam for injection in connection with the project. 
The drilling costs are intangible drilling and development costs that 
are paid in connection with the project and are qualified enhanced oil 
recovery costs. The steam generator is used to produce the tertiary 
injectant. The steam generator is used directly in the project and is 
essential to the completeness of the project; therefore, it is an 
integral part of the project. The costs of leasing the steam generator 
are tangible property costs that are qualified enhanced oil recovery 
costs.

    (c) Primary purpose--(1) In general. For purposes of this section, a 
cost is a qualified enhanced oil recovery cost only if the cost is paid 
or incurred with respect to an asset which is used for the primary 
purpose of implementing one or more enhanced oil recovery projects, at 
least one of which is a qualified enhanced oil recovery project. All the 
facts and circumstances determine whether an asset is used for the 
primary purpose of implementing an enhanced oil recovery project. For 
purposes of this paragraph (c), an enhanced oil recovery project is a 
project that satisfies the requirements of paragraphs (a) (1) and (2) of 
section 1.43-2.
    (2) Tertiary injectant costs. Tertiary injectant costs generally 
satisfy the primary purpose test of this paragraph (c).

[[Page 169]]

    (3) Intangible drilling and development costs. Intangible drilling 
and development costs paid or incurred with respect to a well that is 
used in connection with the recovery of oil by primary or secondary 
methods are not qualified enhanced oil recovery costs. Except as 
provided in this paragraph (c)(3), a well used for primary or secondary 
recovery is not used for the primary purpose of implementing an enhanced 
oil recovery project. A well drilled for the primary purpose of 
implementing an enhanced oil recovery project is not considered to be 
used for primary or secondary recovery, notwithstanding that some 
primary or secondary production may result when the well is drilled, 
provided that such primary or secondary production is consistent with 
the unit plan of development or other similar plan. All the facts and 
circumstances determine whether primary or secondary recovery is 
consistent with the unit plan of development or other similar plan.
    (4) Tangible property costs. Tangible property costs must be paid or 
incurred with respect to property which is used for the primary purpose 
of implementing an enhanced oil recovery project.
    If tangible property is used partly in a qualified enhanced oil 
recovery project and partly in another activity, the property must be 
primarily used to implement the qualified enhanced oil recovery project.
    (5) Offshore drilling platforms. Amounts paid or incurred in 
connection with the acquisition, construction, transportation, erection, 
or installation of an offshore drilling platform (regardless of whether 
the amounts are intangible drilling and development costs) that is used 
in connection with the recovery of oil by primary or secondary methods 
are not qualified enhanced oil recovery costs. An offshore drilling 
platform used for primary or secondary recovery is not used for the 
primary purpose of implementing an enhanced oil recovery project.
    (6) Examples. The following examples illustrate the principles of 
this paragraph (c).


    Example 1. Intangible drilling and development costs. In 1992, J 
incurs intangible drilling and development costs in drilling a well. J 
intends to use the well as an injection well in connection with an 
enhanced oil recovery project in 1994, but in the meantime will use the 
well in connection with a secondary recovery project. J may not take the 
intangible drilling and development costs into account in determining 
the credit because the primary purpose of a well used for secondary 
recovery is not to implement a qualified enhanced oil recovery project.
    Example 2. Offshore drilling platform. K, the owner of an operating 
mineral interest in an offshore oil field located within the United 
States, constructs an offshore drilling platform that is designed to 
accommodate the primary, secondary, and tertiary development of the 
field. Subsequent to primary and secondary development of the field, K 
commences an enhanced oil recovery project that involves the application 
of a qualified tertiary recovery method. As part of the enhanced oil 
recovery project, K drills injection wells from the offshore drilling 
platform K used in the primary and secondary development of the field 
and installs an additional separator on the platform.
    Because the offshore drilling platform was used in the primary and 
secondary development of the field and was not used for the primary 
purpose of implementing tertiary development of the field, costs 
incurred by K in connection with the acquisition, construction, 
transportation, erection, or installation of the offshore drilling 
platform are not qualified enhanced oil recovery costs. However, the 
costs K incurs for the additional separator are qualified enhanced oil 
recovery costs because the separator is used for the primary purpose of 
implementing tertiary development of the field. In addition, the 
intangible drilling and development costs K incurs in connection with 
drilling the injection wells are qualified enhanced oil recovery costs 
with respect to which K may claim the enhanced oil recovery credit.


    (d) Costs paid or incurred prior to first injection--(1) In general. 
Qualified enhanced oil recovery costs may be paid or incurred prior to 
the date of the first injection of liquids, gases, or other matter 
(within the meaning of Sec. 1.43-2(c)). If the first injection of 
liquids, gases, or other matter occurs on or before the date the 
taxpayer files the taxpayer's federal income tax return for the taxable 
year with respect to which the costs are allowable, the costs may be 
taken into account on that return. If the first injection of liquids, 
gases, or other matter is expected to occur after the date the taxpayer 
files that return, costs may be taken into account on that return if the 
Internal Revenue Service issues a private

[[Page 170]]

letter ruling to the taxpayer that so permits.
    (2) First injection after filing of return for taxable year costs 
are allowable. Except as provided in paragraph (d)(3) of this section, 
if the first injection of liquids, gases, or other matter occurs or is 
expected to occur after the date the taxpayer files the taxpayer's 
federal income tax return for the taxable year with respect to which the 
costs are allowable, the costs may be taken into account on an amended 
return (or in the case of a Coordinated Examination Program taxpayer, on 
a written statement treated as a qualified return) after the earlier 
of--
    (i) The date the first injection of liquids, gases, or other matter 
occurs; or
    (ii) The date the Internal Revenue Service issues a private letter 
ruling that provides that the taxpayer may take costs into account prior 
to the first injection of liquids, gases, or other matter.
    (3) First injection more than 36 months after close of taxable year 
costs are paid or incurred. If the first injection of liquids, gases, or 
other matter occurs more than 36 months after the close of the taxable 
year in which costs are paid or incurred, the taxpayer may take the 
costs into account in determining the credit only if the Internal 
Revenue Service issues a private letter ruling to the taxpayer that so 
provides.
    (4) Injections in volumes less than the volumes specified in the 
project plan. For purposes of this paragraph (d), injections in volumes 
significantly less than the volumes specified in the project plan, the 
unit plan of development, or another similar plan do not constitute the 
first injection of liquids, gases, or other matter.
    (5) Examples.  The following examples illustrate the provisions of 
paragraph (d) of this section.

    Example 1. First injection before return filed. In 1992, L, a 
calendar year taxpayer, undertakes a qualified enhanced oil recovery 
project on a property in which L owns an operating mineral interest. L 
incurs $1,000 of intangible drilling and development costs, which L may 
elect to deduct under section 263(c) for 1992. The first injection of 
liquids, gases, or other matter (within the meaning of Sec. 1.43-2(c)) 
occurs in March 1993. L files a 1992 federal income tax return in April 
1993. Because the first injection occurs before the filing of L's 1992 
federal income tax return, L may take the $1,000 of intangible drilling 
and development costs into account in determining the credit for 1992 on 
that return.
    Example 2. First injection after return filed. In 1993, M, a 
calendar year taxpayer, undertakes a qualified enhanced oil recovery 
project on a property in which M owns an operating mineral interest. M 
incurs $2,000 of intangible drilling and development costs, which M 
elects to deduct under section 263(c) for 1993. The first injection of 
liquids, gases, or other matter is expected to occur in 1995. M files a 
1993 federal income tax return in April 1994. Because the first 
injection of liquids, gases, or other matter occurs after the date on 
which M's 1993 federal income tax return is filed in April 1994, M may 
take the $2,000 of intangible drilling and development costs into 
account on an amended return for 1993 after the earlier of the date the 
first injection of liquids, gases, or other matter occurs, or the date 
the Internal Revenue Service issues a private letter ruling that 
provides that M may take the $2,000 into account prior to first 
injection.
    Example 3. First injection more than 36 months after taxable year. 
N, a calendar year taxpayer, owns an operating mineral interest in a 
property on which N undertakes an immiscible carbon dioxide displacement 
project. In 1994, N incurs $5,000 in connection with the construction of 
a pipeline to transport carbon dioxide to the project site. The first 
injection of liquids, gases, or other matter is expected to occur after 
the pipeline is completed in 1998. Because the first injection of 
liquids, gases, or other matter occurs more than 36 months after the 
close of the taxable year in which the $5,000 is incurred, N may take 
the $5,000 into account in determining the credit only if N receives a 
private letter ruling from the Internal Revenue Service that provides 
that N may take the $5,000 into account prior to first injection.

    (e) Other rules--(1) Anti-abuse rule. Costs paid or incurred with 
respect to an asset that is acquired, used, or transferred in a manner 
designed to duplicate or otherwise unreasonably increase the amount of 
the credit are not qualified enhanced oil recovery costs, regardless of 
whether the costs would otherwise be creditable for a single taxpayer or 
more than one taxpayer.
    (2) Costs paid or incurred to acquire a project. A purchaser of an 
existing qualified enhanced oil recovery project may claim the credit 
for any section 43 costs in excess of the acquisition cost. However, 
costs paid or incurred to acquire an existing qualified enhanced oil 
recovery project (or an interest in an

[[Page 171]]

existing qualified enhanced oil recovery project) are not eligible for 
the credit.
    (3) Examples. The following examples illustrate the principles of 
paragraph (e) of this section.

    Example 1. Duplicating or unreasonably increasing the credit. O owns 
an operating mineral interest in a property with respect to which a 
qualified enhanced oil recovery project is implemented. O acquires 
pumping units, rods, casing, and separators for use in connection with 
the project from an unrelated equipment dealer in an arm's length 
transaction. The equipment is used for the primary purpose of 
implementing the project. Some of the equipment acquired by O is used 
equipment. The costs paid by O for the used equipment are qualified 
enhanced oil recovery costs. O does not need to determine whether the 
equipment has been previously used in an enhanced oil recovery project.
    Example 2. Duplicating or unreasonably increasing the credit. P and 
Q are co-owners of an oil property with respect to which a qualified 
enhanced oil recovery project is implemented. In 1992, P and Q jointly 
purchase a nitrogen plant to supply the tertiary injectant used in the 
project. P and Q claim the credit for their respective costs for the 
plant. In 1994, X, a corporation unrelated to P or Q, purchases the 
nitrogen plant and enters into an agreement to sell nitrogen to P and Q. 
Because this transaction duplicates or otherwise unreasonably increases 
the credit, the credit is not allowable for the amounts incurred by P 
and Q for the nitrogen purchased from X.
    Example 3. Duplicating or unreasonably increasing the credit. The 
facts are the same as in Example 2. In addition, in 1995, P and Q 
reacquire the nitrogen plant from X. This constitutes the acquisition of 
property in a manner designed to duplicate or otherwise unreasonably 
increase the amount of the credit. Therefore, the credit is not 
allowable for amounts incurred by P and Q for the nitrogen plant 
purchased from X.
    Example 4. Duplicating or unreasonably increasing the credit. R owns 
an operating mineral interest in a property with respect to which a 
qualified enhanced oil recovery project is implemented. R acquires a 
pump that is installed at the site of the project. After the pump has 
been placed in service for 6 months, R transfers the pump to a secondary 
recovery project and acquires a replacement pump for the tertiary 
project. The original pump is suited to the needs of the secondary 
recovery project and could have been installed there initially. The 
pumps have been acquired in a manner designed to duplicate or otherwise 
unreasonably increase the amount of the credit. Depending on the facts, 
the cost of one pump or the other may be a qualified enhanced oil 
recovery cost; however, R may not claim the credit with respect to the 
cost of both pumps.
    Example 5. Acquiring a project. In 1993, S purchases all of T's 
interest in a qualified enhanced oil recovery project, including all of 
T's interest in tangible property that is an integral part of the 
project and all of T's operating mineral interest. In 1994, S incurs 
costs for additional tangible property that is an integral part of the 
project and which is used for the primary purpose of implementing the 
project. S also incurs costs for tertiary injectants that are injected 
in connection with the project. In determining the credit for 1994, S 
may take into account costs S incurred for tangible property and 
tertiary injectants. However, S may not take into account any amount 
that S paid for T's interest in the project in determining S's credit 
for any taxable year.

[T.D. 8448, 57 FR 54927, Nov. 23, 1992; 58 FR 7987, Feb. 11, 1993]
Sec. 1.43-5  At-risk limitation.  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1.43-6  Election out of section 43.

    (a) Election to have the credit not apply--(1) In general. A 
taxpayer may elect to have section 43 not apply for any taxable year. 
The taxpayer may revoke an election to have section 43 not apply for any 
taxable year. An election to have section 43 not apply (or a revocation 
of an election to have section 43 not apply) for any taxable year is 
effective only for the taxable year to which the election relates.
    (2) Time for making the election. A taxpayer may make an election 
under paragraph (a) of this section to have section 43 not apply (or 
revoke an election to have section 43 not apply) for any taxable year at 
any time before the expiration of the 3-year period beginning on the 
last date prescribed by law (determined without regard to extensions) 
for filing the return for the taxable year. The time for making the 
election (or revoking the election) is prescribed by section 43(e)(2) 
and may not be extended under Sec. 1.9100-1.
    (3) Manner of making the election. An election (or revocation) under 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section is made by attaching a statement to the 
taxpayer's federal income tax return or an amended return (or, in the 
case of a Coordinated Examination Program taxpayer, on a written 
statement treated as a qualified amended return) for the

[[Page 172]]

taxable year for which the election (or revocation) applies. The 
taxpayer must indicate whether the taxpayer is electing to not have 
section 43 apply or is revoking such an election and designate the 
project or projects to which the election (or revocation) applies. For 
any taxable year, the last election (or revocation) made by a taxpayer 
within the period prescribed in paragraph (a)(2) of this section 
determines whether section 43 applies for that taxable year.
    (b) Election by partnerships and S corporations. For partnerships 
and S corporations, an election to have section 43 not apply (or a 
revocation of an election to have section 43 not apply) for any taxable 
year is made, in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (a) of 
this section, by the partnership or S corporation with respect to the 
qualified enhanced oil recovery costs paid or incurred by the 
partnership or S corporation for the taxable year to which the election 
relates.

[T.D. 8448, 57 FR 54930, Nov. 23, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 1.43-7  Effective date of regulations.

    The provisions of Secs. 1.43-1, 1.43-2 and 1.43-4 through 1.43-7 are 
effective with respect to costs paid or incurred after December 31, 
1991, in connection with a qualified enhanced oil recovery project. The 
provisions of Sec. 1.43-3 are effective for taxable years beginning 
after December 31, 1990. For costs paid or incurred after December 31, 
1990, and before January 1, 1992, in connection with a qualified 
enhanced oil recovery project, taxpayers must take reasonable return 
positions taking into consideration the statute and its legislative 
history.

[T.D. 8448, 57 FR 54931, Nov. 23, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 1.44-1  Allowance of credit for purchase of new principal residence after March 12, 1975, and before January 1, 1977.

    (a) General rule. Section 44 provides a credit against the tax 
imposed by chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 in the case of 
an individual who purchases a new principal residence (as defined in 
paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.44-5) which is property to which section 44 
applies (as provided in Sec. 1.44-2). Subject to the limitations set 
forth in paragraph (b) of this section, the credit is in an amount equal 
to 5 percent of the purchase price (as defined in paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 1.44-5).
    (b) Limitations--(1) Maximum credit. The credit allowed under 
section 44 and this section may not exceed $2,000.
    (2) Limitation to one residence. Such credit shall be allowed with 
respect to only one residence of the taxpayer; the combined purchase 
prices of more than one new principal residence cannot be aggregated to 
increase the credit allowed.
    (3) Married individuals. In the case of a husband and wife who file 
a joint return under section 6013, the maximum credit allowed on the 
joint return is $2,000. In the case of married individuals filing 
separate returns the maximum credit allowable to each spouse is $1,000. 
Where a husband and wife do not make equal contributions with respect to 
the purchase price of the new principal residence, allocation of the 
credit is to be made in proportion to their respective ownership 
interests in such residence. For this purpose, tenants by the entirety 
or joint tenants with right of survivorship are treated as equal owners.
    (4) Certain other taxpayers. Where a new principal residence is 
purchased by two or more taxpayers (other than a husband and wife), the 
amount of the credit allowed will be allocated among the taxpayers in 
proportion to their respective ownership interests in such residence, 
with the limitation that the sum of the credits allowed to all such 
taxpayers shall not exceed $2,000. For this purpose, joint tenants with 
right of survivorship are treated as equal owners. For an example of the 
operation of this provision see Example (2) of Sec. 1.44-5(b)(2)(ii).
    (5) Application with other credits. The credit allowed by this 
section shall not exceed the amount of the tax imposed by chapter 1 of 
the Code for the taxable year, reduced by the sum of the credits 
allowable under--
    (i) Section 33 (relating to taxes of foreign countries and 
possessions of the United States),
    (ii) Section 37 (relating to retirement income),

[[Page 173]]

    (iii) Section 38 (relating to investment in certain depreciable 
property),
    (iv) Section 40 (relating to expenses of work incentive program),
    (v) Section 41 (relating to contributions to candidates for public 
office), and
    (vi) Section 42 (relating to personal exemptions).

[T.D. 7391, 40 FR 55851, Dec. 2, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 1.44-2   Property to which credit for purchase of new principal residence applies.

    The provisions of section 44 and the regulations thereunder apply to 
a new principal residence which satisfies the following conditions:
    (a) Construction. The construction of the residence must have begun 
before March 26, 1975. For this purpose construction is considered to 
have commenced in the following circumstances:
    (1)(i) Except as provided in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, 
construction is considered to commence when actual physical work of a 
significant amount has occurred on the building site of the residence. A 
significant amount of construction requires more than drilling to 
determine soil conditions, preparation of an architect's sketches, 
securing of a building permit, or grading of the land. Land preparation 
and improvements such as the clearing and grading (excavation or 
filling), construction of roads and sidewalks, and installation of 
sewers and utilities are not considered commencement of construction of 
the residence even though they might involve a significant expenditure. 
However, driving pilings for the foundation, digging of the footings, 
excavation of the building foundation, pouring of floor slabs, or 
construction of compacted earthen pads when specifically prepared and 
designed for a particular residential structure and not merely as a part 
of the overall land preparation, constitute a significant amount of 
construction of the residence. In the case of a housing or condominium 
development construction of recreational facilities no matter how 
extensive does not by itself constitute commencement of construction of 
any residential unit. However, where residential units are part of a 
building structure, as in the case of certain condominium and 
cooperative housing units, then digging of the footings or excavation of 
the building foundation constitutes commencement of construction for all 
units in that building.
    (ii) The rules in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph are 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. A location chosen for a housing development has extremely 
hilly terrain. In order to make the location suitable for development, 
the builder moves large amounts of earth and places it elsewhere on the 
location. In addition, the earth material which has been moved must be 
compacted according to government specifications in order to provide a 
stable base. Such activities constitute land preparation and, therefore, 
do not constitute the commencement of construction.

    Example 2. A location chosen for a housing development has swampy 
and marshy terrain. In order to make the location suitable for 
development the builder utilizes large quantities of fill. This activity 
constitutes land preparation and does not constitute commencement of 
construction.

    Example 3. Assume the same facts as in either Example 1 or Example 2 
except that the builder also constructs an earthen pad of compacted fill 
specifically prepared for a particular residential structure and not 
merely as a part of the overall land preparation. Construction of the 
compacted earthen pad is considered in the same light as excavation of 
the building foundation and accordingly constitutes commencement of 
construction.

    (2) Construction of a factory-made home (as defined in paragraph (e) 
of Sec. 1.44-5) is considered to have commenced when construction of 
important parts of the factory-made home has commenced. For this 
purpose, commencement of construction of important parts means the 
cutting and shaping or welding of structural components for a specific 
identifiable factory-made home, whether the work was done by the 
manufacturer of the home or by a subcontractor thereof.
    (b) Acquisition and occupancy. The residence must be acquired and 
occupied by the taxpayer after March 12, 1975, and before January 1, 
1977. For this purpose a taxpayer ``acquires'' a residence when legal 
title to it is conveyed to him at settlement, or he has possession of it 
pursuant to a binding purchase contract under which he

[[Page 174]]

makes periodic payments until he becomes entitled under the contract to 
demand conveyance of title. A taxpayer ``occupies'' a residence when he 
or his spouse physically occupies it. Thus, for example, moving of 
furniture or other household effects into the residence or physical 
occupancy by a dependent child of the taxpayer is not ``occupancy'' for 
purposes of this paragraph. The credit may be claimed when both the 
acquisition and occupancy tests have been satisfied. Thus, where a 
taxpayer meets the acquisition and occupancy tests set forth above after 
March 12, 1975, and before January 1, 1976, the credit is allowable for 
1975. Where a taxpayer occupied a residence prior to March 13, 1975, 
without having acquired it (as where his occupancy was pursuant to a 
leasing arrangement pending settlement under a binding contract to 
purchase or pursuant to a leasing arrangement where a written option to 
purchase was contained in the original lease agreement) he will 
nonetheless satisfy the acquisition and occupancy tests set forth above 
if he acquires the residence and continues to occupy it after March 12, 
1975, and before January 1, 1977.
    (c) Binding contract. Except in the case of self-construction, the 
new principal residence must be acquired by the taxpayer (within the 
meaning of paragraph (b) of this section) under a binding contract 
entered into by the taxpayer before January 1, 1976. An otherwise 
binding contract for the purchase of a residence which is conditioned 
upon the purchaser's obtaining a loan for the purchase of the residence 
(including conditions as to the amount or interest rate of such loan) is 
considered binding notwithstanding that condition.
    (d) Self-constructed residence. A self-constructed residence (as 
defined in paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.44-5) must be occupied by the 
taxpayer before January 1, 1977. Where self-construction of a principal 
residence was begun before March 13, 1975, only that portion of the 
basis of the property allocable to construction after March 12, 1975, 
and before January 1, 1977, shall be taken into consideration in 
determining the amount of the credit allowable. For this purpose, the 
portion of the basis attributable to the pre-March 13 period includes 
the total cost of land acquired (as defined in paragraph (b) of this 
section) prior to March 13, 1975, on which the new principal residence 
is constructed and the cost of expenditures with respect to construction 
work performed prior to March 13, 1975. The costs incurred in 
stockpiling materials for later stages of construction, however, are not 
allocated to the pre-March 13 period. Thus, for example, if prior to 
March 13, 1975, a taxpayer who qualifies for the credit has constructed 
a portion of a residence at a cost of $10,000 (including the cost of the 
land purchased prior to March 13, 1975) and the total cost of the 
residence is $40,000 and the taxpayer's basis after the application of 
section 1034(e) (relating to the reduction of basis of new principal 
residence where gain is not recognized upon the sale of the old 
residence) is $36,000, the amount subject to the credit will be $27,000:

                   ($30,000<divide>$40,000) x $36,000.

[T.D. 7391, 40 FR 55852, Dec. 2, 1975; 40 FR 58138, Dec. 15, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 1.44-3   Certificate by seller.

    (a) Requirement of certification by seller. Taxpayers claiming the 
credit should attach Form 5405, Credit for Purchase or Construction of 
New Principal Residence, to their tax returns on which the credit is 
claimed. Except in the case of self-construction (as defined in 
Sec. 1.44-5(d)), taxpayers must attach a certification by the seller 
that construction of the residence began before March 26, 1975, and that 
the purchase price is the lowest price at which the residence was 
offered for sale after February 28, 1975. For purposes of section 
44(e)(4) and this section, the term ``price'' generally does not include 
costs of acquisition other than the amount of the consideration from the 
purchaser to the seller. However, for rules relating to adjustments in 
price due to changes in financing terms and closing costs see paragraph 
(d)(2) of this section.
    (b) Form of certification. The following form of the certification 
statement is suggested:


[[Page 175]]


    I certify that the construction of the residence at (specify 
address) was begun before March 26, 1975, and that this residence has 
not been offered for sale after February 28, 1975 in a listing, a 
written private offer, or an offer by means of advertisement at a lower 
purchase price than (state price), the price at which I sold the 
residence to (state name, present address, and social security number of 
purchaser) by contract dated (give date).
    (Date, seller's signature and taxpayer identification number.)

However, any written certification filed by the taxpayer will be 
accepted provided that such certification is signed by the seller and 
states that construction of the residence began before March 26, 1975, 
and that the purchase price of the residence is the lowest price at 
which the residence was offered for sale after February 28, 1975. With 
regard to factory-made homes the seller, in the absence of his own 
knowledge as to the commencement of construction, may attach to his own 
certification a certification from the manufacturer that construction 
began before March 26, 1975, and may certify based on the manufacturer's 
certification. It is suggested that both certifications include the 
serial number, if any, of the residence.
    (c) Offer to sell. (1) For purposes of section 44(e)(4) and this 
section, an offer to sell is limited to an offer to sell a specified 
residence at a specified purchase price.
    (2) An ``offer'' includes any written offer, whether made to a 
particular purchaser or to the public, and any offer by means of 
advertising. Advertising includes an offer to sell published by 
billboards, flyers, brochures, price lists (unless the lists are 
exclusively for the internal use of the seller and are not made 
available to the public), mailings, newspapers, periodicals, radio, or 
television. The listing of a property with a real estate agency, the 
filing of a prospectus and the registration of construction plans and 
price lists with the appropriate authorities (in the case of 
condominiums or cooperative housing developments) are to be considered 
offers made to the public.
    (3) An offer to sell a specified residence includes:
    (i) Both an offer to sell an existing residence and an offer to 
build and sell a residence of substantially the same design or model as 
that purchased by the taxpayer on the same lot as that on which the 
taxpayer's new principal residence was constructed. It does not include 
an offer to sell the same model residence on a different lot. Where a 
residence of a particular design or model is offered at a specific base 
price, additions of property to the residence, no matter how extensive, 
will not result in the residence being treated as a different residence 
for the purpose of determining the lowest offer (as defined in paragraph 
(f) of Sec. 1.44-5).
    (ii) In the case of a condominium or cooperative housing development 
where units are offered for sale on the basis of models (e.g., all Model 
C two-bedroom apartments sell at a specified base price), an offer to 
sell a specified residence includes an offer to sell a specific type of 
unit (with appropriate adjustments to be made for the location of such 
unit and as provided in paragraph (d) of this section).
    (iii) In the case of a factory-made home, an offer to sell a 
specified residence includes an offer to sell the same model home as 
that purchased by the taxpayer, provided that the offer is made after 
the seller has the right to sell the home purchased by the taxpayer 
(i.e., has that specific home in his inventory). However, it does not 
include an offer to sell such home with land which is not included in 
the taxpayer's purchase nor an offer to sell such home without land 
which is included in the taxpayer's purchase. Appropriate adjustments to 
a prior offer shall be made as provided in paragraph (d) of this 
section, including adjustments for any delivery and installation charges 
as provided in paragraph (d)(3).
    (iv) The rules of this subparagraph may be illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. In March 1975 A advertised colonial-style homes on 
section I of subdivision C at a base price of $40,000. At the time none 
of the homes had been completed but construction of all homes on section 
I was commenced before March 26, 1975. After one-half of the homes were 
sold, A offers to sell the remaining homes in May 1975 at a base price 
of $45,000. Under the facts above the base price of $45,000 is not the 
lowest offer since the seller had offered to sell the same model

[[Page 176]]

home on the same lot at a lower purchase price after February 28, 1975.

    Example 2. In June 1975 A offers houses, otherwise qualifying, on 
section II for the first time for a base price of $50,000. They are 
colonial homes and substantially the same as the homes he previously 
offered on section I. Under the facts stated above the base price of 
$50,000 is the lowest offer since the same model home on the same lot 
was not previously offered for sale.

    Example 3. In March 1975 B, a condominium developer, offers to sell 
any two-bedroom unit in a particular high rise condominium for $45,000 
with an added $5,000 for units with a lakefront view and an additional 
$2,000 for units on higher floors. With regard to all two-bedroom units 
in the condominium an offer to sell a specified residence at a specified 
purchase price has been made. This is true even though at the time of 
the offer construction had not reached the floor on which the particular 
unit will be located.

    (4) A specified purchase price means a stated definite price for a 
particular residence or a specific base price for a residence of a 
particular model or design. An offer to sell for an indefinite price 
(e.g., an advertisement that all houses sell in the $40,000's) is not 
considered an offer to sell at a specified purchase price.
    (5) An offer to sell includes an offer to sell subject to special 
conditions imposed by the seller. Thus, if the lowest price at which a 
house was advertised was ``at $40,000 for March only'', the $40,000 
price would be the lowest offer. However, certain conditions may 
necessitate adjustments in determining the lowest offer. See paragraph 
(d) of this section.
    (6) An offer to sell two or more residences together as for example, 
in a bulk sale shall be disregarded, even though each residence is 
assigned a specific purchase price for the purpose of such a sale. With 
regard to factory-made homes an offer to sell does not include an offer 
made by the manufacturer to a dealer in such homes.
    (7)(i) Where new residences are purchased at a foreclosure sale 
(including a conveyance by the owner in lieu of foreclosure) and prior 
to the foreclosure sale such residences had been offered for sale by the 
foreclosure seller at specified prices, the foreclosure purchaser is 
bound by such prices in determining the lowest offer. He is not bound by 
the prices paid to the foreclosure seller since such prices do not 
constitute voluntary offers.
    (ii) For this purpose, if the foreclosure seller and foreclosure 
purchaser are not related parties (as defined in subdivision (iii) of 
this subparagraph), and if the foreclosure purchaser does not have 
knowledge of the date of commencement of construction and the lowest 
offer made by such seller with respect to each of the foreclosed 
residences, the foreclosure purchaser must request and try to obtain 
from the foreclosure seller a certificate specifying such facts. Upon a 
subsequent sale of a particular residence by the foreclosure purchaser, 
he must certify whether the price is the lowest offer for that 
particular residence based on the certification of the foreclosure 
seller, a copy of which must be attached to the certification of the 
foreclosure purchaser. If the foreclosure seller refuses to so certify, 
the foreclosure purchaser must make a reasonable effort to determine the 
date construction commenced and the lowest offer made by the foreclosure 
seller. For this purpose, reasonable effort includes the effort to 
locate and examine advertising and listings published or used by the 
foreclosure seller. If the foreclosure seller and foreclosure purchaser 
are related parties (as defined in subdivision (iii) of this 
subparagraph), the foreclosure purchaser will be considered as having 
knowledge of the date of the commencement of construction and the lowest 
offer made by such seller with respect to each of the foreclosed 
residences, and, upon a subsequent sale of a particular residence by the 
foreclosure purchaser, he must comply with the certification 
requirements prescribed by paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.
    (iii) For purposes of this subparagraph related parties shall 
include the relationships described in subparagraph (2) of Sec. 1.44-
5(c), and the constructive ownership rules of section 318 shall apply, 
but family members for this purpose shall include spouses, ancestors, 
and lineal descendants.
    (d) Adjustments in determining lowest price. (1)(i) In determining 
whether a residence was sold at the lowest offer appropriate adjustment 
shall be made

[[Page 177]]

for differences in the property offered and in the terms of the sale. 
Where the sale to the taxpayer includes property which was not the 
subject of the prior offer or excludes property which was included in 
the prior offer, the amount of the prior offer shall be adjusted to 
reflect the fair market value of such property, provided that, in the 
case of property included in the sale which was not a part of the 
residence at the time of execution of the contract of purchase, the 
taxpayer had the option to require inclusion or exclusion of such 
property. The fair market value of any excluded property is to be 
determined at the time of the prior offer, while all additions are to be 
valued at their fair market value on the date of execution of the 
contract of sale. If a seller increases his present offer to include 
financing or other costs of the seller in connection with his ownership 
of the residence, the present offer does not qualify as being the lowest 
offer.
    (ii) The rules in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph are 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. A offered to sell a new home without a garage for 
$35,000. Having found no buyers A added a garage and sold the home for 
$40,000. At the time the contract of sale was executed the fair market 
value of the garage was $5,000. The offer to sell for $40,000 qualifies 
since it equals the seller's lowest offer plus the fair market value of 
the garage.

    Example 2. B, unable to sell colonial-style homes presently under 
construction and previously offered for sale for $40,000, makes 
extensive changes in decor and identifies the homes as his new 
Williamsburg model. The Williamsburg models are not different residences 
for purposes of this section. To the extent that the additions have not 
yet been added at the time of execution of a contract of sale, in order 
to qualify for the credit the taxpayer must have the option as to 
whether to include these additions, and if these additions are included 
B must charge no more than the fair market value of the additions on 
that date of execution of the contract of sale.

    (2) Appropriate adjustment to a prior offer to sell shall be made 
for differences in financing terms and closing costs which increase the 
seller's actual net proceeds and the purchaser's actual costs. A seller 
may pass on to the purchaser without affecting the purchase price only 
those additional amounts he is required to expend in connection with 
such differences. The seller may not by changing the financing terms or 
closing costs indirectly increase the purchase price. For these purposes 
closing costs include all charges paid at settlement for obtaining the 
mortgage loan and transferring real estate title. Thus, for example, 
where a seller previously offered a residence for sale for $40,000 and 
agreed to pay financing ``points'' required by the mortgagee, and now 
offers the same residence also for $40,000 but requires the purchaser to 
pay the points, the present offer does not constitute the lowest offer. 
On the other hand, a prior offer to sell based upon a large down payment 
by the prospective purchaser may be adjusted to reflect the additional 
costs to the seller of accepting a small down payment from the taxpayer. 
For purposes of determining the seller's net proceeds, proceeds received 
by all related parties within the meaning of section 318 must be taken 
into account. For purposes of determining the lowest offer, where an 
offer provided for a rebate (e.g., of cash or of a contribution toward 
mortgage payments) or included, without additional charge or at less 
than fair market value, property not normally included in the sale of a 
residence (e.g., an automobile), such offer must be reduced by the 
amount of such rebate or by the amount by which the fair market value of 
such property at the time of the offer exceeds the amount paid for it by 
the purchaser. Thus, where a residence was advertised for sale at 
$40,000, but the seller agreed to pay $200 a month on the purchaser's 
mortgage for 10 months, such residence is considered to have been 
offered for sale at $38,000.
    (3) In the case of a factory-made home, where delivery and 
installation costs are included in the specified base price of such home 
an appropriate adjustment is to be made in such specified base price for 
differences in the fair market value of the delivery and installation in 
determining the lowest offer.
    (e) Civil and criminal penalties. If a person certifies that the 
price for which the residence was sold does not exceed the lowest offer 
and if it is

[[Page 178]]

found that the price for which the residence was sold exceeded the 
lowest offer, then such person is liable (under section 208(b) of the 
Tax Reduction Act of 1975) to the purchaser for damages in an amount 
equal to three times the excess of the certified price over the lowest 
offer plus reasonable attorney's fees. No income tax deduction shall be 
allowed for two-thirds of any amount paid or incurred pursuant to a 
judgment entered against any person in a suit based on such liability. 
However, attorney's fees, court costs, and other such amounts paid or 
incurred with respect to such suit which meet the requirements of 
section 162 are deductible under that section. In addition, an 
individual who falsely certifies may be subject to criminal penalties. 
For example, section 1001 of Title 18 of the United States Code provides 
as follows:

Sec. 1001  Statements or entries generally.
    Whoever, in any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or 
agency of the United States knowingly and willfully falsifies, conceals 
or covers up by any trick, scheme, or device a material fact, or makes 
any false, fictitious or fraudulent statements or representations, or 
makes or uses any false writing or document knowing the same to contain 
any false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or entry, shall be fined 
not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than five years, or both.

The treble damages and criminal sanctions provided under this paragraph 
apply only with regard to false certification as to the lowest offer, 
not to false certification as to commencement of construction. However, 
with regard to false certification as to commencement of construction 
there may exist contractual or tort remedies under State law.
    (f) Denial of credit. In the absence of the taxpayer's participation 
in, or knowledge of, a false certification by the seller, the credit is 
not denied to a taxpayer who otherwise qualifies for the credit solely 
because the seller has falsely certified that the new principal 
residence was sold at the lowest offer. However, if certification as to 
the commencement of construction is false, no credit is allowed since 
such residence does not qualify as a new principal residence 
construction of which began before March 26, 1975.

[T.D. 7391, 40 FR 55852, Dec. 2, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 1.44-4   Recapture for certain dispositions.

    (a) In general. (1) Under section 44(d) except as provided in 
paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, if the taxpayer disposes of 
property, with respect to the purchase of which a credit was allowed 
under section 44(a), at any time within 36 months after the date on 
which he acquired it (or, in the case of construction by the taxpayer, 
the date on which he first occupied it as his principal residence), then 
the tax imposed under chapter 1 of the Code for the taxable year in 
which the replacement period (as provided under subparagraph (2) of this 
paragraph) terminates is increased by an amount equal to the amount 
allowed as a credit for the purchase of such property.
    (2) The replacement period is the period provided for purchase of a 
new principal residence under section 1034 of the Code without 
recognition of gain on the sale of the old residence. In the case of 
residences sold or exchanged after December 31, 1974, it is generally 18 
months in the case of acquisition by purchase and 2 years in the case of 
construction by the taxpayer provided, however, that such construction 
has commenced within the 18-month period. Thus, a calendar-year taxpayer 
who disposes of his old principal residence in December 1975 and does 
not qualify under paragraph (b) or (c) of this section will include the 
amount previously allowed as additional tax on his 1977 tax return.
    (3) Except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, 
section 44(d) applies to all dispositions of property, including sales 
(including foreclosure sales), exchanges (including tax-free exchanges 
such as those under sections 351, 721, and 1031), and gifts.
    (4) In the case of a husband and wife who were allowed a credit 
under section 44(a) claimed on a joint return, for the purpose of 
section 44(d) and this section the credit shall be allocated between the 
spouses in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (b)(3) of 
Sec. 1.44-1.

[[Page 179]]

    (b) Acquisition of a new residence. (1) Section 44(d)(1) and 
paragraph (a) of this section shall not apply to a disposition of 
property with respect to the purchase of which a credit was allowed 
under section 44(a) in the case of a taxpayer who purchases or 
constructs a new principal residence (within the meaning of Sec. 1.44-
5(a)) within the applicable replacement period provided in section 1034. 
In determining whether a new principal residence qualifies for purposes 
of this section the rules relating to construction, acquisition, and 
occupancy under Sec. 1.44-2 do not apply. Where a disposition has 
occurred and the taxpayer's purchase (or construction) costs of a new 
principal residence are less than the adjusted sales price (as defined 
in section 1034(b)) of the old residence, the tax imposed by chapter 1 
of the Code for the taxable year following the taxable year during which 
disposition occurs is increased by an amount which bears the same ratio 
to the amount allowed as a credit for the purchase of the old residence 
as (i) the adjusted sales price of the old residence (within the meaning 
of section 1034), reduced (but not below zero) by the taxpayer's cost of 
purchasing (or constructing) the new residence (within the meaning of 
such section) bears to (ii) the adjusted sales price of the old 
residence.
    (2) The rules of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. On July 15, 1975, A purchases a new principal residence for 
a total purchase price of $40,000. The property meets the tests of 
Sec. 1.44-2, and A is allowed a credit of $2,000 on his 1975 tax return. 
On January 15, 1977 (within 36 months after acquisition) A sells his 
residence for an adjusted sales price of $50,000 and on March 15, 1977, 
purchases a new principal residence at a cost of $40,000. Since the new 
principal residence was purchased within the 18-month replacement period 
(provided in section 1034), the amount recaptured is limited to $400, 
determined by multiplying the amount of the credit allowed ($2,000) by a 
fraction, the numerator of which is $10,000 (determined by reducing the 
adjusted sales price of the old residence ($50,000) by A's cost of 
purchasing the new principal residence ($40,000)) and the denominator of 
which is $50,000 (the adjusted sales price). Therefore, A's tax 
liability for 1978, the year following the taxable year in which the 
disposition occurred, is increased by $400.

    (c) Certain involuntary dispositions. Section 44(d)(1) and paragraph 
(a) of this section shall not apply to the following:
    (1) A disposition of a residence made on account of the death of any 
individual having a legal or equitable interest therein occurring during 
the 36-month period described in paragraph (a) of this section,
    (2) A disposition of the residence if it is substantially or 
completely destroyed by a casualty described in section 165(c)(3),
    (3) A disposition of the residence if it is compulsorily and 
involuntarily converted within the meaning of section 1033(a), or
    (4) A disposition of the residence pursuant to a settlement in a 
divorce or legal separation proceeding where the other spouse retains 
the residence as principal residence (as defined in Sec. 1.44-5(a)).

[T.D. 7391, 40 FR 55854, Dec. 2, 1975; 40 FR 58138, Dec. 15, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 1.44-5   Definitions.

    For purposes of section 44 and the regulations thereunder--
    (a) New principal residence. The term ``new principal residence'' 
means a principal residence, the original use of which commences with 
the taxpayer. The term ``principal residence'' has the same meaning as 
under section 1034 of the Code. For this purpose, the term ``residence'' 
includes, without being limited to, a single family structure, a 
residential unit in a condominium or cooperative housing project, a 
townhouse, and a factory-made home. In the case of a tenant-stockholder 
in a cooperative housing corporation references to property used by the 
taxpayer as his principal residence and references to the residence of a 
taxpayer shall include stock held by the tenant-stockholder in a 
cooperative housing project provided, however, that the taxpayer used as 
his principal residence the house or apartment which he was entitled as 
such stockholder to occupy. ``Original use'' of the new principal 
residence by the taxpayer means that such residence has never been used 
as a residence prior to its use as such by the taxpayer. For this 
purpose, a residence will qualify if the first occupancy was

[[Page 180]]

by the taxpayer pursuant to a lease arrangement pending settlement under 
a binding contract to purchase or pursuant to a lease arrangement where 
a written option to purchase the then existing residence was contained 
in the original lease agreement.

A renovated building does not qualify as new, regardless of the extent 
of the renovation nor does a condominium conversion qualify.
    (b) Purchase price--(1) General rule. For purposes of section 44(a) 
and Sec. 1.44-1, the term ``purchase price'' means the adjusted basis of 
the new principal residence on the date of acquisition and includes all 
amounts attributable to the acquisition or construction, but only to the 
extent that such amounts constitute capital expenditures and are not 
allowable as deductions in computing taxable income. Such capital 
expenditures include but are not limited to the cost of acquisition or 
construction, title insurance, attorney's fees, transfer taxes, and 
other costs of transfer. For these purposes the adjusted basis of a 
factory-made home includes the cost of moving the home and setting it up 
as the taxpayer's principal residence only where such cost is included 
in the base price of the residence; it also includes the purchase price 
of the land on which the home is located, but only if such land was 
purchased by the taxpayer after March 12, 1975 and only if the taxpayer 
acquired the land prior to or in conjunction with the acquisition of 
such factory-made home. However, the adjusted basis does not include any 
expenditures involved in connection with the leasing of land on which 
the factory-made home is located. In the case of factory-made homes the 
adjusted basis includes furniture only where it is included in the base 
price of the unit.
    (2) Sale of old principal residence. (i) The adjusted basis is 
reduced by any gain from the sale or involuntary conversion of an old 
principal residence, which is not recognized due to the application of 
section 1033 or section 1034. However, no reduction will be made for any 
gain excluded from tax by reason of the special treatment provided under 
the tax laws in the case of a sale by a taxpayer who has attained age 65 
(section 121 of the code).
    (ii) The rules in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph are 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. A sells an old principal residence for $30,000 which has 
an adjusted basis of $20,000. A reinvests the proceeds by purchasing a 
new principal residence for $40,000 (including settlement costs which 
are capital in nature), and this purchase satisfies the statutory 
criteria under section 1034 for nonrecognition of gain. The credit under 
section 44 applies with respect to $30,000 ($40,000 costs minus $10,000 
unrecognized gain) of the cost of the new principal residence.

    Example 2. B and C, two sisters, purchase a new principal residence 
as joint tenants with the right of survivorship for a total purchase 
price of $40,000. B has previously sold her old principal residence for 
$25,000 and a $10,000 gain on the sale has qualified for nonrecognition 
under section 1034. B contributes $25,000 and C contributes $15,000. The 
adjusted basis of the new principal residence is $30,000 representing 
the total purchase price of $40,000 less $10,000 representing 
unrecognized gain under section 1034. The total credit allowable, 
therefore, is $1,500. Since joint tenants are treated as equal owners 
and since allocation of the credit is made in proportion to the 
taxpayer's respective ownership interests in such residence B and C each 
will receive a credit of $750.

    Example 3. Taxpayer D is 65 years old and sells his old principal 
residence for $20,000 excluding all gain under section 121. He then 
purchases a new principal residence for $30,000. D's adjusted basis in 
his new principal residence is $30,000, and he is allowed a credit of 
$1,500.

    (3) Tie-in sales. In the case of a purchase of a new principal 
residence which is tied in to the transfer of other property by the 
seller to the purchaser, whether purportedly by sale or gift, the 
adjusted basis of the residence is reduced by the amount of the excess 
of the fair market value of such other property received over the 
amount, if any, purportedly paid for it by the purchaser of the 
residence. For example, if a taxpayer receives a new car with a fair 
market value of $2,500 upon the purchase of a condominium apartment for 
a total purchase price of $40,000 (including settlement costs which are 
capital in nature) his adjusted basis in the residence for computation 
of the credit is $37,500.

[[Page 181]]

    (4) Basis of new principal residence. The taxpayer's basis in his 
new principal residence is not in any way affected by the allowance of 
the credit.
    (c) Purchase--(1) General rule. Except as provided in subparagraph 
(2) of this paragraph, the term ``purchase'' means any acquisition of 
property.
    (2) Exceptions. (i) An acquisition does not qualify as a purchase 
for the purpose of this paragraph if the property is acquired from a 
person whose relationship to the person acquiring it would result in the 
disallowance of losses under section 267 or 707(b). Such persons 
include--
    (A) The purchaser's spouse, ancestors and lineal descendants,
    (B) Related corporations as provided under section 267(b)(2),
    (C) Related trusts as provided under section 267(b), (4), (5), (6), 
and (7),
    (D) Related charitable organizations as provided under section 
267(b)(9), and
    (E) Related partnerships as provided under section 707(b)(1).

For purposes of this subdivision the constructive ownership rules of 
section 267(c) shall apply except that paragraph (4) of section 267(c) 
shall be treated as providing that the family of an individual shall 
include only his spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants.
    (ii) An acquisition does not qualify as a purchase for the purpose 
of this paragraph if the basis of the property in the hands of the 
person acquiring such property is determined--
    (A) In whole or in part by reference to the adjusted basis of such 
property in the hands of the person from whom acquired (e.g., a gift 
under section 1015), or
    (B) Under section 1014(a) (relating to property acquired from a 
decedent).
    (d) Self-construction. The term ``self-construction'' means the 
construction of a residence (other than a factory-made home) to the 
taxpayer's specifications on land already owned or leased by the 
taxpayer at the time of commencement of construction. Thus, where a 
taxpayer purchases land and either builds a residence himself or hires 
an architect and a contractor to build a residence on that land, the 
taxpayer has ``self-constructed'' the residence.
    (e) Factory-made home. The term ``factory-made homes'' includes 
mobile homes, houseboats and prefabricated and modular homes.
    (f) Lowest offer. The term ``lowest offer'' means the lowest price 
at which the residence was offered for sale after February 28, 1975.

[T.D. 7391, 40 FR 55855, Dec. 2, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 1.44A-1  Expenses for household and dependent care services necessary for gainful employment.

    (a) In general. (1) This section applies only for expenses incurred 
in taxable years beginning after December 31, 1975. For deductibility of 
expenses incurred in taxable years beginning before January 1, 1972, see 
Sec. 1.214-1. For deductibility of expenses incurred in taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1971, and before January 1, 1976, see 
Secs. 1.214A-1 through 1.214A-5.
    (2) Section 44A allows a credit against the tax imposed by chapter 1 
of the Code to an individual who maintains a household (within the 
meaning of paragraph (d) of this section) which includes as a member one 
or more qualifying individuals (as defined in paragraph (b) of this 
section). The amount of the credit is equal to the applicable percentage 
of the employment-related expenses (as defined in paragraph (c) of this 
section) paid by the individual during the taxable year (but subject to 
the limits prescribed in Sec. 1.44A-2(a)). However, the credit cannot 
exceed the tax imposed by chapter 1, reduced by the sum of the allowable 
credits enumerated in section 44A(b). The term ``applicable percentage'' 
means 30 percent reduced by 1 percentage point for each $2,000 (or 
fraction thereof) by which the taxpayer's adjusted gross income for the 
taxable year exceeds $10,000, but in no event shall the percent be less 
than 20 percent. Thus, for example, if a taxpayer's adjusted gross 
income is over $10,000, but less than $12,000.01, the applicable 
percentage is 29 percent. (For expenses incurred in taxable years 
beginning before January 1, 1982, the applicable percentage is a flat 20 
percent).
    (3) Generally, the credit for employment-related expenses is 
allowable, regardless of the taxpayer's method of accounting, only for 
expenses which

[[Page 182]]

are actually paid during the taxable year and which are incurred during 
the taxable year or were incurred during a prior taxable year beginning 
after December 31, 1975. If the expenses are incurred but not paid 
during the taxable year, no credit may be taken for that year on account 
of those expenses. Thus, if an expense is incurred in the last month of 
a taxable year but not paid until the following taxable year, a credit 
for the expense is not allowed for the earlier taxable year but is 
allowed for the following taxable year. However, if an expense is 
incurred in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 1976, and paid in 
a later taxable year, no credit is allowed with respect to the expense 
under section 44A. Section 214 and the regulations thereunder are 
applicable in determining whether a deduction for the expense is allowed 
in the year of payment.
    (4) Since an expense cannot be an employment-related expense until 
the services for which the expense was incurred are performed (see 
paragraph (c) of this section), prepaid expenses may be claimed only in 
the taxable year in which the services are performed.
    (5) The requirements of section 44A, this section and Secs. 1.44A-2 
through 1.44A-4 are applied to expenses as of the time they are incurred 
regardless of when they are paid.
    (6) For special rules relating to employment-related expenses which 
also qualify as medical expenses deductible under section 213, see 
Sec. 1.44A-4(b).
    (7) For substantiation of the credit, see paragraph (e) of this 
section.
    (b) Qualifying individual--(1) In general. A person is considered to 
be a qualifying individual if he or she is--
    (i) The taxpayer's dependent who is under the age of 15 and is an 
individual for whom the taxpayer is entitled to a deduction for a 
personal exemption under section 151(e);
    (ii) The taxpayer's dependent (not described in subdivision (i)) who 
is physically or mentally incapable of self-care; or
    (iii) The taxpayer's spouse who is physically or mentally incapable 
of self-care.

The term ``dependent,'' as used in this paragraph (b)(1), includes any 
individual who is a dependent within the meaning of section 152. 
However, see paragraph (b)(2) of this section for special rules for 
determining which parent may treat a child as a qualifying individual 
where the parents are divorced, legally separated, or separated under a 
written separation agreement.
    (2) Special dependency test in case of divorced or separated 
parents. A child (as defined in section 151(e)(3)) who--
    (i) Is under age 15 or is physically or mentally incapable of self-
care,
    (ii) Receives over half of his or her support during the calendar 
year from his or her parents who are divorced or legally separated under 
a decree of divorce or separate maintenance or who are separated under a 
written separation agreement, and
    (iii) Is in the custody of one or both of his or her parents for 
more than one-half of the calendar year,

is treated for any taxable year beginning in the calendar year as a 
qualifying individual (described in subdivision (i) or (ii), as the case 
may be, of paragraph (b)(1) of this section) of that parent who has 
custody for a longer period during the calendar year than the other 
parent. Accordingly, a child may be treated as a qualifying individual 
of a parent even though the parent is not entitled to a dependency 
exemption for the child. The child cannot be treated as a qualifying 
individual with respect to more than one parent.
    (3) Qualification on a daily basis. The status of a person as a 
qualifying individual is determined on a daily basis. Thus, if a 
dependent or spouse of a taxpayer ceases to be a qualifying individual 
on September 16, the dependent or spouse is treated as a qualifying 
individual through September 15 only.
    (4) Physical or mental incapacity. An individual is considered to be 
physically or mentally incapable of self-care if as a result of a 
physical or mental defect the individual is incapable of caring for his 
or her hygienical or nutritional needs, or requires full-time attention 
of another person for his or her own safety or the safety of others. The 
fact that an individual, by reason of a physical or mental defect, is 
unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity, or is unable to 
perform the normal household functions of a homemaker or to care for 
minor children,

[[Page 183]]

does not of itself establish that the individual is physically or 
mentally incapable of self-care. An individual who is physically 
handicapped or is mentally defective, and for such reason requires 
constant attention of another person, is considered to be physically or 
mentally incapable of self-care.
    (c) Employment-related expenses--(1) Gainful employment--(i) In 
general. Expenses are considered to be employment-related expenses only 
if they are incurred to enable the taxpayer to be gainfully employed and 
are paid for household services or for the care of one or more 
qualifying individuals. The expenses must be incurred while the taxpayer 
is gainfully employed or is in active search of gainful employment. The 
employment may consist of service either within or without the home of 
the taxpayer and may include self-employment. An expense is not 
considered to be employment-related merely because it is incurred while 
the taxpayer is gainfully employed. The purpose of the expense must be 
to enable the taxpayer to be gainfully employed. Volunteer work for a 
nominal salary does not constitute gainful employment. Whether the 
purpose of an expense is to enable the taxpayer to be gainfully employed 
depends upon the facts and circumstances of the particular case. Any tax 
required to be paid by the taxpayer under section 3111 (relating to the 
Federal Insurance Contributions Act) and 3301 (relating to the Federal 
Unemployment Tax Act), or under similar State payroll taxes, in respect 
of any wages which otherwise constitute employment-related expenses is 
considered to be an employment-related expense.
    (ii) Determination of period of employment on a daily basis. An 
allocation of expenses is required on a daily basis when the expenses 
cover any period during part of which the taxpayer is gainfully employed 
or is in active search of gainful employment and during the other part 
of which there is no employment or active search for gainful employment. 
Thus, for example, if a taxpayer incurs during each month of the taxable 
year $60 of expenses which would be employment-related if he or she were 
gainfully employed all year, and the taxpayer is gainfully employed, or 
in active search of gainful employment, for only 2 months and 10 days 
during such year, the amount of employment-related expenses is limited 
to $140.
    (2) Household services. Expenses are considered to be paid for 
household services if they are paid for the performance in and about the 
taxpayer's home of ordinary and usual services necessary to the 
maintenance of the household. However, expenses are not considered as 
paid for household services unless the expenses are attributable in part 
to the care of the qualifying individual. Thus, amounts paid for the 
services of a domestic maid or cook are considered to be expenses paid 
for household services if a part of those services is provided to the 
qualifying individual. Amounts paid for the services of an individual 
who is employed as a chauffeur, bartender, or gardener, however, are not 
considered to be expenses paid for household services.
    (3) Care of qualifing individual--(i) In general. The primary 
purpose of expenses for the care of a qualifying individual must be to 
assure that individual's well-being and protection. Not all benefits 
bestowed upon a qualifying individual are considered as provided for the 
individual's care. Accordingly, amounts paid to provide food, clothing, 
or education are not expenses paid for the care of a qualifying 
individual. However, where the manner of providing care is such that the 
expense which is incurred includes expenses for other benefits which are 
incident to and inseparably a part of the care, the full amount of the 
expense is considered to be incurred for care. Thus, for example, the 
full amount paid to a nursery school in which a qualifying child is 
enrolled is considered as being for the care of the child, even though 
the school also furnishes lunch and educational services. Educational 
expenses incurred for a child in the first or higher grade level are not 
expenses incurred for the care of a qualifying individual. Expenses 
incurred for transportation of a qualifying individual described in 
paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section between the taxpayer's household and 
a place outside the taxpayer's household where services for the care of 
the qualifying individual are provided are not

[[Page 184]]

incurred for the care of a qualifying individual.
    (ii) Manner of providing care. The manner of providing the care need 
not be the least expensive alternative available to the taxpayer. For 
example, the taxpayer's mother may reside at the taxpayer's home and be 
available to provide adequate care at no cost for the taxpayer's wife 
who is physically or mentally incapable of caring for herself. 
Nevertheless, the expenses incurred in providing a nurse for the wife 
may be an expense for the care of the wife. See paragraph (c)(1)(i) of 
this section with respect to the requirement that the expense must be 
for the purpose of permitting the taxpayer to be gainfully employed.
    (4) Services outside the taxpayer's household. The credit is allowed 
under section 44A with respect to employment-related expenses incurred 
for services performed outside the taxpayer's household only if those 
expenses are incurred for the care of--
    (i) One or more qualifying individuals who are described in 
paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section; or
    (ii) One or more qualifying individuals (as to expenses incurred for 
taxable years beginning after December 31, 1981) who are described in 
paragraph (b)(1) (ii) or (iii) of this section and who regularly spend 
at least 8 hours each day in the taxpayer's household.
    (5) Dependent care centers. The credit is allowed under section 44A 
with respect to employment-related expenses incurred in taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1981, for services provided outside the 
taxpayer's household by a dependent care center only if--
    (i) The center complies with all applicable laws and regulations of 
a State or unit of local government (e.g., State or local requirements 
for licensing, if applicable, and building and fire Code regulations); 
and
    (ii) The requirement provided in paragraph (c)(4)(i) or (ii) of this 
section is met.

The term ``dependent care center'' means any facility that provides 
full-time or part-time care for more than six individuals (other than 
residents of the facility) on a regular basis during the taxpayer's 
taxable year, and receives a fee, payment, or grant for providing 
services for any such individuals (regardless of whether such facility 
is operated for profit). For purposes of the preceding sentence, a 
facility will be presumed to provide full-time or part-time care for six 
or less individuals on a regular basis during the taxpayer's taxable 
year if the facility has six or less individuals (including the 
qualifying individual) enrolled for full-time or part-time care on the 
day the qualifying individual is enrolled in the facility (or on the 
first day of the taxable year the qualifying individual attends the 
facility in the case where the individual was enrolled in the facility 
in the preceding taxable year) unless the Internal Revenue Service 
demonstrates that the facility provides full-time or part-time care for 
more than six individuals on a regular basis during the taxpayer's 
taxable year.
    (6) Allocation of expenses. Where a portion of an expense is for 
household services or for the care of a qualifying individual and a 
portion of such expense is for other purposes, a reasonable allocation 
must be made and only the portion of the expense paid which is 
attributable to such household services or care is considered to be an 
employment-related expense. No allocation is required to be made, 
however, if the portion of expense for the other purpose is minimal or 
insignificant. An allocation must be made, for example, if a servant 
performs household duties, cares for the qualifying children of the 
taxpayer, and also performs social services for the taxpayer (for which 
a deduction is not allowable) or clerical services in the office of the 
taxpayer outside the home (for which a deduction may be allowable under 
section 162). Employment-related expenses include household service 
expenses which are provided in conjunction with the care of a qualifying 
individual. Thus, if an expense is in part attributable to the care of a 
qualifying individual and in part to household services, no allocation 
is required.
    (7) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph (c) may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. The taxpayer lives with her mother who is physically 
incapable of caring for herself. In order to be gainfully employed

[[Page 185]]

the taxpayer hires a practical nurse whose sole duty consists of 
providing for the care of the mother in the home while the taxpayer is 
at work. All amounts spent for the services of the nurse are employment-
related expenses.

    Example 2. The taxpayer has a dependent child 10 years of age who 
has been attending public school. The taxpayer, who has been working 
part time, is offered a position involving full-time employment which 
she can accept only if the child is placed in a boarding school. The 
taxpayer accepts the position and the child is sent to a boarding 
school. The expenses paid to the school must be allocated between that 
part of the expenses which represents care for the child and that part 
which represents tuition for education. The part of the expense 
representing care of the child is incurred for the purpose of permitting 
the taxpayer to be gainfully employed.

    Example 3. The taxpayer, in order to be gainfully employed, employs 
a full-time housekeeper who cares for the taxpayer's two children, aged 
9 and 15 years, respectively, performs regular household services of 
cleaning and cooking, and chauffeurs the taxpayer to and from his place 
of employment. The chauffeuring service never requires more than 30 
minutes out of the total period of employment each day. No allocation is 
required for purposes of determining the portion of the expense 
attributable to the chauffeuring (not a household service expense) since 
it is de minimis. Further, no allocation is required for the purpose of 
determining the portion of the expense attributable to the care of the 
15-year-old child (not a qualifying individual) since the household 
expense is in part attributable to the care of the 9-year-old child, who 
is a qualifying individual. Accordingly, the entire expense of employing 
the housekeeper is an employment-related expense. However, the total 
amount of employment-related expenses taken into account would be 
limited to the amount allowable for one qualifying individual.

    (d) Maintenance of a household--(1) In general. An individual is 
considered to have maintained a household for the taxable year (or 
lesser period) only if the individual (and his or her spouse if the 
individual is married) have furnished over one-half of the cost incurred 
for such taxable year (or lesser period) in maintaining the household. 
The household must actually constitute for the taxable year the 
principal place of abode of the taxpayer and the qualifying individual 
or individuals described in paragraph (b) of this section. It is not 
sufficient that the taxpayer maintain the household without being its 
occupant. A physical change in the location of the home does not, 
however, prevent the home from constituting the principal place of abode 
of the taxpayer and a qualifying individual. The fact that an individual 
is born or dies during the taxable year does not prevent a home from 
constituting his or her principal place of abode for such year. An 
individual is not considered to have terminated a household as his or 
her principal place of abode merely by reason of temporary absences 
therefrom by reason of illness, education, business, vacation, military 
service, or a custody agreement.
    (2) Two or more families. Solely for purposes of section 44A and 
this section, if two or more families occupy living quarters in common, 
each of the families is treated as constituting a separate household, 
and the taxpayer who provides more than one-half of the costs of 
maintaining such a separate household is treated as maintaining that 
household. Thus, for example, if two unrelated taxpayers each with 
children occupy living quarters in common and each taxpayer pays more 
than one-half of the household costs incurred by each respective family, 
each taxpayer will be treated as maintaining a separate household.
    (3) Costs of maintaining a household. The costs of maintaining a 
household are the expenses incurred for the mutual benefit of the 
occupants thereof by reason of its operation as the principal place of 
abode of the occupants. The expenses of maintaining a household include 
property taxes, mortgage interest, rent, utility charges, upkeep and 
repairs, property insurance, and food consumed on the premises. These 
expenses do not include the cost of clothing, education, medical 
treatment, vacations, life insurance, or transportation or payments on 
mortgage principal or for the purchase, permanent improvement, 
betterment, or replacement of property. Further, the costs of 
maintaining a household do not include the value of services performed 
in the household by a qualifying individual

[[Page 186]]

described in paragraph (b) of this section. An expense incurred by a 
taxpayer which is paid or reimbursed by another is not considered as a 
cost of maintaining a household.
    (4) Monthly proration of annual costs. In determining the cost 
incurred for a period of less than a taxable year in maintaining a 
household, the cost incurred during the entire taxable year must be 
prorated on the basis of the number of calendar months within such 
lesser period. For this purpose a period of less than a calendar month 
will be treated as a calendar month. Thus, for example, if the cost of 
maintaining a household for a taxable year is $6,600, and the period in 
respect of which a determination is being made under section 44A is from 
June 20 to December 31, the taxpayer must furnish more than $1,925 
([$6,600 x \7/12\] x 50 percent) in maintaining the household from June 
1 to December 31.
    (e) Substantiation. A taxpayer claiming a credit under paragraph (a) 
of this section for employment-related expenses must substantiate by 
adequate records or other sufficient evidence any credit taken under 
this section. For example, if requested, the taxpayer must furnish 
information as to the nature and period of the physical or mental 
incapacity of any dependent or spouse in respect of whom a credit is 
claimed, including necessary information from the attending physician as 
to the nature of the physical or mental incapacity.

(Secs. 44A(g) and 7805 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (90 Stat. 
1565, 26 U.S.C. 44A(g); 68A Stat. 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805))

[T.D. 7643, 44 FR 50332, Aug. 28, 1979, as amended by T.D. 7951, 49 FR 
18091, Apr. 27, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 1.44A-2  Limitations on amount creditable.

    (a) Annual dollar limit on amount creditable. The amount of the 
employment-related expenses incurred during any taxable year which may 
be taken into account under Sec. 1.44A-1 (a) cannot exceed--
    (1) $2,400 ($2,000 in the case of expenses incurred in taxable years 
beginning before January 1, 1982) if there is one qualifying individual 
with respect to the taxpayer at any time during the taxable year, or
    (2) $4,800 ($4,000 in the case of expenses incurred in taxable years 
beginning before January 1, 1982) if there are two or more qualifying 
individuals with respect to the taxpayer at any one time during the 
taxable year.

For example, a calendar year taxpayer whose only qualifying individual 
reaches age 15 on April 1, 1982, is subject for 1982 to the entire 
annual dollar limit of $2,400, without proration of the $2,400 limit. 
However, only expenses incurred prior to the child's 15th birthday may 
be employment-related expenses.
    (b) Earned income limitation--(1) In general. The amount of 
employment-related expenses incurred during any taxable year which may 
be taken into account under Sec. 1.44A-1(a) cannot exceed--
    (i) For an individual not married at the close of the year, the 
individual's earned income for the year, or
    (ii) For an individual married at the close of the year, the lesser 
of the individual's earned income or the earned income of his or her 
spouse for the year.

For purposes of this paragraph (b)(1), the earned income of only the 
spouse to whom the taxpayer is married at the close of the year is taken 
into account (and not the earned income of another spouse who died or 
was divorced from the taxpayer during the year). Further, the spouse's 
earned income for the entire year is taken into account, even though the 
taxpayer and his or her spouse were married for only a part of the year. 
For purposes of this paragraph (b), certain married individuals legally 
separated or living apart are treated as not married (see Sec. 1.44A-3 
(b) and (c), respectively).
    (2) Earned income. For purposes of this section, earned income 
means--
    (i) Wages, salaries, tips, other employee compensation, and
    (ii) Net earnings from self-employment (within the meaning of 
section 1402(a) and the regulations thereunder).

For taxable years beginning before January 1, 1979, earned income 
includes only amounts described in subdivision (i) or (ii) of this 
paragraph (b)(2) which are includible in the eligible individual's gross 
income for the taxable year of the individual in which the credit is

[[Page 187]]

claimed. For all taxable years, however, earned income is computed 
without regard to any community property laws which may otherwise be 
applicable. Earned income is reduced by any net loss in earnings from 
self-employment. Earned income does not include amounts received as a 
pension or an annuity or an amount to which section 871(a) and the 
regulations thereunder apply (relating to income of nonresident alien 
individuals not connected with United States business).
    (3) Special rule for spouse who is a student or incapable of self-
care. (i) For purposes of this section, a spouse is deemed, for each 
month during which the spouse is a full-time student or is a qualifying 
individual described in Sec. 1.44A-1(b)(1)(iii), to be gainfully 
employed and to have earned income of not less than--
    (A) $200 ($166 for taxable years beginning before January 1, 1982) 
if there is one qualifying individual with respect to the taxpayer at 
any one time during the taxable year, or
    (B) $400 ($333 for taxable years beginning before January 1, 1982), 
if there are two or more qualifying individuals with respect to the 
taxpayer at any one time during the taxable year.

However, in the case of any husband and wife, this subparagraph shall 
apply with respect to only one spouse for any one month.
    (ii) A ``full-time student'' is an individual who is enrolled at and 
attends and educational institution during each of 5 calendar months of 
the taxable year of the taxpayer for the number of course hours which is 
considered to be a full-time course of study. The enrollment for 5 
calendar months need not be consecutive. School attendance exclusively 
at night does not constitute a full-time course of study. However, a 
full-time course of study may include some attendance at night.
    (iii) For the definition of ``educational institution'', see 
Sec. 1.151-3(c).
    (4) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. During the 1982 taxable year, A, a married taxpayer, 
incurs and pays employment-related expenses of $4,000 for the care of a 
qualifying individual. A's earned income for the taxable year is $20,000 
and his wife's earned income is $1,500. Under these circumstances, the 
amount of employment-related expenses for the year which may be taken 
into account under Sec. 1.44A-1(a) is $1,500, determined as follows:

Employment-related expenses incurred during taxable year ($4,000, but 
limited to $2,400 by paragraph (a)(1) of this section), . . . . . . 
$2,400
Application of paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section (employment-related 
expenses, may not exceed wife's earned income of $1,500 . . . . . $1,500
Employment-related expenses taken into account . . . . . $1,500

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Example 1 except that A's 
wife is a full-time student for nine months of the taxable year and 
earns no income for the year. Under these circumstances, the amount of 
employment-related expenses for the year which may be taken into account 
under Sec. 1.44A-1(a) is $1,800, determined as follows:

Employment-related expenses incurred during taxable year ($4,000, but 
limited to $2,400 by paragraph (a)(1) of this section . . . . . $2,400
Application of paragraph (b)(3) of this section [employment-related 
expenses may not exceed wife's earned income of $1,800 (200 x 9) . . 
$1,800
Employment-related expenses taken into account . . . .$1,800

(Secs. 44A(g) and 7805 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (90 Stat. 
1565, 26 U.S.C. 44A(g); 68A Stat. 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805))

[T.D. 7643, 44 FR 50334, Aug. 28, 1979, as amended by T.D. 7951, 49 FR 
18092, Apr. 27, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 1.44A-3  Special rules applicable to married individuals.

    (a) Joint return requirement. This section applies only if the 
taxpayer is married at the close of a taxable year in which employment-
related expenses are paid. In such a case the credit provided by section 
44A with respect to employment-related expenses is allowed only if for 
the taxable year the taxpayer and his or her spouse file a joint return. 
If either spouse dies during the taxable year and a joint return may be 
made for the year under section 6013(a)(2) for the survivor and the 
deceased spouse, the credit is allowed for the year only if a joint 
return is made. If, however, the surviving spouse remarries before the 
end of the taxable year in which his or her first spouse dies, a credit 
is allowed on the separate return which is made for the decedent

[[Page 188]]

spouse. For purposes of this section, certain married individuals 
legally separated or living apart are treated as not married, as 
provided in paragraphs (b) and (c), respectively, of this section.
    (b) Marital status. For purposes of section 44A, an individual 
legally separated from his or her spouse under a decree of divorce or of 
separate maintenance is not considered as married.
    (c) Certain married individuals living apart. For purposes of 
section 44A, an individual who is married within the meaning of section 
143(a) is treated as not married for the entire taxable year, if the 
individual--
    (1) Files a separate return for the year,
    (2) Maintains as his or her home a household which constitutes for 
more than one-half of the taxable year the principal place of abode of a 
qualifying individual, and
    (3) Furnishes over one-half of the cost of maintaining the household 
for the year,

and if the individual's spouse is not a member of the household at any 
time during the last 6 months of the year. Thus for example, an 
individual who is married during the taxable year, but is treated as not 
married by reason of this paragraph, may determine the earned income 
limitation upon the amount of employment-related expenses without taking 
into account the earned income of his or her spouse under Sec. 1.44A-
2(b).

[T.D. 7643, 44 FR 50335, Aug. 28, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 1.44A-4  Other special rules relating to employment-related expenses.

    (a) Payments to related individuals--(1) Taxable years beginning 
after December 31, 1978. For taxable years beginning after December 31, 
1978, a credit is not allowed under section 44A with respect to the 
amount of any employment-related expenses paid by the taxpayer to an 
individual--
    (i) With respect to whom for the taxable year a deduction under 
section 151(e) (relating to deduction for personal exemptions for 
dependents) is allowable either to the taxpayer or his or her spouse, or
    (ii) Who is a child of the taxpayer (within the meaning of section 
151(e)(3)) who is under age 19 at the close of the taxable year.

For purposes of this paragraph (a)(1), the term ``taxable year''means 
the taxable year of the taxpayer in which the service is performed. 
(1943)
    (2) Taxable years beginning before January 1, 1979. For taxable 
years beginning before January 1, 1979, except as otherwise provided in 
paragraph (a)(3) of this section, a credit is not allowed under section 
44A with respect to the amount of any employment-related expenses paid 
by the taxpayer to an individual who bears to the taxpayer any 
relationship described in section 152(a) (1) through (8). These 
relationships are those of a son or daughter or descendant thereof; a 
stepson or stepdaughter; a brother, a sister, stepbrother, or 
stepsister; a father or mother or an ancestor, of either; a stepfather 
or stepmother; a nephew or niece; an uncle or aunt; or a son-in-law, 
daughter-in-law, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, or 
sister-in-law. In addition, no credit is allowed with respect to the 
amount of any employment-related expenses paid by the taxpayer to an 
individual who qualifies as a dependent of the taxpayer for the taxable 
year within the meaning of section 152(a)(9), which relates to an 
individual (other than the taxpayer's spouse) whose principal place of 
abode for the taxable year is the home of the taxpayer and who is a 
member of the taxpayer's household.
    (3) Exception for payments to certain related individuals. For 
taxable years beginning before January 1, 1979, a credit is allowed for 
the amount of any employment-related expenses paid by the taxpayer to an 
individual provided that neither the taxpayer nor his or her spouse is 
entitled to a deduction under section 151(e) (relating to deduction for 
personal exemptions for dependents) with respect to such individual for 
the taxable year in which the service is performed; and the service with 
respect to which the amount is paid constitutes employment within the 
meaning of section 3121(b). The following services performed for a 
taxpayer by a relative who is an employee of the taxpayer may qualify as 
employment within the meaning of section 3121(b):

[[Page 189]]

    (i) Services performed by the taxpayer's child age 21 or over.
    (ii) Domestic services in the taxpayer's home performed by the 
taxpayer's parent if--
    (A) The taxpayer has living in his or her home a child (as defined 
in section 151(e)(3)) who is under age 18 or who has a physical or 
mental condition requiring the personal care of an adult during at least 
4 continuous weeks in the calendar quarter, and
    (B) The taxpayer is a widow or widower or is divorced, or has a 
spouse living in the home who, because of a physical or mental 
condition, is incapable of caring for his or her child during at least 4 
continuous weeks in the calendar quarter in which services are rendered.
    (iii) Services of all relatives other than a child, spouse, or 
parent of the taxpayer.

For taxable years beginning before January 1, 1979, a credit is not 
allowed under section 44A with respect to employment-related expenses 
paid by the taxpayer to a relative for services which do not constitute 
employment under section 3121(b). Services performed by a relative do 
not constitute employment if they relate to the relative's trade or 
business the income from which is includible in computing the relative's 
net earnings for purposes of the self-employment tax under section 1401.
    (4) Payments to entities or partnerships. If the services are 
performed by an entity or partnership, paragraph (a) (1) and (2) of this 
section is normally not applicable. If, however, the entity or 
partnership is established or maintained primarily to avoid the 
application of paragraph (a) (1) or (2) in order to permit the taxpayer 
to obtain the credit with respect to employment-related expenses, for 
purposes of this paragraph (a), the payments of employment-related 
expenses shall be treated as made directly to each owner of the entity 
or partner in proportion to his or her share of the entity or 
partnership. A factor to consider for purposes of determining whether an 
entity or partnership is so established or maintained is whether the 
entity or partnership is set up solely to care for the taxpayer's 
qualifying individual and to provide household services to the taxpayer.
    (5) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. For A's taxable year ending December 31, 1978, A, a 
divorced taxpayer, pays $5,000 of employment-related expenses to his 
mother for the care of his child age 5. A's mother cares for the child 
in her home. The services performed by A's mother do not constitute 
employment under section 3121(b). Accordingly, A is not allowed a credit 
with respect to the amounts paid to the mother for the care of his 
child.

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Example 1 except that A's 
taxable year under consideration begins after December 31, 1978. A is 
not entitled to a deduction under section 151(e) for his mother. 
Accordingly, A is allowed a credit with respect to the amounts paid to 
the mother for the care of his child even though the services performed 
by A's mother do not constitute employment under section 3121(b).

    Example 3. For B's taxable year ending December 31, 1978, B, a 
divorced taxpayer, pays $6,000 of employment-related expenses to his 
sister (who is not a dependent of the taxpayer) for the care of his 
child. The services performed by B's sister in the care of his child 
constitute a trade or business the income from which is includible in 
computing net earnings for purposes of the self-employment tax under 
section 1401. Accordingly, B is not allowed a credit with respect to the 
amounts paid to the sister for the care of his child.

    Example 4. Assume the same facts as in Example 3 except that B's 
taxable year under consideration begins after December 31, 1978. B is 
allowed a credit with respect to the amounts paid to the sister for the 
care of his child, even though the services performed by B's sister do 
not constitute employment under section 3121(b).

    (b) Expenses qualifying as medical expenses. An expense which may 
constitute an amount otherwise deductible under section 213, relating to 
medical, etc., expenses, may also constitute an expense with respect to 
which a credit is allowable under section 44A. In such a case, that part 
of the amount with respect to which a credit is allowed under section 
44A will not be considered as an expense for purposes of determining the 
amount deductible under section 213. On the other hand, where an amount 
is treated as a medical expense under section 213 for purposes of

[[Page 190]]

determining the amount deductible under that section, it may not be 
treated as an employment-related expense for purposes of section 44A. 
The application of this paragraph may be illustrated by the following 
examples:

    Example 1. In 1982, a calendar year taxpayer incurs and pays $5,000 
of employment-related expenses during the taxable year for the care of 
his child when the child is physically incapable of self-care. These 
expenses are incurred for services performed in the taxpayer's household 
and are of a nature which qualify as medical expenses under section 213. 
The taxpayer's adjusted gross income for the taxable year is $100,000. 
Of the total expenses, the taxpayer may take $2,400 into account under 
section 44A; the balance of the expenses, or $2,600, may be treated as 
medical expenses to which section 213 applies. However, this amount does 
not exceed 3 percent of the taxpayer's adjusted gross income for the 
taxable year and is thus not allowable as a deduction under section 213.

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Example 1. It is not proper 
for the taxpayer first to determine his deductible medical expenses of 
$2,000 ($5,000--[$100,000 x 3 percent]) under section 213 and then claim 
the $3,000 balance as employment-related expenses for purposes of 
section 44A. This is because the $3,000 balance has been treated as a 
medical expense in computing the amount deductible under section 213.

    Example 3. In 1982, a calendar year taxpayer incurs and pays $12,000 
of employment-related expenses during the taxable year for the care of 
his child. These expenses are incurred for services performed in the 
taxpayer's household, and they also qualify as medical expenses under 
section 213. The taxpayer's adjusted gross income for the taxable year 
is $18,000. The taxpayer takes $2,400 of such expenses into account 
under section 44A. The balance, or $9,600, he treats as medical expenses 
for purposes of section 213. The allowable deduction under section 213 
for the expenses is limited to the excess of the balance of $9,600 over 
$540 (3 percent of the taxpayer's adjusted gross income of $18,000), or 
$9,060.

(Secs. 44A(g) and 7805 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (90 Stat. 
1565, 26 U.S.C. 44A(g); 68A Stat. 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805))

[T.D. 7643, 44 FR 50335, Aug. 28, 1979, as amended by T.D. 7951, 49 FR 
18092, Apr. 27, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 1.44B-1  Credit for employment of certain new employees.

    (a) In general--(1) Targeted jobs credit. Under section 44B a 
taxpayer may elect to claim a credit for wages (as defined in section 
51(c) paid or incurred to members of a targeted group (as defined in 
section 51(d)). Generally, to qualify for the credit, the wages must be 
paid or incurred to members of a targeted group first hired after 
September 26, 1978. However, wages paid of incurred to a vocational 
rehabilitation referral (as defined in section 51(d)(2)) hired before 
September 27, 1978, may qualify for the credit if a credit under section 
44B (as in effect prior to enactment of the Revenue Act of 1978) was 
claimed for the individual by the taxpayer for a taxable year beginning 
before January 1, 1979. The amount of the credit shall be determined 
under section 51. Section 280C(b) (relating to the requirement that the 
deduction for wages be reduced by the amount of the credit) and the 
regulations thereunder will not apply to taxpayers who do not elect to 
claim the credit.
    (2) New jobs credit. Under section 44B (as in effect prior to 
enactment of the Revenue Act of 1978) a taxpayer may elect to claim as a 
credit the amount determined under sections 51, 52, and 53 (as in effect 
prior to enactment of the Revenue Act of 1978). Section 280C(b) 
(relating to the requirement that the deduction for wages be reduced by 
the amount of the credit) and the regulations thereunder will not apply 
to taxpayers who do not elect to claim the credit.
    (b) Time and manner of making election. The election to claim the 
targeted jobs credit and the new jobs credit is made by claiming the 
credit on an original return, or on an amended return, at any time 
before the expiration of the 3-year period beginning on the last date 
prescribed by law for filing the return for the taxable year (determined 
without regard to extensions). The election may be revoked within the 
above-described 3-year period by filing an amended return on which the 
credit is not claimed.
    (c) Election by partnership, electing small business corporation, 
and members of a controlled group. In the case of a partnership, the 
election shall be made by the partnership. In the case of an electing 
small business corporation (as defined in section 1371(a)), the election 
shall be made by the corporation. In

[[Page 191]]

the case of a controlled group of corporations (within the meaning of 
section 52(a) and the regulations issued thereunder) not filing a 
consolidlated return under section 1501, the election shall be made by 
each member of the group. In the case of an affiliated group filing a 
consolidated return under section 1501, the election shall be made by 
the group.

(Secs. 44B, 381, and 7805 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (92 Stat. 
2834, 26 U.S.C. 44B; 91 Stat. 148, 26 U.S.C. 381(c)(26); 68A Stat. 917, 
26 U.S.C. 7805)

[T.D. 7921, 48 FR 52904, Nov. 23, 1983]

    rules for computing credit for investment in certain depreciable 
                                property


<R05>
Sec. 1.46-1  Determination of amount.

    (a) Effective dates--(1) In general. This section is effective for 
taxable years beginning after December 31, 1975. However, transitional 
rules under paragraph (g) of this section are effective for certain 
earlier taxable years.
    (2) Acts covered. This section reflects changes made by the 
following Acts of Congress:

                             Act and Section

Tax Reduction Act of 1975, section 301.
Tax Reform Act of 1976, sections 802, 1701, 1703.
Revenue Act of 1978, sections 311, 312, 315.
Energy Tax Act of 1978, section 301.
Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, section 212.
Technical Corrections Act of 1982, section 102(f).
Tax Reform Act of 1986, section 251.

    (3) Prior regulations. For taxable years beginning before January 1, 
1976, see 26 CFR 1.46-1 (Rev. as of April 1, 1979). Those regulatons do 
not reflect changes made by Pub. L. 89-384, Pub. L. 89-389, and Pub. L. 
91-172.
    (b) General rule. The amount of investment credit (credit) allowed 
by section 38 for the taxable year is the portion of credit available 
under section 46(a)(1) that does not exceed the limitation based on tax 
under section 46(a)(3).
    (c) Credit available. The credit available for the taxable year is 
the sum of--
    (1) Unused credit carried over from prior taxable years under 
section 46(b) (carryovers).
    (2) Amount of credit determined under section 46(a)(2) for the 
taxable year (credit earned), and
    (3) Unused credit carried back from succeeding taxable years under 
section 46(b) (carrybacks).
    (d) Credit earned. The credit earned for the taxable year is the sum 
of the following percentages of qualified investment (as determined 
under section 46 (c) and (d))--
    (1) The regular percentage (as determined under section 46),
    (2) For energy property, the energy percentage (as determined under 
section 46), and
    (3) For the portion of the basis of a qualified rehabilitated 
building (as defined in Sec. 1.48-12(b)) that is attributable to 
qualified rehabilitation expenditures (as defined in Sec. 1.48-12(c)), 
the rehabilitation percentage (as determined under section 46(b)(4)).
    (e) Designation of credits. The credit available for the taxable 
year is designated as follows:
    (1) The credit attributable to the regular percentage is the 
``regular credit''.
    (2) The credit attributable to the ESOP percentage is the ``ESOP 
credit''.
    (3) The credit attributable to the energy percentage for energy 
property other than solar or wind is the ``nonrefundable energy 
credit''.
    (4) The credit attributable to the energy percentage for solar or 
wind energy property is the ``refundable energy credit''.
    (5) The credit attributable to the rehabilitation percentage for 
qualified rehabilitation expenditures is the rehabilitation investment 
credit.
    (f) Special rules for certain energy property. Energy property is 
defined in section 48(l). Under section 46(a)(2)(D), energy property 
that is section 38 property solely by reason of section 48(l)(1) 
qualifies only for the energy credit. Other energy property qualifies 
for both the regular credit (and, if applicable, the ESOP credit) and 
the energy credit. For limitation on the energy percentage for property 
financed by industrial development bonds, see section 48(l)(11).
    (g) Transitional rule for regular and ESOP credit--(1) In general. 
Although section 46(a)(2) was amended by section 301(a)(1) of the Energy 
Tax Act of 1977

[[Page 192]]

to eliminate the transitional rules under section 46(a)(2)(D), those 
rules still apply in certain instances. Section 46(a)(2)(D) was added by 
section 301(a) of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975 and amended by section 
802(a) of the Tax Reform Act of 1976.
    (2) Regular credit. Under section 46(a)(2)(D), the regular credit is 
10 percent and applies for the following property:
    (i) Property to which section 46 (d) does not apply, the 
construction, reconstruction, or erection of which is completed by the 
taxpayer after January 21, 1975, but only to the extent of basis 
attributable to construction, reconstruction, or erection after that 
date.
    (ii) Property to which section 46(d) does not apply, acquired by the 
taxpayer after January 21, 1975.
    (iii) Qualified progress expenditures (as defined in section 46(d)) 
made after January 21, 1975.
    (3) ESOP credit. See section 48(m) for transitional rules limiting 
the period for which the ESOP percentage under section 46(a)(2)(E) 
applies. For prior statutes, see section 46(a)(2) (B) and (D), as added 
by section 301 of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975 and amended by section 
802 of the Tax Reform Act of 1976.
    (4) Cross reference. (i) The principles of Sec. 1.48-2 (b) and (c) 
apply in determining the portion of basis attributable to construction, 
reconstruction, or erection after January 21, 1975, and in determining 
the time when property is acquired.
    (ii) Section 311 of the Revenue Act of 1978 made the 10 percent 
regular credit permanent.
    (5) Seven percent credit. To the extent that, under paragraph (g)(1) 
of this section, the 10 percent does not apply, the regular credit, in 
general, is 7 percent. For a special limitation on qualified investment 
for public utility property (other than energy property), see section 
46(c)(3)(A).
    (6) Qualified progress expenditures. For progress expenditure 
property that is constructed, reconstructed, or erected by the taxpayer 
within the meaning of Sec. 1.48-2(b), the ten-percent credit applies in 
the year the property is placed in service to the portion of the 
qualified investment that remains after reduction for qualified progress 
expenditures under section 46(c)(4), but only to the extent that the 
remaining qualified investment is attributable to construction, 
reconstruction, or erection after January 21, 1975. For progress 
expenditure property that is acquired by the taxpayer (within the 
meaning of Sec. 1.48-2(b)) after January 21, 1975, and placed in service 
after that date, the ten-percent credit applies in the year the property 
is placed in service to the entire portion of qualified investment that 
remains after reduction for qualified progress expenditures.
    (h) Tax liability limitation--(1) In general. Section 46(a)(3) 
provides a tax liability limitation on the amount of credit allowed by 
section 38 (other than the refundable energy credit) for any taxable 
year. See section 46(a)(10)(C)(i). Tax liability is defined in paragraph 
(j) of this section. The excess of available credit over the applicable 
tax liability limitation for the year is an unused credit which may be 
carried forward or carried back under section 46(b).
    (2) Regular and ESOP tax liability limitation. In general, the tax 
liability limitation for the regular and ESOP credits is the portion of 
tax liability that does not exceed $25,000 plus a percentage of the 
excess, as determined under section 46(a)(3)(B).
    (3) Nonrefundable energy credit tax liability limitation. (i) For 
nonrefundable energy credit carrybacks to a taxable year ending before 
October 1, 1978, the tax liability limitation is the portion of tax 
liability that does not exceed $25,000 plus a percentage of the excess, 
as determined under section 46(a)(3)(B).
    (ii) For a taxable year ending after September 30, 1978, the tax 
liability limitation for available nonrefundable energy credit is 100 
percent of the year's tax liability.
    (4) Alternative limitations. Alternative limitations apply for 
certain utilities, railroads, and airlines in determining the regular 
tax liability limitation and, for nonrefundable energy credit carrybacks 
to taxable years ending before October 1, 1978, the nonrefundable energy 
credit tax liability limitation. These alternative limitations do not 
apply in determining the energy tax liability limitation for a taxable 
year

[[Page 193]]

ending after October 1, 1978. The provisions listed below set forth the 
alternative limitations:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Code section                Type                Years applicable   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
46(a)(6)\1\            Utilities                 Taxable years ending in
                                                  1975-1978             
46(a)(7)\2\            Utilities                 Taxable year ending in 
                                                  1979                  
46(a)(8)               Railroads and Airlines    Taxable year ending in 
                                                  1979 or 1980          
46(a)(8)\3\            Railroads                 Taxable years ending in
                                                  1977 or 1978          
46(a)(9)\3\            Airlines                  Taxable years ending in
                                                  1977 or 1978          
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\Section 46(a)(6) was added by section 301(b)(2) of the Tax Reduction 
  Act of 1975 and redesignated as section 46(a)(7) by section 302(a)(1) 
  of the Tax Reform Act of 1976.                                        
\2\Section 46(a)(7) was amended by section 312(b)(1) of the Revenue Act 
  of 1978.                                                              
\3\These provisions were repealed by section 312(b)(2) of the Revenue   
  Act of 1978.                                                          


    (i) [Reserved]
    (j) Tax liability--(1) In general. ``Tax liability'' for purposes of 
the regular and ESOP credit and carrybacks of nonrefundable energy 
credit to a taxable year ending before October 1, 1978, means the 
liability for tax as defined in section 46(a)(4). For ordering of 
regular, ESOP, and nonrefundable energy credits, see paragraph (m) of 
this section. In addition to taxes excluded under section 46(a)(4), tax 
liability does not include tax resulting from recapture of credit under 
section 47 and the alternative minimum tax imposed by section 55. See 
sections 47(c) and 55(c)(1).
    (2) Certain nonrefundable energy credit. For a taxable year ending 
after September 30, 1978, ``tax liability'' for purposes of the 
nonrefundable energy credit is liability for tax, as defined in section 
46(a)(4) and paragraph (j)(1) of this section, reduced by the regular 
and ESOP credit allowed for the taxable year. Thus, carrybacks of 
regular or ESOP credit to a taxable year may displace nonrefundable 
energy carryovers or credit earned taken into account in that year. 
However, carrybacks of regular, ESOP, or nonrefundable energy credit do 
not affect refundable energy credit which is treated as an overpayment 
of tax under section 6401(b). See paragraph (k) of this section.
    (k) Special rule for refundable energy credit. The amount of the 
refundable energy credit is determined under the rules of section 46 
(other than section 46(a)(3)). However, to permit the refund, the 
refundable energy credit for purposes of the Internal Revenue Code 
(other than section 38, part IVB, and chapter 63 of the Code) is treated 
as allowed by section 39 and not by section 38. The refundable credit is 
not applied against tax liability for purposes of determining the tax 
liability limitation for other investment credits. Rather, it is treated 
as an overpayment of tax under section 6401(b).
    (l) FIFO rule. If the credit available for a taxable year is not 
allowed in full because of the tax liability limitation, special rules 
determine the order in which credits are applied. Under the first-in-
first-out rule of section 46(a)(1) (FIFO), carryovers are applied 
against the tax liability limitation first. To the extent the tax 
liability limitation exceeds carryovers, credit earned, and carrybacks 
are then applied.
    (m) Special ordering rule--(1) In general. Under section 
46(a)(10)(A), the FIFO rule applies separately--
    (i) First, with respect to regular and ESOP credits, and
    (ii) Second, with respect to nonrefundable energy credit.
    (2) Regular and ESOP credit. Under Sec. 1.46-8(c)(9)(ii), regular 
and ESOP credits available are applied in the following order:
    (i) Regular carryovers;
    (ii) ESOP carryovers;
    (iii) Regular credit earned;
    (iv) ESOP credit earned;
    (v) Regular carrybacks; and
    (vi) ESOP carrybacks.
    (3) Example. For an example of the order of application of regular 
and ESOP credits, see Sec. 1.46-8(c)(9)(iii).
    (n) Examples. The following examples illustrate paragraphs (a) 
through (m) of this section.

    Example 1. (a) Corporation M's regular credit available for its 
taxable year ending December 31, 1979 is as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Regular carryovers...........................................     $5,000
Regular credit earned........................................     10,000
Regular carrybacks...........................................     15,000
                                                              ----------
    Credit available.........................................     30,000
                                                                        

    (b) M's ``tax liability'' for 1979 is $30,000. M's tax liability 
limitation for 1979 for the regular credit is $28,000, consisting of 
$25,000 plus 60 percent of the $5,000 of ``tax liability'' in excess of 
$25,000.

[[Page 194]]

    (c) The regular carryovers and credit earned are allowed in full. 
However, only $13,000 of the regular carryback is allowed for 1979. The 
remaining $2,000 must be carried to the next year to which it may be 
carried under section 46(b).

    Example 2. (a) For its taxable year ending December 31, 1980, 
corporation N has $30,000 regular credit earned and $9,000 nonrefundable 
energy credit earned. N has no carryovers to 1980 and no ``tax 
liability'' for pre-1980 years.
    (b) N's ``tax liability'' for 1980 for the regular credit is 
$35,000. N's tax liability limitation for 1980 for the regular credit is 
$32,000, consisting of $25,000 plus 70 percent of the $10,000 of ``tax 
liability'' in excess of $25,000.
    (c) The entire regular credit is allowed in 1980.
    (d) N's ``tax liability'' for 1980 for the nonrefundable energy 
credit is $5,000, consisting of $35,000 less $30,000 regular credit 
allowed for 1980. N's tax liability limitation for 1980 for the 
nonrefundable energy credit is 100 percent of $5,000.
    (e) $5,000 of the nonrefundable energy credit is allowed for 1980. 
The remaining $4,000 energy credit is an unused nonrefundable energy 
credit which must be carried to the next year to which it may be carried 
under section 46(b).

    Example 3. (a) Assume the same facts as in Example 2 except that in 
its taxable year ending December 31, 1981, N earns a regular credit of 
which it may carry back $2,000 to 1980.
    (b) The $30,000 regular credit earned and $2,000 of the regular 
carryback is allowed for 1980. N's ``tax liability'' for 1980 for the 
nonrefundable energy credit is reduced to $3,000, consisting of $35,000 
less $32,000 regular credit allowed for 1980. The nonrefundable energy 
credit allowed for 1980 is reduced to $3,000. The remaining $6,000 is an 
unused nonrefundable energy credit which must be carried to the next 
year to which it may be carried under section 46(b).

    Example 4. (a) For its taxable year ending December 31, 1980, 
corporation P's regular credit earned is $20,000. P also has a $9,000 
refundable energy credit for 1980. There are no carryovers or carrybacks 
to 1980.
    (b) P's ``tax liability'' for 1980 for the regular credit is $25,000 
which is also the tax liability limitation for the regular credit.
    (c) The entire $20,000 regular credit is allowed for 1980. The 
entire $9,000 refundable energy credit is treated as an overpayment of 
tax under section 6401(b), even though ``tax liability'' remains.

    Example 5. Assume the same facts as in Example 4, except that in the 
following year P earns a regular credit, $5,000 of which it may carry 
back to 1980. The $5,000 carryback is allowed in full in 1980.

    Example 6. (i) Corporation X, a calendar year taxpayer, constructs a 
ship on which it begins construction on January 1, 1973, and which, when 
placed in service on December 31, 1980, has a basis of $450,000. Of that 
amount, $100,000 is attributable to construction before January 22, 
1975. X makes an election under section 46(d) (qualified progress 
expenditures) for taxable years after 1975.
    (ii) For 1976, 1977, 1978, and 1979, qualified progress expenditures 
total $200,000. The ten-percent credit applies to those expenditures.
    (iii) For 1980, qualified investment for the ship is $450,000. Under 
section 46(c)(4), X must reduce this amount by $200,000, the amount of 
qualified progress expenditures taken into account. The ten-percent 
credit applies to the portion of the remaining qualified investment 
attributable to construction after January 21, 1975 ($150,000). The 
seven-percent credit applies to the portion of qualified investment 
attributable to construction before January 22, 1975 ($100,000).

    Example 7. (i) Corporation Y agrees to build a ship for Corporation 
X, which uses the calendar year. In 1973, Y begins construction of the 
ship which X acquires and places in service on December 31, 1980. X 
makes an election under section 46(d) for taxable years after 1974. The 
contract price is $400,000.
    (ii) For 1975, 1976, 1977, 1978, and 1979, qualified progress 
expenditures total $250,000. The ten-percent credit applies to those 
expenditures.
    (iii) For 1980, qualified investment for the ship is $400,000, which 
is the contract price. X must reduce qualified investment by $250,000, 
the amount of qualified progress expenditures. The ten-percent credit 
applies to the $150,000 of qualified investment that remains after 
reduction for qualified progress expenditures.

    (o) Married individuals. If a separate return is filed by a husband 
or wife, the tax liability limitation is computed by substituting a 
$12,500 amount for the $25,000 amount that applies under section 
46(a)(3). However, this reduction of the $25,000 amount to $12,500 
applies only if the taxpayer's spouse is entitled to a credit under 
section 38 for the taxable year of such spouse which ends with, or 
within, the taxpayer's taxable year. The taxpayer's spouse is entitled 
to a credit under section 38 either because of investment made in 
qualified property for such taxable year of the spouse (whether directly 
made by such spouse or whether apportioned to such spouse, for example, 
from an electing small business corporation, as defined

[[Page 195]]

in section 1371(b)), or because of an investment credit carryback or 
carryover to such taxable year. The determination of whether an 
individual is married shall be made under the principles of section 143 
and the regulations thereunder.
    (p) Apportionment of $25,000 amount among component members of a 
controlled group--(1) In general. In determining the tax liability 
limitation under section 46(a)(3) for corporations that are component 
members of a controlled group on December 31, only one $25,000 amount is 
available to those component members for their taxable years that 
include that December 31. See subparagraph (2) of this paragraph for 
apportionment of such amount among such component members. See 
subparagraph (3) of this paragraph for definition of ``component 
member''.
    (2) Manner of apportionment. (i) In the case of corporations which 
are component members of a controlled group on a particular December 31, 
the $25,000 amount may be apportioned among such members for their 
taxable years that include such December 31 in any manner the component 
members may select, provided that each such member less than 100 percent 
of whose stock is owned, in the aggregate, by the other component 
members of the group on such December 31 consents to an apportionment 
plan. The consent of a component member to an apportionment plan with 
respect to a particular December 31 shall be made by means of a 
statement, signed by a person duly authorized to act on behalf of the 
consenting member, stating that such member consents to the 
apportionment plan with respect to such December 31. The statement shall 
set forth the name, address, employer identification number, and taxable 
year of each component member of the group on such December 31, the 
amount apportioned to each such member under the plan, and the location 
of the Service Center where the statement is to be filed. The consent of 
more than one component member may be incorporated in a single 
statement. The statement shall be timely filed with the Service Center 
where the component member having the taxable year first ending on or 
after such December 31 files its return for such taxable year and shall 
be irrevocable after such filing. If two or more component members have 
the same such taxable year, a statement of consent may be filed by any 
one of such members. However, if the due date (including any extensions 
of time) of the return of such member is on or before December 15, 1971, 
the required statement shall be considered as timely filed if filed on 
or before March 15, 1972. Each component member of the group on such 
December 31 shall keep as a part of its records a copy of the statement 
containing all the required consents.
    (ii) An apportionment plan adopted by a controlled group with 
respect to a particular December 31 shall be valid only for the taxable 
year of each member of the group which includes such December 31. Thus, 
a controlled group must file a separate consent to an apportionment plan 
with respect to each taxable year which includes a December 31 as to 
which an apportionment plan is desired.
    (iii) If the apportionment plan is not timely filed, the $25,000 
amount specified in section 46(a)(3) shall be reduced for each component 
member of the controlled group, for its taxable year which includes a 
December 31, to an amount equal to $25,000 divided by the number of 
component members of such group on such December 31.
    (iv) If a component member of the controlled group makes its income 
tax return on the basis of a 52-53-week taxable year, the principles of 
section 441(f)(2)(A)(ii) and paragraph (b)(1) of Sec. 1.441-2 apply in 
determining the last day of such taxable year.
    (3) Definitions of controlled group of corporations and component 
member of controlled group. For the purpose of this paragraph, the terms 
``controlled group of corporations'' and ``component member'' of a 
controlled group of corporations shall have the same meaning assigned to 
those terms in section 1563 (a) and (b). For purposes of applying 
Sec. 1.1563-1(b)(2)(ii)(c), an electing small business corporation shall 
be treated as an excluded member whether or not it is subject to the tax 
imposed by section 1378.

[[Page 196]]

    (4) Members of a controlled group filing a consolidated return. If 
some component members of a controlled group join in filing a 
consolidated return pursuant to Sec. 1.1502-3(a)(3), and other component 
members do not join, then, unless a consent is timely filed apportioning 
the $25,000 amount among the group filing the consolidated return and 
the other component members of the controlled group, each component 
member of the controlled group (including each component member which 
joins in filing the consolidated return) shall be treated as a separate 
corporation for purposes of equally apportioning the $25,000 amount 
under subparagraph (2)(iii) of this paragraph. In that case, the tax 
liability limitation for the group filing the consolidated return is 
computed by substituting for the $25,000 amount under section 46(a)(3) 
the total amount apportioned to each component member that joins in 
filing the consolidated return. If the affiliated group filing the 
consolidated return and the other component members of the controlled 
group adopt an apportionment plan, the affiliated group shall be treated 
as a single member for the purpose of applying subparagraph (2)(i) of 
this paragraph. Thus, for example, only one consent executed by the 
common parent to the apportionment plan is required for the group filing 
the consolidated return. If any component member of the controlled group 
which joins in the filing of the consolidated return is an organization 
to which section 593 applies or a cooperative organization described in 
section 1381(a), see paragraph (a)(3)(ii) of Sec. 1.1502-3.
    (5) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. At all times during 1976 Smith, an individual, owns all 
the stock of corporations X, Y, and Z. Corporation X files an income tax 
return on a calendar year basis. Corporation Y files an income tax 
return on the basis of a fiscal year ending June 30. Corporation Z files 
an income tax return on the basis of a fiscal year ending September 30. 
On December 31, 1976, X, Y, and Z are component members of the same 
controlled group. X, Y, and Z all consent to an apportionment plan in 
which the $25,000 amount is apportioned entirely to Y for its taxable 
year ending June 30, 1977 (Y's taxable year which includes December 31, 
1976). Such consent is timely filed. For purposes of computing the 
credit under section 38, Y's tax liability limitation for its taxable 
year ending June 30, 1977, is so much of Y's tax liability as does not 
exceed $25,000, plus 50 percent of Y's tax liability in excess of 
$25,000. X's and Z's limitations for their taxable years ending December 
31, 1976, and September 30, 1977, respectively, are equal to 50 percent 
of X's tax liability for 50 percent of Z's tax liability. On the other 
hand, if an apportionment plan is not timely filed, X's limitation would 
be so much of X's tax liability as does not exceed $8,333.33, plus 50 
percent of X's liability in excess of $8,333.33, and Y's and Z's 
limitations would be computed similarly.

    Example 2. At all times during 1976, Jones, an individual, owns all 
the outstanding stock of corporations P, Q, and R. Corporations Q and R 
both file returns for taxable years ending December 31, 1976. P files a 
consolidated return as a common parent for its fiscal year ending June 
30, 1977, with its two wholly-owned subsidiaries N and O. On December 
31, 1976, N, O, P. Q, and R are component members of the same controlled 
group. No consent to an apportionment plan is filed. Therefore, each 
member is apportioned $5,000 of the $25,000 amount ($25,000 divided 
equally among the five members). The tax liability limitation for the 
group filing the consolidated return (P, N, and O) for the year ending 
June 30, 1977 (the consolidated taxable year within which December 31, 
1976, falls) is computed by using $15,000 instead of the $25,000 amount. 
The $15,000 is arrived at by adding together the $5,000 amounts 
apportioned to P, N, and O.

    (q) Rehabilitation percentage--(1) General rule--(i) In general. Due 
to amendments made by the Tax Reform Act of 1986, different rules apply 
depending on when the property attributable to the qualified 
rehabilitated expenditures (as defined in Sec. 1.48-12(c)) is placed in 
service. Paragraph (q)(1)(ii) of this section contains the general rule 
relating to property placed in service after December 31, 1986. 
Paragraph (q)(1)(iii) of this section contains rules relating to 
property placed in service before January 1, 1987. Paragraph (q)(1)(iv) 
of this section contains rules relating to property placed in service 
after December 31, 1986, that qualifies for a transition rule.
    (ii) Property placed in service after December 31, 1986. Except as 
otherwise provided in paragraph (q)(1)(iv) of this section, in the case 
of section 38 property described in section 48(a)(1)(E) placed in 
service after December 31, 1986, the

[[Page 197]]

term ``rehabilitation percentage'' means--
    (A) 10 percent in the case of qualified rehabilitation expenditures 
with respect to a qualified rehabilitated building other than a 
certified historic structure, and
    (B) 20 percent in the case of qualified rehabilitation expenditures 
with respect to a certified historic structure.
    (iii) Property placed in service before January 1, 1987. For 
qualified rehabilitation expenditures (as defined in Sec. 1.48-12(c)) 
with respect to property placed in service before January 1, 1987, 
section 46(b)(4)(A) as in effect prior to the enactment of the Tax 
Reform Act of 1986 provided for a three-tier rehabilitation percentage. 
The applicable rehabilitation percentage for such expenditures depends 
on whether the qualified rehabilitated building is a ``30-year 
building,'' a ``40-year building,'' or a certified historic structure 
(as defined in section 48(g)(3) and Sec. 1.48-12(d)(1)). The 
rehabilitation percentage for such qualified rehabilitation expenditures 
incurred with respect to a qualified rehabilitated building is 15 
percent to the extent that the building is a 30-year building (i.e., at 
least 30 years, but less than 40 years, has elapsed between the date the 
physical work on the rehabilitation began and the date the building was 
first placed in service), 20 percent to the extent that the building is 
a 40-year building (i.e., at least 40 years has so elapsed), and 25 
percent for certified historic structures, regardless of age. See 
paragraph (q)(2)(ii) of this section for rules concerning buildings to 
which additions have been added.
    (iv) Property placed in service after December 31, 1986, that 
qualifies under the transition rules. In the case of section 38 property 
described in section 48(a)(1)(E) placed in service after December 31, 
1986, and to which the amendments made by section 251 of the Tax Reform 
Act of 1986 do not apply because the transition rules in section 251(d) 
of that Act and Sec. 1.48-12(a)(2)(iv)(B) or (C) apply, the 
rehabilitation percentage for a ``30-year building'' (within the meaning 
of paragraph (q)(1)(iii) of this section) shall be 10 percent, the 
rehabilitation percentage for a ``40-year building'' (within the meaning 
of paragraph (q)(1)(iii) of this section) shall be 13 percent, and the 
rehabilitation percentage for a certified historic structure shall be 25 
percent.
    (2) Special rules--(i) Moved buildings. With respect to paragraph 
(q)(1)(ii) of this section, Sec. 1.48-12(b)(5) provides that a building 
(other than a certified historic structure) is not a qualified 
rehabilitated building unless it has been at the location where it is 
being rehabilitated since January 1, 1936. In addition, for purposes of 
paragraph (q)(1) (iii) and (iv) of this section, a building is not a 
``30-year building'' unless it has been at the location where it is 
being rehabilitated for the thirty-year period immediately preceding the 
beginning of the rehabilitation process, and is not a ``40-year 
building'' unless it has been at the location where it is being 
rehabilitated for the forty-year period immediately preceding the 
beginning of the rehabilitation process.
    (ii) Building to which additions have been added--(A) Property 
placed in service after December 31, 1986. For purposes of paragraph 
(q)(1)(ii) of this section, if part of a building meets the definition 
of a qualified rehabilitated building, and part of the building does not 
meet the definition of a qualified rehabilitated building because such 
part is an addition that was placed in service after December 31, 1935, 
the qualified rehabilitation expenditures made to the building must be 
allocated to the pre-1936 portion of the building and the post-1935 
portion of the building using the principles in Sec. 1.48-12(c)(10)(ii). 
Qualified rehabilitation expenditures attributable to the post-1935 
addition shall not qualify for the 10 percent rehabilitation percentage.
    (B) Property placed in service before January 1, 1987, and property 
qualifying for a transitional rule. For purposes of paragraphs (q)(1) 
(iii) and (iv) of this section, if part of a building meets the 
definition of a ``40-year building'' and part of the building is an 
addition that was placed in service less than forty years before 
physical work on the rehabilitation began but more than thirty years 
before such date, then the qualified rehabilitation expenditures made to 
the building shall be allocated between the forty year old portion of 
the

[[Page 198]]

building and the thirty year old portion of the building, and a 20 
percent rehabilitation percentage shall be applied to the forty year old 
portion of the building and a 15 percent rehabilitation percentage shall 
be applied to the thirty year old portion. This allocation shall be made 
using the principles in Sec. 1.48-12(c)(10)(ii). If an allocation cannot 
be made between the expenditures to the forty year old portion of the 
building and the thirty year old portion of the building, then the 
building will be considered to be a 30-year building. Furthermore, for 
purposes of this paragraph (q), a building (other than a certified 
historic structure) is not a qualified rehabilitated building to the 
extent of that portion of the building that is less than 30 years old. 
If rehabilitation expenditures are incurred with respect to an addition 
to a qualified rehabilitated building, but the addition is not 
considered to be part of the qualified rehabilitated building because 
the addition does not meet the age requirement in section 48(g)(1)(B) 
(as in effect prior to its amendment by the Tax Reform Act of 1986) and 
Sec. 1.48-12(b)(4)(i)(B), then no rehabilitation percentage will be 
applied to the expenditures attributable to the rehabilitation of the 
addition. Thus, for purposes of paragraphs (q)(1) (iii) and (iv) of this 
section, it may be necessary to allocate rehabilitation expenditures 
incurred with respect to a building between the original portion of the 
building and the addition.
    (iii) Mixed-use buildings. If qualified rehabilitation expenditures 
are incurred for property that is excluded from section 38 property 
described in section 48(a)(1)(E) (because, for example, they are made 
with respect to a portion of the building used for lodging within the 
meaning of section 48(a)(3) and Sec. 1.48-1(h)), an allocation of the 
expenditures must be made between the expenditures that result in an 
addition to basis that is section 38 property and the expenditures that 
result in an addition to basis that is excluded from the definition of 
section 38 property since the rehabilitation percentage is applicable 
only to section 38 property. These allocations should be made using the 
principles contained in Sec. 1.48-12(c)(10)(ii).
    (3) Regular and energy percentages not to apply. The regular 
percentage and the energy percentage shall not apply to that portion of 
the basis of any building that is attributable to qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures (as defined in Sec. 1.48-12(c)).
    (4) Effective date. The rehabilitation percentage is applicable only 
to qualified rehabilitation expenditures (as defined in Sec. 1.48-
12(c)). For rules relating to applicability of the regular percentage to 
qualified rehabilitation expenditures (as defined in Sec. 1.48-11(c)), 
see Sec. 1.48-11.

[T.D. 6731, 29 FR 6064, May 8, 1964]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 1.46-
1, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids section of 
this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 1.46-2  Carryback and carryover of unused credit.

    (a) Effective date. This section is effective for taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1975. For taxable years beginning before 
January 1, 1976, see 26 CFR 1.46-2 (Rev. as of April 1, 1979).
    (b) In general. Under section 46(b)(1), unused credit may be carried 
back and carried over. Carrybacks and carryovers of unused credit are 
taken into account in determining the amount of credit available and the 
credit allowed for the taxable years to which they may be carried. In 
general, the application of the rules of this section to regular and 
ESOP credits are separate from their application to nonrefundable energy 
credits. For example, the limitations on carrybacks and carryovers of 
unused nonrefundable energy credit under section 46(b) (2) and (3), 
respectively, differ in amount from the limitations on the regular and 
ESOP credits because the tax liability limitations for those credits 
differ. See Sec. 1.46-1(h). For a further example, see the special 
ordering rule in Sec. 1.46-1(m). Section 46(b) does not apply to the 
refundable energy credit.
    (c) Unused credit. If carryovers and credit earned (as defined in 
Sec. 1.46-1(c)(1)) exceed the applicable tax liability limitation, the 
excess attributable to credit earned is an unused credit. The taxable 
year in which an unused

[[Page 199]]

credit arises is referred to as the ``unused credit year''.
    (d) Taxable years to which unused credit may be carried. An unused 
credit is a carryback to each of the 3 taxable years preceding the 
unused credit year and a carryover to each of the 7 taxable years 
succeeding the unused credit year. An unused credit must be carried 
first to the earliest of those 10 taxable years. An unused credit then 
must be carried to each of the other 9 taxable years (in order of time) 
to the extent that the unused credit was not absorbed during a prior 
taxable year because of the limitations under section 46(b) (2) and (3).
    (e) Special rule for pre-1971 years--(1) In general. For unused 
credit years ending before January 1, 1971, unused credit is allowed a 
10-year carryover rather than the 7-year carryover. The principles of 
paragraph (d) of this section apply to this 10-year carryover.
    (2) Cross reference. For limitations on the taxable years to which 
unused credit from pre-1971 credit years may be carried, see paragraph 
(g) of this section.
    (f) Limitations on carrybacks. Under the FIFO rule to section 
46(a)(1), carryovers and credit earned are applied against the tax 
liability limitation before carrybacks. Thus, carrybacks to a taxable 
year may not exceed the amount by which the applicable tax liability 
limitation for that year exceeds the sum of carryovers to and credit 
earned for that year. Carrybacks from an unused credit year are applied 
against tax liability before carrybacks from a later unused credit year. 
To the extent an unused credit cannot be carried back to a particular 
preceding taxable year, the unused credit must be carried to the next 
succeeding taxable year to which it may be carried.
    (g) Limitations on carryovers--(1) General rule. Carryovers to a 
taxable year may not exceed the applicable tax liability limitation for 
that year. Carryovers from an unused credit year are applied before 
carryovers from a later unused credit year.
    (2) Exception. A 10-year carryover from a pre-1971 unused credit 
year may, under certain circumstances, be postponed to prevent a later-
earned 7-year carryover from expiring. This exception does not extend 
the 10-year carryover period for pre-1971 unused credit. See section 
46(b)(1)(D).
    (h) Examples. The following examples illustrate paragraphs (a) 
through (g) of this section.

    Example 1. (a) Corporation M is organized on January 1, 1977 and 
files its income tax return on a calendar year basis. Assume the facts 
set forth in columns (1) and (2) of the following table. The 
determination of the regular credit allowed for each of the taxable 
years indicated is set forth in the remaining portions of the table.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)   
                                --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                      Tax                                       
                                                                   liability                                    
                                                                   limitation    Credit    Remaining    Unused  
                                   Credit      Tax                 (remaining   allowed       tax       credit  
                                 available  liability   Percent    from col.   (lower of   liability   ((1)-(5))
                                                                     (6) on      (1) or   limitation  or (amount
                                                                   preceding      (4))     ((4)-(5))   absorbed)
                                                                     line)                                      
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1977:                                                                                                           
  A. Credit earned.............    $20,000    $45,000         50    $35,000      $20,000     $15,000          0 
  B. Carryback from 1978.......    *15,000  .........  .........    [15,000]      15,000  ..........  ..........
1978:                                                                                                           
  A. Credit earned.............     80,000     55,000         50     40,000       40,000           0    $20,000 
    Carryback to 1977..........  .........  .........  .........  ...........  .........  ..........   (*15,000)
    Carryover to 1979..........  .........  .........  .........  ...........  .........  ..........    (*5,000)
1979:                                                                                                           
  A. Carryover from 1978.......     *5,000     50,000         60     40,000        6,000      35,000  ..........
  B. Credit earned.............     50,000  .........  .........    [35,000]      35,000           0     15,000 
    Carryover to 1980..........  .........  .........  .........  ...........  .........  ..........   (*15,000)
1980:                                                                                                           
  A. Carryover from 1979.......    *15,000     55,000         70     46,000       15,000      31,000  ..........
  B. Credit earned.............     25,000  .........  .........    [31,000]      25,000       6,000          0 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*For line ``A'' each year: Lesser of (1) tax liability or (2) $25,000 + (percentage in col. (3)  x  [col. (2) - 
  $25,000]). See, Sec.  1.46-1(h). For other lines: Amount in col. (6) on preceding line.                       


    Example 2. (a) Assume the same facts as in Example 1 except for 1979 
M earns a $35,000 nonrefundable energy credit. The following table shows 
the determinations for each year.

[[Page 200]]



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           (1)                 (2)                (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)   
                                                       -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                          Tax liability                       Tax                                       
                                                                  ----------------------------             liability                                    
                                                                                                          limitation*    Credit    Remaining    Unused  
                                                          Credit                                           (remaining   allowed       tax       credit  
                                                        available     (a)        (b) Energy     Percent    from col.   (lower of   liability   ((1)-(5))
                                                                    Regular   ((2)(a)-(5)(R))                (6) on      (1) or   limitation  or (amount
                                                                                                           preceding      (4))     ((4)-(5))   absorbed)
                                                                                                             line)                                      
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1977:                                                                                                                                                   
  Regular:                                                                                                                                              
    A. Credit earned..................................    $20,000    $45,000  ...............         50    $35,000     $20,000R     $15,000          0 
    B. Carryback from 1978............................    *15,000  .........  ...............  .........    [15,000]     15,000R           0  ..........
1978:                                                                                                                                                   
  Regular:                                                                                                                                              
    A. Credit earned..................................     60,000     55,000  ...............         50     40,000      40,000R           0    $20,000 
      Carryback to 1977...............................  .........  .........  ...............  .........  ...........  .........  ..........   (*15,000)
      Carryover to 1979...............................  .........  .........  ...............  .........  ...........  .........  ..........    (*5,000)
  Energy:                                                                                                                                               
    A. Carryback from 1979............................    *15,000  .........       $15,000           100     15,000      15,000E           0  ..........
1979:                                                                                                                                                   
  Regular:                                                                                                                                              
    A. Carryover from 1978............................     *5,000     50,000  ...............         60     40,000       5,000R      35,000  ..........
    B. Credit earned..................................     50,000  .........  ...............  .........    [35,000]     35,000R           0     15,000 
      Carryover to 1980...............................  .........  .........  ...............  .........  ...........  .........  ..........   (*15,000)
  Energy:                                                                                                                                               
    A. Credit earned..................................     35,000  .........        10,000           100     10,000      10,000E           0     25,000 
      Carryback to 1978...............................  .........  .........  ...............  .........  ...........  .........  ..........   (*15,000)
      Carryover to 1980...............................  .........  .........  ...............  .........  ...........  .........  ..........   (*10,000)
1980:                                                                                                                                                   
  Regular:                                                                                                                                              
    A. Carryover from 1979............................    *15,000     55,000  ...............         70     46,000      15,000R      31,000  ..........
    B. Credit earned..................................     25,000  .........  ...............  .........    [31,000]     25,000R       6,000          0 
  Energy:                                                                                                                                               
    A. Carryover from 1979............................    *10,000  .........        15,000           100     15,000      10,000E       5,000  ..........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*See footnote to the chart in Example 1.                                                                                                                

    (b) Although, in general, a nonrefundable energy credit may be 
carried back to taxable years ending before October 1, 1978, in this 
example the unused nonrefundable energy credit from 1979 may not be 
absorbed in 1977. The 1977 tax liability limitation for the 
nonrefundable energy credit is the same as it is for the regular credit, 
reduced by regular credit previously allowed for 1977. See Secs. 1.46-
1(h)(3) and 1.46-1(m).

    Example 3. (a) Assume the same facts as in Example 2 except M has 
regular credit of $37,000 for 1981 and M's tax liability for 1981 is 
$32,500. The determinations for 1980 and 1981 are set forth in the 
following table.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              (1)               (2)               (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)   
                                                          ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                           Tax liability                      Tax                                       
                                                                     -------------------------             liability                                    
                                                                                                          limitation*    Credit    Remaining    Unused  
                                                             Credit                                        (remaining   allowed       tax       credit  
                                                           available     (a)      (b) Energy    Percent    from col.   (lower of   liability   ((1)-(5))
                                                                       Regular   ((2)-(5)(R))                (6) on      (1) or   limitation  or (amount
                                                                                                           preceding      (4))     ((4)-(5))   absorbed)
                                                                                                             line)                                      
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1979 (restated):                                                                                                                                        
  Energy:                                                                                                                                               
    To be carried over...................................  .........  .........  ............  .........  ...........  .........  ..........    $10,000 
      Carryover to 1980..................................  .........  .........  ............  .........  ...........  .........  ..........    (*9,000)
      Carryover to 1981..................................  .........  .........  ............  .........  ...........  .........  ..........    (*1,000)
1980 (restated):                                                                                                                                        
  Regular:                                                                                                                                              
    A. Carryover from 1979...............................    $15,000    $55,000  ............         70    $46,000     $15,000R     $31,000  ..........
    B. Credit earned.....................................    *25,000  .........  ............  .........    [31,000]     25,000R       6,000          0 
    C. Carryback from 1981...............................     *6,000  .........  ............  .........     [6,000]      6,000R           0  ..........
  Energy:                                                                                                                                               
    A. Carryover from 1979...............................     *9,000  .........       $9,000         100      9,000       9,000E  ..........  ..........
1981: Regular:                                                                                                                                          
    A. Credit earned.....................................     37,000     32,500  ............         80     31,000      31,000R           0      6,000 

[[Page 201]]

                                                                                                                                                        
      Carryback to 1980..................................  .........  .........  ............  .........  ...........  .........  ..........    (*6,000)
  Energy:                                                                                                                                               
    A. Carryover from 1979...............................     *1,000  .........        1,500         100      1,500       1,000E         500          0 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*See footnote to chart under Example 1.                                                                                                                 

    (b) Allowance of the regular carryback in 1980 from 1981 requires 
that the computations for 1980 be restated. The energy tax liability 
limitation for 1980 is reduced from $15,000 (as determined in Example 2) 
to $9,000. Thus, $1,000 of the $10,000 energy credit allowed for 1980 is 
displaced by the regular carryback. That amount may not be carried back 
because there is no remaining energy tax liability limitation for the 
prior 3 years (see table in Example 2). It may be carried over to 1981 
and allowed in full in that year.

    (i) [Reserved]
    (j) Electing small business corporation. A shareholder of an 
electing small business corporation (as defined in section 1371(b)) may 
not take into account unused credit of the corporation attributable to 
unused credit years for which the corporation was not an electing small 
business corporation. However, a taxable year for which the corporation 
is an electing small business corporation is counted as a taxable year 
for determining the taxable years to which that unused credit may be 
carried.
    (k) Periods of less than 12 months. A fractional part of a year that 
is considered a taxable year under sections 441(b) and 7701(a)(23) is 
treated as a preceding or succeeding taxable year for determining under 
section 46(b) the taxable years to which an unused credit may be 
carried.
    (l) Corporate acquisitions. For carryover of unused credits in the 
case of certain corporate acquisitions, see section 381(c)(23).

(Secs. 7805 (68A Stat. 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805) and 38(b) (76 Stat. 962, 26 
U.S.C. 38))

[T.D. 7751, 46 FR 1679, Jan. 7, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 1.46-3  Qualified investment.

    (a) In general. (1) With respect to any taxable year, the qualified 
investment of the taxpayer is the aggregate (expressed in dollars) of 
(i) the applicable percentage of the basis of each new section 38 
property placed in service by the taxpayer during such taxable year, 
plus (ii) the applicable percentage of the cost of each used section 38 
property placed in service by the taxpayer during such taxable year. 
With respect to any section 38 property, qualified investment means the 
applicable percentage of the basis (or cost) of such property. Section 
38 property placed in service by the taxpayer during the taxable year 
includes the taxpayer's share of the basis (or cost) of section 38 
property placed in service by a partnership in the taxable year of such 
partnership ending with or within the taxpayer's taxable year. In the 
case of a shareholder of an electing small business corporation (as 
defined in section 1371(b)), or a beneficiary of an estate or trust, see 
Secs. 1.48-5 and 1.48-6, respectively, for apportionment of the basis 
(or cost) of section 38 property placed in service by such corporation, 
estate, or trust. For the definitions of new section 38 property and 
used section 38 property, see Secs. 1.48-2 and 1.48-3, respectively. See 
Sec. 1.46-5 for special rules for progress expenditure property.
    (2) The basis (or cost) of section 38 property placed in service 
during a taxable year shall not be taken into account in determining 
qualified investment for such year if such property is disposed of or 
otherwise ceases to be section 38 property during such year, except 
where Sec. 1.47-3 applies. Thus, if individual A places in service 
during a taxable year section 38 property and later in the same year 
sells such property, the basis (or cost) of such property shall not be 
taken into account in determining A's qualified investment. On the other 
hand, if A places in service section 38 property during a taxable

[[Page 202]]

year and dies later in the same year, the basis (or cost) of such 
property would be taken into account in computing qualified investment. 
Similarly, if section 38 property is destroyed by fire in the same year 
in which it is placed in service and paragraph (h) of this section 
applies to reduce the basis (or cost) of replacement property, the basis 
(or cost) of the destroyed property would be taken into account in 
computing qualified investment. In order to determine whether section 38 
property is disposed of or otherwise ceases to be section 38 property 
see Sec. 1.47-2.
    (3) Qualified investment is reduced in the case of property which is 
``public utility property'' (see paragraph (h) of this section), and in 
the case of property of organizations to which section 593 applies, 
regulated investment companies or real estate investment trusts subject 
to taxation under subchapter M, chapter 1 of the Code, and cooperative 
organizations described in section 1381(a) (see Sec. 1.46-4).
    (b) Applicable percentage. The applicable percentage to be applied 
to the basis (or cost) of property is 33\1/3\ percent if the estimated 
useful life of the property is 3 years or more but less than 5 years; 
66\2/3\ percent if the estimated useful life is 5 years or more but less 
than 7 years; or 100 percent if the estimated useful life is 7 years or 
more. In the case of property which is not described in section 50, the 
preceding sentence shall be applied by substituting ``4 years'' for ``3 
years'', ``6 years'' for ``5 years'', and ``8 years'' for ``7 years''. 
The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by the following 
example:

    Example. Corporation Y acquires and places in service during 1972 
the following new and used section 38 properties:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   Estimated            
                                                     useful    Basis (or
                     Property                         life       cost)  
                                                    (years)             
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A (new)..........................................          4     $60,000
B (new)..........................................         10      90,000
C (new)..........................................          6     150,000
D (used).........................................          3      30,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Corporation Y's qualified investment for 1972 is $220,000 determined 
in the following manner:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    Basis (or    Applicable   Qualified 
             Property                 cost)      percentage   investment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A................................      $60,000      33\1/3\      $20,000
B................................       90,000        100         90,000
C................................      150,000      66\2/3\      100,000
D................................       30,000      33\1/3\       10,000
                                  --------------------------------------
  Total....................................................      220,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Basis or cost. (1) The basis of any new section 38 property 
shall be determined in accordance with the general rules for determining 
the basis of property. Thus, the basis of property would generally be 
its cost (see section 1012), unreduced by the adjustment to basis 
provided by section 48(g)(1) with respect to property placed in service 
before January 1, 1964, and any other adjustment to basis, such as that 
for depreciation, and would include all items properly included by the 
taxpayer in the depreciable basis of the property, such as installation 
and freight costs. However, for purposes of determining qualified 
investment, the basis of new section 38 property constructed, 
reconstructed, or erected by the taxpayer shall not include any 
depreciation sustained with respect to any other property used in the 
construction, reconstruction, or erection of such new section 38 
property. (See paragraph (b)(4) of Sec. 1.48-1.) If new section 38 
property is acquired in exchange for cash and other property in a 
transaction described in section 1031 in which no gain or loss is 
recognized, the basis of the newly acquired property for purposes of 
determining qualified investment would be equal to the adjusted basis of 
the other property plus the cash paid. See Sec. 1.48-4 for the basis of 
property to a lessee where the lessor has elected to treat such lessee 
as a purchaser.
    (2) The cost of any used section 38 property shall be determined in 
accordance with paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.48-3. However, the aggregate 
cost of used section 38 property which may be taken into account in any 
taxable year in computing qualified investment cannot exceed $50,000 
(see paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.48-3).
    (3) For reduction in the basis (or cost) of certain property which 
replaces other property which was destroyed or damaged by fire, storm, 
shipwreck, or other casualty, or which

[[Page 203]]

was stolen, see paragraph (h) of this section.
    (d) Placed in service. (1) For purposes of the credit allowed by 
section 38, property shall be considered placed in service in the 
earlier of the following taxable years:
    (i) The taxable year in which, under the taxpayer's depreciation 
practice, the period for depreciation with respect to such property 
begins; or
    (ii) The taxable year in which the property is placed in a condition 
or state of readiness and availability for a specifically assigned 
function, whether in a trade or business, in the production of income, 
in a tax-exempt activity, or in a personal activity.

Thus, if property meets the conditions of subdivision (ii) of this 
subparagraph in a taxable year, it shall be considered placed in service 
in such year notwithstanding that the period for depreciation with 
respect to such property begins in a succeeding taxable year because, 
for example, under the taxpayer's depreciation practice such property is 
accounted for in a multiple asset account and depreciation is computed 
under an ``averaging convention'' (see Sec. 1.167(a)-10), or 
depreciation with respect to such property is computed under the 
completed contract method, the unit of production method, or the 
retirement method.
    (2) In the case of property acquired by a taxpayer for use in his 
trade or business (or in the production of income), the following are 
examples of cases where property shall be considered in a condition or 
state of readiness and availability for a specifically assigned 
function:
    (i) Parts are acquired and set aside during the taxable year for use 
as replacements for a particular machine (or machines) in order to avoid 
operational time loss.
    (ii) Operational farm equipment is acquired during the taxable year 
and it is not practicable to use such equipment for its specifically 
assigned function in the taxpayer's business of farming until the 
following year.
    (iii) Equipment is acquired for a specifically assigned function and 
is operational but is undergoing testing to eliminate any defects.
    (iv) Reforestation expenditures (as defined in Sec. 1.194-3(c)) are 
incurred during the taxable year in connection with qualified timber 
property (as defined in Sec. 1.194-3(a)).

However, fruit-bearing trees and vines shall not be considered in a 
condition or state of readiness and availability for a specifically 
assigned function until they have reached an income-producing stage. 
Moreover, materials and parts acquired to be used in the construction of 
an item of equipment shall not be considered in a condition or state of 
readiness and availability for a specifically assigned function.
    (3) Notwithstanding subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, property 
with respect to which an election is made under Sec. 1.48-4 to treat the 
lessee as having purchased such property shall be considered placed in 
service by the lessor in the taxable year in which possession is 
transferred to such lessee.
    (4)(i) The credit allowed by section 38 with respect to any property 
shall be allowed only for the first taxable year in which such property 
is placed in service by the taxpayer. The determination of whether 
property is section 38 property in the hands of the taxpayer shall be 
made with respect to such first taxable year. Thus, if a taxpayer places 
property in service in a taxable year and such property does not qualify 
as section 38 property (or only a portion of such property qualifies as 
section 38 property) in such year, no credit (or a credit only as to the 
portion which qualifies in such year) shall be allowed to the taxpayer 
with respect to such property notwithstanding that such property (or a 
greater portion of such property) qualifies as section 38 property in a 
subsequent taxable year. For example, if a taxpayer places property in 
service in 1963 and uses the property entirely for personal purposes in 
such year, but in 1964 begins using the property in a trade or business, 
no credit is allowable to the taxpayer under section 38 with respect to 
such property. See Sec. 1.48-1 for the definition of section 38 
property.
    (ii) Notwithstanding subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, if, for 
the first taxable year in which property is placed in service by the 
taxpayer, the property

[[Page 204]]

qualifies as section 38 property but the basis of the property does not 
reflect its full cost for the reason that the total amount to be paid or 
incurred by the taxpayer for the property is indeterminate, a credit 
shall be allowed to the taxpayer for such first taxable year with 
respect to so much of the cost as is reflected in the basis of the 
property as of the close of such year, and an additional credit shall be 
allowed to the taxpayer for any subsequent taxable year with respect to 
the additional cost paid or incurred during such year and reflected in 
the basis of the property as of the close of such year. The estimated 
useful life used in computing each additional credit with respect to the 
property shall be the same as the estimated useful life used in 
computing the credit for the first taxable year in which the property 
was placed in service by the taxpayer. Assume, for example, that in 1964 
X Corporation, a utility company which makes its return on the basis of 
a calendar year, enters into an agreement with Y Corporation, a builder, 
to construct certain utility facilities for a housing development built 
by Y. Assume further that part of the funds for the construction of the 
utility facilities is advanced by Y under a contract providing that X 
will repay the advances over a 10-year period in accordance with an 
agreed formula, after which no further amounts will be repayable by X 
even though the full amount advanced by Y has not been repaid. Assuming 
that the utility facilities are placed in service in 1964 and qualify as 
section 38 property, X is allowed a credit for 1964 with respect to its 
basis in the utility facilities at the close of 1964. For each 
succeeding taxable year X is allowed an additional credit with respect 
to the increase in the basis of the utility facilities resulting from 
the repayments to Y during such year.
    (e) Estimated useful life--(1)(i) In general. With respect to assets 
placed in service by the taxpayer during any taxable year, for the 
purpose of computing qualified investment the estimated useful lives 
assigned to all assets which fall within a particular guideline class 
(within the meaning of Revenue Procedure 62-21) may be determined, at 
the taxpayer's option, under either subparagraph (2) or (3) of this 
paragraph. Thus, the taxpayer may assign estimated useful lives to all 
the assets falling in one guideline class in accordance with 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, and may assign estimated useful 
lives to all the assets falling within another guideline class in 
accordance with subparagraph (3) of this paragraph. See subparagraphs 
(4) and (5) of this paragraph for determination of estimated useful 
lives of assets not subject to subparagraph (2) or (3) of this 
paragraph.
    (ii) Except as provided in subparagraph (7), this paragraph shall 
not apply to property described in section 50.
    (2) Class life system. The taxpayer may assign to each asset falling 
within a guideline class, which is placed in service during the taxable 
year, the class life of the taxpayer for the guideline class for such 
year as determined under section 4, part II of Revenue Procedure 62-21. 
The preceding sentence may be applied to the assets falling within a 
guideline class irrespective of whether the taxpayer uses single asset 
accounts or multiple asset accounts in computing depreciation with 
respect to such assets and irrespective of whether the taxpayer chooses 
to have his depreciation allowance with respect to such assets examined 
under the rules provided in Revenue Procedure 62-21.
    (3) Individual useful life system. (i) The taxpayer may assign an 
individual estimated useful life to each asset falling within a 
guideline class which is placed in service during the taxable year. With 
respect to the assets falling within the guideline class which are 
placed in single asset accounts for purposes of computing depreciation, 
the estimated useful life used for each asset for that purpose shall be 
used in determining qualified investment. With respect to the assets 
falling within the guideline class which are placed in multiple asset 
accounts (including a guideline class account described in Revenue 
Procedure 62-21) for which a group, classified, or composite rate is 
used in computing depreciation (or in single asset accounts for which an 
average life rate is used), the determination of estimated useful life 
for each asset in the account shall be made individually

[[Page 205]]

on the best estimate obtainable on the basis of all the facts and 
circumstances. The individual estimated useful lives used for all the 
assets placed in a multiple asset account, when viewed together, must be 
consistent with the group, classified, or composite life used for the 
account for purposes of computing depreciation.
    (ii) In determining the individual estimated useful lives of assets 
similar in kind contained in a multiple asset account (or in single 
asset accounts for which an average life rate is used), the taxpayer may 
(a) assign to each of such assets the average useful life of such assets 
used for purposes of computing depreciation, or (b) assign separate 
lives to such assets based on the estimated range of years taken into 
consideration in establishing the average useful life. Thus, for 
example, if a taxpayer places nine similar trucks with an average 
estimated useful life of 7 years, based on an estimated range of 6 to 8 
years (two trucks with a useful life of 6 years, five trucks with a 
useful life of 7 years, and two trucks with a useful life of 8 years), 
in a multiple asset account for which a group rate is used in computing 
depreciation, he may either assign a useful life of 6 years to two of 
the trucks, 7 years to five of the trucks, and 8 years to two of the 
trucks, or he may assign the average useful life of the trucks (7 years) 
to each of the nine trucks. Likewise, if a taxpayer places 100 similar 
telephone poles with an average useful life of 28 years, based on an 
estimated range of 3 to 40 years (two with a useful life of less than 4 
years, three with a useful life of 4 to 6 years, four with a useful life 
of 6 to 8 years, and 91 with a useful life of more than 8 years), in a 
multiple asset account for which a group rate is used in computing 
depreciation, he may either assign useful lives corresponding to the 
estimated range of years of the poles (i.e., a useful life of less than 
4 years to two of the poles, etc.), or he may assign the average useful 
life of the poles (28 years) to each of the poles.
    (iii) [Reserved]
    (iv) For purposes of subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph, assets 
(other than ``mass assets'') shall not be considered as ``similar in 
kind'' in respect of other assets unless all such assets are 
substantially of the same value, nor shall used section 38 property be 
considered as ``similar in kind'' to new section 38 property.
    (4) Useful life of property subject to amortization--(i) In general. 
In the case of property with respect to which amortization in lieu of 
depreciation is allowable, the term over which amortization deductions 
are taken shall be considered as the estimated useful life of such 
property.
    (ii) Qualified timber property. In the case of qualified timber 
property (within the meaning of section 194(c)(1)), the normal growing 
period of such property shall be considered its estimated useful life.
    (5) Useful life of property subject to certain methods of 
depreciation. If a taxpayer is using a method of depreciation, such as 
the unit of production or retirement method, which does not measure the 
useful life of the property in terms of years, he must estimate such 
useful life in years in order to compute his qualified investment.
    (6) Record requirements. The taxpayer shall maintain sufficient 
records to determine whether section 47 (relating to certain 
dispositions, etc., of section 38 property) applies with respect to any 
asset.
    (7) Section 50 property. (i) The provisions of this subparagraph and 
subparagraphs (4) and (6) of this paragraph shall apply to property 
which is described in section 50.
    (ii) The estimated useful life of property for purposes of computing 
qualified investment shall be the useful life used or to be used by the 
taxpayer in computing the allowance for depreciation with respect to 
such property under section 167 for the taxable year in which the 
property is placed in service. Thus, if property is placed in service by 
a taxpayer in a taxable year but the period for depreciation with 
respect to such property does not begin until a succeeding taxable year 
(see paragraph (d)(1) of this section), the estimated useful life for 
purposes of computing qualified investment must be the estimated useful 
life that the taxpayer uses in computing the allowance for depreciation. 
See subdivision (iv) of this subparagraph for rules for determining

[[Page 206]]

the estimated useful life of property with respect to which the 
allowance for depreciation under section 167 is computed under the unit 
of production method, the income-forecast method, or any other method 
which does not measure the useful life of the property in terms of 
years.
    (iii)(a) The estimated useful life of any section 38 property to 
which an election under section 167(m) applies shall be the asset 
depreciation period selected for such property under Sec. 1.167(a)-
11(b)(4), whether or not such property constitutes mass assets (as 
defined in Sec. 1.47-1(e)(4)).
    (b) The estimated useful life of any section 38 property to which an 
election under section 167(m) does not apply and which is placed in a 
multiple asset account for which a group, classified, or composite rate 
is used in computing depreciation (or in single asset accounts for which 
an average life rate is used) shall be determined individually for each 
asset on the best estimate obtainable on the basis of all the facts and 
circumstances. The individual estimated useful life for each asset 
placed in a multiple asset account (including a mass asset account) must 
be the same as the useful life of such asset used in determining the 
group, classified, or composite life for the account for purposes of 
computing depreciation. The individual estimated useful lives of assets 
similar in kind may be determined in accordance with subdivisions (ii) 
and (iv) of subparagraph (3) of this paragraph. In the case of mass 
assets, subdivision (iii) of subparagraph (3) of this paragraph shall 
apply.
    (f) Partnerships--(1) In general. In the case of a partnership, each 
partner shall take into account separately, for his taxable year with or 
within which the partnership taxable year ends, his share of the basis 
of partnership new section 38 property and his share of the cost of 
partnership used section 38 property placed in service by the 
partnership during such partnership taxable year. Each partner shall be 
treated as the taxpayer with respect to his share of the basis of 
partnership new section 38 property and his share of the cost of 
partnership used section 38 property. The estimated useful life to each 
partner of such property shall be deemed to be the estimated useful life 
of the property in the hands of the partnership. Partnership section 38 
property shall not, by reason of each partner taking his share of the 
basis or cost into account, lose its character as either new section 38 
property or used section 38 property, as the case may be. For 
computation of each partner's qualified investment for the energy credit 
for a qualified intercity bus, see Sec. 1.48-9(q)(9)(iv).
    (2) Determination of partner's share. (i) Each partner's share of 
the basis (or cost) of any section 38 property shall be determined in 
accordance with the ratio in which the partners divide the general 
profits of the partnership (that is, the taxable income of the 
partnership as described in section 702(a)(9)) regardless of whether the 
partnership has a profit or a loss for its taxable year during which the 
section 38 property is placed in service. However, if the ratio in which 
the partners divide the general profits of the partnership changes 
during the taxable year of the partnership, the ratio effective for the 
date on which the property is placed in service shall apply.
    (ii) Notwithstanding subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, if all 
related items of income, gain, loss, and deduction with respect to any 
item of partnership section 38 property are specially allocated in the 
same manner and if such special allocation is recognized under section 
704 (a) and (b) and paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.704-1, then each partner's 
share of the basis of such item of new section 38 property or the cost 
of such item of used section 38 property shall be determined by 
reference to such special allocation effective for the date on which the 
property is placed in service.
    (iii) Notwithstanding subdivisions (i) and (ii) of this 
subparagraph, if with respect to a partnership's taxable year the 
conditions set forth in (a) through (c) of this subdivision are 
satisfied with respect to a partner, then such partner shall not take 
into account the basis (or cost) of any section 38 property placed in 
service by the partnership during such taxable year. The conditions 
referred to in the preceding sentence are:

[[Page 207]]

    (a) Such partner's interest in the general profits of the 
partnership during the taxable year is 5 percent or less;
    (b) Under the partnership agreement, such partner will retire from 
the partnership during the taxable year or within 7 years after the end 
of such year; and
    (c) The partnership agreement provides that the basis (or cost) of 
section 38 property placed in service by the partnership during the 
taxable year shall not be taken into account by a partner described in 
(a) and (b) of this subdivision.

Any basis (or cost) of section 38 property which is not taken into 
account by a partner because of the provisions of this subdivision shall 
be taken into account by the other partners in accordance with 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph.
    (3) Examples. This paragraph may be illustrated by the following 
examples:

    Example 1. Partnership ABCD acquires and places in service on 
January 1, 1962, an item of new section 38 property, and acquires and 
places in service on September 1, 1962, another item of new section 38 
property. The ABCD partnership and each of its partners reports income 
on the basis of the calendar year. Partners A, B, C, and D share 
partnership profits equally. Each partner's share of the basis of each 
new partnership section 38 property is 25 percent.

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Example 1 and the following 
additional facts: A dies on June 30, 1962, and B purchases A's interest 
as of such date. Each partner's share of the profits from January 1 to 
June 30 is 25 percent. From July 1 to December 31, B's share of the 
profits is 50 percent, and C and D's share of the profits is 25 percent 
each. For A's last taxable year (January 1 to June 30, 1962), A shall 
take into account 25 percent of the basis of the section 38 property 
placed in service on January 1. B shall take into account 25 percent of 
the basis of the section 38 property placed in service on January 1 and 
50 percent of the basis of the section 38 property placed in service on 
September 1, C and D shall each take into account 25 percent of the 
basis of each new section 38 property placed in service by the 
partnership in 1962.

    Example 3. Partnership MR is engaged in the business of renting soda 
fountain equipment and icemakers to restaurants. The partnership makes 
no elections under Sec. 1.48-4 to treat its lessees as having purchased 
such property. Under the terms of the partnership agreement, the income, 
gain or loss on disposition, depreciation, and other deductions 
attributable to the icemakers are specially allocated 70 percent to 
partner M and 30 percent to partner R. In all other respects M and R 
share profits and losses equally. If the special allocation with respect 
to the icemakers is recognized under section 704 (a) and (b) and 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.704-1, the basis (or cost) of the icemakers 
which qualify as partnership section 38 property shall be taken into 
account 70 percent by M and 30 percent by R. The basis (or cost) of 
partnership section 38 property not subject to the special allocation 
shall be taken into account equally by M and R.

    Example 4. Assume the same facts as in Example 3 and the following 
additional facts: During November 1962, the partnership, which reports 
its income on the basis of a fiscal year ending May 31, acquires and 
places in service two items which qualify as new section 38 property, an 
icemaker and a soda fountain. The icemaker has an estimated useful life 
of 8 years to the partnership and a basis of $1,000. The soda fountain 
has an estimated useful life of 6 years to the partnership and a basis 
of $600. Partner M also owns and operates a business as a sole 
proprietorship and reports income on the calendar year basis. During 
1963, M acquires and places in service in his sole proprietorship a 
machine which qualifies as new section 38 property. This machine has an 
estimated useful life of 4 years and a basis of $300. M owns no interest 
in any other partnerships, electing small business corporations, 
estates, or trusts. M's total qualified investment for 1963 is $1,000, 
computed as follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Estimated                     M's share of     Applicable       Qualified  
            Property                useful life        Basis           basis        percentage      investment  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Partnership MR                                                                                         
Icemaker........................               8          $1,000            $700           100              $700
Soda fountain...................               6             600             300         66\2/3\             200
       Sole proprietorship                                                                                      
Machine.........................               4             300  ..............         33\1/3\             100
                                 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Total.......................................................................................           1,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 208]]

    (g) Public utility property--(1) In general--(i) Scope of paragraph. 
This paragraph only applies to property described in section 50. For 
rules relating to public utility property not described in section 50, 
see 26 CFR part 1, Sec. 1.46-3(g) (as revised April 1, 1977). This 
paragraph does not reflect amendments to section 46(c) made after 
enactment of the Revenue Act of 1971.
    (ii) Amount of qualified investment. A taxpayer's qualified 
investment in section 38 property that is public utility property is \4/
7\ of the amount otherwise determined under this section.
    (2) Meaning and uses of certain terms. For purposes of this 
paragraph--
    (i) Public utility property. ``Public utility property'' is property 
used by a taxpayer predominantly in a trade or business that is a public 
utility activity and property that is nonregulated communication 
property.
    (ii) Public utility activity. A ``public utility activity'' is any 
activity in which the goods or services described in section 46(c)(3)(B) 
(i), (ii), or (iii) are furnished or sold at regulated rates. If 
property is used by a taxpayer both in a public utility activity and in 
another activity, the characterization of such property is based on the 
predominant use of such property during the taxable year in which it is 
placed in service.
    (iii) Regulated rates. A taxpayer's rates are ``regulated'' if they 
are established or approved on a rate-of-return basis. Rates regulated 
on a rate-of-return basis are an authorization to collect revenues that 
cover the taxpayer's cost of providing goods or services, including a 
fair return on the taxpayer's investment in providing such goods or 
services, where the taxpayer's costs and investment are determined by 
use of a uniform system of accounts prescribed by the regulatory body. A 
taxpayer's rates are not ``regulated'' if they are established or 
approved on the basis of maintaining competition within an industry, 
insuring adequate service to customers of an industry, or charging 
``reasonable'' rates within an industry since the taxpayer is not 
authorized to collect revenues based on the taxpayer's cost of providing 
goods or services. Rates are considered to have been ``established or 
approved'' if a schedule of rates is filed with a regulatory body that 
has the power to approve such rates, even though the regulatory body 
takes no action on the filed schedule or generally leaves undisturbed 
rates filed by the taxpayer.
    (iv) Nonregulated communication property. ``Nonregulated 
communication property'' is property that is clearly the same type of 
property (and is used by the taxpayer predominantly for the same type of 
communication purposes) as communication property, but it is used by the 
taxpayer predominantly in a trade or business that is not a public 
utility activity. For purposes of this paragraph (g)(2)(iv), of this 
section, communication property is property ordinarily used for 
communication purposes by persons who provide regulated telephone or 
microwave communication services described in section 46(c)(3)(B)(iii). 
The determination of whether property is clearly of this same type and 
is used predominantly for these same communication purposes as 
communication property is made on the basis of the facts and 
circumstances of each particular case, including the current state of 
technology in the communications industry and the range and type of 
services permitted or required to be provided by the regulated telephone 
and microwave communication industry. As of 1978, wires or cables used 
predominantly to distribute to subscribers the signals of one or more 
television broadcast stations or cablecast stations (such as in a CATV 
system) are not used for the same type of communication purposes as 
communication property. Communication property includes microwave 
transmission equipment, private communication equipment (other than land 
mobile radio equipment for which the operator must obtain a license from 
the Federal Communications Commission), private switchboard (PBX) 
equipment, communications terminal equipment connected to telephone 
networks, data transmission equipment, and communications satellites. 
Communication property does not include (as of 1978) computer terminals 
or facsimile reproduction equipment that is connected to telephone lines 
to transmit data. It also does not include office furniture stands for 
communication property,

[[Page 209]]

tools, repair vehicles, and similar property, even if such property is 
exclusively used in providing regulated telephone or microwave 
communication services.
    (3) Leased property. Public utility property includes property which 
is leased to others by a taxpayer where the leasing of such property is 
part of the lessor's public utility activity. Thus, such leased property 
is public utility property even though the lessee uses such property in 
an activity which is not a public utility activity, and whether or not 
the lessor of such property makes a valid election under Sec. 1.48-4 to 
treat the lessee as having purchased such property for purposes of the 
credit allowed by section 38. Property leased by a lessor, where the 
leasing is not part of a public utility activity, to a lessee who uses 
such property predominantly in a public utility activity is public 
utility property for purposes of computing the lessor's or lessee's 
qualified investment with respect to such property.
    (4) Property used in both the production or transmission of gas and 
the local distribution of gas. (i) With respect to properties of a 
taxpayer engaged in both the production or transmission of gas and the 
local distribution of gas, section 38 property shall be considered as 
used predominantly in the trade or business of the furnishing or sale of 
gas through a local distribution system if expenditures for such 
property are chargeable to any of the following accounts under either 
the uniform system of accounts prescribed for natural gas companies 
(class A and class B) by the Federal Power Commission, effective January 
1, 1961, or the uniform system of accounts for class A and B gas 
utilities adopted in 1958 by the National Association of Railroad and 
Utility Commissioners (or would be chargeable to any of the following 
accounts if the taxpayer used either of such systems):
    (a) Accounts 360 through 363, inclusive (Local Storage Plant), or
    (b) Accounts 374 through 387, inclusive (Distribution Plant).
    (ii) If expenditures for section 38 property are chargeable (or 
would be chargeable) to any of the following accounts under either of 
the systems named in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, the 
determination of whether or not such property is used predominantly in 
the trade or business of the furnishing or sale of gas through a local 
distribution system shall be made under all the facts and circumstances 
relating to the actual use of such property in the year such property is 
placed in service:
    (a) Accounts 304 through 320, inclusive (Manufactured Gas Production 
Plant), or
    (b) Accounts 389 through 399, inclusive (General Plant).

For example, if an office machine is used 55 percent of the time for 
billing customers of the taxpayer's local distribution system in the 
year in which it is placed in service, such office machine shall be 
considered as used predominantly in the trade or business of the 
furnishing or sale of gas through a local distribution system.
    (5) Certain submarine cable property.  In the case of any interest 
in a submarine cable circuit which is property described in section 50 
used to furnish telegraph service between the United States and a point 
outside the United States of a taxpayer engaged in furnishing 
international telegraph service (if the rates for such furnishing have 
been established or approved by a governmental unit, agency, 
instrumentality, commission, or similar body described in subparagraph 
(2) of this paragraph), the qualified investment shall not exceed the 
qualified investment attributable to so much of the interest of the 
taxpayer in the circuit as does not exceed 50 percent of all interests 
in the circuit.
    (h) Certain replacement property. (1)(i) If section 38 property is 
placed in service by the taxpayer to replace property (whether or not 
section 38 property) similar or related in service or use, which was 
destroyed or damaged before August 16, 1971, by fire, storm, shipwreck, 
or other casualty, or was stolen before such date, then for purposes of 
paragraph (a) of this section the basis (or cost) of the replacement 
section 38 property otherwise determined under paragraph (c) of this 
section shall be reduced by an amount equal to the lesser of--

[[Page 210]]

    (a) The amount of money, or the fair market value of other property, 
received as compensation, by insurance or otherwise, for the property 
which was destroyed, damaged, or stolen, or
    (b) The adjusted basis of such destroyed, damaged, or stolen 
property (immediately before such destruction, damage, or theft).
    (ii) For purposes of subdivision (i) of this subparagraph--
    (a) Section 38 property placed in service after the due date 
(including extensions of time thereof) for filing the taxpayer's income 
tax return for the taxable year in which the other property was 
destroyed, damaged, or stolen shall not be considered as replacement 
section 38 property, and
    (b) If the property which is destroyed, damaged, or stolen, is 
leased property, no other leased property shall be considered as 
replacement property with respect to the property destroyed, damaged, or 
stolen, in any case in which the lessor makes or made an election under 
section 48(d) (relating to election with respect to certain leased 
property) with respect to either the property destroyed, damaged, or 
stolen, the other leased property, or both.
    (2) Subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall not apply to 
replacement property if the reduction, under such subparagraph (1), in 
the basis (or cost) of such replacement property is less than the excess 
of--
    (i) The qualified investment with respect to the destroyed, damaged, 
or stolen property, over
    (ii) The recomputed qualified investment with respect to such 
property (determined under the principles of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-
1).
    (3) This paragraph may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. (i) A acquired and placed in service on January 1, 1962, 
machine No. 1, which qualified as section 38 property, with a basis of 
$30,000 and an estimated useful life of 6 years. The amount of qualified 
investment with respect to such machine was $20,000. On January 2, 1963, 
machine No. 1 is completely destroyed by fire. On January 1, 1963, the 
adjusted basis of such machine in A's hands is $24,500. On November 1, 
1963, A receives $23,000 in insurance proceeds as compensation for the 
destroyed machine, and on December 15, 1963, A acquires and places in 
service machine No. 2, which qualifies as section 38 property, with a 
basis of $41,000 and an estimated useful life of 6 years to replace 
machine No. 1.
    (ii) Under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, the $41,000 basis of 
machine No. 2 is reduced, for purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, 
by $23,000 (that is, the $23,000 insurance proceeds since such amount is 
less than the $24,500 adjusted basis of machine No. 1 immediately before 
it was destroyed) to $18,000 since such reduction (that is, $23,000) is 
greater than the $20,000 reduction in qualified investment which would 
be made if paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 were to apply to machine No. 1 
($20,000 qualified investment less zero recomputed qualified 
investment).

    Example 2. (i) The facts are the same as in Example 1 except that on 
November 1, 1963, A receives only $19,000 in insurance proceeds as 
compensation for the destroyed machine.
    (ii) The $41,000 basis of machine No. 2 is not reduced, for purposes 
of paragraph (a) of this section, under this paragraph since the $19,000 
reduction which would have been made under this paragraph had it applied 
(that is, the $19,000 insurance proceeds since such amount is less than 
the $24,500 adjusted basis of machine No. 1 immediately before it was 
destroyed) is less than the $20,000 reduction in qualified investment 
which is made since paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 applies to machine No. 
1 ($20,000 qualified investment less zero recomputed qualified 
investment).

(Secs. 194 (94 Stat. 1989; 26 U.S.C. 194) and 7805 (68A Stat. 917, 26 
U.S.C. 7805) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; secs. 38(b) (76 Stat. 
963, 26 U.S.C. 38(b)), 48(l)(16) (94 Stat. 264, 26 U.S.C. 48(l)(16)), 
and 7805 (68A Stat. 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805)

[T.D. 6731, 29 FR 6068, May 8, 1964, as amended by T.D. 6931, 32 FR 
14026, Oct. 10, 1967; T.D. 7203, 37 FR 17125, Aug. 25, 1972; T.D. 7602, 
44 FR 17667, Mar. 23, 1979; T.D. 7927, 48 FR 55849, Dec. 16, 1983; T.D. 
7982, 49 FR 39541, Oct. 9, 1984; T.D. 8183, 53 FR 6618, Mar. 2, 1988; 
T.D. 8474, 58 FR 25557, Apr. 27, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 1.46-4   Limitations with respect to certain persons.

    (a) Mutual savings institutions. In the case of an organization to 
which section 593 applies (that is, a mutual savings bank, a cooperative 
bank, or a domestic building and loan association)--
    (1) The qualified investment with respect to each section 38 
property shall be 50 percent of the amount otherwise determined under 
Sec. 1.46-3, and
    (2) The $25,000 amount specified in section 46(a)(2), relating to 
limitation based on amount of tax, shall be reduced by 50 percent of 
such amount.


[[Page 211]]


For example, if a domestic building and loan association places in 
service on January 1, 1963, new section 38 property with a basis of 
$30,000 and an estimated useful life of 6 years, its qualified 
investment for 1963 with respect to such property computed under 
Sec. 1.46-3 is $20,000 (66\2/3\ percent of $30,000). However, under this 
paragraph such amount is reduced to $10,000 (50 percent of $20,000). If 
an organization to which section 593 applies is a member of an 
affiliated group (as defined in section 46(a)(5)), the $25,000 amount 
specified in section 46(a)(2) shall be reduced in accordance with the 
provisions of paragraph (f) of Sec. 1.46-1 before such amount is further 
reduced under this paragraph.
    (b) Regulated investment companies and real estate investment 
trusts. (1) In the case of a regulated investment company or a real 
estate investment trust subject to taxation under subchapter M, chapter 
1 of the Code--
    (i) The qualified investment with respect to each section 38 
property otherwise determined under Sec. 1.46-3, and
    (ii) The $25,000 amount specified in section 46(a)(2), relating to 
limitation based on amount of tax,

shall be reduced to such person's ratable share of each such amount. If 
a regulated investment company or a real estate investment trust is a 
member of an affiliated group (as defined in section 46(a)(5)), the 
$25,000 amount specified in section 46(a)(2) shall be reduced in 
accordance with the provisions of paragraph (f) of Sec. 1.46-1 before 
such amount is further reduced under this paragraph.
    (2) A person's ratable share of the amount described in subparagraph 
(1)(i) and the amount described in subparagraph (1)(ii) of this 
paragraph shall be the ratio which--
    (i) Taxable income for the taxable year, bears to
    (ii) Taxable income for the taxable year plus the amount of the 
deduction for dividends paid taken into account under section 
852(b)(2)(D) in computing investment company taxable income, or under 
section 857(b)(2)(B) (section 857(b)(2)(C), as then in effect, for 
taxable years ending before October 5, 1976) in computing real estate 
investment trust taxable income, as the case may be.

For purposes of the preceding sentence, taxable income means, in the 
case of a regulated investment company its investment company taxable 
income (within the meaning of section 852(b)(2)), and in the case of a 
real estate investment trust its real estate investment trust taxable 
income (within the meaning of section 857(b)(2)). In the case of a 
taxable year ending after October 4, 1976, real estate investment trust 
taxable income, for purposes of section 46(e) and this paragraph, is 
determined by excluding any net capital gain, and by computing the 
deduction for dividends paid without regard to capital gains dividends 
(as defined in section 857(b)(3)(C)). The amount of the deduction for 
dividends paid includes the amount of deficiency dividends (other than 
capital gains deficiency dividends) taken into account in computing 
investment company taxable income or real estate investment trust 
taxable income for the taxable year. See section 860(f) for the 
definition of deficiency dividends. For purposes of this paragraph only, 
in computing taxable income for a taxable year beginning before January 
1, 1964, a regulated investment company or a real estate investment 
trust may compute depreciation deductions with respect to section 38 
property placed in service before January 1, 1964, without regard to the 
reduction in basis of such property required under Sec. 1.48-7.
    (3) This paragraph may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. (i) Corporation X, a regulated investment company subject 
to taxation under section 852 of the Code which makes its return on the 
basis of the calendar year, places in service on January 1, 1964, 
section 38 property with a basis of $30,000 and an estimated useful life 
of 6 years. Corporation X's investment company taxable income under 
section 852(b)(2) is $10,000 after taking into account a deduction for 
dividends paid of $90,000.
    (ii) Under this paragraph, corporation X's qualified investment for 
the taxable year 1964 with respect to such property is $2,000, computed 
as follows: (a) $20,000 (qualified investment under Sec. 1.46-3), 
multiplied by (b) $10,000 (taxable income), divided by (c) $100,000 
(taxable income plus the deduction for dividends paid). For 1964, the 
$25,000

[[Page 212]]

amount specified in section 46(a)(2) is reduced to $2,500.

    (c) Cooperatives. (1) In the case of a cooperative organization 
described in section 1381(a)--
    (i) The qualified investment with respect to each section 38 
property otherwise determined under Sec. 1.46-3, and
    (ii) The $25,000 amount specified in section 46(a)(2), relating to 
limitation based on amount of tax,

shall be reduced to such cooperative's ratable share of each such 
amount. If a cooperative organization described in section 1381(a) is a 
member of an affiliated group (as defined in section 46(a)(5)), the 
$25,000 amount specified in section 46(a)(2) shall be reduced in 
accordance with the provisions of paragraph (f) of Sec. 1.46-1 before 
such amount is further reduced under this paragraph.
    (2) A cooperative's ratable share of the amount described in 
subparagraph (1)(i) and the amount described in subparagraph (1)(ii) of 
this paragraph shall be the ratio which--
    (i) Taxable income for the taxable year, bears to
    (ii) Taxable income for the taxable year plus the sum of (a) the 
amount of the deductions allowed under section 1382(b), (b) the amount 
of the deductions allowed under section 1382(c), and (c) amounts similar 
to the amounts described in (a) and (b) of this subdivision the tax 
treatment of which is determined without regard to subchapter T, chapter 
1 of the Code and the regulations thereunder.

Amounts similar to deductions allowed under section 1382 (b) or (c) are, 
for example, in the case of a taxable year of a cooperative organization 
beginning before January 1, 1963, the amount of patronage dividends 
which are excluded or deducted and any nonpatronage distributions which 
are deducted under section 522(b)(1). In the case of a taxable year of a 
cooperative organization beginning after December 31, 1962, such amounts 
are the amount of patronage dividends and nonpatronage distributions 
which are excluded or deducted without regard to section 1382 (b) or (c) 
because they are paid with respect to patronage occurring before 1963. 
For purposes of this paragraph only, in computing taxable income for a 
taxable year beginning before January 1, 1964, a cooperative may compute 
depreciation deductions with respect to section 38 property placed in 
service before January 1, 1964, without regard to the reduction in basis 
of such property required under Sec. 1.48-7.
    (3) This paragraph may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. (i) Cooperative X, an organization described in section 
1381(a) which makes its return on the basis of the calendar year, places 
in service on January 1, 1964, section 38 property with a basis of 
$30,000 and an estimated useful life of 6 years. Cooperative X's taxable 
income is $10,000 after taking into account deductions of $20,000 
allowed under section 1382(b), deductions of $60,000 allowed under 
section 1382(c), and deductions of $10,000 allowed under section 
522(b)(1)(B).
    (ii) Under this paragraph, cooperative X's qualified investment for 
the taxable year 1964 with respect to such property is $2,000, computed 
as follows: (a) $20,000 (qualified investment under Sec. 1.46-3), 
multiplied by (b) $10,000 (taxable income), divided by (c) $100,000 
(taxable income plus the sum of the deductions allowed under sections 
1382(b), 1382(c), and 522(b)(1)(B)). For 1964, the $25,000 amount 
specified in section 46(a)(2) is reduced to $2,500.

    (d) Noncorporate lessors. (1) In the case of a lease entered into 
after September 22, 1971, a credit is allowed under section 38 to a 
noncorporate lessor of property with respect to the leased property only 
if--
    (i) Such property has been manufactured or produced by the lessor in 
the ordinary course of his business, or
    (ii) The term of the lease (taking into account any options to 
renew) is less than 50 percent of the estimated useful life of the 
property (determined under Sec. 1.46-3(e)), and for the period 
consisting of the first 12 months after the date on which the property 
is transferred to the lessee the sum of the deductions with respect to 
such property which are allowable to the lessor solely by reason of 
section 162 (other than rents and reimbursed amounts with respect to 
such property) exceeds 15 percent of the rental income produced by such 
property.

In the case of property of which a partnership is the lessor, the credit 
otherwise allowable under section 38 with respect to such property to 
any partner

[[Page 213]]

which is a corporation shall be allowed notwithstanding the first 
sentence of this subparagraph. For purposes of this subparagraph, an 
electing small business corporation (as defined in section 1371) shall 
be treated as a person which is not a corporation. This paragraph shall 
not apply to property used by the taxpayer in his trade or business 
(other than the leasing of property) for a period of at least 24 months 
preceding the day on which any lease of such property is entered into.
    (2) For purposes of subparagraph (1)(ii) of this paragraph, if at 
the time the lessor files his income tax return for the taxable year in 
which the property is placed in service, the lessor is unable to show 
that the more-than-15-percent test has been satisfied, then no credit 
may be claimed by the lessor on such return with respect to such 
property unless (i) taking into account the lessor's obligations under 
the lease it is reasonable to believe that the more-than-15-percent test 
will be satisfied, and (ii) the lessor files a statement with his return 
from which it may be determined that he expects to satisfy the more-
than-15-percent test. If the more-than-15-percent test is not satisfied 
with respect to the property, the taxpayer must file an amended return 
for the year in which the property is placed in service.
    (3)(i) The more-than-15-percent test described in subparagraph 
(1)(ii) of this paragraph is based on the relationship of the expenses 
of the lessor relating to or attributable to the property to the gross 
income from rents of the taxpayer produced by the property. The test is 
applied with respect to such expenses and gross income as are properly 
attributable to the period consisting of the first 12 months after the 
date on which the property is transferred to the lessee. When more than 
one property is subject to a single lease and, pursuant to subparagraph 
(4) of this paragraph, the arrangement is considered to be a separate 
lease of each property, the test is applied separately to each such 
lease by making an apportionment of the payments received and expenses 
incurred with respect to each such property, considering all relevant 
factors. Such apportionment is made in accordance with any reasonable 
method selected and consistently applied by the taxpayer. For example, 
under subparagraph (4) of this paragraph, where a taxpayer leases an 
airplane which he owns to an airline along with a baggage truck, he is 
treated as having made two separate leases, one covering the airplane 
and one covering the baggage truck. Thus, the test will be applied by 
apportioning the related income and expenses between the two leases. 
Similarly, where a taxpayer leases a factory building erected by him 
containing section 38 property (machinery and equipment), the test will 
be applied to the taxpayer as though he had leased (to the lessee) the 
building and the section 38 property separately. Thus, the rental income 
and expenses are apportioned between the building and the section 38 
property.
    (ii) Only those deductions allowable solely by reason of section 162 
are taken into account in applying the more-than-15-percent test. Hence, 
depreciation allowable by reason of section 167 (including amortization 
allowable in lieu of depreciation); interest allowable by reason of 
section 163; taxes allowable by reason of section 164; and depletion 
allowable by reason of section 611 are examples of deductions which are 
not taken into account in applying the test. Moreover, rents and 
reimbursed amounts paid or payable by the lessor are not taken into 
account notwithstanding that a deduction in respect of such rents or 
reimbursed amounts is allowable solely by reason of section 162. For 
purposes of this paragraph, a reimbursed amount is any expense for which 
the lessee or some other party is obligated to reimburse the lessor. 
Section 162 expenses paid or payable by any person other than the lessor 
are not taken into account unless the lessor is obligated to reimburse 
the person paying the expense. Further, if the lessee is obligated to 
pay to the lessor a charge for services which is separately stated or 
determinable, the expenses incurred by the lessor with respect to those 
services are not taken into account.
    (iii) For purposes of the more-than- 15-percent test, the gross 
income from rents of the lessor produced by the property is the total 
amount which is

[[Page 214]]

payable to the lessor by reason of the lease agreement other than 
reimbursements of section 162 expenses and charges for services which 
are separately stated or determinable. The fact that such amount 
depends, in whole or in part, on the sales or profits of the lessee or 
the performance of significant services by the lessor shall not affect 
the characterization of such amounts as gross income from rents for 
purposes of this paragraph. Gross income from rents also includes any 
taxes imposed on the lessor by local law but which are paid directly by 
the lessee on behalf of the lessor.
    (4) For purposes of determining under this paragraph whether 
property is subject to a lease, the provisions of Sec. 1.57-3(d)(1) 
(relating to definition of a lease) shall apply. If a noncorporate 
lessor enters into two or more successive leases with respect to the 
same or substantially similar items of section 38 property, the terms of 
such leases shall be aggregated and such leases shall be considered one 
lease for the purpose of determining whether the term of such leases is 
less than 50 percent of the estimated useful life of the property 
subject to such leases. Thus, for example, if an individual owns an 
airplane with an estimated useful life of 7 years and enters into three 
successive 3-year leases of such airplane, such leases will be 
considered to be one lease for a term of nine years for the purpose of 
determining whether the term of the lease is less than 3\1/2\ years (50 
percent of the 7-year estimated useful life).
    (5) The requirements of this paragraph shall not apply with respect 
to any property which is treated as section 38 property by reason of 
section 48(a)(1)(E).

(Sec. 860(e) (92 Stat. 2849, 26 U.S.C. 860(e)); sec. 860(g) (92 Stat. 
2850, 26 U.S.C. 860(g)); and sec. 7805 (68A Stat. 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805))

[T.D. 6731, 29 FR 6071, May 8, 1964, as amended by T.D. 6958, 33 FR 
9170, June 21, 1968; T.D. 7203, 37 FR 17126, Aug. 25, 1972; T.D. 7767, 
46 FR 11262, Feb. 6, 1981; T.D. 7936, 49 FR 2105, Jan. 18, 1984; T.D. 
8031, 50 FR 26697, June 28, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.46-5  Qualified progress expenditures.

    (a) Effective date. This section applies to taxable years ending 
after December 31, 1974. This section reflects amendments to the 
Internal Revenue Code made only by the Tax Reduction Act of 1975, the 
Tax Reform Act of 1976, and the Revenue Act of 1978.
    (b) General rule. Under section 46(d), a taxpayer may elect to take 
the investment credit for qualified progress expenditures (as defined in 
paragraph (g) of this section). In general, qualified progress 
expenditures are amounts paid (paid or incurred in the case of self-
constructed property) for construction of progress expenditure property. 
The taxpayer must reasonably estimate that the property will take at 
least 2 years to construct and that the useful life of the property will 
be 7 years or more. Qualified progress expenditures may not be taken 
into account if made before the later of January 22, 1975, or the first 
taxable year to which an election under section 46(d) applies. In 
general, qualified progress expenditures are not allowed for the year 
property is placed in service, nor for the first year or any subsequent 
year recapture is required under section 47(a)(3). There is a percentage 
limitation on qualified progress expenditures for taxable years 
beginning before January 1, 1980. For a special rule relating to 
transfers of progress expenditure property, see paragraph (r) of this 
section.
    (c) Reduction of qualified investment. Under section 46(c)(4), a 
taxpayer must reduce qualified investment for the year property is 
placed in service by qualified progress expenditures taken into account 
by that person or a predecessor. A ``predecessor'' of a taxpayer is a 
person whose election under section 46(d) carries over to the taxpayer 
under paragraph (o)(3) of this section.
    (d) Progress expenditure property. Progress expenditure property is 
property constructed by or for the taxpayer, with a normal construction 
period of 2 years or more. The taxpayer must reasonably believe that the 
property will be new section 38 property with a useful life of 7 years 
or more

[[Page 215]]

when placed in service. Whether property is progress expenditure 
property is determined on the basis of facts know at the close of the 
taxable year of the taxpayer in which construction begins (or, if later, 
at the close of the first taxable year to which an election under 
section 46(d) applies). For purposes of this paragraph (d), property is 
constructed by or for the taxpayer only if it is built or manufactured 
from materials and component parts. Accordingly, progress expenditure 
property does not include property such as orchards, vineyards, 
livestock, or motion picture films or videotapes.
    (e) Normal construction period--(1) In general. (i) The normal 
construction period is the period the taxpayer reasonably expects will 
be required to construct the property. The period begins on the date 
physical work on construction of the property commences and ends on the 
date the property is available to be placed in service. The normal 
construction period does not include, however, construction before 
January 22, 1975, nor construction before the first day of the first 
taxable year for which an election under section 46(d) is in effect. 
Physical work on construction of property does not include preliminary 
activities such as planning, designing, preparing blueprints, exploring, 
or securing financing.
    (ii) The determination of the time when physical work on 
construction commences is based on the facts and circumstances of each 
case. Physical work on construction of property may include the physical 
work done by a subcontractor on a component specifically designated as 
part of the property. Also, the commencement of physical work on 
construction may occur at a site different from the main site of 
construction of the property. For example, if a shipyard orders a 
turbine before it begins work on building a ship, the normal 
construction period of the ship is measured from the time the 
subcontractor commences physical work on construction of the turbine (if 
it is normal for such work to precede the work of the main contractor).
    (iii) Generally, physical work on construction does not include 
physical activity that is not necessary to complete construction of the 
property, nor does it include physical work on construction of a 
building or other property that will not be new section 38 property when 
placed in service. Physical work on construction also does not include 
research and development activities in a laboratory or experimental 
setting.
    (iv) The normal construction period of property ends on the date it 
is expected the property will be available to be placed in service. 
Property is considered available to be placed in service when 
construction is completed and the property is available for delivery to 
the site of its assigned function. It is not necessary that property be 
in a state of readiness for a specifically assigned function. Nor is it 
necessary that it actually be delivered to the site of its assigned 
function.
    (2) Estimates. Taxpayers should refer to normal industry practice in 
estimating the normal construction period of particular items. A 
different period may be used if special circumstances exist making it 
impractical to make the estimate on the basis of normal industry 
practice. The estimate must be based on information available at the 
close of the taxable year in which physical work on construction of the 
property begins, or, if later, at the close of the first taxable year 
for which an election under section 46(d) is in effect for the taxpayer. 
If the estimate is reasonable when made, the actual time it takes to 
complete the work is, in general, irrelevant in determining whether 
property is progress expenditure property. However, if there is a 
significant error in estimating the normal construction period, it may 
be evidence that the estimate was unreasonable when made. For taxable 
years ending after April 1, 1988, a taxpayer not relying or normal 
industry practice to estimate the normal construction period of 
particular property must attach to the tax return for the taxable year 
in which physical work on construction of the property begins (or, if 
later, the first taxable year for which an election under section 46(d) 
is in effect) a statement of the basis relied upon in estimating the 
normal construction period of the property.

[[Page 216]]

    (3) Integrated unit. (i) In determining whether property has a 
normal construction period of 2 years or more, property that will be 
placed in service separately is to be considered separately. For 
example, if two ships are contracted for at the same time, each ship is 
considered separately under this paragraph. However, for property that 
will be placed in service as an integrated unit, the taxpayer must 
determine the normal construction period of the integrated unit. If the 
normal construction period of the integrated unit is 2 years or more, 
the normal construction period of each item of new section 38 property 
that is a part of the integrated unit is considered to be 2 years or 
more. Thus, the normal construction period of an integrated unit may be 
2 years or more even if no part of the unit has a normal construction 
period of 2 years or more.
    (ii) Property is part of an integrated unit only if the operation of 
that item is essential to the performance of the function to which the 
unit is assigned. Property essential to the performance of the function 
to which the unit is assigned includes property the use of which is 
significantly connected to that function and which effects the safe, 
proper, or efficient performance of the unit. Generally, property must 
be placed in service at the same time to be considered part of the same 
integrated unit. Properties are not an integrated unit, however, solely 
because they are to be placed in service at the same time.
    (iii) The normal construction period for an integrated unit begins 
on the date the normal construction period of the first item of new 
section 38 property that is part of the unit begins. It is not necessary 
that physical work commence at the main construction site of the 
integrated unit.

The period ends on the date the last item of new section 38 property 
that is part of that unit is available to be placed in service. Property 
that is not new section 38 property, such as a building, is not 
considered part of an integrated unit for purposes of determining the 
normal construction period of that unit. For example, if a manufacturing 
plant has a normal construction period of two years or more but the 
equipment (i.e., new section 38 property) to be installed in the plant 
has a normal construction period of less than two years, the plant and 
the equipment do not constitute an integrated unit with a construction 
period of two years or more and the equipment is not progress 
expenditure property.
    (4) Examples. The following examples illustrate this paragraph (e).

    Example 1. On July 1, 1974, corporation X begins physical work on 
construction of a machine with an estimated useful life when placed in 
service of more than 7 years. For its taxable year ending June 30, 1975, 
X makes an election under section 46(d). For purposes of determining on 
June 30, 1975, whether the machine is ``progress expenditure property'', 
the normal construction period is treated as having begun on January 22, 
1975. Thus, the machine will be considered to be progress expenditure 
property on June 30, 1975, only if the estimated time required to 
complete construction after June 30 is at least 18 months and 22 days 
(i.e., 2 years less the period January 22, 1975, through June 30, 1975).

    Example 2. (i) Corporation X constructs a pipeline in two sections 
and simultaneously begins physical work on construction of each section 
on January 1, 1976. One section extends from city M to city N. The other 
extends from city N to city O. Oil will be transferred to storage tanks 
at both city N and city O. Corporation X also begins construction on 
January 1, 1976, of a pumping station necessary to the operation of the 
pipeline from city M to city N. Construction of a pumping station 
necessary to the operation of the pipeline from city N to city O begins 
on June 30, 1977. For 1976, corporation X makes an election under 
section 46(d).
    (ii) The section of pipeline from city M to city N and the 
associated pumping station will be available to be placed in service on 
January 1, 1977. Construction of the section of the pipeline from city N 
to city O will be completed on June 30, 1977. However, that section of 
the pipeline will not be available to be placed in service until 
completion of the associated pumping station on January 1, 1978.
    (iii) The section of pipeline from city M to city N and the section 
from city N to city O must be considered separately in determining the 
normal construction period of the property. Each section will be placed 
in service separately. However, each section of the pipeline and the 
associated pumping station may be considered an integrated unit. The 
pumping stations are essential to the operation of each section of 
pipeline. Each section of pipeline and the associated pumping

[[Page 217]]

station are placed in service at the same time.
    (iv) The section of pipeline from city M to city N and the 
associated pumping station are not progress expenditure property, 
because the normal construction period of that unit is only 1 year 
(January 1, 1976 to January 1, 1977).
    (v) The section of pipeline from city N to city O and the associated 
pumping station are progress expenditure property, because the normal 
construction of that integrated unit is 2 years (January 1, 1976 to 
January 1, 1978). It is immaterial that neither the construction period 
of that section of pipeline (January 1, 1976 to June 30, 1977) nor the 
construction period of the associated pumping station (June 30, 1977 to 
January 1, 1978) is 2 years.
    (vi) Assume the pumping station associated with the pipeline from 
city N to city O includes backup pumping equipment that will be used 
only if the primary pumping equipment fails. The backup equipment is 
part of the integrated unit because it serves to effect the safe or 
efficient performance of the unit.

    (f) New section 38 property with a 7-year useful life--(1) In 
general. The taxpayer must determine if property will be new section 38 
property with a useful life of 7 years or more when placed in service. 
The determination must be made at the close of the taxable year in which 
construction begins or, if later, at the close of the first taxable year 
to which an election under section 46(d) applies for the taxpayer.
    (2) Determination based on reasonably expected use. The 
determination of whether property will be ``new section 38 property'' 
(within the meaning of Secs. 1.48-1 and 1.48-2 when placed in service 
must be based on the reasonably expected use of the property by the 
taxpayer. There is a presumption that property will be new section 38 
property if it would be new section 38 property if placed in service by 
the taxpayer when the determination is made. For example, in determining 
if property is an integral part of manufacturing under section 
48(a)(1)(B)(i), it will be presumed that property will be new section 38 
property if the taxpayer is engaged in manufacturing when the 
determination is made. Also, significant steps taken to establish a 
trade or business will be evidence the taxpayer will be engaged in that 
trade or business when the property is placed in service.
    (3) Estimated useful life. The determination of whether property 
will have an estimated useful life of 7 years or more when placed in 
service must be made by applying the principles of Sec. 1.46-3(e). If 
the estimated useful life is less than 7 years when the property is 
actually placed in service, the credit previously allowed under section 
46(d) must be recomputed under section 47(a)(3)(B).
    (g) Definition of qualified progress expenditures--(1) In general. A 
taxpayer's qualified progress expenditures are the sum of qualified 
progress expenditures for self-constructed property (determined under 
paragraph (h) of this section), plus qualified progress expenditures for 
non-self-constructed property (determined under paragraph (j) of this 
section). Only amounts includible under Sec. 1.46-3(c) in the basis of 
new section 38 property may be considered as qualified progress 
expenditures.
    (2) Excluded amounts. Qualified progress expenditures do not 
include:
    (i) In the case of non-self-constructed property, amounts incurred 
(whether or not paid)--
    (A) Before the normal construction period begins, or
    (B) Before the later of January 22, 1975, or the first day of the 
first taxable year for which an election under section 46(d) applies for 
the taxpayer;
    (ii) In the case of self-constructed property, amounts chargeable to 
capital account--
    (A) Before the normal construction period begins, or
    (B) Before the later of January 22, 1975, or the first day of the 
first taxable year for which an election under section 46(d) applies for 
the taxpayer,

(See, however, section 46(d)(4)(A) and paragraph (h)(3)(i) of this 
section, relating to the time when amounts for component parts and 
materials are properly chargeable to capital account);
    (iii) Expenditures with respect to particular property in the 
earlier of--
    (A) The taxable year in which the property is placed in service, or
    (B) The taxable year in which the taxpayer must recapture investment 
credit under section 47(a)(3) for the property or any subsequent year;

[[Page 218]]

    (iv) Expenditures for construction, reconstruction, or erection of 
property that is not section 38 property; or
    (v) Amounts treated as an expense and deducted in the year paid or 
accrued.
    (h) Qualified progress expenditures for self-constructed property--
(1) In general. Qualified progress expenditures for self-constructed 
property (as defined in paragraph (k) of this section) are amounts 
properly chargeable to capital account in connection with that property. 
In general, amounts paid or incurred are chargeable to capital account 
if under the taxpayer's method of accounting they are properly 
includible in computing basis under Sec. 1.46-3. Qualified progress 
expenditures for self-constructed property include both direct costs 
(e.g., labor, material, parts) and indirect costs (e.g., overhead, 
insurance) associated with construction of property to the extent those 
costs are properly chargeable to capital account.
    (2) Property partially non-self constructed. If an item of property 
is self-constructed because more than half of the construction 
expenditures are made directly by the taxpayer, then any expenditures 
(whether or not made directly by the taxpayer) for construction of that 
item of property are not subject to the limitations of section 
46(d)(3)(B) and paragraph (j) of this section (relating to actual 
payment and progress in construction).
    (3) Time when amounts paid or incurred are properly chargeable to 
capital account. (i) In general, expenditures for component parts and 
materials to be used in construction of self-constructed property are 
not properly chargeable to capital account until consumed or physically 
attached in the construction process. Component parts and materials that 
have been neither consumed nor physically attached in the construction 
process, but which have been irrevocably allocated to construction of 
that property are properly chargeable to capital account. Component 
parts and materials designed specifically for the self-constructed 
property may be considered irrevocably allocated to construction of that 
property at the time of manufacture of the component parts and 
materials. Component parts and materials not designed specifically for 
the property may be considered irrevocably allocated to construction at 
the time of delivery to the construction site if they would be 
economically impractical to remove. For example, pumps delivered to 
sites of construction of a tundra pipeline may be treated as irrevocably 
allocated to that pipeline on the date of delivery, even if they would 
be usable, but for their location on the tundra, in connection with 
other property. Component parts and materials are not to be considered 
irrevocably allocated to use in self-constructed property until physical 
work on construction of that property has begun (as determined under 
paragraph (e)(1)(ii) of this section). Mere bookkeeping notations are 
not sufficient evidence that the necessary allocation has been made.
    (ii) A taxpayer's procedure for determining the time when an 
expenditure is properly chargeable to capital account for self-
constructed property is a method of accounting. Under section 446(e), 
the method of accounting, once adopted, may not be changed without 
consent of the Secretary.
    (4) Records requirement. The taxpayer shall maintain detailed 
records which permit specific identification of the amounts properly 
chargeable by the taxpayer during each taxable year to capital account 
for each item of self-constructed property.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (j) Qualified progress expenditures for non-self-constructed 
property--(1) In general. Qualified progress expenditures for non-self-
constructed property (as defined in paragraph (l) of this section) are 
amounts actually paid by the taxpayer to another person for construction 
of the property, but only to the extent progress is made in 
construction. For example, such expenditures may include payments to the 
manufacturer of an item of progress expenditure property, payments to a 
contractor building progress expenditure property, or payments for 
engineering designs or blueprints that are drawn up during the normal 
construction period.
    (2) Property partially self-constructed. If an item of property is 
non-self-constructed, but a taxpayer uses its own employees to construct 
a portion of the

[[Page 219]]

property, expenditures for construction of that portion are made 
directly by the taxpayer (see Sec. 1.46-5(h)(1)). Subject to the 
limitations of paragraph (g) of this section, those expenditures are 
qualified progress expenditures for non-self-constructed property if 
they satisfy the requirements of paragraphs (j) (4), (5), and (6) of 
this section. Wages actually paid to the taxpayer's employees are 
presumed to correspond to progress in construction. Other amounts, 
including expenditures for materials, parts, and overhead, must be 
actually paid, not borrowed from the payee, and attributable to progress 
made in construction by the taxpayer.
    (3) Property constructed by more than one person. The percentage of 
completion limitation (as prescribed in paragraph (j)(6) of this 
section), including the presumption of ratable progress in construction, 
applies to an item of progress expenditure property as a whole. However, 
if several manufacturers or contractors do work in connection with the 
same property, the progress that each person makes toward completion of 
construction of the property must be determined separately. Section 
46(d)(3)(B) is then applied separately to amounts paid to each 
manufacturer or contractor based on each person's progress in 
construction. For example, assume the taxpayer contracts with three 
persons to build an item of equipment. The taxpayer contracts with A to 
build the frame, B to build the motor, and C to assemble the frame and 
motor. Assume each contract represents 33\1/3\ percent of the 
construction costs of the property. If, within the taxable year in which 
construction begins, A and B each complete 50 percent of the 
construction of the frame and motor, respectively, amounts paid to A 
during that taxable year not in excess of 16\2/3\ percent of the overall 
cost of the property, and amounts paid to B during that taxable year not 
in excess of 16\2/3\ percent of the overall cost of the property, are 
qualified progress expenditures. Section 46(d)(3)(B) does not apply, 
however, to persons, such as lower-tier subcontractors, that do not have 
a direct contractual relationship with the taxpayer. If, in the above 
example, A engages a subcontractor to construct part of the frame, 
section 46(d)(3)(B) is applied only to amounts paid by the taxpayer to 
A, B, and C, but the portion of construction completed by A during a 
taxable year includes the portion completed by A's subcontractor.
    (4) Requirement of actual payment. Qualified progress expenditures 
for non-self-constructed property must be actually paid and not merely 
incurred. Amounts paid during the taxable year to another person for 
construction of non-self-constructed property may be in the form of 
money or property (e.g., materials). However, property given as payment 
may be considered only to the extent it will be includible under 
Sec. 1.46-3(c) in the basis of the non-self-constructed property when it 
is placed in service.
    (5) Certain borrowing disregarded. Qualified progress expenditures 
for non-self-constructed property do not include any amount paid to 
another person (the ``payee'') for construction if the amount is paid 
out of funds borrowed directly or indirectly from the payee. Amounts 
borrowed directly or indirectly from the payee by any person that is 
related to the taxpayer (within the meaning of section 267) or that is a 
member of the same controlled group of corporations (as defined in 
section 1563(a)) will be considered borrowed indirectly from the payee. 
Similarly, amounts borrowed under any financing arrangement that has the 
effect of making the payee a surety will be considered amounts borrowed 
indirectly by the taxpayer from the payee.
    (6) Percentage of completion limitation. (i) Under section 
46(d)(3)(B)(ii), payments made in any taxable year may be considered 
qualified progress expenditures for non-self-constructed property only 
to the extent they are attributable to progress made in construction 
(percentage of completion limitation). Progress will generally be 
measured in terms of the manufacturer's incurred cost, as a fraction of 
the anticipated cost (as adjusted from year to year). Architectural or 
engineering estimates will be evidence of progress made in construction. 
Cost accounting records also will be evidence of progress. Progress will 
be presumed to occur not more rapidly than ratably

[[Page 220]]

over the normal construction period. However, the taxpayer may rebut the 
presumption by clear and convincing evidence of a greater percentage of 
completion.
    (ii) If, after the first year of construction, there is a change in 
either the total cost to the taxpayer or the total cost of construction 
by another person, the taxpayer must recompute the percentage of 
completion limitation on the basis of revised cost. However, the 
recomputation will affect only amounts allowed as qualified progress 
expenditures in the taxable year in which the change occurs and in 
subsequent taxable years. The recomputation remains subject to the 
presumption of pro rata completion.
    (iii) If, for any taxable year, the amount paid to another person 
for construction of an item of property under section 46(d)(3)(B)(i) 
exceeds the percentage of completion limitation in section 
46(d)(3)(B)(ii), the excess is treated as an amount paid to the other 
person for construction for the succeeding taxable year. If for any 
taxable year the percentage of completion limitation for an item of 
property exceeds the amount paid to another during the taxable year for 
construction, the excess is added to the percentage of completion 
limitation for that property for the succeeding taxable year.
    (iv) The taxpayer must maintain detailed records which permit 
specific identification of the amounts paid to each person for 
construction of each item of property and the percentage of construction 
completed by each person for each taxable year.
    (7) Example. The following example illustrates paragraph (j)(6) of 
this section.

    Example. (i) Corporation X agrees to build an airplane for 
corporation Y, a calendar year taxpayer. The airplane is non-self-
constructed progress expenditure property. Physical work on construction 
begins on January 1, 1980. The normal construction period for the 
airplane is five years and the airplane is delivered and placed in 
service on December 31, 1984.
    (ii) The cost of construction to corporation X is $500,000. The 
contract price is $550,000. Corporation Y makes a $110,000 payment in 
each of the years 1980 and 1981, an $85,000 payment in 1982, a $135,000 
payment in 1983, and a $110,000 payment in 1984.
    (iii) For 1980, corporation Y makes an election under section 46(d). 
Progress is presumed to occur ratably over the 5-year construction 
period, which is 20 percent in each year. Twenty percent of the contract 
price is $110,000. The percentage of completion limitation for each 
year, thus, is $110,000.
    (iv) For each of the years 1980 and 1981, the $110,000 payments may 
be treated as qualified progress expenditures. The payments equal the 
percentage of completion limitation.
    (v) For 1982, the $85,000 payment may be treated as a qualified 
progress expenditure, because it is less than the percentage of 
completion limitation. The excess of the percentage of completion 
limitation ($110,000) over the 1982 payment ($85,000) is added to the 
percentage of completion limitation for 1983. One hundred and ten 
thousand dollars minus $85,000 equals $25,000. Twenty-five thousand 
dollars plus $110,000 equals $135,000, which is the percentage of 
completion limitation for 1983.
    (vi) For 1983, the entire $135,000 payment may be treated as a 
qualified progress expenditure. The payment equals the percentage of 
completion limitation for 1983.
    (vii) For 1984, no qualified progress expenditures may be taken into 
account, because the airplane is placed in service in that year.
    (viii) See example 2 of paragraph (r)(4) of this section for the 
result if Y sells its contract rights to the property on December 31, 
1982.

    (k) Definition of self-constructed property--(1) In general. 
Property is self-constructed property if it is reasonable to believe 
that more than half of the construction expenditures for the property 
will be made directly by the taxpayer. Construction expenditures made 
directly by the taxpayer include direct costs such as wages and 
materials and indirect costs such as overhead attributable to 
construction of the property. Expenditures for direct and indirect costs 
of construction will be treated as construction expenditures made 
directly by the taxpayer only to the extent that the expenditures 
directly benefit the construction of the property by employees of the 
taxpayer. Thus, wages paid to taxpayers's employees and expenditures for 
basic construction materials, such as sheet metal, lumber, glass, and 
nails, which are used by employees of the taxpayer to construct progress 
expenditure property, will be considered made directly by the taxpayer. 
Construction expenditures made by the taxpayer to a contractor or 
manufacturer, in general,

[[Page 221]]

will not be considered made directly by the taxpayer. Thus, the cost of 
component parts, such as boilers and turbines, which are purchased and 
merely installed or assembled by the taxpayer, will not be considered 
expenditures made directly by the taxpayer for construction. (See 
paragraph (h)(3) of this section to determine when such cost is properly 
chargeable to capital account.)
    (2) Time when determination made. The determination of whether 
property is self-constructed is to be made at the close of the taxable 
year in which physical work on construction of the property begins, or, 
if later, the close of the first taxable year to which an election under 
this section applies. Once it is reasonably estimated that more than 
half of construction expenditures will be made directly by the taxpayer, 
the fact the taxpayer actually makes half, or less than half, of the 
expenditures directly will not affect classification of the property as 
self-constructed property. Similarly, once a determination has been 
made, classification of property as self-constructed property is not 
affected by a change in circumstances in a later taxable year. However, 
a significant error unrelated to a change in circumstances may be 
evidence that the estimate was unreasonable when made.
    (3) Determination based on certain expenditures. For purposes of 
determining whether more than half of the expenditures for construction 
of an item of property will be made directly by the taxpayer, the 
taxpayer may take into account only expenditures properly includable by 
the taxpayer in the basis of the property under the provisions of 
Sec. 1.46-3(c). Thus, property is self-constructed property only if more 
than half of the estimated basis of the property to be used for purposes 
of determining the credit allowed by section 38 is attributable to 
expenditures made directly by the taxpayer.
    (l) Definition of non-self-constructed property. Non-self-
constructed property is property that is not self-constructed property. 
Thus, property is non-self-constructed property if it is reasonable to 
believe that only half, or less than half, of the expenditures for 
construction will be made directly by the taxpayer.
    (m) Alternative limitations for public utility, railroad, or airline 
property. The alternative limitations on qualified investment under 
section 46(a) (7) and (8) for public utility, railroad, or airline 
property (whichever applies) apply in determining the credit for 
qualified progress expenditures. The determination of whether progress 
expenditure property will be public utility, railroad, or airline 
property (whichever applies) when placed in service must be made at the 
close of the taxable year in which physical work on construction begins 
or, if later, at the close of the first taxable year for which an 
election under section 46(d) is in effect. If, at that time, the 
taxpayer is in a trade or business as a public utility, railroad, or 
airline (as described in section 46(c)(3)(B) and 46(a)(8) (D) and (E), 
respectively), it is evidence the property will be public utility, 
railroad, or airline property when placed in service.
    (n) Leased property. A lessor of progress expenditure property may 
not elect under section 48(d) to treat a lessee (or a person who will be 
a lessee) as having made qualified progress expenditures.
    (o) Election--(1) In general. The election under section 46(d)(6) to 
increase qualified investment by qualified progress expenditures may be 
made for any taxable year ending after December 31, 1974. Except as 
provided in paragraph (o)(2) of this section, the election is effective 
for the first taxable year for which it is made and for all taxable 
years thereafter unless it is revoked with the consent of the 
Commissioner. Except as provided in paragraphs (o) (2) and (3) of this 
section, the election applies to all qualified progress expenditures 
made by the taypayer during the taxable year for construction of any 
progress expenditure property. Thus, the taxpayer may not make the 
election for one item of progress expenditure property and not for other 
items. If progress expenditure property is being constructed by or for a 
partnership, S corporation (as defined in section 1361(a)), trust, or 
estate, an election under section 46(d)(6) must be made separately by 
each partner or shareholder, or each beneficiary if the

[[Page 222]]

beneficiary, in determining his tax liability, would be allowed 
investment credit under section 38 for property subject to the election. 
The election may not be made by a partnership or S corporation, and may 
be made by a trust or estate only if the trust or estate, in determining 
its tax liability, would be allowed investment credit under section 38 
for property subject to the election. The election of any partner, 
shareholder, beneficiary, trust, or estate will be effective for that 
person, even if a related partner, shareholder, beneficiary, trust, or 
estate does not make the election. An election made by a partner, 
shareholder, beneficiary, trust, or estate applies to all progress 
expenditure property of that person. For example, an election made by 
corporation X, which is a partner in the XYZ partnership, applies to 
progress expenditure property the corporation holds in its own capacity 
and also to its interest in progress expenditure property of the 
partnership.
    (2) Time and manner of making election. An election under section 
46(d)(6) must be made on Form 3468 and filed with the original income 
tax return for the first taxable year ending after December 31, 1974 to 
which the election will apply. An election made before March 2, 1988, by 
filing a written statement (whether or not attached to the income tax 
return) will be considered valid. The election may not be made on an 
amended return filed after the time prescribed for filing the original 
return (including extensions) for that taxable year. However, an 
election under this section may be made or revoked by filing a statement 
with an amended return filed on or before May 31, 1988, if the due date 
for filing a return for the first taxable year to which the election 
applies is before May 31, 1988.
    (3) Carryover of election in certain transactions. In general, and 
election under section 46(d)(6) does not carry over to the transferee of 
progress expenditure property (or an interest therein). However, if 
under section 47(b) the property does not cease to be progress 
expenditure property because of the transfer, the election will carry 
over to the transferee. If so, the election will apply only to the 
property transferred. For rules relating to the determination of 
qualified progress expenditures of the transferee, see paragraph (r) of 
this section.
    (p) Partnerships, S corporations, trusts, or estates--(1) In 
general. Each partner, shareholder, trust, estate, or beneficiary of a 
trust or estate that makes an election under section 46(d) shall take 
into account its share of qualified progress expenditures (determined 
under paragraph (p)(2) of this section) made by the partnership, S 
corporation, trust, or estate. In determining qualified investment for 
the year in which the property is placed in service, the basis of the 
property is apportioned as provided in Secs. 1.46-3(f), 1.48-6, or 1.48-
5 (whichever applies). Each partner, shareholder, trust, estate, or 
beneficiary that made the election must reduce qualified investment 
under section 46(c)(4) for the year the property is placed in service by 
qualified progress expenditures taken into account by that person.
    (2) Determination of share of qualified progress expenditures. The 
share of qualified progress expenditures of each partner, shareholder, 
trust, estate, or beneficiary that makes an election under section 46(d) 
must be determined in accordance with the same ratio used under 
Secs. 1.46-3(f)(2), 1.48-5(a)(1), or 1.48-6(a)(1) (whichever applies) to 
determine its share of basis (or cost). The last sentence of Sec. 1.46-
3(f)(2)(i) must be applied by referring to the date on which qualified 
progress expenditures are paid or chargeable to capital amount 
(whichever is applicable).
    (3) Examples. The followng examples illustrate this paragraph (p).

    Example 1. (i) Corporation X contracts to build a ship for 
partnership AB that qualifies as progress expenditure property. The 
contract price is $100,000. Physical work on construction of the ship 
begins on January 1, 1980. The ship is placed in service on December 31, 
1983.
    (ii) The AB partnership reports income on the calendar year basis. 
Partners A and B share profits equally. For A's taxable year ending 
December 31, 1980, A makes an election under section 46(d) B does not 
make the election.
    (iii) For each of the years 1980, 1981, 1982, and 1983, the AB 
partnership makes $25,000 payments to corporation X. The payments made 
in 1980, 1981, and 1982 are qualified progress expenditures. The 1983 
payment is

[[Page 223]]

not a qualified progress expenditure, because the ship is placed in 
service in that year.
    (iv) For each of the years 1980, 1981, and 1982, A may take into 
account qualified progress expenditures of $12,500 because A had a 50 
percent partnership interest in each of those years.
    (v) For 1983, qualified investment for the ship is $100,000. A and 
B's share are $50,000 each, because each had a 50 percent partnership 
interest in 1983. However, A must reduce its $50,000 share for 1983 by 
$37,500, the amount of qualified progress expenditures taken into 
account by A. B's share is not reduced, because B did not take into 
account qualified progess expenditures.

    Example 2. (i) The facts are the same as in example 1 except that on 
June 30, 1983, the partnership agreement is amended to admit a new 
partner, C. The partners agree to share profits equally. There is no 
special allocation in effect under section 704 with respect to the ship.
    (ii) For each of the years 1980, 1981, and 1982, A may take into 
account qualified progress expenditures of $12,500 because A has a 50 
percent partnership interest in those years.
    (iii) For 1983, A, B, and C's share of qualified investment is 
$33,333 each, because each had a 33\1/3\ percent partnership interest in 
that year. A must reduce its share to zero, because it took $37,500 into 
account as qualified progress expenditures. In addition, the excess of 
the $37,500 over the $33,333 applied as a reduction is subject to 
recapture under section 47(a)(3)(B). B and C's shares are not reduced, 
because neither taxpayer took into account qualified progress 
expenditures.

    (q) Limitation on qualified progress expenditures for taxable years 
beginning before 1980--(1) In general. (i) Under section 46(d)(7), 
qualified progress expenditures for any taxable year beginning before 
January 1, 1980, are limited. The taxpayer must apply the limitation 
under section 46(d)(7) on an item by item basis. In general, the 
taxpayer may take into account the applicable percentage (as determined 
under the table in section 46(d)(7)(A)) of qualified progress 
expenditures for each of those years. In addition, the taxpayer may take 
into account for each of those years 20 percent of qualified investment 
for each of the preceding taxable years determined without applying the 
limitations of section 46(d)(7).
    (ii) The applicable percentage under section 46(d)(7)(A) may be 
applied only for one taxable year that ends within a calendar year in 
determining qualified investment for an item of progress expenditure 
property. For example, calendar year partners of a calendar year 
partnership may increase qualified investment for 1976 by 20 percent of 
qualified progress expenditures made in 1975 for an item of property. If 
the partnership incorporates in 1976 and the taxable year of the 
corporation begins on July 1, 1976, and ends on June 30, 1977, qualified 
investment of the corporation for its taxable year beginning on July 1, 
1976, cannot be increased by 20 percent of the 1975 expenditure.

    (2) Example. The following example illustrates this paragraph (q).

    Example. (i) Corporation X contracts with A on January 1, 1976, to 
build an electric generator that qualifies as non-self-constructed 
progress expenditure property. A will build the generator at a cost of 
$125,000. Corporation X agrees to pay A $150,000. Corporation X reports 
income on the calendar year basis. Corporation X makes an election under 
section 46(d) for 1976. Physical work on construction begins on January 
1, 1976. Corporation X makes payments of $30,000 to A for construction 
of the generator in each of the years 1976, 1977, 1978, 1979, and 1980. 
A incurs a cost of $25,000 in each of those years for construction of 
the property. The property is placed in service in 1980.
    (ii) For 1976, X may increase qualified investment by $12,000, 40 
percent of the payment made in 1976.
    (iii) For 1977, corporation X may increase qualified investment by 
$24,000. Eighteen thousand dollars of that amount is 60 percent of the 
1977 payment. The remaining $6,000 is 20 percent of the $30,000 payment 
made in 1976.
    (iv) For 1978, corporation X may increase qualified investment by 
$36,000. Twenty-four thousand dollars of that amount is 80 percent of 
the 1978 payment. The remaining $12,000 is 20 percent of the $30,000 
payment made in 1976, plus 20 percent of the $30,000 payment made in 
1977.
    (v) For 1979, corporation X may increase qualified investment by 
$48,000. Thirty thousand dollars of that amount is 100 percent of the 
1979 payment. The remaining $18,000 of that amount is 20 percent of the 
$30,000 payments made in each of the years 1976, 1977, and 1978.
    (vi) Qualified investment for corporation X for 1980 is $30,000. The 
$30,000 is the basis (or cost) of the generator ($150,000), reduced by 
qualified progress expenditures allowed with respect to that property 
($120,000).

    (r) Special rules for transferred property--(1) In general. A 
transferee of progress expenditure property (or an interest therein) may 
take into account qualified progress expenditures for the property only 
if--

[[Page 224]]

    (i) The property is progress expenditure property in the hands of 
the transferee, and
    (ii) The transferee makes an election under section 46(d) or the 
election made by the transferor (or its predecessor) carries over to the 
transferee under paragraph (o)(3) of this section.
    (2) Status as progress expenditure property. (i) If the transfer 
requires recapture under section 47(a)(3) and Sec. 1.47-1(g) (or would 
require recapture if the transferor had made an election under section 
46(d)), then--
    (A) For purposes of determining if the property is progress 
expenditure property in the hands of the transferee, the normal 
construction period for the property begins on the date of the transfer, 
or, if later, on the first day of the first taxable year for which the 
transferee makes an election under section 46(d), and
    (B) For purposes of determining whether the property is self-
constructed or non-self-constructed in the hands of the transferee, the 
amount paid or incurred for the transfer of the property will not be 
considered a construction expenditure made directly by the transferee.
    (ii) If the transfer does not require recapture under section 
47(a)(3) and Sec. 1.47-1(g), and the election carries over to the 
taxpayer under paragraph (o)(3) of this section, the property does not 
lose its status as progress expenditure property because of the 
transfer.
    (3) Amount of qualified progress expenditures for transferee. (i) If 
the transfer does not require recapture under section 47(a)(3) and 
Sec. 147-1(g), and the election carries over to the taxpayer under 
paragraph (o)(3) of this section, the transferee must determine its 
qualified progress expenditures--
    (A) By using the same normal construction period used by the 
transferor,
    (B) By treating the property as having the same status as self-
constructed or non-self-constructed as the property had in the hands of 
the transferor, and
    (C) In the case of non-self-constructed property, by taking into 
account any excess described in section 46(d)(4)(C)(i) (relating to the 
excess of payments over the percentage-of-completion limitation) or 
section 46(d)(4)(C)(ii) (relating to the excess of the percentage-of-
completion limitation over the amount of payments) that the transferor 
would have taken into account with respect to that property.
    (ii) If the transfer requires recapture under section 47(a)(3) and 
Sec. 1.47-1(g) (or would require recapture if the transferor had made an 
election under section 46(d)), the amount paid or incurred for the 
transfer will be considered a payment for construction of that property 
to the extent that--
    (A) It is properly includible in the basis of the property under 
Sec. 1.46-3(c),
    (B) The taxpayer can show the amount is attributable to construction 
costs paid or chargeable to capital account by the transferor or other 
person after physical work on construction of the property began, and
    (C) It does not exceed the amount by which the transferor has 
increased qualified investment for qualified progress expenditures 
incurred with respect to the property (or would have increased qualified 
investment but for the ``lesser of'' limitation of section 46(d)(3)(B) 
or the absence of an election under section 46(d)), plus any amount that 
would have been treated as a qualified progress expenditure by the 
transferor had the property not been transferred.

Once the status of the property as self-constructed or non-self-
constructed property in the hands of the transferee has been determined, 
all rules under this section for determining the amount of qualified 
progress expenditures for that type of property apply. For example, if 
the property is non-self-constructed in the hands of the transferee, 
amounts merely incurred (but not paid) for the transfer are not taken 
into account as qualified progress expenditures. Actual payment is 
necessary (see paragraph (j)(3) of this section). In applying section 
46(d)(3)(B)(ii), the amount paid or incurred for the transfer (to the 
extent that it qualifies as a payment for construction under the first 
sentence of this paragraph (r)(3)(ii)) is considered to be part of the 
overall cost to the transferee of construction by another person, and 
the portion of construction which is completed during the taxable

[[Page 225]]

year is determined by taking into account construction that was 
completed before the constructed property was acquired by the 
transferee. If the transferee makes an election under section 46(d) and 
this section for the taxable year in which the transfer occurs, then for 
purposes of applying the presumption in section 46(d)(4)(D) that 
construction is deemed to occur not more rapidly than ratably over the 
normal construction period, the transferee's normal construction period 
is considered to have begun on the date on which physical work on 
construction of the acquired property began.
    (4) Examples. The following examples illustrate this paragraph (r).

    Example 1. Corporation X begins physical work on construction of 
progress expenditure property for corporation Y on January 1, 1976. Y 
accurately estimates a 3-year normal construction period and elects 
under section 46(d) on its return for its taxable year ending December 
31, 1976. On January 1, 1978, Y sells the contract rights for 
construction of the property to corporation Z, which uses a fiscal year 
ending June 30. Qualified progress expenditures allowed to Y in 1976 and 
1977 are subject to recapture under section 47(a)(3). Because Z's normal 
construction period for the property is less than 2 years (January 1, 
1978 to January 1, 1979), the property is not progress expenditure 
property in Z's hands. Z may not elect progress expenditure treatment 
for the property.

    Example 2. (i) Assume the same facts as in the example in paragraph 
(j)(7) of this section, except, on December 31, 1982, Y sells its 
contract rights to the property for $340,000 to corporation Z, which 
also uses the calendar year. Z pays Y the full $340,000 on that date. 
The property is still to be placed in service on December 31, 1984, and 
will not be available for placing in service at an earlier date. Z makes 
payments to X of $135,000 on December 31, 1983, and $110,000 on December 
31, 1984.
    (ii) The investment credit allowed Y in 1980 and 1981 for qualified 
progress expenditures is subject to recapture under section 47(a)(3) and 
Y may not treat its $85,000 payment in 1982 as a qualified progress 
expenditure.
    (iii) For purposes of determining if the airplane is qualified 
progress expenditure property with respect to Z, the normal construction 
period for the property for Z begins on December 31, 1982, the date of 
transfer. Since the remaining construction period is two years, the 
property is progress expenditure property if it otherwise qualifies in 
Z's hands.
    (iv) Only $305,000 of the $340,000 payment to Y can qualify as a 
qualified progress expenditure, because only that amount is attributable 
to construction costs paid by Y and does not exceed the sum of the 
amount by which Y increased qualified investment in 1980 and 1981 for 
qualified progress expenditures ($220,000) and the amount that Y would 
have treated as a qualified progress expenditure in 1982 ($85,000).
    (v) Assume that Z cannot establish that progress in construction has 
been completed more rapidly than ratably. If Z makes an election under 
section 46(d) for 1982, then for purposes of applying the percentage of 
completion limitation, Z's normal construction period is considered to 
begin on January 1, 1980. Progress is presumed to occur ratably over the 
5-year construction period, which is 20 percent in each year.
    (vi) For 1982, Z may treat the full $305,000 as a qualified progress 
expenditure because it is less than the percentage of completion 
limitation, $330,000 ($110,000 a year for 1980, 1981, and 1982).
    (vii) For 1983, Z may treat the entire $135,000 payment as a 
qualified progress expenditure, since it does not exceed the percentage 
of completion limitation for that year, $135,000 ($110,000 plus the 
$25,000 excess from 1982).
    (viii) For Z's taxable year ending December 31, 1984, no qualified 
progress expenditures may be taken into account because the property is 
placed in service during that year.

[T.D. 8183, 53 FR 6618, Mar. 2, 1988; 53 FR 11162, Apr. 5, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 1.46-6  Limitation in case of certain regulated companies.

    (a) In general--(1) Scope of section. This section does not reflect 
amendments made to section 46 after enactment of the Revenue Act of 
1971, other than the redesignation of section 46(e) as section 46(f) by 
the Tax Reduction Act of 1975.
    (2) Disallowance of credit. Under section 46(f), a credit otherwise 
allowable under section 38 (``credit'') will be disallowed in certain 
cases with respect to ``section 46(f) property'' as defined in paragraph 
(b)(1) of this section. Paragraph (f) of this section describes 
circumstances under which a determination put into effect by a 
regulatory body will result in the disallowance of the credit. Such a 
determination will result in a disallowance only if section 46(f) (1) or 
(2) applies to such property and such determination affects the 
taxpayer's cost of service or rate base in a manner inconsistent with 
section 46(f) (1) or (2) (whichever is applicable).

[[Page 226]]

    (3) General rules. The provisions of section 46(f) (1) and (2) are 
limitations on the treatment of the credit for ratemaking purposes and 
for purposes of the taxpayer's regulated books of account only. Under 
the provisions of section 46(f)(1), the credit may not be flowed through 
to income (i.e., used to reduce taxpayer's cost of service) but in 
certain circumstances may be used to reduce rate base (provided that 
such reduction is restored not less rapidly than ratably). If an 
election is made under section 46(f)(2), the credit may be flowed 
through to income (but not more rapidly than ratably) and there may not 
be any reduction in rate base. If an election is made under section 
46(f)(3), none of the limitations of section 46(f) (1) or (2) apply to 
certain section 46(f) property of the taxpayer. Thus, under the 
provisions of section 46(f)(3), no credit is disallowed if the credit is 
treated in any manner for ratemaking purposes, including any manner of 
treatment permitted under the limitations of section 46(f) (1) or (2).
    (4) Elections. For rules relating to the manner of making, on or 
before March 9, 1972, the three elections listed in section 46(f) (1), 
(2), and (3), see 26 CFR 12.3. For rules relating to the application of 
such elections, see paragraph (h) of this section.
    (5) Cross references. For rules with respect to the treatment of 
corporate reorganizations, asset acquisitions, and taxpayers subject to 
the jurisdiction of more than one regulatory body, etc., see paragraph 
(j) of this section.
    (6) Nonapplication of prior law. Under section 105 (e) of the 
Revenue Act of 1971, section 203 (e) of the Revenue Act of 1964, 78 
Stat. 35, does not apply to section 46(f) property.
    (b) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following 
definitions apply:
    (1) Section 46(f) property. ``Section 46(f) property'' is property 
described in section 50 that is--
    (i) Public utility property within the meaning of section 
46(c)(3)(B) (other than nonregulated communication property described in 
Sec. 1.46-3(g)(2)(iv)) or
    (ii) Property used predominantly in the trade or business of the 
furnishing or sale of steam through a local distribution system or of 
the transportation of gas or steam by pipeline, if the rates for the 
trade or business are regulated within the meaning of Sec. 1.46-
3(g)(2)(iii).

For purposes of determining whether property is used predominantly in 
the trade or business of transportation of gas by pipeline (or of 
transportation of gas by pipeline and of furnishing or sale of gas 
through a local distribution system), the rules prescribed in Sec. 1.46-
3(g)(4) apply except that accounts 365 through 371 inclusive 
(Transmission Plant) are added to the accounts listed in Sec. 1.46-
3(g)(4)(i).
    (2) Cost of service. (i)(A) For purposes of this section, ``cost of 
service'' is the amount required by a taxpayer to provide regulated 
goods or services. Cost of service includes operating expenses 
(including salaries, cost of materials, etc.) maintenance expenses, 
depreciation expenses, tax expenses, and interest expenses. For purposes 
of this section, any effect on a taxpayer's permitted return on 
investment that results from a reduction in the taxpayer's rate base 
does not constitute a reduction in cost of service, even though, as a 
technical ratemaking term, ``cost of service'' ordinarily includes a 
permitted return on investment. In addition, taking into account a 
deduction for the additional interest that the taxpayer would pay or 
accrue if the credit were unavailable in determining Federal income tax 
expense (``synchronization of interest'') does not constitute a 
reduction in cost of service for purposes of section 46(f)(2). This 
adjustment to Federal income tax expense may be taken into account in 
determining cost of service for the regulated accounting period or 
periods that include the taxable year to which the adjustment relates or 
for any subsequent regulated accounting period.
    (B) See paragraph (b)(3)(ii)(B) of this section for rules relating 
to the amount of additional interest that the taxpayer would pay or 
accrue if the credit were unavailable.
    (ii) In determining whether, or to what extent, a credit has been 
used to reduce cost of service, reference shall be made to any 
accounting treatment that affects cost of service. Examples

[[Page 227]]

of such treatment include reducing by all or a portion of the credit the 
amount of Federal income tax expense taken into account for ratemaking 
purposes and reducing the depreciable bases of property by all or a 
portion of the credit for ratemaking purposes.
    (3) Rate base. (i) For purposes of this section, ``rate base'' is 
the monetary amount that is multiplied by a rate of return to determine 
the permitted return on investment.
    (ii)(A) In determining whether, or to what extent, a credit has been 
used to reduce rate base, reference shall be made to any accounting 
treatment that affects rate base. In addition, in those cases in which 
the rate of return is based on the taxpayer's cost of capital, reference 
shall be made to any accounting treatment that reduces the permitted 
return on investment by treating the credit less favorably than the 
capital that would have been provided if the credit were unavailable. 
Thus, the credit may not be assigned a ``cost of capital'' rate that is 
less than the overall cost of capital rate, determined on the basis of a 
weighted average, for the capital that would have been provided if the 
credit were unavailable.
    (B) For purposes of determining the cost of capital rate assigned to 
the credit and the amount of additional interest that the taxpayer would 
pay or accrue, the composition of the capital that would have been 
provided if the credit were unavailable may be determined--
    (1) On the basis of all the relevant facts and circumstances; or
    (2) By assuming for both such purposes that such capital would be 
provided solely by common shareholders, preferred shareholders, and 
long-term creditors in the same proportions and at the same rates of 
return as the capital actually provided to the taxpayer by such 
shareholders and creditors.

For purposes of this section, capital provided by long-term creditors 
does not include deferred taxes as described in section 167(e)(3)(G) or 
168(e)(3)(B)(ii).
    (C) If a taxpayer's overall rate of return is based on a deemed or 
hypothetical capital structure, paragraph (b)(3)(ii)(B) of this section 
shall be applied by treating the deemed or hypothetical capital as if it 
were the capital actually provided to the taxpayer and determining the 
composition of the capital that would have been provided if the credit 
were unavailable in a manner consistent with such treatment.
    (iii) Whether, or to what extent, a credit has been used to reduce 
rate base for any period to which pre-June 23, 1986 rates apply will be 
determined under 26 CFR 1.46-6(b) (3) and (4) (revised as of April 1, 
1985) if such a determination avoids disallowance of a credit that would 
be disallowed under paragraph (b)(3)(ii) or (4)(ii) of this section. For 
this purpose, a period of which pre-June 23, 1986 rates apply is any 
period for which the effect of the credit on rate base for ratemaking 
purposes is established under a determination put into effect (within 
the meaning of paragraph (f) of this section) before June 23, 1986.
    (4) Indirect reductions to cost of service or rate base. (i) Cost of 
service or rate base is also considered to have been reduced by reason 
of all or a portion of a credit if such reduction is made in an indirect 
manner.
    (ii) One type of such indirect reduction is any ratemaking decision 
in which the credit is treated as operating income (subject to 
ratemaking regulation) or is treated less favorably than the capital 
that would have been provided if the credit were unavailable. For 
example, if the credit is accounted for as nonoperating income on a 
company's regulated books of account but a ratemaking decision has the 
effect of treating the credit as operating income in determining rate of 
return to common shareholders, then cost of service has been indirectly 
reduced by reason of the credit.
    (iii) A second type of indirect reduction is any ratemaking decision 
intended to achieve an effect similar to a direct reduction to cost of 
service or rate base. In determining whether a ratemaking decision is 
intended to achieve this effect, consideration is given to all the 
relevant facts and circumstances of each case, including, but not 
limited to--
    (A) The record of the proceeding,
    (B) The regulatory body's orders or opinions (including any 
dissenting views), and

[[Page 228]]

    (C) The anticipated effect of the ratemaking decision on the 
company's revenues in comparison to a direct reduction to cost of 
service or rate base by reason of the investment tax credits available 
to the regulated company.
    (iv) This paragraph (b)(4)(iv) describes a situation that is not an 
indirect reduction to cost of service or rate base by reason of all or a 
portion of a credit. The ratemaking treatment of credits may affect the 
financial condition of a company, including the company's ability to 
attract new capital, the cost of that capital, the company's future 
financial requirements, the market price of the company's securities, 
and the degree of risk attributable to investment in those securities. 
The financial condition may be reflected in certain customary financial 
indicators such as the comparative capital structure of the company, 
coverage ratios, price/earnings ratios, and price/book ratios. Under the 
facts and circumstances test of paragraph (b)(4)(iii) of this section, 
the consideration of a company's financial condition by a regulatory 
body is not an indirect reduction to cost of service or rate base, even 
though such condition, as affected by the ratemaking treatment of the 
company's investment tax credits, is considered in the development of a 
reasonable rate of return on common shareholders' investment.
    (c) General rule--(1) In general. Section 46(f)(1) applies to all of 
the taxpayer's section 46(f) property except property to which an 
election under section 46(f) (2) or (3) applies. Under section 46(f)(1), 
the credit for the taxpayer's section 46(f) property will be disallowed 
if--
    (i) The taxpayer's cost of service for ratemaking purposes is 
reduced by reason of any portion of such credit, or
    (ii) The taxpayer's rate base is reduced by reason of any portion of 
the credit and such reduction in rate base is not restored or is 
restored less rapidly than ratably within the meaning of paragraph (g) 
of this section.
    (2) Insufficient natural domestic supply. The provisions of 
paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this section shall not apply to permit any 
reduction in taxpayer's rate base with respect to its ``short supply 
property'' if it made an election under the last sentence of section 
46(f)(1) on or before March 9, 1972.
    (3) Short supply property. For purposes of this section, section 
46(f) property is ``short supply property'' if--
    (i) The property is described in paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this 
section,
    (ii) The regulatory body described in section 46(c)(3)(B) that has 
jurisdiction for ratemaking purposes with respect to such trade or 
business is an agency or instrumentality of the United States, and
    (iii) This regulatory body makes a short supply determination and 
the determination is in effect on the date such property is placed in 
service.
    (4) Short supply determination. A short supply determination is made 
or revoked on the date of its publication in the Federal Register. It is 
a determination that the natural domestic supply of gas or steam is 
insufficient to meet the present and future requirements of the domestic 
economy.
    (5) Dates short supply determination in effect. (i) A short supply 
determination is considered to be in effect with respect to section 
46(f) property placed in service at any time before the determination is 
revoked. However, a short supply determination made after June 20, 1979 
is not considered to be in effect with respect to section 46(f) property 
placed in service before such determination was made.
    (d) Special rule for ratable flow-through. If an election was made 
under section 46(f)(2) on or before March 9, 1972, section 46(f)(2) 
applies to all of the taxpayer's section 46(f) property except property 
to which an election under section 46(f)(3) applies. Under section 
46(f)(2), the credit for the taxpayer's section 46(f) property will be 
disallowed if--
    (1) The taxpayer's cost of service, for ratemaking purposes or in 
its regulated books of account, is reduced by more than a ratable 
portion of such credit within the meaning of paragraph (g) of this 
section or
    (2) The taxpayer's rate base is reduced by reason of any portion of 
such credit.
    (e) Flow-through property. If a taxpayer made an election under 
section 46(f)(3) on or before March 9, 1972, section 46(f) (1) and (2) 
do not apply to the

[[Page 229]]

taxpayer's section 46(f) property to which section 167(l)(2)(C) applies. 
In the case of an election under section 46(f)(3), a credit will not be 
disallowed, notwithstanding a determination by a regulatory body having 
jurisdiction over such taxpayer that reduces the taxpayer's cost of 
service or rate base by reason of such credit. In general, section 
167(l)(2)(C) applies to property with respect to which a taxpayer may 
use a flow-through method of accounting (within the meaning of section 
167(l)(3)(H)) to take into account the allowance for depreciation under 
section 167(a). Section 167(l)(2)(C) applies to property even though the 
taxpayer does not use a flow-through method of accounting with respect 
to the property. Section 167(l)(2)(C) does not apply to property if the 
taxpayer can not use a flow-through method of accounting with respect to 
the property. For example, section 167(l)(2)(C) does not apply to 
property with respect to which an election under section 167(l)(4)(A) 
applies. Thus, such property does not qualify for an election under 
section 46(f)(3).
    (f) Limitations--(1) In general. This paragraph provides rules 
relating to limitations on the disallowance of credits under section 
46(f)(4). Key terms are defined in paragraphs (f) (7), (8), and (9) of 
this section.
    (2) Disallowance postponed. There is no disallowance of a credit 
before the first final inconsistent determination is put into effect for 
the taxpayer's section 46(f) property.
    (3) Time of disallowance. A credit is disallowed--
    (i) When the first final inconsistent determination is put into 
effect and
    (ii) When any inconsistent determination (whether or not final) is 
put into effect after the first final inconsistent determination is put 
into effect.
    (4) Credits disallowed. A credit is disallowed for section 46(f) 
property placed in service (within the meaning of Sec. 1.46-3(d)) by the 
taxpayer--
    (i) Before the date any inconsistent determination described in 
paragraph (f)(2) of this section is put into effect and
    (ii) On or after such date and before the date a subsequent 
consistent determination (whether or not final) is put into effect.
    (5) Barred years. No amount of credit for a taxable year is 
disallowed under paragraph (f)(3) of this section if, for such year, 
assessment of a deficiency is barred by any law or rule of law.
    (6) Notification and other requirements. The taxpayer shall notify 
the district director of a disallowance of a credit under paragraph 
(f)(3) of this section within 30 days of the date that the applicable 
determination is put into effect. In the case of such a disallowance, 
the taxpayer shall recompute its tax liability for any affected taxable 
year, and such recomputation shall be made in the form of an amended 
return where necessary.
    (7) Determinations. For purposes of this paragraph, the term 
``determination'' refers to a determination made with respect to section 
46(f) property (other than property to which an election under section 
46(f)(3) applies) by a regulatory body described in section 46(c)(3)(B) 
that determines the effect of the credit--
    (i) For purposes of section 46(f)(1), on the taxpayer's cost of 
service or rate base for ratemaking purposes or
    (ii) In the case of a taxpayer that made an election under section 
46(f)(2), on the taxpayer's cost of service, for ratemaking purposes or 
in its regulated books of account, or on the taxpayer's rate base for 
ratemaking purposes.

A regulatory body does not have to take affirmative action to make a 
determination. Thus, a regulatory body's failure to take action on a 
rate schedule filed by a taxpayer is a determination if the rates can be 
put into effect without further action by the regulatory body.
    (8) Types of determinations. For purposes of this paragraph--
    (i) The term ``inconsistent'' refers to a determination that is 
inconsistent with section 46(f) (1) or (2) (as the case may be). Thus, 
for example, a determination to reduce the taxpayer's cost of service by 
more than a ratable portion of the credit would be a determination that 
is inconsistent with section 46(f)(2). As a further example, such

[[Page 230]]

a determination would also be inconsistent if section 46(f)(1) applied 
because no reduction in cost of service is permitted under section 
46(f)(1).
    (ii) The term ``consistent'' refers to a determination that is 
consistent with section 46(f) (1) or (2) (as the case may be).
    (iii) The term ``final determination'' means a determination with 
respect to which all rights to appeal or to request a review, a 
rehearing, or a redetermination have been exhausted or have lapsed.
    (iv) The term ``first final inconsistent determination'' means the 
first final determination put into effect after December 10, 1971, that 
is inconsistent with section 46(f) (1) or (2) (as the case may be).
    (9) Put into effect. A determination is put into effect on the 
latter of--
    (i) The date it is issued (or, if a first final inconsistent 
determination, the date it becomes final) or
    (ii) The date it becomes operative.
    (10) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated 
by the following examples:

    Example 1. Corporation X, a calendar-year taxpayer engaged in a 
public utility activity is subject to the jurisdiction of regulatory 
body A. On September 15, 1971, X purchases section 46(f) property and 
places it in service on that date. For 1971, X takes the credit 
allowable by section 38 with respect to such property. X does not make 
any election permitted by section 46(f). On October 9, 1972, A makes a 
determination that X must account for the credit allowable under section 
38 in a manner inconsistent with section 46(f)(1). The determination, 
which was the first determination by A after December 10, 1971, becomes 
final on January 1, 1973, and holds that X must retroactively adjust the 
manner in which it accounted for the credit allowable under section 38 
starting with the taxable year that began on January 1, 1972. Since, 
under the provisions of paragraph (f)(8) of this section, the 
determination by A is put into effect on January 1, 1973 (the date it 
becomes final), the credit is retroactively disallowed with respect to 
any of X's section 46(f) property placed in service before January 1, 
1973, on any date which occurs during a taxable year with respect to 
which an assessment of a deficiency has not been barred by any law or 
rule of law. In addition, the credit is disallowed with respect to X's 
section 46(f) property placed in service on or after January 1, 1973, 
and before the date that a subsequent determination by A, which as to X 
is consistent with section 46(f)(1), is put into effect. Thus, X must 
amend its income tax return for 1971 to reflect the retroactive 
disallowance of the credit otherwise allowable under section 38 with 
respect to the section 46(f) property placed in service on September 15, 
1971.

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that the 
first inconsistent determination by A becomes final on April 5, 1972, 
and requires X to account for the credit for all taxable years beginning 
on or after January 1, 1973, in a manner inconsistent with section 
46(f)(1). Under the provisions of paragraph (f)(8) of this section, the 
determination was put into effect on January 1, 1973 (the date it became 
operative). The result is the same as in example 1.

    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that on 
June 1, 1975, A issues a determination that X shall retroactively 
account for the credit allowable by section 38 in a manner consistent 
with the provisions of section 46(f)(1) for taxable years beginning on 
or after January 1, 1971. The determination becomes final on January 5, 
1976, in the same form as originally issued. The result is the same as 
in example 1 with respect to property X places in service before June 1, 
1975. The credit is allowed with respect to property X places in service 
on or after June 1, 1975 (the date that the consistent determination is 
put into effect).

    (g) Ratable methods--(1) In general. Under this paragraph (g), rules 
are prescribed for purposes of determining whether or not, under section 
46(f)(1), a reduction in the taxpayer's rate base with respect to the 
credit is restored less rapidly than ratably and whether or not under 
section 46(f)(2) the taxpayer's cost of service for ratemaking purposes 
is reduced by more than a ratable portion of such credit.
    (2) Regulated depreciation expense. What is ``ratable'' is 
determined by considering the period of time actually used in computing 
the taxpayer's regulated depreciation expense for the property for which 
a credit is allowed. ``Regulated depreciation expense'' is the 
depreciation expense for the property used by a regulatory body for 
purposes of establishing the taxpayer's cost of service for ratemaking 
purposes. Such period of time shall be expressed in units of years (or 
shorter periods), units of production, or machine hours and shall be 
determined in accordance with the individual useful life system or 
composite (or other group asset) account system actually used in

[[Page 231]]

computing the taxpayer's regulated depreciation expense. A method of 
restoring, or reducing, is ratable if the amount to be restored to rate 
base, or to reduce cost of service (as the case may be), is allocated 
ratably in proportion to the number of such units. Thus, for example, 
assume that the regulated depreciation expense is computed under the 
straight line method by applying a composite annual percentage rate to 
``original cost'' (as defined for purposes of computing regulated 
depreciation expense). If, with respect to an item of section 46(f) 
property, the amount to be restored annually to rate base is computed by 
applying a composite annual percentage rate to the amount by which the 
rate base was reduced, then the restoration is ratable. Similarly, if 
cost of service is reduced annually by an amount computed by applying a 
composite annual percentage rate to the amount of the credit, cost of 
service is reduced by a ratable portion. If such composite annual 
percenage rate were revised for purposes of computing regulated 
depreciation expense beginning with a particular accounting period, the 
computation of ratable restoration or ratable portion (as the case may 
be) must also be revised beginning with such period. A composite annual 
percentage rate is determined solely by reference to the period of time 
actually used by the taxpayer in computing its regulated depreciation 
expense without reduction for salvage or other items such as over and 
under accruals. A composite annual percentage rate determined by taking 
into account salvage value or other items shall be considered to be 
ratable in the case of a determination (whether or not final) issued 
before March 22, 1979, and any rate order (whether or not final) that is 
entered into before June 20, 1979, in response to a rate case filed 
before April 23, 1979. For this purpose, the term ``rate order'' does 
not include an order by a regulatory body that perfunctorily adopts 
rates as filed if such rates are suspended or subject to rebate.
    (h) Elections--(1) Applicability of elections. (i) Any election 
under section 46(f) applies to all of the taxpayer's property eligible 
for the election, whether or not the taxpayer is regulated by more than 
one regulatory body.
    (ii) Section 46(f)(1) applies to all of the taxpayer's section 46(f) 
property in the absence of an election under either section 46(f) (2) or 
(3). If an election is made under section 46(f)(2), section 46(f)(1) 
does not apply to any of the taxpayer's section 46(f) property.
    (iii) An election made under the last sentence of section 46(f)(1) 
applies to that portion of the taxpayer's section 46(f) property to 
which section 46(f)(1) applies and which is short supply property within 
the meaning of paragraph (c)(2) of this section.
    (iv) If a taxpayer makes an election under section 46(f)(2) and 
makes no election under section 46(f)(3), the election under section 
46(f)(2) applies to all of the taxpayer's section 46(f) property.
    (v) If a taxpayer makes an election under section 46(f)(3), such 
election applies to all of the taxpayer's section 46(f) property to 
which section 167(l)(2)(C) applies. Section 46(f) (1) or (2) (as the 
case may be) applies to that portion of the taxpayer's section 46(f) 
property that is not property to which section 167(f)(2)(C) applies. 
Thus, for example, if a taxpayer makes an election under section 
46(f)(2) and also makes an election under section 46(f)(3), section 
46(f)(3) applies to all of the taxpayer's section 46(f) property to 
which section 167(l)(2)(C) applies, and section 46(f)(2) applies to the 
remainder of the taxpayer's section 46(f) property.
    (2) Method of making elections. See 26 CFR 12.3 for rules relating 
to the method of making the elections described in section 46(f) (1), 
(2), or (3).
    (i) [Reserved]
    (j) Reorganizations, asset acquisitions, multiple regulation, etc.--
(1) Taxpayers not entirely subject to jurisdiction of one regulatory 
body. (i) If a taxpayer is required by a regulatory body having 
jurisdiction over less than all of its property to account for the 
credit under a determination that is inconsistent with section 46(f) (1) 
or (2) (as the case may be), such credit shall be disallowed only with 
respect to property subject to the jurisdiction of such regulatory body.
    (ii) For purposes of this paragraph (j), a regulatory body is 
considered to have

[[Page 232]]

jurisdiction over property of a taxpayer if the property is included in 
the rate base for which the regulatory body determines an allowable rate 
of return for ratemaking purposes or if expenses with respect to the 
property are included in cost of service as determined by the regulatory 
body for ratemaking purposes. For example, if regulatory body A, having 
jurisdiction over 60 percent of an item of corporation X's section 46(f) 
property, makes a determination which is inconsistent with section 
46(f), and if regulatory body B, having jurisdiction over the remaining 
40 percent of such item of property, makes a consistent determination 
(or if the remaining 40 percent is not subject to the jurisdiction of 
any regulatory body), then 60 percent of the credit for such item will 
be disallowed. For a further example, if regulatory body A, having 
jurisdiction over 60 percent of X's section 46(f) property, has 
jurisdiction over 100 percent of a particular generator, 100 percent of 
the credit for such generator will be disallowed.
    (iii) For rules which provide that the 3 elections under section 
46(f) may not be made with respect to less than all of the taxpayer's 
property eligible for the election, see paragraph (h)(1)(i) of this 
section.

[T.D. 7602, 44 FR 17668, Mar. 23, 1979, as amended by T.D. 8089, 51 FR 
18777, May 22, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 1.46-7  Statutory provisions; plan requirements for taxpayers electing additional investment credit, etc.

    As amended by sections 802(b)(7), and 803 (c), (d), and (e) of the 
Tax Reform Act of 1976 (90 Stat. 1520), section 301 (d), (e), and (f) of 
the Tax Reduction Act of 1975 (89 Stat. 38) provides as follows:

    Sec. 301. Increase in investment credit * * *
    (d) Plan requirements for taxpayers electing additional credit. In 
order to meet the requirements of this subsection--
    (1) Except as expressly provided in subsections (e) and (f), a 
corporation (hereinafter in this subsection referred to as the 
``employer'') must establish an employee stock ownership plan (described 
in paragraph (2)) which is funded by transfers of employer securities in 
accordance with the provisions of paragraph (6) and which meets all 
other requirements of this subsection.
    (2) The plan referred to in paragraph (1) must be a defined 
contribution plan established in writing which--
    (A) Is a stock bonus plan, a stock bonus and a money purchase 
pension plan, or a profit-sharing plan,
    (B) Is designed to invest primarily in employer securities, and
    (C) Meets such other requirements (similar to requirements 
applicable to employee stock ownership plans as defined in section 
4975(e)(7) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954) as the Secretary of the 
Treasury or his delegate may prescribe.
    (3) The plan must provide for the allocation of all employer 
securities transferred to it or purchased by it (because of the 
requirements of section 46(a)(2)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1954) to the account of each participant (who was a participant at any 
time during the plan year, whether or not he is a participant at the 
close of the plan year) as of the close of each year in an amount which 
bears substantially the same proportion to the amount of all such 
securities allocated to all participants in the plan for that plan year 
as the amount of compensation paid to such participant (disregarding any 
compensation in excess of the first $100,000 per year) bears to the 
compensation paid to all such participants during that year 
(disregarding any compensation in excess of the first $100,000 with 
respect to any participant). Notwithstanding the first sentence of this 
paragraph, the allocation to participants' accounts may be extended over 
whatever period may be necessary to comply with the requirements of 
section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. For purposes of this 
paragraph, the amount of compensation paid to a participant for a year 
is the amount of such participant's compensation within the meaning of 
section 415(c)(3) of such Code for such year.
    (4) The plan must provide that each participant has a nonforfeitable 
right to any stock allocated to his account under paragraph (3), and 
that no stock allocated to a participant's account may be distributed 
from that account before the end of the eighty-fourth month beginning 
after the month in which the stock is allocated to the account except in 
the case of separation from the service, death, or disability.
    (5) The plan must provide that each participant is entitled to 
direct the plan as to the manner in which any employer securities 
allocated to the account of the participant are to be voted.
    (6) On making a claim for credit, adjustment, or refund under 
section 38 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, the employer states in 
such claim that it agrees, as a condition of receiving any such credit, 
adjustment, or refund--
    (A) In the case of a taxable year beginning before January 1, 1977, 
to transfer employer

[[Page 233]]

securities forthwith to the plan having an aggregate value at the time 
of the claim of 1 percent of the amount of the qualified investment (as 
determined under section 46 (c) and (d) of such Code) of the taxpayer 
for the taxable year, and
    (B) In the case of a taxable year beginning after December 31, 
1976--
    (i) To transfer employer securities to the plan having an aggregate 
value at the time of the claim of 1 percent of the amount of the 
qualified investment (as determined under section 46 (c) and (d) of such 
Code) of the employer for the taxable year,
    (ii) Except as provided in clause (iii), to effect the transfer not 
later than 30 days after the time (including extensions) for filing its 
income tax return for a taxable year, and
    (iii) In the case of an employer whose credit (as determined under 
section 46(a)(2)(B) of such Code) for a taxable year beginning after 
December 31, 1976, exceeds the limitations of paragraph (3) of section 
46(a) of such Code--
    (I) To effect that portion of the transfer allocable to investment 
credit carrybacks of such excess credit at the time required under 
clause (ii) for the unused credit year (within the meaning of section 
46(b) of such Code), and
    (II) To effect that portion of the transfer allocable to investment 
credit carryovers of such excess credit at the time required under 
clause (ii) for the taxable year to which such portion is carried over.

For purposes of meeting the requirements of this paragraph, a transfer 
of cash shall be treated as a transfer of employer securities if the 
cash is, under the plan, used to purchase employer securities.
    (7) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, if 
the plan does not meet the requirements of section 401 of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1954--
    (A) Stock transferred under paragraph (6) or subsection (e)(3) and 
allocated to the account of any participant under paragraph (3) and 
dividends thereon shall not be considered income of the participant or 
his beneficiary under the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 until actually 
distributed or made available to the participant or his beneficiary and, 
at such time, shall be taxable under section 72 of such Code (treating 
the participant or his beneficiary as having a basis of zero in the 
contract),
    (B) No amount shall be allocated to any participant in excess of the 
amount which might be allocated if the plan met the requirements of 
section 401 of such Code, and
    (C) The plan must meet the requirements of sections 410 and 415 of 
such Code.
    (8)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B)(iii), if the amount of 
the credit determined under section 46(a)(2)(B) of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1954 is recaptured or redetermined in accordance with the 
provisions of such Code, the amounts transferred to the plan under this 
subsection and subsection (e) and allocated under the plan shall remain 
in the plan or in participant accounts, as the case may be, and continue 
to be allocated in accordance with the plan.
    (B) If the amount of the credit determined under section 46(a)(2)(B) 
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 is recaptured in accordance with 
the provisions of such Code--
    (i) The employer may reduce the amount required to be transferred to 
the plan under paragraph (6) of this subsection, or under paragraph (3) 
of subsection (e), for the current taxable year or any succeeding 
taxable years by the portion of the amount so recaptured which is 
attributable to the contribution to such plan,
    (ii) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (12), the employer 
may deduct such portion, subject to the limitations of section 404 of 
such Code (relating to deductions for contributions to an employees' 
trust or plan), or
    (iii) If the requirements of subsection (f)(1) are met, the employer 
may withdraw from the plan an amount not in excess of such portion.
    (C) If the amount of the credit claimed by an employer for a prior 
taxable year under section 38 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 is 
reduced because of a redetermination which becomes final during the 
taxable year, and the employer transferred amounts to a plan which were 
taken into account for purposes of this subsection for that prior 
taxable year, then--
    (i) The employer may reduce the amount it is required to transfer to 
the plan under paragraph (6) of this subsection, or under paragraph (3) 
of subsection, (e), for the taxable year or any succeeding taxable year 
by the portion of the amount of such reduction in the credit or increase 
in tax which is attributable to the contribution to such plan, or
    (ii) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (12), the employer 
may deduct such portion subject to the limitations of section 404 of 
such Code.
    (9) For purposes of this subsection, the term--
    (A) ``Employer securities'' means common stock issued by the 
employer or a corporation which is a member of a controlled group of 
corporations which includes the employer (within the meaning of section 
1563 (a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, determined without regard 
to section 1563 (a)(4) and (e)(3)(C) of such Code) with voting power and 
dividend rights no less favorable than the voting power and dividend 
rights of other common stock issued by the employer or such controlling 
corporation, or securities issued by the employer or such controlling 
corporation, convertible into such stock, and

[[Page 234]]

    (B) ``Value'' means the average of closing prices of the employer's 
securities, as reported by a national exchange on which securities are 
listed, for the 20 consecutive trading days immediately preceding the 
date of transfer or allocation of such securities or, in the case of 
securities not listed on a national exchange, the fair market value as 
determined in good faith and in accordance with regulations issued by 
the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate.
    (10) The Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate shall prescribe 
such regulations and require such reports as may be necessary to carry 
out the provisions of this subsection and subsections (e) and (f).
    (11) If the employer fails to meet any requirement imposed under 
this subsection or subsection (e) or (f) or under any obligation 
undertaken to comply with the requirement of this subsection or 
subsection (e) or (f), he is liable to the United States for a civil 
penalty of an amount equal to the amount involved in such failure. The 
preceding sentence shall not apply if the taxpayer corrects such failure 
(as determined by the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate) within 
90 days after notice thereof. For purposes of this paragraph, the term 
``amount involved'' means an amount determined by the Secretary or his 
delegate, but not in excess of 1 percent of the qualified investment of 
the taxpayer for the taxable year under section 46(a)(2)(B) and not less 
than the product of one-half of one percent of such amount multiplied by 
the number of months (or parts thereof) during which such failure 
continues. The amount of such penalty may be collected by the Secretary 
of the Treasury in the same manner in which a deficiency in the payment 
of Federal income tax may be collected.
    (12) Notwithstanding any provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1954 to the contrary, no deductions shall be allowed under section 162, 
212, or 404 of such Code for amounts transferred to an employee stock 
ownership plan and taken into account under this subsection.
    (13)(A) As reimbursement for the expense of establishing the plan, 
the employer may withhold from amounts due the plan for the taxable year 
for which the plan is established, or the plan may pay, so much of the 
amounts paid or incurred in connection with the establishment of the 
plan as does not exceed the sum of 10 percent of the first $100,000 that 
the employer is required to transfer to the plan for that taxable year 
under paragraph (6) (including any amounts transferred under subsection 
(e)(3)) and 5 percent of any amount in excess of the first $100,000 of 
such amount.
    (B) As reimbursement for the expense of administering the plan, the 
employer may withhold from amounts due the plan, or the plan may pay, so 
much of the amounts paid or incurred during the taxable year as expenses 
of administering the plan as does not exceed the smaller of--
    (i) The sum of 10 percent of the first $100,000 and 5 percent of any 
amount in excess of $100,000 of the income from dividends paid to the 
plan with respect to stock of the employer during the plan year ending 
with or within the employer's taxable year, or
    (ii) $100,000.
    (14) The return of a contribution made by an employer to an employee 
stock ownership plan designed to satisfy the requirements of this 
subsection or subsection (e) (or a provision for such a return) does not 
fail to satisfy the requirements of this subsection, subsection (e), 
section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, or section 
403(c)(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 if--
    (A) The contribution is conditioned under the plan upon 
determination by the Secretary of the Treasury that such plan meets the 
applicable requirements of this subsection, subsection (e), or section 
401(a) of such Code.
    (B) The application for such a determination is filed with the 
Secretary not later than 90 days after the date on which the credit 
under section 38 is allowed, and
    (C) The contribution is returned within one year after the date on 
which the Secretary issues notice to the employer that such plan does 
not satisfy the requirements of this subsection, subsection (e), or 
section 401(a) of such Code.
    (e) Plan requirements for taxpayers electing additional one-half 
percent credit.
    (1) General rule. For purposes of clause (ii) of section 46(a)(2)(B) 
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, the amount determined under this 
subsection for a taxable year is an amount equal to the sum of the 
matching employee contributions for the taxable year which meet the 
requirements of this subsection.
    (2) Election; basic plan requirements. No amount shall be determined 
under this subsection for the taxable year unless the corporation elects 
to have this subsection apply for that year. A corporation may not elect 
to have the provisions of this subsection apply for a taxable year 
unless the corporation meets the requirements of subsection (d) and the 
requirements of this subsection.
    (3) Employer contribution. On making a claim for credit, adjustment, 
or refund under section 38 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, the 
employer shall state in such claim that the employer agrees, as a 
condition of receiving any such credit, adjustment, or refund 
attributable to the provisions of section 46(a)(2)(B)(ii) of such Code, 
to transfer at the time described in subsection (d)(6)(B) employer 
securities (as defined in subsection (d)(9)(A)) to the plan having an 
aggregate value at the time of the transfer of not more

[[Page 235]]

than one-half of one percent of the amount of the qualified investment 
(as determined under subsections (c) and (d) of section 46 of such Code) 
of the taxpayer for the taxable year. For purposes of meeting the 
requirements of this paragraph, a transfer of cash shall be treated as a 
transfer of employer securities if the cash is, under the plan, used to 
purchase employer securities.
    (4) Requirements relating to matching employee contributions.
    (A) An amount contributed by an employee under a plan described in 
subsection (d) for the taxable year may not be treated as a matching 
employee contribution for that taxable year under this subsection 
unless--
    (i) Each employee who participates in the plan described in 
subsection (d) is entitled to make such a contribution,
    (ii) The contribution is designated by the employee as a 
contribution intended to be used for matching employer amounts 
transferred under paragraph (3) to a plan which meets the requirements 
of this subsection, and
    (iii) The contribution is in the form of an amount paid in cash to 
the employer or plan administrator not later than 24 months after the 
close of the taxable year in which the portion of the credit allowed by 
section 38 of such Code (and determined under clause (ii) of section 46 
(a)(2)(B) of such Code which the contribution is to match) is allowed, 
and is invested forthwith in employer securities (as defined in 
subsection (d)(9)(A)).
    (B) The sum of the amounts of matching employee contributions taken 
into account for purposes of this subsection for any taxable year may 
not exceed the value (at the time of transfer) of the employer 
securities transferred to the plan in accordance with the requirements 
of paragraph (3) for the year for which the employee contributions are 
designated as matching contributions.
    (C) The employer may not make participation in the plan a condition 
of employment and the plan may not require matching employee 
contributions as a condition of participation in the plan.
    (D) Employee contributions under the plan must meet the requirements 
of section 401(a)(4) of such Code (relating to contributions).
    (5) A plan must provide for allocation of all employer securities 
transferred to it or purchased by it under this subsection to the 
account of each participant (who was a participant at any time during 
the plan year, whether or not he is a participant at the close of the 
plan year) as of the close of the plan year in an amount equal to his 
matching employee contributions for the year. Matching employee 
contributions and amounts so allocated shall be deemed to be allocated 
under subsection (d)(3).
    (f) Recapture.
    (1) General rule. Amounts transferred to a plan under subsection 
(d)(6) or (e)(3) may be withdrawn from the plan by the employer if the 
plan provides that while subject to recapture--
    (A) Amounts so transferred with respect to a taxable year are 
segregated from other plan assets, and
    (B) Separate accounts are maintained for participants on whose 
behalf amounts so transferred have been allocated for a taxable year.
    (2) Coordination with other law. Notwithstanding any other law or 
rule of law, an amount withdrawn by the employer will neither fail to be 
considered to be nonforfeitable nor fail to be for the exclusive benefit 
of participants or their beneficiaries merely because of the withdrawal 
from the plan of--
    (A) Amounts described in paragraph (1), or
    (B) Employer amounts transferred under subsection (e)(3) to the plan 
which are not matched by matching employee contributions or which are in 
excess of the limitations of section 415 of such Code,

nor will the withdrawal of any such amount be considered to violate the 
provisions of section 403(c)(1) of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974.

[Sec. 301(d) of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975 (89 Stat. 38) as amended 
by sec. 802(b)(7) and sec. 803 (c) and (e) of the Tax Reform Act of 1976 
(90 Stat. 1520); sec. 301 (e) and (f) of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975 
as added by sec. 803(d) of the Tax Reform Act of 1976]

(Sec. 301(d)(2)(C) of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975; sec. 7805 of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (89 Stat. 38, 68A Stat. 917; 26 U.S.C. 
7805)

[T.D. 7857 47 FR 54793, Dec. 6, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1.46-8  Requirements for taxpayers electing additional one-percent investment credit (TRASOP's).

    (a) Introduction--(1) In general. A corporation may elect under 
section 46(a)(2)(B) of the Code to obtain an additional investment 
credit for property described in section 46(a)(2)(D). This section 
provides rules for electing to have the provisions of section 
46(a)(2)(B) apply and for implementing an employee stock ownership plan 
under section 301(d) of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975 (``1975 TRA''). 
The plan must meet the formal requirements of paragraph (d), and the 
operational requirements of paragraph (e), of this section. An 
additional credit may be obtained for the periods described in section 
46(a)(2)(D). Unless otherwise indicated, statutory references in this 
section are to the Internal Revenue

[[Page 236]]

Code of 1954 as in effect prior to the amendments made by the Revenue 
Act of 1978.
    (2) Reports. The returns required by section 6058(a) must be filed 
on behalf of a plan established under paragraph (c)(7) of this section, 
whether or not the plan is qualified under section 401(a).
    (3) Cross-references. The following table indicates where in this 
section provisions appear relating to each provision of section 301 (d) 
and (f) of the 1975 TRA.

                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Section 301              Section 1.46-8          Subject     
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(d)(1)..........................  (c)(7)(i),          Establishing a    
                                   (c)(8)(i).          TRASOP, in       
                                                       general; funding 
                                                       a TRASOP, in     
                                                       general.         
  (2)(A)........................  (c)(7)(ii)........  Type of plan.     
    (B).........................  (d)(3), (e)(10)...  Investment design.
    (C).........................  (d)(1)............  Plan requirements,
                                                       in general.      
  (3)...........................  (d)(6)............  Allocation.       
                                  (b)(8)............  Compensation,     
                                                       definition.      
  (4)...........................  (d)(7)............  Nonforfeitability.
                                  (d)(9)............  Distributions.    
  (5)...........................  (d)(8)............  Voting rights.    
  (6)...........................  (c)...............  Procedures for    
                                                       additional       
                                                       credit.          
  (7)(A)........................  (c)(7)(ii)........  Taxability, non-  
                                                       401(a) TRASOP.   
    (B).........................  (e)(3)............  Allocations under 
                                                       401(a).          
    (C).........................  (e)(3)............  Section 410 and   
                                                       section 415      
                                                       requirements.    
  (8)...........................  (e)(9)............  Reductions of     
                                                       investment       
                                                       credit.          
  (9)(A)........................  (b)(4)............  Employer          
                                                       securities,      
                                                       definition.      
                                  (e)(10), (f)......  Employer          
                                                       securities,      
                                                       requirements.    
    (B).........................  (b)(7)............  Value, definition.
  (10)..........................  (a)(2)............  Reporting         
                                                       requirements.    
  (11)..........................  (h)...............  Failure to comply.
  (12)..........................  (c)(10)...........  Deductibility.    
  (13)..........................  (e) (6) and (7)...  Reimbursement for 
                                                       expenses.        
  (14)..........................  (c)(8)(v) and       Contingent        
                                   (d)(7)(i).          contributions.   
(f).............................  (d)(7),             Withdrawals of    
                                   (e)(8)(vii), (f).   TRASOP           
                                                       securities.      
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Definitions. When used in this section, the terms listed below 
have the indicated meanings:
    (1) TRASOP. A ``TRASOP'' is an employee stock ownership plan that 
meets the requirements of section 301(d) of the 1975 TRA. See Sec. 1.46-
7. It is a type of plan described in paragraph (d)(1) of this section 
and may, but need not, be an ESOP under Sec. 54.4975-11 of this chapter 
(Pension Excise Tax Regulations). See Sec. 1.46-8(d)(5) concerning use 
of TRASOP assets as collateral for debts and expenses of the plan.
    (2) Additional credit. An ``additional credit'' is the additional 
one-percent investment credit under section 46(a)(2)(B)(i).
    (3) Employer. An ``employer'' is a corporation that establishes a 
TRASOP.
    (4) Employer securities--(i) In general. ``Employer securities'' are 
common stock, and securities convertible into common stock, of the 
employer or of a corporation that is a member of a controlled group of 
corporations including the employer. Employer securities must meet the 
requirements of paragraph (g) of this section. Membership in a 
controlled group for purposes of this section is determined under 
section 414(b) of the Code.
    (ii) Pre-1977 employer securities. In addition, employer securities 
acquired by a TRASOP before January 1, 1977, include common stock, and 
securities convertible into common stock, of a corporation in control of 
the employer within the meaning of section 368(c).
    (iii) Caution. An employer security under this section is not 
necessarily a qualifying employer security as defined in section 
407(d)(5) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) 
or section 4975(e)(8). Moreover, sections 406, 407, and 408 of ERISA in 
certain cases limit the acquisition and disposition of qualifying 
employer securities as defined in section 407(d)(5) of ERISA.
    (5) TRASOP securities. ``TRASOP securities'' are employer securities 
that--
    (i) Are transferred to a TRASOP, or acquired with cash transferred 
to a TRASOP, to obtain an additional credit, and
    (ii) Except as provided under paragraphs (g) (4) and (5) of this 
section, or as required by applicable law, are subject to no other put, 
call, or other option, or buy-sell or similar arrangement while held by 
the plan.
    (6) Publicly traded. The term ``publicly traded'' has the meaning 
specified in Sec. 54.4975-7(b)(1)(iv) of this chapter.
    (7) Value--(i) In general. With respect to the transfer of TRASOP 
securities by a corporation to a TRASOP or the acquisition of TRASOP 
securities with cash transferred by a corporation to a

[[Page 237]]

TRASOP, ``value'' means fair market value determined in good faith and 
based on all relevant factors as of the date of transfer or acquisition 
of the TRASOP securities. If the plan acquires TRASOP securities from 
other than a disqualified person within the meaning of section 
4975(e)(2), a good faith determination of value includes a determination 
of fair market value based on an appraisal independently arrived at by a 
person who customarily makes such appraisals and who is independent of 
any person from whom the TRASOP securities are acquired.
    (ii) Twenty-day average rule. A special 20-day average valuation 
rule applies to certain publicly traded securities transferred by a 
corporation to a TRASOP. It does not apply to securities acquired with 
cash transferreed by a corporation to a TRASOP. Under the special rule, 
the term ``value'' refers to an average of daily closing prices for a 
security, as reported on any national securities exchange or as quoted 
on any system sponsored by a national securities association, over the 
20 consecutive trading days immediately preceding the applicable last 
day described in paragraph (c)(8)(i) of this section. The average is 
based on the closing prices for each day when the security is in fact 
traded during the 20-day period. However, the special rule does not 
apply unless the security is in fact traded for at least 10 of the 20 
days.
    (iii) 20-day average transitional exception. If a TRASOP security is 
transferred before March 20, 1979, the plan may value the security on 
the basis of the 20 consecutive trading days preceding the date on which 
the security is transferred or the date as of which the security is 
allocated to a participant's account.
    (8) Compensation. ``Compensation'' means ``participant's 
compensation'' under section 415(c)(3) and Sec. 1.415-2(d). However, 
except for purposes of applying section 415, compensation must be 
determined for a plan year, not a limitation year.
    (c) Procedures for additional credit--(1) Applicable year--(i) 
General rule. With respect to a qualified investment, the ``applicable 
year'' of a corporation is generally the taxable year in which the 
investment is made. For purposes of this section, an investment is made 
either in a year when section 38 property is placed in service or in a 
year when qualified progress expenditures are incurred.
    (ii) Carryover option. A corporation may determine the applicable 
years for qualified investments made in any taxable year beginning after 
December 31, 1976, under the following method: The first applicable year 
with respect to the additional credit for a given year's qualified 
investment is the year the qualified investment is made or, if later, 
the first taxable year for which any additional credit is allowable if 
claimed for that qualified investment. If there is an investment credit 
carryover from the first applicable year, each taxable year to which any 
part of the additional credit for that qualified investment is carried 
over is also an applicable year. If the carryover treatment is elected 
for the additional credit attributable to a year's qualified investment, 
all applicable years for the additional credit attributable to that 
investment must be determined under the carryover option.
    (iii) Increased credit. A taxable year in which a corporation's 
additional credit is increased because of a redetermination is also an 
applicable year. See paragraph (c)(9)(iv) of this section.
    (iv) Illustration. To illustrate the application of paragraphs 
(c)(1) (i) and (ii) of this section, assume that a calendar-year 
corporation makes a qualified investment in 1977 and that 1977 is an 
unused credit year described in section 46(b)(1). If the general rule is 
applied, 1977 is an applicable year. However, because 1977 is an unused 
credit year (at least with respect to the additional credit), if the 
corporation does not elect to treat 1977 as an applicable year but 
carries over its entire additional credit for 1977 to 1978 and uses it 
in 1978, then 1978 is an applicable year. If part of the additional 
credit is carried over further to 1979, the year 1979 is also an 
applicable year.
    (v) Change in method. The choice between the general rule and 
carryover option methods of determining the additional credit 
attributable to applicable years is made with respect to each year's 
qualified investment, and does

[[Page 238]]

not bind the corporation with respect to selection of methods for the 
additional credit attributable to other years' qualified investment. A 
failure to comply does not occur merely because a corporation elects to 
apply either method for the additional credit attributable to separate 
years' qualified investment.
    (2) Time and manner of electing. A corporation with a qualified 
investment must elect to be eligible for an additional credit by 
attaching a statement of election--
    (i) To its income tax return, filed on or before the due date 
including extensions of time, for a taxable year not later than its 
first applicable year with respect to a qualified investment, or
    (ii) In the case of a return filed before December 31, 1975, to an 
amended return filed on or before December 31, 1975.
    (3) Statement of election. The statement of election must contain 
the name and taxpayer identification number of the corporation. Also, it 
must declare in the following words, or in words having substantially 
the same meaning, that:
    (i) The corporation elects to have section 46(a)(2)(B)(i) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1954 apply; and
    (ii) The corporation agrees to implement (or continue to implement, 
as appropriate) a TRASOP and to claim the additional credit as required 
by Sec. 1.46-8 of the Income Tax Regulations.
    (4) Separate election. A separate election must be made for each 
taxable year's qualified investment to obtain an additional credit for 
that qualified investment. If a corporation does not make a timely 
election to obtain an additional credit for a taxable year, it may not 
subsequently make the election on an amended return or otherwise.
    (5) No partial election. An election to obtain an additional credit 
applies to a corporation's entire qualified investment for a taxable 
year. Thus, a corporation may not elect to obtain a partial additional 
credit for any year's qualified investment. However, the partial 
disallowance of an additional credit will not result in an election 
being treated as a partial election. Also, an election by a member of a 
controlled group of corporations that applies only to the electing 
member's qualified investment is not a partial election. See Sec. 1.46-
8(h)(9) with respect to transitional rules for elections made before 
January 19, 1979.
    (6) No revocation of election. After the time for electing the 
additional credit has expired for a taxable year, a corporation may not 
revoke its election for that year.
    (7) Establishing a TRASOP--(i) In general. A corporation electing to 
obtain an additional credit must establish a TRASOP with accompanying 
trust on or before the last day for making the election regardless of 
when in fact the election is made. A TRASOP is considered to be in 
existence on a particular date if it meets the requirements of 
Sec. 1.410(a)-2(c)(1). A new plan need not be established if an existing 
plan qualifies as a TRASOP, or is amended to meet the requirements of 
this section, on or before the last day for making the election. The 
requirements of this section are not satisfied merely by establishing 
and crediting a separate ``TRASOP'' account on the corporation's books.
    (ii) Type of plan. A TRASOP need not meet the requirements of 
section 401(a). However, it must be a stock bonus plan, a combination 
stock bonus plan and money purchase pension plan, or a profit-sharing 
plan under Sec. 1.401-1(b)(1) of this chapter. See section 301(d)(7)(A) 
of the 1975 TRA for the tax consequences relating to a TRASOP that does 
not meet the requirements of section 401(a). See also Title I of ERISA 
for additional provisions applicable to a TRASOP as an employee pension 
benefit plan under section 3(2) of ERISA.
    (8) Funding a TRASOP--(i) In general. A corporation electing to 
obtain an additional credit must fund its TRASOP by transferring TRASOP 
securities or cash to it no later than 30 days after the applicable last 
day. That day is the last day for electing the additional credit, 
irrespective of when the election is actually made. However, in the case 
of an investment credit that was carried over and claimed in a 
subsequent applicable year by reason of paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this 
section, that day is the last day (including extensions) for filing its 
income tax return

[[Page 239]]

for the subsequent applicable year. TRASOP securities may be transferred 
to a plan at any time during the applicable year, but not before the 
first day of an applicable year. If TRASOP securities are transferred to 
the plan within the permissible time period after the close of the 
applicable year, they are treated as transferred during that applicable 
year first until all TRASOP securities required by this paragraph (c) 
for that applicable year are transferred to, and taken into account 
under, the TRASOP. Thus, for example, assume that on a return filed on 
September 17, 1979 (with extensions, the last day for filing a return 
for 1978), a calendar-year corporation claims an additional credit of 
$5,000 for 1978, an applicable year under the TRASOP. No contributions 
were made in 1978 on account of the 1978 credit, but TRASOP securities 
with a value of $6,000 were contributed in 1979. The corporation also 
expects to be able to claim an additional credit of $10,000 for 1979. 
TRASOP securities transferred between January 1, 1979, and October 17, 
1979, must be taken into account under the plan for 1978 before they are 
taken into account for 1979. Accordingly, securities having a value of 
$5,000 are applied against the obligation for 1978, and $1,000 of the 
contribution is retained to be applied to the eventual obligation for 
1979.
    (ii) Cash transfers. A corporation may transfer cash to the TRASOP 
instead of TRASOP securities only if the TRASOP uses the cash to acquire 
TRASOP securities no later than 30 days after the time for funding the 
TRASOP.
    (iii) Valuation. The value of the TRASOP securities for an 
applicable year must equal one percent of the corporation's qualified 
investment for that year. However, if paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this 
section is followed by a corporation, the value of TRASOP securities for 
an applicable year must equal the amount of additional credit claimed 
for that year.
    (iv) Cash reserve. The value of TRASOP securities acquired with cash 
transferred by a corporation may be reduced by two items. The first item 
is an amount not more than the value of fractional shares allocable to 
participants entitled to receive an immediate distribution at the time 
of the transfer. The second item is start-up expenses and administrative 
expenses to the extent permitted under section 301(d)(13) of the 1975 
TRA and paragraphs (e) (6) and (7) of this section.
    (v) Conditional funding. The funding of a TRASOP may be conditional 
if the TRASOP satisfies the provisions of section 301(d)(14) of the 1975 
TRA. For purposes of section 301(d)(14), an investment credit is 
considered to be allowed on the date the election for the applicable 
year is made under paragraph (c)(2) of this section.
    (vi) Certain benefit offset mechanisms. A TRASOP will be deemed to 
be not funded to the extent that TRASOP securities are used to offset 
benefits under a defined benefit plan.
    (9) Claiming additional credit--(i) In general. Section 46(a)(3) 
subjects the amount of investment credit earned with respect to a 
taxpayer's qualified investment for a taxable year to a limitation based 
on the corporation's tax liability.
    (ii) Unused credit year. Section 46(a)(1) provides a first-in-first-
out rule for the investment credit in a taxable year. Section 46(b)(1) 
provides for the carryback and carryover of unused credits. If less than 
all of a taxpayer's credit earned for a taxable year is allowable, the 
10-percent credit determined under section 46(a)(2)(A) earned for a 
particular year is allowed first. Any portion of the additional credit 
for a taxable year that is not allowable may be carried back or carried 
over to the extent permitted by section 46(b)(1). However, an additional 
credit which is allowed for a taxable year is not reduced by a carryback 
to that year of an unused credit from a succeeding taxable year.
    (iii) Example. Paragraph (c)(9)(ii) of this section is illustrated 
by the following example:

    Example. A calendar-year corporation begins operation and 
establishes a TRASOP in 1975. The facts and treatment relating to the 
corporation's qualified investments and investment tax credits for 1975 
and 1976 are as follows:

[[Page 240]]



                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                     1975        1976   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Facts:                                                                  
  1. Qualified investment.......................    $500,000    $500,000
  2. Credits earned:                                                    
    a. 10% credit...............................      50,000      50,000
    b. Additional credit........................       5,000       5,000
    c. Carryover of additional credit from prior                        
     year, line 5...............................  ..........       3,000
  3. Sec. 46(a)(3) limitation                         52,000      47,000
Treatment of credits:                                                   
  4. Credits allowed:                                                   
    a. Carryover of additional credit...........  ..........       3,000
    b. Current 10% credit.......................      50,000      44,000
    c. Current additional credit................       2,000           0
  5. Unused credits:                                                    
    a. 10% credit...............................           0       6,000
    b. Additional credit........................       3,000       5,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Thus, in 1975 the section 46(a)(3) limitation ($52,000) is applied first 
to allow all of the 10-percent investment credit ($50,000). Accordingly 
only $2,000 of the additional credit earned is allowed in 1975 and 
$3,000 of the additional credit is carried forward to 1976. In 1976, 
section 46(a)(1) requires that this $3,000 of additional credit is 
allowed first, and then only $44,000 of the 10-percent credit earned in 
1976 is allowed since the section 46(a)(3) limitation for that year is 
$47,000. The unused credits from 1976 cannot be carried back since 1975, 
the only prior year, is an unused credit year.

    (iv) Redeterminations increasing credit. If a corporation's 
allowable additional credit is increased because of a redetermination, 
the increase is treated as if it were an unused credit carryover for 
purposes of paragraphs (c)(1)(ii) and (c)(8)(i) of this section. For 
purposes of this subdivision (iv), the date of the increase is 
determined under paragraph (e)(9)(iii) of this section as if it were the 
date of a reduction. Thus, for example, assume that a calendar-year 
corporation claims an additional credit of $100,000 in 1978 because of a 
qualified investment in that year. In 1980, the additional credit 
attributable to 1978 qualified investment is redetermined to be 
$110,000. With respect to the 1978 qualified investment, 1980 is also an 
applicable year to the extent of $10,000. The increased credit is 
reflected on the employer's return for 1980. The corporation must fund 
the TRASOP with this $10,000 under paragraph (c)(8) of this section.
    (v) Redeterminations increasing tax liability. If a corporation's 
tax liability for a year is increased such that an additional credit 
carried forward and claimed in a later year is allowable in the earlier 
year, the claim of the additional credit will be considered timely if it 
was otherwise timely under this section. Thus, for example, assume that 
a calendar-year corporation makes qualified investment of $5,000,000 in 
1978 but, based on its income tax liability, is unable to use any of the 
credit until 1979, when the entire $50,000 additional credit can be 
used. The corporation adopts the TRASOP, elects the full $50,000 credit 
and funds in a timely manner for tax year 1979. However, as a result of 
a 1981 redetermination of the 1978 tax liability, the corporation is 
able to use $30,000 of the additional credit in 1978 and the remaining 
$20,000 in 1979. The allowable credit for 1978 is increased by $30,000 
and the increase is treated as an unused credit carryover, for which the 
year of redetermination, 1981, is the applicable year. Assuming that no 
other credits are available, the 1979 credit is reduced from $50,000 to 
$20,000, and this reduction is taken into account in the redetermination 
year by offsetting the reduction against amounts due the plan or by 
deducting the amount of the reduction. The adoption of the TRASOP for 
1979, rather than 1978, is considered timely.
    (10) Deductions at expiration of carryover period. Under paragraph 
(c)(1)(i) of this section, a corporation that uses no additional credit 
in the year of a qualifed investment may nonetheless treat the year in 
which the qualified investment is made as the first applicable year. If 
the carryover period under section 46(b)(1)(B) expires before the 
corporation uses the entire additional credit with respect to the 
qualified investment, contributions attributable to the unused credit 
are deductible, subject to the limitations of section 404(a), as if made 
in the taxable year when the carryover period expires. The amount 
deductible is the dollar amount of the unused credit irrespective of the 
current value of the securities contributed with respect to the credit.
    (d) Formal plan requirements--(1) In general. To be a TRASOP, a plan 
must

[[Page 241]]

meet the formal requirements of this paragraph (d).
    (2) Plan year. To be a TRASOP, a plan must specify a plan year that 
begins with or within the corporation's taxable year.
    (3) Designed to invest primarily in employer securities. To be a 
TRASOP, a plan must state that it is designed to invest primarily in 
employer securities. A TRASOP intended to qualify as an ESOP under 
Sec. 54.4975-11 must state that it is designed to invest primarily in 
employer securities. See paragraph (e)(10) of this section concerning 
the requirement that a plan invest in employer securities on an ongoing 
basis.
    (4) Separate accounting. To be a TRASOP, a plan must state that 
TRASOP securities are to be accounted for separately from any other 
contributions to the plan.
    (5) Debts and expenses of the TRASOP. To be a TRASOP, a plan must 
state that TRASOP securities cannot be used to satisfy a loan made to 
the TRASOP or be used as collateral for a loan made to a TRASOP. 
However, if the plan so provides, to the extent permitted under section 
301(d)(13) of the 1975 TRA and paragraphs (e) (6) and (7) of this 
section, certain amounts may be used for the TRASOP's start-up expenses 
and administrative expenses.
    (6) Allocation of TRASOP securities--(i) General rules. To be a 
TRASOP, a plan must provide for the allocation of TRASOP securities 
under section 301(d)(3) of the 1975 TRA and this subparagraph (6).
    (ii) Timing. TRASOP securities are allocated as of the last day of 
the plan year beginning with or within the appropriate applicable year.
    (iii) Participants. Each employee who is a participant at any time 
during the plan year for which allocation is made must receive an 
allocation as of the end of that year even though not then employed by 
the employer. However, to receive allocations, employees must satisfy 
the minimum participation requirements of the plan (for example, 1,000 
hours of service).
    (iv) Compensation considered. Under section 301(d)(3) of the 1975 
TRA, allocations must be based on the proportion that each participant's 
compensation bears to all participants' compensation. Compensation in 
excess of $100,000 must be disregarded in making these allocations. A 
plan may have a lower stated ceiling on compensation (from $0 to 
$100,000) and if the plan has such a lower ceiling, compensation in 
excess of this ceiling must likewise be disregarded. Also, allocations 
must be based on a participant's compensation while actually employed, 
not just while actually participating, in the plan year.
    (v) Section 415 priority rule; transitional rule. For purposes of 
section 415, this subdivision (v) applies only to limitation years 
beginning after November 30, 1982. If a TRASOP security is not allocated 
to a participant's account for a plan year because of section 415 and 
section 301(d)(3) of the 1975 TRA, no other amount may be allocated for 
that participant under any defined contribution plan of the same 
employer after the actual allocation date for that TRASOP plan year, 
until all unallocated TRASOP securities have been allocated as provided 
in paragraphs (d)(6) (vi) and (vii) of this section. This subdivision 
(v) applies to a TRASOP when, under section 415(f)(1)(B), the TRASOP is 
treated along with an employer's other defined contribution plans as one 
plan for purposes of section 415.
    (vi) Unallocated amounts. Under section 301(d)(3) of the 1975 TRA, 
TRASOP securities unallocated for a plan year to participants' accounts 
because of section 415 must be allocated proportionately to the accounts 
of other participants until the addition to the account of each 
participant reaches the limits of section 415.
    (vii) Suspense account. If, after these allocations, TRASOP 
securities remain unallocated, they must be held in an unallocated 
suspense account under the TRASOP. Any income produced by these 
securities must also be held in the account. A plan with such an account 
will not fail to qualify under section 401(a) merely because of the 
account. In each successive TRASOP plan year (whether or not an 
applicable year), the unallocated assets are released from this account 
for allocation on a first-in-first-out basis. They are

[[Page 242]]

then allocated to the participants' accounts proportionately under 
paragraph (d)(6) (i) through (vi) of this section for each later year 
until no TRASOP securities remain unallocated. Value for this allocation 
is determined under paragraph (b)(7) of this section as of the date of 
transfer from the suspense account or, if the special 20-day average 
rule applies, the value is determined on the basis of the 20 consecutive 
trading days immediately preceding the date of transfer from the 
suspense account.
    (viii) Escrow account. A TRASOP may provide for the establishment of 
an escrow account instead of a suspense account. The escrow account must 
satisfy paragraph (d)(6)(vii) of this section. The beneficiary of the 
escrow account is to be the TRASOP. The corporation may establish the 
escrow account and contribute stock or cash to it. In such a case, the 
escrow agent must transfer assets to the plan each year equal to the 
amount to be allocated proportionately under paragraph (d)(6)(i)-(vi) of 
this section. Assets held in an escrow account are plan assets.
    (ix) Treatment of certain plan terminations. To be a TRASOP, a plan 
must provide that, if a plan terminates because the corporation ceases 
to exist, unallocated amounts described in paragraph (d)(6)(vi) of this 
section must be allocated to the extent possible under section 415 for 
the year of termination. The remaining unallocated amounts must then be 
withdrawn. These unallocated amounts are treated as recaptured under all 
the rules of paragraph (e)(9)(vii) of this section except its last 
sentence. See paragraph (d)(9)(i) of this section concerning 
distributions of allocated TRASOP securities.
    (x) No integration. No TRASOP may be integrated, directly or 
indirectly, with contributions or benefits under Title II of the Social 
Security Act or any other state or federal law.
    (xi) Fractional securities. Participants' accounts are to be 
allocated fractional securities or fractional rights to securities.
    (xii) Accounting for amounts withheld by employer or paid by plan as 
start-up or administrative expenses. An employer may withhold certain 
start-up and administrative expenses from TRASOP securities due the 
plan. Also, a plan may reduce amounts to be allocated to the extent that 
certain plan assets are used to reimburse the employer, for example for 
salaries of employees providing services to the plan, or to pay fees 
directly to independent contractors for expenses. These expenses do not 
reduce the amount of additional credit claimed and are not allowable as 
expenses in computing taxable income. Additional rules concerning these 
expenses are in paragraphs (e) (6) and (7) of this section.
    (7) Nonforfeitability. To be a TRASOP, a plan must state that each 
participant has a nonforfeitable right to allocated TRASOP securities. 
For purposes of this section, forfeitures described in section 411(a)(3) 
are not permitted. However, amounts shall not fail to be considered to 
be nonforfeitable if the plan provides for their return to the 
corporation--
    (i) In the case of conditional contributions, under section 
301(d)(14) of the 1975 TRA and paragraph (c)(8)(v) of this section, and
    (ii) In the case of investment credit recapture or an event deemed 
to be a recapture, under section 301(f) of the 1975 TRA and paragraph 
(f) of this section.
    (8) Voting rights--(i) Provision for passthrough. To be a TRASOP, a 
plan must state that each participant is entitled to direct a designated 
fiduciary how to exercise any voting rights on TRASOP securities 
allocated to the account of the participant. The plan need not permit 
participants to direct the voting of unallocated TRASOP or other 
securities held by the trust. It may authorize the designated fiduciary 
to exercise voting rights for unallocated securities.
    (ii) Notification by the employer. To be a TRASOP, the plan must 
obligate the corporation to furnish the designated fiduciary and 
participants with notices and information statements when voting rights 
are to be exercised. The time and manner for furnishing participants 
with a notice or information statement must comply with both applicable 
law and the corporation's charter and bylaws as generally applicable to 
security holders. In general, the content of the

[[Page 243]]

statement must be the same for plan participants as for other security 
holders.
    (iii) Fractional securities. To be a TRASOP, the plan must allow the 
participants to vote any allocated fractional securities or fractional 
rights to securities. This requirement is met if the designated 
fiduciary votes the combined fractional securities or rights to the 
extent possible to reflect the direction of the voting participants.
    (iv) Unexercised voting rights. To be a TRASOP, the plan may not 
permit the designated fiduciary to exercise voting rights which a 
participant fails to exercise. However, the plan may permit the 
solicitation and exercise of participants' voting rights by management 
and others under a proxy provision applicable to all security holders.
    (9) Distributions--(i) In general. To be a TRASOP, a plan must 
permit the distribution of allocated TRASOP securities only as provided 
under section 301(d)(4) of the 1975 TRA. Also, under Sec. 1.401-
1(b)(1)(i) of this chapter, to the extent that a TRASOP is a money 
purchase pension plan, it can only provide for a distribution in the 
case of separation from service, death, or disability. No TRASOP may 
provide for the distribution of TRASOP securities upon plan termination 
within the 84-month holding period. For purposes of section 301(d)(4) of 
the 1975 TRA, the 84-month holding period begins on the date as of which 
TRASOP securities are allocated.
    (ii) Certain fractional securities. A stock bonus TRASOP may 
distribute cash instead of fractional securities.
    (e) Operational plan requirements--(1) General rule. To be a TRASOP, 
a plan in operation must meet the requirements of this paragraph (e). 
However, the provisions under paragraph (e)(8) of this section apply 
only to TRASOPs qualified under section 401(a).
    (2) Compliance with plan provisions. To be a TRASOP, a plan must 
operate in compliance with its provisions. Failure to operate in 
compliance with plan provisions constitutes an operational failure to 
comply. See paragraph (h)(5)(iii) of this section.
    (3) Compliance with certain Code provisions. To be a TRASOP, a plan 
must meet the requirements of section 301(d)(7) of the 1975 TRA. Thus, 
whether or not it is qualified under section 401(a), a TRASOP must meet 
the requirements of section 401(a) with respect to allocations, section 
410 with respect to participation, and section 415 with respect to 
limitations on contributions and benefits. However, these requirements 
are modified by paragraph (d)(6) of this section, relating to 
allocations and section 415.
    (4) Employee contributions. Under a TRASOP, the participants' 
receipt of benefits attributable to TRASOP securities contributed for 
the additional credit (but not the extra additional credit) must not 
depend on contributions by participants. If a corporation has a plan in 
existence which requires employee contributions, a portion of the plan 
may be a TRASOP if employee contributions are not required with respect 
to that portion of the plan.
    (5) Controlled group of corporations, etc. Whether or not a TRASOP 
is qualified under section 401(a), all employees who by reason of 
section 414 (b) and (c) are treated as employees of an electing 
corporation are treated as employed by the corporation in determining 
whether the plan satisfies the requirements of sections 301(d)(7) (B) 
and (C) of the 1975 TRA. A member of a controlled group under paragraph 
(b)(4)(i) of this section with a qualified investment but with no actual 
employees may obtain an additional credit even though the only 
participants in the corporation's TRASOP are actually employed by 
another member of the controlled group.
    (6) Start-up expenses--(i) In general. For purposes of this section, 
the term ``start-up expense'' means any ordinary and necessary amount of 
a nonrecurring nature paid or incurred by the corporation or by the plan 
in connection with the establishment of a TRASOP under paragraph (c)(7) 
of this section. Thus, for example, start-up expenses may include 
expenses relating to: the drafting or amending of plan documents to 
establish a TRASOP under section 301(d) or (e) of the 1975 TRA, the 
seeking of agency approval for these documents and related transactions, 
the obtaining of shareholder approval for establishing a TRASOP, and the 
registering of securities for initial funding of a TRASOP.

[[Page 244]]

    (ii) Treatment of start-up expenses. Start-up expenses may be 
withheld by the employer from amounts that would otherwise be due the 
plan under paragraph (c)(8) of this section, to the extent that these 
amounts are known by the employer when funding first occurs for an 
applicable year. To the extent that these amounts are not withheld by 
the employer, the plan may pay remaining amounts from plan assets within 
a reasonable time after the amounts are known by the plan.
    (iii) Ceiling on start-up expenses. Reimbursement for start-up 
expenses is limited to a ceiling. This ceiling is the sum of 10 percent 
of the first $100,000 that an employer is first required to transfer 
under paragraph (c)(8) of this section for an applicable year and 5 
percent of that amount in excess of $100,000. If this first year is an 
unused credit year from which there is a carryover, amounts required to 
be transferred in subsequent years for claiming carryovers from this 
first year are considered in determining this ceiling. Thus, for 
example, assume that a calendar-year corporation first earns an 
additional credit in 1977 of $9,000 and that $3,000 of this amount is 
claimed on the income tax return for 1977, for 1978 and for 1979. The 
corporation's ceiling on start-up expenses is $300 when its 1977 return 
is filed. The total ceiling increases to $600 when its 1978 return is 
filed and to $900 when its 1979 return is filed, with the claiming of an 
additional $3,000 credit for each of the three years.
    (iv) Special rule for taxable years ending before January 1, 1977. 
Special treatment is available for expenses paid or incurred before 
January 1, 1977, that were not taken into account in the manner provided 
by section 301(d)(13) of the 1975 TRA. These expenses may be withdrawn 
under paragraph (e)(9)(vii) of this section in the same manner as 
reductions in the corporation's additional credit caused by a recapture. 
This withdrawal may only be made during the first taxable year ending 
after March 20, 1979. It is subject to the ceiling of section 301(d)(13) 
of the 1975 TRA. Expenses previously deducted by a corporation must be 
reduced on a timely-filed amended return by the amount of this 
withdrawal.
    (7) Administrative expenses--(i) In general. For purposes of this 
section, the term ``administrative expense'' means any amount, other 
than a start-up expense, paid or incurred by the corporation or by the 
plan that is ordinary and necessary in maintaining the TRASOP. Thus, for 
example, administrative expenses may include expenses relating to: 
compensating plan fiduciaries and administrators, leasing office space 
and equipment, reproducing and mailing information to participants and 
beneficiaries, and filing reports, returns, and amendments relating to a 
TRASOP. Paragraph (e)(6) (ii) and (iv), relating to treatment of start-
up expenses and to a special rule for taxable years ending before 
January 1, 1977, also applies to administrative expenses.
    (ii) Ceiling on administrative expenses. Reimbursement for 
administrative expenses under paragraph (e)(6)(ii) of this section is 
limited to the smaller of two amounts for each plan year. The first 
amount is $100,000. The second amount is the sum of 10 percent of the 
first $100,000 of dividend income paid with respect to TRASOP securities 
held by the plan during the plan year ending with or within the 
corporation's taxable year and 5 percent of any such dividend income in 
excess of $100,000.
    (8) TRASOP qualification under section 401(a)--(i) Permanence. A 
TRASOP is not required to be a qualified plan under section 401(a). 
However, to meet the requirements of section 401(a), a TRASOP must be a 
permanent plan, as described in Sec. 1.401-1(b)(2) of this chapter. 
Under section 401(a)(21), a plan will not fail to be considered 
permanent merely because the amount of employer contributions under the 
plan is determined solely by reference to the amount of additional 
credit allowable under this section. Thus, for example, it will not fail 
to be considered permanent merely because employer contributions are not 
made for a year for which an additional credit is not available by 
reason of no qualified investment for which an additional credit can be 
obtained. Section 401(a)(21) applies only to the extent the TRASOP is 
funded with TRASOP securities and cash in lieu of TRASOP securities.

[[Page 245]]

    (ii) Partial discontinuance of contributions. A plan that meets the 
requirements of section 401(a) may receive contributions of TRASOP 
securities as well as other contributions. If the other contributions 
continue on a permanent basis, the plan's qualification under section 
401(a) will not be adversely affected merely because TRASOP securities 
cease to be contributed to it. The discontinuance of TRASOP 
contributions does not alter the requirement that past TRASOP 
contributions remain invested in employer securities. See paragraph 
(e)(10) of this section.
    (iii) Income distribution. Income paid with respect to employer 
securities acquired by a TRASOP may be distributed at any time after 
receipt by the plan to participants on whose behalf such securities have 
been allocated without adversely affecting the qualified status of the 
plan under section 401(a). (See the last sentence of section 803(h), Tax 
Reform Act of 1976.) However, under a TRASOP that is a stock bonus or 
profit-sharing plan, income held by the plan for a 2-year period or 
longer must be distributed under rules generally applicable to stock 
bonus and profit-sharing plans qualified under section 401(a). Income 
distributed by a TRASOP is not subject to the partial exclusion of 
dividends provided in section 116, whether or not the income is held by 
the plan for two or more years.
    (9) Reductions in investment credit--(i) General rule. Certain 
reductions in a corporation's investment credit result from either a 
recapture under section 47 of the corporation's investment credit or a 
redetermination of the allowable credit. If these reductions are taken 
into account under a TRASOP, the plan may only use one or more of the 
methods described in paragraphs (e)(9), (v), (vi), and (vii) of this 
section for taking into account these reductions. Thus, for example, 
more than one method is permitted upon a recapture with respect to a 
qualified investment made in a particular year. However, the method 
described in paragraphs (e)(9)(vii) of this section applies only to a 
recapture and not to a redetermination.
    (ii) Ratable reduction. A reduction is allocated ratably between the 
10-percent credit and the additional credit. Thus, for example, if a 
calendar-year corporation claims a $33,000 investment credit for 1976, 
including $3,000 additional credit, and $11,000 of the total credit is 
recaptured in 1978, the $3,000 additional credit is reduced by $1,000. 
This subdivision (ii) does not apply to a reduction solely of the 
additional credit as could occur, for example, in the case of a 
redetermination caused by a mathematical error in computing the 
additional credit or in the case of a recapture caused by a bad faith 
failure to comply under paragraph (h) of this section.
    (iii) Date of reduction. A reduction in investment credit occurs 
under this paragraph (e)(9) on the earliest of these dates: (A) The date 
an income tax return (or an amended return) is filed reflecting the 
reduction; (B) the date a judicial determination affecting the amount of 
the reduction becomes final; and (C) the date specified in a closing 
agreement made under section 7121 that is approved by the Commissioner. 
For purposes of this subdivision (iii), a judicial determination becomes 
final at the time prescribed in Sec. 1.547-2(b)(1) (ii) or (iii), 
relating to personal holding company tax.
    (iv) Year for taking reduction into account. A reduction in 
investment credit must be taken into account in the earliest year or 
years possible under the applicable method beginning no later than the 
year in which the date of the reduction falls.
    (v) Decrease future contributions. The reduction may be taken into 
account as a decrease in the value of TRASOP securities to be 
transferred to the plan. The amount of the decrease is equal to the 
dollar amount of the reduction.
    (vi) Deduct under section 404. On the date of the reduction, the 
amount of the reduction may be treated as an amount paid to the TRASOP 
for purposes of, and as a deduction to the extent allowed under, section 
404.
    (vii) Withdraw TRASOP securities. If an additional credit allowed 
for a taxable year is recaptured, the corporation may withdraw from the 
plan TRASOP securities transferred to, or acquired by, the plan for 
claiming that year's credit. The withdrawal must only be from assets 
segregated under

[[Page 246]]

paragraph (f)(2) of this section and must be first from assets accounted 
for in an unallocated suspense account for the particular year. The 
amount of assets actually withdrawn bears the same proportion to the 
amount of assets subject to withdrawal as the amount of additional 
credit recaptured bears to the amount of additional credit claimed. 
Thus, for example, if the assets subject to withdrawal consist of 300 
shares of one class of employer stock and one-third of the additional 
credit is recaptured, 100 shares of the stock are withdrawn. However, if 
the current value of the assets subject to withdrawal exceeds the dollar 
amount of the additional credit claimed, assets may be withdrawn only to 
the extent that their current value does not exceed the dollar amount of 
the recaptured portion of the additional credit. Thus, for example, if 
the 300 segregated shares in the prior example have a current value of 
$9,000 and the dollar value of the additional credit claimed is $4,500, 
when one-third of the additional credit is recaptured, only 50 shares, 
not 100 shares, are withdrawn. Current value is determined under 
paragraph (b)(7) of this section as of the withdrawal date or, if the 
special 20-day average rule is applied, it is based on the 20 
consecutive trading days immediately preceding the withdrawal date. 
Withdrawals from an individual's account for the year with respect to 
which recapture occurs must bear the same ratio to the total amount 
withdrawn for that year as the individual's TRASOP account balance for 
that year bears to the total TRASOP account balances for that year. In 
the case of a TRASOP security acquired after March 20, 1979, the 
corporation may not withdraw it unless the plan meets the requirements 
of paragraph (d)(7)(ii) of this section when the plan acquires the 
TRASOP security.
    (viii) Prior distribution rule. If a TRASOP distributes an amount 
allocated with respect to an investment credit for a taxable year and 
the credit for that year is later recaptured, withdrawals may not reduce 
participants' accounts below the level to which they would have been 
reduced had the prior distribution not occurred. Recaptured amounts 
above this level may only be deducted under paragraph (e)(9)(vi) of this 
section. They may not be used to decrease future contributions under 
paragraph (e)(9)(v).
    (ix) Illustration. The operation of paragraph (e)(9)(viii) of this 
section is illustrated as follows:

    Example. For 1977, a calendar-year corporation claims an additional 
credit of $10,000. The corporation's TRASOP meets the requirements of 
section 301(f) of the 1975 TRA. Each of 10 participants under the plan 
for that year receives an equal allocation of 10 shares valued at 
$1,000. In 1978, one participant terminates employment and receives a 
distribution of 10 shares. In 1979, a recapture reduces the 1977 
additional credit by $2,000. The value of employer securities has not 
changed from the allocation date. If the 10 shares had not been 
distributed, 20 shares would be available for withdrawal, 2 shares from 
each participant's account. Since 9 participants remain from 1977, only 
18 shares are available for withdrawal (2 shares x 9 remaining 
participants). If these 18 shares are withdrawn, the corporation may 
take into account 2 shares by deducting their value to the extent 
permitted under paragraph (e)(9)(vi) of this section.

    (10) Continued investment in employer securities. The requirement 
that a plan be designed to invest primarily in employer securities is a 
continuing obligation. Therefore, a transaction changing the status of a 
corporation as an employer may require the conversion of certain plan 
assets into other securities. See paragraphs (d)(9) and (g)(6) of this 
section. In general, cash or other assets derived from the disposition 
of employer securities must be reinvested in employer securities not 
later than the 90th day following the date of disposition. However, the 
Commissioner may grant an extension of the period for reinvestment in 
employer securities depending on the facts and circumstances of each 
case.
    (f) Section 301(f) withdrawals--(1) In general. No assets may be 
withdrawn by a corporation under section 301(f) of the 1975 TRA unless 
the assets are either TRASOP securities or plan assets into which TRASOP 
securities have been converted (``withdrawal assets''). See paragraph 
(e)(10) concerning restrictions on investment of TRASOP assets in assets 
other than employer securities. Withdrawal assets must meet the 
segregated accounting requirements of this paragraph. The

[[Page 247]]

physical segregation of assets is not required.
    (2) Segregated accounting. The segregated accounting requirements 
are that--
    (i) Withdrawal assets must be segregated from other plan assets on a 
taxable-year-by-taxable-year basis; and
    (ii) Separate accounts must be maintained on a taxable-year-by-
taxable-year basis for each participant on whose behalf withdrawal 
assets are allocated.
    (3) Aggregate plan year accounting. Withdrawal assets for taxable 
years beginning before October 4, 1976, also meet the segregated 
accounting requirements if they are aggregated and accounted for in one 
separate account apart from withdrawal assets in separate accounts for 
later taxable years.
    (g) Requirements for employer securities--(1) General rules. The 
term ``employer security'' does not include stock rights, warrants and 
options. An employer security that is not common stock must at all times 
be immediately convertible into common stock that is an employer 
security at a conversion price which is no greater than the fair market 
value of that common stock at the time the plan acquires the security.
    (2) Common stock--(i) In general. To be an employer security, common 
stock must meet certain voting power and dividend right requirements. 
For purposes of this paragraph (g), stock held by the TRASOP is not 
treated as outstanding.
    (ii) Dividend right limitations. If dividend rights are subject to a 
limitation, then stock representing at least 50 percent of the fair 
market value of the employer's outstanding common stock at the time the 
commmon stock is transferred to or purchased by the TRASOP must be 
subject to the same limitation. However, common stock that satisfies 
paragraph (g)(3)(ii) of this section is not subject to this subdivision 
(ii).
    (3) Voting power and dividend rights. To be an employer security, 
common stock must have voting power and dividend rights which, when 
taken together, are ``no less favorable'' than the voting power and 
dividend rights of any other common stock issued by the employer. Common 
stock which meets one of the following tests is ``no less favorable''.
    (i) Ten-percent shareholder test. The stock is part of, or identical 
to, a class of outstanding stock of which at least 50 percent is not 
owned by 10-percent shareholders. For this purpose, a 10-percent 
shareholder is one who owns at least 10 percent of the outstanding 
shares in a class, including shares constructively owned under section 
318.
    (ii) Substantial proportionality test. More than one class of common 
stock is outstanding and an identical percentage of shares from each 
class is transferred to the TRASOP.
    (iii) Voting power test. The stock is part of, or identical to, the 
existing class of stock having the greatest number of votes per unit of 
fair market value. For example, assume there are only two classes of 
common stock, Class A and Class B. Their fair market values per share 
are $1 and $.50, respectively, and the owner of each share of each class 
is entitled to one vote per share. Thus, Class B has two votes per $1 
and Class A has one vote per $1. Accordingly, the Class B stock has the 
greatest number of votes per unit of fair market value.
    (4) Right of first refusal. TRASOP securities may, but need not, be 
subject to a right of first refusal. However, whether or not the plan is 
an ESOP, any such right must meet the requirements of Sec. 54.4975-
7(b)(9) of this chapter.
    (5) Put option. A TRASOP security that is transferred to a TRASOP 
after September 30, 1976, must be subject to a put option if it is not 
publicly traded when distributed or if it is subject to a trading 
limitation when distributed. The provisions of Sec. 54.4975-7(b)(10)-
(12) and Sec. 54.4975-11(a)(3) of this chapter apply to such securities 
whether or not the plan is an ESOP.
    (6) Change of employer security status. In general, a transaction 
changing the status of a corporation as an employer, or as a member of a 
controlled group of corporations including the employer, adversely 
affects the status as employer securities of common stock and securities 
held by a plan (``old employer securities''). However, to the extent 
that the transaction causing the change in status of the old employer

[[Page 248]]

securities does not result in a recapture under section 47 of any 
investment credit underlying the transfer to, or acquisition by, the 
plan of the old employer securities, common stock and securities (``new 
employer securities'') substituted for old employer securities are 
treated as if they were the old employer securities if--
    (i) The plan is not terminated,
    (ii) The old employer securities and the new employer securities are 
of equal value at the time of the transaction changing the status of the 
old employer securities, and
    (iii) The new employer securities otherwise meet the requirements of 
this section.
    (h) Failure to comply--(1) General rule--(i) Effect of failure. If a 
corporation elects under paragraphs (c)(2) through (5) of this section 
to obtain an additional credit and fails to comply with respect to that 
credit at any time, it is liable to the United States for a civil 
penalty equal to the amount involved in the failure to comply. If the 
corporation fails to comply with respect to an additional credit during 
the 84-month period described in section 301(d)(4) of the 1975 TRA, the 
credit is also recaptured. A separate failure to comply occurs for each 
taxable year in which a failure continues to exist.
    (ii) Illustration of continuing failure's effect. Assume that in 
1975 an additional credit is allowed and a failure to comply occurs in 
1975 with respect to that credit. Assume also that in 1976 the 1975 
failure continues uncorrected, another additional credit is allowed, and 
a failure to comply occurs with respect to the 1976 credit. Under these 
circumstances, on the last day of 1976 three separate failures to comply 
exist: (A) The 1975 failure with respect to the 1975 credit, (B) the 
1976 failure with respect to the 1975 credit, and (C) the 1976 failure 
with respect to the 1976 credit.
    (2) Assessment and collection. The civil penalty must be assessed 
and collected in the same manner in which a deficiency in the payment of 
federal income tax is assessed and collected.
    (3) Exception. If a failure to comply is corrected within the 
correction period described in paragraph (h)(5) of this section--
    (i) The corporation is not liable for a civil penalty; and
    (ii) If the corporation establishes that at the time of the failure 
a good faith effort to comply was made, its additional credit is not 
disallowed.
    (4) Failure to comply (penalty classifications)--(i) In general. An 
electing corporation fails to comply if a defect described in paragraphs 
(h)(4) (ii) through (iv) of this section occurs with respect to an 
additional credit allowed for a particular taxable year. The 
characterization of the defect in this subparagraph (4) determines the 
amount involved under paragraph (h)(8) of this section for the purpose 
of assessing the civil penalty.
    (ii) Funding defect. A funding defect occurs if a corporation or its 
TRASOP fails to satisfy the requirements of paragraph (c) (8) or (9) of 
this section, relating to funding a TRASOP and claiming an additional 
credit.
    (iii) Special operational defect. A special operational defect 
occurs if a TRASOP fails in operation to satisfy the requirements 
described in paragraphs (d) (5) through (9) of this section, relating to 
debts and expenses of a TRASOP, allocation of TRASOP securities, 
nonforfeitability, voting rights, and distributions, or paragraph (e)(3) 
of this section, relating to compliance with certain Code provisions.
    (iv) De minimis defect. A de minimis defect occurs if a corporation 
or its TRASOP fails to satisfy any requirement of this section other 
than those enumerated either in paragraph (h)(4) (ii) and (iii) of this 
section or in paragraphs (a)(2) and (c) (2) through (5) of this section. 
A failure to comply under this subdivision (iv) may be formal or 
operational in nature.
    (5) Failure to comply (correction rules classifications)--(i) In 
general. If for an electing corporation a defect described in paragraph 
(h)(4) of this section occurs, the procedure for correcting the failure 
to comply depends upon whether the failure is classified as a ``formal'' 
failure or an ``operational'' failure under this subparagraph (5).
    (ii) Formal failure to comply. Formal failures are corrected by 
retroactive amendment. If a formal plan requirement is not met, the plan 
must be retroactively amended by no later than

[[Page 249]]

the expiration of the correction period under paragraph (h)(6) of this 
section. A plan fails to meet a formal plan requirement of paragraph (d) 
of this section if, for example, it does not state, as required by 
paragraph (d)(3) of this section, that it is designed to invest 
primarily in employer securities.
    (iii) Operational failure to comply. Operational failures are 
corrected by undoing the defective transaction and by making the plan 
and the participants whole. If the value of TRASOP securities 
transferred to the TRASOP is less than the amount of the additional 
credit, the corporation must make up any resulting funding deficiency 
within the correction period. This is done, for example, by contributing 
additional TRASOP securities plus an amount equal to the dividends or 
interest that would have been paid between the time that the TRASOP 
securities should have been transferred and the actual time for the 
transfer. The contribution of additional TRASOP securities is based on 
their value under paragraph (b)(7) of this section as of the date by 
which they were required to be transferred to the plan. An electing 
corporation fails to meet an obligation undertaken under this section 
if, for example, it fails to comply with paragraph (c)(8) of this 
section.
    (6) Correction period--(i) In general. For purposes of this 
paragraph (h), the ``correction period'' begins when the failure to 
comply occurs and ends 90 days after receipt by the corporation of a 
notice of deficiency under section 6212 with respect to the civil 
penalty and the investment credit.
    (ii) Extensions of correction period. Extensions of the correction 
period are determined under Sec. 53.4941(e)-1(d)(2) (i), (ii), and (iv) 
of this chapter (Foundation Excise Tax Regulations). For this purpose, a 
failure to comply is treated as an act of self-dealing, the corporation 
is treated as a foundation, and a civil penalty is treated as a tax 
under section 4941(a)(1).
    (7) Good faith. The corporation has the burden of establishing under 
paragraph (h)(3)(ii) of this section that it made a good faith effort to 
comply. For example, if a corporation shows that it has made a good 
faith effort to establish the fair market value of the employer 
securities transferred to the TRASOP, it may be entitled to the 
additional credit even if, on later examination of the return, it is 
determined that more securities should have been transferred. For 
purposes of this paragraph (h)(7), reasonable reliance on Technical 
Information Release 1413 (1975-50 I.R.B. 16), questions and answers 
relating to ESOP's, is a good faith effort to comply.
    (8) Amount involved--(i) In general. The amount involved in a 
failure to comply is an amount described in this subparagraph (8). A 
maximum amount and a minimum amount are determined with respect to an 
additional credit allowed for a particular taxable year.
    (ii) Maximum amount involved. Notwithstanding any other rule in this 
paragraph (h), all amounts involved with respect to an additional credit 
allowed for a particular taxable year may not exceed the amount of that 
credit.
    (iii) Minimum amount involved. The minimum amount is \1/2\ of one 
percent of the additional credit times the number of full months, or 
parts of full months, during which the failure to comply exists. ``Full 
month'' has the meaning assigned in Sec. 1.1250-1(d)(4) (realty 
depreciation recapture).
    (iv) Funding amount involved. The amount involved for a funding 
defect is the greater of the minimum amount involved or the amount 
required to place the plan in the position it would have been in if no 
funding defect had occurred.
    (v) Special operational amount involved. The amount involved for a 
special operational defect is the maximum amount involved.
    (vi) De minimis amount involved. The amount involved for a de 
minimis defect is the minimum amount involved.
    (9) Certain permissible actions--(i) Elections prior to January 19, 
1979. A corporation does not fail to comply (within the meaning of this 
paragraph (h)) merely because it revokes an election made prior to 
January 19, 1979, under the general rule described in paragraph 
(c)(1)(i) of this section and with respect to which no additional credit 
was claimed in the taxable year for which

[[Page 250]]

the election was made. Such a revocation is permitted irrespective of 
whether the carryover option described in paragraph (c)(1)(ii) is 
elected with respect to qualified investment made in a year for which a 
general rule election is revoked.
    (ii) Pro rata use of credit. A corporation does not fail to comply 
merely because, for an applicable year ending prior to January 19, 1979, 
it provides for pro rata use of the regular 10-percent credit and the 1-
percent additional credit to the extent that less than all of a 
taxpayer's credit earned for a taxable year is allowable.
    (iii) Transitional rule. The Commissioner, based on the particular 
facts and circumstances of individual cases, may determine that a good 
faith failure to comply before January 19, 1979, with a final or 
temporary rule adopted under this section on or after that date does not 
require retroactive correction under paragraph (h)(5)(ii) of this 
section.

(Sec. 301(d)(2)(C) of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975; sec. 7805 of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (89 Stat. 38, 68A Stat. 917; 26 U.S.C. 
7805))

[T.D. 7857, 47 FR 54795, Dec. 6, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1.46-9  Requirements for taxpayers electing an extra one-half percent additional investment credit.

    (a) Introduction--(1) In general. A corporation that qualifies for 
an additional credit under Sec. 1.46-8 may elect under section 
46(a)(2)(B)(ii) of the Code to obtain an extra one-half percent 
additional investment credit for property described in section 
46(a)(2)(D). Paragraph (c) of this section provides additional 
procedures for electing this extra credit. This section also provides 
rules for implementing an employee stock ownership plan that meets the 
requirements of sections 301 (d) and (e) of the Tax Reduction Act of 
1975 (``1975 TRA''). The plan must meet the additional formal 
requirements of paragraph (d), and the additional operational 
requirements of paragraph (e) of this section. Unless otherwise 
indicated, statutory references in this section are to the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1954, as applicable for the year in which a qualified 
investment is made.
    (2) Applicability of one-percent TRASOP provisions. Subject to the 
exceptions and additional rules of this section, the provisions of 
Sec. 1.46-8 apply to an election made, and to a plan implemented, under 
this section. However, this section does not change the requirements of 
Sec. 1.46-8 for purposes of obtaining an additional one-percent credit.
    (3) Effective date. This section applies only to taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1976. See section 803(j)(2)(A) of the Tax 
Reform Act of 1976.
    (b) Definitions--(1) One-percent terms. When used in this section, 
the terms listed below have the same meanings as in Sec. 1.46-8(b):
    (i) TRASOP. See Sec. 1.46-8(b)(1).
    (ii) Employer. See Sec. 1.46-8(b)(3).
    (iii) Employer securities. See Sec. 1.46-8(b)(4).
    (iv) TRASOP securities. See Sec. 1.46-8(b)(5).
    (v) Publicly traded. See Sec. 1.46-8(b)(6).
    (vi) Value. See Sec. 1.46-8(b)(7).
    (vii) Compensation. See Sec. 1.46-8(b)(8).
    (2) Additional credit. An ``additional credit'' or ``extra 
additional credit'' is the extra one-half percent additional investment 
credit under section 46(a)(2)(B)(ii)--
    (i) For purposes of applying this section, and
    (ii) When the context requires, for purposes of applying Sec. 1.46-8 
to this extra credit.
    (3) Matching employee contribution. A ``matching employee 
contribution'' is a contribution that meets the requirements of 
paragraph (f) of this section.
    (4) Basic amount. A ``basic amount'' is a matching employee 
contribution which is equal to the maximum credit multiplied by a 
fraction. The numerator of this fraction is a participant's compensation 
for the plan year. (See Sec. 1.46-9(f)(3)(ii), concerning disregarded 
compensation.) The denominator is the aggregate of all participants' 
compensation for the plan year. The ``maximum credit'' is the estimated 
value of all employer contributions under paragraph (c)(4)(i) of this 
section for the applicable year, determined as if the maximum possible 
matching employee contributions were made.

[[Page 251]]

    (5) Supplemental contribution. A ``supplemental contribution'' is a 
matching employee contribution made in addition to a basic amount.
    (c) Special procedures for extra additional credit--(1) Statement of 
election. A corporation's statement of election described in Sec. 1.46-
8(c)(3) must contain the name and taxpayer identification number of the 
corporation. Also, it must declare in the following words, or in words 
having substantially the same meaning, that:
    (i) The corporation elects to have section 46(a)(2)(B) (i) and (ii) 
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 apply; and
    (ii) The corporation agrees to implement (or continue to implement, 
as appropriate) a TRASOP and to claim the additional credit as required 
by Sec. 1.46-8 and Sec. 1.46-9 of the Income Tax Regulations.
    (2) Separate election. A separate election must be made for each 
year's qualified investment to obtain the extra additional credit for 
the qualified investment. If a corporation does not make a timely 
election to obtain an extra additional credit for a taxable year, it may 
not subsequently make the election on an amended return or otherwise.
    (3) No partial election. To reduce administrative costs, a plan may 
establish a ceiling on matching employee contributions. Thus, for 
example, it may provide for the contribution of only a basic amount 
without supplemental contributions under paragraph (f)(2)(iv) of this 
section. Such a ceiling that in effect limits the additional credit to 
less than one-half percent of the qualified investment is not a partial 
election prohibited by Sec. 1.46-8(c)(5).
    (4) Funding a TRASOP--(i) Employer contributions. The carryover 
option under Sec. 1.46-8(c)(1)(ii) is available for both the one-percent 
and one-half percent additional credits or for the one-half percent 
additional credit alone. In applying Sec. 1.46-8(c)(8)(iii), the value 
of TRASOP securities, other than those acquired with matching employee 
contributions, for an applicable year must equal one-half percent of the 
corporation's qualified investment for that year or, if less, the amount 
of matching employee contributions received (including pledges, where 
permitted by the plan) by the time the election for that year is made. 
However, if a corporation exercises the carryover option in Sec. 1.46-
8(c)(1)(ii), the value of these TRASOP securities for an applicable year 
must equal the amount of additional credit claimed for that year 
determined after being reduced, if necessary, to equal contributions 
received (including pledges, if permitted) by the time the credit is 
claimed for that year. The value of these TRASOP securities, but not the 
amount of credit claimed, is further reduced to the extent that the 
employer withholds TRASOP securities to take into account start-up and 
administrative expenses under paragraph (e)(1) of this section or an 
investment tax credit reduction under paragraph (e)(2) of this section.
    (ii) Employee contributions. Paragraph (f)(4) of this section, but 
not Sec. 1.46-8(c)(8) (i) through (iii), applies to TRASOP securities 
acquired with matching employee contributions.
    (5) Claiming additional credit. In applying Sec. 1.46-8(c)(9)(ii), 
if less than all of a corporation's credit earned for a taxable year is 
allowed, the extra additional credit under this section for that year is 
allowed last.
    (d) Additional formal plan requirements--(1) Contributions by 
employees--(i) In general. The plan must contain statements relating to 
matching employee contributions as required under paragraph (f) of this 
section.
    (ii) Aggregate floor. A plan may provide for the return of all 
matching employee contributions for a year if the aggregate amount of 
such contributions is not at least equal to an amount stated in the 
plan. See also Sec. 1.46-9(f)(3)(iv).
    (2) Separate accounting. The plan must state that employer 
contributions and matching employee contributions respectively described 
in paragraph (c)(4)(i) and (ii) of this section are accounted for 
separately from each other as well as from other contributions, 
including those described in Sec. 1.46-8(c)(8).
    (3) Allocation of TRASOP securities contributed by employer. The 
plan must provide for the allocation under section 301(e)(5) of the 1975 
TRA and this subparagraph (3) of TRASOP securities

[[Page 252]]

contributed by the employer. These allocations reflect a ratable 
reduction for TRASOP securities withheld by the employer under paragraph 
(c)(4)(i) of this section. TRASOP securities so allocated are deemed to 
be allocated under section 301(d) of the 1975 TRA. In applying 
Sec. 1.46-8(d)(6) to this section, only subdivisions (ii), (iv), (ix), 
(x), (xi) and (xii) thereof apply to allocations under this section.
    (4) Effect of section 415. In applying the limitations of section 
415 to limitation years beginning after January 19, 1979, allocations of 
TRASOP securities are considered in the following order: first, 
allocations under Sec. 1.46-8; second, allocations under this section. 
See Sec. 1.46-8(d)(6)(v) concerning the allocation of amounts under any 
other defined contribution plan. No suspense or escrow account may be 
maintained to hold contributions under this section that are unallocated 
because of section 415. Thus, section 415 in effect limits the 
availability of an extra additional credit in a particular year. 
However, if the plan so provides, a potential extra additional credit is 
treated as an investment credit carryover under the carryover option 
described in Sec. 1.46-8(c)(1)(ii) to the extent that it is not used in 
a particular year because of section 415.
    (5) Nonforfeitability. Employer contributions are also not 
considered to be forfeitable under Sec. 1.46-8(d)(7) merely because the 
plan provides for their return to the corporation in an amount equal to 
the excess of employer contributions under this section over matching 
employee contributions or in the case of discriminatory operation under 
paragraph (f)(3) of this section. See paragraph (f)(3)(iv).
    (6) Distributions. Notwithstanding Sec. 1.46-8(d)(9)(i), a plan may 
not distribute from a participant's employer contribution account cash 
or employer securities attributable to unpaid pledges of the 
participant.
    (e) Additional operational plan requirements--(1) Start-up and 
administrative expenses--(i) In general. The expense of establishing 
plan features relating to the extra additional credit is a start-up 
expense. The expense of collecting matching employee contributions is an 
administrative expense.
    (ii) Payment. Under Sec. 1.46-8(e) (6) and (7), an employee may 
withhold or a plan may use, to the extent not withheld, TRASOP 
securities for start-up and administrative expense payments. However, 
withdrawals must be either limited to employer contributions under 
Sec. 1.46-8(c)(8) or reasonably apportioned between these employer 
contributions and contributions under paragraph (c)(4)(i) of this 
section. An example of reasonable apportionment is earmarking expenses 
attributable to each of the additional credits and allocating any 
remaining non-earmarked expenses on either a 2:1 or 1:1 ratio between 
the additional credits. Another example is simply apportioning expenses 
between the additional credits on a 2:1 or 1:1 ratio basis without 
earmarking. However, if one-percent and one-half percent start-up 
expenses are attributable to different qualified investments, 
withdrawals for one-half percent expenses are limited to employer 
contributions under paragraph (c)(4)(i) of this section.
    (iii) Ceiling. In determining the ceiling on start-up expenses under 
Sec. 1.46-8(e)(6)(iii), only employer contributions under Sec. 1.46-
8(c)(8) and paragraph (c)(4)(i) of this section are considered. In 
determining the ceiling on administrative expenses under Sec. 1.46-
8(e)(7)(ii), dividends on all TRASOP securities, including those 
acquired with matching employee contributions, are considered.
    (2) Redeterminations and recaptures. A reduction in investment 
credit because of a redetermination or recapture is allocated ratably 
under the principles of Sec. 1.46-8(e)(9)(ii) among the 10-percent 
credit, the one-percent credit, and the one-half percent credit for a 
particular year. However, as illustrated in Sec. 1.46-8(e)(9)(ii), this 
subparagraph (3) does not apply to a redetermination solely of one or 
both of the additional credits.
    (3)Withdrawal asset segregation. The segregated accounting 
provisions of Sec. 1.46-8(f) apply independently to withdrawal assets 
attributable to TRASOP securities under Sec. 1.46-8 and to TRASOP 
securities under this section.
    (f) Matching employee contributions--(1) Designation by employee. 
The plan must state that each employee on whose behalf an allocation is 
made

[[Page 253]]

under Sec. 1.46-8(d)(6) for an applicable year is eligible to designate 
and contribute an amount to the TRASOP for that year as a matching 
employee contribution.
    (2) Form and timing of contribution--(i) Cash. A participant may 
contribute in a manner provide under the plan a designated amount in 
cash directly to the plan or indirectly by the employer's withholding 
from amounts otherwise due the participant. The full amount, or pledge 
in lieu of an amount, for an applicable year must be contributed by the 
applicable last day described in Sec. 1.46-8(c)(8)(i).
    (ii) Optional pledges in lieu of cash. The plan need not permit a 
pledge. However, when permitted by the plan, an irrevocable written 
pledge made in good faith by a participant is treated as a matching 
employee contribution of cash, whether or not the pledge is in fact 
contractually binding. The pledge must be to contribute, by no later 
than a time specified in the TRASOP, a designated amount in cash 
directly to the plan or indirectly by authorizing the employer to 
withhold from compensation otherwise due a participant. The specified 
time may not be later than 24 months after the close of the applicable 
year for which the amount is treated as a matching employee 
contribution.
    (iii) Transitional rule. A plan may provide for the receipt of 
employee pledges at any time before the later of the applicable last day 
or January 15, 1980. If the last day for receipt of pledges for an 
applicable year is January 15, 1980, the one-half percent TRASOP credit 
for the applicable year may be elected on an amended return filed not 
later than that date, and employer contributions for the applicable year 
must be made by that date. A plan may provide that pledges which 
otherwise would have been payable on or before December 31, 1979 may be 
paid on or before January 15, 1980.
    (iv) Basic and supplemental contributions. A plan formula may limit 
a matching employee contribution to a basic amount. It may also permit 
matching employee contributions of supplemental amounts to the extent 
that total basic amount contributions do not equal the amount of the 
additional credit claimed under this section. Employees may make 
supplemental contributions covering unpaid pledges only after the 
employer has disclosed the value of securities and income attributable 
to the unpaid pledge.
    (3) Prohibited discrimination--(i) General rule. Matching employee 
contributions must be based on a formula stated in the plan that does 
not result in prohibited discrimination under section 401(a)(4) either 
in form or in operation. Thus, for example, a flat dollar amount 
required as a matching employee contribution to qualify for employer-
provided benefits under this section may not be too high for lower paid 
employees to contribute under the plan. Further, lower paid employees 
must participate to such an extent that allocations under this section 
do not result in prohibited discrimination
    (ii) Compensation disregarded. Compensation disregarded in 
allocations under Sec. 1.46-8(d)(6)(iv) is disregarded under this 
paragraph and for purposes of determining basic amounts as defined in 
paragraph (b)(4) of this section.
    (iii) Former employees. A TRASOP must give all participants a 
reasonable opportunity to make matching employee contributions. However, 
neither a former employee who is a participant at the end of the plan 
year by reason of Sec. 1.46-8(d)(6)(iii), nor the estate of a deceased 
employee, need have the same options as are available to other 
participants. Thus, for example, a former employee may be limited to 
cash contributions even though other participants are permitted to make 
pledges. Also, if former employees of estates of deceased employees fail 
to make matching employee contributions, they are not considered in 
determining whether or not a TRASOP is discriminatory.
    (iv) Return of contributions. A plan may provide for the return of 
employee and employer contributions for a year to the extent that plan 
operation would otherwise result in prohibited discrimination.
    (4) Investment in employer securities--(i) General rule. Matching 
employee contributions must be invested in TRASOP securities no later 
than 30 days after the time for funding a TRASOP under Sec. 1.46-
8(c)(8)(ii) or, if

[[Page 254]]

later, the time specified under the special rule for pledges.
    (ii) Special rule for pledges. Cash contributed to pay a pledge 
permitted by paragraph (f)(2)(ii) of this section must be invested in 
employer securites so that the cash is not held more than 3 months. The 
3-month period includes the period, if any, that the cash is held by the 
employer.
    (5) Reduction of matching employee contribution--(i) In general. 
Matching employee contributions must be reduced in three cases. First, 
they are reduced to the extent that there are no corresponding employer 
contributions described in paragraph (c)(4)(i) of this section. This 
occurs, for example, when the aggregate of the basic amounts of matching 
employee contributions exceeds the allowable credit. Second, they are 
reduced to the extent that corresponding employer contributions matching 
them under paragraph (c)(4)(i) of this section are withdrawn under 
section 301(f) of the 1975 TRA. Third, they are reduced by the amount of 
any pledge unpaid at the time specified in paragraph (f)(2)(ii) of this 
section.
    (ii) Apportioning reductions. Generally, the account of each 
contributor under this section for an applicable year is reduced by a 
percentage of the account. This percentage equals the total reduction of 
all matching employee contributions for that year divided by the total, 
before the reduction, of all matching employee contributions. However, 
if a reduction is directly attributable to a particular contributor, 
only that contributor's account is reduced. A reduction is directly 
attributable to a particular contributor when, for example, the limits 
of section 415 prohibit a full allocation of employer contributions 
equal to the contributor's matching employee contribution for an 
applicable year or when a contributor fails to pay a pledge. A reduction 
may not yield a negative balance in a participant's account.
    (iii) Disposing of reductions. If a participant's matching employee 
contribution is reduced, the amount of the reduction must either be 
treated as a voluntary contribution or returned to the participant by 
the later of two dates. The first date is 30 days after the time for 
investing in TRASOP securities under paragraph (f)(4) of this section. 
The second date is the 30th day after the date on which the withdrawal 
of employer contributions occurs that causes the reduction. It may be 
treated as a voluntary contribution only if, as stated in the plan, the 
participant so indicates in writing when making the matching employee 
contribution.
    (iv) Supplemental contributions covering unpaid pledges. 
Notwithstanding the timing requirements of paragraph (f)(2) of this 
section, supplemental contributions covering unpaid pledges must be made 
no later than 60 days after accounting for the corresponding reduction 
under paragraph (f)(5)(ii) of this section.
    (v) Effect of reduction on credit. For the purpose of applying 
section 415 to an additional allocation to the account of a participant 
attributable to a supplemental contribution covering an unpaid pledge, 
the contribution is treated as an annual addition to the supplemental 
contributor's account in the applicable year for which the reduction 
occurred. An amount in excess of the contribution may be allocated in 
equal amounts for each year from the applicable year to the year of the 
reduction. The employer's credit is reduced only to the extent that a 
proportionate transfer of assets is not made from the account of the 
participant to whom the reduction is attributable to the accounts of 
supplemental contributors.
    (vi) Example. The rules contained in paragraphs (f) (2) and (5) of 
this section are illustrated by the following example:

    Example. Assume that A is an employee of corporation M, a calendar 
year taxpayer that maintains a TRASOP. A has pledged $100 as a matching 
employee contribution for 1977, the first applicable year of M's TRASOP. 
M has transferred employer securitites valued at $100 that have been 
allocated to A's account under the Plan. The TRASOP provides that 
pledges must be paid no later then 24 months after the end of the 
applicable year. Thus, A's $100 pledge must be paid by December 31, 
1979. As of December 31, 1979, the employer securities attributable to 
A's pledge have a value of $90 and have produced undistributed dividend 
income of $13. Thus, the value of the portion of A's account 
attributable to the unpaid pledge is $103. After December 31, 1979, the 
value of this portion of

[[Page 255]]

A's account is disclosed to participants, and employee B chooses to pay 
off A's unpaid pledge, as provided in the plan, by making a $100 
supplemental contribution. The full amount of the securities and 
dividend income attributable to the unpaid pledge are transferred from 
A's account to that of B as of December 31, 1979. M's credit for 1977 is 
not reduced. The $100 supplemental contribution is an annual addition to 
B's account for purposes of applying section 415 in 1979. Income 
attributable to the pledge in excess of the supplemental contribution, 
$3 ($103-$100), may be allocated and treated as an annual addition by 
spreading this excess amount over the years from the applicable year to 
the year of the reduction (1977, 1978, 1979).

    (g) Failure to comply--(1) General rule. If a corporation elects 
under Sec. 1.46-8(c) (2) through (5) and paragraph (c)(1) of this 
section to obtain an additional credit, Sec. 1.46-8(h) (1), (2), (3), 
(5), (6), and (7) as modified by this paragraph (g) apply.
    (2) Failure to comply (penalty classifications)--(i) In general. A 
corporation fails to comply with an extra additional credit election if 
a defect described in paragraph (g)(2) (ii)-(iv) of this section occurs 
in a taxable year.
    (ii) Funding defect. A funding defect occurs under this section if a 
corporation or its TRASOP fails to satisfy the requirements of 
Sec. 1.46-8(c) (8) or (9) or paragraph (c)(4) of this section, as they 
apply directly to the extra additional credit.
    (iii) Special operational defect. A special operational defect 
occurs if a TRASOP fails in operation to satisfy the requirements 
decribed in Sec. 1.46-8(d) (5) through (9) (except (6) (i), (iii), and 
(v) through (viii)) or (e)(3), or paragraphs (d) (5), (6), and (e)(3) of 
this section, as they apply directly to the extra additional credit.
    (iv) De minimis defect. A de minimis defect occurs if a corporation 
or its TRASOP fails to satisfy the requirements, other than those 
enumerated in paragraphs (c) (1) and (2) and (g)(2) (ii) and (iii), of 
this section or of Sec. 1.46-8 other than those excluded under 
Sec. 1.46-8(h)(4)(iv).
    (3) Amount involved. The amount involved in a failure to comply 
under this section is based upon the extra additional credit within the 
meaning of section 46(a)(2)(B)(ii).
    (4) Coordination of civil penalties. The civil penalties under 
Sec. 1.46-8 and this section are determined separately. In no case may 
the amount involved with respect to a particular failure to comply in 
one year exceed under both sections the full additional credit within 
the meaning of section 46(a)(2)(B) (i) and (ii).

[T.D. 7856, 47 FR 54805, Dec. 6, 1982]
Sec. 1.46-10  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1.46-11  Commuter highway vehicles.

    (a) In general. Section 46(c)(6) provides that the applicable 
percentage to determine qualified investment under section 46(c)(1) for 
a qualifying commuter highway vehicle is 100 percent. A qualifying 
commuter highway vehicle is a vehicle (defined in paragraph (b) of this 
section)--
    (1) Which is acquired by the taxpayer on or after November 9, 1978,
    (2) Which is placed in service by the taxpayer before January 1, 
1986, and
    (3) With respect to which the taxpayer makes an election under 
paragraph (g) of this section.
    (b) Definition of commuter highway vehicle. A commuter highway 
vehicle is a highway vehicle that meets the following requirements:
    (1) The vehicle is section 38 property in the hands of the taxpayer. 
The rule of section 48(d), allowing a lessor to elect to treat the 
lessee of new section 38 property as having acquired the property, 
applies to commuter highway vehicles. If the vehicle is leased and that
election is made, the lessee is treated as the taxpayer under this 
section. However, if that election is not made. the lessor, and not the 
lessee, is treated as the taxpayer under this section.
    (2) The vehicle must meet the seating capacity requirement of 
paragraph (c) of this section; and
    (3) The taxpayer reasonably expects to meet the commuter use 
requirement of paragraph (d) of this section for at least the first 36 
months after the vehicle is placed in service.
    (c) Seating capacity. A commuter highway vehicle must have a seating 
capacity of a least 8 adults in addition to the driver's seat.
    (d) Commuter use requirement. A vehicle meets the commuter use 
requirement only if at least 80 percent of the

[[Page 256]]

miles the vehicle is driven are for trips to transport the taxpayer's 
employees between their residences and their places of employment. A 
trip for this purpose includes driving the vehicle before or after 
employees are in the vehicle, so long as the mileage driven is necessary 
either to pick up or drop off passengers or to park the vehicle in its 
regular parking space. A trip does not include miles driven solely for 
maintenance or to refuel the vehicle. A trip is not considered to 
transport the taxpayer's employees between their residences and their 
places of employment unless at least one-half the seating capacity 
(defined in paragraph (c) of this section) is used to seat employees of 
the taxpayer. In no event is the driver counted as an employee of the 
taxpayer.
    (e) Definition of employee. An employee in this section is the same 
as in section 3121 (d) (definition of employee for withholding 
purposes).
    (f) Transportation between employee's residence and place of 
employment. An employee is transported between that employee's residence 
and place of employment even if that place of employment is not the same 
as any of the other employees transported, and even if picked up or 
dropped off at some central point between that residence and place of 
employment. An employee is not transported between that employee's 
residence and place of employment if the transportation is of the type 
for which a deduction would be allowed under Sec. 1.162-2 were the 
employee providing it, such as the transportation from one work site to 
another after beginning work for the day.
    (g) Election. A taxpayer must elect to have the vehicle treated as a 
qualifying commuter highway vehicle on the return for the taxable year 
in which the vehicle is placed in service. The election may be made only 
if the vehicle actually meets the commuter use requirement under 
paragraph (d) of this section for that taxable year. It must be made on 
or before the due date (including extensions) of that return. The 
election is effective as of that due date.

[T.D. 8035, 50 FR 29370, July 19, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.47-1  Recomputation of credit allowed by section 38.

    (a) General rule--(1) In general. (i) If during the taxable year any 
section 38 property the basis (or cost) of which was taken into account, 
under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.46-3, in computing the taxpayer's 
qualified investment is disposed of, or otherwise ceases to be section 
38 property or becomes public utility property (as defined in paragraph 
(g) of Sec. 1.46-3) or is a qualifying commuter highway vehicle (as 
defined in paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.46-11) which undergoes a change in 
use (as defined in paragraph (m)(2) of this section) with respect to the 
taxpayer, before the close of the estimated useful life (as determined 
under subparagraph (2)(i) of this paragraph) which was taken into 
account in computing such qualified investment, then the credit earned 
for the credit year (as defined in subdivision (ii) (a) of this 
subparagraph) shall be recomputed under the principles of paragraph (a) 
of Sec. 1.46-1 and paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.46-3 substituting, in lieu of 
the estimated useful life of the property that was taken into account 
originally in computing qualified investment, the actual useful life of 
the property as determined under subparagraph (2)(ii) of this paragraph. 
There shall also be recomputed under the principles of Secs. 1.46-1 and 
1.46-2 the credit allowed for the credit year and for any other taxable 
year affected by reason of the reduction in credit earned for the credit 
year, giving effect to such reduction in the computation of carryovers 
or carrybacks of unused credit. If the recomputation described in the 
preceding sentence results in the aggregate in a decrease (taking into 
account any recomputations under this paragraph in respect of prior 
recapture years, as defined in subdivision (ii)(b) of this subparagraph) 
in the credits allowed for the credit year and for any other taxable 
year affected by the reduction in credit earned for the credit year, 
then the income tax for the recapture year shall be increased by the 
amount of such decrease in credits allowed. For treatment of such 
increase in tax, see paragraph (b) of this section. For rules relating 
to ``disposition'' and ``cessation'', see Sec. 1.47-2. For rules 
relating to certain exceptions to the application

[[Page 257]]

of this section, see Sec. 1.47-3. For special rules in the case of an 
electing small business corporation (as defined in section 1371(b)), an 
estate or trust, or a partnership, see respectively, Secs. 1.47-4, 1.47-
5, or 1.47-6. For rules applicable to energy property, see paragraph (h) 
of this section. For special rules relating to recomputation of credit 
allowed by section 38 if progress expenditure property (as defined in 
Sec. 1.46-5(d)) ceases to be progress expenditure property with respect 
to the taxpayer, see paragraph (g) of this section.
    (ii) For purposes of this section and Secs. 1.47-2 through 1.47-6--
    (a) The term ``credit year'' means the taxable year in which section 
38 property was taken into account in computing a taxpayer's qualified 
investment.
    (b) The term ``recapture year'' means the taxable year in which 
section 38 property the basis (or cost) of which was taken into account 
in computing a taxpayer's qualified investment is disposed of, or 
otherwise ceases to be section 38 property or becomes public utility 
property with respect to the taxpayer, before the close of the estimated 
useful life which was taken into account in computing such qualified 
investment.
    (c)  The term ``recapture determination'' means a recomputation made 
under this paragraph.
    (2) Rules for applying subparagraph (1). For purposes of 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph--
    (i) In determining whether section 38 property is disposed of, or 
otherwise ceases to be section 38 property with respect to the taxpayer, 
before the close of the estimated useful life which was taken into 
account in computing the taxpayer's qualified investment, the term 
``estimated useful life'' means the shortest life of the useful life 
category within which falls the estimated useful life which was assigned 
to such property under paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.46-3. Thus, section 38 
property which is assigned, under paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.46-3, an 
estimated useful life of 6 years shall not be treated, for purposes of 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, as having been disposed of before 
the close of its estimated useful life if such property is sold 5 years 
(that is, the shortest life of the 5 years or more but less than 7 years 
useful life category) after the date on which it was placed in service. 
Likewise, section 38 property with an estimated useful life of 15 years 
which is placed in service on January 1, 1972, shall not be treated as 
having been disposed of before the close of its estimated useful life if 
such property is sold at any time after January 1, 1979 (that is, 7 
years or more after the date on which it was placed in service).
    (ii) In determining the recomputed qualified investment with respect 
to property which is disposed of or otherwise ceases to be section 38 
property the term ``actual useful life'' means, except as otherwise 
provided in this section and Secs. 1.47-2 through 1.47-6, the period 
beginning with the date on which the property was placed in service by 
the taxpayer and ending with the date of such disposition or cessation. 
See paragraph (c) of this section.
    (iii) In determining the recomputed qualified investment with 
respect to property which ceases to be section 38 property with respect 
to the taxpayer after August 15, 1971, or which becomes public utility 
property after such date, such property shall be treated as if it were 
property described in section 50 at the time it was placed in service 
(whether or not it was property described in section 50 at such time). 
Thus, if property was placed in service on October 15, 1968, and was 
assigned an estimated useful life of 4 years, there would be no increase 
in tax under section 47 if the property were disposed of at any time 
after October 14, 1971, that is, 3 years or more after the property was 
placed in service.
    (b) Increase in income tax and reduction of investment credit 
carryover--(1) Increase in tax. Except as provided in subparagraph (2) 
of this paragraph, any increase in income tax under this section shall 
be treated as income tax imposed on the taxpayer by chapter 1 of the 
Code for the recapture year notwithstanding that without regard to such 
increase the taxpayer has no income tax liability, has a net operating 
loss for such taxable year, or no income tax return was otherwise 
required for such taxable year.

[[Page 258]]

    (2) Special rule. Any increase in income tax under this section 
shall not be treated as income tax imposed on the taxpayer by chapter 1 
of the Code for purposes of determining the amount of the credits 
allowable to such taxpayer under--
    (i) Section 33 (relating to taxes of foreign countries and 
possessions of United States),
    (ii) Section 34 (relating to dividends received by individuals 
before January 1, 1965),
    (iii) Section 35 (relating to partially tax-exempt interest received 
by individuals),
    (iv) Section 37 (relating to retirement income), and
    (v) Section 38 (relating to investment in certain depreciable 
property).
    (3) Reduction in credit allowed as a result of a net operating loss 
carryback. (i) If a net operating loss carryback from the recapture year 
or from any taxable year subsequent to the recapture year reduces the 
amount allowed as a credit under section 38 for any taxable year up to 
and including the recapture year, then there shall be a new recapture 
determination under paragraph (a) of this section for each recapture 
year affected, taking into account the reduced amount of credit allowed 
after application of the net operating loss carryback.
    (ii) Subdivision (i) of this subparagraph may be illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. (a) X Corporation, which makes its return on the basis of 
a calendar year, acquired and placed in service on January 1, 1962, an 
item of section 38 property with a basis of $10,000 and an estimated 
useful life of 8 years. The amount of qualified investment with respect 
to such asset was $10,000. For the taxable year 1962, X Corporation's 
credit earned of $700 (7 percent of $10,000) was allowed under section 
38 as a credit against its liability for tax of $700. In 1963 and 1964 X 
Corporation had no liability for tax and placed in service no section 38 
property. On January 3, 1963, such item of section 38 property was sold 
to Y Corporation. Since the actual useful life of such item was only 1 
year, there was a recapture determination under paragraph (a) of this 
section. The income tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code on X 
Corporation for the taxable year 1963 was increased by the $700 decrease 
in its credit earned for the taxable year 1962 (that is, the $700 
original credit earned minus zero recomputed credit earned).
    (b) For the taxable year 1965, X Corporation has a net operating 
loss which is carried back to the taxable year 1962 and reduces its 
liability for tax, as defined in paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.46-1, for such 
taxable year to $200. As a result of such net operating loss carryback, 
X Corporation's credit allowed under section 38 for the taxable year 
1962 is limited to $200 and the excess of $500 ($700 credit earned minus 
$200 limitation based on amount of tax) is an investment credit 
carryover to the taxable year 1963.
    (c) For 1965, there is a recapture determination under subdivision 
(i) of this subparagraph for the 1963 recapture year. The $700 increase 
in the income tax imposed on X Corporation for the taxable year 1963 is 
redetermined to be $200 (that is, the $200 credit allowed after taking 
into account the 1965 net operating loss minus zero credit which would 
have been allowed taking into account the 1963 recapture determination). 
In addition, X Corporation's $500 investment credit carryover to the 
taxable year 1963 is reduced by $500 ($700 minus $200) to zero and X 
Corporation is entitled to a $500 refund of the tax paid as a result of 
the 1963 determination.

    Example 2. (a) X Corporation, which makes its returns on the basis 
of a calendar year, acquired and placed in service on January 1, 1962, 
an item of section 38 property with a basis of $10,000 and an estimated 
useful life of 8 years. The amount of qualified investment with respect 
to such asset was $10,000. For the taxable year 1962, X Corporation's 
credit earned of $700 (7 percent of $10,000) was allowed under section 
38 as a credit against its liability for tax of $700. In 1963 and in 
1964 X Corporation had no liability for tax and placed in service no 
section 38 property. On January 3, 1965, such item of section 38 
property is sold to Y Corporation. For the taxable year 1965, X 
Corporation has a net operating loss which is carried back to the 
taxable year 1962 and reduces its liability for tax, as defined in 
paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.46-1, for such taxable year to $100.
    (b) As a result of such net operating loss carryback, X 
Corporation's credit allowed under section 38 for the taxable year 1962 
is limited to $100 and the excess of $600 ($700 credit earned minus $100 
limitation based on amount of tax) is an investment credit carryover to 
the taxable year 1963.
    (c) Since the actual useful life of the item of section 38 property 
sold to Y Corporation was only 3 years, there is a recapture 
determination under paragraph (a) of this section. X Corporation's $600 
investment credit carryover to 1963 is reduced by $600 to zero. The 
income tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code on X Corporation for the 
taxable year 1965 is

[[Page 259]]

increased by the $100 reduction in credit allowed by section 38 for 
1962.

    (4) Statement of recomputation. The taxpayer shall attach to his 
income tax return for the recapture year a separate statement showing in 
detail the computation of the increase in income tax imposed on such 
taxpayer by chapter 1 of the Code and the reduction in any investment 
credit carryovers.
    (c) Date placed in service and date of disposition or cessation--(1) 
General rule. For purposes of this section and Secs. 1.47-2 through 
1.47-6, in determining the actual useful life of section 38 property--
    (i) Such property shall be treated as placed in service on the first 
day of the month in which such property is placed in service. The month 
in which property is placed in service shall be determined under the 
principles of paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.46-3.
    (ii) If during the taxable year such property ceases to be section 
38 property with respect to the taxpayer--
    (a) As a result of the occurrence of an event on a specific date 
(for example, a sale, transfer, retirement or other disposition), such 
cessation shall be treated as having occurred on the actual date of such 
event.
    (b) For any reason other than the occurrence of an event on a 
specific date (for example, because such property is used predominantly 
in connection with the furnishing of lodging during such taxable year), 
such cessation shall be treated as having occurred on the first day of 
such taxable year.
    (2) Special rule. Notwithstanding subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph, if a taxpayer uses an averaging convention (see 
Sec. 1.167(a)(10)) in computing depreciation with respect to section 38 
property, then, for purposes of this section and Secs. 1.47-2 through 
1.47-6, he may use the assumed dates of additions and retirements in 
determining the actual useful life of such property provided such 
assumed dates are used consistently for purposes of subpart B of part IV 
of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Code with respect to all section 38 
property for which such convention is used for purposes of depreciation. 
This subparagraph shall not apply in any case where from all the facts 
and circumstances it appears that the use of such assumed dates results 
in a substantial distortion of the investment credit allowed by section 
38. Thus, for example, if the taxpayer computes depreciation under a 
convention under which the average of the beginning and ending balances 
of the asset account for the taxable year are taken into account, he may 
use July 1 as the assumed date of all additions and retirements to such 
account. Similarly, if the taxpayer computes depreciation under a 
convention under which the average of the beginning and ending balances 
of the asset account for each month is taken into account, he may use 
the date determined by reference to the weighted average of the monthly 
averages as the assumed date of all additions and retirements to such 
account.
    (3) Example. This paragraph may be illustrated by the following 
example:

    Example. Assume that section 38 property is placed in service 
(within the meaning of paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.46-3) on December 1, 1965 
(thus, the credit is treated as being earned in 1965) but under the 
taxpayer's depreciation practice the period for depreciation with 
respect to such property begins on January 1, 1966, and that the 
property is actually retired on December 2, 1970. Under the general rule 
of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, the property is treated as placed 
in service on December 1, 1965, and as ceasing to be section 38 property 
with respect to the taxpayer on December 2, 1970, even though under the 
taxpayer's depreciation practice the period for depreciation with 
respect to such property begins on January 1, 1966, and terminates on 
January 1, 1971. However, under the special rule of subparagraph (2) of 
this paragraph the taxpayer may determine the actual useful life of the 
property by reference to the assumed dates of January 1, 1966, and 
January 1, 1971.

    (d) Examples. Paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. (i) X Corporation, which makes its returns on the basis 
of the calendar year, acquired and placed in service on January 1, 1962, 
three items of section 38 property each with a basis of $12,000 and an 
estimated useful life of 15 years. The amount of qualified investment 
with respect to each such asset was $12,000. For the taxable year 1962, 
X Corporation's credit earned of $2,520 was allowed under section 38 as 
a credit against its liability for tax of $4,000. On December 2, 1965, 
one of the items of section 38 property is sold to Y Corporation.

[[Page 260]]

    (ii) The actual useful life of the item of property which is sold on 
December 2, 1965, is three years and eleven months. The recomputed 
qualified investment with respect to such item of property is zero 
($12,000 basis multiplied by zero applicable percentage) and X 
Corporation's recomputed credit earned for the taxable year 1962 is 
$1,680 (7 percent of $24,000). The income tax imposed by chapter 1 of 
the Code on X Corporation for the taxable year 1965 is increased by the 
$840 decrease in its credit earned for the taxable year 1962 (that is, 
$2,520 original credit earned minus $1,680 recomputed credit earned).

    Example 2. (i) The facts are the same as in example 1 and in 
addition on December 2, 1966, a second item of section 38 property 
placed in service in the taxable year 1962 is sold to Y Corporation.
    (ii) The actual useful life of the item of property which is sold on 
December 2, 1966, is four years and eleven months. The recomputed 
qualified investment with respect to such item of property is $4,000 
($12,000 basis multiplied by 33\1/3\ percent applicable percentage) and 
X Corporation's recomputed credit earned for the taxable year 1962 is 
$1,120 (7 percent of $16,000). The income tax imposed by chapter 1 of 
the Code on X Corporation for the taxable year 1966 is increased by $560 
(that is, $1,400 ($2,520 original credit earned minus $1,120 recomputed 
credit earned) reduced by the $840 increase in tax for 1965).

    Example 3. (i) The facts are the same as in example 1 except that 
for the taxable year 1962 X Corporation's liability for tax under 
section 46(a)(3) is only $1,520. Therefore, for such taxable year X 
Corporation's credit allowed under section 38 is limited to $1,520 and 
the excess of $1,000 ($2,520 credit earned minus $1,520 limitation based 
on amount of tax) is an unused credit. Of such $1,000 unused credit, 
$100 is allowed as a credit under section 38 for the taxable year 1963, 
$100 is allowed for 1964, and $800 is carried to the taxable year 1965.
    (ii) The actual useful life of the item of property which is sold on 
December 2, 1965, is three years and eleven months. The recomputed 
qualified investment with respect to such item of property is zero 
($12,000 basis multiplied by zero applicable percentage) and X 
Corporation's recomputed credit earned for the taxable year 1962 is 
$1,680 (7 percent of $24,000). If such $1,680 recomputed credit earned 
had been taken into account in place of the $2,520 original credit 
earned, X's credit allowed for 1962 would have been $1,520, and of the 
$160 unused credit from 1962 $100 would have been allowed as a credit 
under section 38 for 1963, and $60 would have been allowed for 1964. X 
Corporation's $800 investment credit carryover to the taxable year 1965 
is reduced by $800 to zero. The income tax imposed by chapter 1 of the 
Code on X Corporation for the taxable year 1965 is increased by $40 
(that is, the aggregate reduction in the credits allowed by section 38 
for 1962, 1963, and 1964).

    Example 4. (i) X Corporation, which makes its returns on the basis 
of the calendar year, acquired and placed in service on November 1, 
1962, an item of section 38 property with a basis of $12,000 and an 
estimated useful life of 10 years. The amount of qualified investment 
with respect to such property was $12,000. For the taxable year 1962, X 
Corporation's credit earned of $840 was allowed under section 38 as a 
credit against its liability for tax of $840. For each of the taxable 
years 1963 and 1964 X Corporation's liability for tax was zero and its 
credit earned was $400; therefore, for each of such years its unused 
credit was $400. For the taxable year 1965 its liability for tax was 
$200 and its credit earned was zero; therefore, $200 of the $400 unused 
credit from 1963 was allowed as credit for 1965 and $600 ($200 from 1963 
and $400 from 1964) is an investment credit carryover to 1966. On 
February 2, 1966, such item of section 38 property is sold to Y 
Corporation.
    (ii) The actual useful life of such item of property is three years 
and three months. The recomputed qualified investment with respect to 
such property is zero ($12,000 basis multipled by zero) and X 
Corporation's recomputed credit earned for the taxable year 1962 is 
zero. If such zero recomputed credit earned had been taken into account 
in place of the $840 original credit earned, the entire $400 unused 
credit from 1963 (including the $200 portion which was originally 
allowed as a credit for 1965) and the $400 unused credit from 1964 would 
have been allowed as investment credit carrybacks against X 
Corporation's liability for tax of $840 for 1962. (See Sec. 1.46-2 for 
rules relating to the carryback of unused credits.)
    (iii) Therefore, the $600 carryover from 1963 and 1964 to 1966 is 
eliminated and the income tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code on X 
Corporation for the taxable year 1966 is increased by the $240 aggregate 
reduction in the credits allowed by section 38 for the taxable years 
1962 and 1965 (that is, $1,040 credit allowed minus $800 which would 
have been allowed).

    Example 5. (i) X Corporation, which makes its returns on the basis 
of the calendar year, acquired and placed in service on November 1, 
1962, an item of section 38 property with a basis of $10,000 and an 
estimated useful life of 8 years. The amount of qualified investment 
with respect to such asset was $10,000. For the taxable year 1962, X 
Corporation's credit earned of $700 was allowed as a credit against its 
liability for tax. For each of the taxable years 1963, 1964, and 1965 X 
had no taxable income. On July 3, 1966, the item of section 38 property 
is sold to Y Corporation. For the

[[Page 261]]

taxable year 1966 X Corporation has a net operating loss of $3,000.
    (ii) The actual useful life of the item of property is three years 
and eight months. The recomputed qualified investment with respect to 
such item of property is zero and X Corporation's recomputed credit 
earned for the taxable year 1962 is zero. Notwithstanding the $3,000 net 
operating loss for the taxable year 1966, the income tax imposed by 
chapter 1 of the Code on X Corporation for such year is $700 (that is, 
the decrease in its credit earned for the taxable year 1962).

    (e) Identification of property--(1) General rule--(i) Record 
requirements. In general, the taxpayer must maintain records from which 
he can establish, with respect to each item of section 38 property, the 
following facts:
    (a) The date the property is disposed of or otherwise ceases to be 
section 38 property,
    (b) The estimated useful life which was assigned to the property 
under paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.46-3,
    (c) The month and the taxable year in which the property was placed 
in service, and
    (d) The basis (or cost), actually or reasonably determined, of the 
property.
    (ii) Recapture determination. For purposes of determining whether 
section 38 property is disposed of, or otherwise ceases to be section 38 
property with respect to the taxpayer, before the close of its estimated 
useful life, and for purposes of determining recomputed qualified 
investment, the taxpayer must establish from his records the facts 
required by subdivision (i) of this subparagraph.
    (iii) Examples. If the taxpayer fails to maintain records from which 
he can establish the facts required by subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph, then this section shall be applied to the taxpayer in the 
manner indicated in the following examples:

    Example 1. Corporation X, organized on January 1, 1964, files its 
income tax return on the basis of a calendar year. During the years 1964 
and 1965, X places in service several items of machinery to which it 
assigns estimated useful lives of 8 years. X places the items of 
machinery in a composite account for purposes of computing depreciation. 
When X's 1966 return is being audited, X is unable to establish whether 
the items placed in service in 1964 and 1965 were still on hand at the 
end of 1966. Therefore, for purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, X 
is treated as having disposed of, in 1966, all of the items of machinery 
placed in service in 1964 and 1965.

    Example 2. Corporation Y, organized on January 1, 1960, files its 
income tax return on the basis of a calendar year. During each of the 
years 1960 through 1965, Y places in service four items of machinery to 
each of which it assigns an estimated useful life of 8 years for 
depreciation purposes (and for purposes of computing qualified 
investment for relevant years). Y places the items of machinery in a 
composite account for purposes of computing depreciation (and for 
purposes of computing qualified investment for relevant years). When Y's 
1965 return is being audited, Y can establish that it retired during 
1965 only six items of this machinery. However, Y cannot establish the 
date on which these six items were placed in service, nor can Y 
establish that the items placed in service in 1963 or 1964 are still on 
hand as of the end of 1965. No previous recapture has taken place with 
respect to any of the items placed in service in 1963 or 1964. Assuming 
that paragraph (e) (2) and (3) of this section is not applicable, Y is 
treated, for purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, as having 
disposed of, in 1965, the four items placed in service in 1964, the most 
recent year before 1965 in which such property was placed in service, 
and two items from 1963, the next most recent year.

    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 2 except that when 
Y's 1966 return is being audited, Y can establish from its records that 
all four items placed in service in 1965 are still on hand and that only 
three items were retired in 1966. For purposes of paragraph (a) of this 
section, Y is treated as having disposed of, in 1966, the two remaining 
items of machinery placed in service in 1963, and one of the items 
placed in service in 1962.

    (2) Treatment of ``mass assets''. (i) If, in the case of mass assets 
(as defined in subparagraph (4) of this paragraph), it is impracticable 
for the taxpayer to maintain records from which he can establish with 
respect to each item of section 38 property the facts required by 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, and if he adopts other reasonable 
recordkeeping practices, consonant with good accounting and engineering 
practices, and consistent with his prior recordkeeping practices, then 
he may substitute data from an appropriate mortality dispersion table. 
An appropriate mortality dispersion table must be based on an acceptable 
sampling of the taxpayer's actual experience or other

[[Page 262]]

acceptable statistical or engineering techniques. In lieu of such 
mortality dispersion table, the taxpayer may use a standard mortality 
dispersion table prescribed by the Commissioner. If the taxpayer uses 
such standard mortality dispersion table for any taxable year, it must 
be used for all subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer obtains the 
consent of the Commissioner to change. If mass assets are placed in a 
multiple asset account and if the depreciation rate for such account is 
based on the maximum expected life of the longest lived asset in such 
account, in applying a mortality dispersion table (including a standard 
mortality dispersion table) the average expected useful life of the mass 
assets in such account must be used.
    (ii) Subdivision (i) of this subparagraph shall not apply with 
respect to assets placed in service in a taxable year ending on or after 
June 30, 1967, and beginning before January 1, 1971, or with respect to 
assets placed in service for a taxable year beginning after December 31, 
1970, for which the taxpayer has not made the election provided by 
section 167(m), unless the estimated useful lives which were assigned to 
such assets for purposes of determining qualified investment--
    (a) Were separate lives based on the estimated range of years taken 
into account in establishing the average useful life of assets similar 
in kind under paragraph (e)(3)(ii)(b) of Sec. 1.46-3, and
    (b) Were determined by use of a mortality dispersion table 
(including a standard mortality dispersion table).
    (iii) Any standard mortality dispersion table prescribed by the 
Commissioner shall be based on average useful life categories and with 
respect to each category shall contain five columns, the first four of 
which shall state the percentage of property assumed to have a useful 
life of--

    Column (1): Less than 4 years,
    Column (2): 4 years or more but less than 6 years,
    Column (3): 6 years or more but less than 8 years, and
    Column (4): 8 years or more.

The fifth column shall show the total qualified investment as a 
percentage and shall be used in connection with the determination to be 
made under Sec. 1.46-3(e)(3)(iii). In the case of a table which is to 
apply to property which is described in section 50 or to property which 
is treated as property described in section 50 under paragraph 
(a)(2)(iii) of this section, this subdivision shall be applied by 
substituting ``3 years'' for ``4 years'', ``5 years'' for ``6 years'', 
and ``7 years'' for ``8 years''.
    (iv) Whenever the standard mortality dispersion table is used for a 
taxable year under subdivision (i) of this subparagraph (whether or not 
such table was used in determining qualified investment), the percentage 
of property shown in column (1) of the table shall (for purposes of 
section 47, this section, and Secs. 1.47-2 through 1.47-6) be deemed to 
have been disposed of on the day before the expiration of the 4-year 
period beginning on the date on which it was considered as placed in 
service under Sec. 1.47-1(c); the percentage of property shown in column 
(2) of the table shall be deemed to have been disposed of on the day 
before the expiration of the 6-year period beginning on the date on 
which it was so considered as placed in service; and the percentage of 
property shown in column (3) shall be deemed to have been disposed of on 
the day before the expiration of the 8-year period beginning on the date 
on which it was so considered as placed in service. In applying this 
subdivision for purposes of recomputing qualified investment, the proper 
average useful life category shall be used whether or not such category 
was used in determining qualified investment. In the case of property 
which is described in section 50 or property which is treated as 
property described in section 50 under paragraph (a)(2)(iii) of this 
section (other than property the qualified investment with respect to 
which was determined by use of the standard or an appropriate mortality 
dispersion table), this subdivision shall be applied by substituting 
``3-year period'' for ``4-year period'', ``5-year period'' for ``6-year 
period'', and ``7-year period'' for ``8-year period''.
    (v) In lieu of using subdivision (iv) of this subparagraph for 
purposes of recomputing qualified investment, a taxpayer may, for the 
first recapture year (as defined in paragraph (a)(1)(ii)(b) of this 
section) to which such subdivision (iv) would otherwise apply with 
respect

[[Page 263]]

to any mass asset account, recompute qualified investment on the basis 
of the difference between (a) the proper total qualified investment 
based on the percentage shown in column (5) of the table, and (b) the 
total qualified investment actually claimed by the taxpayer for the year 
in which the property was placed in service.

    Example. Assume that the taxpayer places in service during 1963 mass 
assets costing him $100,000, that he places these assets in a multiple 
asset account for which he properly claims a useful life of 6 years and 
a qualified investment of $66,667 (\2/3\ x  $100,000), and that he is 
allowed an investment credit of $4,667.67. When the taxpayer's 1967 
return is being audited he is unable to establish that any of the mass 
assets placed in service in 1963 were still on hand at the end of 1967.
    The taxpayer elects to use the standard mortality dispersion table 
prescribed by the Commissioner to determine the amount of recapture with 
respect to these mass assets. Assume that the table prescribed by the 
Commissioner shows with respect to mass assets with an average useful 
life of 6 years the following:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Percent of property assumed to have a useful life of--                  
-------------------------------------------------------                 
               4 years or    6 years or                  Total qualified
 Less than 4    more, but     more, but    8 years or      investment   
    years      less than 6   less than 8      more          (percent)   
                  years         years                                   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1).........        (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)     
------------------------------------------------------------------------
15.87.......      34.13         34.13         15.87           50.00     
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (a) Under these circumstances 15.87 percent of the mass assets 
placed in service in 1963 are deemed to have been disposed of during 
1967. With respect to these assets, the amount of qualified investment 
for 1963 was $10,580 ($15,870 x \2/3\) and the amount of credit earned 
was $740.60 (7 percent of $10,580), whereas the recomputed qualified 
investment is zero and the recomputed credit earned is zero. Thus, the 
tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code for 1967 is increased by $740.60.
    (b) No recapture determination is required for 1968 since no assets 
are deemed to have been disposed of in that year. During 1969, 34.13 
percent of the mass assets placed in service in 1963 are deemed to have 
been disposed of. With respect to these assets, the amount of qualified 
investment for 1963 was $22,753.34 ($34,130 x \2/3\) and the amount of 
credit earned was $1,592.73 (7 percent of $22,753.34), whereas the 
recomputed qualified investment is $11,376.67 ($34,130 x \1/3\) and the 
recomputed credit earned is $796.37 (7 percent of $11,376.67). Thus, the 
tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code for 1969 is increased by $796.36 
($1,592.73 minus $796.37).
    (c) If the taxpayer chooses to recompute qualified investment by 
using the method provided in subdivision (v) of this subparagraph, the 
increase in tax for 1967 (the first recapture year) would be $1,167.67, 
i.e., the original credit earned, $4,667.67, minus the recomputed credit 
earned, $3,500 (50 percent, the percentage shown in column (5), of 
$100,000 multiplied by 7 percent). As long as the same average useful 
life category reflects the taxpayer's experience for subsequent years, 
no recapture determination will be required for any future year, except 
as provided by subparagraph (3)(iv) of this paragraph.

    (vi) Subdivision (i) of this subparagraph shall not apply with 
respect to section 38 property to which an election under section 167(m) 
applies unless the taxpayer assigns actual retirements of such section 
38 property for all taxable years to the same vintage account for 
purposes of section 47 and for purposes of computing the allowance for 
depreciation under section 167. The assignment of actual retirements of 
section 38 property for a taxable year to particular vintage accounts 
may be made on the basis of an appropriate mortality dispersion table 
(based on an acceptable sampling of the taxpayer's actual experience or 
other statistical or engineering techniques) or on the basis of a 
standard mortality dispersion table prescribed by the Commissioner. If 
the taxpayer assigns actual retirements for any taxable year to 
particular vintage accounts on the basis of such standard mortality 
dispersion table, actual retirements for all subsequent taxable years 
must be assigned to particular vintage accounts on the basis of such 
table. Actual retirements of section 38 property for a taxable year 
shall be assigned to particular vintage accounts by--
    (a) Determining the expected retirements for such taxable year from 
each vintage account containing such section 38 property, and
    (b) Ratably allocating such actual retirements to each vintage 
account containing such section 38 property.

However, the unadjusted basis of retired assets assigned to any 
particular vintage account shall not exceed the

[[Page 264]]

unadjusted basis of the property contained in such account.
    (3) Special rules. (i) Taxpayers who properly determine estimated 
useful lives under Sec. 1.46-3(e)(3) (ii)(b) or (iii) may treat such 
assets as having been disposed of or having ceased to be section 38 
assets in the order of the estimated useful lives that were assigned to 
such assets. Thus, the asset that is first disposed of or first ceases 
to be section 38 property may be treated as the asset to which there was 
assigned the shortest estimated useful life; the next asset disposed of 
or ceasing to be section 38 property may be treated as the asset to 
which there was assigned the second shortest life, etc.
    (ii) In the case of taxpayers who use the rule of subdivision (i) of 
this subparagraph with respect to mass assets for which the estimated 
useful life was determined under Sec. 1.46-3(e)(3)(iii), if the 
dispersion shown by the mortality dispersion table effective for a 
taxable year subsequent to the credit year is the same as the dispersion 
shown by the mortality table that was effective for the credit year (for 
example, if the same average useful life on the standard mortality 
dispersion table reflects the taxpayer's experience for both such 
years), no recapture determination is required for such subsequent 
taxable year.
    (iii) Notwithstanding subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, 
taxpayers who, for purposes of determining qualified investment, do not 
use a mortality dispersion table with respect to certain section 38 
assets similar in kind but who consistently assign under paragraph 
(e)(3)(ii) (b) of Sec. 1.46-3 to such assets separate lives based on the 
estimated range of years taken into consideration in establishing the 
average useful life of such assets, may select the order in which such 
assets shall be considered as having been disposed of, regardless of the 
taxable years in which such assets were placed in service. If a taxpayer 
uses the method provided in this subdivision to determine that any asset 
is considered as having been disposed of, then, in addition to complying 
with the record requirements of subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph, 
such taxpayer must maintain records from which he can establish to the 
satisfaction of the district director that such asset has not previously 
been considered as having been disposed of. In addition, if, for any 
taxable year, a taxpayer uses the method provided in this subdivision 
for any asset, he must use for such year and for each subsequent taxable 
year (unless he obtains the district director's consent to change) with 
respect to all assets similar in kind to such asset--
    (a) The method of determining estimated useful lives described in 
paragraph (e)(3)(ii)(b) of Sec. 1.46-3, and
    (b) The method he has selected under this subdivision for 
determining the order in which such assets are considered as having been 
disposed of.

A request by a taxpayer to obtain the district director's consent to 
change a system or method described in this subdivision with respect to 
assets similar in kind must be submitted to the district director on or 
before the last day of the taxable year with respect to which the change 
is sought.
    (iv) Notwithstanding subdivisions (i), (ii), and (iii) of this 
subparagraph, there shall be taken into account separately any abnormal 
retirement of section 38 property of substantial value for which the 
estimated useful life was determined under Sec. 1.46-3(e)(3) (ii)(b) or 
(iii). For definition of abnormal retirement, see paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 1.167(a)-8.
    (4) [Reserved]
    (5) Example. This paragraph may be illustrated by the following 
example:

    Example. (i) Taxpayer A uses numerous small returnable containers in 
his business. It is impracticable for A to keep individual detailed 
records with respect to such containers which are mass assets. In 1965, 
A places in service 10 million containers purchased for $1 million, and 
reasonably determines that each of such containers has a basis of 10 
cents. A places such containers in a multiple asset account to which is 
assigned a 5-year average useful life for purposes of computing 
depreciation. A has conducted an appropriate mortality study which shows 
that the containers have the following estimated useful lives:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Useful  
                      Percent of assets                          life   
                                                                (years) 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10..........................................................           3
20..........................................................           6
40..........................................................           5
20..........................................................           6

[[Page 265]]

                                                                        
10..........................................................           7
------------------------------------------------------------------------

A assigns separate lives to such assets based on the estimated range of 
years taken into account in establishing the average useful life of such 
containers. The qualified investment with respect to such containers is 
$400,000 computed as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Applicable   Qualified
             Useful life                 Basis    percentage  investment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4...................................    $200,000     33\1/3\     $66,666
5...................................     400,000     33\1/3\     133,334
6...................................     200,000     66\2/3\     133,334
7...................................     100,000     66\2/3\      66,666
                                     -----------------------------------
      ..............................                             400,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

A's credit earned for 1965 of $28,000 (7 percent times $400,000) is 
allowed as a credit under section 38 against A's liability for tax of $2 
million. (For purposes of this example the computations of investment 
credit and recapture with respect to containers placed in service in 
years other than 1965 are omitted.) The mortality studies effective for 
1966 and 1967 show that none of the containers placed in service in 1965 
was retired.
    (ii) A's mortality study effective with respect to 1968 shows that 
the containers are being retired as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Useful  
                      Percent of assets                          life   
                                                                (years) 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
30..........................................................           3
20..........................................................           4
30..........................................................           5
10..........................................................           6
10..........................................................           7
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Thus, the 1968 study shows that 30 percent of the 10 million containers 
placed in service in 1965 were retired in 1968. Under the rule of 
subparagraph (3)(i) of this paragraph, the 3 million containers are 
treated as consisting of the 1 million containers to which was assigned 
a 3-year useful life and the 2 million containers to which was assigned 
a 4-year useful life. Taking into account only the fact that 30 percent 
of the containers placed in service in 1965 had an actual life of less 
than 4 years, A's recomputed qualified investment for 1965 is $333,333 
and his recomputed credit earned is $23,333. A's income tax for 1968 is 
increased by $4,667 ($28,000 original credit earned minus $23,333 
recomputed credit earned).
    (iii) The mortality study effective for 1969 shows the same results 
as the mortality study effective for 1968. Thus, it shows that 2 million 
containers were retired in 1969 (an actual life of 4 years). Under the 
rule of subparagraph (3)(i) of this paragraph such 2 million containers 
are treated as having been among 4 million containers to which were 
assigned a 5-year useful life. Therefore, no recapture determination is 
required for 1969.
    (iv) The mortality study effective for 1970 shows the same results 
as the mortality study effective for 1968. Thus, it shows that 3 million 
containers were retired in 1970 (an actual life of 5 years). Under the 
rule of subparagraph (3)(i) of this paragraph, the 3 million are treated 
as having been assigned useful lives as follows: 2 million as having 
been assigned a useful life of 5 years, and 1 million as having been 
assigned a useful life of 6 years. Taking into account only the fact 
that 10 percent of the containers placed in service in 1965 had an 
actual life of 5 years rather than the 6 years estimated useful life 
assigned to them, A's recomputed qualified investment is $300,000 and 
A's credit earned for 1965 is $21,000. Thus, taking into account the 
1968 recapture determination A's income tax for 1970 is increased by 
$2,333.

    (f) Public utility property--(1) Recomputed qualified investment. In 
recomputing qualified investment with respect to section 38 property 
which becomes public utility property (as defined in paragraph (g) of 
Sec. 1.46-3)--
    (i) If such property becomes public utility property less than 3 
years from the date on which it was placed in service, then such 
property shall be treated as public utility property for its entire 
useful life.
    (ii) If such property becomes public utility property 3 years or 
more but less than 5 years from the date on which it was placed in 
service, then such property shall be treated as section 38 property 
which is not public utility property for the first 3 years of its 
estimated useful life and as public utility property for the remaining 
period of its estimated useful life.
    (iii) If such property becomes public utility property 5 years or 
more but less than 7 years from the date on which it was placed in 
service, then such property shall be treated as section 38 property 
which is not public utility property for the first 5 years of its 
estimated useful life and as public utility property for the remaining 
period of its estimated useful life.

If property becomes public utility property before August 16, 1971, this 
subparagraph shall be applied by substituting ``4 years'' for ``3 
years'', ``6 years'' for ``5 years'', and ``8 years'' for ``7 years''.

[[Page 266]]

    (2) Examples. Subparagraph (1) of this paragraph may be illustrated 
by the following examples:

    Example 1. (i) X Corporation, which makes its returns on the basis 
of the calendar year, acquired and placed in service on January 1, 1969, 
an item of section 38 property with a basis of $12,000 and an estimated 
useful life of 8 years. The amount of qualified investment with respect 
to such property was $12,000. For the taxable year 1969, X Corporation's 
credit earned was $840 (7 percent of $12,000) and for such taxable year 
X Corporation was allowed under section 38 a credit of $840 against its 
liability for tax. During the taxable year 1972 such property becomes 
public utility property (as defined in paragraph (g) of Sec. 1.46-3) 
with respect to X Corporation.
    (ii) Such item of section 38 property is treated as section 38 
property which is not public utility property for the first 3 years of 
its 8-year estimated useful life and is treated as public utility 
property for the remaining 5 years. The recomputed qualified investment 
with respect to such item of section 38 property is $7,428, computed as 
follows:

$12,000 basis x 33\1/3\ percent applicable percentage.........    $4,000
$12,000 basis x  \3/7\  x 66\2/3\ percent applicable                    
 percentage...................................................     3,428
                                                               ---------
    Total recomputed qualified investment.....................     7,428
                                                                        

X Corporation's recomputed credit earned for the taxable year 1969 is 
$520 (7 percent of $7,428). The income tax imposed by chapter 1 of the 
Code on X Corporation for the taxable year 1972 is increased by the $320 
decrease in its credit earned for the taxable year 1969 (that is, $840 
original credit earned minus $520 recomputed credit earned).

    Example 2. (i) The facts are the same as in example 1 and in 
addition the item of section 38 property which became public utility 
property in 1972 is sold to Y Corporation on January 2, 1975.
    (ii) The actual useful life of such item of property is 6 years. For 
the first 3 years of its 8-year estimated useful life such item is 
treated as section 38 property which is not public utility property and 
for the remaining 3 years is treated as public utility property. The 
recomputed qualified investment with respect to such item of property is 
$5,714, computed as follows:

$12,000 basis x 33\1/3\ percent applicable percentage.........    $4,000
$12,000 basis x  \3/7\  x 33\1/3\ percent applicable                    
 percentage...................................................     1,714
                                                               ---------
    Total recomputed qualified investment.....................     5,714
                                                                        

X Corporation's recomputed credit earned for the taxable year 1969 is 
$400 (7 percent of $5,714). The income tax imposed by chapter 1 of the 
Code on X Corporation for the taxable year 1975 is increased by $120 
(that is, $440 ($840 original credit earned minus $400 recomputed credit 
earned) minus $320 increase in tax for 1969).

    (g) Special rules for progress expenditure property. Under section 
47(a)(3), a recapture determination is required if property ceases to be 
progress expenditure property (as defined in Sec. 1.46-5(d)). Property 
ceases to be progress expenditure property if it is sold or otherwise 
disposed of before it is placed in service. For example, cancellation of 
the contract for progress expenditure property or abandonment of the 
project by the taxpayer will be considered a ``disposition'' within the 
meaning of Sec. 1.47-2. A cessation occurs if progress expenditure 
property ceases to be property that will be section 38 property with a 
useful life of 7 years or more when placed in service. In general, a 
sale and leaseback is treated as a cessation. However, see paragraph 
(g)(2) of Sec. 1.47-3 for special rules for certain sale and leaseback 
transactions. Recapture determinations for progress expenditure property 
are to be made in a way similar to that provided under Secs. 1.47-1 
through 1.47-6. Reduction of qualified investment must begin with the 
most recent credit year (i.e., the most recent taxable year the property 
is taken into account in computing qualified investment under Sec. 1.46-
3 or 1.46-5).
    (h) Special rules for energy property--(1) In general. A recapture 
determination is required for the investment credit attributable to the 
energy percentage (energy credit) if property is (i) disposed of or (ii) 
otherwise ceases to be energy property (as defined in section 48(l)) 
with regard to the taxpayer before the close of the estimated useful 
life (as determined under paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section) which was 
taken into account in computing qualified investment.
    (2) Dispositions. The term ``disposition'' is described in 
Sec. 1.47-2(a)(1). A transfer of energy property that is a 
``disposition'' requiring a recapture determination for the investment 
credit attributable to the regular percentage

[[Page 267]]

(regular credit) and the ESOP percentage (ESOP credit) will also be a 
``disposition'' requiring a recapture determination for the energy 
credit.
    (3) Cessation. (i) The term ``cessation'' is described in Sec. 1.47-
2(a)(2). For energy property, a cessation occurs during a taxable year 
if, by reason of a change in use or otherwise, the property would not 
have qualified for an energy credit if placed in service during that 
year. A change in use will not require a recapture determination for the 
regular or ESOP credit unless, by reason of the change, the property 
would not have qualified for the regular or ESOP credit if placed in 
service during that year.
    (ii) A qualified intercity bus described in Sec. 1.48-9(q) must meet 
the predominant use test (of Sec. 1.48-9(q)(7)) for the remainder of the 
taxable year from the date it is placed in service and for each taxable 
year thereafter. A cessation occurs in any taxable year in which the bus 
is no longer a qualifying bus under Sec. 1.48-9(q)(6). A qualified 
intercity bus does not cease to be energy property for a taxable year 
subsequent to the one in which it was placed in service by reason of a 
decrease in operating capacity (see Sec. 1.48-9(q)(9)) for that year 
compared to any prior taxable year.
    (4) Recordkeeping requirement. For recordkeeping requirements with 
respect to dispositions or cessations, the rules of paragraph (e)(1) of 
this section apply. For example, the taxpayer must maintain records for 
each recycling facility indicating the percentage of virgin materials 
used each year. See, Sec. 1.48-9(g)(5)(ii).
    (5) Examples. The following examples illustrate this paragraph (h).

    Example 1. (a) In 1980, corporation X, a calendar year taxpayer, 
acquires and places in service a computer that will perform solely 
energy conserving functions in connection with an existing industrial 
process. Assume the computer has a 10 year useful life and qualifies for 
both the regular and energy credits. In 1981, a change is made in the 
industrial process (within the meaning of Sec. 1.48-9(l)(2)). However, 
for 1981 the computer continues to perform solely energy conserving 
functions. In 1982, the computer ceases to perform energy conserving 
functions and begins to perform a production related function.
    (b) For 1981, a recapture determination is not required. For 1982, 
the entire energy credit must be recaptured, although none of the 
regular credit is recaptured. If in 1989 the computer first ceased to 
perform an energy conserving function, no part of the energy credit 
would be recaptured.

    Example 2. Assume the same facts and conclusion as in example 1. 
Assume further that X sells the computer in 1985. A recapture 
determination is required for the regular credit.

    Example 3. In 1981, corporation Y, a calendar year taxpayer, 
acquires and places in service recycling equipment. Assume the equipment 
has a 7-year useful life and qualifies for both the regular credit and 
energy credit. During the course of 1982, more than 10 percent of the 
material recycled is virgin material. The energy credit is recaptured in 
its entirety, although none of the regular credit is recaptured. See 
Sec. 1.48-9(g)(5)(B)(ii).

    Example 4. In 1980, corporation Z, a calendar year taxpayer, 
acquires and places in service a boiler the primary fuel for which is an 
alternate substance. The boiler has a 7-year useful life. Assume the 
boiler is a structural component of a building within the meaning of 
Sec. 1.48-1(e)(2). Assume further that the boiler is not a part of a 
qualified rehabilitated building (as defined in section 48(g)(1)) or a 
single purpose agricultural or horticultural structure (as defined in 
section 48(p)). Z is allowed only an energy credit since the boiler is a 
structural component of a building. In 1984, Z modifies the boiler to 
use oil as the primary fuel. A recapture determination is required for 
the energy credit. See Sec. 1.48-9(c)(3).

    (i)--(l) [Reserved]
    (m) Commuter highway vehicles--(1) Recomputed qualified investment. 
(i) If a qualifying commuter highway vehicle (as defined in Sec. 1.46-
11(a) undergoes a change in use but does not cease to be section 38 
property, qualified investment for that vehicle is recomputed as if the 
vehicle was section 38 property which is not a qualifying commuter 
highway vehicle for its entire useful life.
    (ii) The following example illustrates this paragraph (m)(1).

    Example. X Corporation, a calendar year taxpayer, acquired and 
placed in service on January 1, 1982, a qualifying commuter highway 
vehicle with a basis of $10,000 and which qualified as three year 
recovery property under section 168(c)(2)(A)(i). The amount of qualified 
investment for the vehicle under section 46(c) (1) and (6) is $10,000. 
For the taxable year 1982, X Corporation's credit earned was $1,000 (10 
percent of $10,000) and X Corporation was allowed under section 38 a

[[Page 268]]

$1,000 credit against its 1982 tax liability. During the taxable year 
1984, the vehicle undergoes a change in use but does not cease to be 
section 38 property. The vehicle is treated as section 38 property which 
is not a qualifying commuter highway vehicle for its entire useful life. 
The recomputed qualified investment for the vehicle is $6,000 (60 
percent of $10,000) and X Corporation's recomputed credit earned is $600 
(10 percent of $6,000). The income tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code 
on X Corporation for 1984 is increased by the $400 decrease in its 
credit earned for 1982 ($1,000-$600).

    (2) Change in use--(i) A qualifying commuter highway vehicle 
undergoes a change in use if the vehicle does not meet the commuter use 
requirement (as defined in Sec. 1.46-11(d)) for each computation period.
    (ii) Each of the following is a computation period:
    (A) The period beginning on the date the vehicle was placed in 
service and ending on the last day of the taxpayer's taxable year in 
which the vehicle was placed in service;
    (B) Each of the taxpayer's taxable years beginning after the date 
the vehicle was placed in service and ending before the end of the first 
36 months after the vehicle was placed in service; and
    (C) The period ending at the end of the first 36 months after the 
vehicle was placed in service and beginning on the first day of the 
taxpayer's taxable year in which the end of those first 36 months falls.
    (iii) The following example illustrates this paragraph (m)(2).

    Example. (a) Z Corporation, a calendar year taxpayer, acquired and 
placed in service a qualifying commuter highway vehicle on January 15, 
1979. Z Corporation used the vehicle as set forth in the following 
table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Commuter              
       Taxable year ending         Total miles     miles        Ratio   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1979.............................       10,000        9,000          .90
1980.............................       10,000        8,000          .80
1981.............................       10,000        8,000          .80
1982 (1-14)......................        1,000          100          .10
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) The first computation period begins on the date the vehicle is 
placed in service, in this example 1-15-79, and ends 12-31-79. In that 
computation period, the ratio of commuter miles to total miles is .90 
(9,000 miles<divide>10,000 miles). Therefore, the vehicle meets the 
commuter use requirement for that period and has not undergone a change 
in use. Similar calculations for the computation periods 1-1-80 to 12-
31-80 and 1-1-81 to 12-31-81 produce the same result.
    (c) As of the computation period beginning 1-1-82 and ending 1-14-
82, the ratio of commuter use to total mileage is .10 (100 miles 
<divide>1,000 miles). Since that ratio is less than .80, the vehicle 
does not meet the commuter use requirement for the period and the 
vehicle has undergone a change in use.

(secs. 38(b) (76 Stat. 963, 26 U.S.C. 38(b)), 48(l)(16) (94 Stat. 264, 
26 U.S.C. 48(l)(16)), and 7805 (68A Stat. 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805))

[T.D. 6931, 32 FR 14027, Oct. 10, 1967, as amended by T.D. 7203, 37 FR 
17127, Aug. 25, 1972; T.D. 7765, 46 FR 7291, Jan. 23, 1981; T.D. 7982, 
49 FR 39541, Oct. 9, 1984; T.D. 8035, 50 FR 29370, July 19, 1985; T.D. 
8183, 53 FR 6625, Mar. 2, 1988; T.D. 8474, 58 FR 25557, Apr. 27, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 1.47-2   ``Disposition'' and ``cessation''.

    (a) General rule--(1) ``Disposition''. For purposes of this section 
and Sec. 1.47-1 and Secs. 1.47-3 through 1.47-6, the term 
``disposition'' includes a sale in a sale-and-leaseback transaction, a 
transfer upon the foreclosure of a security interest and a gift, but 
such term does not include a mere transfer of title to a creditor upon 
creation of a security interest. See paragraph (g) of Sec. 1.47-3 for 
treatment of certain sale-and-leaseback transactions.
    (2) ``Cessation''. (i) A determination of whether section 38 
property ceases to be section 38 property with respect to the taxpayer 
must be made for each taxable year subsequent to the credit year. Thus, 
in each such taxable year the taxpayer must determine, as if such 
property were placed in service in such taxable year, whether such 
property would qualify as section 38 property (within the meaning of 
Sec. 1.48-1) in the hands of the taxpayer for such taxable year.

[[Page 269]]

    (ii) Section 38 property does not cease to be section 38 property 
with respect to the taxpayer in any taxable year subsequent to the 
credit year merely because under the taxpayer's depreciation practice no 
deduction for depreciation with respect to such property is allowable to 
the taxpayer for the taxable year, provided that the property continues 
to be used in the taxpayer's trade or business (or in the production of 
income) and otherwise qualifies as section 38 property with respect to 
the taxpayer.
    (iii) This subparagraph may be illustrated by the following 
examples:

    Example 1. A, an individual who makes his returns on the basis of 
the calendar year, on January 1, 1962, acquired and placed in service in 
his trade or business an item of section 38 property with an estimated 
useful life of eight years. On January 1, 1965, A removes the item of 
section 38 property from use in his trade or business by converting such 
item to personal use. Therefore no deduction for depreciation with 
respect to such item of property is allowable to A for the taxable year 
1965. On January 1, 1965, such item of property ceases to be section 38 
property with respect to A.

    Example 2. On January 1, 1965, A placed in service an item of 
section 38 property with a basis of $10,000 and an estimated useful life 
of 4 years. A depreciates such item, which has a salvage value of $2,000 
(after taking into account section 167(f)), on the declining balance 
method at a rate of 50 percent (that is, twice the straight line rate of 
25 percent). With respect to such item, A is allowed deductions for 
depreciation of $5,000 for 1965, $2,500 for 1966, and $500 for 1967. A 
is not allowed a deduction for depreciation for 1968 although he 
continues to use such item in his trade or business. Such item does not 
cease to be section 38 property with respect to A in 1968.

    (b) Leased property--(1) In general. For purposes of paragraph (a) 
of Sec. 1.47-1, generally the mere leasing of section 38 property by a 
lessor who took the basis of such property into account in computing his 
qualified investment for the credit year shall not be considered to be a 
disposition. However, in a case where a lease is treated as a sale for 
income tax purposes such transaction is considered to be a disposition. 
Leased section 38 property ceases to be section 38 property with respect 
to the lessor if, in any taxable year subsequent to the credit year, 
such property would not qualify as section 38 property (as defined in 
Sec. 1.48-1) in the hands of the lessor, the lessee, or any sublessee. 
Thus, if, in a taxable year subsequent to the credit year, a lessee uses 
the property predominantly outside the United States, such property 
shall be considered to have ceased to be section 38 property with 
respect to the lessor.
    (2) Where lessor elects to treat lessee as purchaser. For purposes 
of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1, if, under Sec. 1.48-4, the lessor of 
new section 38 property made a valid election to treat the lessee as 
having purchased such property for purposes of the credit allowed by 
section 38, the following rules apply in determining whether such 
property is disposed of, or otherwise ceases to be section 38 property 
with respect to the lessee:
    (i) Generally, a mere disposition by the lessor of property subject 
to a lease shall not be considered to be a disposition by the lessee.
    (ii) If the lessor makes a disposition of property subject to a 
lease to a person who may not, under Sec. 1.48-4, make a valid election 
to treat the lessee as having purchased such property for purposes of 
the credit allowed by section 38 (such as a person described in 
paragraph (a)(5) of Sec. 1.48-4), such property shall be considered to 
have ceased to be section 38 property with respect to the lessee on the 
date of such disposition.
    (iii) If a lease is terminated and the property is transferred by 
the lessee to the lessor or to any other person, such transfer shall be 
considered to be a disposition by the lessee.
    (iv) If the lessee actually purchases such property in the credit 
year or in a taxable year subsequent to the credit year, such purchase 
shall not be considered to be a disposition.
    (v) The property ceases to be section 38 property with respect to 
the lessee if in any taxable year subsequent to the credit year such 
property would not qualify as section 38 property (as defined in 
Sec. 1.48-1) in the hands of the lessor, the lessee, or any sublessee. 
Thus, for example, if, in a taxable year subsequent to the credit year, 
a sublessee uses the property predominantly outside the United States, 
the property

[[Page 270]]

ceases to be section 38 property with respect to the lessee.
    (c) Reduction in basis of section 38 property--(1) General rule. If, 
in the credit year or in any taxable year subsequent to the credit year, 
the basis (or cost) of section 38 property is reduced, for example, as a 
result of a refund of part of the cost of the property, then such 
section 38 property shall be treated as having ceased to be section 38 
property with respect to the taxpayer to the extent of the amount of 
such reduction in basis (or cost) on the date the refund which results 
in such reduction in basis (or cost) is received or accrued, except that 
for purposes of Sec. 1.47-1(a) the actual useful life of the property 
treated as having ceased to be section 38 property shall be considered 
to be less than 3 years.
    (2) Example. Subparagraph (1) of this paragraph may be illustrated 
by the following example:

    Example. (i) On January 1, 1962, A, a cash basis taxpayer, acquired 
from X Cooperative an item of section 38 property with a basis of $100 
and an estimated useful life of 10 years which he placed in service on 
such date. The amount of qualified investment with respect to such asset 
was $100. For the taxable year 1962 A was allowed under section 38 a 
credit of $7 against his liability for tax. On June 1, 1963, A receives 
a $10 patronage dividend from X Cooperative with respect to such asset. 
Under paragraph (c)(2)(i) of Sec. 1.1385-1, the basis of the asset in 
A's hands is reduced by $10.
    (ii) Under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, on June 1, 1963, the 
item of section 38 property ceases to be section 38 property with 
respect to A to the extent of $10 of the original $100 basis.

    (d) Retirements. A retirement of section 38 property, including a 
normal retirement (as defined in paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.167(a)-8, 
relating to definition of normal and abnormal retirements), whether from 
a single asset account or a multiple asset account, and an abandonment, 
are dispositions for purposes of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1.
    (e) Conversion of section 38 property to personal use. (1) If, for 
any taxable year subsequent to the credit year--
    (i) A deduction for depreciation is allowable to the taxpayer with 
respect to only a part of section 38 property because such property is 
partially devoted to personal use, and
    (ii) The part of the property (expressed as a percentage of its 
total basis (or cost)) with respect to which a deduction for 
depreciation is allowable for such taxable year is less than the part of 
the property with respect to which a deduction for depreciation was 
allowable in the credit year,

then such property shall be considered as having ceased to be section 38 
property with respect to the taxpayer to such extent. Further, property 
ceases to be section 38 property with respect to the taxpayer to the 
extent that a deduction for depreciation thereon is disallowed under 
section 274 (relating to disallowance of certain entertainment, etc., 
expenses).
    (2) Examples. Subparagraph (1) of this paragraph may be illustrated 
by the following examples:

    Example 1. (i) A, a calendar-year taxpayer, acquired and placed in 
service on January 1, 1962, an automobile with a basis of $2,400 and an 
estimated useful life of four years. In the taxable year 1962 the 
automobile was used by A 80 percent of the time in his trade or business 
and was used 20 percent of the time for personal purposes. Thus, for the 
taxable year 1962 only 80 percent of the basis of the automobile 
qualified as section 38 property since a deduction for depreciation was 
allowable to A only with respect to 80 percent of the basis of the 
automobile. In the taxable year 1963 the automobile is used by A only 60 
percent of the time in his trade or business. Thus, for the taxable year 
1963 a deduction for depreciation is allowable to A only with respect to 
60 percent of the basis of the automobile.
    (ii) Under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, on January 1, 1963, 
the automobile ceases to be section 38 property with respect to A to the 
extent of 20 percent (80 percent minus 60 percent) of the $2,400 basis 
of the automobile.

    Example 2. (i) The facts are the same as in example 1 and in 
addition for the taxable year 1964 a deduction for depreciation is 
allowable to A only with respect to 40 percent of the basis of the 
property.
    (ii) Under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, on January 1, 1964, 
the automobile ceases to be section 38 property with respect to A to the 
extent of 20 percent (60 percent minus 40 percent) of the $2,400 basis 
of the automobile.

[T.D. 6931, 32 FR 14032, Oct. 10, 1967, as amended by T.D. 7203, 37 FR 
17128, Aug. 25, 1972]

[[Page 271]]


<R05>
Sec. 1.47-3  Exceptions to the application of Sec. 1.47-1.

    (a) In general. Notwithstanding the provisions of Sec. 1.47-2, 
relating to ``disposition'' and ``cessation,'' paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.47-1 shall not apply if paragraph (b) of this section (relating 
to transfers by reason of death), paragraph (c) of this section 
(relating to property destroyed by casualty), paragraph (d) of this 
section (relating to reselection of used section 38 property), paragraph 
(e) of this section (relating to transactions to which section 381(a) 
applies), paragraph (f) of this section (relating to mere change in form 
of conducting a trade or business), paragraph (g) of this section 
(relating to sale-and-leaseback transactions), or paragraph (h) of this 
section (relating to certain property replaced after Apr. 18, 1969) 
applies with respect to such disposition or cessation.
    (b) Transfers by reason of death-- (1) General rule. Notwithstanding 
the provisions of Sec. 1.47-2, relating to ``disposition'' and 
``cessation'', paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 shall not apply to a 
transfer of section 38 property by reason of the death of the taxpayer. 
Thus, for example, with respect to section 38 property held in joint 
tenancy, paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 shall not apply to the transfer of 
the deceased taxpayer's interest to the surviving joint tenant. If, 
under Sec. 1.48-4, the lessor of new section 38 property made a valid 
election to treat the lessee as having purchased such property for 
purposes of the credit allowed by section 38, paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.47-1 does not apply if, by reason of the death of the lessee, 
there is a termination of the lease and transfer of the leased property 
to the lessor, or there is an assignment of the lease and transfer of 
the leased property to another person. Moreover, paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.47-1 does not apply to the transfer of a partner's interest in a 
partnership, a beneficiary's interest in an estate or trust, or shares 
of stock of a shareholder of an electing small business corporation (as 
defined in section 1371(b)) by reason of the death of such partner, 
beneficiary, or shareholder. Paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 shall not 
apply to property prior to his death even if the value of such gift is 
included in his gross estate for estate tax purposes (such as, a gift in 
contemplation of death under section 2035). The effect of this 
subparagraph is that any section 38 property held by a taxpayer at the 
time of his death is deemed to have been held by him for its entire 
estimated useful life.
    (2) Examples. Subparagraph (1) of this paragraph may be illustrated 
by the following examples:

    Example 1. (i) A, an individual, acquired and placed in service on 
January 1, 1962, an item of section 38 property with a basis of $10,000 
and an estimated useful life of eight years. On April 28, 1963, A dies 
and, as a result of A's death, his interest in such item of section 38 
property is transferred to a testamentary trust pursuant to A's will, 
and on February 1, 1967, the trust is terminated and the item of section 
38 property is transferred to the beneficiaries of the trust.
    (ii) Under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.47-1 does not apply to the transfer, as a result of A's death, of 
his interest in such item of section 38 property to the testamentary 
trust. Moreover, paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 does not apply to the 
February 1, 1967, transfer of such item of section 38 property by the 
trust to its beneficiaries.

    Example 2. (i) X Corporation, an electing small business corporation 
(as defined in section 1371(b)) which makes its returns on the basis of 
a calendar year, acquired and placed in service during 1962 an item of 
section 38 property. On December 31, 1962, X Corporation had 10 shares 
of stock outstanding which were owned as follows: A owned eight shares 
and B owned two shares. On December 31, 1962, 80 percent of the basis of 
the item of section 38 property was apportioned to A and 20 percent to 
B. On June 1, 1964, A dies and, as a result of A's death, his eight 
shares of stock in X Corporation are transferred to his wife. On July 
10, 1965, X Corporation sells the item of section 38 property to Y 
Corporation.
    (ii) Under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.47-1 does not apply to the transfer, as a result of A's death, of 
his eight shares of stock in X Corporation to his wife. Moreover, with 
respect to the July 10, 1965, sale paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 applies 
only to the 20 percent of the basis of the item of section 38 property 
which was apportioned to B.

    (c) Property destroyed by casualty-- (1) Dispositions after April 
18, 1969. Notwithstanding the provisions of Sec. 1.47-2, relating to 
``disposition'' and ``cessation'', paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 shall 
not apply to property which, after April 18, 1969, and before August 16, 
1971, is disposed of or otherwise ceases

[[Page 272]]

to be section 38 property with respect to the taxpayer on account of its 
destruction or damage by fire, storm, shipwreck, or other casualty, or 
by reason of its theft.
    (2) Dispositions before April 19, 1969. (i) In the case of property 
which, before April 19, 1969, is disposed of or otherwise ceases to be 
section 38 property with respect to the taxpayer on account of its 
destruction or damage by fire, storm, shipwreck or other casualty, or by 
reason of its theft, paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 shall apply except to 
the extent provided in subdivisions (ii) and (iii) of this subparagraph.
    (ii) Paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 shall not apply if--
    (a) Section 38 property is placed in service by the taxpayer to 
replace (within the meaning of paragraph (h) of Sec. 1.46-3) the 
destroyed, damaged, or stolen property, and
    (b) The basis (or cost) of the section 38 property which is placed 
in service by the taxpayer to replace the destroyed, damaged, or stolen 
property is reduced under paragraph (h) of Sec. 1.46-3.
    (iii) If property which would be section 38 property but for section 
49 is placed in service by the taxpayer to replace the destroyed, 
damaged, or stolen property, then the provisions of paragraph (h) of 
this section (other than the requirement that the replacement take place 
within 6 months after the disposition) shall apply.
    (3) Examples. The provisions of subparagraph (2)(ii) of this 
paragraph may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. (i) A acquired and placed in service on January 1, 1962, 
machine No. 1 which qualified as section 38 property with a basis of 
$30,000 and an estimated useful life of 6 years. The amount of qualified 
investment with respect to such machine was $20,000. For the taxable 
year 1962 A's credit earned of $1,400 was allowed under section 38 as a 
credit against its liability for tax. On January 1, 1963, machine No. 1 
is completely destroyed by fire. On January 1, 1963, the adjusted basis 
of machine No. 1 in A's hands is $24,500. A receives $23,000 in 
insurance proceeds as compensation for the destroyed machine, and on 
February 15, 1964, A acquires and places in service machine No. 2, which 
qualifies as section 38 property, with a basis of $41,000 and an 
estimated useful life of 6 years to replace machine No. 1.
    (ii) Under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.47-1 does not apply with respect to machine No. 1 since machine 
No. 2 is placed in service to replace machine No. 1 and the $41,000 
basis of machine No. 2 is reduced, under paragraph (h) of Sec. 1.46-3, 
by $23,000. (See example 1 of paragraph (h)(3) of Sec. 1.46-3.)

    Example 2. (i) The facts are the same as in example 1 except that A 
receives only $19,000 in insurance proceeds as compensation for the 
destroyed machine.
    (ii) Although machine No. 2 is placed in service to replace machine 
No. 1, subparagraph (1) of this paragraph does not apply with respect to 
machine No. 1 since the basis of machine No. 2 is not reduced under 
paragraph (h) of Sec. 1.46-3. Paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 applies with 
respect to the January 1, 1963, destruction of machine No. 1. The actual 
useful life of machine No. 1 is 1 year. The recomputed qualified 
investment with respect to such machine is zero ($30,000 basis 
multiplied by zero applicable percentage) and A's recomputed credit 
earned for the taxable year 1962 is zero. The income tax imposed by 
chapter 1 of the Code on A for the taxable year 1963 is increased by 
$1,400.

    (d) Reselection of used section 38 property--(1) Reselection. If--
    (i) Used section 38 property (as defined in Sec. 1.48-3) the cost of 
which was taken into account in computing the taxpayer's qualified 
investment is disposed of, or otherwise ceases to be section 38 property 
with respect to the taxpayer, before the close of the estimated useful 
life which was taken into account in computing such qualified 
investment, and
    (ii) For the taxable year in which the property described in 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph was placed in service, the sum of 
(a) the cost of used section 38 property placed in service by the 
taxpayer, and (b) the cost of used section 38 property apportioned to 
such taxpayer exceeded $50,000,

then such taxpayer may treat the cost of any used section 38 property 
(regardless of its estimated useful life) which was not originally 
selected, under paragraph (c)(4) of Sec. 1.48-3, to be taken into 
account in computing qualified investment for such taxable year (or 
previously reselected under this subparagraph) as having been selected 
(in accordance with the principles of paragraph (c)(4)(ii) of Sec. 1.48-
3) in place of the

[[Page 273]]

cost of the used section 38 property described in subdivision (i) of 
this subparagraph. Hereinafter such reselected property is referred to 
as ``newly selected used section 38 property''. For purposes of this 
subparagraph, the cost of used section 38 property apportioned to a 
taxpayer means the sum of the cost of used section 38 property 
apportioned to him by a trust, estate, or electing small business 
corporation (as defined in section 1371(b)), and his share of the cost 
of partnership used section 38 property, with respect to the taxable 
year of such trust, estate, corporation or partnership ending with or 
within such taxpayer's taxable year. In the case of a taxpayer to whom 
paragraph (c)(2) of Sec. 1.48-3 applied for the taxable year in which 
the property described in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph was 
placed in service, a $25,000 amount shall be substituted for the $50,000 
amount referred to in subdivision (ii)(b) of this subparagraph, and in 
the case of a member of an affiliated group (as defined in subparagraph 
(6) of Sec. 1.48-3(e)) the amount apportioned to such member under 
paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.48-3 shall be substituted for such $50,000 
amount.
    (2) Application of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1. (i) If a taxpayer 
treats, under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, the cost of any used 
section 38 property which was not originally selected as having been 
selected in place of the cost of used section 38 property described in 
subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph, then, not withstanding the 
provisions of Sec. 1.47-2 (relating to ``disposition'' and 
``cessation''), paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 shall not apply to the 
property described in subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph to the 
extent of the cost of the newly selected used section 38 property.
    (ii) If the cost of the used section 38 property described in 
subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph exceeds the cost of the newly 
selected used section 38 property, then the property described in 
subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph shall cease to be section 38 
property with respect to the taxpayer to the extent of such excess.
    (iii) If the newly selected used section 38 property is disposed of, 
or otherwise ceases to be section 38 property with respect to the 
taxpayer, before the close of the estimated useful life of the property 
described in subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph, then, unless he 
reselects other used section 38 property, paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 
shall apply with respect to such newly selected used section 38 
property. For purposes of recomputing qualified investment with respect 
to such newly selected used section 38 property the actual useful life 
shall be deemed to be the period beginning with the date on which the 
property described in subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph was placed 
in service by the taxpayer and ending with the date of the disposition 
or cessation with respect to such newly selected used section 38 
property. See paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.47-1, relating to date placed in 
service and date of disposition or cessation.
    (3) Information requirement. (i) If in any taxable year this 
paragraph applies to a taxpayer, such taxpayer shall attach to his 
income tax return for such taxable year a statement containing the 
information required by subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph.
    (ii) The statement referred to in subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph shall contain the following information:
    (a) The taxpayer's name, address and taxpayer account number; and
    (b) With respect to the originally selected used section 38 property 
and the newly selected used section 38 property, the month and year 
placed in service, cost, and estimated useful life.
    (4) Examples. This paragraph may be illustrated by the following 
examples:

    Example 1. (i) X Corporation purchased and placed in service on 
January 1, 1962, machines No. 1 and No. 2, which qualified as used 
section 38 property, each with a cost of $50,000 and an estimated useful 
life of eight years. The aggregate cost of used section 38 property 
taken into account by X Corporation in computing its qualified 
investment for the taxable year 1962 could not exceed $50,000; 
therefore, under paragraph (c)(4) of Sec. 1.48-3, X selected the $50,000 
cost of machine No. 1 to be taken into account in computing its 
qualified investment for the taxable year 1962. The qualified investment 
with respect to machine No. 1 was $50,000. For the taxable year 1962 X's 
credit earned of $3,500 was allowed under section 38 as a credit against 
its liability for tax. On January 2, 1965, X Corporation sells machine 
No. 1 to Y Corporation.

[[Page 274]]

    (ii) Under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, X Corporation treats 
the $50,000 cost of machine No. 2 as having been selected to be taken 
into account in computing its qualified investment for the taxable year 
1962 in place of the $50,000 cost of machine No. 1. Therefore, under 
subparagraph (2)(i) of this paragraph, paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 does 
not apply to the January 2, 1965, disposition of machine No. 1.

    Example 2. (i) The facts are the same as in example 1 and in 
addition X Corporation, on December 2, 1966, sells machine No. 2 to Z 
Corporation.
    (ii) Under subparagraph (2)(iii) of this paragraph, paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.47-1 applies with respect to the December 2, 1966, disposition of 
machine No. 2. The actual useful life of machine No. 2 is four years and 
eleven months (that is, the period beginning on January 1, 1962, and 
ending on December 2, 1966). The recomputed qualified investment with 
respect to machine No. 2 is $16,667 ($50,000 cost multiplied by 33\1/3\ 
percent applicable percentage) and X Corporation's recomputed credit 
earned for the taxable year 1962 is $1,167. The income tax imposed by 
chapter 1 of the Code on X Corporation for the taxable year 1966 is 
increased by the $2,333 decrease in its credit earned for the taxable 
year 1962 (that is, $3,500 original credit earned minus $1,167 
recomputed credit earned).

    Example 3. (i) The facts are the same as in example 1 except that 
machine No. 2 had a cost of $30,000.
    (ii) Under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, X Corporation treats 
the $30,000 cost of machine No. 2 as having been selected to be taken 
into account in computing its qualified investment for the taxable year 
1962 in place of the $50,000 cost of machine No. 1. Therefore, under 
subparagraph (2)(i) of this paragraph, paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 does 
not apply to the January 2, 1965, disposition of machine No. 1 to the 
extent of $30,000 of the $50,000 cost of machine No. 1. However, under 
subparagraph (2)(ii) of this paragraph, paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 
applies to the January 2, 1965, disposition of machine No. 1 to the 
extent of $20,000 (that is, $50,000 cost of machine No. 1 minus $30,000 
cost of machine No. 2). The actual useful life of such $20,000 portion 
of machine No. 1 is three years (that is, the period beginning on 
January 1, 1962, and ending on January 2, 1965). The recomputed 
qualified investment with respect to the $20,000 portion of the cost of 
machine No. 1 is zero ($20,000 portion of the cost multiplied by zero 
applicable percentage) and X Corporation's recomputed credit earned for 
the taxable year 1962 is $2,100 (7 percent of $30,000). The income tax 
imposed by chapter 1 of the Code on X Corporation for the taxable year 
1965 is increased by the $1,400 decrease in its credit earned for the 
taxable year 1962 (that is, $3,500 original credit earned minus $2,100 
recomputed credit earned).

    (e) Transactions to which section 381(a) applies--(1) General rule. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Sec. 1.47-2, relating to 
``disposition'' and ``cessation'', paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 shall 
not apply to a disposition of section 38 property in a transaction to 
which section 381(a) (relating to carryovers in certain corporate 
acquisitions) applies. If the section 38 property described in the 
preceding sentence is disposed of, or otherwise ceases to be section 38 
property with respect to the acquiring corporation, before the close of 
the estimated useful life which was taken into account in computing the 
transferor corporation's qualified investment, then paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.47-1 shall apply to the acquiring corporation with respect to 
such section 38 property. For purposes of recomputing qualified 
investment with respect to such property its actual useful life shall be 
the period beginning with the date on which it was placed in service by 
the transferor corporation and ending with the date of the disposition 
by, or cessation with respect to, the acquiring corporation.
    (2) Examples. This paragraph may be illustrated by the following 
examples:

    Example 1. (i) X Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Y 
Corporation, acquired and placed in service on January 1, 1962, an item 
of section 38 property with a basis of $12,000 and an estimated useful 
life of eight years. Both X and Y make their returns on the basis of a 
calendar year. The qualified investment with respect to such item was 
$12,000. For the taxable year 1962 X Corporation's credit earned of $840 
was allowed under section 38 as a credit against its liability for tax. 
On January 15, 1967, X Corporation is liquidated under section 332 and 
all of its properties, including the item of section 38 property, are 
transferred to Y Corporation. The bases of the properties in the hands 
of Y Corporation are determined under section 334(b)(1).
    (ii) Under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.47-1 does not apply to the January 15, 1967, transfer to Y 
Corporation.

    Example 2. (i) The facts are the same as in example 1 and in 
addition on February 2, 1968, Y Corporation sells the item of section 38 
property to Z Corporation.
    (ii) Under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.47-1 does not apply

[[Page 275]]

to the January 15, 1967, transfer to Y Corporation. However, paragraph 
(a) of Sec. 1.47 applies to the February 2, 1968, sale of the property 
by Y Corporation. The actual useful life of the property is six years 
and one month (that is, the period beginning on January 1, 1962, and 
ending on February 2, 1968).

    (f) Mere change in form of conducting a trade or business--(1) 
General rule. (i) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sec. 1.47-2, 
relating to ``disposition'' and ``cessation'', paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.47-1 shall not apply to section 38 property which is disposed of, 
or otherwise ceases to be section 38 property with respect to the 
taxpayer, before the close of the estimated useful life which was taken 
into account in computing the taxpayer's qualified investment by reason 
of a mere change in the form of conducting the trade or business in 
which such section 38 property is used provided that the conditions set 
forth in subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph are satisfied.
    (ii) The conditions referred to in subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph are as follows:
    (a) The section 38 property described in subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph is retained as section 38 property in the same trade or 
business,
    (b) The transferor (or in a case where the transferor is a 
partnership, estate, trust, or electing small business corporation, the 
partner, beneficiary, or shareholder) of such section 38 property 
retains a substantial interest in such trade or business,
    (c) Substantially all the assets (whether or not section 38 
property) necessary to operate such trade or business are transferred to 
the transferee to whom such section 38 property is transferred, and
    (d) The basis of such section 38 property in the hands of the 
transferee is determined in whole or in part by reference to the basis 
of such section 38 property in the hands of the transferor. This 
subparagraph shall not apply to the transfer of section 38 property if 
paragraph (e) of this section, relating to transactions to which section 
381 applies, applies with respect to such transfer.
    (2) Substantial interest. For purposes of this paragraph, a 
transferor (or in a case where the transferor is a partnership, estate, 
trust, or electing small business corporation, the partner, beneficiary, 
or shareholder) shall be considered as having retained a substantial 
interest in the trade or business only if, after the change in form, his 
interest in such trade or business--
    (i) Is substantial in relation to the total interest of all persons, 
or
    (ii) Is equal to or greater than his interest prior to the change in 
form.

Thus, where a taxpayer owns a 5-percent interest in a partnership, and, 
after the incorporation of that partnership, the taxpayer retains at 
least a 5-percent interest in the corporation, the taxpayer will be 
considered as having retained a substantial interest in the trade or 
business as of the date of the change in form.
    (3) Property held for the production of income. Subparagraph (1)(i) 
of this paragraph applies to section 38 property held for the production 
of income (within the meaning of section 167(a)(2)) as well as to 
section 38 property used in a trade or business.
    (4) Leased property. In a case where a lessor of new section 38 
property made a valid election, under Sec. 1.48-4, to treat the lessee 
as having purchased such property for purposes of the credit allowed by 
section 38, in determining whether subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph 
applies to an assignment of the lease and transfer of possession of such 
property, the condition contained in subparagraph (1)(ii) (d) of this 
paragraph is not applicable.
    (5) Disposition or cessation. (i) If section 38 property described 
in subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph is disposed of by the 
transferee, or otherwise ceases to be section 38 property with respect 
to the transferee, before the close of the estimated useful life which 
was taken into account in computing the qualified investment of the 
transferor (or in a case where the transferor is a partnership, estate, 
trust, or electing small business corporation, the qualified investment 
of the partners, beneficiaries, or shareholders) then under paragraph 
(a) of Sec. 1.47-1 such property ceases to be section 38 property with 
respect to the transferor (or such partners, beneficiaries, or 
shareholders), and a recapture determination shall be made with respect 
to such property. For purposes of recomputing

[[Page 276]]

qualified investment with respect to such property, the actual useful 
life shall be the period beginning with the date on which it was placed 
in service by the transferor and ending with the date of the disposition 
by, or cessation with respect to, the transferee.
    (ii) If in any taxable year the transferor (or in a case where the 
transferor is a partnership, estate, trust, or electing small business 
corporation, the partner, beneficiary, or shareholder) of the section 38 
property described in subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph does not 
retain a substantial interest in the trade or business directly or 
indirectly (through ownership in other entities provided that such other 
entities' bases in such interest are determined in whole or in part by 
reference to the basis of such interest in the hands of the transferor) 
then, under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1, such property ceases to be 
section 38 property with respect to the transferor and he (or the 
partner, beneficiary, or shareholder) shall make a recapture 
determination. For purposes of recomputing qualified investment with 
respect to property described in this subdivision, its actual useful 
life shall be the period beginning with the date on which it was placed 
in service by the transferor and ending with the first date on which the 
transferor (or the partner, beneficiary, or shareholder) does not retain 
a substantial interest in the trade or business. Any taxpayer who seeks 
to establish his interest in a trade or business under the rule of this 
subdivision shall maintain adequate records to demonstrate his indirect 
interest in such trade or business after any such transfer or transfers.
    (iii) In making a recapture determination under this subparagraph 
there shall be taken into account any prior recapture determinations 
with respect to the transferor in connection with the same property.
    (iv) Notwithstanding subparagraph (1) of this paragraph and 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph in the case of a mere change in 
the form of a trade or business, if the interest of a taxpayer in the 
trade or business is reduced but such taxpayer has retained a 
substantial interest in such trade or business, paragraph (a)(2) of 
Sec. 1.47-4 (relating to electing small business corporations), 
paragraph (a)(2) of Sec. 1.47-5 (relating to estates or trusts) or 
paragraph (a)(2) of Sec. 1.47-6 (relating to partnerships) shall apply, 
as the case may be.
    (6) Examples. This paragraph may be illustrated by the following 
examples in each of which it is assumed that the transfer satisfies the 
conditions of subparagraphs (1)(ii) (a), (c), and (d) of this paragraph.

    Example 1. (i) On January 1, 1962, A, an individual, acquired and 
placed in service in his sole proprietorship an item of section 38 
property with a basis of $12,000 and an estimated useful life of eight 
years. The qualified investment with respect to such item was $12,000. 
For the taxable year 1962 A's credit earned of $840 was allowed under 
section 38 as a credit against his liability for tax. On March 15, 1963, 
A transfers all of the assets used in his sole proprietorship to X 
Corporation, a newly formed corporation, in exchange for 45 percent of 
the stock of X Corporation.
    (ii) Under subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph, paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.47-1 does not apply to the March 15, 1963, transfer to X 
Corporation.

    Example 2. (i) The facts are the same as in example 1 and in 
addition on February 2, 1964, X Corporation sells the item of section 38 
property to Y Corporation.
    (ii) Under subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph, paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.47-1 does not apply to the March 15, 1963, transfer to X 
Corporation. However, under subparagraph (5)(i) of this paragraph, 
paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 applies to the February 2, 1964, sale of 
the item of section 38 property by X Corporation to Y Corporation. The 
actual useful life of the property is two years and one month (that is, 
the period beginning on January 1, 1962, and ending on February 2, 
1964). The recomputed qualified investment with respect to such property 
is zero ($12,000 basis multiplied by zero applicable percentage) and A's 
recomputed credit earned for the taxable year 1962 is zero. The income 
tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code on A for 1964 is increased by the 
$840 decrease in his credit earned for the taxable year 1962 (that is, 
$840 credit earned minus zero recomputed credit earned).

    Example 3. (i) On January 1, 1962, partnership ABC, which makes its 
returns on the basis of a calendar year, acquired and placed in service 
on item of section 38 property with a basis of $20,000 and an estimated 
useful life of eight years. Partnership ABC has 10 partners who make 
their returns on the basis of a calendar year and share partnership 
profits equally. Each partner's share of the basis of

[[Page 277]]

such item of section 38 property is 10 percent, that is, $2,000. On 
March 15, 1963, partnership ABC transfers all of the assets used in its 
trade or business to the X Corporation, a newly formed corporation, in 
exchange for all of the stock of X Corporation and immediately 
thereafter transfers 10 percent of such stock to each of the 10 
partners.
    (ii) Under subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph, paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.47-1 does not apply to the March 15, 1963 transfer by the ABC 
Partnership to X Corporation.

    Example 4. (i) The facts are the same as in example 3 except that 
partnership ABC transfers 10 percent of the stock in X Corporation to 
each of 8 partners, 20 percent to partner A, and cash to partner B.
    (ii) Under subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph, with respect to 
all of the partners (including partner A) except partner B, paragraph 
(a) of Sec. 1.47-1 does not apply to the March 15, 1963, transfer by the 
ABC Partnership to X Corporation. Paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 applies 
with respect to partner B's $2,000 share of the item of section 38 
property. See paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.47-6.

    Example 5. (i) X Corporation operates a manufacturing business and a 
separate personal service business. On January 1, 1962, X acquired and 
placed in service a truck, which qualified as section 38 property, in 
its manufacturing business. The truck had a basis of $10,000 and an 
estimated useful life of 8 years. On February 10, 1965, X transfers all 
the assets used in its manufacturing business to Partnership XY in 
exchange for a 50-percent interest in such partnership.
    (ii) Under subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph, paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.47-1 does not apply to the February 10, 1965, transfer to 
Partnership XY.

    (g) Sale-and-leaseback transactions--(1) In general. Notwithstanding 
the provisions of Sec. 1.47-2, relating to ``disposition'' and 
``cessation'', paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 shall not apply where 
section 38 property is disposed of and as part of the same transaction 
is leased back to the vendor even though gain or loss is recognized to 
the vendor-lessee and the property ceases to be subject to depreciation 
in his hands. If paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 applies with respect to 
such property subsequent to the transaction, the actual useful life 
shall begin with the date on which such property was first placed in 
service by the vendor-lessee as owner.
    (2) Special rule for progress expenditure property. The sale and 
leaseback (or agreement or contract to leaseback) of progress 
expenditure property (including any contract rights to the property), in 
general, will be treated as a cessation described in section 47(a)(3)(A) 
with respect to the seller-lessee. However, a sale and leaseback (or 
agreement or contract to leaseback) will not be treated as a cessation 
to the extent qualified investment passed through to the lessee under 
section 48(d) in the year the property is placed in service equals or 
exceeds qualified progress expenditures for the property taken into 
account by the lessee. If a sale-leaseback transaction is treated as a 
cessation, qualified investment must be reduced and the credit 
recomputed, beginning with the most recent credit year (i.e., the most 
recent year property is taken into account in computing qualified 
investment under Sec. 1.46-3 or 1.46-5). The amount of the reduction is 
the amount, if any, by which qualified progress expenditures taken into 
account by the lessee in all prior years exceeds qualified investment 
passed through to the lessee under section 48(d). This paragraph (g)(2) 
does not apply to any progress expenditure property that has been placed 
in service by a vendor-lessee (as described in paragraph (g)(1) of this 
section) prior to a sale-leaseback of that property in a transaction 
described in paragraph (g)(1) of this section.
    (h) Certain property replaced after April 18, 1969--(1) In general. 
(i) If section 38 property is disposed of and property which is, for 
purposes of section 1033 and the regulations thereunder, similar or 
related in service or use to the property disposed of and which would be 
section 38 property but for the application of section 49 is placed in 
service to replace the property disposed of, the increase in income tax 
and adjustment of investment credit carryovers and carrybacks resulting 
from the recomputation under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1 shall be 
reduced (but not below zero) by the credit that would be allowed for the 
qualified investment of the replacement property (determined as if such 
property were section 38 property). The preceding sentence shall not 
apply unless the replacement takes place within 6 months after the 
disposition. If property otherwise qualifies as replacement property, it 
is immaterial that it

[[Page 278]]

is placed in service (for example, to undergo testing) before the 
replaced property is disposed of. The assignment by the taxpayer in his 
return of an estimated useful life to the replacement property in 
computing its qualified investment will be considered a representation 
by the taxpayer that he expects to retain the replacement property for 
its entire estimated useful life. If such property is disposed of before 
the end of such life, then the circumstances surrounding the replacement 
will be examined to determine whether the taxpayer's representation was 
in good faith and, if appropriate, the qualified investment of the 
replacement property will be recomputed for the year of replacement 
using the actual useful life of such property.
    (ii) The provisions of subdivision (i) of this subparagraph may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. On January 1, 1967, A, a calendar year taxpayer, acquired 
and placed in service a new machine with a basis of $100 and an 
estimated useful life of 8 years. A's qualified investment was $100 and 
his credit earned was $7, which was allowed as a credit against tax for 
1967. On January 15, 1971. A disposed of the machine and replaced it 
with a similar new machine costing $75 and having an estimated useful 
life of 8 years. The new machine would be section 38 property but for 
section 49. Since the actual useful life of the original machine was at 
least 4 but less than 6 years, the recomputed qualified investment of 
the machine is $33.33 (33\1/3\ percent of $100) and under paragraph (a) 
of Sec. 1.47-1 the amount of recapture tax would be $4.67 ($7, the 
original credit earned, minus $2.33, the recomputed credit earned). 
However, under the provisions of this paragraph, the recapture tax is 
reduced (but not below zero) by the credit that would be allowed for the 
replacement property (determined as if such property were section 38 
property). Under these facts the recapture tax is zero ($4.67, the 
recapture tax with respect to the original machine, minus $5.25, the 
credit that would be allowed on the new machine).

    (2) Leased property. Property disposed of may be replaced with 
property leased from another, provided (i) an election with respect to 
the newly leased property could be made under section 48(d) but for 
section 49, and (ii) the lessee obtains the lessor's written statement 
that he will not claim such property as replacement property under this 
paragraph. The statement of the lessor shall contain the information 
specified in subdivisions (i) through (vii) of Sec. 1.48-4(f)(1) and the 
statement (or a copy thereof) shall be retained in the records of the 
lessor and the lessee for a period of at least 3 years after the 
property is transferred to the lessee.

[T.D. 6931, 32 FR 14033, Oct. 10, 1967, as amended by T.D. 7126, 36 FR 
11192, June 10, 1971; T.D. 7203; 37 FR 17128, Aug. 25, 1972; T.D. 8183, 
53 FR 6625, Mar. 2, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 1.47-4   Electing small business corporation.

    (a) In general--(1) Disposition or cessation in hands of 
corporation. If an electing small business corporation (as defined in 
section 1371(b)) or a former electing small business corporation 
disposes of any section 38 property (or if any section 38 property 
otherwise ceases to be section 38 property in the hands of the 
corporation) before the close of the estimated useful life which was 
taken into account in computing qualified investment with respect to 
such property, a recapture determination shall be made with respect to 
each shareholder who is treated, under Sec. 1.48-5, as a taxpayer with 
respect to such property. Each such recapture determination shall be 
made with respect to the pro rata share of the basis (or cost) of such 
property taken into account by such shareholder in computing his 
qualified investment. For purposes of each such recapture determination 
the actual useful life of such property shall be the period beginning 
with the date on which it was placed in service by the electing small 
business corporation and ending with the date of the disposition or 
cessation. In making a recapture determination under this subparagraph 
there shall be taken into account any prior recapture determinations 
made with respect to the shareholder in connection with the same 
property. For definition of ``recapture determination'' see paragraph 
(a)(1) of Sec. 1.47-1.
    (2) Disposition of shareholder's interest. (i) If--
    (a) The basis (or cost) of section 38 property is apportioned, under 
Sec. 1.48-5, to a shareholder of an electing small business corporation 
who takes such

[[Page 279]]

basis (or cost) into account in computing his qualified investment, and
    (b) After the end of the shareholder's taxable year in which such 
apportionment was taken into account and before the close of the 
estimated useful life of the property, such shareholder's proportionate 
stock interest in such corporation is reduced (for example, by a sale or 
redemption, or by the issuance of additional shares) below the 
percentage specified in subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph,

then, on the date of such reduction such section 38 property ceases to 
be section 38 property with respect to such shareholder to the extent of 
the actual reduction in such shareholder's proportionate stock interest. 
(For example, if $100 of the basis of section 38 property was 
apportioned to a shareholder and if his proportionate stock interest is 
reduced from 60 percent to 30 percent (that is, 50 percent of his 
original interest), then such property shall be treated as having ceased 
to be section 38 property to the extent of $50.) Accordingly, a 
recapture determination shall be made with respect to such shareholder. 
For purposes of such recapture determination the actual useful life of 
such property shall be the period beginning with the date on which it 
was placed in service by the electing small business corporation and 
ending with the date on which it is treated as having ceased to be 
section 38 property with respect to the shareholder. In making a 
recapture determination under this subparagraph there shall be taken 
into account any prior recapture determination made with respect to the 
shareholder in connection with the same property.
    (ii) The percentage referred to in subdivision (i)(b) of this 
subparagraph is 66\2/3\ percent of the shareholder's proportionate stock 
interest in the corporation on the date of the apportionment under 
Sec. 1.48-5. However, once property has been treated under this 
subparagraph as having ceased to be section 38 property to any extent 
the percentage referred to shall be 33\1/3\ percent of the shareholder's 
proportionate stock interest in the corporation on the date of the 
apportionment under Sec. 1.48-5.
    (iii) In determining a shareholder's proportionate stock interest in 
a former electing small business corporation for purposes of this 
subparagraph, the shareholder shall be considered to own stock in such 
corporation which he owns directly or indirectly (through ownership in 
other entities provided such other entities' bases in such stock are 
determined in whole or in part by reference to the basis of such stock 
in the hands of the transferor). For example, if A, who owns all of the 
100 shares of the outstanding stock of corporation X, a corporation 
which was formerly an electing small business corporation, transfers on 
November 1, 1966, 70 shares of X stock to corporation Y in exchange for 
90 percent of the stock of Y in a transaction to which section 351 
applies, then, for purposes of subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, A 
shall be considered to own 93 percent of the stock of X, 30 percent 
directly and 63 percent indirectly (i.e., 90 percent of 70). Any 
taxpayer who seeks to establish his interest in the stock of a former 
electing small business corporation under the rule of this subdivision 
shall maintain adequate records to demonstrate his indirect interest in 
the corporation after any such transfer or transfers.
    (b) Election of a small business corporation under section 1372--(1) 
General rule. If a corporation makes a valid election under section 1372 
to be an electing small business corporation (as defined in section 
1371(b)), then on the last day of the taxable year immediately preceding 
the first taxable year for which such election is effective, any section 
38 property the basis (or cost) of which was taken into account in 
computing the corporation's qualified investment in taxable years prior 
to the first taxable year for which the election is effective (and which 
has not been disposed of or otherwise ceased to be section 38 property 
with respect to the corporation prior to such last day) shall be 
considered as having ceased to be section 38 property with respect to 
such corporation and Sec. 1.47-1 shall apply. However, if the 
corporation and each of the persons who are shareholders of the 
corporation on the first day of the first taxable year for which the

[[Page 280]]

election under section 1372 is to be effective, or on the date of such 
election, whichever is later, execute the agreement specified in 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, Sec. 1.47-1 shall not apply to any 
such section 38 property by reason of the election by the corporation 
under section 1372.
    (2) Agreement of shareholders and corporation. (i) The agreement 
referred to in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall be signed by the 
shareholders and the corporation, and shall recite that, in the event 
the section 38 property described in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph 
is later disposed of by, or ceases to be section 38 property with 
respect to, the corporation during a taxable year of the corporation for 
which the election under section 1372 is effective, each such signer 
agrees (a) to notify the district director of such disposition or 
cessation, and (b) to be jointly and severally liable to pay to the 
district director an amount equal to the increase in tax provided by 
section 47. The amount of such increase shall be determined as if such 
property had ceased to be section 38 property as of the last day of the 
taxable year immediately preceding the first taxable year for which the 
election under section 1372 is effective, except that the actual useful 
life (within the meaning of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.47-1) of the 
property shall be considered to have ended on the date of the actual 
disposition by, or cessation in the hands of, the electing small 
business corporation.
    (ii) The agreement shall set forth the name, address, and taxpayer 
account number of each party and the internal revenue district in which 
each such party files his or its income tax return for the taxable year 
which includes the last day of the corporation's taxable year 
immediately preceding the first taxable year for which the election 
under section 1372 is effective. The agreement may be signed on behalf 
of the corporation by any person who is duly authorized. The agreement 
shall be filed with the district director with whom the corporation 
files its income tax return for its taxable year immediately preceding 
the first taxable year for which the election under section 1372 is 
effective and shall be filed on or before the due date (including 
extensions of time) of such return. However, if the due date (including 
extensions of time) of such income tax return is on or before September 
1, 1967, the agreement may be filed on or before December 31, 1967. For 
purposes of the two preceding sentences, the district director may, if 
good cause is shown, permit the agreement to be filed on a later date.
    (c) Examples. This section may be illustrated by the following 
examples in each of which it is assumed that X Corporation, an electing 
small business corporation which makes its returns on the basis of the 
calendar year, acquired and placed in service on June 1, 1962, three 
items of section 38 property. The basis and estimated useful life of 
each item of section 38 property are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Estimated
                                                                useful  
                    Asset No.                        Basis       life   
                                                                (Years) 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1...............................................     $30,000           4
2...............................................      30,000           6
3...............................................      30,000           8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

On December 31, 1962, X Corporation had 20 shares of stock outstanding 
which were owned equally by A and B who make their returns on the basis 
of a calendar year. Under Sec. 1.48-5, the total bases of section 38 
properties was apportioned to the shareholders of X Corporation as 
follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Useful life category       
                                     -----------------------------------
                                        4 to 6      6 to 8    8 years or
                                         years       years       more   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Total bases.....................     $30,000     $30,000     $30,000
                                     -----------------------------------
Shareholder A (10/20)...............      15,000      15,000      15,000
Shareholder B (10/20)...............      15,000      15,000      15,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Assuming that during 1962 shareholders A and B did not place in service 
any section 38 property and that they did not own any interests in other 
electing small business corporations, partnerships, estates, or trusts, 
the qualified investment of each shareholder is $30,000, computed as 
follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Applicable   Qualified
                      Basis                       percentage  investment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$15,000.........................................     33\1/3\      $5,000
$15,000.........................................     66\2/3\      10,000
$15,000.........................................         100      15,000
                                                             -----------
                                                                  30,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 281]]

For the taxable year 1962, each shareholder's credit earned of $2,100 (7 
percent of $30,000) was allowed under section 38 as a credit against his 
liability for tax.

    Example 1. (i) On December 2, 1965, X Corporation sells asset No. 3 
to Y Corporation.
    (ii) The actual useful life of asset No. 3 is three years and six 
months. The recomputed qualified investment with respect to each 
shareholder's share of the basis of asset No. 3 is zero ($15,000 share 
of basis multiplied by zero applicable percentage) and for the taxable 
year 1962 each shareholder's recomputed credit earned is $1,050 (7 
percent of $15,000). The income tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code on 
each of the shareholders for the taxable year 1965 is increased by the 
$1,050 decrease in his credit earned for the taxable year 1962 (that is, 
$2,100 original credit earned minus $1,050 recomputed credit earned).

    Example 2. (i) On December 3, 1964, shareholder A sells 5 of his 10 
shares of stock in X Corporation to C, and on December 3, 1965, A sells 
his remaining 5 shares of stock to D. In addition, on January 2, 1966, X 
Corporation sells asset No. 3 to Y Corporation.
    (ii) Under paragraph (a)(2) of this section, on December 3, 1964, 50 
percent of the share of the basis of each of the three items of section 
38 property ceases to be section 38 property with respect to shareholder 
A since immediately after the December 3, 1964, sale A's proportionate 
stock interest in X Corporation is reduced to 50 percent of the 
proportionate stock interest in X Corporation which he held on December 
31, 1962. The actual useful life of the share of the bases of the 
section 38 properties which cease to be section 38 property with respect 
to A is two years and six months (that is, the period beginning with 
June 1, 1962, and ending with December 3, 1964). A's recomputed 
qualified investment with respect to such properties is $15,000, 
computed as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Recomputed
                     Basis                       Applicable   qualified 
                                                 percentage   investment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$7,500........................................      33\1/3\       $2,500
$7,500........................................      66\2/3\        5,000
$7,500........................................          100        7,500
                                                            ------------
                                                                  15,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the taxable year 1962 shareholder A's recomputed credit earned is 
$1,050 (7 percent of $15,000). The income tax imposed by chapter 1 of 
the Code on shareholder A for the taxable year 1964 is increased by the 
$1,050 decrease in his credit earned for the taxable year 1962 (that is, 
$2,100 original credit earned minus $1,050 recomputed credit earned).
    (iii) Under paragraph (a)(2) of this section, on December 3, 1965, 
the remaining 50 percent of the share of the basis of each of the three 
items of section 38 property ceases to be section 38 property with 
respect to shareholder A since immediately after the December 3, 1965, 
sale A's proportionate stock interest in X Corporation is reduced to 
zero. The actual useful life of the share of the bases of the section 38 
properties which cease to be section 38 property with respect to A is 
three years and six months (that is, the period beginning with June 1, 
1962, and ending with December 3, 1965). A's recomputed qualified 
investment with respect to such properties is zero. For the taxable year 
1962 shareholder A's recomputed credit earned is zero. The income tax 
imposed by chapter 1 of the Code on shareholder A for the taxable year 
1965 is increased by $1,050 (that is, $2,100 ($2,100 original credit 
earned minus zero recomputed credit earned) reduced by the $1,050 
increase in tax for 1964).
    (iv) The actual useful life of asset No. 3 which was sold on January 
2, 1966, is three years and seven months. The recomputed qualified 
investment with respect to B's share of the basis of asset No. 3 is zero 
($15,000 share of basis multiplied by zero applicable percentage) and 
for the taxable year 1962, B's recomputed credit earned is $1,050 (7 
percent of $15,000). The income tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code on 
shareholder B for the taxable year 1966 is increased by the $1,050 
decrease in his credit earned for the taxable year 1962 ($2,100 original 
credit earned minus $1,050 recomputed credit earned). The sale of asset 
No. 3 on January 2, 1966, by X Corporation has no effect on A.

    (d) Termination or revocation of an election under section 1372. 
Section 38 property shall not be considered to be disposed of or to have 
ceased to be section 38 property solely by reason of a termination or 
revocation of a corporation's election under section 1372.

[T.D. 6931, 32 FR 14035, Oct. 10, 1967]


<R05>
Sec. 1.47-5   Estates and trusts.

    (a) In general--(1) Disposition or cessation in hands of estate or 
trust. If an estate or trust disposes of any section 38 property (or if 
any section 38 property otherwise ceases to be section 38 property in 
the hands of the estate or trust) before the close of the estimated 
useful life which was taken into account in computing qualified 
investment with respect to such property, a recapture determination 
shall be made with respect to the estate or trust, and each beneficiary 
who is treated, under Sec. 1.48-6, as a taxpayer with respect to

[[Page 282]]

such property. Each such recapture determination shall be made with 
respect to the share of the basis (or cost) of such property taken into 
account by such estate or trust and such beneficiary in computing its or 
his each such recapture determination the actual useful life of such 
property shall be the period beginning with the date on which it was 
placed in service by the estate or trust and ending with the date of the 
disposition or cessation. In making a recapture determination under this 
subparagraph with respect to a taxpayer there shall be taken into 
account any prior recapture determinations made with respect to such 
taxpayer in connection with the same property. For definition of 
``recapture determination'' see paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.47-1.
    (2) Disposition of interest. (i) If--
    (a) The basis (or cost) of section 38 property is apportioned, under 
Sec. 1.48-6, to an estate or trust which, or to a beneficiary of an 
estate or trust who, takes such basis (or cost) into account in 
computing his qualified investment, and
    (b) After the date on which such section 38 property was placed in 
service by the estate or trust and before the close of the estimated 
useful life of the property, such estate's, trust's, or such 
beneficiary's proportionate interest in the income of the estate or 
trust is reduced (for example, by a sale, or by the terms of the estate 
or trust instrument) below the percentage specified in subdivision (ii) 
of this subparagraph, then, on the date of such reduction, such section 
38 property ceases to be section 38 property with respect to such 
estate, trust, or beneficiary to the extent of the actual reduction in 
such estate's, trust's, or beneficiary's proportionate interest in the 
income of the estate or trust. (For example, if $100 of the basis of 
section 38 property was apportioned to a beneficiary and if his 
proportionate interest in the income of the estate or trust is reduced 
from 60 percent to 30 percent (that is, 50 percent of his original 
interest), then such property shall be treated as having ceased to be 
section 38 property to the extent of $50). Accordingly, a recapture 
determination shall be made with respect to such estate, trust, or 
beneficiary. For purposes of such recapture determination the actual 
useful life of such property shall be the period beginning with the date 
on which it was placed in service by the estate or trust and ending with 
the date on which it is treated as having ceased to be section 38 
property with respect to the estate, trust, or beneficiary. In making a 
recapture determination under this subparagraph there shall be taken 
into account any prior recapture determination made with respect to the 
estate, trust, or beneficiary in connection with the same property.
    (ii) The percentage referred to in subdivision (i)(b) of this 
subparagraph is 66\2/3\ percent of the estate's, trust's, or 
beneficiary's proportionate interest in the income of the estate or 
trust for the taxable year of the apportionment under Sec. 1.48-6. 
However, once property has been treated under this subparagraph as 
having ceased to be section 38 property to any extent the percentage 
referred to shall be 33\1/3\ percent of the estate's, trust's, or 
beneficiary's proportionate interest in the income of the estate or 
trust for the taxable year of the apportionment under Sec. 1.48-6.
    (iii) In determining a beneficiary's proportionate interest in the 
income of an estate or trust for purposes of this subparagraph, the 
beneficiary shall be considered to own any interest in such an estate or 
trust which he owns directly or indirectly (through ownership in other 
entities provided such other entities' bases in such interest are 
determined in whole or in part by reference to the basis of such 
interest in the hands of the beneficiary). For example, if A, whose 
proportionate interest in the income of trust X is 30 percent, transfers 
all of such interest to corporation Y in exchange for all of the stock 
of Y in a transaction to which section 351 applies, then, for purposes 
of subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, A shall be considered to own a 
30-percent interest in trust X. Any taxpayer who seeks to establish his 
interest in an estate or trust under the rule of this subdivision shall 
maintain adequate records to demonstrate his indirect interest in the 
estate or trust after any such transfer or transfers.

[[Page 283]]

    (b) Examples. Paragraph (a) of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples in each of which it is assumed that XYZ Trust, 
which makes its returns on the basis of the calendar year, acquired and 
placed in service on June 1, 1962, three items of section 38 property. 
The basis and estimated useful life of each item of section 38 property 
are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Estimated
                                                                useful  
                    Asset No.                        Basis       life   
                                                                (Years) 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1...............................................     $30,000           4
2...............................................      30,000           6
3...............................................      30,000           8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the taxable year 1962 the income of XYZ Trust is $20,000, which is 
allocable equally to XYZ Trust and beneficiary A. Beneficiary A makes 
his returns on the basis of a calendar year. Under Sec. 1.48-6, the 
total bases of the section 38 properties was apportioned to XYZ Trust 
and beneficiary A as follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                     Useful life category       
                                                                             -----------------------------------
                                                                                4 to 6      6 to 8    8 years or
                                                                                 years       years       more   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Total bases.................................................  ..........     $30,000     $30,000     $30,000
                                                                             -----------------------------------
                                                                   ($10,000)      15,000      15,000      15,000
                                                                 ------------                                   
XYZ Trust.......................................................   ($20,000)                                    
Beneficiary A...................................................   ($10,000)      15,000      15,000      15,000
                                                                 ------------                                   
                                                                   ($20,000)                                    
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Assuming that during 1962 beneficiary A did not place in service any 
section 38 property and that he did not own any interests in other 
estates, trusts, electing small business corporations, or partnerships, 
the qualified investment of XYZ Trust and of beneficiary A is $30,000 
each, computed as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Applicable   Qualified
                      Basis                       percentage  investment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$15,000.........................................     33\1/3\      $5,000
$15,000.........................................     66\2/3\      10,000
$15,000.........................................       100        15,000
                                                 -----------------------
                                                                  30,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the taxable year 1962, XYZ Trust and beneficiary A each had a credit 
earned of $2,100 (7 percent of $30,000). Each such credit earned was 
allowed under section 38 as a credit against the liability for tax.

    Example 1. (i) On December 2, 1965, XYZ Trust sells asset No. 3 to X 
Corporation.
    (ii) The actual useful life of asset No. 3 is three years and six 
months. The recomputed qualified investment with respect to XYZ Trust's 
and beneficiary A's share of the basis of asset No. 3 is zero ($15,000 
share of basis multiplied by zero applicable percentage) and for the 
taxable year 1962, XYZ Trust's and beneficiary A's recomputed credit 
earned is $1,050 (7 percent of $15,000). The income tax imposed by 
chapter 1 of the Code on XYZ Trust and on beneficiary A for the taxable 
year 1965 is increased by the $1,050 decrease in his credit earned for 
the taxable year 1962 (that is, $2,100 original credit earned minus 
$1,050 recomputed credit earned).

    Example 2. (i) On December 3, 1964, beneficiary A sells 50 percent 
of his interest in the income of XYZ Trust to B, and on December 3, 
1965, A sells his remaining 50 percent interest to C. In addition, on 
January 2, 1966, XYZ Trust sells asset No. 3 to Y Corporation.
    (ii) Under paragraph (a)(2) of this section, on December 3, 1964, 50 
percent of the basis of each of the three items of section 38 property 
ceases to be section 38 property with respect to beneficiary A since 
immediately after the December 3, 1964, sale A's proportionate interest 
in the income of XYZ Trust is reduced to 50 percent of his proportionate 
interest in the income of XYZ Trust for the taxable year 1962. The 
actual useful life of the share of the bases of the section 38 
properties which cease to be section 38 property with respect to A is 
two years and six months (that is, the period beginning with June 1, 
1962, and ending with December 3, 1964). Beneficiary A's recomputed 
qualified investment with respect to such properties is $15,000, 
computed as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Applicable   Qualified
                      Basis                       percentage  investment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$7,500..........................................     33\1/3\      $2,500
$7,500..........................................     66\2/3\       5,000
$7,500..........................................       100         7,500
                                                 -----------------------
                                                                  15,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 284]]

For the taxable year 1962 beneficiary A's recomputed credit earned is 
$1,050 (7 percent of $15,000). The income tax imposed by chapter 1 of 
the Code on beneficiary A for the taxable year 1964 is increased by the 
$1,050 decrease in his credit earned for the taxable year 1962 (that is, 
$2,100 original credit earned minus $1,050 recomputed credit earned).
    (iii) Under paragraph (a)(2) of this section, on December 3, 1965, 
the remaining 50 percent of the share of the basis of each of the three 
items of section 38 property ceases to be section 38 property with 
respect to beneficiary A since immediately after the December 3, 1965, 
sale A's proportionate interest in the income of XYZ Trust is reduced to 
zero. The actual useful life of the share of the basis of the section 38 
properties which cease to be section 38 property with respect to A is 
three years and six months (that is, the period beginning with June 1, 
1962, and ending with December 3, 1965). A's recomputed qualified 
investment with respect to such properties is zero. For the taxable year 
1962 beneficiary A's recomputed credit earned is zero. The income tax 
imposed by chapter 1 of the Code on beneficiary A for the taxable year 
1965 is increased by $1,050 (that is, $2,100 ($2,100 original credit 
earned minus zero recomputed credit earned) reduced by the $1,050 
increase in tax for 1964).
    (iv) The actual useful life of asset No. 3 which was sold on January 
2, 1966, is three years and seven months. The recomputed qualified 
investment with respect to XYZ Trust's share of the basis of asset No. 3 
is zero ($15,000 share of basis multiplied by zero applicable 
percentage) and for the taxable year 1962, XYZ Trust's recomputed credit 
earned is $1,050 (7 percent of $15,000). The income tax imposed by 
chapter 1 of the Code on XYZ Trust for the taxable year 1966 is 
increased by the $1,050 decrease in its credit earned for the taxable 
year 1962 ($2,100 original credit earned minus $1,050 recomputed credit 
earned). The sale of asset No. 3 on January 2, 1966, has no effect on A.

[T.D. 6931, 32 FR 14037, Oct. 10, 1967]


<R05>
Sec. 1.47-6   Partnerships.

    (a) In general--(1) Disposition or cessation in hands of 
partnership. If a partnership disposes of any partnership section 38 
property (or if any partnership section 38 property otherwise ceases to 
be section 38 property in the hands of the partnership) before the close 
of the estimated useful life which was taken into account in computing 
qualified investment with respect to such property, a recapture 
determination shall be made with respect to each partner who is treated, 
under paragraph (f) of Sec. 1.46-3, as a taxpayer with respect to such 
property. Each such recapture determination shall be made with respect 
to the share of the basis (or cost) of such property taken into account 
by such partner in computing his qualified investment. For purposes of 
each such recapture determination the actual useful life of such 
property shall be the period beginning with the date on which it was 
placed in service by the partnership and ending with the date of the 
disposition or cessation. In making a recapture determination under this 
subparagraph there shall be taken into account any prior recapture 
determinations made with respect to the partner in connection with the 
same property. For definition of ``recapture determination'' see 
paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.47-1.
    (2) Disposition of partner's interest. (i) If--
    (a) The basis (or cost) of partnership section 38 property is taken 
into account by a partner in computing his qualified investment, and
    (b) After the date on which such partnership section 38 property was 
placed in service by the partnership and before the close of the 
estimated useful life of the property, such partner's proportionate 
interest in the general profits of the partnership (or in the particular 
item of property) is reduced (for example, by a sale, by a change in the 
partnership agreement, or by the admission of a new partner) below the 
percentage specified in subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph, then, on 
the date of such reduction such partnership section 38 property ceases 
to be section 38 property with respect to such partner to the extent of 
the actual reduction in such partner's proportionate interest in the 
general profits of the partnership (or in the particular item of 
property). (For example, if $100 of the basis of section 38 property was 
taken into account by a partner and if his proportionate interest in the 
general profits of the partnership is reduced from 60 percent to 30 
percent (that is, 50 percent of his original interest), then such 
property shall be treated as having ceased to be section 38 property to 
the extent of $50.) Accordingly, a recapture determination shall be made 
with respect to such partner. For purposes of

[[Page 285]]

such recapture determination the actual useful life of such property 
shall be the period beginning with the date on which it was placed in 
service by the partnership and ending with the date on which it is 
treated as having ceased to be section 38 property with respect to the 
partner. In making a recapture determination under this subparagraph 
there shall be taken into account any prior recapture determination made 
with respect to the partner in connection with the same property.
    (ii) The percentage referred to in subdivision (i)(b) of this 
subparagraph is 66\2/3\ percent of the partner's proportionate interest 
in the general profits of the partnership (or in the particular item of 
property) for the year in which such property was placed in service. 
However, once property has been treated under this subparagraph as 
having ceased to be section 38 property to any extent the percentage 
referred to shall be 33\1/3\ percent of the partner's proportionate 
interest in the general profits of the partnership (or in the particular 
item of property) for the year in which such property was placed in 
service.
    (iii) In determining a partner's proportionate interest in the 
general profits of a partnership for purposes of this subparagraph, the 
partner shall be considered to own any interest in such a partnership 
which he owns directly or indirectly (through ownership in other 
entities provided the other entities' bases in such interest are 
determined in whole or in part by reference to the basis of such 
interest in the hands of the partner). For example, if A, whose 
proportionate interest in the general profits of partnership X is 20 
percent, transfers all of such interest to corporation Y in exchange for 
all of the stock of Y in a transaction to which section 351 applies, 
then, for purposes of subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, A shall be 
considered to own a 20-percent interest in partnership X. Any taxpayer 
who seeks to establish his interest in a partnership under the rule of 
this subdivision shall maintain adequate records to demonstrate his 
indirect interest in the partnership after any such transfer or 
transfers.
    (b) Examples. Paragraph (a) of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples in each of which it is assumed that ABC 
Partnership, which makes its returns on the basis of the calendar year, 
acquired and placed in service on June 1, 1962, three items of section 
38 property. The basis and estimated useful life of each item of section 
38 property are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Estimated
                    Asset No.                        Basis      useful  
                                                              life Years
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1...............................................     $30,000           4
2...............................................      30,000           6
3...............................................      30,000           8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Partners A and B, who make their returns on the basis of a calendar 
year, share the profits and losses of ABC Partnership equally. Under 
paragraph (f)(2) of Sec. 1.46-3, each partner's share of the basis of 
the partnership section 38 property is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       Partners share of
                                 Estimated                   basis      
           Asset No.               useful     Basis  -------------------
                                    life                A 50      B 50  
                                  (years)              percent   percent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1..............................          4   $30,000   $15,000   $15,000
2..............................          6    30,000    15,000    15,000
3..............................          8    30,000    15,000    15,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Assuming that during 1962 partners A and B did not place in service any 
section 38 property and that they did not own any interests in other 
partnerships, electing small business corporations, estates, or trusts, 
the qualified investment of each partner is $30,000, computed as 
follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       Share of   Applicable   Qualified
        Partnership asset No.            basis    percentage  investment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1...................................     $15,000     33\1/3\      $5,000
2...................................      15,000     66\2/3\      10,000
3...................................      15,000       100        15,000
                                     -----------------------------------
                                                                  30,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the taxable year 1962, each partner's credit earned of $2,100 (7 
percent of $30,000) was allowed under section 38 as a credit against his 
liability for tax.

    Example 1. (i) On December 2, 1965, ABC Partnership sells asset No. 
3 to X Corporation.
    (ii) The actual useful life of asset No. 3 is three years and six 
months. The recomputed qualified investment with respect to each 
partner's share of the basis of asset No. 3 is zero ($15,000 shares of 
basis multiplied by zero applicable percentage) and for the taxable year 
1962, each partner's recomputed credit earned is $1,050 (7 percent of 
$15,000). The income tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code on each of the 
partners for the taxable year 1965 is increased by the $1,050 decrease 
in his credit earned for the taxable year 1962

[[Page 286]]

(that is, $2,100 original credit earned minus $1,050 recomputed credit 
earned).

    Example 2. (i) On December 3, 1964, partner A sells one-half of his 
50 percent interest in ABC Partnership to C, and on December 3, 1965, A 
sells the remaining one- half of his interest to D. In addition, on 
January 2, 1966, ABC Partnership sells asset No. 3 to X Corporation.
    (ii) Under paragraph (a)(2) of this section, on December 3, 1964, 50 
percent of the basis of each of the three items of section 38 property 
ceases to be section 38 property with respect to partner A since 
immediately after the December 3, 1964, sale A's proportionate interest 
in the general profits of ABC Partnership is reduced to 50 percent of 
his proportionate interest in the general profits of ABC Partnership for 
1962. The actual useful life of the share of the basis of each of the 
section 38 properties which cease to be section 38 property with respect 
to A is two years and six months (that is, the period beginning with 
June 1, 1962, and ending with December 3, 1964). Partner A's recomputed 
qualified investment with respect to such properties is $15,000, 
computed as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       Share of   Applicable   Qualified
        Partnership asset No.            basis    percentage  investment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1...................................      $7,500     33\1/3\      $2,500
2...................................       7,500     66\2/3\       5,000
3...................................       7,500       100         7,500
                                     -----------------------------------
                                                                  15,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the taxable year 1962 partner A's recomputed credit earned is $1,050 
(7 percent of $15,000). The income tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code 
on partner A for the taxable year 1964 is increased by the $1,050 
decrease in his credit earned for the taxable year 1962 (that is, $2,100 
original credit earned minus $1,050 recomputed credit earned).
    (iii) Under paragraph (a)(2) of this section, on December 3, 1965, 
the remaining 50 percent of the share of the basis of each of the three 
items of section 38 property ceases to be section 38 property with 
respect to partner A since immediately after the December 3, 1965, sale 
A's proportionate interest in the general profits of ABC Partnership is 
reduced to zero. The actual useful life of the share of the bases of the 
section 38 properties which cease to be section 38 property with respect 
to A is three years and six months (that is, the period beginning with 
June 1, 1962, and ending with December 3, 1965). A's recomputed 
qualified investment with respect to such properties is zero. For the 
taxable year 1962 partner A's recomputed credit earned is zero. The 
income tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code on partner A for the taxable 
year 1965 is increased by $1,050 (that is, $2,100 ($2,100 original 
credit earned minus zero recomputed credit earned) reduced by the $1,050 
increase in tax for 1964).
    (iv) The actual useful life of asset No. 3 which was sold on January 
2, 1966, is three years and seven months. The recomputed qualified 
investment with respect to partner B's share of the basis of asset No. 3 
is zero ($15,000 share of basis multiplied by zero applicable 
percentage) and for the taxable year 1962, partner B's recomputed credit 
earned is $1,050 (7 percent of $15,000). The income tax imposed by 
chapter 1 of the Code on partner B for the taxable year 1966 is 
increased by the $1,050 decrease in his credit earned for the taxable 
year 1962 ($2,100 original credit earned minus $1,050 recomputed credit 
earned). The sale of asset No. 3 on January 2, 1966, has no effect on A.

[T.D. 6931, 32 FR 14039, Oct. 10, 1967]


<R05>
Sec. 1.48-1   Definition of section 38 property.

    (a) In general. Property which qualifies for the credit allowed by 
section 38 is known as ``section 38 property''. Except as otherwise 
provided in this section, the term ``section 38 property'' means 
property (1) with respect to which depreciation (or amortization in lieu 
of depreciation) is allowable to the taxpayer, (2) which has an 
estimated useful life of 3 years or more (determined as of the time such 
property is placed in service), and (3) which is (i) tangible personal 
property, (ii) other tangible property (not including a building and its 
structural components) but only if such other property is used as an 
integral part of manufacturing, production, or extraction, or an an 
integral part of furnishing transportation, communications, electrical 
energy, gas, water, or sewage disposal services by a person engaged in a 
trade or business of furnishing any such service, or is a research or 
storage facility used in connection with any of the foregoing 
activities, (iii) an elevator or escalator which satisfies the 
conditions of section 48(a)(1)(C), or (iv) in the case of a qualified 
rehabilitated building, that portion of the basis which is attributable 
to qualified rehabilitation expenditures. The determination of whether 
property qualifies as section 38 property in the hands of the taxpayer 
for purposes of the credit allowed by section 38 must be made with 
respect to the first taxable year in which such property is placed in 
service by the taxpayer. See paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.46-3. For the 
meaning of ``estimated useful life'', see paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.46-3. 
In

[[Page 287]]

the case of property which is not described in section 50, this 
paragraph shall be applied by substituting ``4 years'' for ``3 years''.
    (b) Depreciation allowable. (1) Property (with the exception of 
property described in section 48(a)(1)(F) and paragraph (p) of this 
section) is not section 38 property unless a deduction for depreciation 
(or amortization in lieu of depreciation) with respect to such property 
is allowable to the taxpayer for the taxable year. A deduction for 
depreciation is allowable if the property is of a character subject to 
the allowance for depreciation under section 167 and the basis (or cost) 
of the property is recovered through a method of depreciation, 
including, for example, the unit of production method and the retirement 
method as well as methods of depreciation which measure the life of the 
property in terms of years. If property is placed in service (within the 
meaning of paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.46-3) in a trade or business (or in 
the production of income), but under the taxpayer's depreciation 
practice the period for depreciation with respect to such property 
begins in a taxable year subsequent to the taxable year in which such 
property is placed in service, then a deduction for depreciation shall 
be treated as allowable with respect to such property in the earlier 
taxable year (or years). Thus, for example, if a machine is placed in 
service in a trade or business in 1963, but the period for depreciation 
with respect to such machine begins in 1964, because the taxpayer uses 
an averaging convention (see Sec. 1.167(a)-10) in computing 
depreciation, then, for purposes of determining whether the machine 
qualifies as section 38 property, a deduction for depreciation shall be 
treated as allowable in 1963.
    (2) If, for the taxable year in which property is placed in service, 
a deduction for depreciation is allowable to the taxpayer only with 
respect to a part of such property, then only the proportionate part of 
the property with respect to which such deduction is allowable qualifies 
as section 38 property for the purpose of determining the amount of 
credit allowable under section 38. Thus, for example, if property is 
used 80 percent of the time in a trade or business and is used 20 
percent of the time for personal purposes, only 80 percent of the basis 
(or cost) of such property qualifies as section 38 property. Further, 
property does not qualify to the extent that a deduction for 
depreciation thereon is disallowed under section 274 (relating to 
disallowance of certain entertainment, etc., expenses).
    (3) If the cost of property is not recovered through a method of 
depreciation but through a deduction of the full cost in one taxable 
year, for purposes of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph a deduction for 
depreciation with respect to such property is not allowable to the 
taxpayer. However, if an adjustment with respect to the income tax 
return for such taxable year requires the cost of such property to be 
recovered through a method of depreciation, a deduction for depreciation 
will be considered as allowable to the taxpayer.
    (4) If depreciation sustained on property is not an allowable 
deduction for the taxable year but is added to the basis of property 
being constructed, reconstructed, or erected by the taxpayer, for 
purposes of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph a deduction for 
depreciation shall be treated as allowable for the taxable year with 
respect to the property on which depreciation is sustained. Thus, if 
$1,000 of depreciation sustained with respect to property No. 1, which 
is placed in service in 1964 by taxpayer A, is not allowable to A as a 
deduction for 1964 but is added to the basis of property being 
constructed by A (property no. 2), for purposes of subparagraph (1) of 
this paragraph a deduction for depreciation shall be treated as 
allowable to A for 1964 with respect to property no. 1. However, the 
$1,000 amount is not included in the basis of property no. 2 for 
purposes of determining A's qualified investment with respect to 
property no. 2. See paragraph (c)(1) of Sec. 1.46-3.
    (c) Definition of tangible personal property. If property is 
tangible personal property it may qualify as section 38 property 
irrespective of whether it is used as an integral part of an activity 
(or constitutes a research or storage facility used in connection with 
such activity) specified in paragraph (a) of this

[[Page 288]]

section. Local law shall not be controlling for purposes of determining 
whether property is or is not ``tangible'' or ``personal''. Thus, the 
fact that under local law property is held to be personal property or 
tangible property shall not be controlling. Conversely, property may be 
personal property for purposes of the investment credit even though 
under local law the property is considered to be a fixture and therefore 
real property. For purposes of this section, the term ``tangible 
personal property'' means any tangible property except land and 
improvements thereto, such as buildings or other inherently permanent 
structures (including items which are structural components of such 
buildings or structures). Thus, buildings, swimming pools, paved parking 
areas, wharves and docks, bridges, and fences are not tangible personal 
property. Tangible personal property includes all property (other than 
structural components) which is contained in or attached to a building. 
Thus, such property as production machinery, printing presses, 
transportation and office equipment, refrigerators, grocery counters, 
testing equipment, display racks and shelves, and neon and other signs, 
which is contained in or attached to a building constitutes tangible 
personal property for purposes of the credit allowed by section 38. 
Further, all property which is in the nature of machinery (other than 
structural components of a building or other inherently permanent 
structure) shall be considered tangible personal property even though 
located outside a building. Thus, for example, a gasoline pump, 
hydraulic car lift, or automatic vending machine, although annexed to 
the ground, shall be considered tangible personal property.
    (d) Other tangible property--(1) In general. In addition to tangible 
personal property, any other tangible property (but not including a 
building and its structural components) used as an integral part of 
manufacturing, production, or extraction, or as an integral part of 
furnishing transportation, communications, electrical energy, gas, 
water, or sewage disposal services by a person engaged in a trade or 
business of furnishing any such service, or which constitutes a research 
or storage facility used in connection with any of the foregoing 
activities, may qualify as section 38 property.
    (2) Manufacturing, production, and extraction. For purposes of the 
credit allowed by section 38, the terms ``manufacturing'', 
``production'', and ``extraction'' include the construction, 
reconstruction, or making of property out of scrap, salvage, or junk 
material, as well as from new or raw material, by processing, 
manipulating, refining, or changing the form of an article, or by 
combining or assembling two or more articles, and include the 
cultivation of the soil, the raising of livestock, and the mining of 
minerals. Thus, section 38 property would include, for example, property 
used as an integral part of the extracting, processing, or refining of 
metallic and nonmetallic minerals, including oil, gas, rock, marble, or 
slate; the construction of roads, bridges, or housing; the processing of 
meat, fish or other foodstuffs; the cultivation of orchards, gardens, or 
nurseries; the operation of sawmills, the production of lumber, lumber 
products or other building materials; the fabrication or treatment of 
textiles, paper, leather goods, or glass; and the rebuilding, as 
distinguished from the mere repairing, of machinery.
    (3) Transportation and communications businesses. Examples of 
transportation businesses include railroads, airlines, bus companies, 
shipping or trucking companies, and oil pipeline companies. Examples of 
communications businesses include telephone or telegraph companies and 
radio or television broadcasting companies.
    (4) Integral part. In order to qualify for the credit, property 
(other than tangible personal property and research or storage 
facilities used in connection with any of the activities specified in 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph) must be used as an integral part of 
one or more of the activities specified in subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph. Property such as pavements, parking areas, inherently 
permanent advertising displays or inherently permanent outdoor lighting 
facilities, or swimming pools, although used in the operation of a 
business, ordinarily is not used as an integral part of any of such 
specified activities. Property is

[[Page 289]]

used as an integral part of one of the specified activities if it is 
used directly in the activity and is essential to the completeness of 
the activity. Thus, for example, in determining whether property is used 
as an integral part of manufacturing, all properties used by the 
taxpayer in acquiring or transporting raw materials or supplies to the 
point where the actual processing commences (such as docks, railroad 
tracks and bridges), or in processing raw materials into the taxpayer's 
final product, would be considered as property used as an integral part 
of manufacturing. Specific examples of property which normally would be 
used as an integral part of one of the specified activities are blast 
furnaces, oil and gas pipelines, railroad tracks and signals, telephone 
poles, broadcasting towers, oil derricks, and fences used to confine 
livestock. Property shall be considered used as an integral part of one 
of the specified activities if so used either by the owner of the 
property or by the lessee of the property.
    (5) Research or storage facilities. (i) If property (other than a 
building and its structural components) constitutes a research or 
storage facility and if it is used in connection with an activity 
specified in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, such property may 
qualify as section 38 property even though it is not used as an integral 
part of such activity. Examples of research facilities include wind 
tunnels and test stands. Examples of storage facilities include oil and 
gas storage tanks and grain storage bins. Although a research or storage 
facility must be used in connection with, for example, a manufacturing 
process, the taxpayer-owner of such facility need not be engaged in the 
manufacturing process.
    (ii) In the case of property described in section 50, property will 
constitute a storage facility only if the facility is used principally 
for the bulk storage of fungible commodities. Bulk storage means the 
storage of a commodity in a large mass prior to its consumption or 
utilization. Thus, if a facility is used to store oranges that have been 
sorted and boxed, it is not used for bulk storage.
    (e) Definition of building and structural components. (1) Generally, 
buildings and structural components thereof do not qualify as section 38 
property. See, however, section 48 (a)(1)(E) and (g), and Sec. 1.48-11 
(relating to investment credit for qualified rehabilitated building). 
The term ``building'' generally means any structure or edifice enclosing 
a space within its walls, and usually covered by a roof, the purpose of 
which is, for example, to provide shelter or housing, or to provide 
working, office, parking, display, or sales space. The term includes, 
for example, structures such as apartment houses, factory and office 
buildings, warehouses, barns, garages, railway or bus stations, and 
stores. Such term includes any such structure constructed by, or for, a 
lessee even if such structure must be removed, or ownership of such 
structure reverts to the lessor, at the termination of the lease. Such 
term does not include (i) a structure which is essentially an item of 
machinery or equipment, or (ii) a structure which houses property used 
as an integral part of an activity specified in section 48(a)(1)(B)(i) 
if the use of the structure is so closely related to the use of such 
property that the structure clearly can be expected to be replaced when 
the property it initially houses is replaced. Factors which indicate 
that a structure is closely related to the use of the property it houses 
include the fact that the structure is specifically designed to provide 
for the stress and other demands of such property and the fact that the 
structure could not be economically used for other purposes. Thus, the 
term ``building'' does not include such structures as oil and gas 
storage tanks, grain storage bins, silos, fractionating towers, blast 
furnaces, basic oxygen furnaces, coke ovens, brick kilns, and coal 
tipples.
    (2) The term ``structural components'' includes such parts of a 
building as walls, partitions, floors, and ceilings, as well as any 
permanent coverings therefor such as paneling or tiling; windows and 
doors; all components (whether in, on, or adjacent to the building) of a 
central air conditioning or heating system, including motors, 
compressors, pipes and ducts; plumbing and plumbing fixtures, such as 
sinks

[[Page 290]]

and bathtubs; electric wiring and lighting fixtures; chimneys; stairs, 
escalators, and elevators, including all components thereof; sprinkler 
systems; fire escapes; and other components relating to the operation or 
maintenance of a building. However, the term ``structural components'' 
does not include machinery the sole justification for the installation 
of which is the fact that such machinery is required to meet temperature 
or humidity requirements which are essential for the operation of other 
machinery or the processing of materials or foodstuffs. Machinery may 
meet the ``sole justification'' test provided by the preceding sentence 
even though it incidentally provides for the comfort of employees, or 
serves, to an insubstantial degree, areas where such temperature or 
humidity requirements are not essential. For example, an air 
conditioning and humidification system installed in a textile plant in 
order to maintain the temperature or humidity within a narrow optimum 
range which is critical in processing particular types of yarn or cloth 
is not included within the term ``structural components''. For special 
rules with respect to an elevator or escalator, the construction, 
reconstruction, or erection of which is completed by the taxpayer after 
June 30, 1963, or which is acquired after June 30, 1963, and the 
original use of which commences with the taxpayer and commences after 
such date, see section 48(a)(1)(C) and paragraph (m) of this section.
    (f) Intangible property. Intangible property, such as patents, 
copyrights, and subscription lists, does not qualify as section 38 
property. The cost of intangible property, in the case of a patent or 
copyright, includes all costs of purchasing or producing the item 
patented or copyrighted. Thus, in the case of a motion picture or 
television film or tape, the cost of the intangible property includes 
manuscript and screenplay costs, the cost of wardrobe and set design, 
the salaries of cameramen, actors, directors, etc., and all other costs 
properly includible in the basis of such film or tape. In the case of a 
book, the cost of the intangible property includes all costs of 
producing the original copyrighted manuscript, including the cost of 
illustration, research, and clerical and stenographic help. However, if 
tangible depreciable property is used in the production of such 
intangible property, see paragraph (b)(4) of this section.
    (g) Property used outside the United States--(1) General rule. (i) 
Except as provided in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, the term 
``section 38 property'' does not include property which is used 
predominantly outside the United States (as defined in section 
7701(a)(9)) during the taxable year. The determination of whether 
property is used predominantly outside the United States during the 
taxable year shall be made by comparing the period of time in such year 
during which the property is physically located outside the United 
States with the period of time in such year during which the property is 
physically located within the United States. If the property is 
physically located outside the United States during more than 50 percent 
of the taxable year, such property shall be considered used 
predominantly outside the United States during that year. If property is 
placed in service after the first day of the taxable year, the 
determination of whether such property is physically located outside the 
United States during more than 50 percent of the taxable year shall be 
made with respect to the period beginning on the date on which the 
property is placed in service and ending on the last day of such taxable 
year.
    (ii) Since the determination of whether a credit is allowable to the 
taxpayer with respect to any property may be made only with respect to 
the taxable year in which the property is placed in service by the 
taxpayer, property used predominantly outside the United States during 
the taxable year in which it is placed in service cannot qualify as 
section 38 property with respect to such taxpayer, regardless of the 
fact that the property is permanently returned to the United States in a 
later year. Furthermore, if property is used predominantly in the United 
States in the year in which it is placed in service by the taxpayer, and 
a credit under section 38 is allowed with respect to such property, but 
such property is

[[Page 291]]

thereafter in any one year used predominantly outside the United States, 
such property ceases to be section 38 property with respect to the 
taxpayer and is subject to the application of section 47.
    (iii) This subparagraph applies whether property is used 
predominantly outside the United States by the owner of the property, or 
by the lessee of the property. If property is leased and if the lessor 
makes a valid election under Sec. 1.48-4 to treat the lessee as having 
purchased such property for purposes of the credit allowed by section 
38, the determination of whether such property is physically located 
outside the United States during more than 50 percent of the taxable 
year shall be made with respect to the taxable year of the lessee; 
however, if the lessor does not make such an election, such 
determination shall be made with respect to the taxable year of the 
lessor.
    (2) Exceptions. The provisions of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph 
do not apply to--
    (i) Any aircraft which is registered by the Administrator of the 
Federal Aviation Agency, and which (a) is operated, whether on a 
scheduled or nonscheduled basis, to and from the United States, or (b) 
is placed in service by the taxpayer during a taxable year ending after 
March 9, 1967, and is operated under contract with the United States: 
Provided, That use of the aircraft under the contract constitutes its 
principal use outside the United States during the taxable year. The 
term ``to and from the United States'' is not intended to exclude an 
aircraft which makes flights from one point in a foreign country to 
another such point, as long as such aircraft returns to the United 
States with some degree of frequency;
    (ii) Rolling stock, of a domestic railroad corporation subject to 
part I of the Interstate Commerce Act, which is used within and without 
the United States. For purposes of this subparagraph, the term ``rolling 
stock'' means locomotives, freight and passenger train cars, floating 
equipment, and miscellaneous transportation equipment on wheels, the 
expenditures for which are chargeable (or, in the case of leased 
property, would be chargeable) to the equipment investment accounts in 
the uniform system of accounts for railroad companies prescribed by the 
Interstate Commerce Commission;
    (iii) Any vessel documented under the laws of the United States 
which is operated in the foreign or domestic commerce of the United 
States. A vessel is documented under the laws of the United States if it 
is registered, enrolled, or licensed under the laws of the United States 
by the Commandant, U.S. Coast Guard. Vessels operated in the foreign or 
domestic commerce of the United States include those documented for use 
in foreign trade, coastwise trade, or fisheries;
    (iv) Any motor vehicle of a United States person (as defined in 
section 7701(a)(30)) which is operated to and from the United States 
with some degree of frequency;
    (v) Any container of a United States person which is used in the 
transportation of property to and from the United States;
    (vi) Any property (other than a vessel or an aircraft) of a U.S. 
person which is used for the purpose of exploring for, developing, 
removing, or transporting resources from the outer Continental Shelf 
(within the meaning of section 2 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands 
Act, as amended and supplemented; 43 U.S.C. 1331). Thus for example, 
offshore drilling equipment may be section 38 property;
    (vii) Any property placed in service after December 31, 1965 which 
(a) is owned by a domestic corporation (other than a corporation 
entitled to the benefits of section 931 or 934(b)) or by a United States 
citizen (other than a citizen entitled to the benefits of section 931, 
932, 933, or 934(c)), and (b) is used predominantly in a possession of 
the United States during the taxable year by such a corporation or such 
a citizen, or by a corporation created or organized in, or under the law 
of, a possession of the United States. Thus, property placed in service 
after December 31, 1965, which is owned by a domestic corporation not 
entitled to the benefits of section 931 or 934(b), which is leased to a 
corporation organized under the laws of a U.S. possession, and

[[Page 292]]

which is used by such lessee predominantly in a possession of the United 
States may qualify as section 38 property. However, property which is 
owned by a corporation not entitled to the benefits of section 931 or 
934(b) but which is leased to a domestic corporation entitled to such 
benefits would not qualify as section 38 property. The determination of 
whether property is used predominantly in a possession of the United 
States during the taxable year shall be made under principles similar to 
those described in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph. For example, if a 
machine is placed in service in a possession of the United States on 
July 1, 1966, by a calendar year taxpayer and if it is physically 
located in such a possession during more than 50 percent of the period 
beginning on July 1, 1966 and ending on December 31, 1966, then such 
machine shall be considered used predominantly in a possession of the 
United States during the taxable year 1966;
    (viii) Any communications satellite (as defined in section 103(3) of 
the Communications Satellite Act of 1962, 47 U.S.C., sec. 702(3)), or 
any interest therein, of a U.S. person;
    (ix) Any cable which is property described in section 50, or any 
interest therein, of a domestic corporation engaged in furnishing 
telephone service to which section 46(c)(3)(B)(iii) applies (or of a 
wholly owned domestic subsidiary of such corporation), if such cable is 
part of a submarine cable system which constitutes part of a 
communications link exclusively between the United States and one or 
more foreign countries; and
    (x) Any property described in section 50 (other than a vessel or an 
aircraft) of a U.S. person which is used in international or territorial 
waters for the purpose of exploring for, developing, removing, or 
transporting resources from ocean waters or deposits under such waters.
    (h) Property used for lodging--(1) In general. (i) Except as 
provided in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, the term ``section 38 
property'' does not include property which is used predominantly to 
furnish lodging or is used predominantly in connection with the 
furnishing of lodging during the taxable year. Property used in the 
living quarters of a lodging facility, including beds and other 
furniture, refrigerators, ranges, and other equipment, shall be 
considered as used predominantly to furnish lodging. The term ``lodging 
facility'' includes an apartment house, hotel, motel, dormitory, or any 
other facility (or part of a facility) where sleeping accommodations are 
provided and let, except that such term does not include a facility used 
primarily as a means of transportation (such as an aircraft, vessel, or 
a railroad car) or used primarily to provide medical or convalescent 
services, even though sleeping accommodations are provided.
    (ii) Property which is used predominantly in the operation of a 
lodging facility or in serving tenants shall be considered used in 
connection with the furnishing of lodging, whether furnished by the 
owner of the lodging facility or another person. Thus, for example, 
lobby furniture, office equipment, and laundry and swimming pool 
facilities used in the operation of an apartment house or in serving 
tenants would be considered used predominantly in connection with the 
furnishing of lodging. However, property which is used in furnishing, to 
the management of a lodging facility or its tenants, electrical energy, 
water, sewage disposal services, gas, telephone service, or other 
similar services shall not be treated as property used in connection 
with the furnishing of lodging. Thus, such items as gas and electric 
meters, telephone poles and lines, telephone station and switchboard 
equipment, and water and gas mains, furnished by a public utility would 
not be considered as property used in connection with the furnishing of 
lodging.
    (iii) Notwithstanding any other provision of this paragraph (h), in 
the case of a qualified rehabilitated building (within the meaning of 
section 48(g)(1) and Sec. 1.48-12(b)), expenditures for property 
resulting in basis described in section 48(a)(1)(E) shall not be treated 
as section 38 property to the extent that such property is attributable 
to a portion of the building that is used for lodging or in connection 
with lodging. For example, if expenditures are incurred to rehabilitate 
a five story qualified rehabilitated building, three

[[Page 293]]

floors of which are used for apartments and two floors of which are used 
as commercial office space, the portion of the basis of the building 
attributable to qualified rehabilitated expenditures attributable to the 
commercial part of the building shall not be considered to be 
expenditures for property, or in connection with property, used 
predominantly for lodging. Allocation of expenditures between the two 
portions of the building are to be made using the principles contained 
in Sec. 1.48-12(C)(10)(ii).
    (2) Exceptions--(i) Nonlodging commercial facility. A nonlodging 
commercial facility which is available to persons not using the lodging 
facility on the same basis as it is available to the tenants of the 
lodging facility shall not be treated as property which is used 
predominantly to furnish lodging or predominantly in connection with the 
furnishing of lodging. Examples of non-lodging commercial facilities 
include restaurants, drug stores, grocery stores, and vending machines 
located in a lodging facility.
    (ii) Property used by a hotel or motel. Property used by a hotel, 
motel, inn, or other similar establishment, in connection with the trade 
or business of furnishing lodging shall not be considered as property 
which is used predominantly to furnish lodging or predominantly in 
connection with the furnishing of lodging, provided that the predominant 
portion of the living accommodations in the hotel, motel, etc., is used 
by transients during the taxable year. For purposes of the preceding 
sentence, the term ``predominant portion'' means ``more than one-half''. 
Thus, if more than one-half of the living quarters of a hotel, motel, 
inn, or other similar establishment is used during the taxable year to 
accommodate tenants on a transient basis, none of the property used by 
such hotel, motel, etc., in the trade or business of furnishing lodging 
shall be considered as property which is used predominantly to furnish 
lodging or predominantly in connection with the furnishing of lodging. 
Accommodations shall be considered used on a transient basis if the 
rental period is normally less than 30 days.
    (iii) Coin-operated machines. In the case of property which is 
described in section 50, coin-operated vending machines and coin-
operated washing machines and dryers shall not be considered as property 
which is used predominantly to furnish lodging or predominantly in 
connection with the furnishing of lodging.
    (iv) Certified historic structures. For purposes of this paragraph 
(h), regardless of the actual use of a certified historic structure, 
that portion of the basis of such certified historic structure which is 
attributable to qualified rehabilitation expenditures (as defined in 
Sec. 1.48-12(c)) shall not be considered as property which is either 
used predominantly to furnish lodging or predominantly in connection 
with the furnishing of lodging. Accordingly, such portion of the basis 
may qualify as section 38 property. (For the definition of ``certified 
historic structure,'' see section 48(g)(3) and Sec. 1.48-12(d).)
    (i) [Reserved]
    (j) Property used by certain tax-exempt organizations. The term 
``section 38 property'' does not include property used by an 
organization (other than a cooperative described in section 521) which 
is exempt from the tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code unless such 
property is used predominantly in an unrelated trade or business the 
income of which is subject to tax under section 511. If such property is 
debt-financed property as defined in section 514(b), the basis or cost 
of such property for purposes of computing qualified investment under 
section 46(c) shall include only that percentage of the basis or cost 
which is the same percentage as is used under section 514(a), for the 
year the property is placed in service, in computing the amount of gross 
income to be taken into account during such taxable year with respect to 
such property. The term ``property used by an organization'' means (1) 
property owned by the organization (whether or not leased to another 
person), and (2) property leased to the organization. Thus, for example, 
a data processing or copying machine which is leased to an organization 
exempt from tax would be considered as property used by such 
organization. Property (unless used predominantly in an unrelated trade 
or

[[Page 294]]

business) leased by another person to an organization exempt from tax or 
leased by such an organization to another person is not section 38 
property to either the lessor or the lessee, and in either case the 
lessor may not elect under Sec. 1.48-4 to treat the lessee of such 
property as having purchased such property for purposes of the credit 
allowed by section 38. This paragraph shall not apply to property leased 
on a casual or short-term basis to an organization exempt from tax.
    (k) Property used by governmental units. The term ``section 38 
property'' does not include property used by the United States, any 
State (including the District of Columbia) or political subdivision 
thereof, any international organization (as defined in section 
7701(a)(18)) other than the International Telecommunications Satellite 
Consortium or any successor organization, or any agency or 
instrumentality of the United States, of any State or political 
subdivision thereof, or of any such international organization. The term 
``property used by the United States, etc.'' means (1) property owned by 
any such governmental unit (whether or not leased to another person), 
and (2) property leased to any such governmental unit. Thus, for 
example, a data processing or copying machine which is leased to any 
such governmental unit would be considered as property used by such 
governmental unit. Property leased by another person to any such 
governmental unit or leased by such governmental unit to another person 
is not section 38 property to either the lessor or the lessee, and in 
either case the lessor may not elect under Sec. 1.48-4 to treat the 
lessee of such property as having purchased such property for purposes 
of the credit allowed by section 38. This paragraph shall not apply to 
property leased on a casual or short-term basis to any such governmental 
unit.
    (l) [Reserved]
    (m) Elevators and escalators--(1) In general. Under section 
48(a)(1)(C), an elevator or escalator qualifies as section 38 property 
if--
    (i) The construction, reconstruction, or erection of the elevator or 
escalator is completed by the taxpayer after June 30, 1963, or
    (ii) The elevator or escalator is acquired after June 30, 1963, and 
the original use of such elevator or escalator commences with the 
taxpayer and commences after such date.

In the case of construction, reconstruction, or erection of an elevator 
or escalator commenced before January 1, 1962, and completed after June 
30, 1963, there shall be taken into account in determining the qualified 
investment under section 46(c) only that portion of the basis which is 
properly attributable to construction, reconstruction, or erection after 
December 31, 1961. Further, if the construction, reconstruction, or 
erection of such property is commenced after December 31, 1961, and is 
completed after June 30, 1963, the entire basis of the elevator or 
escalator shall be taken into account in determining qualified 
investment under section 46(c). Also, if an elevator or escalator is 
reconstructed by the taxpayer after June 30, 1963, the basis 
attributable to such reconstruction may be taken into account in 
determining the qualified investment under section 46(c), irrespective 
of the fact that the original construction or erection of such elevator 
or escalator may have occurred before January 1, 1962. Paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 1.48-2 shall be applied in determining the date of acquisition, 
original use, and basis attributable to construction, reconstruction, or 
erection.
    (2) Definition of elevators and escalators. For purposes of this 
section the term ``elevator'' means a cage or platform and its hoisting 
machinery for conveying persons or freight to or from different levels 
and functionally related equipment which is essential to its operation. 
The term includes, for example, guide rails and cables, motors and 
controllers, control panels and landing buttons, and elevator gates and 
doors, which are essential to the operation of the elevator. The term 
``elevator'' does not, however, include a structure which is considered 
a building for purposes of the investment credit. The term ``escalator'' 
means a moving staircase and functionally related equipment which is 
essential to its operation. For purposes of determining qualified 
investment under section

[[Page 295]]

46(c) and Sec. 1.46-3, the basis of an elevator or escalator does not 
include the cost of any structural alterations to the building, such as 
the cost of constructing a shaft or of making alterations to the floor, 
walls, or ceiling, even though such alterations may be necessary in 
order to install or modernize the elevator or escalator.
    (3) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. If an elevator with a total basis of $100,000 is 
completed after June 30, 1963, and the portion attributable to 
construction by the taxpayer after December 31, 1961, is determined by 
engineering estimates or by cost accounting records to be $30,000, only 
the $30,000 portion may be taken into account as an investment in new 
section 38 property in computing qualified investment.

    Example 2. If construction of an elevator with a total basis of 
$90,000 is commenced by the taxpayer after December 31, 1961, and is 
completed after June 30, 1963, the entire basis of $90,000 may be taken 
into account as an investment in new section 38 property.

    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 2 except that 
construction of the elevator was completed before June 30, 1963. The 
elevator is not considered to be section 38 property.

    Example 4. In 1964, a taxpayer reconditions an elevator, which had 
been constructed and placed in service in 1962 and which had an adjusted 
basis in 1964 of $75,000. The cost of reconditioning amounts to an 
additional $50,000. The basis of the elevator which may be taken into 
account in computing qualified investment in section 38 property is 
$50,000, irrespective of whether the taxpayer contracts to have it 
reconditioned or reconditions it himself, and irrespective of whether 
the materials used in the process are new in use.

    (n) Amortized property. Any property with respect to which an 
election under 167(k), 169, 184, 187, or 188 applies shall not be 
treated as section 38 property. In the case of any property to which 
section 169 applies, the preceding sentence shall apply only to so much 
of the adjusted basis of the property as (after the application of 
section 169(f)) constitutes the amortizable basis for purposes of 
section 169. This paragraph shall not apply to property with respect to 
which an election under section 167(k), 184, 187, or 188 applies unless 
such property is described in section 50.
    (o) [Reserved]
    (p) Qualified timber property. (1) Qualified timber property (within 
the meaning of section 194(c)(1)) shall be treated as section 38 
property to the extent of the portion of the basis of such property 
which is the amortizable basis (as defined in Sec. 1.194-3(b)) acquired 
during the taxable year and taken into account under section 194 (after 
applying the limitation of section 194(b)(1)). Such amortizable basis 
shall qualify as section 38 property whether or not an election is made 
under section 194. However, any portion of such amortizable basis which 
is attributable to property which otherwise qualifies as section 38 
property shall not be treated as section 38 property under section 
48(a)(1)(F) and this paragraph. For example, amortizable basis 
attributable to depreciation on equipment would not qualify as section 
38 property under this paragraph if such equipment qualifies as section 
38 property under sections 48(a)(1) (A) or (B). In determining the 
portion of amortizable basis which qualifies as section 38 property 
under this paragraph, the reduction in amortizable basis to account for 
depreciation sustained with respect to property used in the 
reforestation process (which otherwise qualifies as section 38 property) 
shall be applied before the $10,000 limitation on eligible costs under 
section 194(b)(1). For example, if in a taxable year a taxpayer incurs 
qualifying reforestation costs resulting in $12,000 of amortizable basis 
with respect to property for which an election is in effect, and $2,000 
of these costs are attributable to depreciation of the taxpayer's 
equipment, such $12,000 would first be reduced by the $2,000 of 
depreciation, and the $10,000 limitation under section 194(b)(1) would 
be applied following such reduction.
    (2) If a taxpayer makes an election to amortize reforestation 
expenditures under section 194, and allocates the $10,000 limitation 
among more than one property under Sec. 1.194-2(b)(2), then such 
allocation shall apply for purposes of determining the amortizable basis 
that qualifies as section 38 property under paragraph (p)(1) of this 
section. If no election is made under section 194, the taxpayer may 
select the manner in

[[Page 296]]

which the $10,000 limitation is to be allocated among the qualified 
timber properties.

(Sec. 38(b), 76 Stat. 963; 26 U.S.C. 38; secs. 194 (94 Stat. 1989; 26 
U.S.C. 194) and 7805 (68A Stat. 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805) of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1954)

[T.D. 6731, 29 FR 6073, May 8, 1964, as amended by T.D. 6838, 30 FR 
9060, July 20, 1965; T.D. 6958, 33 FR 9171, June 21, 1968; T.D. 6971, 33 
FR 12899, Sept. 12, 1968; T.D. 7203, 37 FR 17129, Aug. 25, 1972; T.D. 
7229, 37 FR 28142, Dec. 21, 1972; T.D. 7927, 48 FR 55849, Dec. 16, 1983; 
T.D. 8031, 50 FR 26697, June 28, 1985; T.D. 8233, 53 FR 39592, Oct. 11, 
1988; T.D. 8474, 58 FR 25557, Apr. 27, 1993; 59 FR 1476, Jan. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1.48-2   New section 38 property.

    (a) In general. Section 48(b) defines ``new section 38 property'' as 
section 38 property--
    (1) The construction, reconstruction, or erection of which is 
completed by the taxpayer after December 31, 1961, or
    (2) Which is acquired by the taxpayer after December 31, 1961, 
provided that the original use of such property commences with the 
taxpayer and commences after such date.

In the case of construction, reconstruction, or erection of such 
property commenced before January 1, 1962, and completed after December 
31, 1961, there shall be taken into account as the basis of new section 
38 property in determining qualified investment only that portion of the 
basis which is properly attributable to contruction, reconstruction, or 
erection after December 31, 1961. See Sec. 1.48-1 for the definition of 
section 38 property.
    (b) Special rules for determining date of acquisition, original use, 
and basis attributable to construction, reconstruction, or erection. For 
purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, the principles set forth in 
paragraphs (a) (1) and (2) of Sec. 1.167(c)-1 shall be applied. Thus, 
for example, the following rules are applicable:
    (1) Property is considered as constructed, reconstructed, or erected 
by the taxpayer if the work is done for him in accordance with his 
specifications.
    (2) The portion of the basis of property attributable to 
construction, reconstruction, or erection after December 31, 1961, 
consists of all costs of construction, reconstruction, or erection 
allocable to the period after December 31, 1961, including the cost or 
other basis of materials entering into such work (but not including, in 
the case of reconstruction of property, the adjusted basis of the 
reconstructed property as of the time such reconstruction is commenced).
    (3) It is not necessary that materials entering into construction, 
reconstruction, or erection be acquired after December 31, 1961, or that 
they be new in use.
    (4) If construction or erection by the taxpayer began after December 
31, 1961, the entire cost or other basis of such construction or 
erection may be taken into account as the basis of new section 38 
property.
    (5) Construction, reconstruction, or erection by the taxpayer begins 
when physical work is started on such construction, reconstruction, or 
erection.
    (6) Property shall be deemed to be acquired when reduced to physical 
possession, or control.
    (7) The term ``original use'' means the first use to which the 
property is put, whether or not such use corresponds to the use of such 
property by the taxpayer. For example, a reconditioned or rebuilt 
machine acquired by the taxpayer will not be treated as being put to 
original use by the taxpayer. The question of whether property is 
reconditioned or rebuilt property is a question of fact. Property will 
not be treated as reconditioned or rebuilt merely because it contains 
some used parts.

If the cost of reconstruction may properly either be capitalized and 
recovered through depreciation or charged against the depreciation 
reserve, such cost may be taken into account as the basis of new section 
38 property even though it is charged against the depreciation reserve.
    (c) Examples. This section may be illustrated by the following 
examples:

    Example 1. If a machine with a total cost of $100,000 is completed 
after December 31, 1961, and the portion attributable to construction by 
the taxpayer after December 31, 1961, is determined by engineering 
estimates or by cost accounting records to be $30,000, the $30,000 
amount shall be taken into account by the taxpayer in computing 
qualified investment in new section 38 property.


[[Page 297]]


    Example 2. In 1965, a taxpayer reconditions a machine, which he 
constructed and placed in service in 1962 and which has an adjusted 
basis in 1965 of $10,000. The cost of reconditioning amounts to an 
additional $20,000. The basis of the machine which shall be taken into 
account in computing qualified investment in new section 38 property for 
1965 is $20,000, whether he contracts to have it reconditioned or 
reconditions it himself, and irrespective of whether the materials used 
for reconditioning are new in use.

    Example 3. In 1961, a taxpayer pays the entire purchase price of 
$10,000 for section 38 property to be delivered in 1962. In 1962 he 
takes possession of the property and commences the original use of the 
asset in that year. The $10,000 amount shall be taken into account in 
computing qualified investment in new section 38 property for 1962.

    Example 4. A taxpayer, instead of reconditioning his old machine, 
buys a ``factory reconditioned'' or ``rebuilt'' machine in 1962 to 
replace it. The reconditioned or rebuilt machine is not new section 38 
property since such taxpayer is not the first user of the machine. See, 
however, Sec. 1.48-3 (relating to used section 38 property).

    Example 5. In 1962, a taxpayer buys from X for $20,000 an item of 
section 38 property which has been previously used by X. The taxpayer in 
1962 makes an expenditure on the property of $5,000 of the type that 
must be capitalized. Regardless of whether the $5,000 is added to the 
basis of such property or is capitalized in a separate account, such 
amount shall be taken into account by the taxpayer in computing 
qualified investment in new section 38 property for 1962. No part of the 
$20,000 purchase price may be taken into account for such purpose. See, 
however, Sec. 1.48-3 (relating to used section 38 property).

    (d) Special rule for qualified rehabilitated buildings. 
Notwithstanding the rules in paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section, 
that portion of the basis of a qualified rehabilitated building 
attributable to qualified rehabilitation expenditures is treated as new 
section 38 property. See section 48(a)(1)(E) and (g), and Sec. 1.48-11.

[T.D. 6731, 29 FR 6076, May 8, 1964, as amended by T.D. 8031, 50 FR 
26698, June 28, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.48-3   Used section 38 property.

    (a) In general. (1) Section 48(c) provides that ``used section 38 
property'' means section 38 property acquired by purchase after December 
31, 1961, which is not ``new section 38 property.'' See Secs. 1.48-1 and 
1.48-2, respectively, for definitions of section 38 property and new 
section 38 property. In determining whether property is acquired by 
purchase, the provisions of paragraph (c)(1) of Sec. 1.179-3 shall 
apply, except that (i) ``1961'' shall be substituted for ``1957'', and 
(ii) the definition of ``component member'' of a controlled group of 
corporations in paragraph (d)(4) of this section shall be substituted 
for the definition of such term in paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.179-3.
    (2)(i) Property shall not qualify as used section 38 property if, 
after its acquisition by the taxpayer, it is used by (a) a person who 
used such property before such acquisition, or (b) a person who bears a 
relationship described in section 179(d)(2) (A) or (B) to a person who 
used such property before such acquisition. Thus, for example, if 
property is used by a person and is later sold by him under a sale and 
lease-back arrangement, such property in the hands of the purchaser-
lessor is not used section 38 property because the property, after its 
acquisition, is being used by the same person who used it before its 
acquisition. Similarly, where a lessee has been leasing property and 
subsequently purchases it (whether or not the lease contains an option 
to purchase), such property is not used section 38 property with respect 
to the purchaser because the property is being used by the same person 
who used it before its acquisition. In addition, if property owned by a 
lessor is sold subject to the lease, or is sold upon the termination of 
the lease, the property will not qualify as used section 38 property 
with respect to the purchaser if, after the purchase, the property is 
used by a person who used the property as a lessee before the purchase.
    (ii) For purposes of applying subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, 
property shall not be considered as used by a person before its 
acquisition if such property was used only on a casual basis by such 
person.
    (iii) In determining whether a person bears a relationship described 
in section 179(d)(2) (A) or (B) to a person who used property before its 
acquisition by the taxpayer, the provisions of paragraphs (c)(1) (i) and 
(ii) of Sec. 1.179-3 shall apply, except that the definition of 
``component member'' of a controlled group of corporations in paragraph

[[Page 298]]

(d)(4) of this section shall be substituted for the definition of such 
term in paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.179-3.
    (3) The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. Corporation P acquires properties 1 and 2 in 1960 and 
uses them in its trade or business until 1962. In 1962, corporation P 
sells such properties to corporation Y, which leases back property 1 to 
corporation P and leases property 2 to corporation S, a wholly owned 
subsidiary of corporation P. Property 1 is not used section 38 property 
in the hands of corporation Y because, after its acquisition by 
corporation Y, it is used by a person (corporation P) who used it prior 
to such acquisition. Property 2 is not used section 38 property because, 
after its acquisition by corporation Y, it is used by a person 
(corporation S) who is related, within the meaning of section 
179(d)(2)(B), to a person (corporation P) who used it before such 
acquisition.

    Example 2. In 1962, corporation L leases property from corporation 
M. In 1964, corporation L acquires the property that it previously had 
been leasing. The property acquired by corporation L is not used section 
38 property because such property is used after such acquisition by the 
same person (corporation L) who used the property before its acquisition 
(corporation L).

    Example 3. Corporation X buys property in 1962 and leases such 
property to corporation Y. Corporation X in 1965 sells the property to A 
subject to the lease. The property acquired by A is not used section 38 
property if such property continues to be used by corporation Y, because 
corporation Y used the property before its acquisition by A.

    Example 4. A owns a bulldozer which he rents out to a number of 
different users, including B. In 1962, B used the bulldozer from 
February 16 to March 12 and again on October 15 and 16. B purchases the 
bulldozer from A on December 1, 1962. The prior use of the property by B 
does not disqualify such property as used section 38 property to B, 
because he used such property only on a casual basis prior to its 
purchase.

    (b) Cost. (1) The cost of used section 38 property is equal to the 
basis of such property, but does not include so much of such basis as is 
determined by reference to the adjusted basis of other property (whether 
or not section 38 property) held at any time by the taxpayer acquiring 
such used section 38 property.
    (2) If property (whether or not section 38 property) is disposed of 
by the taxpayer (other than by reason of its destruction or damage by 
fire, storm, shipwreck, or other casualty, or its theft) and used 
section 38 property similar or related in service or use is acquired as 
a replacement therefor in a transaction in which the basis of the 
replacement property is not determined by reference to the adjusted 
basis of the property replaced, then the cost of the used section 38 
property so acquired shall be its basis reduced by the adjusted basis of 
the property replaced. The preceding sentence shall apply only if the 
taxpayer acquires (or enters into a contract to acquire) the replacement 
property within a period of 60 days before or after the date of the 
disposition.
    (3) Notwithstanding subparagraphs (1) and (2) of this paragraph, the 
cost of used section 38 property shall not be reduced with respect to 
the adjusted basis of any property disposed of if, by reason of section 
47, such disposition resulted in an increase of tax or a reduction of 
investment credit carrybacks or carryovers described in section 46(b).
    (4) The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. In 1972, A acquires machine 2 (an item of used section 38 
property which has a sales price of $5,600) by trading in machine 1 (an 
item of section 38 property acquired in 1962), and by paying an 
additional $4,000 cash. The adjusted basis of machine 1 is $1,600. Under 
the provisions of sections 1012 and 1031(d), the basis of machine 2 is 
$5,600 ($1,600 adjusted basis of machine 1 plus cash expended of 
$4,000). The cost of machine 2 which may be taken into account in 
computing qualified investment for 1972 is $4,000 (basis of $5,600 less 
$1,600 adjusted basis of machine 1).

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that 
machine 2 has a sales price of $6,000. The trade-in allowance on machine 
1 is $2,000. The result is the same as in example 1, that is, the basis 
of machine 2 is $5,600 ($1,600 plus $4,000); therefore, the cost of 
machine 2 which may be taken into account in computing qualified 
investment for 1972 is $4,000 (basis of $5,600 less $1,600 adjusted 
basis of machine 1).

    Example 3. On September 18, 1962, B sells truck 1, which he acquired 
in 1961 and which has an adjusted basis in his hands of $1,200. On 
October 15, 1962, he purchases for $2,000 truck 2 (an item of used 
section 38 property)

[[Page 299]]

as a replacement therefor. The cost of truck 2 which may be taken into 
account in computing qualified investment is $800 ($2,000 less $1,200).

    Example 4. In 1962, C acquires property 1, an item of new section 38 
property with a basis of $12,000 and a useful life of eight years or 
more. He is allowed a credit under section 38 of $840 (7 percent of 
$12,000) with respect to such property. In 1968, C acquires property 2 
(an item of used section 38 property) by trading in property 1 and by 
paying an additional amount in cash. Section 47(a) applies to the 
disposition of property 1 and C's tax liability for 1968 is increased by 
$280. Since the application of section 47(a) results in an increase in 
tax, for purposes of computing qualified investment the cost of property 
2 is not reduced by any part of the adjusted basis of the property 
traded in.

    (c) Dollar limitation--(1) In general. Section 48(c)(2) provides 
that the aggregate cost of used section 38 property which may be taken 
into account for any taxable year in computing qualified investment 
under section 46(c)(1)(B) shall not exceed $50,000. If the total cost of 
used section 38 property exceeds $50,000, there must be selected, in the 
manner provided in subparagraph (4) of this paragraph, the particular 
items of used section 38 property the cost of which is to be taken into 
account in computing qualified investment. The cost of used section 38 
property that may be taken into account by a person in applying the 
$50,000 limitation for any taxable year includes not only the cost of 
used section 38 property placed in service by such person during such 
taxable year, but also the cost of used section 38 property apportioned 
to such person. For purposes of this section, the cost of used section 
38 property apportioned to any person means the cost of such property 
apportioned to him by a trust, estate, or electing small business 
corporation (as defined in section 1371(b)), and his share of the cost 
of partnership used section 38 property, with respect to the taxable 
year of such trust, estate, corporation or partnership ending with or 
within such person's taxable year. Thus, if an individual places in 
service during his taxable year used section 38 property with a cost of 
$25,000, if the cost of used section 38 property apportioned to him by 
an electing small business corporation for such year is $30,000, and if 
his share for such year of the cost of used section 38 property placed 
in service by a partnership is $20,000, he may select from the used 
section 38 property with a total cost of $75,000 the particular used 
section 38 property the cost of which he wishes to take into account. No 
part of the excess of $25,000 ($75,000 cost minus $50,000 annual 
limitation) may be taken into account in any other taxable year. For 
determining the amount of the cost to be apportioned by an electing 
small business corporation, see paragraph (a)(2) of Sec. 1.48-5; in the 
case of estates and trusts, see paragraph (a)(2) of Sec. 1.48-6. See 
paragraph (e) of this section for application of $50,000 limitation in 
the case of affiliated groups.
    (2) Married individuals filing separate returns. In the case of a 
husband or wife who files a separate return, the aggregate cost of used 
section 38 property which may be taken into account for the taxable year 
to which such return relates cannot exceed $25,000. The preceding 
sentence shall not apply, however, unless the taxpayer's spouse places 
in service (or is apportioned the cost of) used section 38 property for 
the taxable year of such spouse which ends with or within the taxpayer's 
taxable year. Thus, if a husband and wife who file separate returns on a 
calendar year basis both place in service used section 38 property 
during the taxable year, the maximum cost of used section 38 property 
which may be taken into account by each is $25,000. However, in such 
case, if only one spouse places in service (or is apportioned the cost 
of) used section 38 property during the taxable year, such spouse may 
take into account a maximum of $50,000 for such year. The determination 
of whether an individual is married shall be made under the principles 
of section 143 and the regulations thereunder.
    (3) Partnerships. In the case of a partnership, the aggregate cost 
of used section 38 property placed in service by the partnership (or 
apportioned to the partnership) which may be taken into account by the 
partners with respect to any taxable year of the partnership may not 
exceed $50,000. If such aggregate cost exceeds $50,000, the partnership 
must make a selection in the manner provided in subparagraph (4) of this

[[Page 300]]

paragraph. The $50,000 limitation applies to each partner, as well as to 
the partnership.
    (4) Selection of $50,000 cost. (i) If the sum of (a) the cost of 
used section 38 property placed in service during the taxable year by 
any person, (b) such person's share of the cost of partnership used 
section 38 property placed in service during the taxable year of a 
partnership ending with or within such person's taxable year, and (c) 
the cost of used section 38 property apportioned to such person for such 
taxable year by an electing small business corporation, estate, or 
trust, exceeds $50,000, such person must make a selection for such 
taxable year in the manner provided in subdivision (ii) of this 
subparagraph.
    (ii) For purposes of computing qualified investment (or, in the case 
of a partnership, electing small business corporation, estate, or trust, 
for purposes of selecting used section 38 property the cost of which may 
be taken into account by the partners, shareholders, or estate or trust 
and its beneficiaries) any person to whom subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph applies must select a total cost of $50,000 from (a) the 
cost of specific used section 38 property placed in service by such 
person, (b) such person's share of the cost of specific used section 38 
property placed in service by a partnership and (c) the cost of used 
section 38 property apportioned to such person by an electing small 
business corporation, estate, or trust. When a particular property is 
selected, the entire cost (or entire share of cost of a particular 
property in the case of partnership property) of such property must be 
taken into account unless, as a result of the selection of such 
particular property, the $50,000 limitation is exceeded. Likewise, in 
the case of an apportionment from an electing small business 
corporation, estate, or trust, when the cost in a particular useful life 
category is selected, the entire cost in such category must be taken 
into account unless, as a result of the selection of such cost, the 
$50,000 limitation is exceeded. Thus, if a person places in service 
during the taxable year three items of used section 38 property, each 
with a cost of $20,000, he must select the entire cost of two of the 
items and only $10,000 of the cost of the third item; he may not select 
a portion of the cost of each of the three items. The selection by any 
person shall be made by taking the cost of used section 38 property into 
account in computing qualified investment (or in selecting the used 
section 38 property the cost of which may be taken into account by the 
partners, etc.), and if such property was placed in service by such 
person, he must maintain records which permit specific identification of 
any item of used section 38 property selected.
    (5) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. H, who operates a sole proprietorship, purchases and 
places in service in 1963 used section 38 property with a cost of 
$60,000. His spouse, W, is a shareholder in an electing small business 
corporation which purchases and places in service during its fiscal year 
ending June 30, 1963, used section 38 property with a cost of $50,000. 
Both spouses file separate returns on a calendar year basis. W, as a 60 
percent shareholder on the last day of the taxable year of the 
corporation, is apportioned $30,000 (60 percent of $50,000) of the cost 
of the used section 38 property placed in service by the corporation. 
The cost of used section 38 property that may be taken into account by H 
on his separate return is $25,000. The cost of used section 38 property 
that may be taken into account by W on her separate return is $25,000. 
On the other hand, if the corporation had made no investment in used 
section 38 property, H could take $50,000 of the $60,000 cost into 
account.

    Example 2. Partners X, Y, and Z share the profits and losses of 
partnership XYZ in the ratio of 50 percent, 30 percent, and 20 percent, 
respectively. The partnership and each partner make returns on the basis 
of the calendar year. Each partner also operates a sole proprietorship. 
In 1963, the partnership and the partners purchase and place in service 
the following used section 38 property:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   Estimated            
                                                    useful              
                    Property                         life        Cost   
                                                    (years)             
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Partnership XYZ                                        
Property No. 1..................................           9     $10,000
Property No. 2..................................           7      50,000
Property No. 3..................................           7      50,000
Property No. 4..................................           5      30,000
                    Partner X                                           
Property No. 5..................................           6      30,000
                    Partner Y                                           
Property No. 6..................................          10      60,000
                    Partner Z                                           
Property No. 7..................................           4      36,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 301]]

    (i) Selection by partnership. In accordance with subparagraph 
(4)(ii) of this paragraph, the partnership selects property No. 1 and 
$40,000 of the cost of property No. 2 to be taken into account. 
Therefore, each partner's share of cost of the property selected by the 
partnership is as follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Estimated                       Partner's share of cost       
                  Property No.                   useful life    Selected  --------------------------------------
                                                   (years)        cost       X (50%)      Y (30%)      Z (20%)  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1..............................................            9      $10,000       $5,000       $3,000       $2,000
2..............................................            7       40,000       20,000       12,000        8,000
                                                ----------------------------------------------------------------
    Total......................................  ...........       50,000       25,000       15,000       10,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Selection by partners. In accordance with subparagraph (4)(ii) 
of this paragraph, the partners make the following selections: Partner X 
selects property No. 5 ($30,000), his share of the cost of property No. 
1 ($5,000), and $15,000 of his share of the cost of property No. 2. 
Partner Y selects $50,000 of the cost of property No. 6, and no part of 
his share of the cost of partnership property. Partner Z, having an 
aggregate cost of used section 38 property of only $46,000 (partnership 
property of $10,000 and individually owned property of $36,000), takes 
into account the entire $46,000.
    (iii) Qualified investment of partner X. X's total qualified 
investment in used section 38 property for 1963 is $35,000, computed as 
follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Estimated                                        
                        Property No.                          useful life    Selected    Applicable   Qualified 
                                                                (years)        cost      percentage   investment
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1...........................................................            9       $5,000        100         $5,000
2...........................................................            7       15,000      66\2/3\       10,000
5...........................................................            6       30,000      66\2/3\       20,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Total.....................................................  ...........       50,000  ...........       35,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iv) Qualified investment of partner Y. Y's total qualified 
investment in used section 38 property for 1963 is $50,000 (100 percent 
of $50,000) since he selected $50,000 of the cost of property No. 6 
which has a useful life of 8 years or more.
    (v) Qualified investment of partner Z. Z's total qualified 
investment in used section 38 property for 1963 is $19,333, computed as 
follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Estimated                                        
                        Property No.                          useful life    Selected    Applicable   Qualified 
                                                                (years)        cost      percentage   investment
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1...........................................................            9       $2,000        100         $2,000
2...........................................................            7        8,000      66\2/3\        5,333
7...........................................................            4       36,000      33\1/3\       12,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Total.....................................................  ...........       46,000  ...........       19,333
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) Dollar limitation for component members of a controlled group--
(1) In general. (i) Section 48(c)(2)(C) provides that the $50,000 
limitation on the cost of used section 38 property which may be taken 
into account for any taxable year shall, in the case of component 
members of a controlled group (as defined in subparagraph (4) of this 
paragraph) on a particular December 31, be reduced for each such member 
by apportioning the $50,000 amount among such component members for 
their taxable years that include such December 31 in accordance with 
their respective amounts of used section 38 property which may be taken 
into account, that is, in accordance with the total cost of used section 
38 property placed in service by each such member during its taxable 
year (without regard to the $50,000 limitation or the applicable 
percentages to be applied in computing qualified investment).
    (ii) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the $50,000 
amount

[[Page 302]]

shall be apportioned among those corporations which are component 
members of the controlled group on a December 31. For the taxable year 
of each such member which includes such December 31, the cost of used 
section 38 property taken into account in computing qualified investment 
under section 46(c)(1)(B) shall not exceed the amount which bears the 
same ratio to $50,000 as the cost of used section 38 property placed in 
service by such member for such taxable year bears to the total cost of 
used section 38 property placed in service by all component members of 
the controlled group for their taxable years which include such December 
31.
    (iii) If a component member of the group makes its income tax return 
on the basis of a 52-53-week taxable year, the principles of section 
441(f)(2)(A)(ii) and paragraph (b)(1) of Sec. 1.441-2 apply in 
determining the last day of such a taxable year.
    (2) Statement by the ``filing member''. For purposes of this 
paragraph, the term ``filing member'' with respect to a particular 
December 31 means the member (or members) of a controlled group which 
has, among those members of the group which are apportioned part of the 
$50,000 amount for their taxable years which include such December 31, 
the taxable year including such December 31 which ends on the earliest 
date. The filing member of the group shall attach to its income tax 
return a statement containing the name, address, and employer 
identification number of each component member of the controlled group 
on such December 31 and a schedule showing the computation of the 
apportionment of the $50,000 amount among the component members of the 
group. Each such other member shall retain as part of its records a copy 
of the statement containing the apportionment schedule. Except as 
otherwise provided in subparagraph (3)(ii) of this paragraph, each 
member which is apportioned part of the $50,000 amount shall take such 
apportioned amount into account in filing its return for its taxable 
year which includes such December 31.
    (3) Estimate of used section 38 property to be placed in service. 
(i) For purposes of subparagraphs (1) and (2) of this paragraph, if on 
the date (including extensions of time) for filing the income tax return 
of the filing member of the group with respect to a particular December 
31, the total cost of used section 38 property actually placed in 
service by any component member of the group during such member's 
taxable year that includes such December 31 is not known, then such 
member shall estimate such cost. The estimate shall be made on the basis 
of the facts and circumstances known as of the time of the estimate. Any 
such estimate shall also be used in determining the total cost of used 
section 38 property placed in service by all component members for their 
taxable years including such December 31.
    (ii) If an estimate is used by any component member of a controlled 
group pursuant to subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, each member may 
later file an original or amended return in which the apportionment of 
the $50,000 amount is based upon the cost of used section 38 property 
actually placed in service by all component members of the group during 
their taxable year which include such December 31. Such amended 
apportionment shall be made only if each component member of the group 
whose limitation would be changed files an original or amended return 
which reflects the amended apportionment based upon the cost of the used 
section 38 property actually placed in service by component members of 
the group. In such case, the new statement reflecting the amended 
apportionment shall be attached to the amended return of the filing 
member of the group, and a copy of such statement shall be retained by 
each such member pursuant to the requirements of subparagraph (2) of 
this paragraph.
    (4) Definitions of controlled group of corporations and component 
member of controlled group. For purposes of this section, the terms 
``controlled group of corporations'' and ``component member'' of a 
controlled group of corporations shall have the same meaning assigned to 
those terms in section 1563 (a) and (b), except that the phrase ``more 
than 50 percent'' shall be substituted for the phrase ``at least 80 
percent'' each place it appears in section

[[Page 303]]

1563(a)(1). For purposes of applying Sec. 1.1563-1(b)(2)(ii)(c), an 
electing small business corporation shall be treated as an excluded 
member whether or not it is subject to the tax imposed by section 1378.
    (5) Members of controlled group filing a consolidated return. For 
the purpose of apportioning the $50,000 amount in the case of component 
members of a controlled group which join in filing a consolidated 
return, all such members shall be treated as though they were a single 
component member of the controlled group. Thus, in determining the 
limitation on the cost of used section 38 property which may be taken 
into account by the group filing the consolidated return, the 
apportionment provided in subparagraph (1)(ii) of this paragraph shall 
be made by using the aggregate cost of such property placed in service 
by all members of the group filing the consolidated return. If all 
component members of the controlled group join in filing a consolidated 
return, the group may select the items to be taken into account to the 
extent of an aggregate cost of $50,000; if some component members of the 
controlled group do not join in filing the consolidated return, then the 
members of the group which join in filing the consolidated return may 
select the items to be taken into account to the extent of the amount 
apportioned to such members under subparagraph (1)(ii) of this 
paragraph.
    (6) Examples. This paragraph may be illustrated by the following 
examples:

    Example 1. (i) On December 31, 1970, corporations M, N, and O are 
component members of the same controlled group. The taxable years of M, 
N, and O end, respectively, on January 31, March 31, and April 30. 
During the respective taxable years of each corporation which include 
December 31, 1970, M places in service no used section 38 property, and 
N and O place in service used section 38 property with respective costs 
of $100,000 and $150,000. N is the ``filing member'' of the group since 
N, among the members (N and O) which are apportioned part of the $50,000 
amount for their taxable years which include such December 31, has the 
taxable year ending on the earliest date.
    (ii) The cost of used section 38 property taken into account by N 
for its taxable year ending March 31, 1971, may not exceed $20,000, that 
is, an amount which bears the same ratio to $50,000 as the cost of used 
section 38 property placed in service by N for its taxable year 
($100,000) bears to the total cost of used section 38 property placed in 
service by all component members of the controlled group (M, N, and O) 
for their taxable years which include December 31, 1970 ($250,000). 
Similarly, the cost of used section 38 property taken into account by O 
for its taxable year ending April 30, 1971, may not exceed $30,000.

    Example 2. (i) On December 31, 1971, corporations S and T are 
component members of the same controlled group. The taxable years of 
corporations S and T end, respectively, on January 31 and June 30. On 
April 15, 1972, S files an income tax return for its taxable year ending 
January 31, 1972, during which year it places in service used section 38 
property costing $100,000. T estimates that it will place in service 
used section 38 property costing $150,000 during its taxable year ending 
June 30, 1972.
    (ii) S, the ``filing member'' of the group, must file an 
apportionment schedule under which it may take into account as the cost 
of used section 38 property an amount not in excess of $20,000 
($100,000/$250,000 x  $50,000). If T actually places in service during 
its taxable year used section 38 property costing more or less than 
$150,000, its income tax return for its taxable year ending June 30, 
1972, may reflect the amended apportionment of the $50,000 limitation 
based upon the cost of used section 38 property actually placed in 
service by the group, provided that S attaches a new apportionment 
schedule to an amended return to reflect the amended apportionment. For 
example, if T places in service used section 38 property costing 
$200,000, the cost of used section 38 property taken into account by S 
and T for their respective taxable years could not exceed $16,667 
($100,000/$300,000 x $50,000) and $33,333 ($200,000/$300,000 x $50,000), 
respectively, under an amended apportionment.

(Secs. 38(b) and 7805 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (76 Stat. 
962, U.S.C. 38(b); 68A Stat. 917; 26 U.S.C. 7805)

[T.D. 6731, 29 FR 6076, May 8, 1964, as amended by T.D. 7181, 37 FR 
8064, Apr. 25, 1972; T.D. 7820, 47 FR 25139, June 10, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1.48-4   Election of lessor of new section 38 property to treat lessee as purchaser.

    (a) In general--(1) Lessee treated as purchaser. Under section 
48(d), a lessor of property may elect to treat the lessee of such 
property as having purchased such property (or, in the case of short-
term lease property described in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, a 
portion of such property) for purposes

[[Page 304]]

of the credit allowed by section 38 if the following conditions are 
satisfied:
    (i) The property must be ``section 38 property'' in the hands of the 
lessor; that is, it must be property with respect to which depreciation 
(or amortization in lieu of depreciation) is allowable to the lessor, it 
must have a useful life of 3 years (4 years in the case of property 
which is not described in section 50) or more in his hands, and in every 
other respect it must meet the requirements of Sec. 1.48-1. Thus, for 
example, property leased by a municipality to a taxpayer for use in what 
is commonly known as an ``industrial park'' is not eligible for the 
election since, under paragraph (k) of Sec. 1.48-1, property used by a 
governmental unit is not section 38 property. In addition, property used 
by the lessee predominantly outside the United States is not eligible 
for the election since, under paragraph (g) of Sec. 1.48-1, such 
property is not section 38 property. For purposes of this subdivision, 
if the lessor is an estate or trust, depreciation (or amortization in 
lieu of depreciation) will be considered allowable to the estate or 
trust even if it is apportioned to the beneficiaries or other persons.
    (ii) The property must be ``new section 38 property'' (within the 
meaning of Sec. 1.48-2) in the hands of the lessor, and the original use 
of such property must commence with the lessor. See paragraph (b) of 
this section for the application of the rules relating to ``original 
use'' in the case of leased property.
    (iii) The property would constitute ``new section 38 property'' to 
the lessee if such lessee had actually purchased the property. Thus, the 
election is not available if the lessee is not the original user of the 
property. See paragraph (b) of this section for the application of the 
rules relating to ``original use'' in the case of leased property. See 
paragraph (d) of this section for the determination of the estimated 
useful life of leased property in the hands of the lessee.
    (iv) A statement of election to treat the lessee as a purchaser has 
been filed in the manner and within the time provided in paragraph (f) 
or (g) of this section.
    (v) The lessor is not a person referred to in section 46(d)(1), that 
is, a mutual savings bank, cooperative bank, or domestic building and 
loan association to which section 593 applies; a regulated investment 
company or real estate investment trust subject to taxation under 
subchapter M, chapter 1 of the Code; or a cooperative organization 
described in section 1381(a).

The election may be made on a property-by-property basis or a general 
election may be made with respect to each taxable year of a particular 
lessee. If the conditions of this subparagraph have been met, the lessee 
shall be treated as though he were the actual owner of all or a portion 
of the property for purposes of the credit allowed by section 38. Thus, 
the lessee shall be entitled to a credit allowed by section 38 with 
respect to such property for the taxable year in which he places such 
property in service, and the lessor shall not be entitled to a credit 
allowed by section 38 with respect to such property unless the property 
is short-term lease property (as defined in subparagraph (2) of this 
paragraph). Moreover, if the leased property is disposed of, or if it 
otherwise ceases to be section 38 property, the property will be subject 
to the provisions of section 47 (relating to early dispositions, etc.).
    (2) Short-term lease property. For purposes of this section, the 
term ``short-term lease property'' means property which--
    (i) Is new section 38 property;
    (ii) Has a class life (determined under section 167(m)) in excess of 
14 years;
    (iii) Is leased under a lease entered into after November 8, 1971, 
for a period which is less than 80 percent of the class life of such 
property; and
    (iv) Is not leased subject to a net lease within the meaning of 
section 57(c)(1)(B) and the regulations thereunder.

The class life of property shall be determined under section 167(m) and 
the regulations prescribed in connection with that section, except that 
such class life shall be determined without regard to any variance from 
the class life permitted under such section. If a class life has not 
been prescribed for property under section 167(m) on the

[[Page 305]]

date such property is leased, the class life of the property shall be 
the estimated useful life used to compute the allowance for depreciation 
with respect to such property under section 167. For purposes of 
subdivision (iii) of this subparagraph, the period for which a lease is 
entered into shall be determined without regard to any option on the 
part of the lessee to extend or renew such lease, and without regard to 
any option on the part of the lessee to cancel the lease after a 
specified period if under the terms of such lease, such a cancellation 
would result in the imposition of a substantial penalty upon the lessee. 
Generally, a penalty equal to 25 percent of the total remaining rental 
payments due under the lease will be regarded as substantial.
    (b) Original use. For purposes of this section only, the lessor and 
the lessee may both be considered as the original users of an item of 
leased property. The determination of whether the lessor qualifies as 
the original user of leased property shall be made under paragraph 
(b)(7) of Sec. 1.48-2. The determination of whether the lessee qualifies 
as the original user of leased property shall be made, under paragraph 
(b)(7) of Sec. 1.48-2, as if the lessee actually purchased the property. 
Thus, the lessee would not be considered the original user of the 
property if it has been previously used by the lessor or another person, 
or if it is reconstructed, rebuilt, or reconditioned property. However, 
the lessee would be considered the original user if he is the first 
person to use the property for its intended function. Thus, the fact 
that the lessor may have, for example, tested, stored, or attempted to 
lease the property to other persons will not preclude the lessee from 
being considered the original user.
    (c) Qualified investment--(1) In general. If a valid election is 
made under this section, the amount of qualified investment under 
section 46(c) with respect to the leased property shall be determined 
under this paragraph and paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section.
    (2) Nonshort-term lease property. In the case of property which is 
not short-term lease property, the lessee is treated as having acquired 
the entire property for an amount equal to--
    (i) The fair market value of such property on the date possession is 
transferred to the lessee, or
    (ii) If the property is leased by a component member of a controlled 
group to another component member of the same controlled group (within 
the meaning of paragraph (f)(4) of Sec. 1.46-1) on the date possession 
of the property is transferred to the lessee, the basis of the property 
in the hands of the lessor.
    (3) Short-term lease property. (i) In the case of short-term lease 
property, the lessee is treated as having acquired a portion of such 
property. The amount for which the lessee is treated as having acquired 
such portion is an amount equal to a fraction, the numerator of which is 
the term of the lease and the denominator of which is the class life of 
the property leased, of the amount for which the lessee would be treated 
as having acquired the property under subparagraph (2) of this paragraph 
if the property were not short-term lease property.
    (ii) In the case of short-term lease property, the qualified 
investment of the lessor is an amount equal to his qualified investment 
in such property determined under section 46(c) multiplied by a 
fraction, the numerator of which is the class life of the property 
leased minus the term of the lease and the denominator of which is the 
class life of such property.
    (4) Example. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following example:

    Example. (a) On December 1, 1971, X corporation completed 
construction of an item of new section 38 property with a basis of 
$10,000. Under section 167(m), the property has a class life of 16 
years. On December 1, 1971, X leases the property to individual A for 4 
years and A immediately places the property in service. The lease is not 
a net lease within the meaning of section 57(c)(1)(B). On the date of 
the lease, the fair market value of the property is $12,000. The 
property would qualify as new section 38 property in A's hands if it had 
been purchased by A. Under this section, the property is short-term 
lease property. X makes the election under this section to treat A as 
having acquired a portion of the property.
    (b) A is treated as having acquired from X a portion of the property 
for $3,000 (the fair market value of the property, $12,000, multiplied 
by a fraction, 4/16 , the numerator of

[[Page 306]]

which is the term of the lease and the denominator of which is the class 
life of the leased property). Since under paragraph (d) of this section 
the useful life of such property in the hands of A is the same as the 
useful life of such property in the hands of X, and such useful life is 
at least 7 years, A's qualified investment with respect to the property 
is $3,000.
    (c) The qualified investment of X is $7,500 (the qualified 
investment of X under section 46(c), $10,000, multiplied by a fraction, 
\12/16\, the numerator of which is the class life of the leased 
property, 16, minus the term of the lease, 4, and the denominator of 
which is the class life of the property).

    (d) Estimated useful life of leased property. The estimated useful 
life to the lessee of property subject to the election shall be deemed 
to be the estimated useful life in the hands of the lessor for purposes 
of computing depreciation, regardless of the term of the lease. The 
lessor shall determine the estimated useful life of each leased property 
on an individual basis even though multiple asset accounts are used. 
However, in the case of assets similar in kind contained in a multiple 
asset account, the lessor shall assign to each of such assets the 
average useful life of such assets used in computing depreciation. Thus, 
for example, if during a taxable year a lessor leases 10 similar trucks 
with an average estimated useful life for depreciation purposes of 6 
years, based on an estimated range of 5 to 7 years, he must assign a 
useful life of 6 years to each of the 10 trucks.
    (e) Lessor itself a lessee--(1) In general. If the lessee of 
property is treated, under this section, as having purchased all or a 
portion of such property and if such lessee leases such property to a 
sublessee, the qualified investment with respect to such property in the 
hands of the sublessee shall be determined under paragraphs (c) and (d) 
of this section as if the original lessor had leased the property 
directly to the sublessee for the term of the sublessee's lease on the 
date possession of the property is transferred to the sublessee. For 
this purpose, property which is short-term lease property in the hands 
of the lessee shall be treated as short-term lease property in the hands 
of the sublessee regardless of whether such property is leased to the 
sublessee subject to a net lease (within the meaning of section 
57(c)(1)(B)). In the case of property which is short-term lease property 
in the hands of the sublessee, the amount for which the lessee is 
treated as having acquired such property under paragraph (c) of this 
section shall be reduced by an amount equal to such amount multiplied by 
a fraction, the numerator of which is the term of the lease of the 
sublessee and the denominator of which is the term of the lease of the 
lessee.
    (2) Example. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following example:

    Example. (a) On December 1, 1971, corporation X completes 
construction of a machine at a cost of $10,000. The machine has a class 
life under section 167(m) of 20 years. On December 1, 1971, X leases the 
machine to corporation Y for 12 years, and Y immediately subleases the 
machine to individual A for 8 years. X and Y are component members of 
the same controlled group. The lease between X and Y is not a net lease 
within the meaning of section 57(c)(1)(B). The fair market value of the 
property on December 1, 1971, is $16,000. Both X and Y make valid 
elections under this section.
    (b) The property is short-term lease property and this paragraph 
applies.
    (c) The qualified investment of A is $6,400. Such amount is 
determined by multiplying $16,000, the amount for which A would be 
treated under paragraph (c)(2) of this section as having acquired the 
property if it were not short-term lease property, by \8/20\.
    (d) The qualified investment of Y is $2,000. Such amount is 
determined by multiplying $10,000, the amount for which Y would be 
treated under paragraph (c)(2) of this section as having acquired the 
property if it were not short-term lease property, by \12/20\, and by 
reducing the amount so determined ($6,000) by \8/12\ of such amount 
($4,000) to $2,000.
    (e) The qualified investment of X is $4,000. Such amount is 
determined by multiplying the amount of X's qualified investment 
determined under section 46(c) without regard to this section ($10,000) 
by \8/20\.

    (f) Property-by-property election-- (1) Manner of making election. 
The election of a lessor with respect to a particular property (or 
properties) shall be made by filing a statement with the lessee, signed 
by the lessor and including the written consent of the lessee, 
containing the following information:
    (i) The name, address, and taxpayer account number of the lessor and 
the lessee;

[[Page 307]]

    (ii) The district director's office with which the income tax 
returns of the lessor and the lessee are filed;
    (iii) A description of each property with respect to which the 
election is being made;
    (iv) The date on which possession of the property (or properties) is 
transferred to the lessee;
    (v) The estimated useful life category of the property (or 
properties) in the hands of the lessor, that is, 3 years or more but 
less than 5 years, 5 years or more but less than 7 years, or 7 years or 
more;
    (vi) The amount for which the lessee (or sublessee) is treated as 
having acquired the leased property under paragraph (c)(2) or (3) of 
this section; and
    (vii) If the lessor is itself a lessee, the name, address, and 
taxpayer account number of the original lessor, and the district 
director's office with which the income tax return of such original 
lessor is filed.
    (2) Time for making election. The statement referred to in 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall be filed with the lessee on or 
before the due date (including any extensions of time) of the lessee's 
return for the lessee's taxable year during which possession of the 
property is transferred to the lessee, except that if such taxable year 
ends after March 31, 1971, and before December 11, 1971, the statement 
shall be filed with the lessee on or before the due date (including any 
extensions of time) of the lessee's return for such taxable year, or on 
or before October 24, 1972, whichever is later.
    (3) Election is irrevocable. An election under this paragraph shall 
be irrevocable as of the time the statement referred to in subparagraph 
(1) of this paragraph is filed with the lessee.
    (g) General election--(1) In general. In lieu of making elections on 
a property-by-property basis in the manner and time prescribed in 
paragraph (f) of this section, a lessor may, with respect to a 
particular taxable year of a particular lessee, make a general election 
to treat such lessee as having purchased all properties possession of 
which is transferred under lease by the lessor to the lessee during such 
taxable year of the lessee.
    (2) Manner and time for making general election. The general 
election of a lessor with respect to a taxable year of a lessee shall be 
made by filing a statement with the lessee, signed by the lessor and 
including the written consent of the lessee, on or before the due date 
(including any extensions of time) of the lessee's return for such 
taxable year, except that if such taxable year ends after March 31, 
1971, and before December 11, 1971, the statement shall be filed with 
the lessee on or before the due date (including any extensions of time) 
of the lessee's return for such taxable year, or on or before October 
24, 1972, whichever is later. Such statement of general election shall 
contain:
    (i) The name, address, and taxpayer account number of the lessor and 
the lessee;
    (ii) The taxable year of the lessee with respect to which such 
general election is made;
    (iii) The district director's office with which the income tax 
returns of the lessor and the lessee are filed;
    (iv) If the lessor is itself a lessee, the name, address, and 
taxpayer account number of the original lessor, and the district 
director's office with which the income tax return of such original 
lessor is filed.
    (3) Election is irrevocable. A general election under this paragraph 
shall be irrevocable as of the time the statement referred to in 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph is filed with the lessee and shall be 
binding on the lessor and the lessee for the entire taxable year of the 
lessee with respect to which such general election is made.
    (4) Information requirement. If a lessor, with respect to a taxable 
year of the lessee, makes a general election under this paragraph, such 
lessor shall provide such lessee, on or before the date required for 
filing the statement under subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, with a 
statement (or statements) containing the information required by 
paragraphs (f)(1) (iii), (iv), (v), and (vi) of this section with 
respect to all properties possession of which is transferred under lease 
by the lessor to the lessee during such taxable year.
    (h) Signature. The statement referred to in paragraph (f)(1) or 
(g)(2) of this section shall not be valid unless signed

[[Page 308]]

by both the lessor and the lessee. The signature of the lessee shall 
constitute the consent of the lessee to the election. The statement 
shall be signed by the taxpayer or a duly authorized agent of the 
taxpayer. For purposes of this section, a facsimile signature may be 
used in lieu of a signature manually executed and, if used, shall be as 
binding as a signature manually executed.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (j) Record requirements. The lessor and the lessee shall keep as a 
part of their records the statement referred to in paragraph (f)(1), or 
the statements referred to in paragraphs (g)(2) and (g)(4), of this 
section. The lessor shall attach to his income tax return a summary 
statement of all property leased during his taxable year with respect to 
which an election is made. In the case of a taxable year ending after 
March 31, 1971, and before December 11, 1971, a summary statement may be 
filed on or before the due date (including any extensions of time) of 
the return or on or before October 24, 1972, whichever is later, with 
the Internal Revenue Service Center with which the return has been 
filed. Such summary statement shall contain the following information: 
(1) The name, address, and taxpayer account number of the lessor; and 
(2) in numerical account number order, each lessee's account number, 
name, and address, the estimated useful life category of the property 
(or, if applicable, the estimated useful life expressed in years), and 
the basis or fair market value of the property, whichever is applicable.
    (k) Adjustment of rental deductions--(1) In general. The rules of 
this paragraph apply only to section 38 property placed in service 
before January 1, 1964, and with respect to any such property only for 
taxable years of a lessee beginning before January 1, 1964. If a lessor 
makes a valid election under this section with respect to property 
placed in service by the lessee before January 1, 1964, section 48(g) 
and Sec. 1.48-7 (relating to adjustments to basis of property) shall not 
apply to the lessor with respect to such property. Thus, the lessor is 
not required to reduce under section 48(g)(1) the basis of such 
property. However, if such an election is made, the deductions otherwise 
allowable under section 162 to the lessee for amounts paid or accrued to 
the lessor under the lease shall be adjusted in the manner provided in 
this paragraph. For special adjustment for taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1963, see paragraph (m) of this section.
    (2) Decrease in rental deduction. (i) The deductions otherwise 
allowable under section 162 to the lessee for amounts paid or accrued to 
the lessor under the lease with respect to leased property placed in 
service before January 1, 1964, shall be decreased under subdivision 
(ii) or (iii) of this subparagraph, whichever is applicable, by an 
amount determined by reference to the credit earned on the leased 
property. The ``credit earned'' on the leased property is determined by 
multiplying the qualified investment (as defined in section 46(c)) with 
respect to such property by 7 percent. Thus, the credit earned (and the 
decrease in deductions) is determined without regard to the limitation 
based on tax which, under section 46(a)(2), may limit the amount of the 
credit the lessee may take into account in any one year.
    (ii) If, in the case of property placed in service before January 1, 
1964, the lessor, under paragraph (f)(1)(v) of this section, supplies 
the lessee with the useful life of such property expressed in years, 
then for each taxable year beginning before January 1, 1964, any part of 
which falls within a period beginning with the month in which the leased 
property is placed in service by the lessee and ending with the close of 
the estimated useful life of such property (as determined under 
paragraph (d) of this section), the lessee shall decrease the deduction 
otherwise allowable under section 162 for each such taxable year with 
respect to such property. The decrease for each such taxable year shall 
be equal to (a) the credit earned, divided by (b) the estimated useful 
life of the property (expressed in months), multiplied by (c) the number 
of calendar months in which the leased property was held by the lessee 
during such taxable year. Thus, if leased property with a basis of 
$27,000 in the hands of a calendar-year lessee, and with an estimated 
useful life of 10 years, is placed in service by the lessee on July 15, 
1963, the lessee must decrease his section 162

[[Page 309]]

deduction with respect to the leased property for the taxable year 1963 
by $94.50 ($1,890 credit earned, divided by 120, multiplied by 6).
    (iii) If, in the case of property placed in service before January 
1, 1964, the lessor, under paragraph (f)(1)(v) of this section, supplies 
the lessee with the useful life category of such property, then for each 
taxable year beginning before January 1, 1964, during a period equal to 
the shortest life of the useful life category used by the lessee in 
computing qualified investment under section 46(c) with respect to the 
leased property, the lessee shall decrease the deduction otherwise 
allowable under section 162 for such taxable year with respect to such 
property. The decrease for each such taxable year shall be equal to the 
credit earned divided by such shortest life, that is, 4, 6, or 8. Such 
decreases shall begin with the taxable year during which the lessee 
places the property in service. Thus, if leased property with a basis of 
$30,000 to the lessee, and an estimated useful life falling within the 4 
years or more but less than 6 years useful life category, is placed in 
service by the lessee within the lessee's taxable year ending December 
31, 1962, the lessee must decrease his section 162 deduction with 
respect to the leased property for each of the taxable years 1962 and 
1963 by $175 ($700 credit earned divided by 4).
    (iv) To the extent that a required decrease, under subdivision (ii) 
or (iii) of this subparagraph, is not taken into account for any taxable 
year beginning before January 1, 1964, because the deduction otherwise 
allowable under section 162 for such taxable year with respect to the 
leased property is less than the required decrease for such taxable 
year, then the balance of the required decrease not taken into account 
for such taxable year shall decrease the amount otherwise allowable as a 
deduction under section 162 with respect to such property for the next 
succeeding taxable year (or years) beginning before January 1, 1964, if 
any, for which a deduction is allowable with respect to such property. 
Thus, if the required decrease with respect to leased property is $200 
for 1962 but the lessee's deduction otherwise allowable under section 
162 for such taxable year with respect to such property is only $50, the 
balance of $150 must be applied in 1963 to decrease the deduction 
otherwise allowable to the lessee with respect to the leased property 
for such taxable year.
    (v) See paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.48-7 for reduction of basis in the 
case of an actual purchase of leased property by a lessee (in a taxable 
year of such lessee beginning before January 1, 1964) who has been 
treated as a purchaser of such property under this section.
    (3) Increase in rental deductions on account of early disposition, 
etc. (i) If, as a result of an early disposition, etc., in a taxable 
year beginning before January 1, 1964, with respect to leased property 
placed in service before such date, the lessee's tax is increased under 
section 47(a) (1) or (2), or an adjustment in a carryback or carryover 
is made under section 47(a)(3) by reduction of an unused credit, the 
rental deductions (if any) otherwise allowable under section 162 to such 
lessee for amounts paid or accrued to the lessor under the lease with 
respect to such property shall be increased in an amount equal to the 
total decreases previously made in the lessee's rental deductions under 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph.
    (ii) Except as provided in subdivision (iii) of this subparagraph, 
the increase in rental deductions described in subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph shall be taken into account as an increase in rental 
deductions otherwise allowable under section 162 for the taxable year in 
which the early disposition, etc., occurred.
    (iii) If, after the event which caused section 47(a) (1), (2), or 
(3) to apply the lessee continues the use of the property in a trade or 
business or in the production of income, the increase in rental 
deductions described in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph shall be 
taken into account ratably over the remaining portion of the useful life 
of the property which was used in making the decreases in rental 
deductions with respect to the property under subparagraph (2) of this 
paragraph.
    (iv) If subdivision (iii) of this subparagraph applies, and if, 
prior to the expiration of the useful life of the property used in 
making the decreases in

[[Page 310]]

rental deductions, the lease is terminated other than by actual purchase 
of the property by the lessee, any increase in rental deductions not 
previously taken into account shall be taken into account as an increase 
in rental deductions for the taxable year in which the lease is 
terminated. In the case of an actual purchase of the property by the 
lessee, see paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.48-7.
    (l) Examples. The provisions of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. X Corporation is engaged in the business of manufacturing 
and leasing new and reconstructed equipment which in its hands has an 
estimated useful life of 12 years. After December 31, 1961, X 
Corporation constructs machine no. 1 at a cost of $20,000 and 
reconstructs machine no. 2 at a cost of $5,000. On February 15, 1962, Y 
Corporation, a calendar-year taxpayer, leases both machines from X 
Corporation and places them in service. The fair market value of machine 
no. 1 on the date on which possession is transferred to Y is $25,200. 
Machine no. 1 would qualify as new section 38 property in Y's hands if 
it had been purchased by Y. If X elects to treat Y as the purchaser of 
machine no. 1, under paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this section such machine 
will have a basis of $25,200 in Y's hands. Under paragraph (f)(1)(v) of 
this section, X supplies Y with an estimated useful life of 12 years 
(expressed in years rather than useful life category) with respect to 
machine no. 1 for purposes of determining Y's qualified investment. Y's 
credit earned with respect to the property is $1,764 (7 percent of 
$25,200). Under paragraph (k)(2)(ii) of this section, Y's deduction 
attributable to the leased property for 1962 will be decreased by 
$134.75 (credit earned of $1,764, divided by 144, multiplied by 11), and 
for 1963 such deduction will be decreased by $147 ($1,764, divided by 
144, multiplied by 12). The election is not available with respect to 
machine no. 2 since a reconstructed machine would not constitute new 
section 38 property if Y had purchased it. In such case, while X cannot 
make the election to treat Y as a purchaser, X would be entitled to a 
credit under section 38 based on its expenditure of $5,000 as an 
investment in new section 38 property, since such amount represents cost 
of reconstruction after December 31, 1961.

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example 1 except that under 
paragraph (f)(1)(v) of this section, X supplies Y with an estimated 
useful life category of 8 years or more (rather than an estimated useful 
life expressed in years) with respect to machine no. 1 for purposes of 
determining Y's qualified investment. Under paragraph (k)(2)(iii) of 
this section, Y's deduction attributable to the leased property will be 
decreased by $220.50 (credit earned of $1,764, divided by 8) for each of 
its taxable years 1962 and 1963.

    Example 3. Assume the same facts as in example 1 except that the 
lessee disposes of his interest in the lease on January 1, 1963, and 
that there is an increase in Y's tax for 1963 under section 47(a)(1) in 
the amount of $1,764. Under paragraph (k)(2) of this section, Y's 
deductions attributable to the leased property are decreased only in 
1962, and the amount of such decrease is $134.75. In 1963 there shall be 
an increase of $134.75 in the deductions otherwise allowable under 
section 162 for such taxable year with respect to the leased property.

    Example 4. Assume the same facts as in example 1 except that during 
the year 1963 the property was used by Y predominantly outside the 
United States within the meaning of paragraph (g) of Sec. 1.48-1, and 
thereafter was used in Y's trade or business. Under paragraph (k)(3) of 
this section, the increase of $134.75 described in example 3 is taken 
into account ratably as an increase in rental deductions otherwise 
allowable under section 162 in the amount of $12.25 ($134.75 divided by 
11 years) for 1963 and each of the 10 succeeding years.

    (m) Increase in rental deductions on account of section 203(a)(2)(B) 
of the Revenue Act of 1964--(1) In general. (i) Under section 
203(a)(2)(B) of the Revenue Act of 1964, if, for any taxable year of a 
lessee beginning before January 1, 1964, the rental deductions otherwise 
allowable under section 162 to such lessee for amounts paid or accrued 
to the lessor under the lease with respect to leased property placed in 
service before January 1, 1964, were decreased under paragraph (k)(2) of 
this section, such rental deductions shall be increased.
    (ii) The increase in rental deductions described in subdivision (i) 
of this subparagraph shall be in an amount equal to the total decreases 
in the lessee's rental deductions previously made under paragraph (k)(2) 
of this section less any increases in rental deductions made under 
paragraph (k)(3) of this section.
    (iii) Except as provided in subdivision (iv) of this subparagraph, 
the increase in rental deductions described in subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph shall be taken into account ratably over the remaining 
portion of the useful life of the property commencing with the

[[Page 311]]

first day of the first taxable year beginning after December 31, 1963. 
For this purpose, the useful life of the property shall be the useful 
life used in making the decreases in rental deductions with respect to 
the property under paragraph (k)(2) of this section.
    (iv) If the lease is terminated other than by the lessee's actual 
purchase of the property during a taxable year beginning after December 
31, 1963, and before the end of the remaining useful life of the 
property used in making the decreases in rental deductions, the amount 
of the increase in rental deductions described in subdivision (i) of 
this subparagraph and not previously taken into account shall be allowed 
as a deduction for the taxable year in which such termination occurs.
    (v) The rental deductions with respect to any section 38 property 
are not to be increased under this paragraph if the lessee dies in a 
taxable year beginning before January 1, 1964.
    (vi) The increase in rental deductions described in subdivision (i) 
of this subparagraph shall ordinarily be taken into account by the 
lessee treated as the purchaser, that is, the lessee entitled to the 
credit. However, if the property under the lease is transferred by the 
lessee to a successor lessee in a transaction described in section 47(b) 
(other than a transfer by reason of death) under which the successor 
lessee assumes the lessee's obligations under the lease, such increase 
in rental deductions shall be taken into account by the successor lessee 
in the manner prescribed in this paragraph.
    (2) Examples. The operation of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. (a) X Corporation acquired on January 1, 1962, an item of 
new section 38 property with a basis of $24,000 and with a useful life 
to the lessor of 10 years. Y Corporation, which makes its returns on the 
basis of a calendar year, leased such property from X Corporation and 
placed it in service on January 2, 1962. Under this section, X 
Corporation made a valid election to treat Y Corporation as having 
purchased such property for purposes of the credit allowed by section 38 
and supplied the lessee with information that the property had a useful 
life of 10 years. The amount of the credit earned with respect to such 
property was $1,680 (7 percent of $24,000). For each of the taxable 
years 1962 and 1963, Y Corporation decreased, under paragraph (k)(2) of 
this section, its deductions otherwise allowable under section 162 with 
respect to such property by $168 ($1,680 multiplied by \12/120\).
    (b) For each of the taxable years 1964 through 1971, Y Corporation 
increases its deductions otherwise allowable under section 162 for 
amounts paid to X Corporation under the lease by $42 ($336 (that is, 
$168 multiplied by 2) divided by the remaining useful life of 8 years).

    Example 2. (a) The facts are the same as in example 1 except that 
the lease is terminated on January 3, 1965.
    (b) For the taxable year 1964, Y Corporation increases its 
deductions otherwise allowable under section 162 by $42.
    (c) For the taxable year 1965, Y Corporation increases its 
deductions otherwise allowable under section 162 for the portion of the 
increase which had not been taken into account as of the time of the 
termination of the lease. Thus, the amount of such increase for the 
taxable year 1965 is $294 ($336 minus $42).

(Sec. 38, 76 Stat. 963; 26 U.S.C. 38)

[T.D. 6731, 29 FR 6080, May 8, 1964; 29 FR 7671, June 16, 1964, as 
amended by T.D. 6838, 30 FR 9060, July 20, 1965; T.D. 7203, 37 FR 17131, 
17132, Aug. 25, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 1.48-5   Electing small business corporations.

    (a) In general. (1) In the case of an electing small business 
corporation (as defined in section 1371(b)), the basis of ``new section 
38 property'' and the cost of ``used section 38 property'' placed in 
service during the taxable year shall be apportioned pro rata among the 
persons who are shareholders of such corporation on the last day of such 
corporation's taxable year. Section 38 property shall not (by reason of 
such apportionment) lose its character as new section 38 property or 
used section 38 property, as the case may be. The estimated useful life 
of such property in the hands of a shareholder shall be deemed to be the 
estimated useful life of such property in the hands of the electing 
small business corporation. The bases of all new section 38 properties 
which have a useful life falling within a particular useful life 
category shall be aggregated; likewise, the cost of all used section 38 
properties which have a useful life falling within a particular useful 
life category shall be aggregated. The total bases of new section 38 
properties within each useful

[[Page 312]]

life category and the total cost of used section 38 properties within 
each useful life category shall be apportioned separately. The useful 
life categories are:
    (i) 3 years or more but less than 5 years; (ii) 5 years or more but 
less than 7 years; and (iii) 7 years or more. There shall be apportioned 
to each person who is a shareholder of the electing small business 
corporation on the last day of the taxable year of such corporation, for 
his taxable year in which or with which the taxable year of such 
corporation ends, his pro rata share of the total bases of new section 
38 properties within each useful life category, and his pro rata share 
of the total cost of used section 38 properties within each useful life 
category. In determining who are shareholders of an electing small 
business corporation on the last day of its taxable year, the rules of 
paragraph (d)(1) of Sec. 1.1371-1 and of paragraph (a)(2) of 
Sec. 1.1373-1 shall apply.
    (2) The total cost of used section 38 property that may be 
apportioned by an electing small business corporation to its 
shareholders for any taxable year of such corporation shall not exceed 
$50,000. If the total cost of used section 38 property placed in service 
during the taxable year by the electing small business corporation 
exceeds $50,000 such corporation must select, under paragraph (c)(4) of 
Sec. 1.48-3, the used section 38 property the cost of which is to be 
apportioned to its shareholders.
    (3) A shareholder to whom the basis (or cost) of section 38 property 
is apportioned shall, for purposes of the credit allowed by section 38, 
be treated as the taxpayer with respect to such property. Thus, the 
total cost of used section 38 property apportioned to him by the 
electing small business corporation must be taken into account as cost 
of used section 38 property in determining whether the $50,000 
limitation on the cost of used section 38 property which may be taken 
into account by the shareholder in computing qualified investment for 
any taxable year is exceeded. If a shareholder takes into account in 
determining his qualified investment any portion of the basis (or cost) 
of section 38 property placed in service by an electing small business 
corporation and if such property subsequently is disposed of or 
otherwise ceases to be section 38 property in the hands of the 
corporation, such shareholder shall be subject to the provisions of 
section 47. See Sec. 1.47-4.
    (b) Summary statement. An electing small business corporation shall 
attach to its return a statement showing the apportionment to each 
shareholder of the total bases of new, and the total cost of used, 
section 38 properties within each useful life category.
    (c) Example. This section may be illustrated by the following 
example:

    Example. 1 X Corporation, an electing small business corporation 
which makes its return on the basis of the calendar year, acquires and 
places in service on June 1, 1962, three new assets which qualify as new 
section 38 property and three used assets which qualify as used section 
38 property. The basis of each new, and the cost of each used, section 
38 property and the estimated useful life of each property are as 
follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Basis (or    Estimated useful  
               Asset No.                   cost)            life        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1 (new)...............................     $30,000  4 years.            
2 (new)...............................      30,000  4 years.            
3 (new)...............................      30,000  8 years.            
4 (used)..............................      12,000  6 years.            
5 (used)..............................      12,000  6 years.            
6 (used)..............................      12,000  8 years.            
------------------------------------------------------------------------

On December 31, 1962, X Corporation has 10 shares of stock outstanding 
which are owned as follows: A owns 3 shares, B owns 2 shares, and C owns 
5 shares.
    (2) Under this section, the total bases of the new, and the total 
cost of the used, section 38 properties are apportioned to the 
shareholders of X Corporation as follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    New--4 to 6    New--8 years    Used--6 to 8    Used--8 years
              Useful life category                     years          or more          years          or more   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Total bases or total cost.....................         $60,000         $30,000         $24,000         $12,000
                                                 ===============================================================
Shareholder A (\3/10\)..........................          18,000           9,000           7,200           3,600
Shareholder B (\2/10\)..........................          12,000           6,000           4,800           2,400
Shareholder C (\5/10\)..........................          30,000          15,000          12,000           6,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 313]]

Assume that shareholders A, B and C did not place in service during 
their taxable years in which falls December 31, 1962 (the last day of X 
Corporation's taxable year) any section 38 property and that such 
shareholders did not own any interests in other electing small business 
corporations, partnerships, estates, or trusts. Under section 46(c), the 
qualified investment of shareholder A is $23,400, of shareholder B is 
$15,600, and of shareholder C is $39,000, computed as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Applicable   Qualified
                 Basis (or cost)                  percentage  investment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              Shareholder A                             
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$18,000 (new)...................................     33\1/3\      $6,000
$9,000 (new)....................................       100         9,000
$7,200 (used)...................................     66\2/3\       4,800
$3,600 (used)...................................       100         3,600
                                                 -----------------------
    Total.......................................  ..........      23,400
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              Shareholder B                             
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$12,000 (new)...................................     33\1/3\      $4,000
$6,000 (new)....................................       100         6,000
$4,800 (used)...................................     66\2/3\       3,200
$2,400 (used)...................................       100         2,400
                                                 -----------------------
    Total.......................................  ..........      15,600
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              Shareholder C                             
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$30,000 (new)...................................     33\1/3\     $10,000
$15,000 (new)...................................       100        15,000
$12,000 (used)..................................     66\2/3\       8,000
$6,000 (used)...................................       100         6,000
                                                 -----------------------
    Total...................................................      39,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[T.D. 6731, 29 FR 6082, May 8, 1964, as amended by T.D. 6931, 32 FR 
14040, Oct. 10, 1967; T.D. 7203, 37 FR 17133, Aug. 25, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 1.48-6  Estates and trusts.

    (a) In general. (1) In the case of an estate or trust, the basis of 
``new section 38 property'' and the cost of ``used section 38 property'' 
placed in service during the taxable year shall be apportioned among the 
estate or trust and its beneficiaries on the basis of the income of such 
estate or trust allocable to each. Section 38 property shall not (by 
reason of such apportionment) lose its character as new section 38 
property or used section 38 property, as the case may be. The estimated 
useful life of such property in the hands of a beneficiary shall be 
deemed to be the estimated useful life of such property in the hands of 
the estate or trust. The bases of all new section 38 properties which 
have a useful life falling within a particular useful life category 
shall be aggregated; likewise, the cost of all used section 38 
properties which have a useful life falling within a particular useful 
life category shall be aggregated. The total bases of new section 38 
properties within each useful life category and the total cost of used 
section 38 properties within each useful life category shall be 
apportioned separately. The useful life categories are:
    (i) 3 years or more but less than 5 years; (ii) 5 years or more but 
less than 7 years; and (iii) 7 years or more. There shall be apportioned 
to the estate or trust for its taxable year, and to each beneficiary of 
such estate or trust for his taxable year in which or with which the 
taxable year of such estate or trust ends, his share (as determined 
under paragraph (b) of this section) of the total bases of new section 
38 properties within each useful life category, and his share of the 
total cost of used section 38 properties within each useful life 
category.
    (2) The total cost of used section 38 property that may be 
apportioned among an estate or trust and its beneficiaries for any 
taxable year of such estate or trust shall not exceed $50,000. If the 
total cost of used section 38 property placed in service during the 
taxable year by the estate or trust exceeds $50,000, such estate or 
trust must select, under paragraph (c)(4) of Sec. 1.48-3, the used 
section 38 property the cost of which is to be apportioned among such 
estate or trust and its beneficiaries.
    (3) A beneficiary to whom the basis (or cost) of section 38 property 
is apportioned shall, for purposes of the credit allowed by section 38, 
be treated as the taxpayer with respect to such property. Thus, the 
total cost of used section 38 property apportioned to him by the estate 
or trust must be taken into account as cost of used section 38 property 
in determining whether the $50,000 limitation on the cost of used 
property which may be taken into account by the beneficiary in computing 
qualified investment for any taxable year is exceeded. If a beneficiary 
takes into account in determining his qualified investment any portion 
of the basis (or cost) of section 38 property placed in service by an 
estate or trust and if such property subsequently is disposed of or 
otherwise ceases to be

[[Page 314]]

section 38 property in the hands of estate or trust, such beneficiary 
shall be subject to the provisions of section 47. See Sec. 1.47-5.
    (4) For purposes of this section, the term ``beneficiary'' includes 
heir, legatee, and devisee.
    (5) If during the taxable year of an estate or trust a beneficiary's 
interest in the income of such estate or trust terminates, the basis (or 
cost) of section 38 property placed in service by such estate or trust 
after such termination shall not be apportioned to such beneficiary.
    (b) Share. A trust's, estate's, or beneficiary's share of the total 
bases of new section 38 properties, and the total cost of used section 
38 properties, within a useful life category shall be--
    (1) The total bases of new (or the total cost of used) section 38 
properties which have a useful life falling within such useful life 
category placed in service in the taxable year of the estate or trust, 
multiplied by
    (2) The amount of income allocable to such estate or trust or to 
such beneficiary for such taxable year, divided by
    (3) The sum of the amounts of income allocable to such estate or 
trust and all its beneficiaries taken into account under subparagraph 
(2) of this paragraph.
    (c) Limitation based on amount of tax. In the case of an estate or 
trust, the $25,000 amount specified in section 46(a)(2), relating to 
limitation based on amount of tax, shall be reduced for the taxable year 
to--
    (1) $25,000, multiplied by
    (2) The qualified investment with respect to the total bases of new 
section 38 properties plus the qualified investment with respect to the 
total cost of used section 38 properties, apportioned to such estate or 
trust under paragraph (a) of this section, divided by
    (3) The qualified investment with respect to the total bases of all 
new section 38 properties plus the qualified investment with respect to 
the total cost of all used section 38 properties, apportioned among such 
estate or trust and its beneficiaries.

For purposes of subparagraph (3) of this paragraph, cost of used section 
38 property shall not be considered as apportioned to any beneficiary to 
the extent that such cost is not taken into account by such beneficiary 
in computing qualified investment in used section 38 property.
    (d) Summary statement. An estate or trust shall attach to its return 
a statement showing the apportionment to such estate or trust and to 
each beneficiary of the total bases of new, and the total cost of used, 
section 38 properties within each useful life category.
    (e) Example. This section may be illustrated by the following 
example:

    Example. 1 XYZ Trust, which makes its return on the basis of the 
calendar year, acquires and places in service on June 1, 1962, three new 
assets which qualify as new section 38 property and three used assets 
which qualify as used section 38 property. The basis of the new, and the 
cost of the used, section 38 property and the estimated useful life of 
each property are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Basis (or    Estimated useful  
               Asset No.                   cost)            life        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1 (new)...............................     $30,000  4 years.            
2 (new)...............................      30,000  4 years.            
3 (new)...............................      30,000  8 years.            
4 (used)..............................      12,000  6 years.            
5 (used)..............................      12,000  6 years.            
6 (used)..............................      12,000  8 years.            
------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the taxable year 1962 the income of XYZ Trust is $20,000 which is 
allocable as follows: $10,000 to XYZ Trust, $6,000 to beneficiary A, and 
$4,000 to beneficiary B. Beneficiaries A and B make their returns on the 
basis of a calendar year.
    (2) Under this section, the total bases of the new, and the total 
cost of the used, section 38 properties are apportioned to XYZ Trust and 
its beneficiaries as follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    New--4 to 6    New--8 years    Used--6 to 8    Used--8 years
              Useful life category                     years          or more          years          or more   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Total bases or total cost...................         $60,000         $30,000         $24,000         $12,000
                                                 ===============================================================
XYZ Trust ($10,000<divide>20,000)...............          30,000          15,000          12,000           6,000
Beneficiary A ($6,000<divide>20,000)............          18,000           9,000           7,200           3,600
Beneficiary B ($4,000<divide>20,000)............          12,000           6,000           4,800           2,400
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 315]]

Assume that beneficiary A placed in service during his taxable year 1962 
new section 38 property with a basis of $10,000 and an estimated useful 
life of 8 years. Also, assume that beneficiary B did not place in 
service during his taxable year 1962 any section 38 property and that 
beneficiaries A and B did not own any interests in other trusts, 
estates, partnerships, or electing small business corporations. Under 
section 46(c), the qualified investment of XYZ Trust is $39,000, of 
beneficiary A is $33,400, and of beneficiary B is $15,600, computed as 
follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Applicable   Qualified
                 Basis (or cost)                  percentage  investment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                XYZ Trust                               
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$30,000 (new)...................................     33\1/3\     $10,000
$15,000 (new)...................................       100        15,000
$12,000 (used)..................................     66\2/3\       8,000
$6,000 (used)...................................       100         6,000
                                                 -----------------------
    Total.......................................  ..........      39,000
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              Beneficiary A                             
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$18,000 (new)...................................     33\1/3\      $6,000
$9,000 (new)....................................       100         9,000
$7,200 (used)...................................     66\2/3\       4,800
$3,600 (used)...................................       100         3,600
                                                             -----------
                                                                  23,400
                                                             ===========
$10,000 (new)...................................       100        10,000
                                                 -----------------------
    Total.......................................  ..........      33,400
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              Beneficiary B                             
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$12,000 (new)...................................     33\1/3\      $4,000
$6,000 (new)....................................       100         6,000
$4,800 (used)...................................     66\2/3\       3,200
$2,400 (used)...................................       100         2,400
                                                 -----------------------
    Total.......................................  ..........      15,600
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (3) In the case of XYZ Trust, the $25,000 amount specified in 
section 46(a)(2) is reduced to $12,500, computed as follows: (i) 
$25,000, multiplied by (ii) $39,000 (qualified investment apportioned to 
the trust), divided by (iii) $78,000 (total qualified investment 
apportioned among such trust ($39,000), beneficiary A ($23,400), and 
beneficiary B ($15,600)).

[T.D. 6731, 29 FR 6083, May 8, 1964, as amended by T.D. 6931, 32 FR 
14040, Oct. 10, 1967; T.D. 6958, 33 FR 9171, June 21, 1968; T.D. 7203, 
37 FR 17133, Aug. 25, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 1.48-9  Definition of energy property.

    (a) General rule--(1) In general. Under section 48(l)(2), energy 
property means property that is described in at least one of 6 
categories of energy property and that meets the other requirements of 
this section. If property is described in more than one of these 
categories, or is described more than once in a single category, only a 
single energy investment credit is allowed. In that case, the energy 
investment credit will be allowed under the category the taxpayer 
chooses by indicating the chosen category on Form 3468, Schedule B. The 
6 categories of energy property are:
    (i) Alternative energy property,
    (ii) Solar or wind energy property,
    (iii) Specially defined energy property,
    (iv) Recycling equipment,
    (v) Shale oil equipment, and
    (vi) Equipment for producing natural gas from geopressured brine.
    (2) Depreciable property with 3-year useful life. Property is not 
energy property unless depreciation (or amortization in lieu of 
depreciation) is allowable and the property has an estimated useful life 
(determined at the time when the property is placed in service) of 3 
years or more.
    (3) Effective date rules. To be energy property--
    (i) If property is constructed, reconstructed or erected by the 
taxpayer, the construction, reconstruction, or erection must be 
completed after September 30, 1978, or
    (ii) If the property is acquired, the original use of the property 
must (A) commence with the taxpayer and (B) commence after September 30, 
1978, and before January 1, 1983.

For transitional rules, see section 48(m).
    (4) Cross references. (i) To determine if depreciation (or 
amortization in lieu of depreciation) is allowable for property, see 
Sec. 1.48-1(b).
    (ii) For the meaning of ``estimated useful life'', see Sec. 1.46-
3(e)(7).
    (iii) The meaning of ``acquired'', ``original use'', 
``construction'', ``reconstruction'', and ``erection'' is determined 
under the principles of Sec. 1.48-2(b).
    (iv) For the definition of energy investment credit (energy credit), 
see section 48(o)(2).
    (v) For special rules relating to public utility property, see 
paragraph (n) of this section.

[[Page 316]]

    (b) Relationship to section 38 property--(1) In general. (i) Energy 
property is treated under section 48(l)(1) as meeting the general 
requirements for section 38 property set forth in section 48(a)(1). For 
example, structural components of a building may qualify for the energy 
credit. In addition, the exclusion from section 38 property under 
section 48(a)(3) (lodging limitation) does not apply to energy property. 
For purposes of the energy credit, energy property is treated as section 
38 property solely by reason of section 48(l)(1). For example, if 
property ceases to be energy property, it ceases to be section 38 
property for all purposes relating to the energy credit and, thus, if 
subject to recapture under section 47. See Sec. 1.47-1(h).
    (ii) See the effective date rules under paragraph (a)(3) of this 
section for limitations on the eligibility of property as energy 
property.
    (iii) Section 48(l)(1) does not affect the character of property 
under sections of the Code outside the investment credit provisions. For 
example, structural components of a building that are treated as section 
38 property under section 48(l)(1) remain section 1250 property and are 
not section 1245 property.
    (2) Other section 48 rules apply. (i) In general, section 48(a) 
otherwise applies in determining if energy property is section 38 
property. Thus, energy property excluded from the definition of section 
38 property under section 48(a) (except by reason of section 48(a)(1) or 
(a)(3)) is not eligible for the energy credit. For example, energy 
property used predominantly outside the United States (section 48(a)(2)) 
or used by tax exempt organizations (section 48(a)(4)), in general, is 
not treated as section 38 property for any purpose and thus, is not 
eligible for the energy credit.
    (ii) Other rules of section 48, such as those for leased property 
under section 48(d), also apply to energy property.
    (3) Regular credit denied for certain energy property. In computing 
the amount of credit under section 46(a)(2), the regular percentage does 
not apply to any energy property which, but for section 48(l)(1), would 
not be section 38 property. See section 46(a)(2)(D). For example, energy 
property used for lodging (section 48(a)(3)) and, in general, structural 
components of a building (section 48(a)(1)(B)) re not eligible for the 
regular credit even though they may be eligible for the energy credit. 
However, a structural component of a qualified rehabilitated building 
(as defined in section 48(g)(1)) or a single purpose agricultural or 
horticultural structure (as defined in section 48(p)) may qualify for 
the regular credit without regard to section 48(l)(1).
    (c) Alternative energy property--(1) In general. Alternative energy 
property means property described in paragraphs (c)(3) through (10) of 
this section. In general alternative energy property includes certain 
property that uses an alternate substance as a fuel or feedstock or 
converts an alternate substance to a synthetic fuel and certain 
associated equipment.
    (2) Alternate substance. (i) An alternate substance is any substance 
or combination of substances other than an oil or gas substance. 
Alternate substances include coal, wood, and agricultural, industrial, 
and municipal wastes or by-products. Alternate substances do not include 
synthetic fuels or other products that are produced from an alternate 
substance and that have undergone a chemical change as described in 
paragraph (c)(5)(ii) of this section. For example, methane produced from 
landfills is not an alternate substance; rather it is a synthetic fuel 
produced from an alternate substance. However, preparing an alternate 
substance for use as a fuel or feedstock or for conversion into a fuel 
does not create a new product if no chemical change occurs. For example, 
pelletizing, drying, compacting, and liquefying do not result in a new 
product if no chemical change occurs.
    (ii) The term ``oil or gas substance'' means--
    (A) Oil or gas and
    (B) Any primary product of oil or gas.
    (iii) For the definition of primary product of oil or gas, see 
Sec. 1.993-3(g)(3)(i), (ii), and (vi). Thus, petrochemicals are not 
primary products of oil or gas.
    (3) Boiler. (i) A boiler that uses an alternate substance as its 
primary fuel is alternative energy property.

[[Page 317]]

    (ii) A boiler is a device for producing vapor from a liquid. 
Boilers, in general, have a burner in which fuel is burned. A boiler 
includes a fire box, boiler tubes, the containment shell, pumps, 
pressure and operating controls, and safety equipment, but not pollution 
control equipment (as defined in paragraph (c)(8) of this section).
    (iii) A ``primary fuel'' is a fuel comprising more than 50 percent 
of the fuel requirement of an item of equipment, measured in terms of 
Btu's for the remainder of the taxable year from the date the equipment 
is placed in service and for each taxable year thereafter. Electricity 
and waste heat are not fuels. For example, electric boilers do not 
qualify as alternative energy property even if the electricity is 
derived from an alternate substance.
    (4) Burners. (i) A burner for a combustor other than a burner 
described in paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of this section is alternative energy 
property if the burner uses an alternate substance as its primary fuel 
(as defined in paragraph (c)(3)(iii) of this section).
    (ii) A burner is the part of a combustor that produces a flame. A 
combustor is a process heater which includes ovens, kilns, and furnaces.
    (iii) A burner includes equipment (such as conveyors, flame control 
devices, and safety monitoring devices) located at the site of the 
burner and necessary to bring the alternate substance to the burner.
    (5) Synthetic fuel production equipment. (i) Equipment (synthetic 
fuel equipment) that converts an alternate substance into a synthetic 
solid, liquid, or gaseous fuel (other than coke or coke gas) is 
alternative energy property. Synthetic fuel production equipment does 
not include equipment, such as an oxygen plant, that is not directly 
involved in the treatment of an alternate substance, but produces a 
substance that is, like the alternate substance, a basic feedstock or 
catalyst used in the conversion process. Equipment is not eligible if it 
is used beyond the point at which a substance usable as a fuel has been 
produced. Equipment is eligible only to the extent of the equipment's 
cost or basis allocable to the annual production of substances used as a 
fuel or used in the production of a fuel. For example, assume for the 
taxable year that 50 percent of the output of equipment is used to 
produce alcohol for production of whiskey and 50 percent is used to 
produce alcohol for use in a fuel mixture, such as gasohol. The alcohol 
production equipment qualifies as synthetic fuel equipment but only to 
the extent of one-half of its cost or basis. If, in a later taxable 
year, the equipment is used exclusively to produce whiskey, all of the 
equipment ceases to be synthetic fuel equipment.
    (ii) A fuel is a material that produces usable heat upon combustion. 
To be ``synthetic'', the fuel either must differ significantly in 
chemical composition, as opposed to physical composition, from the 
alternate substance used to produce it or, in the case of solid fuel 
produced from biomass, the chemical change must consist of 
defiberization. Examples of synthetic fuels include alcohol derived from 
coal, peat, and vegetative matter, such as wood and corn, and methane 
from landfills.
    (iii) Synthetic fuel equipment includes coal gasification equipment, 
coal liquefaction equipment, equipment for recovering methane from 
landfill, and equipment that converts biomass to a synthetic fuel.
    (iv) Synthetic fuel equipment does not include equipment that merely 
mixes an alternate substance with another substance. For example, 
synthetic fuel equipment includes neither equipment that mixes coal and 
water to produce a slurry nor equipment that mixes alcohol and gasoline 
to produce gasohol. Equipment used to produce coke or coke gas, such as 
coke ovens, is also ineligible.
    (6) Modification equipment. (i) Alternative energy property includes 
equipment (modification equipment) designed to modify existing 
equipment. For the definition of ``existing,'' see paragraph (l)(1)(i) 
of this section. To be eligible, the modification must result in a 
substitution for the remainder of the taxable year from the date the 
equipment is placed in service and for each taxable year thereafter of 
the items in paragraph (c)(6)(ii)(A) or (B) of this section for all or a 
portion of the oil or gas substance used as a fuel or

[[Page 318]]

feedstock. As a result of the modification, the substituted alternate 
substance must comprise at least 25 percent of the fuel or feedstock 
(determined on the basis of Btu equivalency). If the modification also 
increases the capacity of the equipment, only the incremental cost (as 
defined in paragraph (k) of this section) of the equipment qualifies.
    (ii) The substitutes for an oil or gas substance are--
    (A) An alternate substance or
    (B) A mixture of oil and an alternate substance.
    (iii) Modification equipment does not include replacements or a 
boiler of burner. If the boiler or burner is replaced, the items must be 
described in paragraph (c) (3) or (4) of this section to qualify as 
alternative energy property. Modification may include, however, 
replacements of components of a boiler or burner, such as a heat 
exchanger.
    (iv) The following examples illustrate this paragraph (c)(6).

    Example 1. On January 1, 1980, corporation X is using oil to fuel 
its boiler. On June 1, 1980, X modifies the boiler to permit 
substitution of a coal and oil mixture for 40 percent of X's oil fuel 
needs. The mixture consists 75 percent of oil and 25 percent of coal. 
The equipment modifying the boiler does not qualify as modification 
equipment because the alternate substance comprises only 10 percent of 
the fuel.

    Example 2.  Assume the same facts as in example 1 except 75 percent 
of the mixture is coal. The equipment modifying the boiler qualifies.

    Example 3.  Assume the same facts as in example 2 except, instead of 
substituting an oil and coal mixture for 40 percent of X's oil fuel 
needs, X uses the modification to expand the boiler's fuel capacity by 
40 percent using the mixture as additional fuel. The additional fuel 
mixture comprises only 28 percent of X's total fuel needs. Thus, even 
though 75 percent of the additional fuel mixture is an alternate 
substance, the boiler does not qualify as modification equipment because 
the alternate substance comprises only 21 percent of the total fuel.

    (7) Equipment using coal as feedstock. Equipment that uses coal 
(including lignite) to produce a feedstock for the manufacture of 
chemicals, such as petrochemicals, or other products is alternative 
energy property. Equipment is not eligible if it is not directly 
involved in the treatment of coal or a coal product, but produces a 
substance that is, like coal, a basic feedstock or catalyst used in the 
coal conversion process. Equipment is not eligible if it is used beyond 
the point at which the first product marketable as a feedstock has been 
produced. Equipment used to produce coke or coke gas, such as coke 
ovens, is ineligible.
    (8) Pollution control equipment. (i) Pollution control equipment is 
alternative energy property. Eligible equipment is limited to property 
or equipment to the extent it qualifies as a pollution control facility 
under section 103(b)(4)(F) and the regulations thereunder except that, 
if control of pollution is not the only significant purpose (within the 
meaning of those regulations), only the incremental cost (as defined in 
paragraph (k) of this section) of the equipment qualifies. However, if a 
Treasury decision changes the regulations under section 103(b)(4)(F) 
and, thus, the rules reflected in this subdivision (i), the rules as 
changed will apply as of the effective date of the Treasury decision.
    (ii) To be eligible, the equipment must be required by a Federal, 
State, or local government regulation to be installed on, or used in 
connection with, eligible alternative energy property (as defined in 
paragraph (c)(8)(v) of this section).
    (iii) Under section 48(l)(3)(D) equipment is not eligible if 
required by a Federal, State, or local government regulation in effect 
on October 1, 1978, to be installed on, or in connection with, property 
using coal (including lignite) as of October 1, 1978.
    (iv) Under this subparagraph (8), pollution control equipment is 
required by regulation if it would be necessary to install the equipment 
to satisfy the requirements of any applicable law, including nuisance 
law. The pollution control equipment need not be specifically identified 
in the applicable law. If several different types of equipment may be 
used to comply with the applicable law, each type of equipment is

[[Page 319]]

considered necessary to satisfy the requirements of the law. An order 
permitting a taxpayer to delay compliance with any applicable law is 
disregarded.
    (v) Under this subparagraph (8) ``eligible alternative energy 
property'' is energy property (as defined in section 48 (l)(2)) 
described in paragraphs (c) (3) through (7) of this section. If 
equipment otherwise qualifying as pollution control equipment is 
installed on, or used in connection with, both eligible alternative 
energy property and property other than eligible alternative energy 
property, only the incremental cost (as defined in paragraph (k) of this 
section) of the equipment qualifies.
    (vi) Examples. The following examples illustrate this subparagraph 
(8). Assume that the property or equipment in the examples are described 
in Sec. 1.103-8(g)(2)(ii) and that their only purpose is control of 
pollution.

    Example 1. On October 1, 1978, corporation X acquires and places in 
service in State A a paper mill. The facility includes a boiler the 
primary fuel for which is wood chips. The facility includes equipment 
necessary to comply with pollution control standards in effect on 
October 1, 1978 in State A. This equipment qualifies as pollution 
control equipment.

    Example 2. On October 1, 1978, corporation Y was burning coal at its 
facility in State B. The emissions from the facility exceeded State air 
pollution control requirements in effect on October 1, 1978. On January 
1, 1979, X installed cyclone separators to comply with the State 
pollution control requirements. The cyclone separators do not qualify as 
pollution control equipment.

    Example 3. Assume the same facts as in example 2 except that Y 
installs a baghouse instead of cyclone separators to meet more stringent 
standards that take effect on December 31, 1978. The baghouse qualifies 
as pollution control equipment because the baghouse was not necessary to 
meet the standards in effect on October 1, 1978.

    Example 4. On October 1, 1978, corporation Z is burning coal at its 
facility in State C. The emissions from that facility exceed State air 
pollution control standards in effect on October 1, 1978. C orders Z to 
install cyclone separators before January 1, 1979. However, C allows Z 
to operate its facility until January 1, 1979, under less stringent 
interim standards applicable only to Z. The separators do not qualify as 
pollution control equipment. The delayed compliance order is 
disregarded.

    (9) Handling and preparation equipment. (i) Alternative energy 
property includes equipment (handling and preparation equipment) used 
for unloading, transfer, storage, reclaiming from storage, or 
preparation of an alternate substance for use in eligible alternative 
energy property (as defined in paragraph (c)(9)(ii) of this section). 
Handling and preparation equipment must be located at the site the 
alternate substance is used as a fuel or feedstock. For example, 
equipment used to screen and prepare coal for use at a power plant 
qualifies if located at the plant. However, similar equipment located at 
the coal mine would not qualify.
    (ii) Under this subparagraph (9), ``eligible alternative energy 
property'' is energy property (as defined in section 48(l)(2)) described 
in paragraphs (c) (3) through (8) of this section. If equipment 
otherwise qualifying as handling and preparation equipment is installed 
on, or used in connection with, property other than eligible alternative 
energy property, only the incremental cost (as defined in paragraph (k) 
of this section) of the equipment qualifies.
    (iii) The term ``preparation'' includes washing, crushing, drying, 
compacting, and weighing of an alternate substance. Handling and 
preparation equipment also includes equipment for shredding, chopping, 
pulverizing, or screening agricultural or forestry byproducts at the 
site of use.
    (iv) Handling and preparation equipment does not include equipment, 
such as coal slurry pipelines and railroad cars, that transports a fuel 
or a feedstock to the site of its use.
    (10) Geothermal equipment--(i) Alternative energy property includes 
equipment (geothermal equipment) that produces, distributes, or uses 
energy derived from a geothermal deposit (as defined in Sec. 1.44C-
2(h)).
    (ii) In general, production equipment includes equipment necessary 
to bring geothermal energy from the subterranean deposit to the surface, 
including well-head and downhole equipment (such as screening or 
slotting liners, tubing, downhole pumps, and associated equipment). 
Reinjection wells required for production also may qualify. Production 
does not include exploration and development.

[[Page 320]]

    (iii) Distribution equipment includes equipment that transports 
geothermal steam or hot water from a geothermal deposit to the site of 
ultimate use. If geothermal energy is used to generate electricity, 
distribution equipment includes equipment that transports hot water from 
the geothermal deposit to a power plant. Distribution equipment also 
includes components of a heating system, such as pipes and ductwork that 
distribute within a building the energy derived from the geothermal 
deposit.
    (iv) Geothermal equipment includes equipment that uses energy 
derived both from a geothermal deposit and from sources other than a 
geothermal deposit (dual use equipment). Such equipment, however, is 
geothermal equipment (A) only if its use of energy from sources other 
than a geothermal deposit does not exceed 25 percent of its total energy 
input in an annual measuring period and (B) only to the extent of its 
basis or cost allocable to its use of energy from a geothermal deposit 
during an annual measuring period. An ``annual measuring period'' for an 
item of dual use equipment is the 365 day period beginning with the day 
it is placed in service or a 365 day period beginning the day after the 
last day of the immediately preceding annual measuring period. The 
allocation of energy use required for purposes of paragraph (c)(10)(iv) 
(A) and (B) of this section may be made by comparing, on a Btu basis, 
energy input to dual use equipment from the geothermal deposit with 
energy input from other sources. However, the Commissioner may accept 
any other method that, in his opinion, accurately establishes the 
relative annual use by dual use equipment of energy derived from a 
geothermal deposit and energy derived from other sources.
    (v) The existence of a backup system designed for use only in the 
event of a failure in the system providing energy derived from a 
geothermal deposit will not disqualify any other equipment. If 
geothermal energy is used to generate electricity, equipment using 
geothermal energy includes the electrical generating equipment, such as 
turbines and generators. However, geothermal equipment does not include 
any electrical transmission equipment, such as transmission lines and 
towers, or any equipment beyond the electrical transmission stage, such 
as transformers and distribution lines.
    (vi) Examples. The following examples illustrate this subparagraph 
(10):

    Example 1. On October 1, 1979, corporation X, a calendar year 
taxpayer, places in service a system which heats its office building by 
circulating hot water heated by energy derived from a geothermal deposit 
through the building. Geothermal equipment includes the circulation 
system, including the pumps and pipes which circulate the hot water 
through the building.

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1, except that 
corporation X also places in service a boiler to produce hot water for 
heating the building exclusively in the event of a failure of the 
geothermal equipment. Such a boiler is not geothermal equipment, but the 
existence of such a backup system does not serve to disqualify property 
eligible in Example 1.

    Example 3. The facts are the same as in Example 1, except that the 
water heated by energy derived from a geothermal deposit is not hot 
enough to provide sufficient heat for the building. Therefore, the 
system includes an electric boiler in which the water is heated before 
being circulated in the heating system. Assume that, on a Btu basis, 
eighty percent of the total energy input to the circulating system 
during the 365 day period beginning on October 1, 1979, is energy 
derived from a geothermal deposit. The boiler is not geothermal 
equipment. For the 1979 taxable year, eighty percent of the circulating 
system is geothermal equipment because eighty percent of its basis or 
cost is allocable to use of energy from a geothermal deposit. If, in a 
subsequent taxable year, the basis or cost allocable to use of energy 
from a geothermal deposit falls below eighty percent, recapture may be 
required under section 47 and Sec. 1.47-1(h). Thus, if, on a Btu basis, 
only 70 percent of the total energy input to the circulating system for 
the 365 day period beginning October 1, 1980, is energy derived from a 
geothermal deposit, then there will be complete recapture of the credit 
during the 1980 taxable year. If, however, for that 365 day period, the 
portion of the total energy input that is derived from a geothermal 
deposit is less than 80 percent but greater than or equal to 75 percent, 
then only a proportional amount of credit will be recaptured during the 
1980 taxable year. No additional credit is allowable in a subsequent 
taxable year, however, if the portion of the basis or cost allocable to 
use of energy from a geothermal deposit increases above what it was for 
a previous taxable year (see Sec. 1.46-3(d)(4)(i)).


[[Page 321]]


    Example 4. Corporation Y acquires a commercial vegetable dehydration 
system in 1981. The system operates by placing fresh vegetables on a 
conveyor belt and moving them through a dryer. The conveyor belt is 
powered by electricity. The dryer uses solely energy derived from a 
geothermal deposit. The dryer is geothermal equipment while the 
equipment powered by electricity does not qualify.

    (d) Solar energy property--(1) In general. Energy property includes 
solar energy property. The term ``solar energy property'' includes 
equipment and materials (and parts related to the functioning of such 
equipment) that use solar energy directly to (i) generate electricity, 
(ii) heat or cool a building or structure, or (iii) provide hot water 
for use within a building or structure. Generally, those functions are 
accomplished through the use of equipment such as collectors (to absorb 
sunlight and create hot liquids or air), storage tanks (to store hot 
liquids), rockbeds (to store hot air), thermostats (to activate pumps or 
fans which circulate the hot liquids or air), and heat exchangers (to 
utilize hot liquids or air to create hot air or water). Property that 
uses, as an energy source, fuel or energy derived indirectly from solar 
energy, such as ocean thermal energy, fossil fuel, or wood, is not 
considered solar energy property.
    (2) Passive solar excluded--(i) Solar energy property excludes the 
materials and components of ``passive solar systems,'' even if combined 
with ``active solar systems.''
    (ii) An active solar system is based on the use of mechanically 
forced energy transfer, such as the use of fans or pumps to circulate 
solar generated energy.
    (iii) A passive system is based on the use of conductive, 
convective, or radiant energy transfer. Passive solar property includes 
greenhouses, solariums, roof ponds, glazing, and mass or water trombe 
walls.
    (3) Electric generation equipment. Solar energy property includes 
equipment that uses solar energy to generate electricity, and includes 
storage devices, power conditioning equipment, transfer equipment, and 
parts related to the functioning of those items. In general, this 
process involves the transformation of sunlight into electricity through 
the use of such devices as solar cells or other collectors. However, 
solar energy property used to generate electricity includes only 
equipment up to (but not including) the stage that transmits or uses 
electricity.
    (4) Pipes and ducts. Pipes and ducts that are used exclusively to 
carry energy derived from solar energy are solar energy property. Pipes 
and ducts that are used to carry both energy derived from solar energy 
and energy derived from other sources are solar energy property (i) only 
if their use of energy other than solar energy does not exceed 25 
percent of their total energy input in an annual measuring period and 
(ii) only to the extent of their basis or cost allocable to their use of 
solar energy during an annual measuring period. (See paragraph (d)(6) of 
this section for the definition of ``annual measuring period'' and for 
rules relating to the method of allocation.)
    (5) Specially adapted equipment. Equipment that uses solar energy 
beyond the distribution stage is eligible only if specially adapted to 
use solar energy.
    (6) Auxiliary equipment. Solar energy property does not include 
equipment (auxiliary equipment), such as furnaces and hot water heaters, 
that use a source of power other than solar or wind energy to provide 
usable energy. Solar energy property does include equipment, such as 
ducts and hot water tanks, which is utilized by both auxiliary equipment 
and solar energy equipment (dual use equipment). Such equipment is solar 
energy property (i) only if its use of energy from sources other than 
solar energy does not exceed 25 percent of its total energy input in an 
annual measuring period and (ii) only to the extent of its basis of cost 
allocable to its use of solar or wind energy during an annual measuring 
period. An ``annual measuring period'' for an item of dual use equipment 
is the 365 day period beginning with the day it is placed in service or 
a 365 day period beginning the day after the last day of the immediately 
preceding annual measuring period. The allocation of energy use required 
for purposes of paragraphs (d)(6) (i) and (ii) of this section may be 
made by comparing, on a Btu basis, energy input to dual use

[[Page 322]]

equipment from solar energy with energy input from other sources. 
However, the Commissioner may accept any other method that, in his 
opinon, accurately establishes the relative annual use by dual use 
equipment of solar energy and energy derived from other sources.
    (7) Solar process heat equipment. Solar energy property does not 
include equipment that uses solar energy to generate steam at high 
temperatures for use in industrial or commercial processes (solar 
process heat).
    (8) Example. The following example illustrates this paragraph (d).

    Example. (a) In 1979, corporation X, a calendar year taxpayer, 
constructs an apartment building and purchases equipment to convert 
solar energy into heat for the building. Corporation X also installs an 
oil-fired water heater and other equipment to provide a backup source of 
heat when the solar energy equipment cannot meet the energy needs of the 
building. For purposes of this example, all equipment is placed in 
service on October 1, 1979. On a Btu basis, eighty percent of the total 
energy input to the dual use equipment during the 365 day period 
beginning October 1, 1979, is from solar energy.
    (b) The items purchased, in addition to the water heater, include a 
roof solar collector, a heat exchanger, a hot water tank, a control 
component, pumps, pipes, fan-coil units, and valves. Assume the fan-coil 
units could be used with energy derived from an oil or gas substance 
without significant modification. All items are depreciable and have a 
useful life of three years or more. The use of the equipment to heat the 
building is the first use to which the equipment has been put.
    (c) Water is pumped from the basement through pipes to the roof 
solar collector. Heated water returns through pipes to a heat exchanger 
which transfers heat to the water in the hot water tank.
    (d) The hot water tank and the oil-fired water heater utilize the 
same distribution pipe. Pumps and valves at the points of connection 
between the hot water tank, the oil-fired water heater, and the 
distribution pipe regulate the auxiliary energy supply use. They also 
prevent the oil-fired water heater from heating water in the hot water 
tank.
    (e) An integrated control component determines whether hot water 
from the hot water tank or from the oil-fired water heater is 
distributed to fan-coil units located throughout the building.
    (f) The roof solar collector is solar energy property. The pump that 
moves the water to the roof collector and the pipes between the roof 
collector and the hot water tank qualify because they are solely related 
to transporting solar heated water. The hot water tank qualifies because 
it stores water heated solely by solar radiation. The heat exchanger 
also qualifies.
    (g) The oil-fired water heater does not qualify as solar energy 
property because it is auxiliary equipment.
    (h)(1) Because the distribution pipe, the control component, and the 
pumps and valves serve the oil-fired water heater as well as the solar 
energy equipment; they qualify only to the extent of eighty percent of 
their cost or basis, the portion allocable to use of solar energy. If, 
in a subsequent taxable year, the basis or cost allocable to their use 
of solar energy falls below eighty percent, recapture may be required 
under section 47 and Sec. 1.47-1(h). Thus, if, on a Btu basis, only 70 
percent of the total energy input to that equipment for the 365 day 
period beginning October 1, 1980, is from solar energy, then there will 
be complete recapture of the credit during the 1980 taxable year. If, 
however, for that 365 day period, the portion of that equipment's total 
energy input that is from solar energy is less than 80 percent but 
greater than or equal to 75 percent, then only a proportional amount of 
credit will be recaptured during the 1980 taxable year. No additional 
credit is allowable for the equipment in a subsequent taxable year, 
however, if the portion of its basis or cost allocable to use of solar 
energy increases above what it was for a previous taxable year (see 
Sec. 1.46-3 (d)(4)(i)).
    (2) The fan-coil units do not qualify as solar energy property 
because they are not specially adapted to use energy derived from solar 
energy.

    (e) Wind energy property--(1) In general. Energy property includes 
wind energy property. Wind energy property is equipment (and parts 
related to the functioning of that equipment) that performs a function 
described in paragraph (e)(2) of this section. In general, wind energy 
property consists of a windmill, wind-driven generator, storage devices, 
power conditioning equipment, transfer equipment, and parts related to 
the functioning of those items. Wind energy property does not include 
equipment that transmits or uses electricity derived from wind energy. 
In addition, limitations apply similar to those set forth in paragraphs 
(d) (5), (6), and (8) of this section. For example, if equipment is used 
by both auxiliary equipment and wind energy equipment, such equipment is 
wind energy property only if its use of energy other than wind energy 
does not exceed 25 percent of its total energy input in an

[[Page 323]]

annual measuring period and only to the extent of its basis or cost 
allocable to its use of wind energy during an annual measuring period.
    (2) Eligible functions. Wind energy property is limited to equipment 
(and parts related to the functioning of that equipment) that--
    (i) Uses wind energy to heat or cool, or provide hot water for use 
in, a building or structure, or
    (ii) Uses wind energy to generate electricity (but not mechanical 
forms of energy).
    (f) Specially defined energy property--(1) In general. Specially 
defined energy property means only those items described in paragraphs 
(f) (4) through (14) of this section that meet the requirements of 
paragraph (f)(2) of this section. The items described in paragraphs (f) 
(4) through (14) of this section also consist of related equipment, such 
as fans, pumps, ductwork, piping, and controls, the installation of 
which is necessary for the specified item to reduce the energy consumed 
or heat wasted by the process.
    (2) General requirements. To be eligible, each item described in 
paragraphs (f) (4) through (14) of this section must be installed in 
connection with an existing industrial or commercial facility. In 
addition, the principal purpose of each of those items must be reduction 
of energy consumed or heat wasted in any existing industrial or 
commercial process. See section 48(l)(10) and paragraph (l) of this 
section. If an item performs more than one function, only the 
incremental cost (as defined in paragraph (k) of this section) of the 
equipment qualifies.
    (3) Industrial or commercial process. (i) A process is a means or 
method of producing a desired result by chemical, physical, or 
mechanical action. For example, equipment installed in connection with 
retail sales, general office use, and residential use are not used in a 
process within the meaning of this paragraph (f)(3).
    (ii) An industrial process includes agricultural processes and 
thermal processes relating to production or manufacture, such as those 
involving boilers and furnaces.
    (iii) A commercial process includes laundering and food preparation.
    (iv) More than one process may be conducted in a single facility. 
The fact that several processes involved in the production of a product 
are integrated does not cause such integrated processes to be treated as 
one process. For example, in a food canning facility, producing prepared 
food from fresh vegetables is not one process but rather an integration 
of several processes including washing, cooking and canning.
    (v) The following example illustrates this paragraph (f)(3).

    Example. Corporation X, an advertising agency, acquires an automatic 
energy control system designed to reduce energy consumed by heating and 
cooling its office building. Although the use of an office for X's 
business is a commercial activity, heating or cooling an office is not 
an industrial or commercial process. The automatic energy control system 
does not qualify because it does not reduce energy consumed in an 
industrial or commercial process.

    (4) Recuperators. Recuperators recover energy, usually in the form 
of waste heat from combustion exhaust gases, hot exiting product, or 
product cooling air, that is used to heat incoming combustion air, raw 
materials, or fuel. Recuperators are configurations of equipment 
consisting in part of fixed heat transfer surfaces between two gas 
flows, and include related baffles, dividers, entrance flanges, 
transition sections, and shells or cases enclosing the other components 
of the recuperator. In general, a fixed heat transfer surface absorbs 
heat from a gas or liquid flow or dissipates heat to the gas or liquid 
flow.
    (5) Heat wheels. Heat wheels recover energy, usually in the form of 
waste heat, from exhaust gases to preheat incoming gases. Heat wheels 
are items of equipment consisting in part of regenerators (which rotate 
between two gas flows) and related drive components, wiper seals, 
entrance flanges, and transition sections.
    (6) Regenerators. Regenerators are devices, such as clinker columns 
or chains, that recover energy by efficiently storing heat while exposed 
to high temperature gases and releasing heat while exposed to low 
temperature gases, fluids, or solids.

[[Page 324]]

    (7) Heat exchangers. Heat exchangers recover energy, usually in the 
form of waste heat, from high temperature gases, liquids, or solids for 
transfer to low temperature gases, liquids, or solids. Heat exchangers 
consist in part of fixed heat transfer surfaces (described in paragraph 
(f)(4) of this section) separating two media. Heat exchange equipment 
does not include fluidized bed combustion equipment.
    (8) Waste heat boilers. Waste heat boilers use waste heat, usually 
in the form of combustion exhaust gases, as a substantial source of 
energy. A substantial source of energy is one that comprises more than 
20 percent of the energy requirement on the basis of Btu's during the 
course of each taxable year (including the start-up year).
    (9) Heat pipes. Heat pipes recover energy, usually in the form of 
waste heat, from high temperature fluids to heat low temperature fluids. 
A heat pipe consists in part of sealed heat transfer chambers and a 
capillary structure. In general, the heat transfer chambers 
alternatively vaporize and condense a working fluid as it passes from 
one end of the chamber to the other.
    (10) Automatic energy control systems. Automatic energy control 
systems automatically reduce energy consumed in an industrial or 
commercial process for such purposes as environmental space conditioning 
(i.e., lighting, heating, cooling or ventilating, etc.). Automatic 
energy control systems include, for example, automatic equipment 
settings controls, load shedding devices, and relay devices used as part 
of such system. Property such as computer hardware installed as a part 
of the energy control system also qualifies, but only to the extent of 
its incremental cost (as defined in paragraph (k) of this section).
    (11) Turbulators. Turbulators increase the rate of transfer of heat 
from combustion gases to heat exchange surfaces by increasing the 
turbulence in the gases. A turbulator is a baffle placed in a boiler 
firetube or in a heat exchange tube in industrial process equipment to 
deflect gases to the heat transfer surface.
    (12) Preheaters. Preheaters recover energy, usually in the form of 
waste heat, from either combustion exhaust gases or steam, to preheat 
incoming combustion air or boiler feedwater. A preheater consists in 
part of fixed heat transfer surfaces (described in paragraph (f)(4) of 
this section) separating two fluids.
    (13) Combustible gas recovery systems. Combustible gas recovery 
systems are items of equipment used to recover unburned fuel from 
combustion exhaust gases.
    (14) Economizers. Economizers are configurations of equipment used 
to reduce energy demand or recover energy from combustion exhaust gases 
and other high temperature sources to preheat boiler feedwater.
    (15) Other property added by the Secretary. [Reserved]
    (g) Recycling equipment--(1) In general. Recycling equipment is 
equipment used exclusively to sort and prepare, or recycle, solid waste 
(other than animal waste) to recover usable raw materials (``recovery 
equipment''), or to convert solid waste (including animal waste) into 
fuel or other useful forms of energy (``conversion equipment''). 
Recycling equipment may include certain other onsite related equipment.
    (2) Recovery equipment. Recovery equipment includes equipment that--
    (i) Separates solid waste from a mixture of waste,
    (ii) Applies a thermal, mechanical, or chemical treatment to solid 
waste to ensure the waste will properly respond to recycling, or
    (iii) Recycles solid waste to recover usable raw materials, but not 
beyond occurrence of the first of the following:
    (A) The point at which a material has been created that can be used 
in beginning the fabrication of an end-product in the same way as 
materials from a virgin substance. Examples are the fiber stage in 
textile recycling, the newsprint or paperboard stage in paper recycling, 
and the ingot stage for other metals (other than iron and steel). In the 
case of recycling iron or steel, recycling equipment does not include 
any equipment used to reduce solid waste to a molten state or any 
process thereafter.
    (B) The point at which the material is a marketable product (i.e., 
has a value other than for recycling) even if

[[Page 325]]

the material is not marketed by the taxpayer at that point.
    (3) Conversion equipment. Conversion equipment includes equipment 
that converts solid waste into a fuel or other usable energy, but not 
beyond the point at which a fuel, steam, electricity, hot water, or 
other useful form of energy has been created. Thus, combustors, boilers, 
and similar equipment may be eligible if used for a conversion process, 
but steam and heat distribution systems between the combustor or boiler 
and the point of use are not eligible.
    (4) On-site related equipment. Recycling equipment also includes 
onsite loading and transportation equipment, such as conveyors, 
integrally related to other recycling equipment. This equipment may 
include equipment to load solid waste into a sorting or preparation 
machine and also a conveyor belt system that transports solid waste from 
preparation equipment to other equipment in the recycling process.
    (5) Solid waste. (i) The term ``solid waste'' has the same meaning 
as in Sec. 1.103-8(f)(2)(ii)(b), subject to the following exceptions and 
the other rules of this subparagraph (5):
    (A) The date the equipment is placed in service is substituted in 
the first sentence of Sec. 1.103-8(f)(2)(ii)(b) for the date of issue of 
the obligations, and
    (B) Material that has a market value at the place it is located only 
by reason of its value for recycling is not considered to have a market 
value.
    (ii) Solid waste may include a nominal amount of virgin materials, 
liquids, or gases, not to exceed 10 percent. If more than 10 percent of 
the material recycled during the course of any taxable year (including 
the ``start up'' year) consists of virgin material, liquids, or gases, 
the equipment ceases to be energy property and is subject to recapture 
under section 47. The determination of the portion of virgin material, 
liquids, or gases used is based on volume, weight, or Btu's whichever is 
appropriate.
    (6) Ineligible equipment. Transportation equipment, such as trucks, 
that transfer solid waste between geographically separated sites (e.g., 
the collection point and the recycling point) is not eligible. Steam and 
heat distribution systems are also ineligible.
    (7) Increased recycling capacity. If the equipment both replaces 
recycling capacity and increases that capacity at a particualr site, 
only the incremental cost (as defined in paragraph (k) of this section) 
of increasing the capacity qualifies. Recycling capacity is determined 
by the ability to produce a product not previously produced by the 
taxpayer, or more of an existing product, in a way that does not lower 
overall production.
    (8) Examples. The following examples illustrate this paragraph (g).

    Example 1 Corporation W recycles aluminum scrap metal. W owns a junk 
yard where it collects and crushes the metal into compact units. W's 
trucks bring the scrap metal from the junk yard to its main plant 
located 3 miles away. W's furnace equipment at the main plant reduces 
the scrap to the molten state and W's rolling equipment rolls the 
aluminum into sheets. The furnace qualifies, but for two separate 
reasons the rolling equipment does not qualify. First, the molten 
aluminum would be a marketable product if reduced to ingots prior to 
rolling. It is not necessary that W actually reduce the molten aluminum 
to ingots. Second, the molten aluminum could be used in the same way as 
virgin material.

    Example 2 Corporation X manufactures newsprint using wood chips 
discarded during X's lumber operations. Assume X could sell the wood 
chips to other companies located a short distance from X's mill for use 
as a fuel. None of the equipment used to manufacture the newsprint 
qualifies.

    Example 3 Assume the same facts as in example 2 except X uses old 
newspapers which have no value except for recycling in the area where 
X's mill is located. The equipment qualifies.

    Example 4 Corporation Y recycles municipal waste. Assume the 
municipal waste is ``solid waste'' under paragraph (g)(5) of this 
section. During the first taxable year Y operates the equipment, Y uses 
8,500 pounds of municipal waste and 1,500 pounds of virgin material and 
liquids. No energy credit is allowed for the equipment.

    Example 5 Corporation Z owns a waste recovery facility. The 
corrugated paper portion of the waste stream is picked off a conveyor as 
it enters the facility. The corrugated paper is baled and sold as a 
secondary paper product. Z acquires shredding and air-classification 
equipment. Corrugated paper that is not removed from the conveyor belt 
enters the new equipment for production as a fuel.

[[Page 326]]

Z increases the input of corrugated paper so that the same amount of 
corrugated paper is removed from the conveyor to be baled. The excess 
paper that is not removed for baling enters the shredding and air-
classification equipment. The new equipment qualifies.

    (h) Shale oil equipment--(1) In general. Shale oil equipment used in 
mining or either surface or in situ processing qualifies as energy 
property. Shale oil equipment means equipment used exclusively to mine, 
or produce or extract oil from, shale rock.
    (2) Eligible processes. In general, processing equipment qualifies 
if used in or after the mining stage and up through the retorting 
process. Thus, eligible processes include crushing, loading into the 
retort, and retorting, but not hydrogenation, refining, or any process 
subsequent to retorting. However, with respect to in situ processing, 
eligible processes include creating the underground cavity.
    (3) Eligible equipment. Shale oil equipment includes--
    (i) Heading jumbos, bulldozers, and scaling and bolting rigs used to 
create an underground cavity for in situ processing,
    (ii) On-site water supply and treatment equipment and handling 
equipment for spent shale.
    (iii) Crushing and screening plant equipment, such as hoppers, 
feeders, vibrating screens, and conveyors,
    (iv) Briquetting plant equipment, such as hammer mills and vibratory 
pan feeders, and
    (v) Retort equipment, including direct cooling and condensing 
equipment.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (j) Natural gas from geopressured brine. Equipment used exclusively 
to extract natural gas from geopressured brine described in section 
613A(b)(3)(C)(i) is energy property. Eligible equipment includes 
equipment used to separate the gas from saline water and remove other 
impurities from the gas. Equipment is eligible only up to the point the 
gas may be introduced into a pipeline.
    (k) Incremental cost. The term ``incremental cost'' means the excess 
of the total cost of equipment over the amount that would have been 
expended for the equipment if the equipment were not used for a 
qualifying purpose. For example, assume equipment costing $100 performs 
a pollution control function and another function. Assuming it would 
cost $60 solely to perform the nonqualifying function, the incremental 
cost would be $40.
    (l) Existing--(1) In general. For purposes of section 48(l), the 
term ``existing'' means--
    (i) When used in connection with a facility or equipment, 50 percent 
or more of the basis of that facility or equipment is attributable to 
construction, reconstruction, or erection before October 1, 1978, or
    (ii) When used in connection with an industrial or commercial 
process, that process was carried on in the facility as of October 1, 
1978.
    (2) Industrial or commercial process. (i) A process will be 
considered the same as the process carried on in the facility as of 
October 1, 1978, unless and until capitalizable expenditures are paid or 
incurred for modification of the process. The expenditures need not be 
capitalized in fact; it is sufficient if the taxpayer has an option or 
may elect to capitalize. In general, the date of change will be the date 
the expenditures are properly chargeable to capital account. If the 
taxpayer properly elects to expense a capitalizable expenditure, the 
date of change will be the date the expenditure could have been properly 
chargeable to capital account if the expenditure had been capitalized. 
Recapture will not occur by reason of a change in a process unless the 
process change also changes the use of the equipment. See example (1) of 
Sec. 1.47-1(h)(5).
    (m) Quality and performance standards--(1) In general. Energy 
property must meet quality and performance standards, if any, that have 
been prescribed by the Secretary (after consultation with the Secretary 
of Energy) and are in effect at the time of acquisition.
    (2) Time of acquisition. Under this paragraph (m) the time of 
acquisition is--
    (i) The date the taxpayer enters into a binding contract to acquire 
the property or
    (ii) For property constructed, reconstructed, or erected by the 
taxpayer, (A) the earlier of the date it begins construction, 
reconstruction, or erection of the property, or (B) the date the

[[Page 327]]

taxpayer and another person enter into a binding contract requiring each 
to construct, reconstruct, or erect property and place the property in 
service for an agreed upon use. See example under paragraph (m)(4) of 
this section.
    (3) Binding contract. Under this paragraph (m), a binding contract 
to construct, reconstruct, or erect property, or to acquire property, is 
a contract that is binding at all times on the taxpayer under applicable 
State or local law. A binding contract to construct, reconstruct, or 
erect property or to acquire property, does not include a contract for 
preparation of architect's sketches, blueprints, or performance of any 
other activity not involving the beginning of physical work.
    (4) Example. The following example illustrates this paragraph (m).

    Example. Corporation X owns a junk yard. Corporation Y manufactures 
recycling equipment and operates several recycling facilities. On 
January 1, 1979, X and Y enter into a written contract that is binding 
on both parties on that date and at all times thereafter. Under the 
contract's terms X will supply scrap metals to Y and Y agrees in return 
to build a recycling facility on land adjacent to the junk yard. Y will 
own and operate the facility using the scrap metal supplied by X. Y may 
treat the agreement as a binding contract under paragraph (m) (2) and 
(3) of this section.

    (n) Public utility property--(1) Inclusions. Public utility property 
is included in both of the following categories of energy property:
    (i) Shale oil equipment and
    (ii) Equipment for producing natural gas from geopressured brine.
    (2) Exclusions. Public utility property is excluded from each of the 
following categories of energy property:
    (i) Alternative energy property,
    (ii) Specially defined energy property,
    (iii) Solar or wind energy property, and
    (iv) Recycling equipment.
    (3) Public utility property. The term ``public utility property'' 
has the meaning given in section 46(f)(5).
    (o)--(p) [Reserved]
    (q) Qualified intercity buses--(1) In general. This paragraph (q) 
prescribes rules and definitions for purposes of section 48(l)(2)(A)(ix) 
and (16). Energy property includes qualified intercity buses of an 
eligible taxpayer, but only to the extent of the increase in the 
taxpayer's total operating seating capacity (operating capacity) under 
paragraphs (q) (9), (10), and (11) of this section. For application of 
recapture rules see Sec. 1.47-1(h)(3)(ii).
    (2) Eligible taxpayer. A taxpayer is an eligible taxpayer only if it 
is determined to be both--
    (i) A common carrier regulated by the Interstate Commerce Commission 
or an appropriate State agency and
    (ii) Engaged in the trade or business of furnishing intercity 
transportation by bus.
    (3) Common carrier. The taxpayer is a common carrier only if the 
taxpayer holds itself out to the general public as providing passenger 
bus transportation for compensation over regular or irregular routes, or 
both.
    (4) Appropriate State agency. A State agency is appropriate only if 
it has both--
    (i) Power to regulate intrastate transportation provided by a motor 
carrier, within the meaning of section 10521(b)(1) of the Revised 
Interstate Commerce Act (49 U.S.C. 10521(b)(1)), and
    (ii) Power to initiate an exemption proceeding under section 1025(b) 
of that Act (49 U.S.C. 10525(b)).
    (5) Intercity transportation. Intercity transportation means 
intercity passenger transportation or intercity passenger charter 
service. Intercity transportation does not include transportation 
provided entirely within a municipality, contiguous municipalities, or 
within a zone that is adjacent to, and commercially a part of, the 
municipality or municipalities (within the meaning of section 
10526(b)(1) of the Revised Interstate Commerce Act (49 U.S.C. 
10526(b)(1)). See 49 CFR part 1048 (regulations defining commercial 
zones under that statute).
    (6) Definition of qualified intercity bus. A qualified intercity bus 
(qualifying bus) is an automobile bus--
    (i) The chassis and body of which are exempt (under section 
4063(a)(6)) from the 10-percent excise tax generally imposed under 
section 4061(a) on trucks and buses.

[[Page 328]]

    (ii) With a seating capacity of at least 36 passengers (in addition 
to the driver).
    (iii) With one or more baggage compartments, in an area separated 
from the passenger area, with an aggregate capacity of at least 200 
cubic feet, and
    (iv) Which meets the predominant use test.
    (7) Predominant use test. (i) A bus meets the predominant use test 
for a taxable year only if it meets the following conditions:
    (A) It is used on a full-time basis during the taxable year, and
    (B) At least 70 percent of the total miles driven are driven while 
furnishing intercity transportation.
    (ii) A bus driven from the end point of one trip to the beginning 
point of another trip (``deadheading''), both of which furnish intercity 
transportation of passengers, will be considered to have been driven 
while furnishing intercity transportation of passengers, even if no 
passengers are carried.
    (iii) A bus is considered used on a full-time basis in a taxable 
year if it was driven 10,000 miles in that year. If available, the best 
evidence of annual mileage is the difference between odometer readings 
at the beginning and end of each taxable year. If the bus was placed in 
service during the taxable year, or for a short taxable year described 
in section 441(b)(3), that 10,000 mile figure is prorated on a daily 
basis.
    (iv) If a qualifying bus fails to meet the predominant use test in a 
taxable year, a cessation occurs in that taxable year. See Sec. 1.47-
1(h)(3)(ii).
    (v) The following examples illustrate this paragraph (q)(7):

    Example 1. X, a bus company, used a bus for trips between city M and 
city N, a distance of 100 miles. These trips qualify as furnishing 
intercity transportation. During the taxable year, 300 round trips were 
run carrying passengers both ways and 75 trips were run carrying 
passengers from city M to city N immediately after each of which the bus 
was returned to city M for the next trip. The bus was also driven 20,000 
miles to furnish passenger service which was local transportation. 
During the taxable year, the bus was driven a total of 100,000 miles. X 
makes the following calculations to determine if it met the predominant 
use test for the taxable year.

1. Total miles driven......................................      100,000
2. Intercity miles driven:                                              
    a. Passenger round trips (100 x 2 X 300)...............       60,000
    b. Passenger one-way (75 x 100)........................        7,500
    c. Non-passenger return trips (75 x 100)...............        7,500
3. Total intercity passenger miles (sum of lines 2 a, b,                
 and c)....................................................       75,000
4. 79% of line 1...........................................       70,000
                                                                        


Since line 1 is not less than 10,000 miles, the full-time use 
requirement is met. Since line 3 is greater than line 4, the 70 percent 
intercity mileage test is met. Thus, for the taxable year, the bus meets 
the predominant use test in paragraph (q)(7)(i) of this section.

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that the 
bus was placed in service on the last day of the taxable year. The bus 
was used only to run one round trip, carrying passengers, between cities 
M and N. 10,000 miles X one day <divide>365 days=27.4 miles. Because, 
for the one day of the taxable year that the bus was in service, the bus 
was driven more than 27.4 miles, and all these miles were driven to 
furnish intercity transportation, it met the predominant use test for 
the taxable year.

    (8) Leased buses. (i) A bus which is leased is energy property only 
if it meets the requirements of paragraphs (q)(6) (i), (ii), and (iii) 
of this section, the lessee is an eligible taxpayer, and the bus meets 
the predominant use test in the hands of the lessee. If a leased bus is 
energy property, the energy credit is available only to the lessee 
unless paragraph (q)(8)(ii) of this section applies. The lessor must 
elect under section 48(d) for the lessee to claim the energy credit.
    (ii) If a leased bus is energy property and, on or before October 9, 
1984, either (A) the lessor and lessee enter into a lease and the lessee 
places the bus in service, or (B) the bus is not placed in service but 
the lessor and lessee enter into a binding contract under which the 
amount of the lease payments cannot be modified, then the energy credit 
is available to the lessor even if the lessor is not an eligible 
taxpayer.
    (iii) Notwithstanding Sec. 1.47-2(b)(1) (relating to the effect of a 
disposition by the lessee on the credit claimed by the lessor), if, by 
reason of a lease or the termination of a lease, a bus is used in a 
taxable year subsequent to the credit year by a person other than the 
one whose increase in operating capacity determined the amount of 
qualified investment for the energy credit, a disposition of the bus 
under Sec. 1.47-1(h)(2) results. However, if the energy credit

[[Page 329]]

for a bus was earned in a taxable year and a lease of the bus which 
qualifies under section 168(f)(8) (safe-harbor lease) is entered into in 
a subsequent taxable year, the safe-harbor lease is not a disposition of 
the bus and the lessee under that lease is treated as the lessee for 
purposes of this paragraph (q)(8). For the requirement to file an 
amended return if the energy credit was allowed in a prior taxable year, 
see Sec. 5c.168(f)(8)-6(b)(2)(ii) (Temporary Income Tax Regulations 
under the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981). For the rule for 
determining whose operating capacity determines qualified investment for 
the energy credit, see paragraph (q)(9)(ii) of this section. For the 
rule for leases to related taxpayers, see paragraph (q)(10)(ii) of this 
section.
    (9) Operating capacity. (i) Qualified investment for a qualifying 
bus is taken into account for the energy credit only to the extent the 
bus increases the taxpayer's operating capacity. To increase operating 
capacity, a bus must be counted in operating capacity. The increase in a 
taxpayer's operating capacity is the excess of the taxpayer's operating 
capacity for the current taxable year over its operating capacity for 
the immediately preceding taxable year. Related taxpayers determine 
operating capacity on a group basis under paragraph (q)(10) of this 
section.
    (ii) Operating capacity for a particular taxable year is determined 
by adding together the seating capacities of all intercity buses used by 
the taxpayer in that year and still owned by the taxpayer at the end of 
that year. An intercity bus is a bus which meets the chassis and body 
test and the predominant use test in paragraph (q)(6) of this section 
whether or not the bus is still in use at the end of the taxable year. 
In the case of a leased bus to which paragraph (q)(8) of this section 
applies, the lessee's operating capacity determines qualified investment 
for the energy credit.
    (iii) The qualified investment for the energy credit for a 
qualifying bus is the bus's qualified investment for the regular credit 
multiplied by a fraction. The numerator of the fraction is the increase 
in the taxpayer's operating capacity for the taxable year. The 
denominator is the added operating capacity for the taxable year. Added 
operating capacity for the taxable year is determined for a taxpayer by 
adding together the seating capacities of the taxpayer's intercity buses 
included in operating capacity for the taxable year which were not 
included in operating capacity for the immediately preceding taxable 
year.
    (iv) In the case of a partnership, each partner's qualified 
investment for the energy credit for a qualifying bus is the partner's 
qualified investment for the regular credit (determined under Sec. 1.46-
3(f) multiplied by the fraction referred to in paragraph (q)(9)(iii) of 
this section for the partnership, as determined for the partnership 
taxable year in which the bus is placed in service.
    (v) The following example illustrates this paragraph (q)(9):

    Example. Corporation Y is a calendar year bus company that is an 
eligible taxpayer under paragraph (q)(2) of this section. Based upon the 
facts as set forth in the following table, Y makes the following 
calculations to determine the energy credit earned in 1981:

1. 1980 operating capacity determined as of 12/31/80:                   
    a. 5 intercity buses x 50 seats each...................          250
                                                            ------------
    b. Total 1980 operating capacity.......................          250
2. 1981 operating capacity determined as of 12/31/8:                    
    a. 2 1980 buses used on a full-time basis in 1981......          100
    b. 1981 added capacity:................................             
        i. Qualifying buses:                                            
            Bus 1..........................................           45
            Bus 2..........................................           55
            Bus 3..........................................           50
        ii. Intercity bus not a qualifying bus.............           50
        iii. Total 1981 added capacity.....................          200
                                                            ------------
  c. Total 1981 operating capacity.........................          300
3. 1981 increase in operating capacity (line 2c-line 1b)...           50
4. Fraction for determining qualified investment                        
 attributable to increase in capacity (line 3+line 2                    
 (b)(iii)).................................................        \1/4\
                                                                        

    Accordingly, the energy credit earned in 1981 for each of the 
qualifying buses is determined as follows:

                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Energy
 Qualified investment for the   x    Line 4   x     Energy    =   credit
        regular credit                            percentage      earned
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bus 1: $15,000                        \1/4\              10             
                                                                    $375
Bus 2: $20,000                        \1/4\              10             
                                                                     500
Bus 3: $25,000                        \1/4\              10             
                                                                     625
                              ------------------------------------------
  Total energy credit earned                                            
   in 1981                     ...  .......  ...  ..........  .    1,500
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 330]]

    (10) Related taxpayers. (i) Related taxpayers are treated as one 
taxpayer in determining the increase in operating capacity under 
paragraph (q)(9)(ii) of this section and in determining the qualified 
investment in qualified intercity buses for the energy credit under 
paragraph (q)(9)(iii) of this section. Related taxpayers are members of 
a group of trades or businesses that are under common control (as 
defined in Sec. 1.52-1(b)).
    (ii) Related taxpayers make all computations relating to operating 
capacity on a group basis. Also, the determination of whether a bus 
meets the predominant use test is made on a group basis by aggregating 
bus usage by each member of the group. For example, if a bus is acquired 
by one member and used by that member for part of a taxable year and 
used by other members for the remainder, the combined usage is 
aggregated in determining whether the predominant use test is met. In 
addition, all related taxpayers are treated as one person in applying 
paragraph (q)(8) of this section (relating to leasing).
    (iii) The energy credit earned for a qualifying bus is allocated to 
the member which acquired (or is a lessee treated under section 48(d) as 
having acquired) the bus whether or not that member had a separate 
increase in operating capacity for the taxable year.
    (iv) Each member must make its own computation of the group's 
increase in operating capacity for the period comprising its taxable 
year. A member will make this computation as of the end of its taxable 
year ignoring different taxable years of other members. For the period 
comprising its taxable year, the member makes all calculations relating 
to group operating capacity, including the determination of full-time 
use by other members.
    (v) Each member determines the composition of the group as of the 
end of that member's taxable year. For example, if X uses the calendar 
year and makes its computation as of December 31, 1981, and Y is a 
member of X's group at that time, Y's operating capacity determined as 
of the end of X's immediately preceding taxable year (December 31, 1980) 
is taken into account by X for 1980 even if Y was not a member of the 
group for any day prior to December 31, 1981.
    (vi) The following example illustrates this paragraph (q)(10):

    Example (a). Corporations X and Y are related taxpayers. In this 
example, each bus is a qualifying bus with a seating capacity of 50. 
Each bus owned at the close of either X's or Y's taxable year was used 
on a full-time basis for the relevant period corresponding to X's or Y's 
taxable year. Other facts are set forth in the following table:


                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                          X                   Y         
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Taxable year ends..............  Dec. 31...........  June 30.           
Operating capacity for 1979....  5 buses...........  10 buses.          
Buses added....................  3 buses Mar. 1,     3 buses May 15,    
                                  1980.               1981.             
Buses sold.....................  2 buses Mar. 31,    2 buses Sept. 30,  
                                  1981.               1980.             
Cost of each added bus.........  $40,000...........  $60,000.           
------------------------------------------------------------------------


    (b) X makes the following calculations to determine the energy 
credit earned for calendar year 1980.

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
1. 1979 operating capacity determined as of 12/31/79:                   
    a. Attributable to X (5 buses x 50 seats)..................      250
    b. Attributable to Y (10 buses x 50 seats).................      500
                                                                --------
    c. Total 1979 operating capacity...........................      750
2. 1980 operating capacity determined as of 12/31/80:                   
    a. X's 5 and Y's 8 1979 buses used on a full-time basis in          
     1980 and still owned on 12/31/80..........................      650
    b. 1980 added capacity (X's 3 buses x 50 seats)............      150
                                                                --------
    c. Total 1980 operating capacity...........................      800
3. 1980 increase in operating capacity (line 2c-line 1c).......       50
4. Fraction in paragraph (q)(9)(iii) of this section (line              
 3<divide>line 2b).............................................    \1/3\
                                                                        

    Accordingly, X earned an energy credit of $4,000 in 1980 
($40,000 x \1/3\ x 10% x 3 buses).
    (c) Since in calendar year 1981 X placed no qualifying buses in 
service, X earned no energy credit in 1981.
    (d) Since in the taxable year 7/1/79-6/30/80 Y placed no qualifying 
buses in service, Y earned no energy credit in that taxable year.
    (e) Y makes the following calculations to determine the energy 
credit earned in the taxable year 7/1/80--6/30/81.

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
1. Operating capacity for the taxable year ending 6/30/80               
 determined as of the close of that year:                               
    a. Attributable to X (8 buses x 50 seats)..................      400
    b. Attributable to Y (10 buses x 50 seats).................      500
                                                                --------
    c. Total operating capacity for that year..................      900
2. Operating capacity for the taxable year ending 6/30/81               
 determined as of the close of that year:                               
    a. X's 6 and Y's 8 buses from prior taxable year used on a          
     full-time basis during current taxable year and still              
     owned on 6/30/81..........................................      700

[[Page 331]]

                                                                        
    b. Capacity added during current taxable year (Y's 3 buses          
     x 50 seats)...............................................      150
                                                                --------
    c. Total operating capacity for that year..................      850
3. Increase in operating capacity for taxable year ending 6/30/         
 81 (line 2c-line 1c)..........................................     (50)
                                                                        

    As determined for Y's taxable year ending 6/30/81 the group 
experienced a decrease in operating capacity. Thus, no energy credit is 
available for the buses Y placed in service in its taxable year ending 
6/30/81.

    (11) Section 381(a) transactions. (i) In the case of a transaction 
described in section 381(a), the operating capacity of each transferor 
or distributor corporation, determined as of the date of distribution or 
transfer (within the meaning of Sec. 1.381(b)-1(b)), shall reduce the 
operating capacity of the acquiring corporation (determined without this 
paragraph (q)(11)) for its first taxable year ending on or after that 
date for purposes of determining the acquiring corporation's energy 
credit for that year. This paragraph (q)(11) shall not apply to any case 
to which paragraph (q)(10) of this section (dealing with related 
taxpayers) applies.
    (ii) The following example illustrates this paragraph (q)(11):

    Example. X and Y are unrelated corporations which use the calendar 
year. For 1981, each has an operating capacity of 250 seats (5 
buses x 50 seats). X merges into Y on January 1, 1982. On May 1, 1982, Y 
retires and sells two buses and acquires four 50-seat qualifying buses 
at a cost of $40,000 each. All buses owned by Y on December 31, 1982, 
are included in operating capacity. Y makes the following calculations 
to determine the energy credit earned in taxable year 1982.

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
1. Y's 1981 operating capacity determined as of 12/31/81.......      250
2.1982 operating capacity determined as of 12/31/82 without             
 this paragraph (q)(11):                                                
    a. X's 5 buses plus Y's 5 1981 buses less 2 retired buses           
     (8 buses x 50 seats)......................................      400
    b. 1982 added capacity (4 buses x 50 seats)................      200
                                                                --------
    c. Total...................................................      600
3. Operating capacity of transferor (X) on 1/1/82..............      250
                                                                --------
4. Y's 1982 operating capacity (line 2c-line 3)................      350
5. 1982 increase in operating capacity (line 4-line 1).........      100
6. Fraction in paragraph (q)(9)(iii) of this section (line              
 5<divide>line 2b).............................................    \1/2\
7. Energy credit earned in 1982 ($40,000 x \1/2\ x 10% x 4              
 buses)........................................................   $8,000
                                                                        


(Secs. 7805 (68A Stat. 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805) and 38 (b) (76 Stat. 962, 26 
U.S.C. 38) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; secs. 38(b) (76 Stat. 
963, 26 U.S.C. 38(b)), 48(l)(16) (94 Stat. 264, 26 U.S.C. 48(l)(16)), 
and 7805 (68A Stat. 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805))

[T.D. 7291, 46 FR 7291, Jan. 23, 1981, as amended by T.D. 7982, 49 FR 
39542, Oct. 9, 1984; 49 FR 41246, Oct. 22, 1984; T.D. 8014, 50 FR 11853, 
Mar. 26, 1985; T.D. 8147, 52 FR 27337, July 21, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.48-10  Single purpose agricultural or horticultural structures.

    (a) In general--(1) Scope. Under section 48(a)(1)(D), ``section 38 
property'' includes single purpose agricultural and horticultural 
structures, as defined in section 48 (p) and paragraphs (b) and (c) of 
this section. These structures are subject to a special rule for 
recapture of the credit. See paragraph (g) of this section. For the 
relation of this section to section 48(a)(1)(B) (other tangible 
property) and to sections 1245 and 1250 (depreciation recapture), see 
paragraph (h) of this section.
    (2) Effective date. The provisions of section 48(a)(1)(D) and this 
section apply to open taxable years ending after August 15, 1971.
    (b) Definition of single purpose agricultural structure--(1) In 
general. Under section 48(p)(2), a single purpose agricultural structure 
is any structure or enclosure that meets all of the following 
requirements:
    (i) It is specifically designed and constructed for permissible 
purposes (as defined in paragraph (b)(2) of this section). See paragraph 
(d) of this section for the rule regarding ``specifically designed and 
constructed''.
    (ii) It is specifically used exclusively for those permissible 
purposes. See paragraph (e) of this section for the rules regarding 
``specifically used''.
    (iii) It houses equipment necessary to house, raise, and feed 
livestock and their produce. See paragraphs (b)(3) and (4) of this 
section.
    (2) Permissible purposes. The following are the only permissible 
purposes for a single purpose agricultural structure:
    (i) Housing, raising, and feeding a particular type of livestock 
and, at the taxpayer's option, its produce. The term ``housing, raising, 
and feeding'' includes the full range of livestock

[[Page 332]]

breeding and raising activities, including ancillary post-production 
activities (as defined in paragraph (f) of this section). Thus, for 
example, use of a structure for breeding livestock, or for producing 
eggs or livestock, is permitted. The structure may also be used for 
storing feed or machinery, but more than strictly incidental use for 
these purposes will disqualify the structure. See paragraph (e)(1) of 
this section. For the special rule concerning the permissible purposes 
for a milking parlor, see paragraph (b)(2)(iii) of this section.
    (ii) Housing required equipment (including any replacements) as 
defined in paragraph (b)(4) of this section.
    (iii) If the structure is a dairy facility, it will qualify if it is 
used for: (A) activities consisting of the production of milk or of the 
production of milk and the housing, raising, or feeding dairy cattle, 
and (B) housing equipment (including any replacements) necessary for 
these activities. The term ``housing, raising, or feeding'' includes the 
full range of dairy cattle breeding and raising activities including 
ancillary post-production activities (as defined in paragraph (f) of 
this section). The structure may also be used for storing feed or 
machinery, but, more than incidental use for these purposes will 
disqualify the structure. See paragraph (e)(1) of this section.
    (3) Livestock; particular type of livestock--(i) Livestock. 
Livestock qualifying as ``section 38 property'' under Sec. 1.48-1(l) 
constitutes livestock for purposes of this section. Thus, for example, 
horses are not livestock for purposes of this section since they do not 
qualify as ``section 38 property'' under Sec. 1.48-1(l). Under section 
48(p)(6) poultry constitutes livestock for purposes of section 
48(a)(1)(D). The term ``livestock'' includes the offspring of livestock. 
``Livestock'' is distinguished from the produce of livestock, such as 
milk and eggs held for sale. For purposes of this section, eggs held for 
hatching and newborn livestock are considered livestock. A structure 
used solely to house produce of livestock or equipment necessary to 
house produce of livestock will not qualify as a single purpose 
agricultural structure. Thus, for example, a dairy facility used solely 
for storing milk will not qualify.
    (ii) Particular type of livestock. A structure qualifies as a single 
purpose agricultural structure only if it is specifically designed, 
constructed, and used exclusively for permissible purposes with respect 
to one particular type of livestock. For purposes of this section, each 
species is a different type except that all species of poultry are 
considered to be of a single type. Thus, for example, a structure 
specifically designed and constructed as a single purpose hog-raising 
facility will not qualify if it is used to raise dairy cows, but a 
structure specifically designed, constructed, and used to raise poultry 
may house, raise, and feed both chickens and turkeys.
    (4) Required equipment rule. (i) A single purpose agricultural 
structure must also house equipment necessary to house, raise, and feed 
the livestock (``required equipment''). Required equipment must be an 
integral part of the structure, and includes, but is not limited to, 
equipment necessary to contain the livestock, to provide them with water 
or feed, and to control the temperature, lighting, and humidity of the 
interior of the structure. For purposes of this section, equipment is an 
integral part of the structure if it is physically attached to or a part 
of the structure. The useful life of the structure, however, need not be 
contemporaneous with the life of the equipment it houses. A structure 
without required equipment is not a single purpose agricultural 
structure.
    (ii) A single purpose agricultural structure may, but is not 
required to, house equipment (for example, loading chutes) necessary to 
the conduct of ancillary post-production activities as defined in 
paragraph (f) of this section.
    (5) Livestock structure. In section 48(p)(2), the terms ``single 
purpose livestock structure'' and ``single purpose agricultural 
structure'' are interchangeable.
    (c) Definition of single purpose horticultural structure--(1) In 
general. Under section 48(p)(3), a single purpose horticultural 
structure is any structure that meets both of the following 
requirements:
    (i) It is a greenhouse or other structure specifically designed and 
constructed for permissible purposes (as

[[Page 333]]

defined in paragraph (c)(2) of this section). See paragraph (d) of this 
section for the rule regarding ``specifically designed and 
constructed.''
    (ii) It is specifically used exclusively for those permissible 
purposes. See paragraph (e) of this section for the rules regarding 
``specifically used.''
    (2) Permissible purposes. The following are the only permissible 
purposes for a single purpose horticultural structure:
    (i) The commercial production of plants (including plant products 
such as flowers, vegetables, or fruit) in a greenhouse.
    (ii) The commercial production of mushrooms.
    (iii) A single purpose horticultural structure also may, but is not 
required to, house equipment necessary to carry out these permissible 
purposes listed in paragraphs (c)(2) (i) and (ii) of this section.
    (3) Ancillary post-production activities. The terms ``commercial 
production of plants'' and ``commercial production of mushrooms'' 
include ancillary post-production activities (as defined in paragraph 
(f) of this section).
    (d) Specifically designed and constructed. A structure is 
specifically designed and constructed if it is not economic to design 
and construct the structure for the intended qualifying purpose and then 
use the structure for a different purpose. For example, if a hog raising 
structure is designed and constructed in accordance with a standard set 
of plans for such a structure provided by the Department of Agriculture, 
it would not be economic to use the structure for purposes other than 
hog raising.
    (e) Specifically used. There are two aspects of the specific use 
requirement--exclusive use and actual use.
    (1) Exclusive use. (i) A structure qualifies as a single purpose 
agricultural or horticultural structure only if it is used exclusively 
for the permitted purposes by reason of which it qualified for the 
credit. Thus--
    (A) The structure may not be used for any nonpermissible purposes 
(for example, processing, marketing, or more than incidental use for 
storing feed or equipment) and
    (B) It may not be put to any use other than the specific use by 
reason of which it qualifies for the credit.
    (ii) For purposes of this section, the term ``incidental use'' means 
a use which is both related and subordinate to the qualifying purpose. 
Thus, for example, if feed is stored in an agricultural structure which 
will be used for raising hogs, the feed must be used only for the hogs 
in order to be related to the qualifying purpose. In determining whether 
use of the structure for feed storage is subordinate to the qualifying 
purpose, all of the facts and circumstances must be considered, 
including, with respect to feed storage, the following:
    (A) Type of animal involved;
    (B) Number of, and consumption rate for, each animal;
    (C) Climate of area;
    (D) Total volume of storage area; and
    (E) Percentage of structure's total volume devoted to storage.
    (iii) It will be presumed that the storage function is not 
subordinate to the qualifying purpose of the structure if more than one-
third of the structure's total usable volume is devoted to storage. This 
presumption may be rebutted with clear and convincing evidence.
    (iv) A structure may fail the exclusive use test if either of the 
requirements of paragraph (e)(1)(i) of this section is not met. Thus, 
for example, a horticultural structure that contains an area for 
processing plants or plant products will fail the exclusive use test 
because there is a nonpermissible use. An agricultural structure that is 
used to house more than one particular type of livestock fails the 
exclusive use test for the same reason. A change in the use of an 
agricultural structure from one species of livestock to another will 
cause the structure to fail the exclusive use test when the change 
occurs. Thus, for example, a hog-raising facility which qualified for 
the credit when it was placed in service cannot later be modified and 
used for producing broiler chickens even if the structure would have 
qualified for the credit if it had been originally designed, 
constructed, and used exclusively for producing broiler chickens.
    (2) Actual use. (i) A single purpose agricultural or horticultural 
structure

[[Page 334]]

also must actually be used for the permissible purpose by reason of 
which it qualifies for the credit. ``Actual use'' means ``placed in 
service'' (as defined in Sec. 1.46-3(d)). Mere vacancy, on a temporary 
basis, will not disqualify the structure. Thus, for example, a structure 
that is designed and constructed as a hog-raising structure will not 
qualify if it is never placed in service for raising hogs. However, a 
turkey-raising facility will not be disqualified if the turkeys are all 
sent to a packing plant in November and the structure remains vacant 
until the next spring when newly hatched turkeys are placed in the 
structure to be raised.
    (ii) For purposes of this section, ``vacancy on a temporary basis'' 
includes temporary vacancy caused by market fluctuations or other 
economic considerations and vacancy on a seasonal basis.
    (f) Work space; ancillary post-production activities--(1) 
Permissible work space. Under section 48(p)(4), a single purpose 
agricultural or horticultural structure may contain work space only if 
it is used for--
    (i) Stocking, caring for, or collecting livestock, plants, or 
mushrooms,
    (ii) Maintenance of the structure, or
    (iii) Maintenance or replacement of the equipment or stock enclosed 
by or contained in the structure. Thus, for example, an eligible 
structure may not contain space devoted to processing or marketing or 
other nonpermissible purposes.
    (2) Ancillary post-production activities. The term ``stocking, 
caring for, or collecting'' the livestock, plants, or mushrooms includes 
ancillary post-production activities. These activities, therefore, 
constitute permissible purposes when carried on in conjunction with 
other permissible purposes, and a qualifying structure may contain work 
space devoted to such activities. Ancillary post-production activities 
include gathering, sorting, and loading livestock, plants, and mushrooms 
and packing unprocessed plants, mushrooms, and the live offspring and 
unprocessed produce of the livestock. Ancillary post-production 
activities do not include processing activities, such as slaughtering or 
packing meat, nor do they include marketing activities.
    (g) Special rule for recapture under section 47. Under section 
48(p)(5), if a structure which qualifies for the credit under this 
section becomes ineligible because it ceases to be held for the specific 
use by reason of which it qualified (or it is used for other than that 
qualifying use) before the end of the applicable estimated useful life 
or period specified in section 47(a), then the investment credit 
previously allowed with respect to the structure may be partially or 
entirely recaptured under section 47. Unlike other property to which 
section 47 applies, single purpose structures may not be converted from 
one permissible use to another without recapture. See subparagraph 
(e)(2) of this section.
    (h) Relationship to other sections--(1) Relation to section 
48(a)(1)(B). All structures satisfying the requirements of section 
48(a)(1)(B) and (a)(1)(D) will be considered to qualify under either 
provision.
    (2) Relationship to sections 1245 and 1250. For purposes of 
depreciation recapture, property to which section 48(a)(1)(D) applies is 
section 1245 property, except that property placed in service prior to 
January 1, 1981, may, at the option of the taxpayer, be treated as 
section 1250 property if depreciation deductions allowed were not under 
one of the methods authorized only for section 1245 property.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (j) Examples. The provisions of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. A constructs a rectangular structure for use as an egg-
producing facility. The structure has no windows. The walls and roof are 
made of corrugated steel and there is a door which is 4 feet wide and 8 
feet tall at each end of the structure. At the end of each wall are 
louvered openings approximately 4 feet high and 8 feet long. These 
openings house thermostatically controlled fans. In the center of the 
walls are manually operated fresh-air openings. Corrugated steel 
``curtains'' hang from the top of the openings so that the openings can 
be completely closed in cold weather, but the curtains can be propped 
open to admit fresh air. The building is well insulated. A has 
reinforced the roof with extra trusses and rafters and reinforced the 
building with extra wall studs. Two rows of cages are suspended from the 
rafters by thin steel girders and wires. The floor of the structure is a 
sloping concrete slab pierced with long troughs which run the

[[Page 335]]

length of the structure beneath the cages. The troughs are used for 
collection and disposal of chicken wastes. When this structure is placed 
in service it will qualify for an investment credit under this section.

    Example 2. B constructs a greenhouse for the commercial production 
of plants. The greenhouse is a rectangular structure with translucent 
fiberglass walls and roof. The structure is equipped with an automatic 
temperature and humidity control system. Pipes were installed to carry 
water and liquid fertilizer to the plants and to release minute amounts 
of carbon dioxide into the air. When the structure was originally placed 
in service B used the entire structure for growing flowers commercially. 
In September 1978, B began to use the structure for growing tomatoes. 
Because of the success of the venture, in January 1979, B began to use 
the entire structure for growing tomatoes. In February 1980, B set up a 
small counter with a cash register at one end of the structure so that 
workers could sell tomatoes to customers at the greenhouse. Until 
February 1980, the structure would qualify for the credit under this 
section. The change in use from growing flowers to growing tomatoes will 
not affect the eligibility of the structure. Once the cash register is 
installed, however, the structure fails to meet both the exclusive use 
test of paragraph (e)(1) of this section and the work space rule of 
paragraph (f) of this section since a single purpose structure may not 
be used for marketing activities.

    Example 3. C purchases a prefabricated structure and makes 
modifications so that the structure will meet C's requirements. C adds 
gates and constructs a partition which divides the structure into two 
parts. One part of the structure constitutes less than one-third of the 
total usable volume of the structure and is used to house feeder cattle 
while they are fed with hay. This part of the structure has a sloping 
concrete floor. The other part of the structure constitutes more than 
two-thirds of the total usable volume of the structure and is used to 
store the hay used to feed the cattle. This structure will not qualify 
for the credit since it fails the required equipment test. The structure 
does not contain equipment which is an integral part of the structure. 
This structure also fails the ``specifically designed and constructed'' 
test of paragraph (d) of this section since it would be economic to use 
the structure for purposes other than housing, raising, and feeding 
cattle (such as a general purpose barn, for example). Finally, the 
structure fails the incidental use test of paragraph (e) of this section 
because the storage function is presumptively not subordinate to the 
qualifying purpose since more than two-thirds of the structure's total 
usable volume is devoted to storage and none of the facts will serve to 
rebut the presumption.

(Secs. 7805 (68A Stat. 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805) and 38 (b) (76 Stat. 926, 26 
U.S.C. 38))

[T.D. 7900, 48 FR 32768, July 19, 1983; 48 FR 36448, Aug. 11, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.48-11  Qualified rehabilitated building; expenditures incurred before January 1, 1982.

    (a) In general. Under section 48(a)(1)(E), that portion of the basis 
of a qualified rehabilitated building which is attributable to qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures qualifies as section 38 property. In 
general, property which is treated as section 38 property by reason of 
section 48(a)(1)(E) is treated as new section 38 property and therefore 
is not subject to the used property limitation. See Sec. 1.48-2(d). 
Section 48(g)(1) and paragraph (b) of this section define the term 
``qualified rehabilitated building''. Section 48(g)(2) and paragraph (c) 
of this section define the term ``qualified rehabilitation 
expenditure''. Paragraph (d) of this section provides guidance for 
coordination of these provisions with other sections of the Code.
    (b) Definition of qualified rehabilitated building--(1) In general. 
The term ``qualified rehabilitated building'' means any building and its 
structural components--
    (i) Which has been rehabilitated (within the meaning of paragraph 
(b)(3) of this section),
    (ii) Which was placed in service (within the meaning of Sec. 1.46-
3(d)) by any person at any time before the beginning of the 
rehabilitation,
    (iii) 75 percent or more of the existing external walls of which are 
retained in place as external walls (within the meaning of paragraph 
(b)(4) of this section) in the rehabilitation process, and
    (iv) Which meets the twenty-year requirement in paragraph (b)(2) of 
this section.

In addition, a major portion of a building may be treated as a separate 
building for purposes of this paragraph if the requirements of paragraph 
(b)(5) of this section are met.
    (2) Twenty-year requirement--(i) In general. A building is 
considered a qualified rehabilitated building only if

[[Page 336]]

a period of at least 20 years has elapsed between the date physical work 
on the rehabilitation of the building began, and the later of--
    (A) The date the building was first placed in service (see 
Sec. 1.46-3(d)) by any person as a building, or
    (B) The date the building was placed in service by any taxpayer in 
connection with a prior rehabilitation with respect to which a credit 
was allowed by reason of section 48(a)(1)(E).
    (ii) Vacant periods. The 20-year period includes periods during 
which a building was vacant or devoted to a personal use and is computed 
without regard to the number of owners or the identity of owners during 
the period.
    (iii) Physical work on a rehabilitation. For purposes of this 
section, ``physical work on a rehabilitation'' begins when actual 
construction begins. The term ``physical work on a rehabilitation'' does 
not include preliminary activities such as planning, designing, securing 
financing, exploring, researching, developing plans and specifications, 
or stabilizing a building to prevent deterioration (e.g., placing boards 
over broken windows).
    (iv) Special rule. If a part of a building meets the twenty-years 
requirement in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph and a part (for 
example, an addition) does not, a rehabilitation of that part that meets 
the requirement may qualify for a credit only if that part constitutes a 
major portion (as defined in paragraph (b)(5) of this section) of the 
building.
    (3) Rehabilitation--(i) In general. For purposes of this paragraph, 
rehabilitation includes renovation, restoration, or reconstruction. 
However, the term ``rehabilitation'' does not include enlargement 
(within the meaning of paragraph (c)(7)(ii) of this section), new 
construction, or the completion of new construction after a building has 
been placed in service. For purposes of this paragraph (b)(3), whether 
expenditures are attributable to the rehabilitation of an existing 
building, or to new construction, is determined upon all the facts and 
circumstances.
    (ii) Substantial rehabilitation. For a building to be considered 
rehabilitated, the rehabilitation must be substantial. Whether a 
rehabilitation is substantial is determined upon the basis of all the 
facts and circumstances. In general, to be substantial, the 
rehabilitation must do one of the following:
    (A) Materially extend the useful life of the building;
    (B) Significantly upgrade its usefulness (for either the same or a 
new use); or
    (C) Preserve it in a way that significantly improves its condition 
or enhances its historic value.

A substantial rehabilitation may vary in degree from gutting and 
extensive reconstruction of a building's major structural components to 
the cure of a substantial accumulation of major disrepairs. It may also 
include renovation, alteration, or remodelling for the conversion of a 
structurally sound building to a design and condition required for a new 
use. Cosmetic improvements alone, however, do not qualify as a 
substantial rehabilitation.
    (iii) Aggregation of rehabilitation. In the case where qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures are incurred with respect to a 
rehabilitation of a building by more than one person (e.g., a lessor and 
a lessee, several lessees, or several condominium owners), the 
substantial rehabilitation requirement in this paragraph (b)(3) shall be 
applied by aggregating all the rehabilitation work done by such persons.
    (iv) Special rule by qualified rehabilitation expenditures treated 
as incurred by the taxpayer. In the case where qualified rehabilitation 
expenditures are treated as having been incurred by a taxpayer because 
of the application of paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of this section, the 
substantial rehabilitation test in paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of this section 
will be applied by aggregating the rehabilitation work done by the 
transferor and the transferee.
    (v) Examples. The provisions of this subparagraph (3) may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Taxpayer A is the owner of a 30-year old building. The 
building is air conditioned by means of window air conditioning units. A 
replaces the window units with a central air conditioning system and no 
other rehabilitation is performed by A. The expenditures incurred by A 
did not materially extend the building's useful life, significantly 
upgrade its usefulness, or preserve it in a manner that significantly 
improves its

[[Page 337]]

condition or enhances its historic value. Although expenditures for 
replacement of window units with a central air conditioning system may 
constitute qualified expenditures as part of an overall rehabilitation, 
alone they do not qualify as a substantial rehabilitation and the 
building is not considered rehabilitated within the meaning of this 
subparagraph.

    Example 2. Taxpayer B is the owner of a 10 story office building 
that is 35 years old. The building is in substantial disrepair and in 
order to modernize it as an office building B installs new plumbing, 
electrical wiring, and heating and air conditioning systems. In 
addition, the layout of each floor is changed by means of tearing down 
many existing interior walls and partitions and building new walls, 
partitions, and doors. Old plaster is removed from many walls and 
replaced by new wall covering. New windows and new flooring are 
installed throughout the building. The improvements made by B materially 
extend the useful life of the building and significantly upgrade its 
usefulness. The building is considered rehabilitated within the meaning 
of the facts and circumstances test in this subparagraph.

    Example 3. Taxpayer C is the owner of a 100-year old building that 
has substantial historic character, although the building is not a 
certified historic structure (as defined in section 191(d)(1) and the 
regulations thereunder). C uncovers and restores the original woodwork, 
wall coverings and moldings throughout the building. The windows and 
doors are replaced with replicas of the original. The improvements made 
by C significantly preserve the building and significantly enhance its 
historic value. Thus, the building is considered rehabilitated within 
the meaning of this subparagraph.

    (4) Retention of 75 percent of external walls--(i) In general. A 
building meets the requirements set forth in paragraph (b)(1)(iii) only 
if 75 percent or more of the existing external walls (as measured by the 
total area of the existing external walls) are retained in place as 
external walls in the rehabilitation process. For this purpose, the area 
of existing external walls includes the area of windows and doors.
    (ii) External wall. For purposes of this paragraph (b)(4), a wall 
includes both the supporting elements of the wall and the nonsupporting 
elements (e.g., a curtain) of the wall. Except as otherwise provided in 
this paragraph (b)(4), the term ``external wall'' includes any wall that 
has one face exposed to the weather, earth, or an abutting wall erected 
on an adjacent property. An external wall also includes a shared wall 
(i.e., a single wall shared with an adjacent building), generally 
referred to as a ``party wall''.
    (iii) Alternative rule. Notwithstanding the definition of external 
wall contained in paragraph (b)(4)(ii) of this section, in any case in 
which the building being rehabilitated would fail to meet the 
requirements of a qualified rehabilitation building if the definition of 
external wall in paragraph (b)(4)(ii) of this section were used, then 
the term ``external wall'' shall be defined as a wall, including its 
supporting elements, with one face exposed to the weather or earth, and 
a common wall shall not be treated as an external wall.
    (iv) Retained in place. An existing external wall is retained in 
place if the supporting elements of the wall are retained in place. An 
existing external wall is not retained in place if the supporting 
elements of the wall are replaced by new supporting elements. An 
external wall is retained in place, however, if the supporting elements 
are reinforced in the rehabilitation, provided that such supporting 
elements of the external wall are retained in place. An external wall is 
retained in place even though it is covered (e.g., with new siding). 
Moreover, the existing curtain may be replaced with a new curtain 
provided that the structural framework that provides for the support of 
the existing curtain is retained in place. An external wall is retained 
in place notwithstanding that the existing doors and windows in the wall 
are modified, eliminated, or replaced. A wall may be disassembled and 
reassembled so long as the same supporting elements are used when the 
wall is reassembled. Thus, for example, in the case of the brick wall, 
the wall is considered retained in place even though the original bricks 
are removed (for cleaning, etc.) and put back to form the wall.
    (v) Retention as an external wall. For purposes of meeting the 75 
percent requirement of this subparagraph (4), an existing external wall 
must be retained in place as an external wall. If an addition is made 
that results in an existing external wall being converted into an

[[Page 338]]

internal wall, the wall is not retained in place as an external wall.
    (vi) Special rule. Solely for the purpose of meeting the 75 percent 
requirement of this subparagraph (4), the walls of an uncovered internal 
shaft designed solely to bring light or air into the center of a 
building which are completely surrounded by external walls of the 
building and which enclose space not designated for occupancy or other 
use by people (other than for maintenance or emergency) are not 
considered external walls. Thus, a wall of a light well in the center of 
an office building is not an external wall. However, walls surrounding 
an uncovered courtyard which is usable by the building's occupants, 
(e.g., at lunch time) are external walls.
    (vii) Examples. The provisions of this subparagraph (4) may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Taxpayer A rehabilitated a building all of the walls of 
which consisted of wood siding attached to gypsum board sheets (which 
covered the studs). A covered the existing wood siding with aluminum 
siding in a part of a rehabilitation that otherwise qualified under this 
subparagraph. A satisfied the requirement that 75 percent of the 
existing external walls must be retained in place as external walls.

    Example 2. Taxpayer B rehabilitated a building the external walls of 
which had a masonry curtain. The masonry on the wall face was replaced 
with a glass curtain. The steel beam and girders supporting the existing 
curtain were retained in place. B satisfied the requirement that 75 
percent of the existing external walls must be retained in place as 
external walls.

    Example 3. Taxpayer C rehabilitated a building which has two 
external walls measuring 75' x 20' and two other external walls 
measuring 100' x 20'. C tore down one of the larger walls, including its 
supporting elements, which accounted for more than 25% of the building's 
external walls and constructed a new wall. C has not satisfied the 
requirement that 75 percent of the existing external walls must be 
retained in place as external walls.

    Example 4. The facts are the same as in example 3, except C does not 
tear down any walls, but makes an addition that results in one of the 
smaller walls becoming an internal wall. In addition, C enlarged 8 of 
the existing windows on the larger walls, increasing them from a size of 
3' x 4' to 6' x 8'. Since the smaller wall accounts for less than 25 
percent of the total wall area, C has satisfied the requirement that 75 
percent of the existing external walls must be retained in place as 
external walls in the rehabilitation process. The enlargement of the 
existing windows on the larger wall does not change the result.

    (5) Major portion treated as separate building--(i) In general. 
Where there is a separate rehabilitation of a major portion of a 
building, such major portion shall be treated as a separate building. 
Thus, such major portion may qualify as a qualified rehabilitated 
building if the requirements of this paragraph are met with respect to 
such major portion. Expenditures for property that services both a major 
portion of a building and another portion must be specifically allocated 
to each portion to the extent possible. If it is not possible to make 
such an allocation, the expenditures must be allocated to each portion 
on some reasonable basis. What constitutes a reasonable basis for an 
allocation depends on factors such as the type of improvement and how 
the improvement relates functionally to the building. For example, in 
the case of expenditures for an air conditioning system or a roof, a 
reasonable basis for allocating the expenditures would be the volume of 
the major portion served by the improvement relative to the volume of 
the other portion of the building served by the improvement.
    (ii) Major portion defined. Whether a part of a building constitutes 
a major portion of the building is determined upon the basis of all the 
facts and circumstances. A major portion must generally consist of 
clearly identifiable parts of a building (e.g., a wing of a building or 
the first 5 stories of a 7 story building). The following factors shall 
be taken into account:
    (A) Whether the portion comprises an entire leasehold interest or an 
entire ownership (e.g., condominium) interest;
    (B) Whether the portion (as measured by volume) is sufficiently 
large that it would be reasonable to treat it as a separate building; 
and
    (C) Whether the portion is functionally different from other parts 
of the building.
    (6) Special rule for rehabilitation done in phases. If 
rehabilitation which is not continuous is determined under this

[[Page 339]]

subparagraph to be a single rehabilitation done in phases, the 
requirements of this paragraph (b) are to be applied with respect to the 
overall rehabilitation and not merely to a phase of the rehabilitation. 
In such case, a phase of a single overall rehabilitation will not be 
considered as ``prior rehabilitation'' for purposes of subparagraph 
(2)(i)(B) of this paragraph (b). Whether rehabilitation which is not 
continuous is a single rehabilitation that is done in phases is 
determined on the basis of all the facts and circumstances. Generally, 
however, to constitute a single rehabilitation that is done in phases, 
there must exist, prior to the time any rehabilitation work is 
commenced, a set of written plans describing generally all phases of the 
rehabilitation of the building and a reasonable expectation that all 
phases of the rehabilitation will be completed. Such written plans are 
not required to contain detailed working drawings or detailed 
specifications of the material to be used. In addition, the period 
between the time that physical work on the first phase of the overall 
rehabilitation begins and physical work on the last phase of the overall 
rehabilitation begins must be reasonable. In determining whether the 
rehabilitation is completed within a reasonable time, the fact that a 
building is occupied during the rehabilitation, the necessity of 
acquiring a lease (of additional portions of the building), and 
unforeseen delays shall be taken into account. Other factors that are 
relevant in determining whether rehabilitation is a single 
rehabilitation include the length of time between each phase of 
rehabilitation activities and the extent of rehabilitation activity in 
each phase.
    (7) Special rule for adjoining buildings that are combined. For 
purposes of this paragraph (b), if as part of a rehabilitation process 
two or more adjoining buildings are combined and placed in service as a 
single building after the rehabilitation process, then all of the 
requirements of a qualified rehabilitated building in section 48(g)(1) 
and this section may be applied to the constituent adjoining buildings 
in the aggregate. Any party walls or abutting walls between the 
constitutent buildings that would otherwise be treated as external walls 
(within the meaning of paragraph (b)(4)(ii) of this section) would not 
be treated as external walls of the building; the substantial 
rehabilitation test in paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of this section would be 
applied to the aggregate rehabilitation work with respect to all of the 
constitutent buildings.
    (c) Definition of qualified rehabilitation expenditures--(1) In 
general. Except as provided in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, the 
term ``qualified rehabilitation expenditure'' means any amount--
    (i) Properly chargeable to capital account (as described in 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph),
    (ii) Incurred after October 31, 1978, for depreciable or amortizable 
property (or additions or improvements to property) with a useful life 
of five years or more, and
    (iii) Made in connection with the rehabilitation of a qualified 
rehabilitated building.
    (2) Chargeable to capital account. For purposes of paragraph 
(c)(1)(i) of this section, amounts paid or incurred are chargeable to 
capital account if under the taxpayer's method of accounting they are 
property includible in computing basis under Sec. 1.46-3. Amounts 
treated as an expense and deducted in the year they are paid or incurred 
are not chargeable to capital account.
    (3) Incurred by the taxpayer--(i) In general. Generally, to qualify 
for a credit under section 48 (a)(1)(E), qualified rehabilitation 
expenditures must be incurred by the taxpayer after October 31, 1978. An 
expenditure is incurred for purposes of this paragraph on the date such 
expenditure would be considered incurred under the accrual method of 
accounting, regardless of the method of accounting used by the taxpayer 
with respect to other items of income and expense. If qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures are treated as having been incurred by a 
taxpayer under paragraph (c)(3)(ii)) of this section, the taxpayer shall 
be treated as having incurred the expenditures on the date such 
expenditures were incurred by the transferor.
    (ii) Qualified rehabilitation expenditures treated as incurred by 
the taxpayer. (A) Where rehabilitation expenditures are incurred with 
respect to a building

[[Page 340]]

by a person (or persons) other than the taxpayer and the taxpayer 
acquires the building, or a portion of the building to which the 
expenditures are allocable, the taxpayer acquiring such property will be 
treated as having incurred the rehabilitation expenditures actually 
incurred by the transferor (or treated as incurred by the transferor 
under this paragraph (c)(3)(ii)) with respect to the acquired property, 
provided that--
    (1) The building, or the portion of the building, acquired by the 
taxpayer was not used after the rehabilitation expenditures were 
incurred and prior to the date of acquisition by the taxpayer, and
    (2) No credit with respect to such qualified rehabilitation 
expenditures is claimed by anyone other than the taxpayer acquiring the 
property.

For purposes of this paragraph (c)(3)(ii), use shall mean actual use, 
whether personal or business.
    (B) The amount of qualified rehabilitation expenditures treated as 
incurred by the taxpayer under this paragraph is the lesser of--
    (1) The qualified rehabilitation expenditures incurred before the 
date on which the taxpayer acquired the building (or portion thereof), 
to which the expenditures are attributable, or
    (2) That portion of the taxpayer's cost or other basis for the 
property which is attributable to the qualified rehabilitation 
expenditures described in paragraph (c)(3)(B)(1) of this section 
incurred before such date.

For purposes of paragraph (c)(6)(ii) of this section, the amount of 
rehabilitation expenditures treated as incurred by the taxpayer under 
this paragraph (c)(3)(ii) shall not be considered to be part of the cost 
of acquiring a building or any interest in the building. The portion of 
the cost of acquiring a building (or an interest therein) which is not 
treated under this paragraph as qualified rehabilitation expenditures 
incurred by the taxpayer is not eligible for a rehabilitation investment 
credit. See paragraph (c)(6)(ii) of this section.
    (C) See paragraph (b)(2)(iv) of this section for rules concerning 
the application of the substantial rehabilitation test to expenditures 
treated as incurred by the taxpayer.
    (iii) Examples. The provisions of this subparagraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. In 1978, taxpayer A, a cash basis taxpayer, commenced the 
rehabilitation of a 30-year old building. In June 1978, A signed 
contract with a plumbing contractor for replacement of the plumbing in 
the building. A agreed to pay the contractor as soon as the work was 
completed. The work was completed in September 1978, but A did not pay 
the amount due until November 1, 1978. The expenditures for the plumbing 
are not qualified rehabilitation expenditures because they were not 
incurred after October 31, 1978.

    Example 2. B incurred qualified rehabilitation expenditures of 
$300,000 with respect to an existing building between January 1, 1980, 
and May 15, 1980, and then sold the building to C on June 1, 1980. If 
the property attributable to the expenditures was not placed in service 
by A during the period from January 1, 1980, to June 1, 1980, C will be 
treated as having incurred the expenditures.

    (4) Incurred for 5-year property. An expenditure is incurred for 
depreciable or amortizable property if the amount of the expenditure is 
added to the basis of property which is depreciable or amortizable under 
section 167. The determination of whether property has a useful life of 
five years or more is made by applying the principles of Sec. 1.46-3(e). 
In the case of expenditures for property made by a lessee, see sections 
167 and 178 and the regulations thereunder for rules relating to whether 
improvements made to leased property are depreciable or amortizable.
    (5) Made in connection with the rehabilitation of a qualified 
rehabilitated building. Expenditures attributable to work done to 
facilities related to a building (e.g., sidewalk, parking lot, 
landscaping) are not considered made in connection with a rehabilitation 
of a qualified rehabilitated building.
    (6) Certain expenditures excluded from qualified rehabilitation 
expenditures. The term ``qualified rehabilitation expenditures'' does 
not include the following expenditures:
    (i) An expenditure for property which is ``section 38 property'' 
(determined without regard to section 48(a)(1) (E) and (l)).
    (ii) The cost of acquiring a building or any interest in a building 
(including a leasehold interest) except as provided in paragraph 
(c)(3)(ii) of this section.

[[Page 341]]

    (iii) An expenditure attributable to enlargement of a building (as 
defined in paragraph (c)(7) of this section).
    (iv) An expenditure attributable to rehabilitation of a certified 
historic structure (as defined in section 191(d)(1) and the regulations 
thereunder), unless the rehabilitation is a certified rehabilitation (as 
defined in paragraph (c)(8) of this section).
    (7) Expenditures for enlargement distinguished--(i) In general. 
Expenditures attributable to an enlargement of an existing building do 
not qualify as qualified rehabilitated expenditures. A building is 
enlarged to the extent that the total volume of the building is 
increased. An increase in floor space resulting from interior remodeling 
is not considred an enlargement. Generally, the total volume of a 
building is equal to the product of the floor area of the base of the 
building and the height from the underside of the lowest floor 
(including the basement) to the average height of the finished roof (as 
it exists or existed). For this purpose, floor area is measured from the 
exterior faces of external walls (other than shared walls that are 
external walls) and from the centerline of shared walls that are 
external walls. In addition, a building is enlarged to the extent of any 
construction outside the exterior faces of the existing external wall of 
the building.
    (ii) Rehabilitation which includes enlargement. If expenditures for 
property only partially qualify as qualified rehabilitation expenditures 
because some of the expenditures are also attributable to the 
enlargement of the building, the expenditures must be apportioned 
between the original portion of the building and the enlargement. This 
allocation should be made using the principles contained in paragraph 
(b)(5)(i) of this section.
    (8) Certified rehabilitation--(i) In general. For the purpose of 
this paragraph (c) of this section, the term ``certified 
rehabilitation'' means any rehabilitation of a certified historic 
building in a registered historic district which the Secretary of the 
Interior has certified to the Secretary as being consistent with the 
historic character of such building or the district in which such 
building is located.
    (ii) Revoked or invalidated certifications. If the Department of 
Interior revokes or otherwise invalidates a certification after it has 
been provided to a taxpayer, the decertified property will cease to be 
section 38 property described in section 48(a)(1)(e). Such cessation 
shall be effective as of the date the activity giving rise to the 
revocation or invalidation occurred. See section 47 for the rules 
applicable to property that ceases to be section 38 property.
    (d) Coordination with other provisions of the Code--(1) Credit by 
lessees--(i) Rehabilitation performed by lessor. A lessee may take the 
credit for rehabilitation performed by the lessor if the requirements of 
this section and section 48(d) are satisfied. For purposes of applying 
section 48(d), the fair market value of section 38 property described in 
section 48(a)(1)(E) shall be equal to that portion of the lessor's basis 
in a qualified rehabilitated building that is attributable to qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures.
    (ii) Rehabilitation performed by lessee. A lessee may take the 
credit for rehabilitation performed by the lessee, provided that the 
property (or improvements or additions to property) for which the 
rehabilitation expenditures are made is depreciable (or amortizable) by 
the lessee (see sections 167 and 178, and the regulations thereunder) 
and the requirements of this section are satisfied.
    (2) When credit may be claimed. The investment credit for qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures is allowed generally in the taxable year in 
which the property to which the rehabilitation expenditures is 
attributable is placed in service, provided the building is a qualified 
rehabilitated building for the taxable year. See Sec. 1.46-3(d). Under 
certain circumstances, however, the credit may be available prior to the 
date the property is placed in service. See section 46(d) and Sec. 1.46-
5 (relating to qualified progress expenditures).
    (3) Recapture. If property described in section 48(a)(1)(E) is 
disposed of by the taxpayer, or otherwise ceases to be ``section 38 
property,'' recapture may result under section 47. Property will cease 
to be section 38 property, and therefore recapture may occur under

[[Page 342]]

section 47, in any case where the Department of Interior revokes or 
otherwise invalidates a certification of rehabilitation (see section 
48(g)(2)(C)) after the property is placed in service because, for 
example, the taxpayer made modifications to the building inconsistent 
with Department of Interior standards.
    (e) Effective date--(1) General rule. Except as provided in 
paragraph (e)(2) of this section, this Sec. 1.48-11 shall not apply to 
expenditures incurred after December 31, 1981.
    (2) Transitional rule. This Sec. 1.48-11 shall continue to apply to 
expenditures incurred after December 31, 1981, for the rehabilitation of 
a building if--
    (i) The physical work on the rehabilitation began before January 1, 
1982, and
    (ii) The building does not meet the requirements of section 48(g)(1) 
of the Code as amended by the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981.

[T.D. 8031, 50 FR 26698, June 28, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.48-12  Qualified rehabilitated building; expenditures incurred after December 31, 1981.

    (a) General rule--(1) In general. Under section 48(a)(1)(E), the 
portion of the basis of a qualified rehabilitated building that is 
attributable to qualified rehabilitation expenditures (within the 
meaning of section 48(g) and this section) is section 38 property. 
Property that is section 38 property by reason of section 48(a)(1)(E) is 
treated as new section 38 property and, therefore, is not subject to the 
used property limitation in section 48(c). Section 48(g)(1) and 
paragraph (b) of this section define the term ``qualified rehabilitated 
building.'' Section 48(g)(2) and paragraph (c) of this section define 
the term ``qualified rehabilitation expenditure.'' Section 48(g) 
(2)(B)(iv) and (3) and paragraph (d) of this section describe the rules 
applicable to ``certified historic structures.'' Section 48(q) and 
paragraph (e) of this section provide rules concerning an adjustment to 
the basis of the rehabilitated building. Paragraph (f) of this section 
provides guidance for coordination of these provisions with other 
sections of the Code, including rules for determining when the 
rehabilitation credit may be claimed.
    (2) Effective dates and transition rules--(i) In general. Except as 
otherwise provided in this paragraph (a)(2)(i), this section applies to 
expenditures incurred after December 31, 1981, in connection with the 
rehabilitation of a qualified rehabilitated building. (See paragraph 
(c)(3)(i) of this section for rules concerning the determination of when 
an expenditure is incurred.) If, however, physical work on the 
rehabilitation began before January 1, 1982, and the building does not 
meet the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section, the rules in 
Sec. 1.48-11 shall apply to the expenditures incurred after December 31, 
1981, in connection with such rehabilitation. (See paragraph (b)(6)(i) 
of this section for rules determining when physical work on a 
rehabilitation begins.)
    (ii) Transition rules concerning ACRS lives. (A) For property placed 
in service before March 16, 1984, and any property subject to the 
exception set forth in section 111(g)(2) of Pub. L. 98-369 (Deficit 
Reduction Act of 1984), the references to ``19 years'' in paragraph 
(c)(4)(ii) and (7)(v) shall be replaced with ``15 years'' and the 
reference to ``19-year real property'' in paragraph (c)(4)(ii) shall be 
replaced with ``15-year real property.''
    (B) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (a)(2)(ii)(A) of this 
section, for property placed in service before May 9, 1985, and any 
property subject to the exception set forth in section 105(b) (2) and 
(5) of Pub. L. 99-121 (99 Stat. 501, 511), the reference to ``19 years'' 
in paragraph (c)(4)(ii) and (7)(v) shall be replaced with ``18 years'' 
and the references to ``19-years real property'' in paragraph (c)(4)(ii) 
shall be replaced with ``18-year real property.''
    (iii) Transition rule concerning external wall definition. 
Notwithstanding the definition of external wall contained in paragraph 
(b)(3)(ii) of this section, in any case in which the written plans and 
specifications for a rehabilitation were substantially completed on or 
before June 28, 1985, and the building being rehabilitated would fail to 
meet the requirement of paragraph (b)(1)(iii) of this section if the 
definition of external wall in paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of

[[Page 343]]

this section were used, the term ``external wall'' shall be defined as a 
wall, including its supporting elements, with one face exposed to the 
weather or earth, and a common wall shall not be treated as an external 
wall. See paragraph (b)(2)(v) of this section for the definition of 
written plans and specifications.
    (iv) Transition rules concerning amendments made by the Tax Reform 
Act of 1986--(A) In general. Except as otherwise provided in section 
251(d) of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 and this paragraph (a)(2)(iv), the 
amendments made by section 251 of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 shall apply 
to property placed in service after December 31, 1986, in taxable years 
ending after that date, regardless of when the rehabilitation 
expenditures attributable to such property were incurred. If property 
attributable to qualified rehabilitation expenditures is incurred with 
respect to a rehabilitation to a building placed in service in segments 
or phases and some segments are placed in service before January 1, 
1987, and the remaining segments are placed in service after December 
31, 1986, the amendments under the Tax Reform Act would not apply to the 
property placed in service before January 1, 1987, but would apply to 
the segments placed in service after December 31, 1986, unless one of 
the transition rules in paragraph (a)(2)(iv) (B) or (C) of this section 
applies.
    (B) General transition rule. The amendments made by sections 251 and 
201 of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 shall not apply to property that 
qualifies under section 251(d) (2), (3), or (4) of the Tax Reform Act of 
1986. Property qualifies for the general transition rule in section 
251(d)(2) of the Act if such property is placed in service before 
January 1, 1994, and if such property is placed in service as part of--
    (1) A rehabilitation that was completed pursuant to a written 
contract that was binding on March 1, 1986, or
    (2) A rehabilitation incurred in connection with property (including 
any leasehold interest) acquired before March 2, 1986, or acquired on or 
after such date pursuant to a written contract that was binding on March 
1, 1986, if--
    (i) Parts 1 and 2 of the Historic Preservation Certificate 
Application were filed with the Department of the Interior (or its 
designee) before March 2, 1986, or
    (ii) The lesser of $1,000,000 or 5 percent of the cost of the 
rehabilitation is incurred before March 2, 1986, or is required to be 
incurred pursuant to a written contract which was binding on March 1, 
1986.
    (C) Specific rehabilitations. See section 251(d) (3) and (4) of the 
Tax Reform Act of 1986 for additional rehabilitations that are exempted 
from the amendments made by sections 251 and 201 of the Tax Reform Act 
of 1986.
    (b) Definition of qualified rehabilitated building-- (1) In general. 
The term ``qualified rehabilitated building'' means any building and its 
structural components--
    (i) That has been substantially rehabilitated (within the meaning of 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section) for the taxable year,
    (ii) That was placed in service (within the meaning of Sec. 1.46-
3(d)) as a building by any person before the beginning of the 
rehabilitation, and
    (iii) That meets the applicable existing external wall retention 
test or the existing external wall and internal structural framework 
retention test in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section.

The requirement in paragraph (b)(1)(iii) of this section does not apply 
to a certified historic structure. See paragraphs (b) (4) and (5) of 
this section for additional requirements related to the definition of a 
qualified rehabilitated building.

    (2) Substantially rehabilitated building--(i) Substantial 
rehabilitation test. A building shall be treated as having been 
substantially rehabilitated for a taxable year only if the qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures (as defined in paragraph (c) of this 
section) incurred during any 24-month period selected by the taxpayer 
ending with or within the taxable year exceed the greater of--
    (A) The adjusted basis of the building (and its structural 
components), or (B) $5,000.
    (ii) Date to determine adjusted basis of the building--(A) In 
general. The adjusted basis of the building (and its

[[Page 344]]

structural components) shall be determined as of the beginning of the 
first day of the 24-month period selected by the taxpayer or the first 
day of the taxpayer's holding period of the building (within the meaning 
of section 1250(e)), whichever is later. For purposes of determining the 
holding period under section 1250(e), any reconstruction that is part of 
the rehabilitation shall be disregarded.
    (B) Special rules. In the event that a building is not owned by the 
taxpayer, the adjusted basis of the building shall be determined as of 
the date that would have been used if the owner had been the taxpayer. 
The adjusted basis of a building that is being rehabilitated by a 
taxpayer other than the owner shall thus be determined as of the 
beginning of the first day of the 24-month period selected by the 
taxpayer or the first day of the owner's holding period, whichever is 
later. Therefore, if a building that is being rehabilitated by a lessee 
is sold subject to the lease prior to the date that the lessee has 
substantially rehabilitated the building, the lessee's adjusted basis is 
determined as of the beginning of the first day of the new lessor's 
holding period or the beginning of the first day of the 24-month period 
selected by the lessee (the taxpayer), whichever is later. If, 
therefore, the first day of the new lessor's holding period were later 
than the first day of the 24-month period selected by the lessee (the 
taxpayer), the lessee's adjusted basis for purposes of the substantial 
rehabilitation test would be the same as the adjusted basis of the new 
lessor as determined under paragraph (b)(2)(vii) of this section. If a 
building is sold after the date that a lessee has substantially 
rehabilitated the building with respect to the original lessor's 
adjusted basis, however, the lessee's basis may be determined as of the 
first day of the 24-month period selected by the lessee or the first day 
of the original lessor's holding period, whichever is later, and the 
transfer of the building will not affect the adjusted basis for purposes 
of the substantial rehabilitation test. The preceding sentence shall not 
apply, however, if the building is sold to the lessee or a related party 
within the meaning of section 267(b) or section 707(b)(1).
    (iii) Adjusted basis of the building--(A) In general. The term 
``adjusted basis of the building'' means the aggregate adjusted basis 
(within the meaning of section 1011(a)) in the building (and its 
structural components) of all the parties who have an interest in the 
building.
    (B) Special rules. In the case of a building that is leased to one 
or more tenants in whole or inpart, the adjusted basis of the building 
is determined by adding the adjusted basis of the owner (lessor) in the 
building to the adjusted basis of the lessee (or lessees) in the 
leasehold and any leasehold improvements that are structural components 
of the building. Similarly, in the case of a building that is divided 
into condominium units, the adjusted basis of the building means the 
aggregate adjusted basis of all of the respective condominium owners 
(including the basis of any lessee in the leasehold and leasehold 
improvements) in the building (and its structural components). If the 
adjusted basis of a building would be determined in whole or in part by 
reference to the adjusted basis of a person or persons other than the 
taxpayer (e.g., a rehabilitation by a lessee) and the taxpayer is unable 
to obtain the required information, the taxpayer must establish by clear 
and convincing evidence that the adjusted basis of such person or 
persons in the building on the date specified in paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of 
this section is an amount that is less than the amount of qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures incurred by the taxpayer. If no such amount 
can be so established, the adjusted basis of the building will be deemed 
to be the fair market value of the building on the relevant date. For 
purposes of determining the adjusted basis of a building, the portion of 
the adjusted basis of a building that is allocable to an addition 
(within the meaning of paragraph (b)(4)(ii) of this section) to the 
building that does not meet the age requirement in paragraph (b)(4)(i) 
of this section shall be disregarded. (See paragraph (b)(2)(vii) of this 
section for the rule applicable to the determination of the adjusted 
basis of a building when qualified rehabilitation expenditures are 
treated as incurred by the taxpayer.)

[[Page 345]]

    (iv) Rehabilitation. Rehabilitation includes renovation, 
restoration, or reconstruction of a building, but does not include an 
enlargement (within the meaning of paragraph (c)(10) of this section) of 
new construction. The determination of whether expenditures are 
attributable to the rehabilitation of an existing building or to new 
construction shall be based upon all the facts and circumstances.
    (v) Special rule for phased rehabilitation. In the case of any 
rehabilitation that may reasonably be expected to be completed in phases 
set forth in written architectural plans and specifications completed 
before the physical work on the rehabilitation begins, paragraphs (b)(2) 
(i), (ii), and (vii) of this section shall be applied by substituting 
``60-month period'' for ``24-month period.'' A rehabilitation may 
reasonably be expected to be completed in phases if it consists of two 
or more distinct stages of development. The determination of whether a 
rehabilitation consists of distinct stages and therefore may reasonably 
be expected to be completed in phases shall be made on the basis of all 
the relevant facts and circumstances in existence before physical work 
on the rehabilitation begins. For purposes of this paragraph and 
paragraph (a)(2)(iii) of this section, written plans that describe 
generally all phases of the rehabilitation process shall be treated as 
written architectural plans and specifications. Such written plans are 
not required to contain detailed working drawings or detailed 
specifications of the materials to be used. In addition, the taxpayer 
may include a description of work to be done by lessees in the written 
plans. For example, where the owner of a vacant four story building 
plans to rehabilitate two floors of the building and plans to require, 
as a condition of any lease, that tenants of the other two floors must 
rehabilitate those floors, the requirements of this paragrpah (b)(2)(v) 
shall be met if the owner provides written plans for the rehabilitation 
work to be done by the owner and a description of the rehabilitation 
work that the tenants will be required to complete. The work required of 
the tenants may be described in the written plans in terms of minimum 
specifications (e.g., as to lighting, wiring, materials, appearance) 
that must be met by such tenants. See paragraph (b)(6)(i) of this 
section for the definition of physical work on a rehabilitation.
    (vi) Treatment of expenses incurred by persons who have an interest 
in the building. For purposes of the substantial rehabilitation test in 
paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section, the taxpayer may take into account 
qualified rehabilitation expenditures incurred during the same 
rehabilitation process by any other person who has an interest in the 
building. Thus, for example, to determine whether a building has been 
substantially rehabilitated, a lessee may include the expenditures of 
the lessor and of other lessees; a condominium owner may include the 
expenditures incurred by other condominium owners; and an owner may 
include the expenditures of the lessees.
    (vii) Special rules when qualified rehabilitation expenditures are 
treated as incurred by the taxpayer. In the case where qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures are treated as having been incurred by a 
taxpayer under paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of this section, the transferee 
shall be treated as having incurred the expenditures incurred by the 
transferor on the date that the transferor incurred the expenditures 
within the meaning of paragraph (c)(3)(i) of this section. For purposes 
of the substantial rehabilitation test in paragrpah (b)(2)(i) of this 
section, the transferee's adjusted basis in the building shall be 
determined as of the beginning of the first day of a 24-month period, or 
the first day of the transferee's holding period, whichever is later, as 
provided in paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section. The transferee's basis 
as of the first day of the transferee's holding period for purposes of 
the substantial rehabilitation test in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this 
section, however, shall be considered to be equal to the transferee's 
basis in the building on such date less--
    (A) The amount of any qualified rehabilitation expenditures incurred 
(or treated as having been incurred) by the transferor during the 24-
month period that are treated as having been incurred by the transferee 
under paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of this section, and

[[Page 346]]

    (B) The amount of qualified rehabilitation expenditures incurred 
before the transfer and during the 24-month period by any other person 
who has an interest in the building (e.g., a lessee of the transferor). 
The preceding sentence shall not apply, however, unless the transferee's 
basis in the building is determined with reference to (1) the 
transferee's cost of the building (including the rehabilitation 
expenditures), (2) the transferor's basis in the building (where such 
basis includes the amount of the expenditures), or (3) any other amount 
that includes the cost of the rehabilitation expenditures. In the event 
that the transferee's basis is determined with reference to an amount 
not described above (e.g., transferee's basis in one building is 
determined with reference to the transferee's basis in another building 
under section 1031(d)), the amount of the expenditures incurred by the 
transferor and treated as having been incurred by the transferee are not 
deducted from the transferee's basis for purposes of the substantial 
rehabilitation test. If a transferee's basis is determined under section 
1014, any expenditures incurred by the decedent within the measuring 
period that are treated as having been incurred by the transferee under 
paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of this section shall decrease the transferee's 
basis for purposes of the substantial rehabilitation test.
    (viii) Statement of adjusted basis, measuring period, and qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures. In the case of any tax return filed after 
August 27, 1985, on which an investment tax credit for property, 
described in section 48(a)(1)(E) is claimed, the taxpayer shall indicate 
by way of a marginal notation on, or a supplemental statement attached 
to, Form 3468--
    (A) The beginning and ending dates for the measuring period selected 
by the taxpayer under section 48(g)(1)(C)(i) and paragraph (b)(2) of 
this section,
    (B) The adjusted basis of the building (within the meaning of 
paragraph (b)(2) (iii) or (vii) of this section) as of the beginning of 
such measuring period, and
    (C) The amount of qualified rehabilitation expenditures incurred, 
and treated as incurred, respectively, during such measuring period.

Furthermore, for returns filed after August 27, 1985, if the adjusted 
basis of the building for purposes of the substantial rehabilitation 
test is determined in whole or in part by reference to the adjusted 
basis of a person, or persons, other than the taxpayer (e.g., a 
rehabilitation by a lessee), the taxpayer must attach to the Form 3468 
filed with the tax return on which the credit is claimed a statement 
addressed to the District Director, signed by such third party, that 
states the first day of the third party's holding period and the amount 
of the adjusted basis of such third party in the building at the 
beginning of the measuring period or the first day of the holding 
period, whichever is later. If the taxpayer is unable to obtain the 
required information, that fact should be indicated and the taxpayer 
should state the manner in which the adjusted basis was determined and, 
if different, the fair market value of the building on the relevant 
date.
    (ix) Partnerships and S corporations. If a building is owned by a 
partnership (i.e., the building is partnership property) or an S 
corporation, the substantial rehabilitation test shall be determined at 
the entity level. Thus, the entity shall compare the amount of qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures incurred during the measuring period against 
its basis in the building at the beginning of its holding period or the 
beginning of its measuring period, whichever is later. (See section 
1223(2) for rules concerning the determination of a partnership's 
holding period in the case of a contribution of property to the 
partnership meeting the requirements of section 721.) The adjusted basis 
of the building to a partnership shall be determined by taking into 
account any adjustments to the basis of the building made under section 
743 and section 734. Any adjustments to the building's basis that are 
made under section 743 or section 734 after the beginning of the 
partnership's holding period, but before the end of the measuring 
period, shall be deemed for purposes of the substantial rehabilitation 
test to have been made on the first day of the partnership's holding 
period.

[[Page 347]]

However, in such case, the partnership's basis in the building shall be 
reduced by the amount of qualified rehabilitation expenditures incurred 
by the partnership. In the case of any tax return filed after January 9, 
1989 on which a credit is claimed by a partner or a shareholder of an S 
corporation for rehabilitation expenditures incurred by a partnership or 
an S corporation, the partner or shareholder shall indicate on the Form 
3468 on which the credit is claimed the name, address, and 
identification number of the partnership or S corporation that incurred 
the rehabilitation expenditures, and the partnership or S corporation 
shall, by way of a marginal notation on or a supplemental statement 
attached to the entity's return, provide the information required by 
paragraph (b)(2)(viii) of this section.
    (x) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
the substantial rehabilitation test in this paragraph (b)(2):

    Example 1. Assume that A, a calendar year taxpayer, purchases a 
building for $140,000 on January 1, 1982, incurs qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures in the amount of $48,000 (at the rate of 
$4,000 per month) in 1982, $100,000 in 1983, and $20,000 (at the rate of 
$2,000 per month) in the first ten months of 1984, and places the 
rehabilitated building in service on October 31, 1984. Assume that A did 
not have written architectural plans and specifications describing a 
phased rehabilitation within the meaning of paragraph (b)(2)(v) of this 
section in existence prior to the beginning of physical work on the 
rehabilitation. For purposes of the substantial rehabilitation test in 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section, A may select any 24-consecutive-month 
measuring period that ends in 1984, the taxable year in which the 
rehabilitated building was placed in service. Assume that on A's 1984 
return, A selects a measuring period beginning on February 1, 1982, and 
ending on January 31, 1984, and specifies that A's basis in the building 
(within the meaning of section 1011(a)) was $144,000 on February 1, 1982 
($140,000+$4,000). (The $4,000 of rehabilitation expenditures incurred 
during January 1982 are included in A's basis under section 1011 even 
though such property has not been placed in service.) The amount of 
qualified rehabilitation expenditures incurred during the measuring 
period was $146,000 ($44,000 from February 1 to December 31, 1982, plus 
$100,000 in 1983, plus $2,000 in January 1984). The building shall be 
treated as ``substantially rehabilitated'' within the meaning of this 
paragraph (b)(2) for A's 1984 taxable year because the $146,000 of 
expenditures incurred by A during the measuring period exceeded A's 
adjusted basis of $144,000 at the beginning of the period. If the other 
requirements of section 48(g)(1) and this paragraph are met, the 
building is treated as a qualified rehabilitated building, and A can 
treat as qualified rehabilitation expenditures the amount of $168,000 
(i.e., $146,000 of expenditures incurred during the measuring period, 
$4,000 of expenditures incurred prior to the beginning of the measuring 
period as part of the rehabilitation process, and $18,000 of 
expenditures incurred after the measuring period during the taxable year 
within which the measuring period ends (See paragraph (c)(6) of this 
section.)). The result would generally be the same if the property 
attributable to the rehabilitation expenditures was placed in service as 
the expenditures were incurred, but A would have $148,000 of qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures for 1983 and $20,000 of qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures for 1984. (See paragraph (f)(2) of this 
section).

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example 1, except that 
additional rehabilitation expenditures are incurred after the portion of 
the basis of the building attributable to qualified rehabilitation 
expenditures was placed in service on October 31, 1984. Such 
expenditures are incurred through the end of 1984 and in 1985 when the 
portion of the basis attributable to the additional expenditures is 
placed in service. The fact that the building qualified as a 
substantially rehabilitated building for A's 1984 taxable year has no 
effect on whether the building is a qualified rehabilitated building for 
property placed in service in A's 1985 taxable year. In order to 
determine whether the building is a qualified rehabilitated building for 
A's 1985 taxable year, A must select a measuring period that ends in 
1985 and compare the expenditures incurred within that period with the 
adjusted basis as of the beginning of the period. Solely for the purpose 
of determining whether the building was substantially rehabilitated for 
A's 1985 taxable year, expenditures incurred during 1983 and 1984, even 
though considered in determining whether the building was substantially 
rehabilitated in 1984, may also be used to determine whether the 
building was substantially rehabilitated for A's 1985 taxable year, 
provided the expenditures were incurred during any 24-month measuring 
period selected by A that ends in 1985.

    Example 3. (i) Assume the B purchases a building for $100,000 on 
January 1, 1982, and leases the building to C who rehabilitates the 
building. Assume that C, a calendar year taxpayer, places the property 
with respect to which rehabilitation expenditures were made in service 
in 1982 and selects December 31, 1982, as the end of the measuring 
period for purposes of the substantial rehabilitation

[[Page 348]]

test. The beginning of the measuring period is January 2, 1982, the 
beginning of B's holding period under section 1250(e), and the adjusted 
basis of the building is $100,000. Accordingly, if C incurred more than 
$100,000 of qualified rehabilitation expenditures during 1982, the 
building would be substantially rehabilitated within the meaning of 
paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section.
    (ii) Assume the facts of example 3(i), except that after C begins 
physical work on the rehabilitation, but before C incurs $100,000 of 
expenditures, D acquires the building, subject to C's lease, from B for 
$200,000. D's holding period under section 1250(e) begins on the day 
after D acquired the building, and C's adjusted basis for purposes of 
the substantial rehabilitation test is $200,000, less the amount of 
expenditures incurred by C before the transfer. (See paragraphs (b)(2) 
(ii) and (vii) of this section.) Accordingly, if C incurred more than 
$200,000 (less the amount of expenditures incurred prior to the 
transfer) of qualified rehabilitation expenditures during 1982, the 
building would be substantially rehabilitated within the meaning of 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section. Under paragraph (b)(2)(ii)(B) of this 
section, however, C's adjusted basis for purposes of the substantial 
rehabilitation test would be $100,000 if C had substantially 
rehabilitated the building (i.e., incurred more than $100,000 in 
rehabilitation expenditures) prior to B's sale to D.

    Example 4. E owns a building with a basis of $10,000 and E incurs 
$5,000 of rehabilitation expenditures. Before completing the 
rehabilitation project, E sells the building to F for $30,000. Assume 
that F is treated under paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of this section as having 
incurred the $5,000 of rehabilitation expenditures actually incurred by 
E. Because F's basis in the building is determined under section 1011 
with reference to F's $30,000 cost of the building (which includes the 
property attributable to E's rehabilitation expenditures), F's basis for 
purposes of the substantial rehabilitation test is $25,000 ($30,000 cost 
basis less $5,000 rehabilitation expenditures treated as if incurred by 
F). (See paragraph (b)(2)(vii) of this section.) F would thus be 
required to incur more than $20,000 of rehabilitation expenditures (in 
addition to the $5,000 incurred by E and treated as having been incurred 
by F) during a measuring period selected by F to satisfy the substantial 
rehabilitation test.

    Example 5. G owns Building I with a basis of $10,000 and a fair 
market value of $20,000. H owns Building II with a basis of $5,000 and a 
fair market value of $20,000, with respect to which H has incurred 
$1,000 of rehabilitation expenditures. G and H exchange their buildings 
in a transaction that qualifies for nonrecognition treatment under 
section 1031. Assume that G is treated under paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of 
this section as having incurred $1,000 of rehabilitation expenditures. 
G's basis in Building II, computed under section 1031(d), is $10,000. 
G's basis in Building II is not determined with reference to (A) the 
cost of Building II, (B) H's basis in Building II (including the cost of 
the rehabilitation expenditures) or (C) any other amount that includes 
the cost of expenditures, but is instead determined with reference to 
G's basis in other property (Building I). Therefore, G's basis in 
Building II for purposes of the substantial rehabilitation test is not 
reduced by the $1,000 of rehabilitation expenditures treated as if 
incurred by G. (See paragraph (b)(2)(vii) of this section.) Accordingly, 
G's basis in Building II for purposes of the substantial rehabilitation 
test is $10,000, and G must incur additional rehabilitation expenditures 
in excess of $9,000 within a measuring period selected by G to satisfy 
the test.

    (3) Retention of existing external walls and internal structural 
framework--(i) In general--(A) Property placed in service after December 
31, 1986. Except in the case of property that qualifies for the 
transition rules in paragraphs (a)(2)(iv) (B) and (C) of this section, 
in the case of property that is placed in service after December 31, 
1986, a building (other than a certified historic structure) meets the 
requirement in paragraph (b)(1)(iii) of this section only if in the 
rehabilitation process--
    (1) 50 percent or more of the existing external walls of such 
building are retained in place as external walls;
    (2) 75 percent or more of the existing external walls of such 
building are retained in place as internal or external walls; and
    (3) 75 percent or more of the internal structural framework of such 
building (as defined in paragraph (b)(3)(iii) of this section) is 
retained in place.
    (B) Expenditures incurred before January 1, 1984, for property 
placed in service before January 1, 1987. With respect to rehabilitation 
expenditures incurred before January 1, 1984, for property that is 
either placed in service before January 1, 1987, or that qualifies for 
the transition rules in paragraph (a)(2)(iv) (B) or (C) of this section, 
a building meets the requirement in paragraph (b)(1)(iii) of this 
section only if 75 percent or more of the existing external walls of the 
building are retained in place as external walls in the rehabilitation 
process. If an addition to a building is not treated as part of a

[[Page 349]]

qualified rehabilitated building because it does not meet the 30-year 
requirement in paragraph (b)(4)(i)(B) of this section, then the external 
walls of such addition shall not be considered to be existing external 
walls of the building for purposes of section 48(g)(1)(A)(iii) (as in 
effect prior to enactment of the Tax Reform Act of 1986), and this 
section.
    (C) Expenditures incurred after December 31, 1983, for property 
placed in service before January 1, 1987. With respect to expenditures 
incurred after December 31, 1983, for property that is either placed in 
service before January 1, 1987, or that qualifies for the transition 
rules in paragraph (a)(2)(iv) (B) or (C) of this section, the 
requirement of paragraph (b)(1)(iii) of this section is satisfied only 
if in the rehabilitation process either the existing external wall 
retention requirement in paragraph (b)(3)(i) (B) of this section is 
satisfied, or:
    (1) 50 percent or more of the existing external walls of the 
building are retained in place as external walls,
    (2) 75 percent or more of the existing external walls are retained 
in place as internal or external walls, and
    (3) 75 percent or more of the existing internal structural framework 
of such building is retained in place.
    (D) Area of external walls and internal structural framework. The 
determinations required by paragraphs (b)(3)(i) (A), (B), and (C) of 
this section shall be based upon the area of the external walls or 
internal structural framework that is retained in place compared to the 
total area of each prior to the rehabilitation. The area of the existing 
external walls and internal structural framework of a building shall be 
determined prior to any destruction, modification, or construction of 
external walls or internal structural framework that is undertaken by 
any party in anticipation of the rehabilitation.
    (ii) Definition of external wall. For purposes of this paragraph 
(b), a wall includes both the supporting elements of the wall and the 
nonsupporting elements, (e.g., a curtain, windows or doors) of the wall. 
Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph (b)(3), the term 
```external wall'' includes any wall that has one face exposed to the 
weather, earth, or an abutting wall of an adjacent building. The term 
``external wall'' also includes a shared wall (i.e., a single wall 
shared with an adjacent building), generally referred to as a ``party 
wall,'' provided that the shared wall has no windows or doors in any 
portion of the wall that does not have one face exposed to the weather, 
earth, or an abutting wall. In general, the term ``external wall'' 
includes only those external walls that form part of the outline or 
perimeter of the building or that surround an uncovered courtyard. 
Therefore, the walls of an uncovered internal shaft, designed solely to 
bring light or air into the center of a building, which are completely 
surrounded by external walls of the building and which enclose space not 
designated for occupancy or other use by people (other than for 
maintenance or emergency), are not considered external walls. Thus, for 
example, a wall of a light well in the center of a building is not an 
external wall. However, walls surrounding an outdoor space which is 
usable by people, such as a courtyard, are external walls.
    (iii) Definition of internal structural framework. For purposes of 
this section, the term ``internal structural framework'' includes all 
load-bearing internal walls and any other internal structural supports, 
including the columns, girders, beams, trusses, spandrels, and all other 
members that are essential to the stability of the building.
    (iv) Retained in place. An existing external wall is retained in 
place if the supporting elements of the wall are retained in place. An 
existing external wall is not retained in place if the supporting 
elements of the wall are replaced by new supporting elements. An 
external wall is retained in place, however, if the supporting elements 
are reinforced in the rehabilitation, provided that such supporting 
elements of the external wall are retained in place. An external wall 
also is retained in place if it is covered (e.g., with new siding). 
Moreover, an external wall is retained in place if the existing curtain 
is replaced with a new curtain, provided that the structural framework 
that provides for the support of the existing

[[Page 350]]

curtain is retained in place. An external wall is retained in place 
notwithstanding that the existing doors and windows in the wall are 
modified, eliminated, or replaced. An external wall is retained in place 
if the wall is disassembled and reassembled, provided the same 
supporting elements are used when the wall is reassembled and the 
configuration of the external walls of the building after the 
rehabilitation is the same as it was before the rehabilitation process 
commenced. Thus, for example, a brick wall is considered retained in 
place even though the original bricks are removed (for cleaning, etc.) 
and replaced to form the wall. The principles of this paragraph 
(b)(3)(iv) shall also apply to determine whether internal structural 
framework of the building is retained in place.
    (v) Effect of additions. If an existing external wall is converted 
into an internal wall (i.e., a wall that is not an external wall), the 
wall is not retained in place as an external wall for purposes of this 
section.
    (vi) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph (b)(3) may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Taxpayer A rehabilitated a building all of the walls of 
which consisted of wood siding attached to gypsum board sheets (which 
covered the supporting elements of the wall, i.e., studs). A covered the 
existing wood siding with aluminum siding as part of a rehabilitation 
that otherwise qualified under this subparagraph. The addition of the 
aluminum siding does not affect the status of the existing external 
walls as external walls and they would be considered to have been 
retained in place.

    Example 2. Taxpayer B rehabilitated a building, the external walls 
of which had a masonry curtain. The masonry on the wall face was 
replaced with a glass curtain. The steel beam and girders supporting the 
existing masonry curtain were retained in place. The walls of the 
building are considered to be retained in place as external walls, 
notwithstanding the replacement of the curtain.

    Example 3. Taxpayer C rehabilitated a building that has two external 
walls measuring 75' x 20' and two other external walls measuring 100' x 
20'. C demolished one of the larger walls, including its supporting 
elements and constructed a new wall. Because one of the larger walls 
represents more than 25 percent of the area of the building's external 
walls, C has not satisfied the requirements that 75 percent of the 
existing external walls must be retained in place as either internal or 
external walls. If however, C had not demolished the wall, but had 
converted it into an internal wall (e.g., by building a new external 
wall), the building would satisfy the external wall requirements.

    Example 4. The facts are the same as in example 3, except that C 
does not tear down any walls, but builds an addition that results in one 
of the smaller walls becoming an internal wall. In addition, C enlarged 
8 of the existing windows on one of the larger walls, increasing them 
from a size of 3' x 4' to 6' x 8'. Since the smaller wall accounts for 
less than 25 percent of the total wall area, C has satisfied the 
requirement that 75 percent of the existing external walls must be 
retained in place as external walls in the rehabilitation process. The 
enlargement of the existing windows on the larger wall does not affect 
its status as an external wall.

    Example 5. Taxpayer D rehabilitated a building that was in the 
center of a row of three buildings. The building being rehabilitated by 
D shares its side walls with the buildings on either side. The shared 
walls measure 100' x 20' and the rear and front walls measure 75' x 20'. 
As part of a rehabilitation, D tears down and replaces the front wall. 
Because the shared walls as well as the front and back walls are 
considered external walls and the front wall accounts for less than 25 
percent of the total external wall area (including the shared walls), D 
has satisfied the requirement that 75 percent of the existing external 
walls must be retained in place as external walls in the rehabilitation 
process.

    (4) Age requirement--(i) In general--(A) Property placed in service 
after December 31, 1986. Except in the case of property that qualifies 
for the transition rules in paragraph (a)(2)(iv) (B) or (C) of this 
section, a building other than a certified historic structure shall not 
be considered a qualified rehabilitated building unless the building was 
first placed in service (within the meaning of     Sec. 1.46-3(d)) 
before January 1, 1936.
    (B) Property placed in service before January 1, 1987, and property 
qualifying under a transition rule. In the case of property placed in 
service before January 1, 1987, and property that qualifies under the 
transition rules in paragraph (a)(2)(iv) (B) or (C) of this section, a 
building other than a certified historic structure is considered a 
qualified rehabilitated building only if a period of at least 30 years 
has elasped between the date physical work on the rehabilitation of the 
building began and the

[[Page 351]]

date the building was first placed in service (within the meaning of 
Sec. 1.46-3(d)) as a building by any person.
    (ii) Additions. A building that was first placed in service before 
1936 in the case described in paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A) of this section, or 
at least 30 years before physical work on the rehabilitation began in 
the case described in paragraph (b)(4)(i)(B) of this section, will not 
be disqualified because additions to such building have been added since 
1936 in the case described in paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A) of this section, or 
are less than 30 years old in the case described in paragraph 
(b)(4)(i)(B) of this section. Such additions, however, shall not be 
treated as part of the qualified rehabilitated building. The term 
``addition'' means any construction that resulted in any portion of an 
external wall becoming an internal wall, that resulted in an increase in 
the height of the building, or that increased the volume of the 
building.
    (iii) Vacant periods. The determinations required by paragraph 
(b)(4)(i) of this section include periods during which a building was 
vacant or devoted to a personal use and is computed without regard to 
the number of owners or the identify of owners during the period.
    (5) Location at which the rehabilitation occurs. A building, other 
than a certified historic structure is not a qualified rehabilitated 
building unless it has been located where it is rehabilitated since 
before 1936 in the case described in paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A) of this 
section. Similarly, in the case described in paragraph (b)(4)(i)(B) of 
this section, a building, other than a certified historic structure, is 
not a qualified rehabilitation building unless it has been located where 
it is rehabilitated for the thirty-year period immediately preceding the 
date physical work on the rehabilitation began in the case of a ``30-
year building'' or the forty-year period immediately preceding the date 
physical work on the rehabilitation began in the case of a ``40-year 
building.'' (See     Sec. 1.46-1(q)(1)(iii) for the definitions of ``30-
year building'' and ``40-year building.'')
    (6) Definition and special rule--(i) Physical work on a 
rehabilitation. For purposes of this section, ``physical work on a 
rehabilitation'' begins when actual construction, or destruction in 
preparation for construction, begins. The term ``physical work on a 
rehabilitation,'' however, does not include preliminary activities such 
as planning, designing, securing financing, exploring, researching, 
developing plans and specifications, or stabilizing a building to 
prevent deterioration (e.g., placing boards over broken windows).
    (ii) Special rule for adjoining buildings that are combined. For 
purposes of this paragraph (b), if as part of a rehabilitation process 
two or more adjoining buildings are combined and placed in service as a 
single building after the rehabilitation process, then, at the election 
of the taxpayer, all of the requirements for a qualified rehabilitated 
building in section 48(g)(1) and this section may be applied to the 
constituent adjoining buildings in the aggregate. For example, if such 
requirements are applied in the aggregate, any shared walls or abutting 
walls between the constituent buildings that would otherwise be treated 
as external walls (within the meaning of paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section) would not be treated as external walls of the building, and the 
substantial rehabilitation test in paragraph (b)(2) of this section 
would be applied to the aggregate expenditures with respect to all of 
the constituent buildings and to the aggregate adjusted basis of all of 
the constituent buildings. A taxpayer shall elect the special rule of 
this paragraph (b)(6)(ii) for adjoining buildings by indicating by way 
of a marginal notation on, or a supplemental statement attached to, the 
Form 3468 on which a credit is first claimed for qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures with respect to such buildings that such 
buildings are a single qualified rehabilitated building because of the 
application of the special rule in this paragraph (b)(6)(ii).
    (c) Definition of qualified rehabilitation expenditures--(1) In 
general. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (c)(7) of this 
section, the term ``qualified rehabilitation expenditure'' means any 
amount that is--
    (i) Properly chargeable to capital account (as described in 
paragraph (c)(2) of this section),

[[Page 352]]

    (ii) Incurred by the taxpayer after December 31, 1981 (as described 
in paragraph (c)(3) of this section),
    (iii) For property for which depreciation is allowable under section 
168 and which is real property described in paragraph (c)(4) of this 
section, and
    (iv) Made in connection with the rehabilitation of a qualified 
rehabilitated building (as described in paragraph (c)(5) of this 
section).
    (2) Chargeable to capital account. For purposes of paragraph (c)(1) 
of this section, amounts are chargeable to capital account if they are 
properly includible in computing basis of real property under Sec. 1.46-
3(c). Amounts treated as an expense and deducted in the year they are 
paid or incurred or amounts that are otherwise not added to the basis of 
real property described in paragraph (c)(4) of this section do not 
qualify. For purposes of this paragraph (c), amounts incurred for 
architectural and engineering fees, site survey fees, legal expenses, 
insurance premiums, development fees, and other construction related 
costs, satisfy the requirement of this paragraph (c)(2) if they are 
added to the basis of real property that is described in paragraph 
(c)(4) of this section. Construction period interest and taxes that are 
amortized under section 189 (as in effect prior to its repeal by the Tax 
Reform Act of 1986) do not satisfy the requirement of this paragraph 
(c)(2). If, however, such interest and taxes are treated by the taxpayer 
as chargeable to capital account with respect to property described in 
paragraph (c)(4) of this section, they shall be treated in the same 
manner as other costs described in this paragraph (c)(2). Any 
construction period interest or taxes or other fees or costs incurred in 
connection with the acquisition of a building, any interest in a 
building, or land, are subject to paragraph (c)(7)(ii) of this section. 
See paragraph (c)(9) of this section for additional rules concerning 
interest.
    (3) Incurred by the taxpayer--(i) In general. Qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures are incurred by the taxpayer for purposes of 
this section on the date such expenditures would be considered incurred 
under an accrual method of accounting, regardless of the method of 
accounting used by the taxpayer with respect to other items of income 
and expense. If qualified rehabilitation expenditures are treated as 
having been incurred by a taxpayer under paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of this 
section, the taxpayer shall be treated as having incurred the 
expenditures on the date such expenditures were incurred by the 
transferor.
    (ii) Qualified rehabilitation expenditures treated as incurred by 
the taxpayer--(A) Where rehabilitation expenditures are incurred with 
respect to a building by a person (or persons) other than the taxpayer 
and the taxpayer subsequently acquires the building, or a portion of the 
building to which some or all of the expenditures are allocable (e.g., a 
condominium unit to which rehabilitation expenditures have been 
allocated), the taxpayer acquiring such property shall be treated as 
having incurred the rehabilitation expenditures actually incurred by the 
transferor (or treated as incurred by the transferor under this 
paragraph (c)(3)(ii)) allocable to the acquired property, provided 
that--
    (1) The building, or the portion of the building, acquired by the 
taxpayer was not used (or, if later, was not placed in service (as 
defined in paragraph (f)(2) of this section)) after the rehabilitation 
expenditures were incurred and prior to the date of acquisition, and
    (2) No credit with respect to such qualified rehabilitation 
expenditures is claimed by anyone other than the taxpayer acquiring the 
property. For purposes of this paragraph (c)(3)(ii), use shall mean 
actual use, whether personal or business. In the case of a building that 
is divided into condominium units, expenditures attributable to the 
common elements shall be allocable to the individual condominium units 
in accordance with the principles of paragraph (c)(10)(ii) of this 
section. Furthermore, for purpose of this paragraph (c)(3)(ii), a 
condominium unit's share of the common elements shall not be considered 
to have been used (or placed in service) prior to the time that the 
particular condominium unit is used.
    (B) The amount of rehabilitation expenditures described in paragraph 
(c)(3)(ii)(A) of this section treated as

[[Page 353]]

incurred by the taxpayer under this paragraph shall be the lesser of--
    (1) The amount of rehabilitation expenditures incurred before the 
date on which the taxpayer acquired the building (or portion thereof) to 
which the rehabilitation expenditures are attributable, or
    (2) The portion of the taxpayer's cost or other basis for the 
property that is properly allocable to the property resulting from the 
rehabilitation expenditures described in paragraph (c)(3)(ii)(B)(1) of 
this section.
    (C) For purposes of this paragraph (c)(3)(ii), the amount of 
rehabilitation expenditures treated as incurred by the taxpayer under 
this paragraph (c) shall not be treated as costs for the acquisition of 
a building. The portion of the cost of acquiring a building (or an 
interest therein) that is not treated under this paragraph as qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures incurred by the taxpayer is not treated as 
section 38 property in the hands of the acquiring taxpayer. (See 
paragraph (c)(7)(ii) of this section.) (See paragraph (b)(2)(vii) for 
rules concerning the application of the substantial rehabilitation test 
when expenditures are treated as incurred by the taxpayer.)
    (iii) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph (c) may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. In 1981, A, a taxpayer using the cash receipts and 
disbursements method of accounting, commenced the rehabilitation of a 
30-year old building. In June 1981, A signed a contract with a plumbing 
contractor for replacement of the plumbing in the building. A agreed to 
pay the contractor as soon as the work was completed. The work was 
completed in December 1981, but A did not pay the amount due until 
January 15, 1982. The expenditures for the plumbing are not qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures (within the meaning of this paragraph (c)) 
because they were not incurred under an accrual method of accounting 
after December 31, 1981.
    Example 2. B incurred qualified rehabilitation expenditures of 
$300,000 with respect to an existing building between January 1, 1982, 
and May 15, 1982, and then sold the building to C on June 1, 1982. The 
portion of the building to which the expenditures were allocable was not 
used by B or any other person during the period from January 1, 1982, to 
June 1, 1982, and neither B nor any other person claimed the credit. 
Consequently, C will be treated as having incurred the expenditures on 
the dates that B incurred the expenditures.
    Example 3. D, a taxpayer using the cash receipts and disbursements 
method of accounting, begins the rehabilitation of a building on January 
11, 1982. Prior to May 1, 1982, D makes rehabilitation expenditures of 
$16,000. On May 3, 1982, D sells the building, the land, and the 
property attributable to the rehabilitation expenditures to E for 
$35,000. The purchase price is properly allocable as follows:

Land...........................................................   $5,000
Existing building..............................................   11,000
Property attributable to rehabilitation expenditures...........   19,000
                                                                --------
      Total purchase price.....................................   35,000
                                                                        

    The property attributable to the rehabilitation expenditures is 
placed in service by E on September 5, 1982. E may treat a portion of 
the $35,000 purchase price as rehabilitation expenditures paid or 
incurred by him. Since the rehabilitation expenditures paid by D 
($16,000) are less than the portion of the purchase price properly 
allocable to property attributable to these expenditures ($19,000), E 
may treat only $16,000 as rehabilitation expenditures paid or incurred 
by him. The excess of the purchase price allocable to rehabilitation 
expenditures ($19,000) over the rehabilitation expenditures paid by D 
($16,000), or $3,000, is treated as the cost of acquiring an interest in 
the building and is not a qualified rehabilitation expenditure treated 
as incurred by E.

    Example 4. The facts are the same as in example 3, except that the 
purchase price properly allocable to the property attributable to 
rehabilitation expenditures is $15,000. Under these circumstances, E may 
treat only $15,000 of D's $16,000 expenditures as rehabilitation 
expenditures paid by D. The excess of the rehabilitation expenditures 
paid by D ($16,000) over the purchase price allocable to rehabilitation 
expenditures ($15,000), or $1,000, is treated as the cost of acquiring 
an interest in the building and is not a qualified rehabilitation 
expenditure treated as incurred by E.

    (4) Incurred for depreciable real property--(i) Property placed in 
service after December 31, 1986. Except as otherwise provided in 
paragraph (c)(4)(ii) of this section (relating to certain property that 
qualifies under a transition rule), in the case of property placed in 
service after December 31, 1986, an expenditure is incurred for 
depreciable real property for purposes of paragraph (c)(1)(iii) of this 
section, only if it is added to the depreciable basis of depreciable 
property which is--

[[Page 354]]

    (A) Nonresidential real property,
    (B) Residential rental property,
    (C) Real property which has a class life of more than 12.5 years, or
    (D) An addition or improvement to property described in paragraph 
(c)(4)(i) (A), (B), or (C) of this section.

For purposes of this paragraph (c)(4)(i), the terms ``nonresidential 
real property'', ``residential rental property'', and ``class life'' 
have the respective meanings given to such terms by section 168 and the 
regulations thereunder.
    (ii) Property placed in service before January 1, 1987, and property 
that qualifies under a transition rule. In the case of property placed 
in service before January 1, 1987, and property placed in service after 
December 31, 1986, that qualifies for the transition rules in paragraph 
(a)(2)(iv) (B) or (C) of this section, an expenditure attributable to 
such property shall be a qualified rehabilitation expenditure only if 
such expenditure is incurred for property that is real property (or 
additions or improvements to real property) with a recovery period 
(within the meaning of section 168 as in effect prior to its amendment 
by the Tax Reform Act of 1986) of 19 years (15 years for low-income 
housing) and if the other requirements of this paragraph (c) are met. 
For purposes of this section, an expenditure is incurred for recovery 
property having a recovery period of 19 years only if the amount of the 
expenditure is added to the basis of property which is 19-year real 
property or 15-year real property in the case of low-income housing. For 
purposes of this section, the term ``low-income housing'' has the 
meaning given such term by section 168(c)(2)(F) (as in effect prior to 
the amendments made by the Tax Reform Act of 1986).
    (5) Made in connection with the rehabilitation of a qualified 
rehabilitated building. In order for an expenditure to be a qualified 
rehabilitation expenditure, such expenditure must be incurred in 
connection with a rehabilitation (as defined in paragraph (b)(2)(iv) of 
this section) of a qualified rehabilitated building. Expenditures 
attributable to work done to facilities related to a building (e.g., 
sidewalk, parking lot, landscaping) are not considered made in 
connection with the rehabilitation of a qualified rehabilitated 
building.
    (6) When expenditures may be incurred. An expenditure is a qualified 
rehabilitation expenditure only if the building with respect to which 
the expenditures are incurred is substantially rehabilitated (within the 
meaning of paragraph (b)(2) of this section) for the taxable year in 
which the property attributable to the expenditures is placed in service 
(i.e., the building is substantially rehabilitated during a measuring 
period ending with or within the taxable year in which a credit is 
claimed). (See paragraph (f)(2) of this section for rules relating to 
when property is placed in service.) Once the substantial rehabilitation 
test is met for a taxable year, the amount of qualified rehabilitation 
expenditures upon which a credit can be claimed for the taxable year is 
limited to expenditures incurred:
    (i) Before the beginning of a measuring period during which the 
building was substantially rehabilitated that ends with or within the 
taxable year, provided that the expenditures were incurred in connection 
with the rehabilitation process that resulted in the substantial 
rehabilitation of the building;
    (ii) Within a measuring period during which the building was 
substantially rehabilitated that ends with or within the taxable year, 
and
    (iii) After the end of a measuring period during which the building 
was substantially rehabilitated but prior to the end of the taxable year 
with or within which the measuring period ends.
    (7) Certain expenditures excluded from qualified rehabilitation 
expenditures. The term ``qualified rehabilitation expenditures'' does 
not include the following expenditures:
    (i) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (c)(8) of this 
section, any expenditure with respect to which the taxpayer does not use 
the straight line method over a recovery period determined under section 
168 (c) and (g).
    (ii) The cost of acquiring a building, any interest in a building 
(including a leasehold interest), or land, except as provided in 
paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of this section.

[[Page 355]]

    (iii) Any expenditure attributable to an enlargement of a building 
(within the meaning of paragraph (c)(10) of this section).
    (iv) Any expenditure attributable to the rehabilitation of a 
certified historic structure or a building located in a registered 
historic district, unless the rehabilitation is a certified 
rehabilitation. (See paragraph (d) of this section which contains 
definitions and special rules applicable to rehabilitations of certified 
historic structures and buildings located in registered historic 
districts.)
    (v) Any expenditure of a lessee of a building or a portion of a 
building, if, on the date the rehabilitation is completed with respect 
to property placed in service by such lessee, the remaining term of the 
lease (determined without regard to any renewal period) is less than the 
recovery period determined under section 168(c) (or 19 years in the case 
of property placed in service before January 1, 1987, and property 
placed in service that qualifies under the transition rules in paragraph 
(a)(2)(iv)(B) or (C) of this section).
    (vi) Any expenditure allocable to that portion of a building which 
is (or may reasonably be expected to be) tax-exempt use property (within 
the meaning of section 168 and the regulations thereunder), except that 
the exclusion in this paragraph (c)(7)(vi) shall not apply for purposes 
of determining whether the building is a substantially rehabilitated 
building under paragraph (b)(2) of this section.
    (8) Requirement to use straight line depreciation--(i) Property 
placed in service after December 31, 1986. The requirement in section 
48(g)(2)(B)(i) and paragraph (c)(7)(i) of this section to use straight 
line cost recovery does not apply to any expenditure to the extent that 
the alternative depreciation system of section 168(g) applies to such 
expenditure by reason of section 168(g)(1) (B) or (C). In addition, the 
requirement in section 48(g)(2)(B)(i) and paragraph (c)(7)(i) of this 
section applies only to the depreciation of the portion of the basis of 
a qualified rehabilitated building that is attributable to qualified 
rehabilitation expenditures.
    (ii) Property placed in service before January 1, 1987, and property 
placed in service after December 31, 1986, that qualifies for a 
transition rule. In the case of expenditures attributable to property 
placed in service before January 1, 1987, and property that qualifies 
for the transition rules in paragraph (a)(2)(iv) (B) or (C) of this 
section, the term ``qualified rehabilitation expenditure'' does not 
include an expenditure with respect to which an election was not made 
under section 168(b)(3) as in effect prior to its amendment by the Tax 
Reform Act of 1986, to use the straight line method of depreciation. In 
such case, the requirement that an election be made to use straight line 
cost recovery applies only to the cost recovery of the portion of the 
basis of a qualified rehabilitated building that is attributable to 
qualified rehabilitation expenditures. See section 168(f)(1), as in 
effect prior to its amendment by the Tax Reform Act of 1986, for rules 
relating to the use of different methods of cost recovery for different 
components of a building. In addition, such requirement shall not apply 
to any expenditure to the extent that section 168(f)(12) or (j), as in 
effect prior to the amendments made by the Tax Reform Act of 1986, 
applied to such expenditure.
    (9) Cost of acquisition. For purposes of paragraph (c)(7)(ii) of 
this section, cost of acquisition includes any interest incurred on 
indebtedness the proceeds of which are attributable to the acquisition 
of a building, an interest in a building, or land open which a building 
exists. Interest incurred on a construction loan the proceeds of which 
are used for qualified rehabilitation expenditures, however, is not 
treated as a cost of acquisition.
    (10) Enlargement defined--(i) In general. A building is enlarged to 
the extent that the total volume of the building is increased. An 
increase in floor space resulting from interior remodeling is not 
considered an enlargement. The total volume of a building is generally 
equal to the product of the floor area of the base of the building and 
the height from the underside of the lowest floor (including the 
basement) to the average height of the finished roof (as it exists or 
existed). For this purpose, floor area is measured from the exterior 
faces of external walls (other than

[[Page 356]]

shared walls that are external walls) and from the centerline of shared 
walls that are external walls.
    (ii) Rehabilitation that includes enlargement. If expenditures for 
property only partially qualify as qualified rehabilitation expenditures 
because some of the expenditures are attributable to the enlargement of 
the building, the expenditures must be apportioned between the original 
portion of the building and the enlargement. The expenditures must be 
specifically allocated between the original portion of the building and 
the enlargement to the extent possible. If it is not possible to make a 
specific allocation of the expenditures, the expenditures must be 
allocated to each portion on some reasonable basis. The determination of 
a reasonable basis for an allocation depends on factors such as the type 
of improvement and how the improvement relates functionally to the 
building. For example, in the case of expenditures for an air-
conditioning system or a roof, a reasonable basis for allocating the 
expenditures among the two portions generally would be the volume of the 
building, excluding the enlargement, served by the air-conditioning 
system or the roof relative to the volume of the enlargement served by 
the improvement.
    (d) Rules applicable to rehabilitations of certified historic 
structures--(1) Definition of certified historic structure. The term 
``certified historic structure'' means any building (and its structural 
components) that is--
    (i) Listed in the National Register of Historic Places (``National 
Register''); or
    (ii) Located in a registered historic district and certified by the 
Secretary of the Interior to the Internal Revenue Service as being of 
historic significance to the district.
For purposes of this section, a building shall be considered to be a 
certified historic structure at the time it is placed in service if the 
taxpayer reasonably believes on that date the building will be 
determined to be a certified historic structure and has requested on or 
before that date a determination from the Department of Interior that 
such building is a certified historic structure within the meaning of 
this paragraph (d)(1)(i) or (ii) and the Department of Interior later 
determines that the building is a certified historic structure.
    (2) Definition of registered historic district. The term 
``registered historic district'' means any district that is--
    (i) Listed in the National Register, or
    (ii) (A) Designated under a statute of the appropriate State or 
local government that has been certified by the Secretary of the 
Interior to the Internal Revenue Service as containing criteria that 
will substantially achieve the purpose of preserving and rehabilitating 
buildings of historic significance to the district, and (B) certified by 
the Secretary of the Interior as meeting substantially all of the 
requirements for the listing of districts in the National Register.
    (3) Definition of certified rehabilitation. The term ``certified 
rehabilitation'' means any rehabilitation of a certified historic 
structure that the Secretary of the Interior has certified to the 
Internal Revenue Service as being consistent with the historic character 
of the building and, where applicable, the district in which such 
building is located. The determination of the scope of a rehabilitation 
shall be made on the basis of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding the rehabilitation and shall not be made solely on the basis 
of ownership. The Secretary of the Interior shall take all of the 
rehabilitation work performed as part of a single rehabilitation, 
including any post-certification work, into account in determining 
whether the rehabilitation complies with the Department of Interior 
standards for rehabilitation and whether the certification should be 
granted, revoked, or otherwise invalidated.
    (4) Revoked or invalidated certification. If the Department of 
Interior revokes or otherwise invalidates a certification after it has 
been issued to a taxpayer, the basis attributable to rehabilitation of 
the decertified property shall cease to be section 38 property described 
in section 48(a)(1)(E). Such cessation shall be effective as of the date 
the activity giving rise to the revocation or invalidation commenced. 
See section 47 for the rules applicable to property that ceases to be 
section 38 property.

[[Page 357]]

    (5) Special rule for certain buildings located in registered 
historic districts. The exclusion in paragraph (c)(7)(iv) of this 
section does not apply to a building in a registered historic district 
if--
    (i) Such building was not a certified historic structure during the 
rehabilitation process; and
    (ii) The Secretary of the Interior certified to the Internal Revenue 
Service that such building was not of historic significance to the 
district.
In general, the certification referred to in paragraph (d)(5)(ii) of 
this section must be requested by the taxpayer prior to the time that 
physical work on the rehabilitation began. If, however, the 
certification referred to in paragraph (d)(5)(ii) of this section is 
requested by the taxpayer after physical work on the rehabilitation of 
the building has begun, the taxpayer must certify to the Internal 
Revenue Service that, prior to the date that physical work on the 
rehabilitation began, the taxpayer in good faith was not aware of the 
requirement of paragraph (d)(5)(ii) of this section. The certification 
referred to in the previous sentence must be attached to the Form 3468 
filed with the tax return for the year in which the credit is claimed.
    (6) Special rule for certain rehabilitations begun before an area is 
designated as a registered historic district. In general, the exclusion 
from the definition of qualified rehabilitation expenditure in paragraph 
(c)(7)(iv) of this section applies to any rehabilitation expenditures 
that are incurred after a building becomes a certified historic 
structure within the meaning of section 48 (g)(3)A) and paragraph (d)(1) 
of this section or the area in which a building is located becomes a 
registered historic district within the meaning of section 48 (g)(3)(B) 
and paragraph (d)(2) of this section. Rehabilitation expenditures 
incurred prior to such date, however, are not disqualified. In addition, 
rehabilitation expenditures made after the date the area in which a 
building is located becomes a registered historic district shall not be 
disqualified under paragraph (c)(7)(iv) of this section in any case in 
which physical work on the rehabilitation of a building begins prior to 
the date the taxpayer knows or has reason to know of an intention to 
nominate the area in which such building is located as a registered 
historic district. For purposes of this paragraph (d)(6), the taxpayer 
knows or has reason to know of such an intention if there is (A) a 
communication (written or oral) to the owner of any building within the 
district from the Department of the Interior, or any agency or 
instrumentality of the appropriate state or local government (or a 
designee of such agency or instrumentality) that the district in which 
the building is located is being considered for designation as a 
registered historic district, (B) a legal notice of such consideration 
published in a newspaper, or (C) a public meeting held to discuss such 
consideration. In order to take advantage of the special rule of this 
paragraph (d)(6), the taxpayer must attach to the Form 3468 filed for 
the taxable year in which the credit is claimed a statement that the 
taxpayer in good faith did not know, or have reason to know, of an 
intention to nominate the area in which the building is located as a 
registered historic district.
    (7) Notice of certification--(i) In general. Except as otherwise 
provided in paragraph (d)(7)(ii) of this section, a taxpayer claiming 
the credit for rehabilitation of a certified historic structure (within 
the meaning of section 48(g)(3) and paragraph (d)(1) of this section) 
must attach to the Form 3468 filed with the tax return for the taxable 
year in which the credit is claimed a copy of the final certification of 
completed work by the Secretary of the Interior, and for returns filed 
after January 9, 1989, evidence that the building is a certified 
historic structure.
    (ii) Late certification. If the final certification of completed 
work has not been issued by the Secretary of the Interior at the time 
the tax return is filed for a year in which the credit is claimed, a 
copy of the first page of the Historic Preservation Certification 
Application--Part 2--Description of Rehabilitation (NPS Form 10-168a), 
with an indication that it has been received by the Department of the 
Interior or its designate, together with proof that the building is a 
certified historic structure (or that such status has been requested), 
must be attached to the Form 3468 filed with the return. A notice

[[Page 358]]

from the Department of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation 
Officer, stating that the nomination or application has been received, 
or a date-stamped nomination or application shall be sufficient 
indication that the nomination or application has been received. The 
building need not be either listed in the National Register or be 
determined to be of historic significance to a registered historic 
district at the time the return is filed for the year in which the 
credit is claimed. (See paragraph (d)(1) of this section.) The taxpayer 
must submit a copy of the final certification as an attachment to Form 
3468 with the first income tax return filed after the receipt by the 
taxpayer of the certification. If the final certification is denied by 
the Department of Interior, the credit will be disallowed for any 
taxable year in which it was claimed. If the taxpayer fails to receive 
final certification of completed work prior to the date that is 30 
months after the date that the taxpayer filed the tax return on which 
the credit was claimed, the taxpayer must submit a written statement to 
the District Director stating such fact prior to the last day of the 
30th month, and the taxpayer shall be requested to consent to an 
agreement under section 6501(c)(4) extending the period of assessment 
for any tax relating to the time for which the credit was claimed. The 
procedure permitted by the preceding sentence shall be used whenever the 
entire rehabilitation project is not fully completed by the date that is 
30 months after the taxpayer filed the tax return upon which the credit 
was claimed (e.g. a phased rehabilitation) and the Secretary of the 
Interior has thus not yet certified the rehabilitation.
    (e) Adjustment to basis--(1) General rule. Except as otherwise 
provided by this paragraph (e), if a credit is allowed with respect to 
property attributable to qualified rehabilitation expenditures incurred 
in connection with the rehabilitation of a qualified rehabilitated 
building, the increase in the basis of the rehabilitated property that 
would otherwise result from the qualified rehabilitation expenditures 
must be reduced by the amount of the credit allowed. See section 48(q) 
and the regulations there under for other rules concerning adjustments 
to basis in the case of section 38 property.
    (2) Special rule for certain property relating to certified historic 
structures. If a rehabilitation investment credit is allowed with 
respect to property that is placed in service before January 1, 1987, or 
property that qualifies for the transition rules in paragraph (a)(2)(iv) 
(B) or (C) of this section, and such property is attributable to 
qualified rehabilitation expenditures incurred in connection with the 
rehabilitation of a certified historic structure, the increase in the 
basis of the rehabilitated property that would otherwise result from the 
qualified rehabilitation expenditures must be reduced by one-half of the 
amount of the credit allowed.
    (3) Recapture of rehabilitation investment credit. If during any 
taxable year there is a recapture amount determined with respect to any 
credit that resulted in a basis adjustment under paragraph (e) (1) or 
(2) of this section, the basis of such building (immediately before the 
event resulting in such recapture) shall be increased by an amount equal 
to such recapture amount. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the 
term `'recapture amount'' means any increase in tax (or adjustment in 
carrybacks or carryovers) determined under section 47(a)(5).
    (f) Coordination with other provisions of the Code--(1) Credit 
claimed by lessee for rehabilitation performed by lessor.  A lessee may 
take the credit for rehabilitation performed by the lessor if the 
requirements of this section and section 48(d) are satisfied. For 
purposes of applying section 48(d), the fair market value of section 38 
property described in section 48(a)(1)(E) shall be limited to that 
portion of the lessor's basis in the qualified rehabilitated building 
that is attributable to qualified rehabilitation expenditures. In the 
case of a portion of a building that is divided into more than one 
leasehold interest, the qualified rehabilitation expenditures 
attributable to the common elements shall be allocated to the individual 
leasehold interests in accordance with the principles of paragraph 
(c)(10)(ii) of this section. Furthermore, a leasehold interest's share 
of the common elements

[[Page 359]]

shall not be considered to have been placed in service prior to the time 
that the particular leasehold interest is placed in service. 
    (2) When the credit may be claimed--(i) In general. The investment 
credit for qualified rehabilitation expenditures is generally allowed in 
the taxable year in which the property attributable to the expenditure 
is placed in service, provided the building is a qualified rehabilitated 
building for the taxable year. See paragraph (b) of this section and 
section 46(c) and Sec. 1.46-3(d). Under certain circumstances, however, 
the credit may be available prior to the date the property is placed in 
service. See section 46(d) and Sec. 1.46-5 (relating to qualified 
progress expenditures). Solely for purposes of section 46(c), property 
attributable to qualified rehabilitation expenditures will not be 
treated as placed in service until the building with respect to which 
the expenditures are made meets the definition of a qualified 
rehabilitated building (as defined in section 48(g)(1) and paragraph (b) 
of this section) for the taxable year. Accordingly, in the first taxable 
year for which the building becomes a qualified rehabilitated building, 
the property described in section 48(a)(1)(E) attributable to 
expenditures described in paragraph (c) of this section, shall be 
considered to be placed in service, if such property was considered 
placed in service under section 46(c) and the regulations thereunder 
without regard to this paragraph (f)(2)(i) in that taxable year or a 
prior taxable year. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the 
requirement of section 48(g)(1)(A)(iii) and paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section, relating to the definition of a qualified rehabilitated 
building shall be deemed to be met if the taxpayer reasonably expects 
that no rehabilitation work undertaken during the remainder of the 
rehabilitation process will result in a failure to satisfy the 
requirements of paragraph (b)(3) of this section. If the requirements of 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section, are not satisfied, however, the credit 
shall be disallowed for the taxable year in which it was claimed. If a 
taxpayer fails to complete physical work on the rehabilitation prior to 
the date that is 30 months after the date that the taxpayer filed a tax 
return on which the credit is claimed, the taxpayer must submit a 
written statement to the District Director stating such fact prior to 
the last day of the 30th month, and shall be requested to consent to an 
agreement under section 6501(c)(4) extending the period of assessment 
for any tax relating to the item for which the credit was claimed.
    (ii) Section 38 property described in section 48(a)(1)(E). In the 
case of section 38 property described in section 48(a)(1)(E), the 
section 38 property is not the building. Instead, the section 38 
property is the portion of the basis of the building that is 
attributable to qualified rehabilitation expenditures. Therefore, for 
example, for purposes of the determination of when such section 38 
property is placed in service, a determination must be made regarding 
when property attributable to the portion of the basis of the building 
attributable to qualified rehabilitation expenditures is placed in 
service. The issue of when the building is placed in service is thus not 
relevant. In fact, under this test, the building itself may never have 
been taken out of service during the rehabilitation process. If the 
building is rehabilitated over several years in stages (e.g., by 
floors), section 38 property attributable to qualified rehabilitation 
expenditures to a qualified rehabilitated building placed in service in 
each taxable year shall, generally, be treated as a separate item of 
section 38 property.
    (iii) Example. The application of this paragraph (f)(2) may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. Assume that A, a calendar year taxpayer, purchases a four-
story building on January 1, 1983, for $100,000, and incurs $10,000 of 
qualified rehabilitation expenditures in 1983 to rehabilitate floor one, 
$50,000 of qualified rehabilitation expenditures in 1984 to rehabilitate 
floor two, $70,000 of qualified rehabilitation expenditures in 1985 to 
rehabilitate floor three, and $60,000 of qualified rehabilitation 
expenditures in 1986 to rehabilitate floor four. Assume further that A 
places the property attributable to these expenditures in service on the 
last day of the year in which the respective expenditures were incurred 
and that the building is never taken out of service since as each floor 
is rehabilitated, the other three floors are occupied by tenants. Under 
the rule in this paragraph (f)(2), the portion of the basis of the

[[Page 360]]

building that is attributable to qualified rehabilitation expenditures 
incurred with respect to floor one and two are deemed to be placed in 
service in 1985, because that is the first year that the substantial 
rehabilitation test described in paragraph (b) of this section is met 
($120,000 of expenditures incurred by A during a measuring period ending 
on December 31, 1985 is greater than the $110,000 basis at the beginning 
of the period). Assume that as of December 31, 1985, at least 75 percent 
of the external walls of the building have been retained during the 
rehabilitation process and that A has a reasonable expectation that no 
work during the remainder of the rehabilitation process will result in 
less than 75 percent of the external walls being retained. A may claim a 
credit for A's 1985 taxable year on $130,000 of qualified rehabilitation 
expenditures ($10,000 in 1983, $50,000 in 1984, and $70,000 in 1985). 
(See paragraph (c)(6) of this section for rules applicable to when 
qualified expenditures may be incurred. In addition, see section 46 (d) 
and Sec. 1.46-5 for rules relating to qualified progress expenditures.) 
The fact that the building was a qualified rehabilitated building for 
A's 1985 taxable year, however, has no effect on whether the building is 
a qualified rehabilitated building for A's 1986 taxable year. In order 
to determine whether A is entitled to claim a credit on A's 1986 return 
for the $60,000 of qualified rehabilitation expenditures incurred in 
1986, A must select a measuring period ending in 1986 and must determine 
whether the building is a qualified rehabilitated building for that 
year. Solely for purposes of determining whether the building was 
substantially rehabilitated, expenditures incurred in 1984 and 1985, 
even though considered in determining whether the building was 
substantially rehabilitated for A's 1985 taxable year, may be used in 
addition to the expenditures incurred in 1986 to determine whether the 
building was substantially rehabilitated for A's 1986 taxable year, 
provided the expenditures were incurred during any measuring period 
selected by A that ends in 1986.

    (3) Coordination with section 47. If property described in section 
48(a)(1)(E) is disposed of by the taxpayer, or otherwise ceases to be 
``section 38 property,'' section 47 may apply. Property will cease to be 
section 38 property, and therefore section 47 may apply, in any case in 
which the Department of Interior revokes or otherwise invalidates a 
certification of rehabilitation after the property is placed in service 
or a building (other than a certified historic structure) is moved from 
the place where it is rehabilitated after the property is placed in 
service. If, for example, the taxpayer made modifications to the 
building inconsistent with Department of Interior standards, the 
Secretary of the Interior might revoke the certification. In addition, 
if all or a portion of a substantially rehabilitated building becomes 
tax-exempt use property (see paragraph (c)(7)(vi) of this section) for 
the first time within five years after the credit is claimed, the credit 
will be recaptured under section 47 at that time as if the building or 
portion of the building which becomes tax-exempt use property had then 
been sold.

[T.D. 8233, 53 FR 39592, Oct. 11, 1988; 53 FR 43866, Oct. 31, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 1.48-12T  Tax-exempt entity leasing (Temporary).

    In general. For certain investment tax credit consequences for 
property which is tax-exempt use property under section 168(j), see 
Sec. 1.168(j)-1T.

[T.D. 8033, 50 FR 27223, July 2, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.50-1  Restoration of credit.

    (a) In general. Section 49(a) (relating to termination of credit) 
does not apply to property--
    (1) The construction, reconstruction, or erection of which by the 
taxpayer--
    (i) Is completed after August 15, 1971, or
    (ii) Is begun after March 31, 1971, or
    (2) Which is acquired by the taxpayer--
    (i) After August 15, 1971, or
    (ii) After March 31, 1971, and before August 16, 1971, pursuant to 
an order which the taxpayer establishes was placed after March 31, 1971.
    (b) Transitional rule. In the case of property (other than 
pretermination property) the construction, reconstruction, or erection 
of which by the taxpayer is begun before April 1, 1971, and completed 
after August 15, 1971, there shall be taken into account as the basis of 
new section 38 property in determining qualified investment only that 
portion of the basis which is properly attributable to construction, 
reconstruction, or erection after August 15, 1971.
    (c) Principles to be applied. The principles of Sec. 1.48-2 (b) and 
(c) shall be applied in determining when property is

[[Page 361]]

acquired and in determining that portion of the basis of property 
properly attributable to construction, reconstruction, or erection after 
August 15, 1971.

[T.D. 7203, 37 FR 17133, Aug. 25, 1972]

   rules for computing credit for expenses of work incentive programs


<R05>
Sec. 1.50A-1  Determination of amount.

    (a) In general. Except as otherwise provided in this section and in 
Sec. 1.50A-2, the amount of the work incentive program (WIN) credit 
allowed by section 40 for the taxable year is equal to 20 percent of the 
taxpayer's WIN expenses (as determined under paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.50B-1). The amount equal to 20 percent of the WIN expenses shall 
be referred to in this section and Secs. 1.50A-2 through 1.50B-5 as the 
``credit earned.''
    (b) Limitation based on amount of tax. Notwithstanding the amount of 
the credit earned for the taxable year, under section 50A(a)(2) the 
credit allowed by section 40 for the taxable year is limited to--
    (1) If the liability for tax (as defined in paragraph (c) of this 
section) is $25,000 or less, the liability for tax; or
    (2) If the liability for tax is more than $25,000, then, the first 
$25,000 of the liability for tax plus 50 percent of the liability for 
tax in excess of $25,000. However, such $25,000 amount may be reduced in 
the case of certain married individuals filing separate returns (see 
paragraph (e) of this section); corporations which are members of a 
controlled group (see paragraph (f) of this section); estates and trusts 
(see paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.50B-3); and organizations to which section 
593 applies, regulated investment companies or real estate investment 
trusts subject to taxation under subchapter M, chapter 1 of the Code, 
and cooperative organizations described in section 1381(a) (see 
Sec. 1.50B-5). The excess of the credit earned for the taxable year over 
the limitations described in this paragraph for such taxable year is an 
unused credit which may be carried back or forward to other taxable 
years in accordance with Sec. 1.50A-2.
    (c) Liability for tax. For the purpose of computing the limitation 
based on amount of tax, section 50A(a)(3) defines the liability for tax 
as the income tax imposed for the taxable year by chapter 1 of the Code, 
reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under--
    (1) Section 33 (relating to taxes of foreign countries and 
possessions of the United States,
    (2) Section 37 (relating to credit for the elderly),
    (3) Section 38 (relating to investment in certain depreciable 
property), and
    (4) Section 41 (relating to contributions to candidates for public 
office).

For purposes of this paragraph, the tax imposed for the taxable year by 
section 56 (relating to imposition of minimum tax for tax preferences), 
section 72(m)(5)(B) (relating to 10 percent tax on premature 
distributions to owner-employees), section 402(e) (relating to tax on 
lump sum distributions), section 408(f) (relating to additional tax on 
income from certain retirement accounts), section 531 (relating to 
imposition of accumulated earnings tax), section 541 (relating to 
imposition of personal holding company tax), or section 1378 (relating 
to tax on certain capital gains of subchapter S corporations), and any 
additional tax imposed for the taxable year by section 1351(d)(1) 
(relating to recoveries of foreign expropriation losses), shall not be 
considered tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code for such year. Thus, the 
liability for tax for purposes of computing the limitation based on 
amount of tax for the taxable year is determined without regard to any 
tax imposed by sections 56, 72(m)(5)(B), 402(e), 408(f), 531, 541, 
1351(d)(1) or 1378 of the Code. In addition, any increase in tax 
resulting from the application of section 50A (c) and (d) and 
Sec. 1.50A-3 (relating to recomputation of credit allowed due to early 
termination of employment by employer, or failure to pay comparable 
wages) shall not be treated as tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code for 
purposes of computing the liability for tax. See section 50A (c)(3) and 
(d)(2).
    (d) Example. The application of paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this 
section may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. X Corporation's WIN expenses for its taxable year ending 
December 31, 1973, are $500,000. X's credit earned for its taxable

[[Page 362]]

year is $100,000 (20 percent of $500,000). X's income tax for such year, 
computed without regard to credits against tax and without regard to any 
tax imposed by section 56, 531, 541, 1351(d)(1) or 1378, is $190,000. 
That amount includes $5,000 resulting from the application of section 
50A(c)(3) and Sec. 1.50 A-3. X is allowed under section 33 a foreign tax 
credit of $50,000. X's liability for tax is computed as follows:

Income tax (including increase in tax under section                     
 50A(c)(3), but before any credits and without regard to any            
 tax imposed by section 56, 531, 541, 1351(d)(1) or 1378)...    $190,000
                                                 =============          
Less:                                                                   
  Increase in tax resulting from application of                         
   section 50A(c)(3)............................      $5,000            
  Foreign tax credit............................      50,000            
                                                 ------------           
                                                                  55,000
                                                             -----------
    Liability for tax.......................................     135,000
                                                 =============          
                                                                        

Under section 50A(a)(2) and paragraph (b) of this section, X's 
limitation based on amount of tax for the taxable year is $80,000 
($25,000 plus 50 percent of $110,000). X Corporation's credit allowed by 
section 40 for the taxable year therefore is $80,000. X has an unused 
credit for the year of $20,000 ($100,000 less $80,000) which it may 
carry back or forward to other taxable years in accordance with 
Sec. 1.50A-2.

    (e) Married individuals. If a separate return is filed by a husband 
or wife, the limitation based on amount of tax under paragraph (b) of 
this section shall be computed by substituting a $12,500 amount for the 
$25,000 amount in applying such paragraph (b). However, this reduction 
of the $25,000 amount to $12,500 applies only if the taxpayer's spouse 
is entitled to a credit under section 40 for the taxable year of such 
spouse which ends with, or within, the taxpayer's taxable year. The 
taxpayer's spouse is entitled to a credit under section 40 either 
because of incurring WIN expenses for such taxable year of the spouse 
(whether directly incurred by such spouse or whether apportioned to such 
spouse, for example, from an electing small business corporation, as 
defined in section 1371(b)), or because of a credit carryback or 
carryover to such taxable year under Sec. 1.50A-2. The determination of 
whether an individual is married shall be made under the principles of 
section 143 and the regulations thereunder.
    (f) Apportionment of $25,000 amount among component members of a 
controlled group--(1) In general. In determining the limitation based on 
amount of tax under section 50A(a)(2) in the case of corporations which 
are component members of a controlled group of corporations on a 
December 31, only one $25,000 amount is available to such component 
members for their taxable years that include such December 31. See 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph for apportionment of such amount 
among such component members. See subparagraph (3) of this paragraph for 
the definition of ``component member.''
    (2) Manner of apportionment. (i) In the case of corporations which 
are component members of a controlled group on a particular December 31, 
the $25,000 amount may be apportioned among such members for their 
taxable years that include such December 31 in any manner the component 
members may select, provided that each such member less than 100 percent 
of whose stock is owned, in the aggregate, by the other component 
members of the group on such December 31 consents to an apportionment 
plan. The consent of a component member to an apportionment plan with 
respect to a particular December 31 shall be made by means of a 
statement signed by a person duly authorized to act on behalf of the 
consenting member, stating that such member consents to the 
apportionment plan with respect to such December 31. The statement shall 
set forth the name, address, employer identification number, and taxable 
year of each component member of the group on such December 31, the 
amount apportioned to each such member under the plan, and the location 
of the Internal Revenue Service center where the statement is to be 
filed. The consent of more than one component member may be incorporated 
in a single statement. The statement shall be timely filed with the 
Internal Revenue Service center where the component member having the 
taxable year first ending on or after such December 31 files its return 
for such taxable year and shall be irrevocable after such filing. If two 
or more component members have the same such taxable year, a statement 
of

[[Page 363]]

consent may be filed by any one of such members. Such statement shall be 
considered as timely filed if filed on or before the due date (including 
any extensions of time) of such member's income tax return which 
includes such December 31. However, if the due date (including any 
extensions of time) of the return of such member is on or before 
December 15, 1972, the required statement shall be considered as timely 
filed if filed on or before March 15, 1973. Each component member of the 
group on such December 31 shall keep as a part of its records a copy of 
the statement containing all the required consents.
    (ii) An apportionment plan adopted by a controlled group with 
respect to a particular December 31 shall be valid only for the taxable 
year of each member of the group which includes such December 31. Thus, 
a controlled group must file a separate consent to an apportionment plan 
with respect to each taxable year which includes a December 31 as to 
which an apportionment plan is desired.
    (iii) If an apportionment plan is not timely filed, the $25,000 
amount specified in section 50A(a)(2) shall be reduced for each 
component member of the controlled group, for its taxable year which 
includes a December 31, to an amount equal to $25,000 divided by the 
number of component members of each group on such December 31.
    (iv) If a component member of the controlled group makes its income 
tax return on the basis of a 52-53 week taxable year, the principles of 
section 441(f)(2)(A)(ii) and paragraph (b)(1) of Sec. 1.441-2 apply in 
determining the last day of such taxable year.
    (3) Definitions of controlled group of corporations and component 
member of controlled group. For the purpose of this paragraph, the terms 
``controlled group of corporations'' and ``component member'' of a 
controlled group of corporations shall have the same meaning assigned to 
those terms in section 1563 (a) and (b) and the regulations thereunder. 
For purposes of applying Sec. 1.1563-1(b)(2)(ii)(c), an electing small 
business corporation shall be treated as an excluded member whether or 
not it is subject to the tax imposed by section 1378.
    (4) Members of a controlled group filing a consolidated return. If 
some component members of a controlled group join in filing a 
consolidated return pursuant to Sec. 1.1502-3(a)(3), and other component 
members do not join, then, unless a consent is timely filed apportioning 
the $25,000 amount among the group filing the consolidated return and 
the other component members of the controlled group, each component 
member of the controlled group (including each component member which 
joins in filing the consolidated return) shall be treated as a separate 
corporation for purposes of equally apportioning the $25,000 amount 
under subparagraph (2)(iii) of this paragraph. In such case, the 
limitation based on the amount of tax for the group filing the 
consolidated return shall be computed by substituting for the $25,000 
amount the total of the amount apportioned to each component member 
which joins in filing the consolidated return. If the affiliated group, 
filing the consolidated return and the other component members of the 
controlled group adopt an apportionment plan, the affiliated group shall 
be treated as a single member for the purpose of applying subparagraph 
(2)(i) of this paragraph. Thus, for example, only one consent executed 
by the common parent to the apportionment plan is required for the group 
filing the consolidated return. If any component member of the 
controlled group which joins in the filing of the consolidated return is 
an organization to which section 593 applies or a cooperative 
organization described in section 1381(a), rules similar to the rules 
contained in paragraph (a)(3)(ii) of Sec. 1.1502-3 are applicable.
    (5) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. At all times during 1972 Smith, an individual, owns all 
the stock of corporations X, Y, and Z. Corporation X files an income tax 
return on a calendar year basis. Corporation Y files an income tax 
return on the basis of a fiscal year ending June 30. Corporation Z files 
an income tax return on the basis of a fiscal year ending September 30. 
On December 31, 1972, X, Y, and Z are component members of the same 
controlled group. X, Y, and Z all consent to an apportionment

[[Page 364]]

plan in which the $25,000 amount is apportioned entirely to Y for its 
taxable year ending June 30, 1973 (Y's taxable year which includes 
December 31, 1972). Such consent is timely filed. For purposes of 
computing the credit under section 40, Y's limitation based on amount of 
tax for its taxable year ending June 30, 1973, is so much of Y's 
liability for tax as does not exceed $25,000, plus 50 percent of Y's 
liability for tax in excess of $25,000. X's and Z's limitations for 
their taxable years ending December 31, 1972, and September 30, 1973, 
respectively, are equal to 50 percent of X's liability for tax and 50 
percent of Z's liability for tax. On the other hand, if an apportionment 
plan is not timely filed, X's limitation would be so much of X's 
liability for tax as does not exceed $8,333.33, plus 50 percent of X's 
liability in excess of $8,333.33, and Y's and Z's limitations would be 
computed similarly.

    Example 2. At all times during 1972, Jones, an individual, owns all 
the outstanding stock of corporations P, Q, and R. Corporations Q and R 
both file returns for taxable year ending December 31, 1972. P files a 
consolidated return as a common parent for its fiscal year ending June 
30, 1973, with its wholly owned subsidiaries N and O. On December 31, 
1972, N, O, P, Q, and R are component members of the same controlled 
group. No consent to an apportionment plan is filed. Therefore, each 
member is apportioned $5,000 of the $25,000 amount ($25,000 divided 
equally among the five members). The limitation based on the amount of 
tax for the group filing the consolidated return (P, N, and O) for the 
year ending June 30, 1973 (the consolidated taxable year within which 
December 31, 1972, falls), is computed by using $15,000 instead of the 
$25,000 amount. The $15,000 is arrived at by adding together the $5,000 
amounts apportioned to P, N, and O.

[38 FR 6152, Mar. 7, 1973, as amended by T.D. 7636, 44 FR 47049, Aug. 
10, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 1.50A-2   Carryback and carryover of unused credit.

    (a) Allowance of unused credit as carryback or carryover--(1) In 
general. Section 50A(b)(1) provides for carrybacks and carryovers of any 
unused credit. An unused credit is the excess of the credit earned for 
the taxable year (as determined under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-1) 
over the limitation based on amount of tax for such taxable year (as 
determined under paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.50A-1). Subject to the 
limitation contained in paragraph (b) of this section, an unused credit 
shall be added to the amount allowable as a credit under section 40 for 
the years to which the unused credit can be carried. The year with 
respect to which an unused credit arises shall be referred to in this 
section as the ``unused credit year.''
    (2) Taxable years to which unused credit may be carried. An unused 
credit shall be a work incentive program (WIN) credit carryback to each 
of the 3 taxable years preceding the unused credit year and a WIN credit 
carryover to each of the 7 taxable years succeeding the unused credit 
year, except that an unused credit shall be a carryback only to taxable 
years beginning after December 31, 1971. An unused credit must be 
carried first to the earliest of the taxable years to which it may be 
carried, and then to each of the other taxable years (in order of time) 
to the extent that the unused credit may not be added (because of the 
limitation contained in paragraph (b) of this section) to the amount 
allowable as a credit under section 40 for a prior taxable year.
    (b) Limitation on allowance of unused credit. The amount of the 
unused credit from any particular unused credit year which may be added 
to the amount allowable as a credit under section 40 for any of the 
preceding or succeeding taxable years to which such credit may be 
carried shall not exceed the amount by which the limitation based on 
amount of tax for such preceding or succeeding taxable year exceeds the 
sum of (1) the credit earned for such preceding or succeeding year, and 
(2) other unused credits carried to such preceding or succeeding year 
which are attributable to unused credit years prior to the particular 
unused credit year.
    (c) Corporate acquisitions. For the carryover of unused credits in 
the case of certain corporate acquisitions, see section 381(c)(24) and 
the regulations thereunder. [Sec. 1.381(c)(24)-1]
    (d) Periods of less than 12 months. A fractional part of a year 
which is considered as a taxable year under sections 441(b) and 
7701(a)(23) shall be treated as a preceding or a succeeding taxable year 
for the purpose of determining under section 50A(b) and this section the 
taxable years to which an unused credit may be carried.
    (e) Example. The provisions of paragraphs (a) through (d) of this 
section

[[Page 365]]

may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. Corporation X files its income tax return on the basis of 
the calendar year. X's credit earned and its limitation based on amount 
of tax for each of its taxable years 1972 through 1978 are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              Credit    Limitation based
                                              earned    on amount of tax
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1972......................................    $175,000          $200,000
1973......................................     250,000           160,000
1974......................................     200,000           210,000
1975......................................     210,000           230,000
1976......................................     220,000           260,000
1977......................................     260,000           220,000
1978......................................     270,000           280,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------


    (i) Corporation X's credit earned for 1972, $175,000, is allowable 
in full as a credit under section 40 for 1972 since such amount is less 
than the limitation based on amount of tax for such year, $200,000. 
Since the limitation based on amount of tax for 1973 is $160,000, only 
$160,000 of the $250,000 credit earned for such year is allowable under 
section 40 as a credit for 1973. The unused credit for 1973 of $90,000 
($250,000 less $160,000) is a WIN credit carryback to 1972 and a WIN 
credit carryover to 1974 and subsequent years up to and including 1980. 
The portion of the $90,000 unused credit which shall be added to the 
amount allowable as a credit under section 40 for 1972 and 1974 and 
subsequent years is computed as follows:

    (a) 1972. The portion of the unused credit for 1973 ($90,000) which 
is allowable as a credit for 1972 is $25,000. This amount shall be added 
to the amount allowable as a credit for 1972. The balance of the unused 
credit for 1973 to be carried to 1974 is $65,000. These amounts are 
computed as follows:

Carryback to 1972...........................................     $90,000
1972 limitation based on tax....................    $200,000            
Less: Credit earned for 1972........    $175,000                        
Unused credits attributable to years                                    
 preceding 1973.....................           0                        
                                     ------------                       
                                                     175,000            
                                                 ------------           
Limit on amount of 1973 unused credit which may be added as             
 a credit for 1972..........................................      25,000
                                     -------------                      
    Balance of 1973 unused credit to be carried to 1974.....      65,000
                                                                        


    (b) 1974. The portion of the balance of the unused credit for 1973 
($65,000) allowable as a credit for 1974 is $10,000. This amount shall 
be added to the amount allowable as a credit for 1974. The balance of 
the unused credit for 1973 to be carried to 1975 is $55,000. These 
amounts are computed as follows:

Carryover to 1974..........................................      $65,000
1974 limitation based on tax..................     $210,000             
Less: Credit earned for 1974.....     $200,000                          
Unused credits attributable to                                          
 years preceding 1973............            0                          
                                      --------      200,000             
                                               -------------            
Limit on amount of 1973 unused credit which may be added as             
 a credit for 1974.........................................       10,000
                                  --------------                        
    Balance of 1973 unused credit to be carried to 1975....       55,000
                                                                        


    (c) 1975. The portion of the balance of the unused credit for 1973 
($55,000) allowable as a credit for 1975 is $20,000. This amount shall 
be added to the amount allowable as a credit for 1975. The balance of 
the unused credit for 1973 to be carried to 1976 is $35,000. These 
amounts are computed as follows:

Carryover to 1975..........................................      $55,000
1975 limitation based on tax..................     $230,000             
Less: Credit earned for 1975.....     $210,000                          
Unused credits attributable to                                          
 years preceding 1973............            0                          
                                  -------------                         
                                                    210,000             
                                               -------------            
Limit on amount of 1973 unused credit which may be added as             
 a credit for 1975.........................................      $20,000
                                  --------------                        
    Balance of 1973 unused credit to be carried to 1976....       35,000
                                                                        


    (d) 1976. The entire balance of the unused credit for 1973 ($35,000) 
is allowable as a credit for 1976, since the limitation based on amount 
of tax for 1976 exceeds the sum of the credit earned for 1976 and unused 
credits attributable to years prior to 1973 by an amount in excess of 
$35,000. Since the balance of the unused credit for 1973 has been fully 
allowed, no portion thereof remains to be carried to subsequent taxable 
years. This is illustrated as follows:

Carryover to 1976..........................................      $35,000
1976 limitation based on tax..................     $260,000             
Less: Credit earned for 1976.....     $220,000                          
Unused credits attributable to                                          
 years preceding 1973............            0                          
                                  -------------                         
                                                    220,000             
                                               -------------            
Limit on amount of 1973 unused credit which may be added as             
 a credit for 1976.........................................       40,000
                                  --------------                        
    Balance of 1973 unused credit to be carried to 1977....            0
                                                                        


    (ii) Since the limitation based on amount of tax for 1977 is 
$220,000, only $220,000 of the $260,000 credit earned for such year is 
allowable as a credit for 1977. The unused credit

[[Page 366]]

for 1977 of $40,000 ($260,000 less $220,000) is a WIN credit carryback 
to 1974, 1975, and 1976 and a WIN credit carryover to 1978 and 
subsequent years. The portions of the $40,000 unused credit which shall 
be added to the amount allowable as a credit for such years are computed 
as follows:

    (a) 1974. The portion of the unused credit for 1977 ($40,000) 
allowable as a credit for 1974 is zero. The balance of the unused credit 
for 1977 to be carried to 1975 is $40,000. These amounts are computed as 
follows:

Carryback to 1974..........................................      $40,000
1974 limitation based on tax..................     $210,000             
Less: Credit earned for 1974.....     $200,000                          
Unused credits attributable to                                          
 years preceding 1977 (unused                                           
 credit from 1973)...............       10,000                          
                                  -------------                         
                                                   $210,000             
                                                            ------------
Limit on amount of 1977 unused credit which may be added as             
 a credit for 1974.........................................            0
                                  --------------                        
    Balance of 1977 unused credit to be carried to 1975....       40,000
                                                                        


    (b) 1975. The portion of the unused credit for 1977 ($40,000) 
allowable as a credit for 1975 is zero. The balance of the unused credit 
for 1977 to be carried to 1976 is $40,000. These amounts are computed as 
follows:

Carryback to 1975..........................................      $40,000
1975 limitation based on tax..................     $230,000             
Less: Credit earned for 1975.....     $210,000                          
Unused credits attributable to                                          
 years preceding 1977 (unused                                           
 credit from 1973)...............       20,000                          
                                      --------      230,000             
                                               -------------            
Limit on amount of 1977 unused credit which may be added as             
 a credit for 1975.........................................            0
                                  --------------                        
  Balance of 1977 unused credit to be carried to 1976......       40,000
                                                                        


    (c) 1976. The portion of the unused credit for 1977 ($40,000) 
allowable as a credit for 1976 is $5,000. This amount shall be added to 
the amount allowable as a credit for 1976. The balance of the unused 
credit for 1977 to be carried to 1978 is $35,000. These amounts are 
computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Carryback to 1976..........................................      $40,000
1976 limitation based on tax..................     $260,000             
Less: Credit earned for 1976.....     $220,000                          
Unused credits attributable to                                          
 years preceding 1977 (unused                                           
 credit from 1973)...............       35,000                          
                                      --------      255,000             
                                               -------------            
Limit on amount of 1977 unused credit which may be added as             
 a credit for 1976.........................................        5,000
                                  --------------                        
    Balance of 1977 unused credit to be carried to 1978....       35,000
                                                                        


    (d) 1978. The portion of the balance of the unused credit for 1977 
($35,000) allowable as a credit for 1978 is $10,000. This amount shall 
be added to the amount allowable as a credit for 1978. The balance of 
the unused credit for 1977 to be carried to 1979 and subsequent years is 
$25,000. These amounts are computed as follows:

Carryover to 1978..........................................      $35,000
1978 limitation based on tax..................     $280,000             
Less: Credit earned for 1978.....     $270,000                          
Unused credits attributable to                                          
 years preceding 1977............            0                          
                                      --------     $270,000             
                                               -------------            
Limit on amount of 1977 unused credit which may be added as             
 a credit for 1978.........................................      $10,000
                                  --------------                        
    Balance of 1977 unused credit to be carried to 1979....       25,000
                                                                        


    (f) Electing small business corporation. An unused credit of a 
corporation which arises in an unused credit year for which the 
corporation is not an electing small business corporation (as defined in 
section 1371(b)) and which is a carryback or carryover to a taxable year 
for which the corporation is an electing small business corporation 
shall not be added to the amount allowable as a credit under section 40 
to the shareholders of such corporation for any taxable year. However, a 
taxable year for which the corporation is an electing small business 
corporation shall be counted as a taxable year for purposes of 
determining the taxable years to which such unused credit may be 
carried.

[38 FR 6153, Mar. 7, 1973]

[[Page 367]]


<R05>
Sec. 1.50A-3   Recomputation of credit allowed by section 40.

    (a) General rule--(1) Early termination of employment by employer--
(i) In general. If the employment of any employee, with respect to whom 
work incentive program (WIN) expenses (as defined in paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.50B-1) are taken into account under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-
1, is terminated by the taxpayer at any time during the first 12 months 
of such employment (whether or not consecutive) or before the close of 
the 12th calendar month after the calendar month in which such employee 
completes the first 12 months of employment (whether or not consecutive) 
with the taxpayer, then subparagraph (3) of this paragraph shall apply. 
See paragraph (c) of this section for rules relating to the 
determination of the first 12 months of employment (whether or not 
consecutive). See Sec. 1.50A-4 for rules relating to other circumstances 
under which a termination of employment will not be treated as a 
termination of employment to which the provisions of subparagraph (3) of 
this paragraph are applicable.
    (ii) Rules for determining whether a termination of employment has 
occurred. For purposes of this section, the taxpayer is deemed to have 
terminated the employment of any WIN employee (as defined in paragraph 
(h) of Sec. 1.50B-1) if the employment relationship (as determined under 
common law principles) has terminated. A layoff for any reason is 
considered a termination of employment for purposes of the preceding 
sentence. However, a temporary suspension of employment of any WIN 
employee necessitated by the installation of new equipment or by the 
retooling of existing equipment (such as for a model changeover in the 
automobile industry) shall not be deemed to be a termination of 
employment if such suspension is for a period of time no longer than 60 
days. For purposes of this section, the death of the taxpayer is 
considered a termination of the employment relationship between the 
taxpayer and any WIN employee.
    (2) Failure to pay comparable wages--(i) In general. If, at any time 
during the period described in subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph, 
the taxpayer pays wages (as defined in section 50B(b) and paragraph (b) 
of Sec. 1.50B-1) to an employee, with respect to whom WIN expenses are 
taken into account under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-1, which are less 
than the wages paid to other employees of the taxpayer who perform 
comparable services, then subparagraph (3) of this paragraph shall 
apply.
    (ii) Comparable services. (a) For purposes of subdivision (i) of 
this subparagraph, the term ``comparable services'' refers to services 
performed in work positions which require similar education, training, 
and skills. Comparable services are those associated with other work 
positions which require similar levels of judgment and responsibility, 
which make similar physical and mental demands of an employee, and which 
could easily be performed by the employee without substantial additional 
training or experience.
    (b) If substantial training, skill, or experience are material to 
the performance of a particular job, a taxpayer may pay wages to a WIN 
employee which are less than those paid to other employees of the 
taxpayer who possess such training, skill, or experience. However, there 
must be a reasonable relationship between the lower wages or salary of 
such WIN employee and his relative lack of training, skill, or 
experience.
    (3) Recomputation of credit earned. (i) If, by reason of 
subparagraph (1) or (2) of this paragraph, this subparagraph (3) is 
applicable, then the credit earned for all credit years (as defined in 
subdivision (ii)(a) of this subparagraph) shall be recomputed under the 
principles of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-1 by not taking into account 
WIN expenses with respect to the employee (or employees) described in 
subparagraph (1) or (2) of this paragraph. There shall be recomputed 
under the principles of Secs. 1.50A-1 and 1.50A-2 the credit allowed for 
all credit years and for any other taxable year affected by reason of 
the reduction in credit earned for such credit year or years, giving 
effect to such reduction in the computation of carrybacks or carryovers 
of unused credit from any taxable year. If the recomputation described 
in the preceding sentence results, in the aggregate, in a

[[Page 368]]

decrease (taking into account any recomputation under this paragraph in 
respect of prior recapture years, as defined in subdivision (ii)(b) of 
this subparagraph) in the credits allowed for any credit year and for 
any other taxable year affected by the reduction in credit earned for 
any credit year, then the income tax for the recapture year shall be 
increased by the amount of such decrease in credits allowed. For 
treatment of such increase in tax, see paragraph (b) of this section. 
For special rules in the case of an electing small business corporation 
(as defined in section 1371(b)), an estate or trust, or a partnership, 
see respectively, Sec. 1.50A-5, Sec. 1.50A-6 or Sec. 1.50A-7.
    (ii) For purposes of this section and Secs. 1.50A-4 through 1.50B-
6--
    (a) The term ``credit year'' means a taxable year in which WIN 
expenses with respect to the employee described in subparagraph (1) or 
(2) of this paragraph are taken into account under paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.50A-1.
    (b) The term ``recapture year'' means a taxable year in which a 
termination of employment (within the meaning of subparagraph (1) of 
this paragraph) or a failure to pay comparable wages (within the meaning 
of subparagraph (2) of this paragraph) occurs by reason of which the 
rule of subparagraph (3) of this paragraph becomes applicable.
    (c) The term ``recapture determination'' means a recomputation made 
under this paragraph.
    (b) Increase in income tax and reduction of WIN credit carryback and 
carryover--(1) Increase in tax. Except as provided in subparagraph (2) 
of this paragraph, any increase in income tax under this section shall 
be treated as income tax imposed on the taxpayer by chapter 1 of the 
Code for the recapture year notwithstanding that without regard to such 
increase the taxpayer has no income tax liability, has a net operating 
loss for such taxable year, or no income tax return was otherwise 
required for such taxable year.
    (2) Special rule. Any increase in income tax under this section 
shall not be treated as income tax imposed on the taxpayer by chapter 1 
of the Code for purposes of determining the amount of the credits 
allowable to such taxpayer under--
    (i) Section 33 (relating to taxes of foreign countries and 
possessions of the United States),
    (ii) Section 35 (relating to partially tax-exempt interest received 
by individuals),
    (iii) Section 37 (relating to retirement income),
    (iv) Section 38 (relating to investment in certain depreciable 
property),
    (v) Section 39 (relating to certain uses of gasoline, special fuels, 
and lubricating oil),
    (vi) Section 40 (relating to expenses of work incentive programs), 
and
    (vii) Section 41 (relating to contributions to candidates for public 
office).
    (3) Reduction in credit allowed as a result of a net operating loss 
carryback. (i) If a net operating loss carryback from the recapture year 
or from any taxable year subsequent to the recapture year reduces the 
amount allowed as a credit under section 40 for any taxable year up to 
and including the recapture year, then there shall be a new recapture 
determination under paragraph (a) of this section for each recapture 
year affected, taking into account the reduced amount of credit allowed 
after application of the net operating loss carryback.
    (ii) Subdivision (i) of this subparagraph may be illustrated by the 
following example:

    Example. (a) X Corporation, which makes its returns on the basis of 
a calendar year, hired WIN employees on March 1, 1972, and incurred 
$10,000 in WIN expenses with respect to these employees for the year. 
For the taxable year 1972, X Corporation's credit earned of $2,000 (20 
percent of $10,000) was allowed under section 40 as a credit against its 
liability for tax of $2,000. In 1973 and 1974 X Corporation had no 
liability for tax and had no WIN expenses. In January 1974, X 
Corporation terminated the employees for whom the WIN expenses had been 
incurred. Since these terminations were not subject to the exceptions 
provided by Sec. 1.50A-4, there was a recapture determination under 
paragraph (a) of this section. The income tax imposed by chapter 1 of 
the Code on X Corporation for the taxable year 1974 was increased by the 
$2,000 decrease in its credit earned for the taxable year 1972 (that is, 
the $2,000 original credit earned minus zero recomputed credit earned).

    (b) For the taxable year 1975, X Corporation has a net operating 
loss which is carried back to the taxable year 1972 and reduces its 
liability for tax, as defined in paragraph (c)

[[Page 369]]

of Sec. 1.50A-1, for such taxable year to $800. As a result of such net 
operating loss carryback, X Corporation's credit allowed under section 
40 for the taxable year 1972 is limited to $800 and the excess of $1,200 
($2,000 credit earned minus the $800 limitation based on amount of tax) 
is a WIN credit carryover to the taxable year 1973.

    (c) For 1975 there is a recapture determination under subdivision 
(i) of this subparagraph for the 1974 recapture year. The $2,000 
increase in the income tax imposed on X Corporation for the taxable year 
1974 is redetermined to be $800 (that is, the $800 credit allowed after 
taking into account the 1975 net operating loss minus zero credit which 
would have been allowed taking into account the 1974 recapture 
determination). In addition, X Corporation's $1,200 WIN credit carryover 
to the taxable year 1973 is reduced by $1,200 ($2,000 minus $800) to 
zero and X Corporation is entitled to a $1,200 refund of the $2,000 tax 
paid as a result of the 1974 recapture determination.

    (4) Statement of recomputation. The taxpayer shall attach to his 
income tax return for the recapture year a separate statement showing in 
detail the computation of the increase in income tax imposed on such 
taxpayer by chapter 1 of the Code and the reduction in any WIN credit 
carryovers.
    (c) Period of employment--(1) Initial date of employment. For 
purposes of this section and Secs. 1.50A-4 through 1.50B-6, the initial 
date of employment (for purposes of applying paragraph (a) (1) and (2) 
of this section and paragraphs (a)(1) and (f) of Sec. 1.50B-1) is the 
date the WIN employee reports to the taxpayer (or in the case where the 
taxpayer is a partner of a partnership, a beneficiary of an estate or 
trust, or a shareholder of an electing small business corporation, to 
such partnership, estate, trust, or electing small business corporation) 
for work.
    (2) Computation of the first 12 months of employment (whether or not 
consecutive). For purposes of computing the first 12 months of 
employment (whether or not consecutive), the first month of employment 
shall begin with the initial date of employment (as defined in 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph) of the WIN employee, the second 
month of employment shall begin with the corresponding date in the 
following month, the third month of employment shall begin with the 
corresponding date in the next following month, and so forth. If the WIN 
employee performs any services during any such month (as determined 
under the preceding sentence), that month shall be counted in computing 
the WIN employee's ``first 12 months of employment (whether or not 
consecutive)''. If the WIN employee performs no services during any such 
month, that month shall not be counted in computing the WIN employee's 
``first 12 months of employment (whether or not consecutive)''. Thus, if 
the initial date of employment of a WIN employee is June 15, the first 
month of employment of such employee shall be the period beginning June 
15, and ending July 14. The second month of employment is the period 
beginning July 15 and ending August 14. If during such second month of 
employment the employee performs no services for the taxpayer, that 
month is not counted in determining the employee's first 12 months of 
employment (whether or not consecutive).

[38 FR 6154, Mar. 7, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 1.50A-4   Exceptions to the application of Sec. 1.50A-3.

    (a) In general. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.50A-3, a termination of employment shall not be deemed to occur 
if paragraph (b) (relating to voluntary termination of employment), 
paragraph (c) (relating to termination of employment due to disability), 
paragraph (d) (relating to termination of employment due to misconduct), 
paragraph (f) (relating to transactions to which section 381(a) 
applies), or paragraph (g) (relating to mere change in form of 
conducting a trade or business) applies.
    (b) Voluntary termination of employment. A termination of employment 
shall not be deemed to occur for purposes of paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.50A-3 if the employee voluntarily leaves the employment of the 
taxpayer. If the taxpayer makes the working conditions of the employee 
so untenable that the employee is, in effect, compelled by the taxpayer 
to quit, or if the employee is coerced into quitting, the employee will 
not be deemed to have voluntarily left the employment of the taxpayer. 
For purposes of the preceding sentence, a substantial reduction in the 
benefits of employment of an employee (such as

[[Page 370]]

a substantial decrease in the hours of the employee's working week) 
shall constitute untenable working conditions. An employee has 
voluntarily left the employment of the taxpayer if he leaves for any 
reason external to his employment, such as sickness or death in the 
employee's family which the employee feels necessitates his quitting 
work with the taxpayer to remain at home. Any employee who participates 
in an authorized strike (as finally determined by a court, labor 
relations administrative body, or arbiter) will not be deemed to have 
voluntarily left the employment of the taxpayer.
    (c) Termination of employment due to death or disability. A 
termination of employment shall not be deemed to occur for purposes of 
paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-3 if, after the initial date of employment 
(as defined in paragraph (c)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3) and before the close of 
the period referred to in paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3, the employee 
becomes disabled, by reason of illness or injury (including a disability 
relating to the employment), to perform the services required by such 
employment, unless, before the close of such period:
    (1) Such disability is removed,
    (2) The employer knows of the removal of the disability, and
    (3) The employer fails to offer reemployment to such employee.

The death of an employee shall not be deemed a termination of employment 
for purposes of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-3.
    (d) Termination of employment due to misconduct. A termination of 
employment shall not be deemed to occur for purposes of paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.50A-3 if it is determined by the appropriate State administrative 
agency or State court that under the applicable State unemployment 
compensation law such termination was due to the misconduct of the WIN 
employee. If the WIN employee is not covered by the applicable State 
unemployment compensation law (or if the employee did not work for the 
minimum period required to qualify for unemployment compensation or if 
the employee did not apply for unemployment compensation), a termination 
of employment shall not be deemed to occur for purposes of paragraph (a) 
of Sec. 1.50A-3 if the taxpayer demonstrates by convincing evidence 
that, were such employee covered by the applicable State unemployment 
compensation law (or if the employee had worked for such minimum period 
or if the employee had applied for unemployment compensation), he could 
reasonably have been found by such administrative agency or court to 
have been terminated for misconduct.
    (e) Recordkeeping requirement. A taxpayer who is claiming that a 
termination of employment falls within the provisions of paragraph (b), 
(c), or (d) of this section shall maintain sufficient records to support 
his claim until the expiration of the pertinent period of limitations.
    (f) Transactions to which section 381(a) applies--(1) General rule. 
The employment relationship between the taxpayer and a WIN employee (as 
defined in paragraph (h) of Sec. 1.50B-1) shall not be deemed terminated 
for purposes of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-3 in the case of a 
transaction to which section 381(a) (relating to carryovers in certain 
corporate acquisitions) applies. If there is a termination of employment 
(within the meaning of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-3 and this section) 
by the acquiring corporation with respect to the WIN employee described 
in the preceding sentence, or if the acquiring corporation fails to pay 
comparable wages to such employee (within the meaning of paragraph 
(a)(2) of Sec. 1.50A-3), then paragraph (a)(3) of Sec. 1.50A-3 shall 
apply to the acquiring corporation with respect to the credit allowed 
the acquired corporation as well as the credit allowed the acquiring 
corporation with respect to such employee. For purposes of the preceding 
sentence, the initial date of employment (as defined in paragraph (c)(1) 
of Sec. 1.50A-3) of such employee with respect to the acquired 
corporation shall be deemed to be the initial date of employment of such 
employee with respect to the acquiring corporation and employment by the 
acquired corporation shall be deemed employment by the acquiring 
corporation.
    (2) Examples. This paragraph may be illustrated by the following 
examples:

    Example 1. (i) X Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Y 
Corporation, incurred WIN expenses of $12,000 for its taxable year 
ending December 31, 1972, with respect to

[[Page 371]]

WIN employees hired on March 1, 1972. Both X and Y made their returns on 
the basis of a calendar year. For the taxable year 1972 X Corporation's 
credit earned of $2,400 (20 percent of $12,000) was allowed under 
section 40 as a credit against its liability for tax. On December 15, 
1973, X Corporation is liquidated under section 332 and all of its 
assets and liabilities are transferred to Y Corporation in a transaction 
to which section 334(b)(2) is not applicable. In addition, Y Corporation 
continues the employment of the WIN employees which were employed by X 
Corporation and with respect to which X Corporation was allowed the 
credit for its taxable year 1972.

    (ii) Under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, a termination of 
employment of the WIN employees shall not be deemed to occur for 
purposes of paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3 due to the liquidation of X 
Corporation on December 15, 1973. Thus, no recapture determination under 
paragraph (a)(3) of Sec. 1.50A-3 shall be made with respect to X 
Corporation.

    Example 2. (i) The facts are the same as in Example 1 and, in 
addition, on February 2, 1974, Y Corporation terminates the employment 
of the employees with respect to whom X Corporation had incurred WIN 
expenses. The termination is a termination for purposes of paragraph 
(a)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3. For purposes of applying the period described in 
paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3, the date the employees reported for 
work at X Corporation is deemed to be the initial date of employment of 
the employees with respect to Y Corporation.

    (ii) Under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, a termination of 
employment of the WIN employees shall not be deemed to occur for 
purposes of paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3 due to the liquidation of X 
Corporation on December 15, 1973. However, a termination of employment 
of the WIN employees is deemed to occur for purposes of paragraph (a)(1) 
of Sec. 1.50A-3 on February 2, 1974. Thus, Y Corporation shall make a 
recapture determination under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-3 with respect 
to the credit allowed X Corporation with respect to the WIN employees.

    (g) Mere change in form of conducting a trade or business--(1) 
General rule. (i) The employment relationship between the taxpayer and a 
WIN employee (as defined in paragraph (h) of Sec. 1.50B-1) shall not be 
deemed terminated for purposes of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-3 in the 
case of a mere change in the form of conducting the trade or business in 
which such employment occurs, provided that the conditions set forth in 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph are satisfied.
    (ii) The conditions referred to in subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph are as follows:
    (a) The WIN employee described in subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph is retained in the same trade or business,
    (b) The taxpayer retains a substantial ownership interest in such 
trade or business,
    (c) Substantially all the assets necessary to operate such trade or 
business are transferred to the transferee who continues the employment 
of the WIN employee described in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, 
and
    (d) The basis of the assets described in (c) of this subdivision in 
the hands of the transferee is determined in whole or in part by 
reference to the basis of such assets in the hands of the transferor.

This subparagraph shall not apply if paragraph (e) of this section 
(relating to transactions to which section 381(a) applies) is applicable 
with respect to such transfer.
    (2) Substantial interest. For purposes of this paragraph, the 
taxpayer shall be considered as having retained a substantial ownership 
interest in the trade or business only if, after the change in form, the 
ownership interest in such trade or business by such taxpayer--
    (i) Is substantial in relation to the total ownership interests of 
all persons, or
    (ii) Is equal to or greater than the ownership interest prior to the 
change in form.

Thus, where a taxpayer owns a 5-percent interest in a partnership, and, 
after the incorporation of that partnership, the taxpayer retains at 
least a 5-percent interest in the corporation, the taxpayer will be 
considered as having retained a substantial interest in the trade or 
business as of the date of the change in form because of the application 
of the rule contained in subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph.
    (3) Termination of employment. (i) If employment of a WIN employee 
described in subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph is terminated by the 
transferee, the employment of such employee shall be deemed terminated 
by the taxpayer for purposes of paragraph

[[Page 372]]

(a) of Sec. 1.50A-3. For purposes of determining the period described in 
paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3 with respect to such taxpayer 
employment by the transferee shall be deemed employment by the 
transferor.
    (ii) If in any taxable year the taxpayer does not retain a 
substantial ownership interest in the trade or business directly or 
indirectly (through ownership in other entities provided that such other 
entities' bases in such interest are determined in whole or in part by 
reference to the basis of such interest in the hands of the taxpayer) 
then, for purposes of paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3, there shall be 
deemed to be a termination of employment of the WIN employees described 
in subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph on the first date on which such 
taxpayer does not retain a substantial interest in the trade or 
business. For purposes of determining the period described in paragraph 
(a)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3, employment by the transferee shall be deemed 
employment by the transferor. Any taxpayer who seeks to establish his 
interest in a trade or business under the rule of this subdivision shall 
maintain adequate records to demonstrate his indirect interest in such 
trade or business after any such transfer or transfers.
    (iii) Notwithstanding subparagraph (1) of this paragraph and 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph in the case of a mere change in 
the form of a trade or business, if the interest of a taxpayer in the 
trade or business is reduced but such taxpayer has retained a 
substantial interest in such trade or business, paragraph (a)(2) of 
Sec. 1.50A-5 (relating to electing small business corporations), 
paragraph (a)(2) of Sec. 1.50A-6 (relating to estates or trusts), or 
paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of Sec. 1.50A-7 (relating to partnerships) shall 
apply, as the case may be.
    (4) Failure to pay comparable wages. If the transferee fails to pay 
comparable wages (within the meaning of paragraph (a)(2) of Sec. 1.50A-
3) to the WIN employee within the period described in paragraph (a)(1) 
of Sec. 1.50A-3, then such failure shall be deemed to be a failure of 
the transferor (or in a case where the transferor is a partnership, 
estate, trust, or electing small business corporation, the partners, 
beneficiaries, or shareholders), and a recapture determination shall be 
made with respect to such WIN employee as provided in Sec. 1.50A-3. For 
purposes of determining the period described in paragraph (a)(1) of 
Sec. 1.50A-3 with respect to such transferor (or such partners, 
beneficiaries, or shareholders), employment by the transferee shall be 
deemed employment by such transferor. For special rules in the case of 
an electing small business corporation (as defined in section 1371(b)), 
an estate or trust, or a partnership, see respectively, Sec. 1.50A-5, 
Sec. 1.50A-6, or Sec. 1.50A-7.
    (5) Examples. This paragraph may be illustrated by the following 
examples in each of which it is assumed that the transfer satisfies the 
conditions of subparagraphs (1)(ii) (a), (c) and (d) of this paragraph.

    Example 1. (i) On January 1, 1972, A, an individual, employed WIN 
employees in his sole proprietorship. A incurred WIN expenses with 
respect to these employees of $12,000 for the taxable year ending 
December 31, 1972. For the taxable year 1972 A's credit earned of $2,400 
(20 percent of $12,000) was allowed under section 40 as a credit against 
his liability for tax. On March 15, 1973, A transferred all of the 
assets used in his sole proprietorship to X Corporation, a newly formed 
corporation, in exchange for 45 percent of the stock of X Corporation.
    (i) Under subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph, paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.50A-3 does not apply to the March 15, 1973, transfer to X 
Corporation.

    Example 2. (i) The facts are the same as in Example 1 and in 
addition on June 1, 1973, X Corporation terminates the employment of WIN 
employees with respect to whom 50 percent of the WIN expenses were 
incurred during A's 1972 taxable year.

    (ii) Under subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph, paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.50A-3 does not apply to the March 15, 1973, transfer to X 
Corporation. However, under subparagraph (3)(i) of this paragraph, 
paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-3 applies to the June 1, 1973, termination 
of WIN employees by X Corporation. The actual period of employment of 
such WIN employees is 1 year and 5 months (that is, the period beginning 
on January 1, 1972, and ending on June 1, 1973). For taxable year 1972, 
A's recomputed credit earned is $1,200 (20 percent of $6,000). The 
income tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code on A for the taxable year 
1973 is increased by the $1,200 decrease in his credit earned for the 
taxable year 1972 (that is, $2,400 original credit earned minus $1,200 
recomputed credit earned).


[[Page 373]]


    Example 3. (i) The facts are the same as in Example 1 and in 
addition on April 1, 1973, X Corporation begins paying wages to the 
employees referred to in Example 1 which are less than the wages paid to 
its other employees who perform comparable services.

    (ii) Under subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph, paragraph (a)(1) 
of Sec. 1.50A-3 does not apply to the March 15, 1973, transfer to X 
Corporation. However, under subparagraph (4) of this paragraph, 
paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-3 applies to the failure of X Corporation to 
pay wages to the WIN employees which are equal to the wages paid to its 
other employees who perform comparable services. For taxable year 1972, 
A's recomputed credit earned is zero. The income tax imposed by chapter 
1 of the Code on A for the taxable year 1973 is increased by the $2,400 
decrease in his credit earned for the taxable year 1972.

    Example 4. (i) On January 1, 1972, partnership ABC, which makes its 
returns on the basis of a calendar year, employed WIN employees. 
Partnership ABC incurred WIN expenses with respect to these employees of 
$20,000 for the taxable year. Partnership ABC has 10 partners who make 
their returns on the basis of a calendar year and share partnership 
profits equally. Each partner's share of the WIN expenses is 10 percent, 
that is, $2,000. On March 15, 1973, partnership ABC transfers all of the 
assets used in its trade or business to the X Corporation, a newly 
formed corporation, in exchange for its stock and immediately thereafter 
transfers 10 percent of the stock to each of the 10 partners.

    (ii) Under subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph, paragraph (a)(1) 
of Sec. 1.50A-1 does not apply to the March 15, 1973, transfer by the 
ABC Partnership to X Corporation.

    Example 5. (i) The facts are the same as in Example 4 except that 
partnership ABC transfers 10 percent of the stock in X Corporation to 
each of eight partners, 20 percent to partner A, and cash to partner B.

    (ii) Under subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph, with respect to 
all of the partners (including partner A) except partner B, paragraph 
(a)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3 does not apply to the March 15, 1973, transfer by 
the ABC Partnership. Paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3 applies with 
respect to partner B's $2,000 share of the WIN expenses. See paragraph 
(a)(2) of Sec. 1.50A-7.

    Example 6. (i) X Corporation operates a manufacturing business and a 
separate retail sales business. During the month of January 1972, X 
incurred WIN expenses in its manufacturing business. On February 10, 
1973, X transfers all the assets used in its manufacturing business to 
Partnership XY in exchange for a 50 percent interest in such 
partnership.

    (ii) Under subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph, paragraph (a)(1) 
of Sec. 1.50A-3 does not apply to the February 10, 1973, transfer to 
Partnership XY.

[T.D. 7263, 38 FR 6156, Mar. 7, 1973; 38 FR 8656, Apr. 5, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 1.50A-5   Electing small business corporations.

    (a) In general--(1) Termination of employment by a corporation. If 
an electing small business corporation (as defined in section 1371(b)) 
or a former electing small business corporation terminates (in a 
termination subject to the provisions of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-3) 
the employment of any WIN employee with respect to whom WIN expenses 
have been paid or incurred, a recapture determination shall be made 
under Sec. 1.50A-3 with respect to each shareholder who is treated, 
under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50B-2 as a taxpayer who paid or incurred 
such expenses. Each such recapture determination shall be made with 
respect to the pro rata share of the WIN expenses of such employee which 
were taken into account by such shareholder under paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.50B-2. For purposes of each such recapture determination the 
period of employment of such employee or employees shall be the period 
beginning with the initial date of employment (as defined in paragraph 
(c)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3) with respect to the electing small business 
corporation and ending with the date of such employee's termination (as 
defined in paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of Sec. 1.50A-3). For the definition of 
the term ``recapture determination'' see paragraph (a)(3) of Sec. 1.50A-
3.
    (2) Disposition of shareholder's interest. (i) If--
    (a) WIN expenses are apportioned to a shareholder of an electing 
small business corporation who takes such expenses into account in 
computing his WIN expenses, and
    (b) After the end of the shareholder's taxable year in which such 
apportionment was taken into account and before the close of the period 
to which paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3 applies with respect to the 
employee to which such WIN expenses relate, such shareholder's 
proportionate stock interest in such corporation is reduced (for 
example, by a sale or redemption, or by the

[[Page 374]]

issuance of additional shares) below the percentage specified in 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph,

then, on the date of such reduction the employment of such employee 
shall be deemed terminated with respect to such shareholder to the 
extent of the actual reduction in such shareholder's proportionate stock 
interest. (For example, if $100 of WIN expenses were apportioned to a 
shareholder and if his proportionate stock interest is reduced from 60 
percent to 30 percent (that is, 50 percent of his original interest), 
then the employment of the employee to which such WIN expenses relate 
shall be deemed terminated as to that shareholder to the extent of $50.) 
Accordingly, a recapture determination shall be made with respect to 
such shareholder. For purposes of such recapture determination the 
period of employment of any employee or employees with respect to whom 
WIN expenses were paid or incurred shall be the period beginning with 
the initial date of employment (as defined in paragraph (c)(1) of 
Sec. 1.50A-3) with respect to the electing small business corporation 
and ending with the date on which such reduction occurs.
    (ii) The percentage referred to in subdivision (i)(b) of this 
subparagraph is 66\2/3\ percent of the shareholder's proportionate stock 
interest in the corporation on the date of the apportionment under 
paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50B-2. However, once employment of an employee 
has been treated under this subparagraph as having terminated with 
respect to the shareholder to any extent, the percentage referred to 
shall be 33\1/3\ percent of the shareholder's proportionate stock 
interest in the corporation on the date of apportionment under paragraph 
(a) of Sec. 1.50B-2.
    (iii) In determining a shareholder's proportionate stock interest in 
a former electing small business corporation for purposes of this 
subparagraph, the shareholder shall be considered to own stock in such 
corporation which he owns directly or indirectly (through ownership in 
other entities provided such other entities' bases in such stock are 
determined in whole or in part by reference to the basis of such stock 
in the hands of the shareholder). For example, if A, who owns all of the 
100 shares of the outstanding stock of corporation X, a corporation 
which was formerly an electing small business corporation, transfers on 
November 1, 1973, 70 shares of X stock to corporation Y in exchange for 
90 percent of the stock of Y in a transaction to which section 351 
applies, then, for purposes of subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, A 
shall be considered to own 93 percent of the stock of X, 30 percent 
directly and 63 percent indirectly (i.e., 90 percent of 70). Any 
taxpayer who seeks to establish his interest in the stock of a former 
electing small business corporation under the rule of this subdivision 
shall maintain adequate records to demonstrate his indirect interest in 
the corporation after any such transfer or transfers.
    (3) Computation of the first 12 months of employment. The period 
described in paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3 shall not be affected by a 
change in the shareholders in such corporation and shall not be affected 
by a reduction in any shareholder's proportionate stock interest in such 
corporation (for example, by a sale or redemption or by the issuance of 
additional shares). Thus, the first 12 months of employment (whether or 
not consecutive) of any WIN employee shall be the same with respect to 
any shareholder who is allowed a credit under section 40 for salaries 
and wages paid or incurred for services rendered by such employee. Also, 
such first 12 months of employment and the period described in section 
50B(c)(4) with respect to any WIN employee shall not be deemed to begin 
again in the case of a corporation making a valid election under section 
1372.
    (b) Election of a small business corporation under section 1372--(1) 
General rule. If a corporation makes a valid election under section 1372 
to be an electing small business corporation (as defined in section 
1371(b)), then on the last day of the first taxable year immediately 
preceding the taxable year for which such election is effective, the 
employment of any WIN employees whose initial date of employment (as 
defined in paragraph (c)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3) occurred in taxable years 
prior to the first taxable year for which the election is effective (and 
whose employment has not been terminated prior to such last day) shall

[[Page 375]]

be considered as having been terminated on such last day with respect to 
the WIN expenses paid or incurred by such corporation and Sec. 1.50A-3 
shall apply to such corporation. However, if the corporation and each of 
the persons who are shareholders of the corporation on the first day of 
the first taxable year for which the election under section 1372 is to 
be effective, or on the date of such election, whichever is later, 
execute the agreement specified in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, 
Sec. 1.50A-3 shall not apply with respect to any such WIN expenses by 
reason of the election by the corporation under section 1372.
    (2) Agreement of shareholders and corporation. (i) The agreement 
referred to in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall be signed by the 
shareholders and by the corporation. The agreement shall recite that:
    (a) In the event the employment of any WIN employee described in 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph is later terminated (in a termination 
subject to the rules contained in paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-3) during 
a taxable year of the corporation for which the election under section 
1372 is effective, each signer agrees to notify the district director or 
the director of the Internal Revenue service center of such termination, 
and agrees to be jointly and severally liable to pay to the district 
director or the director of the Internal Revenue service center an 
amount equal to the increase in tax which would have been imposed by 
Sec. 1.50A-3 on the corporation but for the agreement under this 
paragraph.
    (b) In the event any WIN employee described in subparagraph (1) of 
this paragraph is paid wages (as defined in section 50B(b) and paragraph 
(b) of Sec. 1.50B-1) by such electing corporation, which are less than 
the wages paid to other employees of such electing corporation who 
perform comparable services (as defined in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of 
Sec. 1.50A-3), during a taxable year of the corporation for which the 
election under section 1372 is effective, each signer agrees to notify 
the district director or the director of the Internal Revenue service 
center of such failure to pay equal wages for comparable services, and 
agrees to be jointly and severally liable to pay to the district 
director or the director of the Internal Revenue service center an 
amount equal to the increase in tax which would have been imposed by 
Sec. 1.50A-3 on the corporation as a result of such failure but for the 
election under section 1372.

For purposes of computing the period described in paragraph (a)(1) of 
Sec. 1.50A-3, the period of employment by the corporation before the 
election under section 1372 shall be added to the period of employment 
by the electing small business corporation after such election.
    (ii) The agreement shall set forth the name, address, and taxpayer 
account number of each party and the internal revenue district or 
service center in which each such party files his or its income tax 
return for the taxable year which includes the last day of the 
corporation's taxable year immediately preceding the first taxable year 
for which the election under section 1372 is effective. The agreement 
may be signed on behalf of the corporation by any person who is duly 
authorized. The agreement shall be filed with the district director or 
the director of the Internal Revenue service center with whom the 
corporation files its income tax return for its taxable year immediately 
preceding the first taxable year for which the election under section 
1372 is effective and shall be filed on or before the due date 
(including extensions of time) of such return. For purposes of the 
preceding sentence, the district director or the director of the 
Internal Revenue service center may, if good cause is shown, permit the 
agreement to be filed on a later date.
    (c) Examples. This section may be illustrated by the following 
examples:

    Example 1. (i) X Corporation, an electing small business corporation 
which makes its returns on the basis of the calendar year, hired 
employees under a WIN program on July 1, 1972, and incurred expenses for 
such employees during the following 12 months at an initial rate of 
$10,000 per month. For taxable year 1972, X Corporation had 20 shares of 
stock outstanding which were owned equally by A and B who make their 
returns on the basis of a calendar year. Under paragraph (a) of this 
section, the WIN expenses were apportioned to the shareholders of X 
Corporation as follows:

[[Page 376]]



                                                                        
                                                           Period ending
                                                           Dec. 31, 1973
                                                                        
  Total WIN expenses for the taxable year...............         $60,000
Shareholder A (10/20)...................................          30,000
Shareholder B (10/20)...................................          30,000
                                                                        

Assuming that during 1972 shareholders A and B did not directly incur 
any WIN expenses and that they did not own any interest in other 
electing small business corporations, partnerships, estates, or trusts 
incurring WIN expenses, the WIN expenses attributable to each 
shareholder is $30,000. For the taxable year 1972, each shareholder's 
credit earned of $6,000 (20 percent of $30,000) was allowed under 
section 40 as a credit against his liability for tax.

    (ii) On January 1, 1973, X Corporation terminates the employment of 
the employees accounting for 50 percent of its WIN expenses incurred to 
that date, or $30,000 in salaries and wages. The actual period of 
employment for these WIN employees was 6 months. For taxable year 1972, 
each shareholder's recomputed credit is $3,000 (20 percent of $15,000). 
The income tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code on each of the 
shareholders for the taxable year 1973 is increased by the $3,000 
decrease in his credit earned for the taxable year 1972 (that is, $6,000 
original credit earned minus $3,000 recomputed credit earned).

    Example 2. (i) The facts are the same as in subdivision (i) of 
example 1, except that on January 1, 1973, shareholder A sells five of 
his 10 shares of stock in X Corporation to C. No other changes in stock 
ownership occurred during 1973. Under paragraph (a)(2) of this section, 
the WIN expenses of X Corporation were apportioned on December 31, 1973, 
to the shareholders of X Corporation as follows:

                                                                        
                                                           Period ending
                                                           Dec. 31, 1972
                                                                        
  Total WIN expenses for the taxable year...............         $60,000
Shareholder A (5/20)....................................          15,000
Shareholder B (10/20)...................................          30,000
Shareholder C (5/20)....................................          15,000
                                                                        


    (ii) Under paragraph (a)(2) of this section, on January 1, 1973, the 
employment of these WIN employees shall be deemed terminated by 
shareholder A with respect to 50 percent of the WIN expenses allocated 
to him since immediately after the January 1, 1973, sale A's 
proportionate stock interest in X Corporation is reduced to 50 percent 
of the proportionate stock interest in X Corporation which he held for 
taxable year 1972. The actual period of employment of the WIN employees 
accounting for the 50 percent of the WIN expenses originally allocated 
to A is 6 months (that is, the period beginning with July 1, 1972, and 
ending with January 1, 1973). The income tax imposed by chapter 1 of the 
Code on shareholder A for the taxable year 1973 is increased by the 
$3,000 decrease in his credit earned for the taxable year 1972 (that is, 
$6,000 original credit earned minus $3,000 recomputed credit earned).

    (d) Termination or revocation of an election under section 1372. The 
employment of employees with respect to whom WIN expenses were paid or 
incurred shall not be considered to have been terminated solely by 
reason of a termination or revocation of a corporation's election under 
section 1372.

[38 FR 6158, Mar. 7, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 1.50A-6   Estates and trusts.

    (a) In general--(1) Termination of employment by an estate or trust. 
If an estate or trust terminates (in a termination subject to the 
provisions of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-3) the employment of any 
employee with respect to whom WIN expenses have been paid or incurred, a 
recapture determination shall be made under Sec. 1.50A-3 with respect to 
the estate or trust, and each beneficiary who is treated, under 
paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50B-3 as a taxpayer who paid or incurred such 
expenses. For purposes of each such recapture determination the period 
of employment of such employees shall be the period beginning with the 
initial date of employment (as defined in paragraph (c)(1) of 
Sec. 1.50A-3) with respect to the estate or trust and ending with the 
date of such employee or employees' termination (as defined in paragraph 
(a)(1)(ii) of Sec. 1.50A-3). For definition of ``recapture 
determination'' see paragraph (a)(3) of Sec. 1.50A-3.
    (2) Disposition of interest. (i) If--
    (a) WIN expenses are apportioned to an estate or trust, or to a 
beneficiary of an estate or trust who takes such expenses into account 
in computing his WIN expenses, and
    (b) After the end of the estate's, trust's, or beneficiary's taxable 
year in which such apportionment was taken into account and before the 
close of the period to which paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3 applies 
with respect to the employees to which such WIN expenses relate, such 
estate's, trust's, or such beneficiary's proportionate interest in the 
income of the estate or trust is reduced (for example, by a sale, or by 
the

[[Page 377]]

terms of the estate or trust instrument) below the percentage specified 
in subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph,

then, on the date of such reduction, the employment of such employee 
shall be deemed terminated with respect to such estate, trust, or 
beneficiary to the extent of the actual reduction in such estate's, 
trust's, or beneficiary's proportionate interest in the income of the 
estate or trust. (For example, if $100 of WIN expenses were apportioned 
to a beneficiary and if his proportionate interest in the income of the 
estate or trust is reduced from 60 percent to 30 percent (that is, 50 
percent of his original interest), then the employment of the employee 
to which such WIN expenses relates shall be deemed terminated as to that 
beneficiary to the extent of $50.) Accordingly, a recapture 
determination shall be made with respect to such estate, trust, or 
beneficiary. For purposes of such recapture determination the period of 
employment of any employee or employees with respect to whom WIN 
expenses were paid or incurred shall be the period beginning with the 
initial date of employment (as defined in paragraph (c)(1) of 
Sec. 1.50A-3) with respect to the estate or trust and ending with the 
date on which such reduction occurs.
    (ii) The percentage referred to in subdivision (i)(b) of this 
subparagraph is 66\2/3\ percent of the estate's, trust's, or 
beneficiary's proportionate interest in the income of the estate or 
trust for the taxable year of the apportionment under paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.50B-3. However, once employment of an employee has been treated 
under this subparagraph as having terminated with respect to the estate, 
trust, or beneficiary to any extent, the percentage referred to shall be 
33\1/3\ percent of the estate's, trust's, or beneficiary's proportionate 
interest in the income of the estate or trust for the taxable year of 
the apportionment under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50B-3.
    (iii) In determining a beneficiary's proportionate interest in the 
income of an estate or trust for purposes of this subparagraph, the 
beneficiary shall be considered to own any interest in such an estate or 
trust which he owns directly or indirectly (through ownership in other 
entities provided such other entities' bases in such interests are 
determined in whole or in part by reference to the basis of such 
interest in the hands of the beneficiary). For example, if A, whose 
proportionate interest in the income of trust X is 30 percent, transfers 
all of such interest to corporation Y in exchange for all of the stock 
of Y in a transaction to which section 351 applies, then, for purposes 
of subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, A shall be considered to own a 
30-percent interest in trust X. Any taxpayer who seeks to establish his 
interest in an estate or trust under the rule of this subdivision shall 
maintain adequate records to demonstrate his indirect interest in the 
estate or trust after any such transfer or transfers.
    (b) Computation of the first 12 months of employment. The period 
described in paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3 shall not be affected by a 
change in the beneficiaries of an estate or trust and shall not be 
affected by a reduction or a termination of a beneficiary's interest in 
the income of such estate or trust. Thus, the period described in 
paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3 for any WIN employee shall be the same 
with respect to a trust or estate and any beneficiary of such trust or 
estate which is allowed a credit under section 40 for salaries and wages 
paid or incurred for services rendered by such employee. Also, such 
period with respect to any WIN employee shall not be deemed to begin 
again as the result of the acquisition of the interest by another.
    (c) Examples. Paragraph (a) of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. (i) XYZ Trust, which makes its returns on the basis of 
the calendar year, hired employees under the WIN program on July 1, 
1972, and incurred expenses for such employees during the following 12 
months at an initial rate of $10,000 per month. For the taxable year 
1972 the income of XYZ Trust is $60,000, which is allocated equally to 
XYZ Trust and beneficiary A. Beneficiary A makes his returns on the 
basis of a calendar year. Under paragraph (a) of this section, the WIN 
expenses were apportioned to XYZ Trust and to beneficiary A as follows:

                                                                        
                                                           Period ending
                                                           Dec. 31, 1972
                                                                        
  Total WIN expenses for the taxable year...............         $60,000
XYZ Trust ($30,000/$60,000).............................          30,000
Beneficiary A ($30,000/$60,000).........................          30,000
                                                                        


[[Page 378]]

Assuming that during 1972 beneficiary A did not directly incur any WIN 
expenses and that he did not own any interest in other estates, trusts, 
electing small business corporations, or partnerships incurring WIN 
expenses, the WIN expenses incurred by XYZ Trust and by beneficiary A 
are $30,000 each. For the taxable year 1972, XYZ Trust and beneficiary A 
each had a credit earned of $6,000. Each credit earned was allowed under 
section 40 as a credit against the liability for tax.

    (ii) On January 1, 1973, XYZ Trust terminates the employment of its 
employees accounting for 50 percent of its WIN expenses incurred to that 
date, or $30,000 in salaries and wages. The actual period of employment 
for these WIN employees was 6 months. For the taxable year 1972, XYZ 
Trust's and beneficiary A's recomputed credit is $3,000 (20 percent of 
$15,000). The income tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code on XYZ Trust 
and on beneficiary A for the taxable year 1973 is increased by the 
$3,000 decrease in his credit earned for the taxable year 1972 (that is, 
$6,000 original credit earned minus $3,000 recomputed credit earned).

    Example 2. (i) The facts are the same as in subdivision (i) of 
example 1, except that on January 1, 1973, beneficiary A sells 50 
percent of his interest in the income of XYZ Trust to B. No other 
changes in income interest occurred during 1973. Under paragraph (a)(2) 
of Sec. 1.50B-4, each beneficiary's share and the trust's share of the 
WIN expenses are apportioned as follows:

                                                                        
                                                           Period ending
                                                           Dec. 31, 1972
                                                                        
  Total WIN expenses for the taxable year...............         $60,000
XYZ Trust ($30,000/$60,000).............................          30,000
Beneficiary A ($15,000/$60,000).........................          15,000
Beneficiary B ($15,000/$60,000).........................          15,000
                                                                        


    (ii) Under paragraph (a)(2) of this section, on January 1, 1973, the 
employment of these WIN employees shall be deemed terminated by 
beneficiary A with respect to 50 percent of the WIN expenses allocated 
to him since immediately after the January 1, 1973, sale A's 
proportionate interest in the income of XYZ Trust is reduced to 50 
percent of his proportionate interest in the income of XYZ Trust for the 
taxable year 1972. The period of employment of the WIN employees 
accounting for the 50 percent of the WIN expense originally allocated to 
A is 6 months (that is, the period beginning with July 1, 1972, and 
ending with December 31, 1972). For the taxable year 1972 beneficiary 
A's recomputed credit earned is $3,000 (20 percent of $15,000). The 
income tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code on beneficiary A for the 
taxable year 1973 is increased by the $3,000 decrease in his credit 
earned for the taxable year 1972 (that is, $6,000 original credit earned 
minus $3,000 recomputed credit earned).

[38 FR 6159, Mar. 7, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 1.50A-7   Partnerships.

    (a) In general--(1) Termination of employment by a partnership. If a 
partnership terminates (in a termination subject to the provisions of 
paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-3) the employment of any WIN employee with 
respect to whom WIN expenses have been paid or incurred, a recapture 
determination shall be made under Sec. 1.50A-3 with respect to each 
partner who is treated, under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50B-4, as a 
taxpayer with respect to such expenses. Each such recapture 
determination shall be made with respect to the share of the WIN 
expenses with respect to such employee which were taken into account by 
such partner under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50B-4. For purposes of each 
such recapture determination the period of employment of any such 
employee shall be the period beginning with the initial date of 
employment (as defined in paragraph (c)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3) with respect 
to the partnership and ending with the date of such employee's 
termination (as defined in paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of Sec. 1.50A-3). For 
the definition of ``recapture determination'' see paragraph (a)(3) of 
Sec. 1.50A-3.
    (2) Disposition of partner's interest. (i) If--
    (a) WIN expenses are allocated to a partner of a partnership who 
takes such expenses into account in computing his WIN expenses, and
    (b) After the end of the partner's taxable year in which such 
allocation was taken into account and before the close of the period to 
which paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3 applies with respect to the 
employee to which such WIN expenses relate, such partner's proportionate 
interest in the general profits of the partnership (or in the particular 
expenses) is reduced (for example, by a sale, by a change in the 
partnership agreement, or by the admission of a new partner) below the 
percentage specified in subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph,

then, on the date of such reduction the employment of such employee 
shall be deemed terminated with respect to

[[Page 379]]

such partner to the extent of the actual reduction in such partner's 
proportionate interest in the general profits (or in the particular 
expenses) of the partnership. (For example, if $100 of WIN expenses were 
taken into account by a partner and if his proportionate interest in the 
general profits of the partnership is reduced from 60 percent to 30 
percent (that is, 50 percent of his original interest), then the 
employment of the employee to which such WIN expenses relate shall be 
deemed terminated as to that partner to the extent of $50.) Accordingly, 
a recapture determination shall be made with respect to such partner. 
For purposes of such recapture determination the period of employment of 
any employee or employees with respect to whom WIN expenses were paid or 
incurred shall be the period beginning with the initial date of 
employment (as defined in paragraph (c)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3) with respect 
to the partnership and ending with the date on which such reduction 
occurs.
    (ii) The percentage referred to in subdivision (i) (b) of this 
subparagraph is 66\2/3\ percent of the partner's proportionate interest 
in the general profits (or in the WIN expenses) of the partnership for 
the year of the apportionment under Sec. 1.50B-4(a). However, once 
employment of an employee has been treated under this subparagraph as 
having terminated with respect to the partner to any extent, the 
percentage referred to shall be 33\1/3\ percent of the partner's 
proportionate interest in the general profits (or in the WIN expenses) 
of the partnership for the taxable year of the apportionment under 
paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50B-4.
    (iii) In determining a partner's proportionate interest in the 
general profits (or in the WIN expenses) of a partnership for purposes 
of this subparagraph, the partner shall be considered to own any 
interest in such a partnership which he owns directly or indirectly 
(through ownership in other entities provided the other entities' bases 
in such interests are determined in whole or in part by reference to the 
basis of such interest in the hands of the partner). For example, if A, 
whose proportionate interest in the general profits of partnership X is 
20 percent, transfers all of such interest to Corporation Y in exchange 
for all of the stock of Y in a transaction to which section 351 applies 
then, for purposes of subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, A shall be 
considered to own a 20 percent interest in partnership X. Any taxpayer 
who seeks to establish his interest in a partnership under the rule of 
this subdivision shall maintain adequate records to demonstrate his 
indirect interest in the partnership after any such transfer or 
transfers.
    (3) Computation of the first 12 months of employment. The period 
described in paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3 shall not be affected by a 
change in the partners of such partnership and shall not be affected by 
a change in the ratio in which the partners divide the general profits 
(or the WIN expenses) of the partnership. Thus, such period for any WIN 
employee shall be the same with respect to any partner claiming a credit 
under section 40 for salaries and wages paid or incurred for services 
rendered by such employee.
    (b) Examples. Paragraph (a) of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. (i) AB partnership, which makes its returns on the basis 
of the calendar year, hired employees under the WIN program on July 1, 
1972, and incurred expenses for such employees during the following 12 
months at an initial rate of $10,000 per month. Partners A and B, who 
make their returns on the basis of a calendar year, share the profits 
and losses of AB partnership equally. Under paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section, each partner's share of the WIN expenses was approportioned as 
follows:

                                                                        
                                                           Period ending
                                                           Dec. 31, 1972
                                                                        
  Total WIN expenses for the taxable year...............         $60,000
Partner A's share (50 percent)..........................          30,000
Partner B's share (50 percent)..........................          30,000
                                                                        

Assuming that during 1972 A and B did not directly incur any WIN 
expenses and that they did not own any interest in other partnerships, 
electing small business corporations, estates, or trusts incurring WIN 
expenses, each partner's share of the WIN expenses is $30,000. For the 
taxable year 1972, each partner's credit earned of $6,000 (20 percent of 
$30,000) was allowed under section 40 as a credit against his liability 
for tax.

    (ii) On January 1, 1973, AB partnership terminates the employment of 
its employees accounting for 50 percent of its WIN expenses incurred to 
that date, or $30,000 in salaries

[[Page 380]]

and wages. The actual period of employment for these WIN employees was 6 
months. For the taxable year 1972, each partner's recomputed credit 
earned is $3,000 (20 percent of $15,000). The income tax imposed by 
chapter 1 of the Code on each of the partners for the taxable year 1973 
is increased by the $3,000 decrease in his credit earned for the taxable 
year 1972 (that is, $6,000 original credit earned minus $3,000 
recomputed credit earned).

    Example 2. (i) The facts are the same as in subdivision (i) of 
example 1, except that on January 1, 1973, partner A sells one-half of 
his 50 percent interest in AB partnership to C, to form the ABC 
partnership. No other changes in the partners' proportionate interest in 
the general profits of the partnership occurred during 1973. Under 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section, each partner's share of the WIN 
expenses was apportioned on December 31, 1973, as follows:

                                                                        
                                                           Period ending
                                                           Dec. 31, 1973
                                                                        
  Total WIN expenses for the taxable year...............         $60,000
Partner A's share (25 percent)..........................          15,000
Partner B's share (50 percent)..........................          30,000
Partner C's share (25 percent)..........................          15,000
                                                                        


    (ii) Under paragraph (a)(2) of this section, on January 1, 1973, the 
employment of these WIN employees shall be deemed terminated by partner 
A with respect to 50 percent of the WIN expenses allocated to him since 
immediately after the January 1, 1973, sale, A's proportionate interest 
in the general profits of ABC partnership is reduced to 50 percent of 
his proportionate interest in the general profits of AB partnership for 
1972. The period of employment of the WIN employees accounting for the 
50 percent of the WIN expenses originally allocated to A is 6 months 
(that is, the period beginning with July 1, 1972, and ending with 
December 31, 1972). For the taxable year 1972 partner A's recomputed 
credit earned is $3,000 (20 percent of $15,000). The income tax imposed 
by chapter 1 of the Code on partner A for the taxable year 1973 is 
increased by the $3,000 decrease in his credit earned for the taxable 
year 1972 (that is, $6,000 original credit earned minus $3,000 
recomputed credit earned).

[38 FR 6160, Mar. 7, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 1.50B-1   Definitions of WIN expenses and WIN employees.

    (a) WIN expenses--(1) In general. Except as otherwise provided in 
paragraphs (b) through (g) of this section, for purposes of Secs. 1.50A-
1 through 1.50B-5, the term ``work incentive program expenses'' 
(referred to in Secs. 1.50A-1 through 1.50B-5 as ``WIN expenses'') means 
the salaries and wages paid or incurred by the taxpayer for services 
rendered during the first 12 months of employment (whether or not 
consecutive) by an employee who is certified by the Secretary of Labor 
as--
    (i) Having been placed in employment by the taxpayer (or if the 
taxpayer is a partner of a partnership, beneficiary of an estate or 
trust, or a shareholder of an electing small business corporation, by 
such partnership, estate, trust, or electing small business corporation) 
under a work incentive (WIN) program established under section 432(b)(1) 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 632(b)(1)), and
    (ii) Not having displaced any individual from employment.

The term ``WIN expenses'' includes only salaries and wages paid or 
incurred in taxable years beginning after December 31, 1971. See 
paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.50A-3 for rules relating to the determination of 
the first 12 months of employment (whether or not consecutive).
    (2) Examples. The provisions of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph 
may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. X Corporation, an accrual basis taxpayer which files its 
return on the basis of the calendar year, hired an employee on July 1, 
1971, who was certified by the Secretary of Labor under this paragraph. 
The first 12 months of employment were continuous. X is entitled to the 
credit provided by section 40 with respect to the salaries or wages 
incurred during its taxable year beginning January 1, 1972, for services 
rendered by that employee during the period beginning July 1, 1971, and 
ending June 30, 1972.

    Example 2. Y, a cash basis taxpayer who files his return on the 
basis of the calendar year, employed A, an employee certified by the 
Secretary of Labor under this paragraph, on July 1, 1971. A's first 12 
months of employment were continuous. Y paid A on the basis of a 
semimonthly payroll period, but paid his payroll 2 days after the close 
of the payroll period during which the wages were earned. Thus, Y paid A 
on January 2, 1972, for services rendered between December 16, 1971, and 
December 31, 1971. Y is entitled to the credit provided by section 40 
with respect to the wages paid for services rendered by A during the 
period beginning December 16, 1971, and ending June 30, 1972, because 
those wages were paid by Y in a taxable year beginning after December 
31, 1971.

    (b) Salaries and wages. For purposes of this section, the term 
``salaries and wages'' means only cash remuneration

[[Page 381]]

including a check. Amounts deducted and withheld from the employee's pay 
(for example, taxes and contributions to health and retirement plans) 
shall be deemed to be cash remuneration even though not actually paid 
directly to the employee.
    (c) Trade or business expenses. The term ``WIN expenses'' includes 
only salaries and wages which are paid or incurred in a trade or 
business of the taxpayer and which are deductible in computing taxable 
income. Thus, salaries and wages paid to domestic employees in a private 
home are not ``WIN expenses''.
    (d) Reimbursed expenses--(1) In general. The term ``WIN expenses'' 
does not include salaries and wages to the extent that the taxpayer is 
reimbursed for such salaries or wages from any source.
    (2) Example. Subparagraph (1) of this paragraph may be illustrated 
by the following example:

    Example. X Company, which makes its return on the basis of the 
calendar year, hired WIN employees on January 1, 1972. X Company has a 
cost-plus construction contract with the Federal Government. The fact 
that X has a construction contract with the Federal Government or anyone 
else does not change its character from a normal business transaction in 
which there has been a sale of materials and services. Thus, the 
salaries or wages paid or incurred for services rendered by these WIN 
employees would not be reimbursed expenses, and X would be entitled to 
the credit provided by section 40.

    (e) Geographical limitation--(1) In general. The term ``WIN 
expenses'' does not include salaries and wages paid or incurred for 
services rendered outside the United States (as defined in sections 638 
(relating to Continental Shelf areas) and 7701(a)(9). However, services 
rendered by any WIN employee outside the United States (as defined in 
sections 638 (relating to Continental Shelf areas) and 7701(a)(9)) shall 
contribute to such employee's first 12 months of employment (whether or 
not consecutive) for purposes of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-3 and 
paragraph (a) of this section.
    (2) Example. Subparagraph (1) of this paragraph may be illustrated 
by the following example:

    Example. X Corporation, which files its return on the basis of the 
calendar year, hired A, a WIN employee, on January 1, 1972, and 
continuously employed him for the following 24-month period. During 
January and February of 1972, X paid A's wages while he received 
training conducted in Puerto Rico. For the remainder of the calendar 
year A performed services for X within the United States. For purposes 
of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-3 and paragraph (a) of this section, A's 
first 12 months of employment are January 1, 1972, to December 31, 1972. 
Under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph no wages paid to A for services 
rendered during the months of January and February of 1972 may be taken 
into account by X under paragraph (a) of this section as WIN expenses 
because the services were rendered outside the United States. However, X 
may take into account wages he has incurred with respect to A for the 
period March 1, 1972, to December 31, 1972.

    (f) Maximum period of training or instruction. The term ``WIN 
expenses'' does not include salaries and wages paid or incurred for 
services rendered by a WIN employee after the end of the 24-month period 
beginning with the date of initial employment (as defined in paragraph 
(c)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3) of the WIN employee.
    (g) Ineligible individuals. The term ``WIN expenses'' does not 
include salaries and wages paid or incurred for services rendered by a 
WIN employee who--
    (1) Bears any of the relationships described in paragraphs (1) 
through (8) of section 152(a) of the Code to the taxpayer, or, if the 
taxpayer is a corporation, to an individual who owns, directly or 
indirectly, more than 50 percent in value of the outstanding stock of 
the corporation (determined with the application of section 267(c) of 
the Code),
    (2) If the taxpayer is an estate or trust, is a grantor, 
beneficiary, or fiduciary of the estate or trust, or is an individual 
who bears any of the relationships described in paragraphs (1) through 
(8) of section 152(a) of the Code to a grantor, beneficiary, or 
fiduciary of the estate or trust, or
    (3) Is a dependent (described in section 152(a)(9) of the Code) of 
the taxpayer, or, if the taxpayer is a corporation, of an individual 
described in subparagraph (1), or, if the taxpayer is an

[[Page 382]]

estate or trust, of a grantor, beneficiary, or fiduciary of the estate 
or trust.
    (h) WIN employee. For purposes of Secs. 1.50A-1 through 1.50B-5 the 
term ``WIN employee'' means an employee who is certified by the 
Secretary of Labor as meeting the requirements of paragraphs (a)(1) (i) 
and (ii) of this section.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (j) Special rule applicable to transactions to which section 381(a) 
applies and transactions involving a mere change in form of conducting a 
trade or business. The first 12 months of employment (whether or not 
consecutive) and the period described in section 50B (c)(4) of any WIN 
employee, for purposes of determining the amount of WIN expenses (as 
defined in paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50B-1), shall not be affected by 
transactions to which the rule contained in paragraph (f) (relating to 
transaction to which section 381(a) (relating to certain corporate 
acquisitions) applies), or paragraph (g) (relating to a mere change in 
form of conducting a trade or business) of Sec. 1.50A-4 applies.

[38 FR 6161, Mar. 7, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 1.50B-2   Electing small business corporations.

    (a) General rule--(1) In general. In the case of an electing small 
business corporation (as defined in section 1371 (b)), WIN expenses (as 
defined in paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50B-1) shall be apportioned pro rata 
among the persons who are shareholders of such corporation on the last 
day of such corporation's taxable year, and shall be taken into account 
for the taxable years of such shareholders within which or with which 
the taxable year of such corporation ends. The WIN expenses for each 
employee shall be apportioned separately. In determining who are 
shareholders of an electing small business corporation on the last day 
of its taxable year, the rules of paragraph (d)(1) of Sec. 1.1371-1 and 
of paragraph (a)(2) of Sec. 1.1373-1 shall apply.
    (2) Shareholder as taxpayer. A shareholder to whom WIN expenses are 
apportioned shall, for purposes of the credit allowed by section 40, be 
treated as the taxpayer who paid or incurred the expenses allocated to 
him. If a shareholder takes into account in determining his WIN expenses 
any WIN expenses with respect to an employee of an electing small 
business corporation, and if the employment of such employee is 
terminated in a termination subject to the rules contained in paragraph 
(a) of Sec. 1.50A-3, or if the electing small business corporation fails 
to pay comparable wages and such failure is subject to the rules 
contained in paragraphs (a) (2) and (3) of Sec. 1.50A-3, then such 
shareholder shall make a recapture determination under the provisions of 
section 50A (c) and (d) of the Code and Sec. 1.50A-3. See Sec. 1.50A-5.
    (3) Computation of the first 12 months of employment. The first 12 
months of employment (whether or not consecutive) and the period 
described in section 50B(c)(4) of any WIN employee for purposes of 
determining the amount of WIN expenses (as defined in paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.50B-1) shall not be affected by a change in the shareholders in 
such corporation and shall not be affected by a reduction in any 
shareholder's proportionate stock interest in such corporation (for 
example, by a sale or redemption or by the issuance of additional 
shares). Thus, the first 12 months of employment (whether or not 
consecutive) of any WIN employee shall be the same with respect to any 
shareholder claiming a credit under section 40 for salaries and wages 
paid or incurred for services rendered by such employee. Also, such 
first 12 months of employment and the period described in section 
50B(c)(4), with respect to any WIN employee, shall not be deemed to 
begin again because of the making of a valid election under section 
1372.
    (b) Summary statement. An electing small business corporation shall 
attach to its return a statement showing the apportionment to each 
shareholder of its WIN expenses with respect to each WIN employee.
    (c) Examples. Paragraph (a) of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. (i) X Corporation, an electing small business corporation 
which files its returns on the basis of the calendar year, hired WIN 
employees on July 1, 1972, whose employment was continuous for the next 
24 months. A, a shareholder, has a 10 percent interest in X Corporation. 
X Corporation incurred $24,000 in wages with respect to these

[[Page 383]]

WIN employees in calendar year 1972, and $48,000 in calendar year 1973. 
Assuming that during 1972 shareholder A did not directly incur any other 
WIN expenses and did not own any other interest in other electing small 
business corporations, partnerships, estates, or trusts that incurred 
WIN expenses, for taxable year 1972 shareholder A's credit earned of 
$480 (10 percent (A's ownership interest) multiplied by $24,000 of WIN 
expenses multiplied by 20 percent) was allowed under section 40 as a 
credit against his liability for tax.

    (ii) On March 1, 1973, shareholder A sold all of his interest to B, 
a new shareholder. Therefore, the employment of the WIN employees is 
deemed terminated for purposes of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-3 with 
respect to shareholder A. For taxable year 1972, A's recomputed credit 
is zero because the termination occurred before the end of the period 
described in paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.50A-3. The income tax imposed by 
chapter 1 of the Code on A for the taxable year 1973 is increased by the 
$480 decrease in his credit earned for the taxable year 1972 (that is, 
$480 original credit earned minus zero recomputed credit earned). Under 
paragraph (a) of this section A has no credit earned for 1973.

    (iii) Under paragraph (a)(1) of this section, assuming that during 
1973 shareholder B did not directly incur any other WIN expenses and 
that he did not own any interest in other electing small business 
corporations, partnerships, estates, or trusts that incurred WIN 
expenses, shareholder B's credit earned is $480 (10 percent (B's 
ownership interest) multiplied by $24,000 of WIN expenses multiplied by 
20 percent) and is allowable under section 40 as a credit against his 
liability for tax. Under paragraph (a)(3) for purposes of determining 
the period of employment that may be taken into account by B the initial 
date of employment of these WIN employees relates back to the date they 
were first employed, i.e., July 1, 1972. Thus, the first 12 months of 
employment ends on June 30, 1973.

    Example 2. (i) Y Corporation, an electing small business corporation 
which files its return on the basis of the calendar year, hires five WIN 
employees in 1972. The WIN expenses incurred with respect to each 
employee are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                   WIN employee No.                        WIN expenses 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.......................................................          $6,000
2.......................................................           5,000
3.......................................................           4,000
4.......................................................           4,000
5.......................................................           3,000
                                                         ---------------
    Total...............................................          22,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

On December 31, 1972, Y Corporation has 10 shares of stock outstanding 
which are owned as follows: A owns 3 shares, B owns 2 shares, and C owns 
5 shares.

    (ii) Under this section, the WIN expenses are apportioned to the 
shareholders of Y Corporation as follows:

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      WIN employees                              1               2               3               4               5             Total    
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Total WIN expenses....................................          $6,000          $5,000          $4,000          $4,000          $3,000  ..............
                                                         ===============================================================================================
Shareholder A (3/10)....................................           1,800           1,500           1,200           1,200             900           6,600
Shareholder B (2/10)....................................           1,200           1,000             800             800             600           4,400
Shareholder C (5/10)....................................           3,000           2,500           2,000           2,000           1,500          11,000
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Assume that shareholders A, B, and C did not directly incur any other 
WIN expenses during their taxable year in which falls December 31, 1972 
(the last day of Y Corporation's taxable year), and that such 
shareholders did not own any interest in other electing small business 
corporations, partnerships, estates or trust that incurred WIN expenses. 
The total WIN expenses of shareholder A are $6,600, of shareholder B are 
$4,400, and of shareholder C are $11,000.

[38 FR 6162, Mar. 7, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 1.50B-3   Estates and trusts.

    (a) General rule--(1) In general. In the case of an estate or trust, 
WIN expenses (as defined in paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50B-1) shall be 
apportioned among the estate or trust and its beneficiaries on the basis 
of the income of such estate or trust allocable to each. There shall be 
apportioned to the estate or trust for its taxable year, and to each 
beneficiary of such estate or trust for his taxable year in which or 
with which the taxable year of such estate or trust ends, his share (as 
determined under paragraph (b) of this section) of the total WIN 
expenses. The WIN expenses for each employee shall be apportioned 
separately.
    (2) Beneficiary as taxpayer. A beneficiary to whom WIN expenses are 
apportioned shall, for purposes of the credit allowed by section 40, be 
treated as the taxpayer who paid or incurred such WIN expenses allocated 
to him. If

[[Page 384]]

a beneficiary takes into account in determining his WIN expenses any 
portion of the WIN expenses paid or incurred by an estate or trust and 
if the employee with respect to which the WIN expenses were paid or 
incurred is terminated in a termination subject to the rules in 
paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-3, or if there is a failure (which is 
subject to the rules is paragraphs (a) (2) and (3) of Sec. 1.50A-3) to 
pay such employee comparable wages then such beneficiary shall make a 
recapture determination under the provisions of section 50A (c) and (d) 
of the Code and Sec. 1.50A-3. See Sec. 1.50A-6.
    (3) Beneficiary. For purposes of this section, the term 
``beneficiary'' includes heir, legatee, and devisee.
    (4) Special rule for termination of interest. If during the taxable 
year of an estate or trust a beneficiary's interest in the income of 
such estate or trust terminates, WIN expenses paid or incurred by such 
estate or trust after such termination shall not be apportioned to such 
beneficiary.
    (b) Share. A trust's, estate's, or beneficiary's share of the WIN 
expenses with respect to each employee shall be:
    (1) The total WIN expenses incurred in the taxable year of the 
estate or trust with respect to such employee, multiplied by
    (2) The amount of income allocable to such estate or trust or to 
such beneficiary for such taxable year, divided by
    (3) The sum of the amounts of income allocable to such estate or 
trust and all its beneficiaries taken into account under subparagraph 
(2) of this paragraph.
    (c) Limitation based on amount of tax. In the case of an estate or 
trust, the $25,000 amount specified in section 50A(a)(2), relating to 
limitation based on amount of tax, shall be reduced for the taxable year 
to--
    (1) $25,000, multiplied by
    (2) The WIN expenses apportioned to such estate or trust under 
paragraph (a) of this section, divided by
    (3) The WIN expenses apportioned among such estate or trust and its 
beneficiaries.
    (d) Computation of the first 12 months of employment. The first 12 
months of employment (whether or not consecutive) and the period 
described in section 50B(c)(4) of any WIN employee for purposes of 
determining the amount of WIN expenses (as defined in paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.50B-1) shall not be affected by a change in the beneficiaries of 
an estate or trust and shall not be affected by a reduction or a 
termination of a beneficiary's interest in the income of such estate or 
trust. Thus, the first 12 months of employment (whether or not 
consecutive) of any WIN employee shall be the same with respect to trust 
or estate, and any beneficiary of such trust or estate claiming a credit 
under section 40 for salaries and wages paid or incurred for services 
rendered by such employee.
    (e) Summary statement. An estate or trust shall attach to its return 
a statement showing the apportionment of WIN expenses with respect to 
each employee to such estate or trust and to each beneficiary.
    (f) Examples. This section may be illustrated by the following 
examples:

    Example 1. (1) XYZ trust, which makes its return on the basis of the 
calendar year, hires five WIN employees in 1972. The WIN expenses 
incurred with respect to each employee are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                    WIN employee No.                       WIN expenses 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.......................................................          $6,000
2.......................................................           5,000
3.......................................................           4,000
4.......................................................           4,000
5.......................................................           3,000
                                                         ---------------
    Total...............................................          22,000
                                                         ===============
------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the taxable year 1972 the income of XYZ trust is $10,000 which is 
allocable as follows: $5,000 to XYZ trust, $2,000 to beneficiary A, and 
$3,000 to beneficiary B. Beneficiaries A and B make their returns on the 
basis of a calendar year.

    (2) Under this section, the WIN expenses are apportioned to XYZ 
trust and to its beneficiaries as follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
           WIN employees                 1            2            3            4            5          Total   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Total WIN expenses..............       $6,000       $5,000       $4,000       $4,000       $3,000  ...........
                                   =============================================================================

[[Page 385]]

                                                                                                                
XYZ Trust: $5,000/10,000..........        3,000        2,500        2,000        2,000        1,500      $11,000
Beneficiary A: $2,000/10,000......        1,200        1,000          800          800          600        4,400
Beneficiary B: $3,000/10,000......        1,800        1,500        1,200        1,200          900        6,600
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Assume that beneficiary A hired a WIN employee during his taxable year 
1972 and incurred $6,000 in wages. Also, assume that beneficiary B did 
not hire WIN employees during his taxable year 1972 and that 
beneficiaries A and B did not own any interests in other trusts, 
estates, partnerships, or electing small business corporations that 
hired WIN employees. The WIN expenses of XYZ trust are $11,000, of 
beneficiary A are $10,400, and of beneficiary B are $6,600.

    (3) In the case of XYZ trust, the $25,000 amount specified in 
section 50A(a)(2) is reduced to $12,500, computed as follows: (i) 
$25,000 multiplied by (ii) $11,000 (WIN expense apportioned to the 
trust), divided by (iii) $22,000 (total WIN expenses apportioned among 
such trust ($11,000), beneficiary A ($4,400), and beneficiary B 
($6,600)).

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that 
beneficiary A's interest is reduced to zero. Under paragraph (a)(2) for 
purposes of determining the period of employment that may be taken into 
account by XYZ trust and by beneficiary B, the initial date of 
employment of the WIN employees relates back to the date they were first 
employed.

[38 FR 6163, Mar. 7, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 1.50B-4   Partnerships.

    (a) General rule--(1) In general. In the case of a partnership, each 
partner shall take into account separately, for his taxable year with or 
within which the partnership taxable year ends, his share (as determined 
under subparagraph (3) of this paragraph) of the WIN expenses (as 
defined in paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50B-1) of employees employed by the 
partnership during such partnership's taxable year. The WIN expenses for 
each employee shall be allocated separately.
    (2) Partner as taxpayer. Each partner shall be treated as the 
taxpayer who paid or incurred the share of the WIN expenses allocated to 
him. If a partner takes into account in determining his WIN expenses the 
WIN expenses of an employee of a partnership, and if the employment of 
such employee is terminated in a termination subject to the rules 
contained in paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50A-3, or if the partnership fails 
to pay comparable wages and such failure is subject to the rules 
contained in paragraphs (a) (2) and (3) of Sec. 1.50A-3, then such 
partner shall make a recapture determination under the provisions of 
section 50A (c) and (d) of the Code and Sec. 1.50A-3. See Sec. 1.50A-7.
    (3) Determination of partner's share. (i) Each partner's share of 
the WIN expenses shall be determined in accordance with the ratio in 
which the partners divide the general profits of the partnership (that 
is, the taxable income of the partnership as described in section 702 
(a)(9)) regardless of whether the partnership has a profit or a loss for 
the taxable year during which the WIN expenses are paid or incurred. 
However, if the ratio in which the partners divide the general profits 
of the partnership changes during the taxable year of the partnership, 
the ratio effective for the date on which the WIN expenses are paid or 
incurred shall apply.
    (ii) Notwithstanding subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, if the 
deduction with respect to any WIN expenses is specially allocated and if 
such special allocation is recognized under section 704 (a) and (b) and 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.704-1, then each partner's share of the WIN 
expenses shall be determined by reference to such special allocation 
effective for the date on which the WIN expenses are paid or incurred.
    (4) Computation of the first 12 months of employment. The first 12 
months of employment (whether or not consecutive) and the period 
described in section 50B(c)(4) with respect to any WIN employee for 
purposes of determining the amount of WIN expenses (as defined in 
paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50B-1) shall not be affected by a change in the 
partners of such partnership and shall not be affected by a change in 
the ratio in which the partners divide the general profits of the 
partnership. Thus, the first 12 months of employment (whether or not 
consecutive) and the 24-month period described in section 50B(c)(4) of 
any WIN employee shall be the same with respect to any partner

[[Page 386]]

claiming a credit under section 40 for salaries and wages paid or 
incurred for services rendered by such employee.
    (b) Summary statement. A partnership shall attach to its return a 
statement showing the allocation to each partner of its WIN expenses 
with respect to each WIN employee.
    (c) Examples. Paragraph (a) of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. Partnership ABCD hires a WIN employee on January 1, 1972, 
and hires a second WIN employee on September 1, 1972. The ABCD 
partnership and each of its partners reports income on the basis of the 
calendar year. Partners A, B, C, and D share partnership profits 
equally. Each partner's share of the WIN expenses incurred with respect 
to these employees is 25 percent.

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example 1 and the following 
additional facts: A dies on June 30, 1972, and B purchases A's interest 
as of such date. Each partner's share of the profits from January 1 to 
June 30 is 25 percent. From July 1 to December 31, B's share of the 
profits is 50 percent, and C and D's share of the profits is 25 percent 
each. B shall take into account 25 percent of the WIN expenses incurred 
during the period beginning January 1 and ending June 30 and 50 percent 
of the WIN expenses incurred during the remainder of the year with 
respect to the employee hired on January 1, 1972. Also, B shall take 
into account 50 percent of the WIN expenses incurred with respect to the 
employee hired on September 1, C and D shall each take into account 25 
percent of the WIN expenses incurred with respect to the employees 
employed by the partnership in 1972. Under paragraph (a)(3), for 
purposes of determining the period of employment that may be taken into 
account by B, the initial date of employment of the WIN employee hired 
on January 1 relates back to the date he was first employed, i.e., 
January 1, 1972.

    Example 3. Partnership SH is engaged in manufacturing. Under the 
terms of the partnership agreements deductions attributable to the 
employment of WIN employees are specially allocated 70 percent to 
partner S and 30 percent to partner H. In all other respects S and H 
share profits and losses equally. If the special allocation with respect 
to the WIN expenses is recognized under section 704 (a) and (b) and 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.704-1, the WIN expenses shall be taken into 
account, 70 percent by S and 30 percent by H.

    Example 4. (i) LMN partnership, which files its return on the basis 
of the calendar year, hires five WIN employees in 1973. The WIN expenses 
incurred with respect to each employee are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                    WIN employee No.                       WIN expenses 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.......................................................          $6,000
2.......................................................           5,000
3.......................................................           4,000
4.......................................................           4,000
5.......................................................           3,000
                                                         ---------------
    Total...............................................          22,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

On December 31, 1973, the ratio in which the partners divide the general 
profits of the LMN partnership is as follows: L receives three-tenths of 
the general profits, M receives two-tenths of the general profits, and N 
receives five-tenths of the general profits.

    (ii) Under this section the WIN expenses are apportioned to the 
partners of LMN partnership as follows:

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      WIN employees                              1               2               3               4               5             Total    
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Total WIN expenses....................................          $6,000          $5,000          $4,000          $4,000          $3,000         $22,000
                                                         ===============================================================================================
Partner L (3/10)........................................           1,800           1,500           1,200           1,200             900           6,600
Partner M (2/10)........................................           1,200           1,000             800             800             600           4,400
Partner N (5/10)........................................           3,000           2,500           2,000           2,000           1,500          11,000
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Assume that partners L, M, and N did not directly incur any other WIN 
expenses during their taxable year in which falls December 31, 1973 (the 
last day of LMN partnership's taxable year) and that such partners did 
not own any interest in other partnerships, electing small business 
corporations, estates, or trusts that incurred WIN expenses. The total 
WIN expenses of partner L are $6,600, of partner M are $4,400, and of 
partner N are $11,000.

[38 FR 6164, Mar. 7, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 1.50B-5   Limitations with respect to certain persons.

    (a) Mutual savings institutions. In the case of an organization to 
which section 593 applies (that is, a mutual savings bank, a cooperative 
bank, or a domestic building and loan association)--
    (1) WIN expenses shall be 50 percent of the amount otherwise 
determined under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50B-1, and

[[Page 387]]

    (2) The $25,000 amount specified in section 50A(a)(2), relating to 
limitation based on amount of tax, shall be reduced by 50 percent of 
such amount.

For example, a domestic building and loan association incurs $30,000 in 
WIN expenses (as determined under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50B-1) during 
its taxable year. However, under this paragraph such amount is reduced 
to $15,000 (50 percent of $30,000). If an organization to which section 
593 applies is a member of a controlled group (as defined in section 
50A(a)(5)), the $25,000 amount specified in section 50A(a)(2) shall be 
reduced in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (f) of 
Sec. 1.50A-1 before such amount is further reduced under this paragraph.
    (b) Regulated investment companies and real estate investment 
trusts. (1) In the case of a regulated investment company or a real 
estate investment trust subject to taxation under subchapter M, chapter 
1 of the Code--
    (i) The WIN expenses determined under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50B-1, 
and
    (ii) The $25,000 amount specified in section 50A(a)(2), relating to 
limitation based on amount of tax,

shall be reduced to such person's ratable share of each such amount. If 
a regulated investment company or a real estate investment trust is a 
member of a controlled group (as defined in section 50A (a)(5)), the 
$25,000 amount specified in section 50A(a)(2) shall be reduced in 
accordance with the provisions of paragraph (f) of Sec. 1.50A-1 before 
such amount is further reduced under this paragraph.
    (2) A person's ratable share of the amount described in subparagraph 
(1)(i) and the amount described in subparagraph (1)(ii) of this 
paragraph shall be the ratio which--
    (i) Taxable income for the taxable year, bears to,
    (ii) Taxable income for the taxable year plus the amount of the 
deduction for dividends paid taken into account under section 
852(b)(2)(D) in computing investment company taxable income, or under 
section 857(b)(2)(B) (section 857(b)(2)(C), as then in effect, for 
taxable years ending before October 5, 1976) in computing real estate 
investment trust taxable income, as the case may be.

For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term ``taxable income'' 
means, in the case of a regulated investment company, its investment 
company taxable income (within the meaning of section 852(b)(2)) and, in 
the case of a real estate investment trust its real estate investment 
trust, taxable income (within the meaning of section 857(b)(2)). In the 
case of a taxable year ending after October 4, 1976, real estate 
investment trust taxable income, for purposes of this paragraph, is 
determined by excluding any net capital gain, and by computing the 
deduction for dividends paid without regard to capital gains dividends 
(as defined in section 857(b)(3)(C)). The amount of the deduction for 
dividends paid includes the amount of deficiency dividends (other than 
capital gains deficiency dividends) taken into account in computing 
investment company taxable income or real estate investment trust 
taxable income for the taxable year. See section 860(f) for the 
definition of deficiency dividends.
    (3) This paragraph may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. (i) Corporation X, a regulated investment company subject 
to taxation under section 852 of the Code, which makes its return on the 
basis of the calendar year, incurs WIN expenses of $30,000 during the 
year 1974. Corporation X's investment company taxable income under 
section 852 (b)(2) is $10,000 after taking into account a deduction for 
dividends paid of $90,000.

    (ii) Under this paragraph, Corporation X's WIN expenses for the 
taxable year 1974 is $3,000, computed as follows: (a) $30,000 (WIN 
expenses), multiplied by (b) $10,000 (taxable income), divided by (c) 
$100,000 (taxable income plus the deduction for dividends paid). For 
1974, the $25,000 amount specified in section 50A(a)(2) is reduced to 
$2,500.

    (c) Cooperatives. (1) In the case of a cooperative organization 
described in section 1381(a)--
    (i) The WIN expenses determined under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.50B-1, 
and
    (ii) The $25,000 amount specified in section 50A(a)(2), relating to 
limitation based on amount of tax,

shall be reduced to such cooperative's ratable share of each such amount 
(as determined under subparagraph (2) of

[[Page 388]]

this paragraph). If a cooperative organization described in section 
1381(a) is a member of a controlled group (as defined in section 
50A(a)(5)), the $25,000 amount specified in section 50A(a)(2) shall be 
reduced in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (f) of 
Sec. 1.50A-1 before such amount is further reduced under this paragraph.
    (2) A cooperative's ratable share of the amount described in 
subparagraph (1)(i) and the amount described in subparagraph (1)(ii) of 
this paragraph shall be the ratio which--
    (i) Taxable income for the taxable year, bears to
    (ii) Taxable income for the taxable year plus the sum of (a) the 
amount of the deductions allowed under section 1382(b), and (b) the 
amount of the deductions allowed under section 1382(c), and (c) amounts 
similar to the amounts described in (a) and (b) of this subdivision the 
tax treatment of which is determined without regard to subchapter T, 
chapter 1 of the Code and the regulations thereunder.
    (3) This paragraph may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. (i) Cooperative X, an organization described in section 
1381(a) which makes its return on the basis of the calendar year, incurs 
WIN expenses of $30,000 for the taxable year 1972. Cooperative X's 
taxable income is $10,000 after taking into account deductions of 
$30,000 allowed under section 1382(b), and deductions of $60,000 allowed 
under section 1382(c).

    (ii) Under this paragraph, Cooperative X's WIN expenses for the 
taxable year 1972 are $3,000, computed as follows: (a) $30,000 (WIN 
expenses), multiplied by (b) $10,000 (taxable income), divided by (c) 
$100,000 (taxable income plus the sum of deductions allowed under 
sections 1382(b) and 1382(c)). For 1972, the $25,000 amount specified in 
section 50A(a)(2) is reduced to $2,500.

(Sec. 860(e) (92 Stat. 2849, 26 U.S.C. 860(e)); sec. 860(g) (92 Stat. 
2850, 26 U.S.C. 860(g)); sec. 7805 (68A Stat. 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805))

[38 FR 6164, Mar. 7, 1973, as amended by T.D. 7767, 46 FR 11262, Feb. 6, 
1981; T.D. 7936, 49 FR 2105, Jan. 18, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 1.51-1  Amount of credit.

    (a) Determination of amount--(1) General rule. Except as provided in 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section, the amount of the targeted jobs credit 
for purposes of section 38 (formerly designated section 44B) for the 
taxable year equals 50 percent of the qualified first-year wages (minus 
any qualified first-year wages paid to individuals while such 
individuals are qualified summer youth employees) plus 25 percent of the 
qualified second-year wages.
    (2) Special rule for employment of qualified summer youth employees. 
In the case of an employer who pays or incurs qualified wages after 
April 30, 1983, to a qualified summer youth employee beginning work for 
the employer after such date, the amount of the targeted jobs credit for 
the taxable year is equal to the amount determined under paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section plus an amount equal to 85 percent of the first 
$3,000 of qualified wages paid to each qualified summer youth employee 
during the taxable year. Such wages must be attributable to services 
tendered by the qualified summer youth employee during any 90-day period 
beginning on or after May 1 and ending on or before September 15.
    (3) Limitation. See section 38(c) for rules limiting the amount of 
the credit to a percentage of the amount of the taxpayer's net tax 
liability.
    (b) Definitions--(1) Qualified wages. The term ``qualified wages'' 
means wages (as defined in paragraph (b)(4)) paid or incurred by the 
employer during the taxable year to individuals who are members of a 
targeted group (within the meaning of section 51(d)).
    (2) Qualified first-year wages--(i) General rule. Except in the case 
of qualified summer youth employees, the term ``qualified first-year 
wages'' means the first $6,000 of wages (as defined in paragraph (b)(4) 
of this section) attributable to service rendered by a member of a 
targeted group during the 1-year period beginning with the day the 
individual first begins work for the employer. In the case of a 
vocational rehabilitation referral (as defined in section 51(d)(2)) who 
begins work for the employer before July 19, 1984, the one-year period 
begins with the day the individual begins work for the employer on or 
after the beginning of such individual's rehabilitation plan. However, 
with the exception of vocational rehabilitation referrals for whom the 
employer claimed a credit under section 44B (as in effect prior to 
enactment of

[[Page 389]]

the Revenue Act of 1978) for a taxable year beginning before January 1, 
1979, members of a targeted group who are first hired after September 
26, 1978, and before January 1, 1979, will be treated as if they first 
began work for the employer on January 1, 1979. The date on which the 
wages are paid is not determinative of whether the wages are first-year 
wages; rather, the wages must be attributed to the period during which 
the work was performed. See paragraph (f)(1) of this section for an 
additional limitation on the term ``qualified first-year wages''. (See 
examples 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 in paragraph (j) of this section for 
examples illustrating the application of the rules in this paragraph 
(b)(2)).
    (ii) Special rule for qualified summer youth employees. In the case 
of a qualified summer youth employee, qualified first-year wages for 
purposes of the 85 percent credit referred to in paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section include only wages attributable to services rendered by a 
qualified summer youth employee during any 90-day period beginning on or 
after May 1 and ending on or before September 15. If the individual is 
retained by the employer after the 90-day period and recertified as a 
member of another targeted group, the term ``qualified first-year 
wages'' for purposes of the 50 percent credit described by section 
51(a)(1) has the meaning assigned that term in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of 
this section except that the $6,000 limitation for qualified first-year 
wages shall be reduced by wages up to, but not more than, $3,000 
attributable to services rendered during the 90-day period.
    (3) Qualified second-year wages. The term ``qualified second-year 
wages'' means the first $6,000 of wages attributable to services 
rendered by a member of a targeted group, other than a qualified summer 
youth employee, during the 1-year period beginning on the day after the 
last day of the period for qualified first-year wages. The date on which 
the wages are paid is not determinative of whether the wages are second-
year wages; rather, the wages must be attributed to the period during 
which the work was performed.
    (4) Wages--(i) General rule. Except as otherwise provided in 
paragraphs (b)(4) (ii) and (iii) of this section, the term ``wages'' 
shall only include amounts paid or incurred after December 31, 1978, for 
taxable years ending after December 31, 1978. For purposes of this 
section, the term ``wages'' has the meaning assigned such term by 
section 3306(b) (determined without regard to any dollar limitation 
contained in such subsection).
    (ii) Special rules. In the case of agricultural labor or railway 
labor, the term ``wages'' means unemployment insurance wages within the 
meaning of subparagraph (A) or (B) of section 51(h)(1). The term 
``wages'' shall not include any amounts paid or incurred by an employer 
for any pay period to any individual for whom the employer receives 
federally funded payments for on-the-job training for such individual 
for such pay period. (See example 7 in paragraph (j) of this section.) 
The amount of wages which would otherwise be qualified wages under this 
section with respect to an individual for a taxable year shall be 
reduced by an amount equal to the amount of payments made to the 
employer (however utilized by such employer) with respect to such 
individual for such taxable year under a program established under 
section 414 of the Social Security Act. In addition, the term ``wages'' 
shall not include any amount paid or incurred by the employer in a 
taxable year beginning before January 1, 1982, to an individual with 
respect to whom the employer claims a credit under section 40 (relating 
to expenses of work incentive programs). For youths participating in a 
qualified cooperative education program:
    (A) Section 3306(c)(10)(C) (relating to the definition of employment 
for certain students) does not apply in determining wages under this 
section; and
    (B) The term ``wages'' shall include only those amounts paid or 
incurred by the employer that are attributable to services rendered by 
the individual while he or she meets the conditions specified in section 
51(d)(8)(A). For purposes of the preceding sentence, an employee who met 
the requirement in section 51(d)(8)(A)(iv), dealing with economically 
disadvantaged status, when hired, shall be deemed to continuously meet 
the requirement in section

[[Page 390]]

51(d)(8)(A)(iv) during the time the employee is in the cooperative 
education program. See also paragraph (e) of this section for rules 
relating to the exclusion of wages paid to certain individuals.
    (iii) Termination. The term ``wages'' shall not include any amount 
paid or incurred to an individual who begins work for the employer after 
December 31, 1985.
    (5) Special rule for eligible work incentive employees. In the case 
of an eligible work incentive employee (as defined in Sec. 1.51-
1(c)(4)), this paragraph (b) shall be applied for taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1981, as if such employee had been a member 
of a targeted group for taxable years beginning before January 1, 1982. 
(See example 8 in paragraph (j) of this section.)
    (c) Members of targeted groups--(1) In general. An individual is a 
member of a targeted group if the individual is certified as (i) a 
vocational rehabilitation referral, (ii) an economically disadvantaged 
youth, (iii) an economically disadvantaged Vietnam-era veteran, (iv) an 
SSI recipient, (v) a general assistance recipient, (vi) a youth 
participating in a cooperative education program, (vii) an economically 
disadvantaged ex-convict, (viii) an eligible work incentive employee, 
(ix) a qualified summer youth employee, or (x) an involuntarily 
terminated CETA employee. Except as provided below, see section 51(d) of 
this section for a definition of these groups. See paragraph (d) of this 
section for rules concerning the certification of individuals as members 
of one of these targeted groups.
    (2) Youths participating in a qualified cooperative education 
Program--(i) Student requirements. For an individual to qualify as a 
youth participating in a qualified cooperative education program, the 
individual must meet each of the following conditions (A) through (D)--
    (A) The youth must have attained the age of 16 but not 20. (An 
individual reaching 19 will be treated as a youth participating in a 
qualified cooperative education program only for wages paid or incurred 
after November 26, 1979.)
    (B) The youth must not have graduated from a high school or 
vocational school.
    (C) The youth must be enrolled in and actively pursuing a qualified 
cooperative education program (as defined in paragraph (c)(2)(iii) of 
this section).
    (D) With respect to wages paid or incurred after December 31, 1981, 
the youth must be a member of an economically disadvantaged family when 
initially hired.
    (ii) Economically disadvantaged family. See section 51(d)(11) for 
the rules relating to the determination of whether an individual is a 
member of an economically disadvantaged family.
    (iii) Qualified cooperative education program. The term ``qualified 
cooperative education program'' means a program of vocational education 
for individuals who (through written cooperative arrangements between a 
qualified school and one or more employers) receive instruction 
(including required academic instruction) by alternation of study in 
school with a job in any occupational field (but only if these two 
experiences are planned by the school and employer so that each 
contributes to the student's education and employability). See section 
51(d)(8)(C) for the definition of a ``qualified school.'' For purposes 
of this paragraph, the term ``program of vocational education'' means an 
organized educational program which is directly related to the 
preparation of individuals for employment, or for additional preparation 
for a career requiring other than a baccalaureate or advanced degree. An 
``organized educational program'' means only instruction related to the 
occupation or occupations for which the students are in training or 
instruction necessary for students to benefit from such training. The 
student's employment contributes to his or her education and 
employability only if it is related to the occupation, or a cluster of 
closely related occupations, for which the student is in training in 
school. However, the student's employment need not be directly related 
to or in the same technical field as the training the student receives 
in school. For example, a student studying carpentry does not have to 
work as a carpenter for the program to constitute a ``qualified 
cooperative education program.'' The program will qualify if, for

[[Page 391]]

example, the student works at a hardware store because the student's 
work would familiarize the student with the materials and tools used by 
carpenters. The program would not qualify, however, if the student works 
at a restaurant and generally performs tasks in such employment not 
related to carpentry.
    (iv) Actively pursuing. For purposes of this paragraph (c)(2), a 
youth will not be considered to be ``actively pursuing'' a school's 
qualified cooperative education program (within the meaning of paragraph 
(c)(2)(iii) of this section) during summer vacation unless that school 
program continues during the summer vacation. Whether the school program 
continues during the summer vacation will be determined by examining the 
written agreement between the school and the employer. Thus, if a 
written agreement specifically covers the summer vacation period and 
provides for a significant degree of involvement by school personnel to 
provide supervision for the students in the program during that period, 
the school program will be considered to continue during the summer, 
regardless of whether classes are held during the vacation period.
    (3) General assistance recipients. In order for an individual to 
qualify as a general assistance recipient, the individual, or another 
member of the assistance unit (within the meaning of 45 CFR 
205.40(a)(1)) that the individual is a member of, must receive 
assistance for a period of not less than 30 days ending within the 
preemployment period (as defined in section 51(d)(13)) from a qualified 
general assistance program. A qualified general assistance program is a 
program of a State or a political sudivision of a State that the 
Secretary (after consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services) has designated as providing general assistance (or similar 
assistance) which is based on need and consists of money payments or 
voucher or scrip. For purposes of the preceding sentences, a program 
qualifying as a general assistance program by reason of non-cash 
assistance (i.e., voucher or scrip) shall be so treated only with 
respect to amounts paid or incurred after July 1, 1982, to individuals 
beginning work for the employer after such date. For purposes of this 
subparagraph, the term ``money'' means cash or an instrument convertible 
into cash (e.g., a check).
    (4) Eligible work incentive employees. An eligible work incentive 
employee means an individual who has been certified by the designated 
local agency (as defined in paragraph (d)(10) of this section) as--
    (i) Being eligible for financial assistance under part A of title IV 
of the Social Security Act and as having continuously received such 
financial assistance during the 90-day period which immediately precedes 
the date on which such individual is hired by the employer, or
    (ii) Having been placed in employment under a work incentive program 
established under section 432(b)(1) or 445 of the Social Security Act.
The provisions of this paragraph (c)(4) are effective with respect to 
taxable years of the employer beginning after December 31, 1981. (See 
paragraph (b)(5) of this section for a special rule relating to eligible 
work incentive employees.)
    (5) Involuntarily terminated CETA employees--(i) In general. An 
involuntarily terminated CETA employee is an individual who first began 
work for an employer after August 13, 1981, in taxable years of the 
employer ending after August 13, 1981, and is certified by the 
designated local agency (as defined in paragraph (d)(10) of this 
section) as having been involuntarily terminated after December 31, 
1980, from employment financed in whole, or in part, under a program 
under part D of title II or title VI of the Comprehensive Employment and 
Training Act.
    (ii) Termination. Section 51(d)(10) and this paragraph (c)(5) shall 
not apply to any individual who begins work for the employer after 
December 31, 1982.
    (d) Certification--(1) General rule. Except as otherwise provided in 
this paragraph, an individual shall not be treated as a member of a 
targeted group unless, on or before the day on which such individual 
begins work for the employer, the employer has received, or has 
requested in writing, a certification that the individual is a member of 
a targeted group from the designated

[[Page 392]]

local agency (as defined in paragraph (d)(10) of this section). In 
addition, the employer must receive a certification before the targeted 
jobs credit can be claimed. However, with respect to individuals who 
began work for the employer on or before May 11, 1982, the certification 
will be timely only if requested or received before the day the 
individual began work for the employer. In the case of a request in 
writing mailed via the United States Postal Service, the request shall 
be deemed to be made on the date of the postmark stamped on the cover in 
which such request was mailed to the designated local agency provided 
the request is mailed in accordance with the mailing requirements in 
Sec. 301.7502-1(c) and delivered in accordance with the delivery 
requirements in Sec. 301.7502-1(d). In the case of a deadline that but 
for this sentence would fall on a Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, 
the deadline for making a timely request in writing for a certification 
or receiving a timely certification shall be the next succeeding day 
which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. (See section 7503 for 
the definition of ``legal holiday.'') See paragraph (d)(2) of this 
section for transitional rules applicable to certain employees who began 
work for the employer before September 26, 1981. See paragraph (d)(3) of 
this section for special rules applicable to cooperative education 
students and paragraph (d)(4) of this section for special rules 
applicable to eligible work incentive employees.
    (2) Timeliness of certification in the case of an individual to whom 
a written preliminary eligibility determination has been issued. If on 
or before the day on which an individual begins work for the employer, 
such individual has received from a designated local agency (or other 
agency or organization designated pursuant to a written agreement with 
such designated local agency) a written preliminary determination that 
such individual is a member of a targeted group, then such individual 
may be treated as a member of a targeted group if on or before the fifth 
day after the day such individual begins work for the employer such 
employer receives, or requests in writing, from the designated local 
agency a certification that such individual is a member of a targeted 
group. This paragraph (d)(2) only applies to individuals who begin work 
for the employer after July 18, 1984.
    (3) Transitional rules for certain employees who began work for the 
employer on or before September 26, 1981. In the case of an individual, 
other than a cooperative education student, who began work for the 
employer before June 29, 1981, the employer must either receive, or 
request in writing, a certification before July 23, 1981. In the case of 
an individual, other than a cooperative education student, who began 
work for the employer after June 28, 1981, and on or before September 
26, 1981, the employer must either receive, or request in writing, a 
certification before September 26, 1981.
    (4) Cooperative education students. In the case of cooperative 
education students, the school administering the cooperative education 
program must issue the certification. Form 6199 is provided for this 
purpose. If the student begins work for the employer after September 26, 
1981, see the general rule in Sec. 1.51-1(d)(1) for the date when this 
certification must be received or requested. If the student begins work 
for the employer on or before September 26, 1981, the employer must 
receive the certification or request it in writing before September 26, 
1981. In order for an employer to claim a credit on wages paid or 
incurred to a cooperative education student after December 31, 1981, the 
employer must receive or request in writing a determination that the 
student is a member of an economically disadvantaged family. A request 
for economic eligibility determination for a cooperative education 
student must be made in writing by the employer to the participating 
school. If the student begins work for the employer on or before 
September 26, 1981, the employer must receive or request in writing such 
determination before September 26, 1981. However, a request in writing 
on or after August 13, 1981, to a participating school for certification 
will be deemed to include a request for an economic eligibility 
determination. In addition, any certification issued by a school after 
August 13, 1981, will be deemed to be issued in response

[[Page 393]]

to a request for certification which includes a request for an economic 
eligibility determination. The rule in the preceding sentence does not 
eliminate the requirement that the employer receive a certification that 
includes an economic eligibility determination in order to claim a 
credit for wages paid or incurred after December 31, 1981. If a 
certification issued by a school after August 13, 1984, does not contain 
an economic eligibility determination and the employer wishes to claim a 
credit for wages paid or incurred after December 31, 1981, the employer 
must receive a completed certification before the date on which the 
credit is claimed.
    (5) Eligible work incentive employees. In the case of eligible work 
incentive employees, the employer must either receive, or request in 
writing, a certification within the time requirements of paragraph (d) 
(1), (2), or (3) of this section, whichever is applicable. Before 
October 12, 1981 (the date the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 
codified the State employment security agency as the designated local 
agency for certifying targeted groups), a certificate may be received or 
requested in writing from either the designated local agency (as defined 
in paragraph (d)(10) of this section) or the office or agency that 
properly issued certifications under former section 50B(h)(1) (relating 
to the work incentive credit).
    (6) Certifications that are not timely. Any certification that is 
not timely received or requested by the employer in accordance with the 
rules of this paragraph will be treated as invalid. Thus, the employer 
will not be allowed to claim a credit under section 51 with respect to 
any wages paid or incurred to an employee whose certification or request 
for certification is not timely. A timely request for certification does 
not eliminate the need for the employer to receive a certification 
before claiming the credit. In the case of a request for certification 
that was denied, resubmitted, and then approved, the timeliness of the 
request shall be determined by the timeliness of the first request.
    (7) Incorrect certification--(i) In general. Except as otherwise 
provided in paragraph (d)(7)(ii) of this section, if an individual has 
been certified as a member of a targeted group, and such certification 
is based on false information provided by such individual, the 
certification shall be revoked and wages paid by the employer after the 
date on which notice of revocation is received by the employer shall not 
be treated as qualified wages. For purposes of this paragraph, a 
certification will be revoked only if the individual would not have been 
certified had correct information been provided to the issuer of the 
certification. Thus, false information that is not material to an 
individual's eligibility as a member of a targeted group will not 
invalidate an otherwise valid certification.
    (ii) Employer's knowledge that the certification was incorrect. In 
the case of an employer who knew, or had reason to know, at the time of 
certification that the information provided to the designated local 
agency was false, none of the wages paid by such employer to an 
individual to whom an incorrect certification has been issued will be 
qualified wages.
    (8) Certifications issued to certain rehires. This paragraph (d)(8) 
applies in the case of an employee who first began work for the employer 
before August 13, 1981, and was dismissed and rehired by the employer. A 
certification received or requested by an employer with respect to such 
an employee will be considered timely only if there was a valid business 
reason, unrelated to the availability of the credit, for the dismissal 
and rehire and if the employer did not dismiss and then rehire the 
employee in order to meet the timing requirement with respect to 
certification. An individual who is dismissed and then rehired for the 
purpose described in the preceding sentence will be considered for 
purposes of section 51(d)(16) and this paragraph to have been 
continuously employed by the employer during the time between the 
dismissal and the rehire. Whether the employer was motivated by reason 
of the certification rules in section 51(d)(16) and this paragraph to 
dismiss and then rehire an employee is a question of fact to be 
determined from all the circumstances surrounding the dismissal and 
rehire. (See paragraph (e)(2)

[[Page 394]]

of this section for a separate rule disallowing the credit in the case 
of nonqualifying rehires.)
    (9) Individuals who continue to be employed by the same employer but 
as a member of another targeted group. This paragraph (d)(9) applies in 
the case of an employee who continues to be employed by the same 
employer but no longer qualifies as a member of the targeted group for 
which such employee was first certified (e.g., the employee was 
orginally certified as a qualified summer youth employee with respect to 
a ninety-day period between May 1 and September 15, but such ninety-day 
period has ended). In such case, the employer may request a 
certification that the employee is a member of another targeted group, 
and if any wages paid to such individual are qualified first-year wages 
or qualified second-year wages, the employer may be entitled to a 
targeted jobs credit with respect to such wages. The second 
certification will not be invalid merely because it was requested or 
received after the individual began work for the employer; only the 
first certification (for example, the certification with respect to an 
individual hired first as a qualified summer youth employee) must meet 
the requirement of section 51(d)(16) that a certification must be 
requested or received by an employer on or before the day on which the 
individual begins work for the employer. In the case of a former 
qualified summer youth employee or a youth participating in a qualified 
cooperative education program who is recertified as an economically 
disadvantaged youth, the term ``hiring date'' in section 51(d)(3)(B) 
does not mean the day the individual is hired by the employer but means 
the day the individual is certified as a member of the new targeted 
group. Accordingly, the age requirement of section 51(d)(3)(B) shall be 
applied as of the day the individual is certified as a member of the 
second targeted group. In addition, see section 51(d)(11) for rules 
concerning the viability of the original economic eligibility 
determination.
    (10) Certification where a trade or business has been transferred to 
a new employer. In the case of a transfer of a trade or business in 
which an individual who is a member of a targeted group is retained as 
an employee in the trade or business, the certification obtained for 
such employee by the transferor-employer will apply with respect to the 
transferee-employer.
    (11) Designated local agency--(i) In general. For the period before 
October 12, 1981, the term ``designated local agency'' means the agency 
for any locality designated jointly by the Secretary and the Secretary 
of Labor to perform certifications of employees for employers in that 
locality. On or after October 12, 1981, the term ``designated local 
agency'' means a State employment security agency established in 
accordance with the Act of June 6, 1933, as amended (29 U.S.C. 49 
through 49n).
    (ii) Jurisdiction. The designated local agency is the agency that 
has, pursuant to its charter, jurisdiction over the individual that is 
sought to be certified. Thus, any certification that is issued with 
respect to an individual who is not within the jurisdiction of the 
designated local agency that issued the certification will be invalid. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a request in 
writing for certification to the appropriate designated local agency 
that is made before January 23, 1984, will be considered to be timely if 
it is made after an otherwise timely request in writing for 
certification was made to a designated local agency that does not have 
jurisdiction over the individual sought to be certified.
    (e) Certain ineligible individuals--(1) Related individuals. For 
purposes of section 51(a), ``qualified wages'' does not include any 
amounts paid or incurred by a taxpayer to any of the following 
individuals:
    (i) An individual who is related (within the meaning of any of 
paragraphs (1) through (8) of section 152 (a)) to the taxpayer;
    (ii) An individual who is a dependent (within the meaning of section 
152(a)(9)) of the taxpayer;
    (iii) An individual who is related (within the meaning of any of 
paragraphs (1) through (8) of section 152(a)) to a shareholder who owns 
(within the meaning of section 267(c)) more than 50 percent in value of 
the outstanding

[[Page 395]]

stock of the taypayer, if the taxpayer is a corporation;
    (iv) An individual who is a dependent (within the meaning of section 
152(a)(9)) of a shareholder described in paragraph (e)(1)(iii) of this 
section;
    (v) An individual who is a grantor, beneficiary or fiduciary of the 
taxpayer, if the taxpayer is an estate or trust;
    (vi) An individual who is a dependent (within the meaning of section 
152(a)(9)) of an individual described in paragraph (e)(1)(v) of this 
section; or
    (vii) An individual who is related (within the meaning of any of 
paragraphs (1) through (8) of section 152(a)) to an individual described 
in paragraph (e)(1)(v) of this section.
    (2) Nonqualifying rehires. For purposes of section 51(a), 
``qualified wages'' does not include wages paid to an employee who had 
been employed by the employer prior to the current hiring date of the 
employee if at any time during such prior employment the employee was 
not a member of a targeted group. The preceding sentence shall not apply 
to an employee who was previously timely certified as a member of a 
targeted group with respect to the same employer. An employee shall be 
treated as not having been a member of a targeted group if the 
certification requirements of section 51(d)(16) were not met. (See 
example 8 in paragraph (j) of this section.)
    (3) Effective date. The provisions of this paragraph (e) are 
effective with respect to employees first beginning work for an employer 
after August 13, 1981.
    (f) Limitations--(1) Limitation on qualified first-year wages. With 
respect to taxable years beginning before January 1, 1982, the amount of 
the qualified first-year wages which may be taken into account for 
purposes of the targeted jobs credit for any taxable year shall not 
exceed 30 percent of the aggregate unemployment insurance wages paid by 
the employer during the calendar year ending in such taxable year. In 
the case of a group of trades or businesses under common control (as 
defined in Sec. 1.52-1(b)), the qualified first-year wages cannot exceed 
30 percent of the aggregate unemployment insurance wages paid to all 
employees of that group of trades or businesses under common control 
during the calendar year ending in such taxable year. For this purpose, 
the term ``unemployment insurance wages'' has the same meaning given to 
the term ``wages'' as defined in Sec. 1.51-1(b)(4). In this case of 
agricultural or railway labor, see section 51(h)(1) for the applicable 
definition of unemployment insurance wages. (See examples 13 and 14 in 
paragraph (j) of this section.)
    (2) Remuneration must be for trade or business employment. 
Remuneration paid by an employer to an employee during any taxable year 
shall be taken into account only if more than one-half of the 
remuneration paid by the employer to an employee is for services in a 
trade or business of the employer. This determination shall be made by 
each employer without regard to section 52 (a) or (b). Accordingly, 
employees of corporations that are members of a controlled group or 
employees of partnerships, proprietorships, and other trades or 
businesses (whether or not incorporated) which are under common control 
will be treated as being employed by each separate employer for this 
purpose. For this purpose, the term ``year'' means the taxable year of 
the employer. (See example 15 in paragraph (j) of this section.)
    (g) Election not to claim the targeted jobs credit. The election 
under section 51(j) (as amended by section 474(p) of the Tax Reform Act 
of 1984) not to claim the targeted jobs credit is available for taxable 
years beginning after December 31, 1983, and shall be made for the 
taxable year in which such credit is available by not claiming such 
credit on an original return or amended return at any time before the 
expiration of the 3-year period beginning on the last date prescribed by 
law for filing the return for the taxable year (determined without 
regard to extensions). The election may be revoked within the 3-year 
period by filing an amended return on which the credit is claimed.
    (h) Treatment of successor-employers. In the case of a successor-
employer referred to in section 3306(b)(1), the determination of the 
amount of credit under this section with respect to wages paid by such 
successor-employer shall be

[[Page 396]]

made in the same manner as if such wages were paid by the predecessor-
employer referred to in such section. Thus, the 1-year period referred 
to in Sec. 1.51-1(b)(2)(i) will be considered to begin with the day the 
employee first began work for the transferor-employer, and the amount of 
qualified first-year wages and qualified second-year wages paid or 
incurred with respect to the employee must be reduced by the amount of 
any such wages paid or incurred by the transferor-employer. (See 
examples 10 and 11 in paragraph (j) of this section.) Also, see 
paragraph (d)(10) of this section for rules concerning the viability of 
the employee's certification.
    (i) Treatment of employees performing services for other persons. No 
credit shall be determined under this section with respect to 
remuneration paid by an employer to an employee for services performed 
by such employee for another person unless the amount reasonably 
expected to be received by the employer for such services from such 
other person exceeds the remuneration paid by the employer to such 
employee for such services.
    (j) Examples. The application of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples which, except as otherwise stated, assume that 
the limitations imposed by Secs. 1.51-1(f)(2) and 1.53-3 are 
inapplicable:

    Example 1. Corporation M is a calendar year, cash receipts and 
disbursements method taxpayer. A, an economically disadvantaged youth, 
first began work for Corporation M on October 1, 1978. Qualified first-
year wages with respect to A are wages attributable to the period 
beginning on January 1, 1979 (since A was first hired after September 
26, 1978, he is treated as having begun work on January 1, 1979) and 
ending on December 31, 1979. In the 1979 taxable year, Corporation M 
pays A $5,000 of qualified first-year wages attributable to services 
performed in 1979. Corporation M's allowable credit is equal to $2,500 
(50 percent of $5,000).

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example 1, except that in 
1980 Corporation M pays to A $100 of wages attributable to services 
rendered in 1979. These wages will still be considered as qualified 
first-year wages, but the credit may not be claimed until the 1980 
taxable year.

    Example 3. Corporation O is a calendar year, cash receipts and 
disbursements method taxpayer. C, a vocational rehabilitation referral, 
first began work for Corporation O on July 1, 1978. Corporation O 
claimed a credit under section 44B (as in effect prior to enactment of 
the Revenue Act of 1978) for $3,000 of wages paid to C in the 1978 
taxable year. Corporation O paid C $6,000 for services performed from 
January 1, 1979 to June 30, 1979. The period during which qualified 
first-year wages are determined begins on July 1, 1978, and ends on June 
30, 1979. Amounts paid before January 1, 1979, however, are not taken 
into consideration in determining the amount of qualified first-year 
wages. Accordingly, only the wages attributable to services performed 
from January 1, 1979, through June 30, 1979, are considered as qualified 
first-year wages. Corporation O's allowable credit is equal to $3,000 
(50 percent of $6,000).

    Example 4. I first began work for Corporation Q, a cash receipts and 
disbursements method taxpayer, on January 1, 1981, and was not a member 
of a targeted group. On March 1, 1981, I was convicted of a felony and 
sentenced to prison. I quit working for Corporation Q, and served the 
prison sentence. On November 1, 1981, I again was hired by Corporation Q 
and began work on that date. On the November 1, 1981 hiring date, I was 
an economically disadvantaged ex-convict for whom Corporation Q received 
a certificate. Corporation Q paid I $500 of wages for services performed 
from November 1, 1981, to December 31, 1981, and $6,000 of wages for 
services performed during 1982. The $500 of wages paid for services 
performed from November 1, 1981, to December 31, 1981, would be 
qualified first-year wages because these qualified wages were paid for 
services performed during the 1-year period beginning on the date I 
first began work for Corporation Q (January 1, 1981). The $6,000 of 
wages paid for services performed during 1982 would be qualified second-
year wages because these qualified wages were paid for services 
performed during the 1-year period beginning on the day after the first 
1-year period. Accordingly, Corporation Q has an allowable credit of 
$250 attributable to qualified first-year wages and $1,500 attributable 
to qualified second-year wages.

    Example 5. Assume the same facts as in example 4, except that all 
dates are 1 year later. Thus, I first began work for Corporation Q on 
January 1, 1982, was convicted on March 1, 1982, and was rehired on 
November 1, 1982. Under these facts, Q is not entitled to take a 
targeted jobs credit with respect to I's wages because I is a 
nonqualifying rehire.

    Example 6. J, an economically disadvantaged youth, first began work 
for Corporation R, a calendar year cash receipts and disbursements 
method taxpayer, on December 1, 1979. On July 1, 1980, J was laid off by 
Corporation R and began work for Corporation S, which is unrelated to 
Corporation R, on

[[Page 397]]

July 2, 1980. On November 1, 1980, J again began work for Corporation R 
and continued working for Corporation R until January 1, 1982. At the 
time J first began work for Corporation S, J no longer met the 
qualifications of an economically disadvantaged youth. Corporation S may 
not claim a credit for wages paid to J because J was not a member of a 
targeted group at the time he began work for Corporation S. Corporation 
R, however, may claim a credit for wages paid to J because J was a 
member of a targeted group when he was hired by Corporation R. 
Corporation R's qualified first-year wages paid to J are the wages paid 
for services performed by J from December 1, 1979, to July 1, 1980, and 
from November 1, 1980, to November 30, 1980. Corporation R's qualified 
second-year wages paid to J are wages paid for services performed by J 
from December 1, 1980, to November 30, 1981. Corporation R may not claim 
a credit for wages paid for services performed by J after November 30, 
1981.

    Example 7. K, a member of a targeted group, first began work for 
Corporation T on January 1, 1979. For the pay periods from January 1, 
1979, to March 31, 1979, Corporation T received federally funded 
payments for on-the-job training for K and paid wages of $2,000 to K. 
During the remainder of 1979 Corporation T paid wages of $7,000 to K. 
Corporation T may claim a credit on $6,000 of qualified first-year 
wages. Amounts paid to K by Corporation T during the pay periods for 
which Corporation T received federally funded payments for on-the-job 
training for K are not considered wages for purposes of the credit. 
However, Corporation T may consider $6,000 of the total $7,000 of wages 
paid after March 31, 1979, as qualified first-year wages.

    Example 8. P first began work for Corporation X on January 1, 1981, 
as an individual who was certified to be an eligible employee for 
purposes of the WIN credit provided in section 40. Corporation X paid P 
$6,000 of wages during its taxable year beginning on January 1, 1981, 
and $6,000 of wages during its taxable year beginning on January 1, 
1982. X can claim a targeted jobs credit for the wages paid in 1982 if 
the requirements of section 51 are met. For purposes of section 51 (a), 
P's qualified first-year wages are the wages paid from January 1, 1981, 
to December 31, 1981, and P's qualified second-year wages are the wages 
paid from January 1, 1982, to December 31, 1982. Thus, Corporation X is 
only entitled to claim a targeted job credit based on P's qualified 
second-year wages.

    Example 9. (i) L, 15 years of age, first began work for Corporation 
U on August 1, 1979. On September 3, 1979, L began her junior year in 
high school and enrolled in a qualified cooperative education program 
that was to run for her junior and senior years. On October 1, 1979, 
when L turned 16, she met all the requirements of Sec. 1.51-1(c)(2)(i) 
and qualified as a youth participating in a qualified cooperative 
education program. Corporation U is entitled to claim a credit on wages 
paid or incurred for services performed by L after September 30, 1979, 
so long as L meets the requisite requirements. L's summer vacation began 
on June 1, 1980. Assume that the cooperative education program L was 
enrolled in did not continue during the summer vacation (i.e., the 
written agreement between the employer and the school did not cover the 
summer vacation). Thus, during her summer vacation, L did not meet the 
requirement of actively pursuing a qualified cooperative education 
program. Accordingly, Corporation U may not claim a credit on wages paid 
for services performed by L during L's summer vacation. On September 2, 
1980, L began her senior year, and again met all the requirements of 
Sec. 1.51-1(c)(2)(i). She continued to meet these requirements until 
June 5, 1981, when she graduated from high school. Accordingly, 
Corporation U may claim a credit on wages paid for services performed 
after September 1, 1980, and before June 5, 1981.

    (ii) Assume the same facts as in (i), above, except that all dates 
are 3 years later. Under these facts, U is not entitled to claim a 
targeted jobs credit with respect to any of L's wages because L has not 
been timely certified under section 51(d)(16) and Sec. 1.51-1(d)(3).

    Example 10. D began work for a drugstore owned by E as a sole 
proprietor on January 1, 1979, and was certified as a member of a 
targeted group with respect to E. On June 1, 1979, E sold the drugstore 
where D worked to F, who continued to operate the drugstore with D as an 
employee. D's qualification as a member of a targeted group is not 
required to be redetermined in order for F to qualify for the targeted 
jobs credit. F will take into account the certification of D's 
eligibility that was provided to E. F will have qualified first-year 
wages consisting of the first $6,000 of wages paid or incurred to D by E 
and F from January 1, 1979 to December 31, 1979 (reduced by any 
qualified wages paid or incurred by E to D from January 1, 1979, to May 
31, 1979). F's qualified second-year wages will consist of the first 
$6,000 of wages paid or incurred to D by F from January 1, 1980, to 
December 31, 1980.

    Example 11. G began work in a machine shop owned by H as a sole 
proprietor on January 1, 1979, and was certified as a member of a 
targeted group with respect to H. On June 1, 1980, H transferred all the 
assets of the machine shop to newly formed Corporation P. Corporation P 
retained G as an employee in the machine shop. G's qualification as a

[[Page 398]]

member of a targeted group is not required to be redetermined in order 
for P to qualify for the targeted jobs credit. H has qualified first-
year wages in the amount of the first $6,000 of wages paid or incurred 
to G by H from January 1, 1979, to December 31, 1979. Corporation P has 
qualified second-year wages in the amount of the first $6,000 of wages 
paid or incurred to G by H and Corporation P from January 1, 1980, to 
December 31, 1980 (reduced by any qualified second-year wages paid by H 
to G).

    Example 12. W operates a retail store as a sole proprietor. On June 
1, 1982, W hires S after receiving a written determination from a local 
community organization that S meets the requirements of an economically 
disadvantaged youth. W does not request a certification from the State 
employment security agency as to S's eligibility. W is not entitled to 
claim a credit with respect to wages paid to S because W did not 
receive, or request in writing, a certification from the State 
employment security agency as to S's eligibility on or before the day on 
which S began work for W.

    Example 13. Corporation V is a cash receipts and disbursements 
method taxpayer with a July 1 through June 30 taxable year. In the 
taxable year ending June 30, 1980, the aggregate unemployment insurance 
wages paid by V were $150,000. In calendar year 1979 the aggregate 
unemployment insurance wages paid by Corporation V were $110,000. 
Corporation V's qualified first-year wages are limited to 30 percent of 
the aggregate unemployment insurance wages paid by it in calendar year 
1979 or $33,000 (30 percent of $110,000), even though the aggregate 
unemployment insurance wages paid by it in the taxable year ending June 
30, 1980, were $150,000.

    Example 14. Assume the same facts as in example 13, except that all 
dates are 3 years later. Since the limitation on qualified first-year 
wages does not apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1981, 
Corporation V's qualified first-year wages are $150,000.

    Example 15. M operates a retail store as a sole proprietor. N and O, 
both members of a targeted group, first began work for M on January 1, 
1979. M paid N total qualified first-year wages of $6,000 in 1979. Three 
thousand one hundred dollars of those wages were for services in M's 
retail store, and $2,900 of those wages were for services as M's maid. M 
paid O total qualified first-year wages of $6,000 in 1979. Three 
thousand dollars of those wages were for services in M's store and 
$3,000 of those wages were for services as M's chauffeur. M has an 
allowable credit of $3,000 in 1979 on all $6,000 of qualified first-year 
wages paid to N because more than one-half of the remuneration paid by M 
to N was for services in M's trade or business. M may not take into 
account the wages paid to O because not more than one-half of the 
remuneration paid by M to O was for services in M's trade or business. 
Acordingly, M may not claim a credit on wages paid to O.

[T.D. 8062, 50 FR 45998, Nov. 6, 1985]

                              Tax Surcharge


<R05>
Sec. 1.52-1  Trades or businesses that are under common control.

    (a) Apportionment of jobs credit among members of a group of trades 
or businesses that are under common control--(1) Targeted jobs credit. 
(i) In the case of a group of trades or businesses that are under common 
control (within the meaning of paragraph (b) of this section) at any 
time during the calendar year, the amount of the targeted jobs credit 
(computed under section 51 as if all the organizations that are under 
common control are one trade or business) under section 4-1B must be 
apportioned among the members of the group on the basis of each member's 
proportionate share of the wages giving rise to such credit. If the 
group of trades or businesses that are under common control have 
different taxable years, the credit shall be computed as if all the 
organizations have the same taxable year as the organization for which a 
determination of the proportionate share of the credit is being made. 
For taxable years beginning before January 1, 1982, the amount of the 
qualified first-year wages cannot exceed 30 percent of the aggregate 
unemployment insurance wages paid by the group of trades or businesses 
under common control during the calendar year ending in the taxable year 
of the organization for which a determination of the proportionate share 
of the credit is being made. The limitations in section 53 and the 
regulations thereunder apply to each organization individually 
(although, in applying these limitations, an affiliated group of 
corporations electing to make a consolidated return shall be treated as 
one organization).
    (ii) The application of the subparagraph may be illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. (a) Corporation M and its three subsidiaries, 
Corporations N, O, and P, are a group of businesses that are under 
common

[[Page 399]]

control and each uses the cash receipts and disbursements method of 
accounting and has a calendar year taxable year. Corporations M, N, O, 
and P paid out the following amounts in unemployment insurance wages, 
qualified first-year wages and qualified second-year wages during 1980.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      Unemployment  Qualified  Qualified
                                        insurance    1st-Year   2d-year 
                                          wages       wages      wages  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Corporation:                                                            
  M.................................     $600,000    $184,000    $75,000
  N.................................      300,000      85,000     90,000
  O.................................      360,000     120,000    115,000
  P.................................       24,000      24,000          0
                                     -----------------------------------
    Total...........................    1,284,000     413,000    280,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------


    (b) Since Corporations M, N, O, and P are under common control, the 
amount of qualified first-year wages paid by the group is limited to 30 
percent of the aggregate unemployment insurance wages paid by the group 
in the calendar year ending in the group's taxable year. Since the 
qualified first-year wages of $413,000 exceeds 30% of the aggregate 
unemployment insurance wages, the group is limited to qualified first-
year wages of $385,200 (30% of $1,284,000). The amount of the targeted 
jobs credit attributable to qualified first-year wages is equal to 
$192,600 (50% of $385,200). The amount of the credit attributable to 
qualified second-year wages is equal to $70,000 (25% of $280,000).

    (c) The credit is apportioned among Corporations M, N, O, and P on 
the basis of their proportionate share of the qualified first-year wages 
or qualified second-year wages giving rise to the credit. Each 
corporation's share of the credit attributable to qualified first-year 
wages would be computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                              Amount of 
                                                               credit   
                                                                        
Corporation:                                                            
                                                  $184,000              
  M...............................  $192,600 x                          
                                                 --------    =$85,807.26
                                                  $413,000              
                                                                        
                                                   $85,000              
  N...............................  $192,600 x                          
                                                 --------    =$39,639.23
                                                  $413,000              
                                                                        
                                                  $120,000              
  O...............................  $192,600 x                          
                                                 --------    =$55,961.26
                                                  $413,000              
                                                                        
                                                   $24,000              
  P...............................  $192,600 x                          
                                                 --------    =$11,192.25
                                                  $413,000              
                                                                        

    Each corporation's share of the credit attributable to qualified 
second-year wages is computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                               Amount of
                                                                 credit 
                                                                        
Corporation:                                                            
                                                      $75,000           
  M....................................  $70,000 x                      
                                                     --------   =$18,750
                                                     $280,000           
                                                                        
                                                      $90,000           
  N....................................  $70,000 x                      
                                                     --------   =$22,500
                                                     $280,000           
                                                                        
                                                     $115,000           
  O....................................  $70,000 x                      
                                                     --------   =$28,750
                                                     $280,000           
                                                                        
                                                        0               
  P....................................  $70,000 x                      
                                                     --------       =  0
                                                     $280,000           
                                                                        


    Example 2. Assume the facts in example 1 with these additional 
facts. A, a member of a targeted group, worked for more than one of the 
members of the controlled group in the taxable year. A first began work 
for Corporation M on January 1, 1980, and later worked for Corporations 
N and O during 1980. For services rendered by A during 1980, the 
following wages were paid to A: Corporation M paid A $2,500 of qualified 
first-year wages: Corporation N paid A $1,500 of qualified first-year 
wages; Corporation O paid A $3,000 of qualified first-year wages. 
Corporations M, N, and O paid A a total of $7,000 of wages during 1980. 
Only $6,000 of qualified first-year wages per year per employee may be 
taken into account for purposes of the credit. See Sec. 1.51-1(d)(1). 
Since Corporations M, N, and O are treated as a single employer under 
section 52(a), the maximum $6,000 of qualified first-year wages paid A 
by the group must be apportioned among Corporations M, N, and O as 
follows:

                                                                        
                                                              Qualified 
                                                              1st year  
                                                                wages   
                                                                        
Corporation:                                                            
                                                    $2,500              
  M.................................  $6,000 x                          
                                                 --------     =$2,142.86
                                                    $7,000              
                                                                        
                                                    $1,500              
  N.................................  $6,000 x                          
                                                 --------     =$1,285.71
                                                    $7,000              
                                                                        
                                                    $3,000              
  O.................................  $6,000 x                          
                                                 --------     =$2,571.43
                                                    $7,000              
                                                                        


    Example 3. (a) Corporation Q and its two subsidiaries, Corporations 
R and S, are a group of businesses that are under common control and 
each uses the cash receipts and disbursements method of accounting. 
Corporation Q has a calendar year taxable year. Corporation R has a July 
1 through June 30 taxable year. Corporation S has an October 1 through 
September 30 taxable year. For purposes of determining Corporation R's 
proportionate share of the credit, the credit is computed as if 
Corporations Q and S have the

[[Page 400]]

same taxable year as Corporation R. Accordingly, Corporation R would 
compute its share of the credit for its 1979-1980 taxable year as set 
forth below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Qualified wages paid  
                                                  from July 1, 1979, to 
                                  Unemployment        June 30, 1980     
                                    insurance  -------------------------
                                   wages, 1979    1st year     2d year  
                                                   wages        wages   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Corporation:                                                            
  Q.............................      $500,000     $150,000      $80,000
  R.............................       300,000      110,000       50,000
  S.............................       100,000       25,000       10,000
                                 ---------------------------------------
    Total.......................       900,000      285,000      140,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------


    (b) Since Corporations Q, R, and S are under common control, the 
amount of qualified first-year wages is limited to 30 percent of the 
aggregate unemployment insurance wages paid by the group during the 
calendar year ending in Corporation R's taxable year. Since the 
qualified first-year wages of $285,000 exceeds 30 percent of the 
aggregate unemployment insurance wages, the group is limited to 
qualified first-year wages of $270,000 (30% of $900,000). The amount of 
the targeted jobs credit attributable to qualified first-year wages paid 
by members of the group during the period of the taxpayer's taxable year 
is $135,000 (50% of $270,000). The amount of the credit attributable to 
qualified second-year wages paid or incurred by members of the group 
during the period of the taxpayer's taxable year is $35,000 (25% of 
$140,000).

    (c) The credit is apportioned to Corporation R on the basis of its 
proportionate share of the qualified first-year wages and qualified 
second-year wages giving rise to the credit. Corporation R's share of 
the credit attributable to qualified first-year wages is $52,105.26


                                                                        
                                             $110,000                   
                                $135,000 x  ----------                  
                                             $285,000                   
                                                                        


Corporation R's share of the credit attributable to qualified second-
year wages is $12,500


                                                                        
                                              $50,000                   
                                 $35,000 x  ----------                  
                                             $140,000                   
                                                                        


Corporation R's share of the credit for its 1979-1980 taxable year is 
$64,605.26 ($52,105.26+$12,500).

    (2) New jobs credit. In the case of a group of trades or businesses 
that are under common control at any time during the calendar year, the 
amount of the new jobs credit (computed under section 51 as if all the 
organizations that are under common control are one trade or business) 
under section 44B (as in effect prior to enactment of the Revenue Act of 
1978) must be apportioned among the members of the group on the basis of 
each member's proportionate contribution to the increase in unemployment 
insurance wages for the entire group. The limitations in section 53 (as 
in effect prior to enactment of the Revenue Act of 1978) and the 
regulations thereunder apply to each organization individually 
(although, in applying these limitations, an affiliated group of 
corporations electing to make a consolidated return shall be treated as 
one organization). The application of this subparagraph may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. (a) Corporation T and its three subsidiaries, U, V, and W, 
are a group of businesses that are under common control and each has a 
calendar year taxable year. Corporations T, U, V, and W have paid out 
the following amounts in unemployment insurance wages during 1976 and 
1977:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Increase in
                                                              FUTA wages
                                       1976         1977       in 1977  
                                                              over 1976 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Corporation.                                                            
  T..............................   $1,000,000   $1,015,000     +$15,000
  U..............................      500,000      650,000     +150,000
  V..............................      600,000      580,000      -20,000
  W..............................       40,000      100,000      +60,000
                                  --------------------------------------
    Total........................    2,140,000    2,345,000      205,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------


    (b) Since all employees of trades or, businesses that are under 
common control are treated as employed by a single employer, the 
computations in section 51 are performed as if all the organizations 
which are under common control are one trade or business. Consequently, 
the amounts of the total unemployment insurance wages of the group in 
1976 (i.e., $2,140,000) and 1977 (i.e., $2,345,000) are used to 
determine the increase in unemployment insurance wages in 1977 over the 
1976 wage base. Since the amount equal to 102 percent of the 1976 
unemployment insurance wages ($2,182,800) is greater than the amount 
equal to 50 percent of the 1977 unemployment insurance wages 
($1,172,500), the increase in unemployment insurance wages in 1977 over 
the 1976 wage base is $162,200 ($2,345,000-$2,182,800). The limitations 
in section 51(c), (d), and (g) (as in effect prior to enactment of the 
Revenue Act of 1978) must

[[Page 401]]

also be computed as though all the organizations under common control 
are one trade or business. For purposes of this example, it is assumed 
that none of those limitations reduce the amount of increase in 
unemployment insurance wages. As a result, the amount of the new jobs 
credit allowed to the group of business is $81,100 (50% of $162,200).

    (c) The credit is apportioned among Corporations T, U, and W on the 
basis of their proportionate contributions to the increase in 
unemployment insurance wages. No credit would be allowed to Corporation 
V because it did not contribute to the increase in the group's 
unemployment insurance wages. Corporation T's share of the credit would 
be $5,406.66
($81,100 x ($15,000<divide>$225,000 (i.e., $15,000+$150,000+$60,000))), 
Corporation U's share would be $54,066.67 
($81,100 x ($150,000<divide>225,000)), and Corporation W's share would 
be $21,626.67 ($81,100 x ($60,000<divide>$225,000)).

    (b) Trades or businesses that are under common control. For purposes 
of this section, the term ``trades or businesses that are under common 
control'' means any group of trades or businesses that is either a 
``parent-subsidiary group under common control'' as defined in paragraph 
(c) of this section, a ``brother-sister group under common control'' as 
defined in paragraph (d) of this section, or a ``combined group under 
common control'' as defined in paragraph (e) of this section. For 
purposes of this section and Secs. 1.52-2 and 1.52-3, the term 
``organization'' means a sole proprietorship, a partnership, a trust, an 
estate, or a corporation. An organization may be a member of only one 
group of trades or businesses under common control. If, without the 
application of this paragraph, an organization would be a member of more 
than one such group, that organization shall indicate in its timely 
filed return the group in which it is being included. If the 
organization does not so indicate, then the district director with audit 
jurisdiction of the organization's return will determine the group in 
which the organization is to be included.
    (c) Parent-subsidiary group under common control--(1) In general. 
The term ``parent-subsidiary group under common control'' means one or 
more chains of organizations conducting trades or businesses that are 
connected through ownership of a controlling interest with a common 
parent organization if--
    (i) A controlling interest in each of the organizations, except the 
common parent organization, is owned (directly and with the application 
of Sec. 1.414(c)-4(b)(1), relating to options) by one or more of the 
other organizations; and
    (ii) The common parent organization owns (directly and with the 
application of Sec. 1.414(c)-4(b)(1), relating to options) a controlling 
interest in at least one of the other organizations, excluding, in 
computing the controlling interest, any direct ownership interest by the 
other organizations.
    (2) Controlling interest defined. For purposes of this paragraph, 
the term ``controlling interest'' means:
    (i) In the case of a corporation, ownership of stock possessing more 
than 50 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of 
stock entitled to vote or more than 50 percent of the total value of the 
shares of all classes of stock of the corporation;
    (ii) In the case of a trust or estate, ownership of an actuarial 
interest (determined under paragraph (f) of this section) of more than 
50 percent of the trust or estate;
    (iii) In the case of a partnership, ownership of more than 50 
percent of the profit interest or capital interest of the partnership; 
and
    (iv) In the case of a sole proprietorship, ownership of the sole 
proprietorship.
    (d) Brother-sister group under common control--(1) In general. The 
term ``brother-sister group under common control'' means two or more 
organizations conducting trades or businesses if--
    (i) The same five or fewer persons who are individuals, estates, or 
trusts own (directly and with the application of Sec. 1.414(c)-4(b)(1)), 
a controlling interest of each organization; and
    (ii) Taking into account the ownership of each person only to the 
extent that person's ownership is identical with respect to each 
organization, such persons are in effective control of each 
organization.

The five or fewer persons whose ownership is considered for purposes of 
the controlling interest requirement for each organization must be the 
same

[[Page 402]]

persons whose ownership is considered for purposes of the effective 
control requirement.
    (2) Controlling interest defined. For purposes of this paragraph, 
the term ``controlling interest'' means:
    (i) In the case of a corporation, ownership of stock possessing at 
least 80 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of 
stock entitled to vote or at least 80 percent of the total value of the 
shares of all classes of stock of the corporation;
    (ii) In case of a trust or estate, ownership of an actuarial 
interest (determined under paragraph (f) of this section) of a least 80 
percent of the trust or estate;
    (iii) In the case of a partnership, ownership of at least 80 percent 
of the profit interest or capital interest of the partnership; and
    (iv) In the case of a sole proprietorship, ownership of the sole 
proprietorship.
    (3) Effective control defined. For purposes of this paragraph 
``effective control'' means:
    (i) In the case of a corporation, ownership of stock possessing more 
than 50 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of 
stock entitled to vote or more than 50 percent of the total value of the 
shares of all classes of stock of the corporation;
    (ii) In the case of a trust or estate, ownership of an actuarial 
interest (determined under paragraph (f) of this section) of more than 
50 percent of the trust or estate;
    (iii) In the case of a partnership, ownership of more than 50 
percent of the profit interest or capital interest of the partnership; 
and
    (iv) In the case of a sole proprietorship, ownership of the sole 
proprietorship.
    (e) Combined group under common control. The term ``combined group 
under common control'' means a group of three or more organizations, in 
which (1) each organization is a member of either a parent-subsidiary 
group under common control or brother-sister group under common control, 
and (2) at least one organization is the common parent organization of a 
parent-subsidiary group under common control and also a member of a 
brother-sister group under common control.
    (f) Actuarial interest. For purposes of this section, the actuarial 
interest of each beneficiary of a trust or estate shall be determined by 
assuming the maximum exercise of discretion by the fiduciary in favor of 
the beneficiary. The factors and method prescribed in Sec. 20.2031-7 or, 
for certain prior periods, 20.2031-7A of this chapter (Estate Tax 
Regulations) for use in ascertaining the value of an interest in 
property for estate tax purposes will be used to determine a 
beneficiary's actuarial interest.
    (g) Exclusion of certain interests and stock in determining control. 
In determining control under this paragraph, the term ``interest'' and 
the term ``stock'' do not include an interest that is treated as not 
outstanding under Sec. 1.414(c)-3. In addition, the term ``stock'' does 
not include treasury stock or nonvoting stock that is limited and 
preferred regarding dividends.
    (h) Transitional rule--(1) In general. Paragraph (d) of this 
section, as amended by T.D. 8179, applies to all taxable years to which 
section 52(b) applies.
    (2) Election. In the case of taxable years ending before March 2, 
1988.
    (i) If, pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section, an organization 
indicated in a timely filed return that it chose to be a member of a 
brother-sister group under common control, and it is not a member of 
such group because of the amendments to paragraph (d) of this section 
made by T.D. 8179 such organization may make the choice described in 
paragraph (b) of this section by filing an amended return on or before 
September 2, 1988 if such organization would otherwise still be a member 
of more than one group of trades or businesses under common control, and
    (ii) If an organization--
    (A) Is a member of a brother-sister group of trades or businesses 
under common control under Sec. 1.52-1(d)(1) as in effect before 
amendment by T.D. 8179 (``old group''), for such taxable year, and
    (B) Is not such a member for such taxable year because of the 
amendments made by such Treasury decision,


[[Page 403]]


such organization (whether or not a corporation) nevertheless will be 
treated as a member of such old group if all the organizations (whether 
or not corporations) that are members of the old group meet all the 
requirements of Sec. 1.1563-1(d)(3) with respect to such taxable year.

(Secs. 44B, 381, and 7805 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (92 Stat. 
2834, 26 U.S.C. 44B); 91 Stat. 148, 26 U.S.C. 381(c)(26); 68A Stat. 917, 
26 U.S.C. 7805)

[T.D. 7553, 43 FR 31322, July 21, 1978, as amended by T.D. 7921, 48 FR 
52904, Nov. 23, 1983; T.D. 7955, 49 FR 19975, May 11, 1984; T.D. 8179, 
53 FR 6605, Mar. 2, 1988; 53 FR 8302, Mar. 14, 1988; 53 FR 16408, May 9, 
1988; T.D. 8540, 59 FR 30102, June 10, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1.52-2  Adjustments for acquisitions and dispositions.

    (a) General rule. The provisions in this section only apply to the 
computation of the new jobs credit. If, after December 31, 1975, an 
employer acquires the major portion of a trade or business or the major 
portion of a separate unit of a trade or business, then, for purposes of 
computing the new jobs credit for any calendar year ending after the 
acquisition, both the amount of unemployment insurance wages and the 
amount of total wages considered to have been paid by the acquiring 
employer, for both the year in which the acquisition occurred and the 
preceding year, must be increased, respectively, by the amount of 
unemployment insurance wages and the amount of total wages paid by the 
predecessor employer that are attributable to the acquired portion of 
the trade or business or separate unit. If the predecessor employer 
informs the acquiring employer in writing of the amount of unemployment 
insurance wages and the amount of total wages attributable to the 
acquired portion of the trade or business that have been paid during the 
periods preceding the acquisition, then, for purposes of computing the 
credit for any calendar year ending after the acquisition the amount of 
unemployment insurance wages and the amount of total wages considered 
paid by the predecessor employer shall be decreased by those amounts. 
Regardless of whether the predecessor employer so informs the acquiring 
employer, the predecessor employer shall not be allowed a credit for the 
amount of any increase in the employment insurance wages or the total 
wages in the calendar year of the acquisition attributable to the 
acquired portion of the trade or business over the amount of such wages 
in the calendar year preceding the acquisition.
    (b) Meaning of terms--(1) Acquisition. (i) For the purposes of this 
section, the term ``acquisition'' includes a lease agreement if the 
effect of the lease is to transfer the major portion of the trade or 
business or of a separate unit of the trade or business for the period 
of the lease. For instance, if one company leases a factory (including 
equipment) to another company for a 2-year period, the employees are 
retained by the second company, and the factory is used for the same 
general purposes as before, then for purposes of this section the lessee 
has acquired the lessor's trade or business for the period of the lease.
    (ii) Neither the major portion of a trade or business nor the major 
portion of a separate unit of a trade or business is acquired merely by 
acquiring physical assets. The acquisition must transfer a viable trade 
or business.
    (iii) Subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. R Co., a restaurant, sells its building and all its 
restaurant equipment to S Co. and moves into a larger, more modern 
building across the street. R Co. purchases new equipment, retains its 
name and continues to operate as a restaurant. S Co. opens a new 
restaurant in the old R Co. building. S Co. has merely acquired the old 
R Co. assets; it has not acquired any portion of R Co.'s business.

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1, except that R Co. 
also sells its name and goodwill to S Co. and ceases to operate a 
restaurant business. S Co. operates its restaurant using the old R Co. 
name. In this situation, S Co. has acquired R Co.'s business.

    (2) Separate unit. (i) A separate unit is a segment of a trade or 
business capable of operating as a self-sustaining enterprise with minor 
adjustments. The allocation of a portion of the goodwill of a trade or 
business to one of its segments is a strong indication that that segment 
is a separate unit.

[[Page 404]]

    (ii) The following examples are illustrations of the acquisition of 
a separate unit of a trade or business:

    Example 1. The M Corp., which has been engaged in the sale and 
repair of boats, leases the repair shop building and all the property 
used in its boat repair operations to the N Co. for four years and gives 
the N Co. a covenant not to compete in the boat repair business for the 
period of the lease. The N Co. is considered to have acquired a separate 
unit of M Corp.'s business for the period of the lease.

    Example 2. (a) The P Co. is engaged in the operation of a chain of 
department stores. There are eight divisions, each division is located 
in a different metropolitan area of the country, and each division 
operates under a different name. Although certain buying and 
merchandising functions are centralized, each division's day-to-day 
operations are independent of the others. The Q Corp. acquires all of 
the physical and intangible assets of one of the divisions, including 
the division's name. Other than making those minor adjustments necessary 
to give the division buying and merchandising departments, the Q Corp. 
allows the division to continue doing business in the same manner as it 
had been operating prior to the acquisition. The Q Corp. has acquired a 
separate unit of the P Co.'s business.

    (b) The facts are the same as in paragraph (a) of example 2, except 
that Q Corporation buys the division merely to obtain its store 
locations. Before the Q Corporation takes over, the division liquidates 
its inventory in a going-out-of-business sale. The Q Corporation has 
merely acquired assets in this transaction, not a separate unit of P 
Company's business.

    Example 3. The R Company processes and distributes meat products. 
Both the processing division and the distributorship are self-
sustaining, profitable operations. The acquisition of either the meat 
processing division or the distributorship would be an acquisition of a 
separate unit of the R Company's business.

    Example 4. The S Corporation is engaged in the manufacture and sale 
of steel and steel products. S Corporation also owns a coal mine, which 
it operates for the sole purpose of supplying its coal requirements for 
its steel manufacturing operations. The acquisition of the coal mine 
would be an acquisition of a separate unit of the S company's business.

    Example 5. The T Company, which is engaged in the business of 
operating a chain of drug stores, sells its only downtown drug store to 
the V Company and agrees not to open another T Company store in the 
downtown area for five years. Included in the purchase price is an 
amount that is charged for the goodwill of the store location. The V 
Company has acquired a separate unit of the T Company's business.

    Example 6. The W Company, which is engaged in the business of 
operating a chain of drug stores sells one of its stores to the X 
Company, but continues to operate another drug store three blocks away. 
The X Company opens the store doing business under its own name. The X 
Company has not acquired a separate unit of the W Company's business.

    Example 7. (a) The Y Corporation, which is engaged in the 
manufacture of mattresses, sells one of its three factories to the Z 
Company. At the time of the sale, the factory is capable of profitably 
manufacturing mattresses on its own. Z Company has acquired a separate 
unit of the Y Corporation.

    (b) The facts are the same as in (a) above, except that a profitable 
manufacturing operation cannot be conducted in the factory standing on 
its own. Z Company has not acquired a separate unit of the Y 
Corporation.

    Example 8. The O Construction Company is owned by A, B, and C, who 
are unrelated individuals. It owns equipment valued at 1.5 million 
dollars and construction contracts valued at 6 million dollars. A, 
wishing to start his own company, exchanges his interest in O Company 
for 2 million dollars of contracts and a sufficient amount of equipment 
to enable him to begin business immediately. A has acquired a separate 
unit of the O Company's business.

    (3) Major portion. All the facts and circumstances surrounding the 
transaction shall be taken into account in determining what constitutes 
a major portion of a trade or business (or separate unit). Factors to be 
considered include:
    (i) The fair market value of the assets in the portion relative to 
the fair market value of the other assets of the trade or business (or 
separate unit);
    (ii) The proportion of goodwill attributable to the portion of the 
trade or business (or separate unit);
    (iii) The proportion of the number of employees of the trade or 
business (or separate unit) attributable to the portion in the periods 
immediately preceding the transaction; and
    (iv) The proportion of the sales or gross receipts, net income, and 
budget

[[Page 405]]

of the trade or business (or separate unit) attributable to the portion.

(Secs. 44B, 381, and 7805 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (92 Stat. 
2834, 26 U.S.C. 44B); 91 Stat. 148, 26 U.S.C. 381(c)(26); 68A Stat. 917, 
26 U.S.C. 7805)

[T.D. 7553, 43 FR 31323, July 21, 1978, as amended by T.D. 7921, 48 FR 
52906, Nov. 23, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.52-3  Limitations with respect to certain persons.

    (a) Mutual savings institutions. In the case of an organization to 
which section 593 applies (that is, a mutual savings bank, a cooperative 
bank or a domestic building and loan association), the amount of the 
targeted jobs credit (new jobs credit in the case of wages paid before 
1979) allowable under section 44B shall be 50 percent of the amount 
otherwise determined under section 51, or, in the case of an 
organization under common control, under Sec. 1.52-1 (a) and (b).
    (b) Regulated investment companies and real estate investment 
trusts. In the case of a regulated investment company or a real estate 
investment trust subject to taxation under subchapter M, chapter 1 of 
the Code, the amount of the targeted jobs credit (new jobs credit in the 
case of wages paid before 1979) allowable under section 44B shall be 
reduced to the company's or trust's ratable share of the credit. The 
ratable share shall be determined in accordance with rules similar to 
the rules provided in section 46(e)(2)(B) and the regulations 
thereunder. For purposes of computing the ratable share, the reduction 
of the deduction for wage or salary expenses under Sec. 1.280C-1 shall 
not be taken into account.
    (c) Cooperatives--(1) Taxable years ending after October 31, 1978. 
For taxable years ending after October 31, 1978, in the case of a 
cooperative organization described in section 1381(a), rules similar to 
rules provided in section 46(h) and the regulations thereunder shall 
apply in determining the distribution of the amount of the targeted jobs 
credit (new jobs credit in the case of wages paid before 1979) allowable 
to the cooperative organization and its patrons under section 44B.
    (2) Taxable years ending before November 1, 1978. For taxable years 
ending before November 1, 1978, in the case of a cooperative 
organization described in section 1381(a), the amount of new jobs credit 
allowable under section 44B shall be reduced to the cooperative's 
ratable share of the credit. The ratable share shall be the ratio which 
the taxable income of the cooperative for the taxable year bears to its 
taxable income increased by the amount of the deductions allowed under 
section 1382 (b) and (c). For purposes of computing the ratable share, 
the reduction of the deduction for wage or salary expenses under 
Sec. 1.280C-1 shall not be taken into account.

(Secs. 44B, 381, and 7805 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (92 Stat. 
2834, 26 U.S.C. 44B); 91 Stat. 148, 26 U.S.C. 381(c)(26); 68A Stat. 917, 
26 U.S.C. 7805)

[T.D. 7921, 48 FR 52906, Nov. 23, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.53-1  Limitation based on amount of tax.

    (a) General rule--(1) Targeted jobs credit. For taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1978, the amount of the targeted jobs 
credit allowed by section 44B (as amended by the Revenue Act of 1978) 
shall not exceed 90 percent of the tax imposed by chapter 1, reduced by 
the credits enumerated in section 53(a).
    (2) New jobs credit.  For taxable years beginning before January 1, 
1979, the amount of the new jobs credit allowed by section 44B (as in 
effect prior to enactment of the Revenue Act of 1978) shall not exceed 
the tax imposed by chapter 1, reduced by the credits enumerated in 
section 53(a).
    (b) Special rule for 1978-79 fiscal year. In the case of a taxable 
year beginning before January 1, 1979, and ending after that date, the 
sum of the targeted jobs credit (determined without regard to the tax 
liability limitation in paragraph (a)(1) of this section) and the new 
jobs credit (determined without regard to the tax liability limitation 
in (a)(2) of this section) shall not exceed the tax imposed by chapter 
1, reduced by the credits enumerated in section 53(a).

(Secs. 44B, 381, and 7805 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (92 Stat. 
2834, 26 U.S.C. 44B); 91 Stat. 148, 26 U.S.C. 381(c)(26); 68A Stat. 917, 
26 U.S.C. 7805)

[T.D. 7921, 48 FR 52906, Nov. 23, 1983]

[[Page 406]]


<R05>
Sec. 1.53-2  Carryback and carryover of unused credit.

    (a) Allowance of unused credit as a carryback or carryover--(1) In 
general. Section 53(b) (formerly designated as section 53(c) for taxable 
years beginning before 1979) provides for carrybacks and carryovers of 
unused targeted jobs credit (new jobs credit in the case of wages paid 
before 1979). An unused credit is the excess of the credit determined 
under section 51 for the taxable year over the limitation provided by 
Sec. 1.53-1 for such taxable year. Subject to the limitations contained 
in paragraph (b) of this section and paragraph (f) of Sec. 1.53-3, an 
unused credit shall be added to the amount allowable as a credit under 
section 44B for the years to which an unused credit can be carried. The 
year with respect to which an unused credit arises shall be referred to 
in this section as the ``unused credit year.''
    (2) Taxable years to which unused credit may be carried. An unused 
targeted jobs credit (new jobs credit in the case of wages paid before 
1979) shall be a new employee credit carryback to each of the 3 taxable 
years preceding the unused credit year and a new employee credit 
carryover to each of the 15 taxable years succeeding the unused credit 
year. An unused credit must be carried first to the earliest of the 
taxable years to which it may be carried, and then to each of the other 
taxable years (in order of time) to the extent that the unused credit 
may not be added (because of the limitation contained in paragraph (b) 
of this section) to the amount allowable as a credit under section 44B 
for a prior taxable year.
    (b) Limitations on allowance of unused credit--(1) In general. The 
amount of the unused targeted jobs credit (new jobs credit in the case 
of wages paid before 1979) from any particular unused credit year which 
may be added under section 53(b)(1) (section 53(c)(1) in the case of a 
new jobs credit) to the amount allowable as a credit under section 44B 
for any of the preceding or succeeding taxable years to which such 
credit may be carried shall not exceed the amount by which the 
limitation in Sec. 1.53-1 for such preceding or succeeding taxable year 
exceeds the sum of (i) the credit allowable under section 44B for such 
preceding or succeeding taxable year, and (ii) other unused credits 
carried to such preceding or succeeding taxable year which are 
attributable to unused credit years prior to the particular unused 
credit year. Thus, in determining the amount, if any, of an unused 
credit from a particular unused credit year which shall be added to the 
amount allowable as a credit for any preceding or succeeding taxable 
year, the credit earned for such preceding or succeeding taxable year, 
plus any unused credits originating in taxable years prior to the 
particular unused credit year, shall first be applied against the 
limitation based on amount of tax for such preceding or succeeding 
taxable year. To the extent the limitation based on amount of tax for 
the preceding or succeeding year exceeds the sum of the credit earned 
for such year and other unused credits attributable to years prior to 
the particular unused credit year, the unused credit from the particular 
unused credit year shall be added to the amount allowable as a credit 
under section 44B for such preceding or succeeding year. If any portion 
of the unused credit is a carryback to a taxable year beginning before 
January 1, 1977, section 44B shall be deemed to have been in effect for 
such taxable year for purposes of allowing such carryback as a credit 
under section 44B. To the extent that an unused credit cannot be added 
for a particular preceding or succeeding taxable year because of the 
limitation contained in this paragraph, such unused credit shall be 
available as a carryback or carryover to the next succeeding taxable 
year to which it may be carried.
    (2) Special rules for an electing small business corporation. An 
unused targeted jobs credit (new jobs credit in the case of wages paid 
before 1979) under section 44B of a corporation which arises in an 
unused credit year for which the corporation is not an electing small 
business corporation (as defined in section 1371(b)) and which is a 
carryback or carryover to a taxable year for which the corporation is an 
electing small business corporation shall not be added to the amount 
allowable as a credit under section 44B to the shareholders of such 
corporation

[[Page 407]]

for any taxable year. However, a taxable year for which the corporation 
is an electing small business corporation shall be counted as a taxable 
year for purposes of determining the taxable years to which such unused 
credit may be carried.
    (3) Corporate acquisitions. For the carryover of unused credits 
under section 44B in the case of certain corporate acquisitions, see 
section 381(c)(26) and Sec. 1.381(c)(26)-1.
    (4) Examples. This paragraph may be illustrated by the following 
examples.

    Example 1. In 1978, A, a calendar year taxpayer, had an unused new 
jobs credit of $2,000. In 1979, A has a targeted jobs credit of $2,000 
and a tax liability imposed by chapter 1 of the Code of $4,000 after all 
credits listed in section 53(a) have been taken into account. The amount 
of A's targeted jobs credit allowable under section 44B for 1979 is 90 
percent of A's tax liability. The amount of the new jobs credit that may 
be carried to 1979 is limited to $1,600 ($3,600 [90% of $4,000]-$2,000).

    Example 2. In 1979, B, a calendar year taxpayer, has a tax liability 
imposed by chapter 1 of the Code of $10,000 after all credits listed in 
section 53(a) have been taken. B's targeted jobs credit for that taxable 
year is limited to 90 percent of his income tax liability or $9,000. B 
had a $15,000 targeted jobs credit in 1979 resulting in an unused 
targeted jobs credit of $5,000 for that year. In 1976 and 1977 B had tax 
liabilities imposed by chapter 1 of the Code of $3,000 and $4,000 
respectively after all credits listed in section 53(a) had been taken. 
For purposes of carrying back an unused targeted jobs credit to a 
taxable year beginning before January 1, 1977, section 44B as amended by 
the Revenue Act of 1978 is deemed to have been in effect for such 
taxable year. Accordingly, the applicable tax liability limitation for 
1976 would be governed by section 53(a) (as amended by the Revenue Act 
of 1978) which limits the amount of targeted jobs credit allowed to 90 
percent of the tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code after all credits 
listed in section 53(a) have been taken. B may carry back $2,700 (90% of 
$3,000) of the 1979 unused targeted jobs credit to 1976. B may carry 
back $4,000 of the unused targeted jobs credit to 1977 because section 
53(a) as it applied to the 1977 taxable year limited the amount of the 
credit to 100 percent of the taxpayer's tax liability imposed by chapter 
1 of the Code after all credits listed in section 53(a) had been taken.

(Secs. 44B, 381, and 7805 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (92 Stat. 
2834, 26 U.S.C. 44B); 91 Stat. 148, 26 U.S.C. 381(c)(26); 68A Stat. 917, 
26 U.S.C. 7805)

[T.D. 7921, 48 FR 52906, Nov. 23, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.53-3  Separate rule for pass-through of jobs credit.

    (a) In general. Under section 53(b), in the case of a new jobs 
credit or targeted jobs credit earned under section 44B by a 
partnership, estate or trust, or subchapter S corporation, the amount of 
the credit that may be taken into account by a partner, beneficiary, or 
shareholder may not exceed a limitation under section 53(b) separately 
computed with respect to the partner's, beneficiary's, or shareholder's 
interest in the entity. A credit is subject to the limitation of section 
53(b) with respect to a partner, beneficiary, or shareholder if it is 
earned by a partnership, estate or trust, or subchapter S corporation in 
a taxable year ending within, or ending before, a taxable year beginning 
before January 1, 1979 of the partner, beneficiary, or shareholder. See 
paragraph (f) of this section for rules on carryback or carryover of a 
credit subject to separate limitation. This section prescribes rules, 
under the authority of section 44B(b), relating to the computation of 
the separate limitation. For purposes of this section, references to 
section 53(a) and (b) are to that section as it existed before it was 
amended by the Revenue Act of 1978. This paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. A, a calendar year taxpayer, is a partner in P, a 
calendar year partnership. A's pro rata portion of the credit earned by 
P in 1978 is $200. The $200 credit to be claimed on A's 1978 return is 
subject to the separate limitation in section 53(b) because the 
limitation applies to taxable years of the taxpayer beginning before 
January 1, 1979.

    Example 2. B, a calendar year taxpayer, is a shareholder in 
Corporation M, a subchapter S corporation with a July to June fiscal 
year. B's pro rata portion of the credit earned by Corporation M in its 
taxable year beginning in 1978 is $100. The $100 credit to be claimed on 
B's 1979 return is not subject to

[[Page 408]]

the separate limitation requirement of section 53(b) because the 
limitation only applies to taxable years of the taxpayer beginning 
before 1979, notwithstanding the credit was earned by Corporation M 
before 1979.

    (b) Application of credit earned. A credit earned under section 44B 
by a partnership, estate or trust, or subchapter S corporation shall be 
applied by a partner, beneficiary, or shareholder, to the extent allowed 
under section 53(b), before applying any other credit earned under 
section 44B. For example, if an individual has a new jobs credit from a 
proprietorship of $2,000 and from a partnership (after applying section 
53(b)) of $1,800, but the credit must be limited under section 53(a) to 
$3,000, the entire $1,800 credit from the partnership would be applied 
before any part of the $2,000 amount is applied.
    (c) Amount of separate limitation. The amount of the separate 
limitation is equal to the partner's, beneficiary's, or shareholder's 
limitation under section 53(a) for the taxable year multiplied by a 
fraction. The numerator of the fraction is the portion of the taxpayer's 
taxable income for the year attributable to the taxpayer's interest in 
the entity. The denominator of the fraction is the taxpayer's total 
taxable income for the year reduced by the zero bracket amount, if any.
    (d) Portion of taxable income attributable to an interest in a 
partnership, estate or trust, or subchapter S corporation--(1) General 
rule. The portion of a taxpayer's taxable income attributable to an 
interest in a partnership, estate or trust, or subchapter S corporation 
is the amount of income from that entity the taxpayer is required to 
include in gross income, reduced by--
    (i) The amount of the deductions allowed to the taxpayer that are 
attributable to the taxpayer's interest in the entity; and
    (ii) A proportionate share of the deductions allowed to the taxpayer 
not attributable to a specific activity (as defined in paragraph (e)).

If a deduction comprises both an item that is attributable to the 
taxpayer's interest in the entity and an item or items that are not 
attributable to the interest in the entity, and if the deduction is 
limited by a provision of the Code (such as section 170(b), relating to 
limitations on charitable contributions), the deduction must be prorated 
among the items taken into account in computing the deduction. For 
example, if an individual makes a charitable contribution of $5,000 and 
his distributive share of a partnership includes $2,000 in charitable 
contributions made by the partnership, and if the charitable 
contribution deduction is limited to $3,500 under section 170(b), then 
the portion of the deduction allowed to the taxpayer that is not 
attributable to a specific activity is $2,500 
($3,500 x ($5,000<divide>$7,000)) and the portion of the deduction 
allowed to the taxpayer that is attributable to the interest in the 
partnership is $1,000 ($3,500 x ($2,000<divide>$7,000)).
    (2) Deductions attributable to an interest in an entity. Examples of 
deductions that are attributable to the taxpayer's interest in an entity 
include (but are not limited to) a deduction under section 1202 
attributable to a net capital gain passed through the entity, and a 
deduction attributable to a deductible item (such as a charitable 
contribution) that has been passed through the entity.
    (3) Computation of the proportionate share of deductions not 
attributable to a specific activity. The proportionate share of a 
deduction of the taxpayer not attributable to a specific activity is 
obtained by multiplying the amount of the deduction by a fraction. The 
numerator of the fraction is the income from the entity that the 
taxpayer is required to include in gross income, reduced by the amount 
of the deductions of the taxpayer that are attributable to the 
taxpayer's interest in the entity. The denominator is the taxpayer's 
gross income reduced by the amount of all the deductions attributable to 
specific activities.
    (4) Examples. The method of determining the amount of taxable income 
attributable to an interest in a partnership, estate or trust, or 
subchapter S corporation is illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. (a) A, a single individual, is a shareholder in S 
Corporation, a subchapter S corporation. A is required to include the 
following amounts from S corporation is his gross income:

[[Page 409]]



Salary......................................................      $3,000
                                                             ===========
Undistributed taxable income:                                           
  Ordinary income...........................................       8,000
  Net capital gain..........................................       2,000
                                                             -----------
    Total...................................................      10,000
                                                                        
                                                             ===========
    Total...................................................      13,000
                                                                        
                                                             ===========
                                                                        

A has income from other activities:

  Ordinary income...........................................       6,000
  Net capital gain..........................................       4,000
                                                             -----------
    Total...................................................      10,000
                                                                        


    (b) In order to determine the taxable income attributable to A's 
interest in S Corporation, it is necessary to reduce the amount of 
income from S Corporation that A is required to include in gross income 
by the amount of A's deductions attributable to the interest in S 
Corporation and by a proportionate share of A's deductions not 
attributable to a specific activity. These computations are made in 
paragraph (c) of this example. However, before the computation reducing 
A's income by a proportionate share of the deductions not attributable 
to a specific activity can be made, the ratio described in subparagraph 
(3) of this paragraph (d) must be determined. The numerator of the ratio 
(the amount of income from S Corporation that A is required to include 
in gross income, reduced by the amount of the deductions attributable to 
A's interest in S Corporation) is obtained in paragraph (c) of this 
example in the process of computing A's taxable income attributable to 
the interest in S Corporation. The determination of the denominator (A's 
gross income reduced by the amount of all deductions attributable to 
specific activities), however, require a separate computation, which 
follows:

Gross income:                                                           
  Income from S Corporation.................................     $13,000
  Income from other sources.................................      10,000
                                                             -----------
    Total...................................................      23,000
Less: Deductions attributable to specific activities:                   
  Section 1202 deduction (50 percent. of $6,000)............       3,000
                                                             -----------
  A's gross income reduced by the amount of the deductions              
   attributable to specific activities (denominator of the              
   ratio for determining the proportionate share of                     
   deductions not attributable to a specific activity)......      20,000
                                                                        


    (c) Computation of the amount of A's taxable income attributable to 
the interest in S Corporation:

Income from S Corporation that A is required to include in              
 gross income:                                                          
  Ordinary income...........................................     $11,000
  Net capital gain..........................................       2,000
                                                             -----------
    Total...................................................      13,000
Less: Deductions of the taxpayer attributable to the                    
 interest in S Corporation:                                             
  Section 1202 deduction (50 pct. of $2,000)................       1,000
                                                             -----------
  (Numerator of the ratio for determining the proportionate             
   share of deductions not attributable to a specific                   
   activity)................................................      12,000
                                                             ===========
Less: Proportionate share of the deductions of the taxpayer             
 not attributable to a specific activity:                               
  Personal exemption deduction ($750 x $12,000/$20,000).....         450
  Zero bracket amount ($2,200 x $12,000/$20,000)............       1,320
                                                             -----------
    Total...................................................       1,770
                                                             ===========
  Portion of A's taxable income attributable to interest in             
   S Corporation............................................      10,230
                                                                        


    Example 2. (a) C, a married individual with two children, is a 
partner in the CD Company. C's distributive share of the CD Company 
consists of the following:

  Ordinary income (other than guaranteed payment)...........     $38,420
  Guaranteed payment........................................      20,000
  Net long-term capital gain................................       6,000
  Net short-term capital loss...............................       2,000
  Dividends qualifying for exclusion........................         100
  Charitable contributions..................................         500
                                                                        

C also has items of income from other sources and deductions, as 
follows:

  Ordinary income...........................................     $21,680
  Short-term capital gain...................................       2,000
  Dividends qualifying for exclusion........................         400
Deductions:                                                             
  Deductible medical expenses...............................      16,000
  Charitable contributions..................................       4,000
  Alimony...................................................      18,000
  Interest and taxes on home................................       8,000
  Loss relating to another specific activity................       4,000
                                                                        


    (b) In order to determine C's taxable income attributable to the 
interest in the partnership, it is necessary to reduce the amount of 
income from the partnership that C is required to include in gross 
income by the amount of C's deductions attributable to the interest in 
the partnership and by a proportionate share of C's deductions not 
attributable to a specific activity. These computations are made in 
paragraph (c) of this example. However, before the computation reducing 
C's income by a proportionate share of the deductions not attributable 
to a specific activity can be made, the ratio described in paragraph 
(d)(3) of this section must be determined. The numerator of the ratio is 
determined in paragraph (c) of this example in the process of computing 
C's taxable income attributable to the interest in the partnership. The 
denominator, however, requires a

[[Page 410]]

separate computation, reducing C's gross income by the amount of all 
deductions attributable to specific activities. This computation is as 
follows:

Gross income: Income from the partnership:                              
  Ordinary income...........................................     $58,420
  Net long-term capital gain................................       6,000
                                                             ===========
  Dividends.................................................         100
  Less: Proportionate share of dividend exclusion ($100 x               
   $100/$500)...............................................          20
                                                             -----------
                                                                      80
                                                             ===========
                                                                  64,500
Income from other sources:                                              
  Ordinary income...........................................      21,680
  Net short/term capital gain...............................       2,000
                                                             ===========
  Dividends.................................................         400
  Less: Proportionate share of dividend exclusion ($100 x               
   $400/$500)...............................................         $80
                                                             -----------
                                                                     320
                                                             ===========
                                                                  24,000
                                                             ===========
                                                                  88,500
                                                             ===========
Less: Deductions attributable to specific activities:                   
  Net short-term capital loss passed through the partnership       2,000
  Loss related to another specific activity.................       4,000
  Section 1202 deduction attributable to the interest in the            
   partnership..............................................       2,000
  Charitable contribution deduction passed through the                  
   partnership..............................................         500
                                                             -----------
                                                                   8,500
                                                             ===========
  C's gross income, reduced by the amount of the deductions             
   attributable to specific activities (denominator of the              
   ratio for determining the proportionate share of                     
   deductions not attributable to a specific activity)......      80,000
                                                                        


    (c) Computation of the amount of C's taxable income attributable to 
the interest in the partnership:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  Distributive share of ordinary income (other than                     
   guaranteed payments).....................................     $38,420
  Guaranteed payment........................................      20,000
  Distributive share of dividends less share of exclusion...          80
  Distributive share of net long-term capital gain..........       6,000
                                                             -----------
                                                                  64,500
                                                             ===========
  Section 1202 deduction (50 pct. of $4,000)................       2,000
  Charitable contribution passed through the partnership....         500
  Net short-term capital loss passed through the partnership       2,000
                                                             -----------
                                                                   4,500
                                                             ===========
  (Numerator of the ratio for determining the proportionate             
   share of deductions not attributable to a specific                   
   activity)................................................      60,000
                                                             ===========
  Section 1202 deduction ($1,000 x $60,000/$80,000).........         750
  Deductible medical expenses ($16,000 x $60,000/$80,000)...      12,000
  Charitable contributions ($4,000 x $60,000/$80,000).......       3,000
  Alimony ($18,000 x $60,000/$80,000).......................      13,500
  Interest and taxes on home ($8,000 x $60,000/$80,000).....       6,000
  Personal exemption deduction ($3,000 x $60,000/$80,000)...       2,250
                                                             -----------
    Total...................................................      37,500
                                                             ===========
  Portion of C's taxable income attributable to the interest            
   in the partnership.......................................      22,500
                                                                        

    C has a deduction under section 1202 of $3,000. Of that deduction, 
$2,000 is attributable directly to C's interest in the partnership (50 
percent of the net capital gain that would result from offsetting the 
$6,000 net long-term capital gain and the $2,000 net short-term capital 
loss that are attributable to C's interest in the partnership). Since 
the remaining $1,000 deduction under section 1202 cannot be attributed 
directly to either C's income from the partnership or any other specific 
activity, it must be treated as a deduction not attributable to a 
specific activity.

    (e) Deductions not attributable to a specific activity--(1)  
Specific activity defined. A specific activity means a course of 
continuous conduct involving a particular line of endeavor, whether or 
not the activity is carried on for profit. Examples of a specific 
activity are:
    (i) A trade or business carried on by the taxpayer;
    (ii) A trade or business carried on by an entity in which the 
taxpayer has an interest;
    (iii) An activity with respect to which the taxpayer is entitled to 
a deduction under section 212;
    (iv) The operation of a farm as a hobby.
    (2) Types of deductions not attributable to a specific activity. 
Examples of deductions not attributable to a specific activity include 
charitable contributions made by the partner, beneficiary, or 
shareholder; medical expenses; alimony; interest on personal debts of 
the partner, beneficiary, or shareholder; and real estate taxes on the 
personal residence of the partner, beneficiary, or shareholder. For 
purposes of this section, in cases in which deductions are

[[Page 411]]

not itemized, the zero bracket amount is considered to be a deduction 
not attributable to a specific activity.
    (f) Carryback or carryover of credit subject to separate limitation. 
A credit subject to the separate limitation under section 53(b) that is 
carried back or carried over to a taxable year beginning before January 
1, 1979, is also subject to the separate limitation in the carryback or 
carryover year. For purposes of the preceding sentence, a credit that is 
earned by a partnership, a trust, or estate, or a subchapter S 
corporation in a taxable year of such entity ending within, or after, 
the taxable year of a partner beneficiary or shareholder beginning after 
December 31, 1978, will not be subject to the separate limitation in 
section 53(b) with respect to such partner, beneficiary, or shareholder. 
The taxpayer to whom the credit has been passed through shall not be 
prevented from applying the unused portion in a carryback or carryover 
year merely because the entity that earned the credit changes its form 
of conducting business if the nature of its trade or business 
essentially remains the same. The computation of the separate limitation 
in such a case shall reflect the income attributable to the taxpayer's 
interest in the entity in its revised form. Thus, a shareholder carrying 
over a credit from a subchapter S corporation may include dividends 
declared by that corporation after the subchapter S election had been 
terminated as income attributable to that person's interest in the 
entity. Similarly, if a partnership incorporates in a carryover year, 
any income attributable to an interest in the corporation will be 
regarded, for purposes of computing the separate limitation under 
section 53(b), as income attributable to an interest in the entity. This 
paragraph may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. A, a calendar year taxpayer, is a shareholder in 
Corporation M, a subchapter S corporation. In 1977, A's pro rata share 
of the new jobs credit earned by Corporation M was $10,000. A could only 
use $2,000 of the credit in 1977 because of the separate limitation 
under section 53(b). In 1978, A carries the unused credit over from 
1977. The carryover credit is subject to the separate limitation under 
section 53(b).

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example 1 except that the 
unused credit is carried over to 1979. The carryover credit is not 
subject to the separate limitation under section 53(b) because that 
limitation does not apply to taxable years of a taxpayer beginning after 
December 31, 1978.

    Example 3. B, a calendar year taxpayer, is a shareholder in 
Corporation W, a subchapter S corporation. In 1979, B's pro rata share 
of the targeted jobs credit covered by Corporation W was $5,000 but B 
could only use $3,000 of the credit in 1979. B carries back the unused 
credit to 1978. The carryback credit is not subject to the separate 
limitation under section 53(b).

(Secs. 44B, 381, and 7805 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (92 Stat. 
2834, 26 U.S.C. 44B); 91 Stat. 148, 26 U.S.C. 381(c)(26); 68A Stat. 917, 
26 U.S.C. 7805)

[T.D. 7560, 43 FR 60445, Dec. 28, 1978. Redesignated and amended by T.D. 
7921, 48 FR 52906, 52907, Nov. 23, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.55-1   Alternative minimum taxable income.

    (a) General rule for computing alternative minimum taxable income. 
Except as otherwise provided by statute, regulations, or other published 
guidance issued by the Commissioner, all Internal Revenue Code 
provisions that apply in determining the regular taxable income of a 
taxpayer also apply in determining the alternative minimum taxable 
income of the taxpayer.
    (b) Items based on adjusted gross income or modified adjusted gross 
income. In determining the alternative minimum taxable income of a 
taxpayer other than a corporation, all references to the taxpayer's 
adjusted gross income or modified adjusted gross income in determining 
the amount of items of income, exclusion, or deduction must be treated 
as references to the taxpayer's adjusted gross income or modified 
adjusted gross income as determined for regular tax purposes.
    (c) Effective date. These regulations are effective for taxable 
years beginning after December 31, 1993.

[T.D. 8569, 59 FR 60557, Nov. 25, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1.56-0  Table of contents to Sec. 1.56-1, adjustment for book income of corporations.

(a) Computation of the book income adjustment.
    (1) In general.

[[Page 412]]

    (2) Taxpayers subject to the book income adjustment.
    (3) Consolidated returns.
    (4) Examples.
(b) Adjusted net book income.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Net book income.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Measures of net book income.
    (iii) Tax-free transactions and tax-free income.
    (iv) Treatment of dividends and other amounts.
    (3) Additional rules for consolidated groups.
    (i) consolidated adjusted net book income.
    (ii) Consolidated net book income.
    (iii) Consolidated pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable 
income.
    (iv) Cross references.
    (4) Computation of adjusted net book income when taxable year and 
financial accounting year differ.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Estimating adjusted net book income.
    (iii) Election to compute adjusted net book income based on the 
financial statement for the year ending within the taxable year.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Time of making election.
    (C) Eligibility to make and manner of making election.
    (D) Election or revocation of election made on an amended return.
    (iv) Quarterly statement filed with the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC).
    (5) Computation of net book income using current earnings and 
profits.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Current earnings and profits of a consolidated group.
    (6) Additional rules for computation of net book income of a foreign 
corporate taxpayer.
    (i) Adjusted net book income of a foreign taxpayer.
    (ii) Effectively connected net book income of a foreign taxpayer.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Certain exempt amounts.
    (iii) Computation of net book income of a foreign taxpayer using 
current earnings and profits.
    (7) Examples.
(c) Applicable financial statement.
    (1) In general.
    (i) Statement required to be filed with the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC).
    (ii) Certified audited financial statement.
    (iii) Financial statement provided to a government regulator.
    (iv) Other financial statements.
    (v) Required use of current earnings and profits.
    (2) Election to treat net book income as equal to current earnings 
and profits for the taxable year.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Time of making election.
    (iii) Eligibility to make and manner of making election.
    (iv) Election by common parent of consolidated group.
    (v) Election or revocation of election made on an amended return.
    (3) Priority among statements.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Special priority rules for use of certified audited financial 
statements and other financial statements.
    (iii) Priority among financial statements provided to a government 
regulator.
    (iv) Statements of equal priority.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Exceptions to the general rule in paragraph (c)(3)(iv)(A).
    (4) Use of financial statement for a substantial non-tax purpose.
    (5) Special rules.
    (i) Applicable financial statement of related corporations.
    (A) Applicable financial statement of a consolidated group.
    (B) Special rule for statements of equal priority.
    (C) Special rule for related corporations.
    (D) Anti-abuse rule.
    (ii) Applicable financial statement of foreign corporation with a 
United States trade or business.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Special rules for applicable financial statement of a trade or 
business of a foreign taxpayer.
    (C) Special rule for statements of equal priority.
    (D) Anti-abuse rule.
    (iii) Supplement or amendment to an applicable financial statement.
    (A) Excluding a restatement of net book income.
    (B) Restatement of net book income.
    (6) Examples.
(d) Adjustments to net book income.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Definitions.
    (i) Historic practice.
    (ii) Accounting literature.
    (3) Adjustments for certain taxes.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Exception for certain foreign taxes.
    (iii) Certain valuation adjustments.
    (iv) Examples.
    (4) Adjustments to prevent omission or duplication.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Special rule for depreciating an asset below is cost.
    (iii) Consolidated group using current earnings and profits.

[[Page 413]]

    (iv) Restatement of a prior year's applicable financial statement.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Reconciliation of owner's equity in applicable financial 
statements.
    (B) Use of different priority applicable financial statements in 
consecutive taxable years.
    (D) First successor year defined.
    (E) Exceptions.
    (v) Adjustment for items previously taxed as subpart F income.
    (vi) Adjustment for pooling of interests.
    (vii) Adjustment for certain deferred foreign taxes.
    (viii) Examples.
    (5) Adjustments resulting from disclosure.
    (i) Adjustment for footnote disclosure or other supplementary 
information.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Disclosures not specifically authorized in the accounting 
literature.
    (ii) Equity adjustments.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Definition of equity adjustment.
    (iii) Amount disclosed in an accountant's opinion.
    (iv) Accounting method changes that result in cumulative adjustments 
to the current year's applicable financial statement.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Exception.
    (v) Examples.
    (6) Adjustments applicable to related corporations.
    (i) Consolidated returns.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Corporations included in the consolidated Federal income tax 
return but excluded from the applicable financial statement.
    (C) Corporations included in the applicable financial statement but 
excluded from the consolidated tax return.
    (ii) Adjustment under the principles of section 482.
    (iii) Adjustment for dividends received from section 936 
corporations.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Treatment as foreign taxes.
    (C) Treatment of taxes imposed on section 936 corporations.
    (iv) Adjustment to net book income on sale of certain investments.
    (v) Examples.
    (7) Adjustments for foreign taxpayers with a United States trade or 
business.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Example.
    (8) Adjustment for corporations subject to subchapter F.
(e) Special rules.
    (1) Cooperatives.
    (2) Alaska Native Corporations.
    (3) Insurance companies.
    (4) Estimating the net book income adjustment for purposes of 
estimated tax liability.

[T.D. 8307, 55 FR 33675, Aug. 17, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 1.56-1  Adjustment for the book income of corporations.

    (a) Computation of the book income adjustment--(1) In general. For 
taxable years beginning in 1987, 1988, and 1989, the alternative minimum 
taxable income of any taxpayer is increased by the book income 
adjustment described in this paragraph (a)(1). The book income 
adjustment is 50 percent of the excess, if any, of--
    (i) The adjusted net book income (as defined in paragraph (b) of 
this section) of the taxpayer, over
    (ii) The pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income for the 
taxable year.

For purposes of this section, pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable 
income is alternative minimum taxable income, determined without regard 
to the book income adjustment or the alternative tax net operating loss 
determined under section 56(a)(4). See paragraph (a)(4) of this section 
for examples relating to the computation of the income adjustment.
    (2) Taxpayers subject to the book income adjustment. The book income 
adjustment is applicable to any corporate taxpayer that is not an S 
corporation, regulated investment company (RIC), real estate investment 
trust (REIT), or real estate mortgage investment company (REMIC).
    (3) Consolidated returns. In the case of a taxpayer that is a 
consolidated group, the book income adjustment equals 50 percent of the 
amount, if any, by which its consolidated adjusted net book income (as 
defined in paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section) exceeds its consolidated 
pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income (as defined in 
paragraph (b)(3)(iii) of this section). See paragraph (a)(4), Example 4 
of this section. For purposes of this section, with respect to any 
taxable year the term ``consolidated group'' has the same meaning as in 
Sec. 1.1502-1T. See paragraph (d)(6) of this section for rules relating 
to adjustments attributable to related corporations.

[[Page 414]]

    (4) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following examples.

    Example 1. Corporation A has adjusted net book income of $200 and 
pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income of $100. A must 
increase its pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income by $50 
(($200-$100)  x  .50).

    Example 2. Corporation B has adjusted net book income of $200 and 
pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income of $300. B does not 
have a book income adjustment for the taxable year because its adjusted 
net book income does not exceed its pre-adjustment alternative minimum 
taxable income.

    Example 3. Corporation C has adjusted net book income of negative 
$200 and pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income of negative 
$300. C must increase its pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable 
income by $50 ((-$200 - (-$300))  x  .50). Thus, C's alternative minimum 
taxable income determined after the book income adjustment, but without 
regard to the alternative tax net operating loss, is negative $250 
(-$300 + $50).

    Example 4. Corporations D and E are a consolidated group for tax 
purposes. D and E do not have a consolidated financial statement. On 
their separate financial statements D and E have adjusted net book 
income of $100 and $50 respectively, and pre-adjustment alternative 
minimum taxable income of $50 and $80 respectively. Assuming there are 
no intercompany transactions, DE's consolidated adjusted net book income 
(as defined in paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section) is $150 and its 
consolidated pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income (as 
defined in paragraph (b)(3)(iii) of this section) is $130. DE must 
increase its consolidated pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable 
income by $10 (($150 - $130)  x  .50).

    (b) Adjusted net book income--(1) In general. ``Adjusted net book 
income'' means the net book income (as defined in paragraph (b)(2) of 
this section) adjusted as provided in paragraph (d) of this section. 
Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, a taxpayer may not 
make any adjustments to net book income.
    (2) Net book income--(i) In general. ``Net book income'' means the 
income or loss for a taxpayer reported in the taxpayer's applicable 
financial statement (as defined in paragraph (c) of this section). Net 
book income must take into account all items of income, expense, gain 
and loss of the taxable year, including extraordinary items, income or 
loss from discontinued operations, and cumulative adjustments resulting 
from accounting method changes. Net book income is not reduced by any 
distributions to shareholders. See paragraph (b)(5)(i) of this section 
for a similar rule for corporations using current earnings and profits 
to compute net book income.
    (ii) Measures of net book income. Except as described in paragraph 
(b)(5) of this section, net book income is disclosed on the income 
statement included in a taxpayer's applicable financial statement. Such 
income statement must reconcile with the balance sheet, if any, that is 
included in the applicable financial statement and must be used in 
computing changes in owner's equity reflected in the applicable 
financial statement. See paragraph (c) of this section for the 
definition of an applicable financial statement.
    (iii) Tax-free transactions and tax-free income. Net book income 
includes income or loss that is reported on a taxpayer's applicable 
financial statement regardless of whether such income or loss is 
recognized, realized or otherwise taken into account for other Federal 
income tax purposes. See paragraph (b)(7), Examples 1, 2 and 3 of this 
section.
    (iv) Treatment of dividends and other amounts. The adjusted net book 
income of a taxpayer shall include the earnings of other corporations 
not filing a consolidated Federal income tax return with the taxpayer 
only to the extent that amounts are required to be included in the 
taxpayer's gross income under chapter 1 of the Code with respect to the 
earnings of such other corporation (e.g., dividends received from such 
corporation and amounts included under subpart A). See paragraph (b)(7), 
Examples 4 and 5 of this section.
    (3) Additional rules for consolidated groups--(i) Consolidated 
adjusted net book income. ``Consolidated adjusted net book income'' 
means the consolidated net book income (as defined in paragraph 
(b)(3)(ii) of this section), after taking into account the adjustments 
under the rules of paragraph (d) of this section.
    (ii) Consolidated net book income. Consolidated net book income is 
the income or loss of a consolidated group as

[[Page 415]]

reported on its applicable financial statement as defined in paragraph 
(c)(5) of this section.
    (iii) Consolidated pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable 
income. Consolidated pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income 
is the taxable income of the consolidated group for the taxable year, 
determined with the adjustments provided in sections 56 and 58 (except 
for the book income adjustment and the alternative tax net operating 
loss determined under section 56(a)(4)) and increased by the preference 
items described in section 57.
    (iv) Cross references. See paragraph (c)(5) of this section for 
rules relating to the applicable financial statement of related 
corporations and paragraph (d)(6) of this section for rules relating to 
adjustments attributable to related corporations.
    (4) Computation of adjusted net book income when taxable year and 
financial accounting year differ--(i) In general. If a taxpayer's 
applicable financial statement is prepared on the basis of a financial 
accounting year that differs from the year that the taxpayer uses for 
filing its Federal income tax return, adjusted net book income must be 
computed either--
    (A) By including a pro rata portion of the adjusted net book income 
for each financial accounting year that includes any part of the 
taxpayer's taxable year (see paragraph (b)(7), Example 6 of this 
section), or
    (B) In accordance with the election described in paragraph 
(b)(4)(iii) of this section.
    (ii) Estimating adjusted net book income. If a taxpayer is using the 
pro rata approach described in paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A) of this section 
and an applicable financial statement for part of the taxpayer's taxable 
year is not available when the taxpayer files its Federal income tax 
return, the taxpayer must make a reasonable estimate of adjusted net 
book income for the pro rata portion of the taxable year. If the actual 
pro rata portion of adjusted net book income that results from the 
taxpayer's applicable financial statement for the financial accounting 
year exceeds the estimate of adjusted net book income used on the 
original tax return and results in additional tax liability, the 
taxpayer must file an amended Federal income tax return reflecting such 
additional liability. The amended return must be filed within 90 days of 
the date the previously unavailable applicable financial statement is 
available.
    (iii) Election to compute adjusted net book income based on the 
financial statement for the year ending within the taxable year--(A) In 
general. If a taxpayer's accounting year ends five or more months after 
the end of its taxable year, the taxpayer may elect to compute adjusted 
net book income based on the net book income reported on the applicable 
financial statement prepared for the financial accounting year ending 
within the taxpayer's taxable year. See paragraph (b)(7), Examples 7 and 
8 of this section. For purposes of this paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(A), if a 
taxpayer uses a 52-53 week year for financial accounting or Federal 
income tax purposes, the last day of such year shall be deemed to occur 
on the last day of the calendar month ending closest to the end of such 
year.
    (B) Time of making election. An election under this paragraph 
(b)(4)(iii) is made by attaching the statement described in paragraph 
(b)(4)(iii)(C) of this section to the taxpayer's Federal income tax 
return for the first taxable year in which the taxpayer is eligible to 
make the election. An election under this paragraph (b)(4)(iii) that is 
made prior to the first taxable year in which the taxpayer is eligible 
to make the election (as determined under paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(C) of 
this section) is valid unless revoked pursuant to paragraph 
(b)(4)(iii)(D) of this section.
    (C) Eligibility to make and manner of making election. A taxpayer is 
eligible to make the election specified in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(A) of 
this section in the first taxable year beginning after 1986 in which--
    (1) The taxpayer has an accounting year ending five or more months 
after the end of its taxable year,
    (2) The use of the pro rata approach described in paragraph 
(b)(4)(i)(A) of this section produces an excess of adjusted net book 
income over pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income, as 
defined in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, and

[[Page 416]]

    (3) The taxpayer has an excess of tentative minimum tax over regular 
tax for the taxable year, as defined in section 55(a), or is liable for 
the environmental tax imposed by section 59A.

Thus, a taxpayer is not required to evaluate the merits of an election 
to compute its adjusted net book income based on the applicable 
financial statement prepared for the financial accounting year ending 
within the taxpayer's taxable year unless the taxpayer, when using the 
pro rata approach described in paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A) of this section, 
either has an excess of tentative minimum tax over its regular tax or is 
liable for the environmental tax imposed by section 59A. The election 
statement must set forth the electing taxpayer's name, address, taxpayer 
identification number, taxable year and financial accounting year. An 
election under this paragraph (b)(4)(iii) will apply for the taxable 
year when initially made and for all subsequent years until revoked with 
the consent of the District Director.
    (D) Election or revocation of election made on an amended return. An 
election under paragraph (b)(4)(iii) of this section may be made by 
attaching the statement described in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(C) to an 
amended return for the first taxable year in which the taxpayer is 
eligible to make the election. An election under paragraph (b)(4)(iii) 
of this section that was made prior to the first taxable year in which 
the taxpayer was eligible to make the election, as determined under 
paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(C) of this section, may be revoked by filing an 
amended return for the taxable year in which the election was initially 
made. However, an election made or revoked on an amended return under 
paragraph (b)(4)(iii) of this section will be allowed only if the 
amended return is filed no later than December 14, 1990.
    (iv) Quarterly statement filed with the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC). A taxpayer with different financial accounting and 
taxable years that is required to file both annual and quarterly 
financial statements with the SEC may not aggregate quarterly statements 
filed with the SEC in order to obtain a statement covering the 
taxpayer's taxable year. See paragraph (b)(7), Example 9 of this 
section. See paragraph (c)(3)(iv)(B)(1) of this section for priority 
rules relating to statements required to be filed with the SEC.
    (5) Computation of net book income using current earnings and 
profits--(i) In general. If a taxpayer does not have an applicable 
financial statement, or only has a statement described in paragraph 
(c)(1)(iv) of this section and makes the election described in paragraph 
(c)(2) of this section, net book income for purposes of this section is 
equal to the taxpayer's current earnings and profits for its taxable 
year. Generally, a taxpayer's current earnings and profits is computed 
under the rules of section 312 and the regulations thereunder. Current 
earnings and profits therefore is reduced by Federal income tax expense 
and any foreign tax expense for foreign taxes eligible for the foreign 
tax credit under section 27 of the Code. Current earnings and profits is 
then adjusted as described in paragraph (d) of this section to arrive at 
adjusted net book income. No adjustment is made under paragraph (d) of 
this section, however, for any adjustment that is already reflected in 
current earnings and profits. See paragraph (d)(3) of this section for 
adjustments to net book income with respect to certain taxes. For 
purposes of this section, current earnings and profits is not reduced by 
any distribution to shareholders. See paragraph (d)(3)(iv), Example 5 of 
this section.
    (ii) Current earnings and profits of a consolidated group. For 
purposes of this paragraph (b)(5), the current earnings and profits of a 
consolidated group is the aggregate of the current earnings and profits 
of each member of the group, as determined pursuant to paragraph 
(d)(4)(iii) of this section.
    (6) Additional rules for computation of net book income of a foreign 
corporate taxpayer--(i) Adjusted net book income of a foreign taxpayer. 
Adjusted net book income of a foreign corporate taxpayer (``foreign 
taxpayer'') means the effectively connected net book income (as defined 
in paragraph (b)(6)(ii) of this section) of the foreign taxpayer, after 
taking into account the adjustments under the rules of paragraph (d) of 
this section.

[[Page 417]]

    (ii) Effectively connected net book income of a foreign taxpayer--
(A) In general. Effectively connected net book income of a foreign 
taxpayer is the income or loss reported in its applicable financial 
statement (as defined in paragraph (c)(5)(ii) of this section), but only 
to the extent that such amount is attributable to items of income or 
loss that would be treated as effectively connected with the conduct of 
a trade or business in the United States by the foreign taxpayer as 
determined under either the principles of section 864(c) and the 
regulations thereunder, or any other applicable provision of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986. Thus, if for tax purposes an item of 
income or loss is treated as effectively connected with the conduct of a 
trade or business in the United States, then the income or loss reported 
on the foreign taxpayer's applicable financial statement attributable to 
such item is effectively connected net book income. See paragraph 
(b)(7), Examples 11, 12 and 13 of this section.
    (B) Certain exempt amounts. Effectively connected net book income 
does not include any amount attributable to an item that is exempt from 
United States taxation under sections 883, 892, 894 or 895 of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986. See paragraph (b)(7), Examples 14 and 15 
of this section.
    (iii) Computation of net book income of a foreign taxpayer using 
current earnings and profits. If a foreign taxpayer does not have an 
applicable financial statement or only has a statement described in 
paragraph (c)(1)(iv) of this section and makes the election described in 
paragraph (c)(2) of this section, net book income for purposes of this 
section is equal to the foreign taxpayer's current earnings and profits 
that are attributable to income or loss that is effectively connected 
(or treated as effectively connected) with the conduct of a trade or 
business in the United States. Effectively connected current earnings 
and profits are computed under the rules of section 884(d) and the 
regulations thereunder, relating to effectively connected earnings and 
profits for purposes of computing the branch profits tax, but without 
regard to the exceptions set forth under section 884(d)(2)(B) through 
(E). For purposes of this section, effectively connected current 
earnings and profits are not reduced by any remittances or 
distributions. Effectively connected current earnings and profits takes 
into account Federal income tax expense and any foreign tax expense; 
however, see paragraph (d)(3) of this section for adjustments to net 
book income with respect to certain taxes.
    (7) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following examples.

    Example 1. Corporation A owns 100 percent of corporation B and the 
AB affiliated group files a consolidated Federal income tax return. AB 
uses a calendar year for both financial accounting and tax purposes. 
During 1987, A transfers all of its stock in B for stock on an acquiring 
corporation in a transaction described in section 368(a)(1)(B). Although 
AB recognizes no taxable gain on the transfer pursuant to section 354, 
gain from the transfer is reported on AB's 1987 applicable financial 
statement. Pursuant to paragraph (b)(2)(iii) of this section, AB's net 
book income includes the book gain attributable to the transfer.

    Example 2. Corporation C uses a calendar year for both financial 
accounting and tax purposes. C adopted a plan of liquidation prior to 
August 1, 1986. On June 1, 1987, C makes a bulk sale of all of its 
assets subject to liabilities and completely liquidates. Pursuant to 
section 633(c) of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (the Act), section 337, as 
in effect prior to its amendment by the Act, applies. Thus, C will 
generally not recognize taxable gain upon the bulk sale. However, C's 
applicable financial statement for the period January 1, 1987 through 
June 1, 1987, reports net book income of $500, $400 of which is 
attributable to the bulk sale of assets on June 1, 1987. Pursuant to 
paragraph (b)(2)(iii) of this section, C's net book income includes the 
amount attributable to the bulk sale. Thus, assuming C has no other 
adjustments to net book income, its adjusted net book income for the 
period January 1, 1987 through June 1, 1987, is $500.

    Example 3. Corporation Z has a large inventory of marketable 
securities. On its applicable financial statement, Z marks these 
securities to market, i.e., as they appreciate in value, Z restates 
their value on its balance sheet to their fair market value, and 
increases the income on its income statement by that amount. Pursuant to 
paragraph (b)(2)(iii) of this section, the adjusted net book income of Z 
includes the income from the valuation adjustment.


[[Page 418]]


    Example 4. Corporation D owns 100 percent of E, a controlled foreign 
corporation as defined in section 957. Both D and E use a calendar year 
for financial accounting and tax purposes. D's applicable financial 
statement includes E. Pursuant to section 951, D includes $100 of E's 
subpart F income in its gross income for 1987. Although D's applicable 
financial statement is adjusted to eliminate E's income, pursuant to 
paragraph (b)(2)(iv) of this section, D's adjusted net book income for 
1987 includes the $100 of gross income included under section 951.

    Example 5. Corporation F owns 20 percent of G, a foreign 
corporation. Both F and G use a calendar year for financial accounting 
and tax purposes. During 1987, G pays F a $100 dividend. F's applicable 
financial statement accounts for F's investment in G by the equity 
method. F is eligible for a deemed paid foreign tax credit of $30 with 
respect to the dividend from G and must include the $130 in gross income 
pursuant to section 78 of the Code. Although F's applicable financial 
statement is adjusted to eliminate F's income from G under the equity 
method, pursuant to paragraph (b)(2)(iv) of this section, F's adjusted 
net book income for 1987 includes the $130 of gross income recognized 
with respect to the dividend from G.

    Example 6. Corporation H files its Federal income tax return on a 
calendar year basis. However, its applicable financial statement is 
based on a fiscal year ending June 30. H does not make the election 
described in paragraph (b)(4)(iii) of this section. Pursuant to 
paragraph (b)(4)(i) of this section, H's adjusted net book income for 
calendar year 1987 is computed by adding 50 percent of adjusted net book 
income from the applicable financial statement for the year ending June 
30, 1987 and 50 percent of adjusted net book income from the applicable 
financial statement for the year ending June 30, 1988.

    Example 7. Corporation J files its Federal income tax returns for 
1987, 1988, and 1989 on a calendar year basis. However, its applicable 
financial statement is based on a year ending May 31. Pursuant to 
paragraph (b)(4)(iii) of this section, J elects in 1987 to compute its 
adjusted net book income by using the applicable financial statement for 
the fiscal year ending May 31, 1987. Unless the District Director 
consents to revocation of the election, for calendar year 1988 or 1989, 
J's adjusted net book income for 1988 and 1989 is determined from its 
applicable financial statements for the years ending May 31, 1988 and 
May 31, 1989, respectively.

    Example 8. The facts are the same as in Example 7, except that J's 
applicable financial statement is based on a year ending April 30. Since 
April 30, is less than 5 months after December 31, the end of J's 
taxable year, J is not permitted to make the election described in 
paragraph (b)(4)(iii) of this section.

    Example 9. The facts are the same as in Example 8, except H files 
quarterly and annual financial statements with the Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC). The fourth quarter statement is included as a 
footnote to the annual statement that it files with the SEC. Pursuant to 
paragraph (b)(4)(iv) of this section, H may not determine its net book 
income by aggregating its four quarterly statements for 1987. Thus, H's 
net book income is computed as described in Example 8.

    Example 10. Corporation I is a United States corporation with a 100 
percent owned subsidiary, J, a foreign sales corporation (FSC). I uses a 
calendar year for both financial accounting and tax purposes. Income 
from J is consolidated in I's applicable financial statement. I and J do 
not file a consolidated tax return. In 1987, J pays a dividend to I of 
$100 out of J's earnings and profits. For purposes of this example, it 
is assumed that the distribution is made out of the profits attributable 
solely to foreign trade income determined through use of the 
administrative pricing rules of section 925(a) (1) and (2). Accordingly, 
the distribution is eligible for the 100 percent dividends received 
deduction under section 245(c). Although I's applicable financial 
statement is adjusted to eliminate income or loss attributable to J, the 
entire amount of the dividend distribution must be included in I's 
adjusted net book income pursuant to paragraph (b)(2)(iv) of this 
section.

    Example 11. Corporation K is a foreign corporation incorporated 
under the laws of country X. K uses a calendar year for both financial 
accounting and tax purposes. In 1987, K actively conducts a real estate 
business, L, in the United States. The financial statement that is used 
as K's applicable financial statement (as determined under paragraph 
(c)(5)(ii) of this section) discloses total net income of $150. Of this 
amount, $100 is attributable to L's real estate business and $50 is 
attributable to dividends paid to L from its investment in certain 
securities. The securities investment is not connected with L's real 
estate business. Under the rules of section 864, only $100 is 
effectively connected to the conduct of a trade or business in the 
United States. Thus, K's effectively connected net book income for 1987 
equals $100.

    Example 12. Assume the same facts as in Example 11 except that K's 
applicable financial statement also discloses $75 attributable to 
investment real property located in the United States, so that the net 
income amount reported on the financial statement equals $225. The $75 
of income is not effectively connected with the conduct of a trade

[[Page 419]]

or business in the United States. K, for regular tax purposes, makes an 
election under section 882(d) to treat this income as effectively 
connected with the conduct of a trade or business in the United States. 
As a result, K's effectively connected net book income for 1987 equals 
$175 ($100+$75).

    Example 13. Corporation M is a foreign corporation that actively 
conducts a manufacturing business, N, in the United States. M is a 
calendar year taxpayer for both financial accounting and tax purposes. 
In 1987, the financial statement that is used as M's applicable 
financial statement (as determined under paragraph (c)(5)(ii) of this 
section) reflects an anticipated loss from the sale of a division of N. 
For Federal income tax purposes the loss is not recognized in 1987, but 
rather is recognized in 1988 when M sells the division. In determining 
M's effectively connected net book income for 1987, the anticipated loss 
reported on M's 1987 applicable financial statement is taken into 
account because the reported loss is effectively connected to the 
conduct of a trade or business in the United States under the principles 
of section 864.

    Example 14. Corporation O is a foreign corporation that is engaged 
in the international shipping business. O is incorporated under the laws 
of X. O is a calendar year taxpayer for both financial accounting and 
tax purposes. In 1987, O actively conducts a shipping business, P, 
within the United States. The statement that is used in 1987 as O's 
applicable financial statement (as determined under paragraph (c)(5)(ii) 
of this section) discloses income of $100 that is attributable to P's 
operation of ships in international traffic. Under section 864, $50 is 
effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business in the 
United States. However, the United States income tax treaty with X 
exempts from United States income tax any income derived by a resident 
of X from the operation of ships in international traffic. Thus, 
pursuant to paragraph (b)(6)(ii)(B) of this section, no amount of P's 
income is includible in O's effectively connected net book income.

    Example 15. Assume the same facts as in Example 14 except that there 
is no United States income tax treaty with X. However, X by statute 
exempts United States citizens and United States corporations from tax 
imposed by X on gross income derived from the operation of a ship or 
ships in international traffic. Under section 883(a), P's income of $50 
that is effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business in 
the United States is exempt from United States taxation. Thus, pursuant 
to paragraph (b)(6)(ii)(B) of this section, no amount of P's income is 
includible in O's effectively connected net book income.

    (c) Applicable Financial Statement--(1) In general. A taxpayer's 
applicable financial statement is the statement described in this 
paragraph (c)(1) that has the highest priority, as determined under 
paragraph (c)(3) of this section. Generally, an applicable financial 
statement includes an income statement, a balance sheet (listing assets, 
liabilities, and owner's equity including changes thereto), and other 
appropriate information. An income statement alone may constitute an 
applicable financial statement for purposes of this section if the other 
materials described in this paragraph are not prepared or used by the 
taxpayer. However, an income statement that does not reconcile with 
financial materials otherwise issued will not qualify as an applicable 
financial statement. For purposes of determining the book income 
adjustment, the following may be considered applicable financial 
statements (subject to the rules relating to priority among statements 
under paragraph (c)(3) of this section)--
    (i) Statement required to be filed with the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC). A financial statement that is required to be filed 
with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
    (ii) Certified audited financial statement. A certified audited 
financial statement that is used for credit purposes, for reporting to 
shareholders or for any other substantial non-tax purpose. Such a 
statement must be accompanied by the report of an independent (as 
defined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 
Professional Standards, Code of Professional Conduct, Rule 101 and its 
interpretations and rulings) Certified Public Accountant or, in the case 
of a foreign corporation, a similarly qualified and independent 
professional who is licensed in any foreign country. A financial 
statement is ``certified audited'' for purposes of this section if it 
is--
    (A) Certified to be fairly presented (an unqualified or ``clean'' 
opinion),
    (B) Subject to a qualified opinion that such financial statement is 
fairly presented subject to a concern about a contingency (a qualified 
``subject to'' opinion),
    (C) Subject to a qualified opinion that such financial statement is 
fairly

[[Page 420]]

presented, except for a method of accounting with which the accountant 
disagrees (a qualified ``except for'' opinion), or
    (D) Subject to an adverse opinion, but only if the accountant 
discloses the amount of the disagreement with the statement.

Any other statement or report, such as a review statement or a 
compilation report that is not subject to a full audit is not a 
certified audited statement. See paragraph (c)(3)(iv)(B)(2) of this 
section for a special rule for a statement accompanied by a review 
report when there are statements of equal priority. See also paragraph 
(d)(5)(iii) of this section for rules relating to adjustments for 
information disclosed in an accountant's opinion to a certified audited 
statement.

    (iii) Financial statement provided to a government regulator. A 
financial statement that is required to be provided to the Federal 
government or any agency thereof (other than the Securities and Exchange 
Commission), a state government or any agency thereof, or a political 
subdivision of a state or any agency thereof. An income tax return, 
franchise tax return or other tax return prepared for the purpose of 
determining any tax liability that is filed with a Federal, state or 
local government or agency cannot be an applicable financial statement.
    (iv) Other financial statements. A financial statement that is used 
for credit purposes, for reporting to shareholders, or for any other 
substantial non-tax purpose, even though such financial statement is not 
described in paragraphs (c)(1)(i) through (c)(1)(iii) of this section.
    (v) Required use of current earnings and profits. If a taxpayer does 
not have a financial statement described in paragraphs (c)(1)(i) through 
(c)(1)(iv) of this section, the taxpayer does not have an applicable 
financial statement. In that case, net book income for the taxable year 
will be treated as being equal to the taxpayer's current earnings and 
profits for the taxable year. See paragraph (b)(5) of this section for 
rules relating to the computation of current earnings and profits for 
the taxable year. See paragraph (c)(4) of this section for rules 
relating to use of a financial statement for a substantial non-tax 
purpose.
    (2) Election to treat net book income as equal to current earnings 
and profits for the taxable year--(i) In general. If a taxpayer's only 
financial statement is a statement described in paragraph (c)(1)(iv) of 
this section, the taxpayer may elect to treat net book income as equal 
to the taxpayer's current earnings and profits for all taxable years in 
which the taxpayer is eligible to make the election.
    (ii) Time of making election. An election under this paragraph 
(c)(2) is made by attaching the statement described in paragraph 
(c)(2)(iii) of this section to the taxpayer's Federal income tax return 
for the first taxable year the taxpayer is eligible to make the 
election. An election under this paragraph (c)(2), which is made prior 
to the first taxable year in which the taxpayer is eligible to make the 
election, as determined under paragraph (c)(2)(iii) of this section, is 
valid unless revoked pursuant to paragraph (c)(2)(iv) of this section.
    (iii) Eligibility to make and manner of making election. A taxpayer 
is eligible to make the election in the first taxable year in which--
    (A) The taxpayer has an applicable financial statement described in 
paragraph (c)(1)(iv) of this section;
    (B) The use of this applicable financial statement produces an 
excess of adjusted net book income over preadjustment alternative 
minimum taxable income, as defined in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, 
and
    (C) The taxpayer has, as determined under section 55(a), an excess 
of tentative minimum tax over regular tax for the taxable year, or is 
liable for the environmental tax imposed by section 59A.

Thus, a taxpayer is not required to evaluate the merits of an election 
to use its current earnings and profits as its net book income unless 
the taxpayer, when using an applicable financial statement described in 
paragraph (c)(1)(iv) of this section, has an excess of tentative minimum 
tax over its regular tax or is liable for the environmental tax imposed 
by section 59A. The election statement must set forth the electing 
taxpayer's name, address

[[Page 421]]

and taxpayer identification number, state that the election is being 
made under the provisions of section 56(f)(3)(B), and state that the 
only financial statement of the taxpayer is a financial statement 
described in paragraph (c)(1)(iv) of this section. An election under 
this paragraph (c)(2) is effective for every taxable year in which the 
taxpayer does not have a financial statement described in paragraphs 
(c)(1)(i) through (c)(1)(iii) of this section and may be revoked only 
with the consent of the District Director. See paragraph (c)(6), Example 
1 of this section.

    (iv) Election or revocation of election made on an amended return. 
An election under paragraph (c)(2) of this section may be made by 
attaching the statement described in paragraph (c)(2)(iii) to an amended 
return for the first taxable year in which the taxpayer is eligible to 
make the election. An election under paragraph (c)(2) of this section 
that was made prior to the first taxable year in which the taxpayer was 
eligible to make the election, as determined under paragraph (c)(2)(iii) 
of this section, may be revoked by filing an amended return for the 
taxable year in which the election was initially made. However, an 
election made or revoked on an amended return will be allowed only if 
the amended return is filed no later than December 14, 1990.
    (v) Election by common parent of consolidated group. The election by 
the common parent of a consolidated group to treat net book income as 
equal to current earnings and profits shall bind all members of the 
group. This rule shall not apply in the case of any taxpayer that first, 
has made the election on a return filed before August 16, 1990, second, 
applied the election only to those members of the group that are 
themselves eligible to make the election, and third, properly 
consolidated the adjusted net book income of the group. In order to 
change its election to apply to all members of the group, a taxpayer 
must attach a statement to an amended return for the first taxable year 
the taxpayer is eligible to make the election. However, an election made 
on an amended return under this paragraph (c)(2)(iv) will be allowed 
only if the amended return is filed no later than December 14, 1990. See 
paragraph (b)(5)(ii) of this section regarding the current earnings and 
profits of a consolidated group. See paragraph (d)(4)(iii) of this 
section for adjustments that apply when a consolidated group uses 
current earnings and profits to compute its net book income.
    (3) Priority among statements--(i) In general. If a taxpayer has 
more than one financial statement described in paragraphs (c)(1)(i) 
through (c)(1)(iv) of this section, the taxpayer's applicable financial 
statement is the statement with the highest priority. Priority is 
determined in the following order--
    (A) A financial statement described in paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this 
section.
    (B) A certified audited statement described in paragraph (c)(1)(ii) 
of this section.
    (C) A financial statement required to be provided to a Federal or 
other government regulator described in paragraph (c)(1)(iii) of this 
section.
    (D) Any other financial statement described in paragraph (c)(1)(iv) 
of this section.

For example, corporation A, which uses a calendar year for both 
financial accounting and tax purposes, prepares a financial statement 
for calendar year 1987 that is provided to a state regulator and an 
unaudited financial statement that is provided to A's creditors. The 
statement provided to the state regulator is A's financial statement 
with the highest priority and thus is A's applicable financial 
statement.

    (ii) Special priority rules for use of certified audited financial 
statements and other financial statements. In the case of financial 
statements described in paragraphs (c)(1)(ii) and (c)(1)(iv) of this 
section, within each of these categories the taxpayer's applicable 
financial statement is determined according to the following priority--
    (A) A statement used for credit purposes,
    (B) A statement used for disclosure to shareholders, and
    (C) Any other statement used for other substantial non-tax purposes.

For example, corporation B uses a calendar year for both financial 
accounting and tax purposes. B prepares a financial statement for 
calendar year 1987 that it uses for credit purposes and

[[Page 422]]

prepares another financial statement for calendar year 1987 that it uses 
for disclosure to shareholders. Both financial statements are unaudited. 
The statement used for credit purposes is B's financial statement with 
the highest priority and thus is B's applicable financial statement.

    (iii) Priority among financial statements provided to a government 
regulator. In the case of two or more financial statements described in 
paragraph (c)(1)(iii) of this section (relating to financial statements 
required to be provided to a Federal or other governmental regulator) 
that are of equal priority, the taxpayer's applicable financial 
statement is determined according to the following priority--
    (A) A statement required to be provided to the Federal government or 
any of its agencies,
    (B) A statement required to be provided to a State government or any 
of its agencies, and
    (C) A statement required to be provided to any subdivision of a 
state or any agency of a subdivision.

    (iv) Statements of equal priority--(A) In general. Except as 
provided in paragraph (c)(3)(iv)(B) and paragraph (c)(5)(i)(B) of this 
section, if a taxpayer has two or more financial statements of equal 
priority (determined under paragraphs (c)(3)(i), (c)(3)(ii) and 
(c)(3)(iii) of this section), the taxpayer's applicable financial 
statement is the statement that results in the greatest amount of 
adjusted net book income.
    (B) Exceptions to the general rule in paragraph (c)(3)(iv)(A)--(1) 
In the case of two or more financial statements described in paragraph 
(c)(1)(i) of this section (relating to financial statements required to 
be filed with the SEC) that are of equal priority, a certified audited 
financial statement has a higher priority than an unaudited financial 
statement.
    (2) In the case of two or more financial statements described in 
paragraph (c)(1)(iv) of this section (relating to other financial 
statements) that are of equal priority, a financial statement 
accompanied by an auditor's ``review report'' has a higher priority than 
another financial statement of otherwise equal priority. For purposes of 
this section, an auditor's review report is defined in the American 
Institute of Certified Public Accountant Professional Standards, AR 
section 100.32. See paragraph (c)(6), Examples and 3 of this section.
    (4) Use of financial statement for a substantal non-tax purpose. In 
order to be an applicable financial statement for purposes of computing 
the book income adjustment, a financial statement described in paragraph 
(c)(1)(ii) or (c)(1)(iv) must be used by the taxpayer for credit 
purposes, for disclosure to shareholders, or for any other substantial 
non-tax purpose. A financial statement is used by a taxpayer if the 
taxpayer reasonably anticipates that users of the statement will rely on 
it for non-tax purposes. Thus, a financial statement used for the 
purpose of computing the book income adjustment is not an applicable 
financial statement even if it is provided to shareholders or creditors, 
unless the taxpayer reasonably anticipates that users of the statement 
will rely on it for non-tax purposes. See paragraph (c)(6), Examples 4, 
5, 19 and 20 of this section.
    (5) Special rules--(i) Applicable financial statement of related 
corporations--(A) Applicable financial statement of a consolidated 
group. The applicable financial statement of a consolidated group (as 
defined in paragraph (a)(3) of this section) is the financial statement 
of the common parent (within the meaning of section 1504(a)(1)) of the 
consolidated group that has the highest priority under the rules of 
paragraphs (c)(3)(i), (c)(3)(ii) and (c)(5)(i)(B) of this section. See 
paragraph (d)(6)(i) of this section for rules relating to adjustments to 
net book income of a consolidated group. See paragraph (c)(6), Example 7 
of this section. See paragraph (c)(2)(iv) of this section for rules 
relating to the election by the common parent of a consolidated group to 
use current earnings and profits to compute net book income.
    (B) Special rule for statements of equal priority. If a consolidated 
group has two or more financial statements of equal priority (determined 
under paragraphs (c)(3)(i) and (c)(3)(ii) of this section and this 
paragraph (c)(5)), the consolidated group's applicable financial 
statement is determined under either paragraph

[[Page 423]]

(c)(5)(i)(B) (1) or (2), whichever is applicable.
    (1) Two or more financial statements reporting on the same 
corporations. If two or more financial statements of equal priority 
report on the same corporations, the consolidated group's applicable 
financial statement is determined under the rules of paragraph 
(c)(3)(iv) of this section. Thus, the financial statement that results 
in the greatest consolidated adjusted net book income is the 
consolidated group's applicable financial statement.
    (2) Two or more financial statements reporting on different 
corporations. If two or more financial statements of equal priority 
report on different corporations, the consolidated group's applicable 
financial statement is--
    (i) The statement that reflects the greatest amount of gross 
receipts attributable to members of the consolidated group, or
    (ii) The statement that reflects the greatest amount of gross 
receipts (including gross receipts attributable to corporations that are 
not members of the consolidated group), but only if the consolidated 
group has financial statements of equal priority after applying the 
rules of paragraph (c)(5)(i)(B)(2)(i).

If after applying the rules of paragraphs (c)(5)(i)(B)(2) (i) and (ii) 
of this section, the consolidated group still has financial statements 
of equal priority, the rules of paragraph (c)(3)(iv) of this section 
apply. See paragraph (c)(6), Examples 7 and 8 of this section.

    (C) Special rule for related corporations. If any portion of the net 
book income of a corporation (the ``first corporation'') is included on 
the applicable financial statement of a second corporation, but the 
first and second corporations are not members of the same consolidated 
group, the applicable financial statement of the second corporation is 
disregarded when determining the applicable financial statement of the 
first corporation. Thus, the applicable financial statement of the first 
corporation is the financial statement of highest priority determined 
under the rules of paragraph (c)(3) of this section without regard to 
the financial statement of the second corporation. Pursuant to paragraph 
(c)(1)(iv) of this section, if a separate financial statement is not 
prepared by the first corporation, the rules of paragraph (b)(5) 
(relating to current earnings and profits) apply. See paragraph (c)(6), 
Examples 9 and 10 of this section.
    (D) Anti-abuse rule. The special rules of this paragraph (c)(5)(i) 
will not apply if the taxpayer rearranges its corporate structure or 
modifies its financial reporting and the principal purpose of such 
action is to use the special rules of this paragraph (c)(5)(i) to reduce 
the amount of the book income adjustment. In such cases, the District 
Director may, based upon all the facts and circumstances, determine the 
taxpayer's applicable financial statement. See paragraph (c)(6), 
Examples 13 and 14 of this section.
    (ii) Applicable financial statement of a foreign corporation with a 
United States trade or business--(A) In general. The applicable 
financial statement of a foreign taxpayer conducting one or more trades 
or businesses in the United States is the financial statement prepared 
by any such trade or business (or attributable to more than one such 
trades or businesses) that has the highest priority as determined under 
paragraph (c)(3) of this section. See paragraph (c)(6), Example 15 of 
this section.
    (B) Special rules for applicable financial statement of a trade or 
business of a foreign taxpayer--(1) Financial statement prepared under 
foreign generally accepted accounting principles. Subject to the rules 
of this section, a financial statement prepared by a United States trade 
or business using generally accepted accounting principles of a foreign 
country may be an applicable financial statement under this paragraph 
(c). See paragraph (c)(6), Example 16 of this section.
    (2) Financial statement denominated in United States dollars. Except 
as provided in paragraph (c)(5)(ii)(D) of this section, the financial 
statement of a United States trade or business must be denominated in 
United States dollars in order to be considered the applicable financial 
statement of the foreign taxpayer under this paragraph (c). See 
paragraph (c)(6), Example 17 of this section.
    (C) Special rule for statements of equal priority. If a foreign 
taxpayer has two or more financial statements of equal

[[Page 424]]

priority (determined under paragraphs (c)(3)(i) and (c)(3)(ii) of this 
section and this paragraph (c)(5)(ii)), the foreign taxpayer's 
applicable financial statement is determined under either paragraph 
(c)(5)(ii)(C) (1) or (2) of this section, whichever is applicable.
    (1) Two or more financial statements reporting on the same trades or 
businesses. If two or more financial statements of equal priority report 
on the same United States trades or businesses, the applicable financial 
statement of the foreign taxpayer is determined under the rule of 
paragraph (c)(3)(iv) of this section. In applying this rule, adjusted 
net book income (as defined under paragraph (b)(6) of this section) 
shall be used. Thus, the financial statement that results in the 
greatest amount of adjusted net book income is the foreign taxpayer's 
applicable financial statement.
    (2) Two or more financial statements reporting on different trades 
or businesses. If two or more financial statements of equal priority 
report on different United States trades or businesses, the foreign 
taxpayer's applicable financial statement is--
    (i) The financial statement that reflects the greatest amount of 
gross receipts attributable to United States trades or businesses, or
    (ii) If after applying the rules of paragraph (c)(5)(ii)(C)(2)(i) of 
this section, the foreign taxpayer still has financial statements of 
equal priority, the financial statement determined under the rules of 
paragraph (c)(3)(iv) of this section (using effectively connected 
adjusted net book income).

See paragraph (c)(6), Example 18 of this section.
    (D) Anti-abuse rules. The special rules of this paragraph (c)(5)(ii) 
will not apply if a trade or business conducted in the United States by 
a foreign taxpayer modifies its financial reporting and the principal 
purpose of such action is to reduce the amount of the book income 
adjustment. In such cases, the District Director may, based upon all the 
facts and circumstances, determine the taxpayer's applicable financial 
statement. See paragraph (c)(6), Example 21, of this section.
    (iii) Supplement or amendment to an applicable financial statement--
(A) Excluding a restatement of net book income. An applicable financial 
statement includes any supplement or amendment thereto (excluding a 
restatement of net book income) for the taxable year that is prepared 
and used for a substantial non-tax purpose (within the meaning of 
paragraph (c)(4) of this section) prior to the date the taxpayer's 
Federal income tax return for the taxable year would be due if the time 
for filing were extended under section 6081. For example, a calendar 
year taxpayer's applicable financial statement includes any supplement 
or amendment prepared and used prior to September 15 of the year 
immediately following its taxable year. If a taxpayer files its Federal 
income tax return before the issuance of a supplement or amendment to 
the applicable financial statement and before the extended due date for 
filing under section 6081, the taxpayer must file an amended Federal 
income tax return reporting any additional tax that results from 
treating the supplement or amendment as part of the applicable financial 
statement. A supplement or amendment (excluding restatements of net book 
income) to an applicable financial statement after the date specified in 
section 6081 is disregarded for purposes of the book income adjustment.
    (B) Restatement of net book income. If a taxpayer restates net book 
income in what otherwise would have been its applicable financial 
statement (its ``original financial statement''), referred to in this 
section as a ``restatement of net book income,'' prior to the date that 
the taxpayer's Federal income tax return for such taxable year would be 
due if the time for filing were extended under section 6081, then--
    (1) If the financial statement that includes the restated net book 
income is of a higher priority than the original financial statement, 
the restated financial statement is the taxpayer's applicable financial 
statement.
    (2) If the financial statement that includes the restated net book 
income is of equal priority to the original financial statement and--
    (i) The restatement is attributable to an error (as described in 
Accounting

[[Page 425]]

Principles Board Opinion No. 20, paragraph 13), the restated financial 
statement is the taxpayer's applicable financial statement, or
    (ii) The restatement is not attributable to an error, the original 
and restated financial statements will be considered of equal priority, 
and paragraph (c)(3)(iv) will apply. Thus, the taxpayer's applicable 
financial statement is the financial statement that results in the 
greatest amount of adjusted net book income.

See paragraph (d)(4)(iv) of this section for rules that apply to 
restatements occurring after the due date (including the extension under 
section 6081) of the return for the taxable year to which the applicable 
financial statement relates. See paragraph (c)(6), Examples 11 and 12 of 
this section.
    (6) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following examples.

    Example 1. In 1987, Corporation A only has a financial statement 
described in paragraph (c)(1)(iv) of this section and elects to treat 
net book income as equal to its current earnings and profits. In 1988, A 
has a certified audited financial statement (as described in paragraph 
(c)(1)(ii) of this section). In 1989, A only has a statement described 
in paragraph (c)(1)(iv) of this section. In 1988, A's certified audited 
financial statement is its applicable financial statement. However, in 
1989, A is bound by the election it made in 1987 (unless revoked with 
the consent of the District Director) and must treat net book income as 
equal to its current earnings and profits.

    Example 2. Corporation B prepares two unaudited financial 
statements. Both statements are distributed to creditors and are used 
for substantial non-tax purposes. The first financial statement is 
accompanied by an auditor's review report while the second statement has 
no auditor's review report. B has no other financial statement. Pursuant 
to paragraph (c)(3)(iv)(B)(2) of this section, the financial statement 
accompanied by the auditor's review report is B's applicable financial 
statement.

    Example 3. Assume the same facts as in Example (2), except the 
financial statement accompanied by an auditor's review report is 
distributed to shareholders while the other statement is distributed to 
creditors, and both statements are used for substantial non-tax 
purposes. Pursuant to paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of this section, B's 
applicable financial statement is the statement distributed to its 
creditors. Paragraph (c)(3)(iv)(B)(2) of this section does not apply 
because the two statements are not of equal priority after applying 
paragraphs (c)(3) (i) and (ii) of this section.

    Example 4. Corporation C is a closely held corporation with two 
shareholders. Both shareholders participate in the business on a day-to-
day basis and are aware of the financial status of the business. C 
prepares a financial statement that is used by C's two shareholders to 
calculate bonuses. The financial statement prepared by C is used for a 
substantial non-tax purpose.

    Example 5. Corporation D prepares a financial statement that it only 
sends to banks with which D is neither currently doing business nor 
negotiating. D does not reasonably anticipate that the financial 
statement will be relied on by the banks for any non-tax purpose, and 
therefore, for purposes of computing net book income, the financial 
statement is not used for a substantial non-tax purpose. The result 
would be the same if D sent the statement to a bank whose only 
relationship to D is that it holds a mortgage on D's property and D's 
rights and obligations under the mortgage are not affected by changes in 
its financial condition. The result would also be the same if D sent the 
statement to a bank with which D is doing business, and the statement is 
not reasonably expected to come to the attention of the bank's employees 
who are responsible for D's account.

    Example 6. Corporation E and its subsidiaries, F and G are a 
consolidated group. Certified audited financial statements are prepared 
by EF and by FG. Both statements are used for substantial non-tax 
purposes. Pursuant to paragraph (c)(5)(i)(A) of this section, the 
financial statement that is prepared by EF is the applicable financial 
statement of the consolidated group. However, pursuant to paragraph 
(d)(6)(i)(B) of this section, an adjustment will be required to include 
the adjusted net book income attributable to G. The result would be the 
same even if the financial statement prepared by FG is of higher 
priority (under the rules of paragraph (c)(3) of this section) than the 
statement prepared by E and F.

    Example 7. Corporation H and its subsidiaries I, J, and K are a 
consolidated group. Certified audited financial statements are prepared 
by H and I and by H, J, and K. Both statements are used for substantial 
non-tax purposes. The financial statement prepared by H, J, and K 
includes the greater amount of gross receipts attributable to members of 
the consolidated group and thus, pursuant to paragraph 
(c)(5)(i)(B)(2)(i) of this section, it is the consolidated group's 
applicable financial statement.

    Example 8. Corporation L and its subsidiary M are a consolidated 
group. Corporation L

[[Page 426]]

also owns 100 percent of N, a foreign corporation that is not part of 
the consolidated group. A certified audited financial statement prepared 
by L, M and N discloses gross receipts of $200, of which $150 is 
attributable to L and M, and a separate certified audited financial 
statement prepared by L and M discloses gross receipts of $150. Both 
statements are used for substantial non-tax purposes. Pursuant to 
paragraph (c)(5)(i)(B) of this section, the consolidated group's 
applicable financial statement is the statement prepared by L, M and N.

    Example 9. Corporation O is 60 percent owned by corporation P and 40 
percent owned by corporation Q. Both P and Q prepare financial 
statements that are required to be filed with the SEC reflecting their 
respective interests in O. O also separately prepares a certified 
audited financial statement, or uses a summary of its books and records 
for credit purposes. Under paragraph (c)(5)(i)(C), O's separate 
statement is its applicable financial statement.

    Example 10. Assume the same facts as in Example 9 except that O does 
not prepare a separate financial statement or a summary of its books and 
records for credit purposes. Pursuant to paragraph (c)(5)(i)(C) of this 
section, O must treat its net book income as equal to its current 
earnings and profits.

    Example 11. Corporation R uses a calendar year for both financial 
accounting and tax purposes. Initially, R issues its calendar year 1987 
financial statement on March 1, 1988. R's adjusted net book income 
resulting from this statement is $80. This would be R's applicable 
financial statement for 1987, but for the restatement described in the 
next sentence. On September 1, 1988, R restates its 1987 financial 
statement to correct an error (as described in Accounting Principles 
Board Opinion No. 20, paragraph 13). The restated financial statement is 
of the same priority as the initial financial statement. The restatement 
results in adjusted net book income for calendar year 1987 of $50. 
Pursuant to paragraph (c)(5)(iii)(B)(2)(i) of this section, the restated 
financial statement is treated as R's 1987 applicable financial 
statement.

    Example 12. Assume the same facts as in Example (11), except that R 
restates its financial statement in order to reflect a change in 
accounting method. Since the restatement does not result from an error, 
paragraph (c)(5)(iii)(B)(2)(i) of this section does not apply. Pursuant 
to paragraph (c)(5)(iii)(B)(2)(ii) of this section, R's 1987 applicable 
financial statement is the financial statement for 1987 that results in 
the greater amount of adjusted net book income. Thus, R's March 1, 1988 
financial statement is treated as its 1987 applicable financial 
statement.

    Example 13. Corporation S, which is not a member of an affiliated 
group, uses a calendar year for both financial accounting and tax 
purposes. S's 1987 applicable financial statement is a certified audited 
financial statement. On January 1, 1988, S transfers all of its assets 
subject to liabilities to T, a newly created subsidiary that is 100 
percent owned by S. The principal purpose of the transfer is to use the 
special rules of paragraph (c)(5)(i) of this section to reduce the 
adjusted net book income of S. For calendar year 1988, T prepares and 
uses a certified audited financial statement. Since S's only asset is 
its investment in T, S does not prepare a financial statement for 
calendar year 1988. In addition, since S is only a holding company, T's 
1988 certified audited financial statement reports the same net book 
income that would have been reported on a consolidated ST financial 
statement. If paragraph (c)(5)(i)(D) of this section does not apply, 
ST's 1988 applicable financial statement is the financial statement of S 
(the parent of the consolidated group) with the highest priority. Under 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section, since S does not have a financial 
statement in 1988, the net book income of the ST consolidated group is 
ordinarily deemed to equal the aggregate earnings and profits of the 
members of the consolidated group. However, given these facts, the 
District Director may determine that the 1988 certified audited 
financial statement of T is the 1988 applicable financial statement of 
the ST consolidated group.

    Example 14. The facts are the same as in Example 13, except that S 
has owned 100 percent of T for several years prior to calendar year 
1987. In addition, prior to 1987, ST prepared a consolidated certified 
audited financial statement. For calendar year 1987, ST does not prepare 
a consolidated certified audited financial statement. Instead, T 
prepares and uses a certified audited financial statement while S does 
not prepare a financial statement. The principal purpose of the change 
in financial reporting is to use the special rules of paragraph 
(c)(5)(i) of this section to reduce the adjusted net book income of the 
ST consolidated group. Given these facts, the District Director may 
determine that the 1987 certified audited financial statement of T is 
the 1987 applicable financial statement of the ST consolidated group.

    Example 15. Corporation U is a foreign corporation incorporated in 
A. U is a calendar year taxpayer for both financial accounting and tax 
purposes. U actively conducts three real estate businesses, X, Y and Z, 
in the United States. In 1987, X prepares a certified audited financial 
statement that it provides to its United States creditor. In addition, 
in 1987, X, Y and Z each prepare unaudited financial statements that 
they provide to U for incorporation in U's worldwide financial

[[Page 427]]

statement. Under paragraph (c)(5)(ii)(A) of this section, U's applicable 
financial statement is the certified audited financial statement 
prepared by X. However, pursuant to paragraph (d)(7) of this section, an 
adjustment is required to include any of U's effectively connected net 
book income that is not included in X's certified audited financial 
statement (i.e., the effectively connected net book income attributable 
to Y and Z).

    Example 16. Corporation A is a foreign corporation incorporated in 
Z. A is a calendar year taxpayer for both financial accounting and tax 
purposes. A actively conducts a real estate business, B, in the United 
States. B prepares a certified audited financial statement for 1987 
using the accounting principles of Z that it provides to A for 
incorporation into A's worldwide financial statement. In addition, B 
prepares a review statement for 1987 using United States generally 
accepted accounting principles that it provides to its United States 
creditors. Both the certified statement and the review statement are 
denominated in United States dollars. Under paragraphs (c)(5)(ii)(A) and 
(c)(5)(ii)(B)(1) of this section, the financial statement prepared under 
the accounting principles of Z is the applicable financial statement.

    Example 17. Assume the same facts as in Example (16) except that 
amounts are reported on B's certified audited financial statement in the 
currency of Z and amounts are reported on B's review statement in United 
States dollars. Since the review statement is denominated in United 
States dollars, under paragraph (c)(5)(ii)(B)(2) of this section, it is 
the applicable financial statement.

    Example 18. Corporation C is a foreign corporation incorporated in 
Z. C is a calendar year taxpayer for both financial accounting and tax 
purposes. C actively conducts two real estate businesses, D and E, in 
the United States. D and E each separately prepare a certified audited 
financial statement for 1987 that they provide to their United States 
creditors. D's financial statement reports gross receipts of $100. E's 
financial statement reports gross receipts of $200. Under paragraph 
(c)(5)(ii)(C)(2) of this section, E's certified audited financial 
statement is the applicable financial statement and must be adjusted 
under the rules of paragraph (d)(7) of this section to include 
effectively connected book income attributable to D.

    Example 19. F is a foreign corporation incorporated in X. F is a 
calendar year taxpayer for both financial accounting and tax purposes. F 
actively conducts a banking business, G, in the United States. G has 
been engaged in business in the United States since 1977. For the years 
1977 through 1986, G did not prepare a separate financial statement. 
However, each year G provided F with its books, records and other raw 
financial data. F used this data in preparing its worldwide financial 
statement. G provides F with its 1987 books and records on January 5, 
1988, in accordance with its historic practice. On February 15, 1988, G 
prepares an unaudited financial statement for calendar year 1987 that it 
provides to F. The principal purpose of creating this financial 
statement is to reduce net book income. Under these facts, the financial 
statement provided by G is not intended to be reasonably relied upon by 
F in preparing its worldwide financial statement. Therefore, for 
purposes of computing net book income, G's financial statement has not 
been used for a substantial non-tax purpose.

    Example 20. Assume the same facts as in Example 19 except that for 
purposes of preparing F's 1987 worldwide financial statement, G does not 
provide F with any raw financial data, and G only provides F with an 
audited financial statement that is prepared for a substantial non-tax 
purpose. Under these facts, the financial statement provided by G is 
intended to be relied upon by F in preparing its worldwide financial 
statement. Therefore, for purposes of computing net book income, G's 
financial statement has been used for a substantial non-tax purpose.

    Example 21. Corporation H is a foreign corporation incorporated in 
I. H is a calendar year taxpayer for both financial accounting and tax 
purposes. H actively conducts a real estate business, J, in the United 
States. For the years 1976 through 1986, J prepared a certified audited 
financial statement using United States dollars that it provided to H. 
In 1987, J prepares a certified audited financial statement using the 
currency of I. The principal purpose of the modification of J's 
financial reporting is to reduce the amount of the book income 
adjustment. Given these facts, the District Director may determine that 
J's 1987 certified audited financial statement prepared in the currency 
of I is J's applicable financial statement for 1987, and such statement 
must be converted into United States dollars based upon the translation 
used to prepare the certified audited financial statement in the 
currency of I. Accordingly, the effectively connected net book income of 
J for 1987 is the effectively connected net book income reported on the 
financial statement that has been converted into United States dollars.

    (d) Adjustments to net book income--(1) In general. Adjusted net 
book income is computed by making the adjustments described in this 
paragraph (d) to net book income (as defined in paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section). No adjustment may be made to net book income except as 
provided in this paragraph (d).

[[Page 428]]

    (2) Definitions--(i) Historic practice. For purposes of this 
paragraph (d), historic practice is defined as an accounting practice 
that--
    (A) Was used consistently by the taxpayer for each of the 2 years 
immediately preceding its first taxable year beginning after 1986, and
    (B) Was used on the financial statement that would have been the 
taxpayer's applicable financial statement (as determined under paragraph 
(c) of this section) for each of the 2 years immediately preceding its 
first taxable year beginning after 1986 if section 56(f), as amended by 
the Tax Reform Act of 1986, had been in effect.

Thus, in order for a calendar year corporation to have an historic 
practice in 1987, the corporation must have used the accounting practice 
in its 1985 and 1986 financial statements. However, to be treated as 
used for purposes of this paragraph, an accounting practice must have 
been used prior to April 23, 1987. For example, an accounting practice 
that is first used after April 23, 1987, in a restatement of a 
taxpayer's 1985 and 1986 financial statements is not the taxpayer's 
historic practice.
    (ii) Accounting literature. For purposes of this paragraph (d), the 
term ``accounting literature'' means--
    (A) Generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) as defined in 
the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Professional 
Standards, AU Sec. 411.05, paragraphs (a) through (c), and
    (B) Pronouncements by the SEC including, but not limited to, 
Regulations S-X, SEC Financial Reporting Releases, and SEC Staff 
Accounting Bulletins,

that are effective for the accounting period covered by the applicable 
financial statement.
    (3) Adjustments for certain taxes--(i) In general. Net book income 
for purposes of this paragraph (d) must be adjusted to disregard (for 
example, by adding back) any Federal income taxes or income, war 
profits, or excess profits taxes imposed by any foreign country or 
possession of the United States that are directly or indirectly taken 
into account on the taxpayer's applicable financial statement. No 
adjustment is made for taxes not described in the preceding sentence. 
Taxes directly or indirectly taken into account consist of the 
taxpayer's total income tax expense that includes both current and 
deferred income tax expense. In addition, items of income and expense, 
including extraordinary items that are stated net of tax, must be 
adjusted to disregard the taxes described in this paragraph (d)(3)(i). 
See paragraph (d)(4)(vii) of this section for an adjustment for certain 
deferred foreign taxes.
    (ii) Exception for certain foreign taxes. Net book income is not 
adjusted to disregard taxes imposed by a foreign country or possession 
of the United States if the taxpayer does not choose to take the 
benefits of section 901 (relating to the foreign tax credit) with 
respect to these taxes for the taxable year. The rule in the preceding 
sentence only applies to the amount of taxes the taxpayer deducts in the 
current taxable year under section 164(a). See paragraph (d)(3)(iv), 
Example 4 of this section. Net book income also is not adjusted to 
disregard foreign taxes that cannot be claimed as a credit (other than 
by virtue of a foreign tax credit limitation). Thus, a taxpayer does not 
add back to net book income any taxes it is not allowed to claim as a 
credit against its United States income tax liability because of section 
245(a)(8), 901(j), 907(b) or 908 of the Code.
    (iii) Certain valuation adjustments. Income tax expense under 
paragraph (d)(3)(i) of this section does not include valuation 
adjustments such as the valuation adjustments related to purchase 
accounting described in Accounting Principles Board (APB) Opinion No. 
16, paragraph 89. However, income tax expense does include the tax 
associated with any gain or loss on the sale or other disposition of any 
asset the basis of which was adjusted under paragraph 89 of Opinion 16. 
See paragraph (d)(3)(iv), Example 6 of this section.
    (iv) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated 
by the following examples:

    Example 1. Corporation A has $120 of net book income. In calculating 
net book income, A has deducted $20 of state income tax expense and $60 
of Federal income tax expense. Assuming there are no other adjustments 
to net book income, A's adjusted net book income is $180 ($120 of net 
book income

[[Page 429]]

+ $60 of Federal income tax expense). Pursuant to paragraph (d)(3)(i) of 
this section, no adjustment is made for the state income tax expense.

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Example 1, except that A also 
has a net extraordinary item of $40. Thus, A has net book income of $160 
($120 + $40). The $40 net extraordinary item is composed of a $70 gross 
extraordinary item less $30 of Federal income tax expense. Assuming 
there are no other adjustments to net book income, A's adjusted net book 
income is $250 ($160 of net book income + $60 of Federal income tax 
expense on book income other than the extraordinary item + $30 of 
Federal income tax expense on the extraordinary item).

    Example 3. Assume the same facts as in Example 1, except that in 
calculating A's $120 of net book income, A has $50 of Federal income tax 
expense and $10 of foreign income tax expense. The $10 of foreign income 
tax expense results from a foreign branch and is composed of $7 of 
current foreign income tax expense and $3 of deferred foreign income tax 
expense. A chooses to take the benefits of the foreign tax credit under 
section 901 for the current taxable year. Assuming there are no other 
adjustments to net book income, A's adjusted net book income is $180 
($120 of net book income + $50 of Federal income tax expense + $10 of 
foreign income tax expense).

    Example 4. Assume the same facts as in Example 3, except that A does 
not choose to take the benefits of the foreign tax credit in the current 
taxable year and instead deducts the $7 of current foreign income tax 
paid. Pursuant to paragraph (d)(3)(ii) of this section, net book income 
is not adjusted for the $7 of current foreign income tax expense. 
However, net book income is adjusted for the $3 of deferred foreign 
income tax expense. Thus, assuming there are no other adjustments to net 
book income, D's adjusted net book income is $173 ($120 of net book 
income + $50 of Federal income tax expense + $3 of deferred foreign 
income tax expenses).

    Example 5. In 1987, corporation B only has a financial statement 
described in paragraph (c)(1)(iv) of this section. B elects pursuant to 
paragraph (c)(2) of this section to treat net book income as equal to 
its current earnings and profits. B's current earnings and profits in 
1987 is $60, after reduction for $40 of Federal income tax (see 
paragraph (b)(5)(i) of this section). Pursuant to paragraph (d)(3) of 
this section, B must make a $40 adjustment to net book income. Thus, 
assuming no other adjustments to net book income, B's 1987 adjusted net 
book income is $100 ($60 of net book income + $40 adjustment for Federal 
income taxes).

    Example 6. Corporation A acquires assets from corporation B in a 
transaction where the tax basis of B's assets will carry over to A. For 
financial accounting purposes, A will account for the acquisition in 
accordance with Accounting Principles Board (APB) Opinion No. 16. One of 
the assets acquired from B has an appraised value of $10,000. However, 
because the tax basis of B's assets will carry over to A, A's tax basis 
in the asset is only $7,000. Given these facts, APB Opinion No. 16, 
paragraph 89 requires that the asset be recorded at $10,000 less the tax 
effect of the difference between the appraised value and the tax basis. 
Assuming a 30 percent tax rate for A, the asset would be recorded at 
$9,100 ($10,000 appraised value--($3,000 difference between the 
appraised value and the tax basis  x  30 percent)). If A sells the asset 
for $10,000, A will recognize a book gain of $900 with respect to the 
sale (assuming the asset is not amortized for book purposes). However, A 
will also have income tax expense of $900 (($10,000 sales proceeds--
$7,000 tax basis)  x  30 percent) with respect to the sale. Thus, A will 
have no net book income from the sale. Pursuant to paragraph (d)(3)(iii) 
of this section, A's income tax expense includes the $900 of income tax 
expense attributable to the effects of the valuation adjustment made in 
accordance with APB Opinion No. 16, paragraph 89. As a result, A's 
adjusted net book income with respect to its asset sale is $900 ($0 of 
net book income + $900 adjustment for income tax expense).

    (4) Adjustments to prevent omission or duplication--(i) In general. 
In order to prevent omissions or duplications, net book income must be 
adjusted for the items described in paragraph (d)(4)(ii) through 
(d)(4)(vii) of this section and for such other items as approved or 
required by the Commissioner in published guidance. Except as provided 
in this paragraph (d), a taxpayer may not adjust net book income to 
prevent omission or duplication of items. See paragraph (d)(4)(viii), 
Example 1 of this section.
    (ii) Special rule for depreciating an asset below its cost. Net book 
income must be adjusted to exclude depreciation or amortization expense 
to the extent such expense exceeds the asset's financial accounting 
historical cost (``excess depreciation''). However, no adjustment is 
required if excess depreciation has been the taxpayer's historic 
practice (as defined in paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section) or if the 
excess depreciation is properly attributable to negative salvage value 
(i.e., where the cost of removal or clean-up exceeds the salvage value).

[[Page 430]]

    (iii) Consolidated group using current earnings and profits. In the 
case of a consolidated group that uses its aggregate current earnings 
and profits as net book income (as determined under the rules of 
paragraph (b)(5)(ii) of this section), the current earnings and profits 
of the group is the aggregate of the current earnings and profits of 
each member of the group. In determining aggregate current earnings and 
profits, the adjustments described in Sec. 1.1502-33 apply except for 
the adjustment for intercompany distributions with respect to stock and 
obligations or members of the group described in Sec. 1.1502-33(c)(1) 
and the investment adjustment described in Sec. 1.1502-33(c)(4)(ii)(a).
    (iv) Restatement of a prior year's applicable financial statement--
(A) In general. If a taxpayer restates an applicable financial statement 
and as a result, the net book income for a taxable year is restated 
after the last date that the taxpayer could have filed its Federal 
income tax return for such taxable year (if it had obtained an extension 
of time under section 6081 of the Code), net book income for the first 
successor year (as defined in paragraph (d)(4)(iv)(D) of this section) 
must be adjusted by that part of the cumulative effect of the 
restatement on net book income attributable to taxable years beginning 
after 1986. To the extent that the cumulative effect of the restatement 
on net book income includes a tax component, paragraph (d)(3) of this 
section may apply. See paragraph (c)(5)(iii) of this section for rules 
relating to the restatement of an applicable financial statement prior 
to the date the taxpayer's return for the taxable year would be due if 
the time for filing the return is extended.
    (B) Reconciliation of owner's equity in applicable financial 
statements. If--
    (1) The beginning balance of owner's equity on the taxpayer's 
applicable financial statement for the current taxable year is different 
than the ending balance of owner's equity on the taxpayer's applicable 
financial statement for the preceding taxable year, and
    (2) The taxpayer is not otherwise subject to the restatement rules 
in paragraph (d)(4)(iv)(A) of this section,

the taxpayer will be deemed to have restated its applicable financial 
statement for the preceding year and paragraph (d)(4)(iv)(A) of this 
section will apply.
    (C) Use of different priority applicable financial statements in 
consecutive taxable years. If the priority of a taxpayer's applicable 
financial statement (as determined under the rules of paragraph (c)(3) 
of this section) for the current taxable year is different than the 
priority of the taxpayer's applicable financial statement for the 
preceding taxable year, the taxpayer shall be required to adjust net 
book income to the extent required under the rules of either paragraph 
(d)(4)(iv) (A) or (B) of this section.
    (D) First successor year defined. The ``first successor year'' is 
the first taxable year for which the taxpayer could have timely filed a 
return if it had obtained an extension of time under section 6081 of the 
Code after the restatement occurs. For example, if a calendar year 
corporation restates and uses its 1987 applicable financial statement 
between September 16, 1988 and September 15, 1989, any adjustment 
resulting from the restatement will be made in the taxpayer's 1988 
Federal income tax return. If the restatement occurs prior to September 
15, 1988, the rules of paragraph (c)(5)(iii) of this section will apply.
    (E) Exceptions. (1) No adjustment is made under paragraph 
(d)(4)(iv)(A) of this section for a restatement prepared in accordance 
with APB Opinion No. 16, paragraph 53, requiring restatements of 
financial statements to reflect the combined operation of corporations 
combined in a pooling transaction.
    (2) In order to prevent duplication of an adjustment, an adjustment 
otherwise required under paragraph (d)(4)(iv)(A) of this section may be 
decreased to take into account an adjustment previously made under the 
disclosure rules described in paragraph (d)(5) of the section. See 
paragraph (d)(4)(viii), Example 3 of this section.
    (v) Adjustment for items previously taxed as subpart F income. Net 
book income does not include any item excluded from regular taxable 
income under section 959 if the item was included in adjusted net book 
income in

[[Page 431]]

a prior taxable year under the provisions of paragraph (b)(2)(iv) of 
this section and due to section 951. A taxpayer may not adjust net book 
income under this paragraph (d)(4)(v) to the extent any portion of the 
subpart F income was recognized during taxable years beginning before 
1987. See Example 5 of paragraph (d)(4)(viii) of this section.
    (vi) Adjustment for poolings of interests. In a business combination 
accounted for as a pooling of interests under paragraph 50 of APB 
Opinion 16, net book income does not include the income of a separate 
corporation for that part of the taxable year preceding the combination 
of that corporation with the taxpayer, to the extent the separate 
corporation included this income in its net book income for the taxable 
year preceding the business combination. A taxpayer may not adjust net 
book income under this paragraph (d)(4)(vi) to the extent the separate 
corporation's income is attributable to taxable years beginning before 
1987.
    (vii) Adjustment for certain deferred foreign taxes. In the case of 
deferred foreign taxes that were previously added back to net book 
income in accordance with paragraph (d)(3) of this section, a deduction 
is allowed in computing adjusted net book income for the taxable year in 
which the deferred foreign taxes are deducted under section 164(a). A 
taxpayer may not adjust net book income under this paragraph (d)(4)(vii) 
to the extent the foreign taxes were deferred during taxable years 
beginning before 1987.
    (viii) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated 
by the following examples.

    Example 1. Corporation A uses a calendar year for both financial 
accounting and tax purposes. In 1986, A's financial statement included a 
$100 financial accounting loss for a plant shutdown. A could not deduct 
the loss on its 1986 Federal income tax return. In 1987, A deducts the 
loss from the 1986 plant shutdown in its 1987 Federal income tax return. 
As a result, A's 1987 adjusted net book income exceeds its 1987 pre-
adjustment alternative minimum taxable income by $100 (an amount equal 
to the deduction for the 1986 plant shutdown). Pursuant to paragraph 
(d)(4)(i) of this section, A cannot make an adjustment to net book 
income.

    Example 2. Corporation B uses a calendar year for both financial 
accounting and tax purposes. B issues its calendar year 1987 applicable 
financial statement on March 1, 1988. The applicable financial statement 
reports net book income for the calendar years 1985 through 1987 of $50, 
$70, and $80, respectively. On March 1, 1989 when it issues its calendar 
year 1988 applicable financial statement, B restates its 1985, 1986, and 
1987 applicable financial statements. The restatement results from a 
change in accounting method that is made during calendar year 1988. 
After restatement, B's net book income for 1985, 1986, and 1987 is $60, 
$80, and $90, respectively. Based upon these facts, the cumulative 
effect of the restatement on B's net book income for years prior to 1988 
is $30. However, since $20 of the cumulative effective is attributable 
to years beginning before 1987, B's 1988 net book income is increased by 
only $10 ($30-$20). If the cumulative effect includes a tax adjustment, 
see paragraph (d)(3) of this section

    Example 3. Assume the same facts for Corporation B as in Example 2, 
except that B's 1987 net book income of $80 is increased by $10 for 
purposes of B's 1987 Federal income tax return. The $10 adjustment is 
made pursuant to paragraph (d)(5)(iii) of this section relating to 
disclosure in the accountant's opinion. Specifically, the accountant's 
opinion on B's 1987 applicable financial statement disclosed that if D 
had used a certain accounting method, B's 1987 net book income would 
have been $90 rather than $80. The restatement of B's 1987 applicable 
financial statement on March 1, 1988 results entirely from B changing to 
the accounting method referred to in the 1987 accountant's opinion. 
Pursuant to paragraph (d)(4)(iv)(E)(2) of this section, no adjustment is 
made to B's 1988 net book income as a result of the restatement of B's 
1987 applicable financial statement.

    Example 4. Assume the same facts as in Example 1, except that when A 
issues its 1987 applicable financial statement it also restates the net 
book income reported on its 1986 financial statement to exclude the $100 
loss attributable to the plant shutdown. Furthermore, the $100 loss from 
the plant shutdown is included in A's 1987 net book income as reported 
on its 1987 applicable financial statement. Pursuant to paragraph (d)(4) 
of this section, no adjustment is made to A's 1987 net book income as a 
result of the restatement of A's 1986 net book income.

    Example 5. Corporation D is a domestic corporation. D owns ten 
percent of the issued and outstanding stock of corporation F, a foreign 
corporation. D and F file separate financial statements and federal 
income tax returns, both on a calendar-year basis. F is a controlled 
foreign corporation as defined in

[[Page 432]]

section 957. In 1987, D includes ten percent of F's subpart F income in 
its income under section 951. F makes no actual distributions to D in 
that year, and D's applicable financial statement includes the earnings 
of F only when actual distributions are made. See paragraph (d)(6)(i)(A) 
of this section. In 1987, D must adjust its net book income under 
paragraph (b)(2)(iv) of this section to include ten percent of F's 
subpart F income. In 1988, F makes an actual distribution to D which 
qualifies for the exclusion of section 959. D includes this actual 
distribution as income on its applicable financial statement for 1987. 
Pursuant to paragraph (d)(4)(v) of this section, D must adjust its net 
book income for 1988 to exclude the actual distribution from F.

    (5) Adjustments resulting from disclosure--(i) Adjustment for 
footnote disclosure or other supplementary information--(A) In general. 
Except as described in this paragraph (d)(5)(i), net book income must be 
increased by any amount disclosed in a footnote or other supplementary 
information to the applicable financial statement if the disclosure 
supports a calculation of a net book income amount that would be greater 
than the net book income reported on the taxpayer's applicable financial 
statement. However, net book income will not be increased if the 
disclosure--
    (1) Is specifically authorized by the accounting literature 
described in paragraph (d)(2)(ii) of this section, or
    (2) Is in accordance with the taxpayer's historic practice as 
defined in paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section.

See paragraph (d)(5)(v), Examples 1 and 2 of this section.
    (B) Disclosures not specifically authorized in the accounting 
literature. The following footnote or other supplementary disclosure 
will not be considered specifically authorized in the accounting 
literature--
    (1) Disclosure of what the taxpayer's net book income would have if 
GAAP had been used in preparing the applicable financial statement 
instead of tax accounting rules (or disclosure of the adjustment 
necessary to determine net book income on a GAAP basis), and
    (2) Disclosure of what the taxpayer's net book income would have 
been if the accrual method had been used in preparing the applicable 
financial statement instead of the cash method (or disclosure of the 
adjustment necessary to determine net book income on the accrual 
method).
    (ii) Equity adjustments--(A) In general. Except as described in this 
paragraph (d)(5)(ii), net book income must be increased by the amount of 
any equity adjustment (as defined in paragraph (d)(5)(ii)(B) of this 
section) included in the applicable financial statement if the equity 
adjustment increases owner's equity as reported on the taxpayer's 
applicable financial statement and the increase is attributable to the 
taxpayer or a member of the taxpayer's consolidated group. However, net 
book income will not be increased if the equity adjustment--
    (1) Is specifically authorized by the accounting literature 
described in paragraph (d)(2)(ii) of this section, or
    (2) Is in accordance with the taxpayer's historic practice as 
defined in paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section.

See paragraph (d)(5)(v), Examples 3 and 4 of this section.
    (B) Definition of equity adjustment. An equity adjustment is any 
reconciling item between beginning and ending owner's equity as reported 
on the taxpayer's applicable financial statement for the current taxable 
year. However, if properly accounted for, the following reconciling 
items are not considered equity adjustments and do not require 
adjustment under paragraph (d)(5)(ii)(A) of this section--
    (1) Net book income,
    (2) Non-liquidating dividend distributions, and
    (3) Contributions to capital.
    (iii) Amounts disclosed in an accountant's opinion. Net book income 
must be increased by the amount of any item disclosed in the 
accountant's opinion (as described in paragraphs (c)(1)(ii)(C) and 
(c)(1)(ii)(D) of this section) if the disclosure supports a calculation 
of a net book income amount that would be greater than the net book 
income reported on the taxpayer's applicable financial statement. 
However, net book income will not be increased if the disclosure is in 
accordance with the taxpayer's historic practice, as defined in 
paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section.
    (iv) Accounting method changes that result in cumulative adjustments 
to the

[[Page 433]]

current year's applicable financial statement---(A) In general. If net 
book income for the current taxable year includes a cumulative 
adjustment attributable to an accounting method change and the amount of 
the cumulative adjustment may be determined upon review of the 
applicable financial statement (including footnotes) or other 
supplementary disclosure, net book income for the current taxable year 
shall be adjusted to exclude that portion of the cumulative adjustment 
attributable to taxable years beginning before 1987. To the extent the 
cumulative adjustment is reported net of a tax, paragraph (d)(3) of this 
section may apply. See paragraph (d)(5)(V), Example 5 of this section. 
If an accounting method change results in a restatement of an applicable 
financial statement, paragraphs (c)(5)(iii) or (d)(4)(iv)(A) of this 
section may apply.
    (B) Exception. In order to prevent duplication of an adjustment, the 
adjustment required under paragraph (d)(5)(iv)(A) of this section may be 
decreased to take into account any adjustment for the accounting method 
change previously made under the rules described in paragraph (d)(5) of 
this section (relating to adjustments resulting from disclosure).
    (v) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following examples.

    Example 1. Corporation A uses a calendar year for both financial 
accounting and tax purposes. For calendar years 1984 through 1986, A 
used the cash method of accounting on its financial statement and 
disclosed in a footnote the net income or loss that would have resulted 
if the accrual method of accounting had been used. A's 1987 net book 
income, as reported on its 1987 applicable financial statement, is $100 
and is calculated on the cash method of accounting. In addition, a 
footnote in A's 1987 applicable financial statement states that A's 1987 
net book income would have been $30 greater had the accrual method of 
accounting been used. Pursuant to paragraph (d)(5)(i)(B)(2) of this 
section, A's 1987 footnote disclosure is not considered specifically 
authorized by the accounting literature. However, since A made such 
disclosure for calendar years 1985 and 1986, the 1987 disclosure is in 
accordance with A's historic practice, as defined in paragraph (d)(2)(i) 
of this section. Since A satisfies the exception described in paragraph 
(d)(5)(i)(A)(2) of this section, no adjustment is made to A's 1987 net 
book income for the footnote disclosure.

    Example 2. Assume the same facts for corporation B as in Example 
(1), except that B's 1985 and 1986 financial statements did not disclose 
the amount of income or loss that would result if the accrual method of 
accounting (rather than the cash method of accounting) were used. Since 
B does not satisfy either of the exceptions described in paragraph 
(d)(5)(i)(A) of this section, B's 1987 adjusted net book income is $130 
($100 of net book income plus $30 adjustment for footnote disclosure).

    Example 3. Corporation C uses a calendar year for both financial 
accounting and tax purposes. C's 1987 net book income, as reported on 
its 1987 applicable financial statement, is $200. However, as 
specifically authorized in FASB Statement of Standards No. 52, C's 1987 
applicable financial statement also includes a $50 equity adjustment (as 
defined in paragraph (d)(5)(ii)(B) of this section) for foreign currency 
translation gains. Since the equity adjustment is specifically 
authorized in the accounting literature, C satisfies the exception 
described in paragraph (d)(5)(ii)(A)(1) of this section, and no 
adjustment is made to C's 1987 net book income for the $50 equity 
adjustment.

    Example 4. Assume the same facts for coporation D as in Example (3), 
except that D's equity adjustment is for foreign currency transaction 
gains instead of foreign currency translation gains. Pursuant to FASB 
Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 52, foreign currency 
transaction gains (as compared with foreign currency translation gains) 
are included in the income statement rather than in equity. In addition, 
in 1985 and 1986, D included foreign currency transaction gains in its 
income statement. Since D does not satisfy either of the exceptions 
described in paragraph (d)(5)(ii)(A) of this section, D's 1987 adjusted 
net book income is $250 ($200 of net book income plus $50 equity 
adjustment).

    Example 5. Corporation E uses a calendar year for both financial 
accounting and tax purposes. E's net book income for 1988 is $100. The 
$100 of net book income includes $30 of financial accounting loss 
attributable to a cumulative adjustment as of January 1, 1988, resulting 
from a change in E's accounting method. The $30 cumulative loss is 
disclosed in E's 1988 applicable financial statement. If E had made the 
accounting method change in calendar year 1987, the cumulative loss as 
of January 1, 1987 would have been $20. Based upon the above facts, E 
must increase net book income by $20 to disregard that portion of the 
cumulative adjustment attributable to years beginning before 1987. Thus, 
assuming no other adjustments to net book income,

[[Page 434]]

E's adjusted net book income for 1988 is $120 ($100 plus $20).

    (6) Adjustments applicable to related corporations--(i) Consolidated 
returns--(A) In general. Pursuant to paragraphs (a)(3) and (b)(3) of 
this section, the book income adjustment with respect to a consolidated 
group (as described under paragraph (a)(3) of this section) is computed 
based on the consolidated adjusted net book income (as defined in 
paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section). In the case of any corporation 
that is not included in the consolidated group, consolidated adjusted 
net book income of the consolidated group shall include only the sum of 
the dividends received from such other corporation and other amounts 
includible in gross income under this chapter with respect to the 
earnings of such other corporation. See paragraph (d)(6)(v), Example 4 
of this section.
    (B) Corporations included in the consolidated Federal income tax 
return but excluded from the applicable financial statement--(1) In 
general. Consolidated net book income reported on the applicable 
financial statement (as determined under paragraph (c)(5) of this 
section) shall be adjusted to include net book income attributable to a 
corporation that is included in the consolidated group but is not 
included in the applicable financial statement. Net book income for the 
corporation not included in the applicable financial statement of the 
consolidated group is the net book income reported on such corporation's 
applicable financial statement (determined under the rules of paragraph 
(c) of this section and adjusted under the rules of this paragraph (d)). 
The adjusted net book income of such corporation must be consolidated 
with the adjusted net book income of other members of the consolidated 
group and appropriate adjustments, including consolidating elimination 
entries, must be made.
    (2) Adjustments to net book income for minority interests. 
Consolidated net book income must be adjusted to include income or loss 
allocated to minority interests in members of the consolidated group. 
Failure to include income or loss allocated to minority interests shall 
be treated as an omission of net book income. See paragraph (d)(6)(v), 
Example 1 of this section.
    (3) Corporations included in the consolidated group that are 
accounted for under the equity method of accounting. No adjustment is 
required to consolidated net book income for income or loss of a member 
of the consolidated group that is reported in the applicable financial 
statement under the equity method of accounting (as described in APB 
Opinion No. 18, paragraph (6)). However, consolidated adjusted net book 
income (as defined in paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section) must include 
100 percent of the net book income attributable to such member. See 
paragraph (d)(6)(i)(B)(2) of this section. For example, if consolidated 
net book income (as defined in paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of this section) 
only includes 85 percent of the equity income attributable to a member 
of the consolidated group, an adjustment will be required to include the 
15 percent of equity income excluded from consolidated net book income. 
In addition, to the extent the equity income reflects an adjustment for 
tax expense or benefit, paragraph (d)(3) may apply. See paragraph 
(d)(6)(v), Examples 2 and 3 of this section.
    (C) Corporations included in the applicable financial statement but 
excluded from the consolidated tax return. Net book income or 
consolidated net book income must be adjusted to eliminate the income or 
loss of a corporation that is included in the applicable financial 
statement, but is not included in the consolidated group. When net book 
income attributable to a corporation that is not a member of the 
consolidated group is removed from the computation of net book income in 
the applicable financial statement, consolidating elimination entries 
attributable to the excluded member must also be removed.
    (ii) Adjustment under the principles of section 482. In order to 
fairly allocate items relating to intercompany transactions between 
corporations that are owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the 
same interests but are not members of a consolidated group, adjustments 
must be made to the net book income reported on the applicable financial 
statement of each corporation under the principles of section 482

[[Page 435]]

and the regulations thereunder (relating to allocation of income and 
deductions among related taxpayers). For example, assume corporation A 
owns 100 percent of F, a foreign subsidiary, but A and F are not members 
of a consolidated group. However, A and F prepare a consolidated 
financial statement. In adjusting A's applicable financial statement to 
eliminate the net book income attributable to F, A must apply the 
principles of section 482. If a corporation fails to make appropriate 
adjustments to its applicable financial statement under the rules of 
this paragraph (d)(6)(ii), the District Director may make such 
adjustments under the principles of section 482 and the regulations 
thereunder.
    (iii) Adjustment for dividends received from section 936 
corporations--(A) In general. Any dividend received from a corporation 
eligible for the credit provided by section 936 (relating to the 
possession tax credit) shall be included in adjusted net book income. 
For example, assume corporation A owns 100 percent of B, a section 936 
corporation, and B pays a $100 dividend to A. Furthermore, assume that 
of the $100 dividend, $15 of withholding tax is paid to a possession of 
the United States, so that A only receives $85 from the dividend. Given 
these facts, A's adjusted net book income includes $100 with respect to 
the dividend from B.
    (B) Treatment as foreign taxes. Fifty percent of any withholding tax 
paid to a possession of the United States with respect to dividends 
referred to in paragraph (d)(6)(iii)(A) of this section may be treated 
for purposes of the alternative minimum foreign tax credit as a tax paid 
to a foreign country by the corporation receiving the dividend. However, 
if the aggregate of these dividends exceeds the excess referred to in 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section, the amount treated as a tax paid to 
the foreign country shall not exceed 50 percent of the aggregate amount 
of the tax withheld multiplied by a fraction.
    (1) The numerator of which is the excess referred to in paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section; and
    (2) The denominator numerator of which is the aggregate amount of 
these dividends.
    (C) Treatment of taxes imposed on section 936 corporations. Taxes 
paid by any corporation eligible for the credit provided under section 
936 shall be treated as a withholding tax paid with respect to any 
dividend paid by such corporation, and thus subject to the rules of this 
paragraph (d)(6)(iii), but only to the extent such taxes would be 
treated as paid by the corporation receiving the dividend under rules 
similar to the rules of section 902.
    (iv) Adjustment to net book income on sale of certain investments. 
If a taxpayer accounts for an investment under any method equivalent to 
the equity method of accounting (as described in APB Opinion No. 18, 
paragraph 6) and pursuant to paragraphs (b)(2)(iv) or (d)(6)(i) of this 
section the taxpayer excludes net book income attributable to that 
investment, the taxpayer must adjust its net book income in the year the 
investment is sold (or partially sold). The adjustment equals the amount 
of net book income previously excluded under paragraphs (b)(2)(iv) or 
(d)(6)(i)(A) of this section). See paragraph (d)(6)(v), Example 4 of 
this section.
    (v) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following examples.

    Example 1. Corporation A and its 100 percent owned subsidiary B and 
its 90 percent owned subsidiary C are a consolidated group. A also owns 
100 percent of D, a foreign corporation. ABC's applicable financial 
statement is a certified audited financial statement that includes A, B, 
C and D. The net book income reported on the statement excludes $10 of 
C's net book income that is attributable to the 10 percent minority 
interest in C held outside of the consolidated group. Pursuant to 
paragraph (d)(6)(i)(B)(2) of this section, net book income of the 
consolidated group must be adjusted to include the $10 of net book 
income attributable to the minority interest in C. In addition, pursuant 
to paragraph (d)(6)(i)(C) of this section, net book income shown on the 
applicable financial statement must be adjusted to eliminate the net 
book income attributable to D.

    Example 2. Corporation E owns 100 percent of F, a finance 
subsidiary, and EF are a consolidated group. Since F is a finance 
subsidiary E's applicable financial statement accounts for F under the 
equity method of accounting. F also prepares a separate financial 
statement that is of equal or higher priority than E's applicable 
financial statement. In 1987, E's applicable financial statement 
includes $60 of equity income from F.

[[Page 436]]

The $60 of equity income reflects a reduction for $40 of Federal income 
tax expense. Thus, E's equity income from F prior to the reduction for 
Federal income tax expense, is $100 ($60 + $40). Since E's applicable 
financial statement includes E's equity income in F, F's separate 
financial statement is not relevant for determining the adjusted net 
book income of the EF consolidated group. However, pursuant to 
paragraphs (d)(3) and (d)(6)(i)(B)(3) of this section, E is required to 
adjust its equity income in F by the $40 of Federal income tax expense 
attributable to F. Thus, assuming there are no other adjustments, E's 
adjusted net book income with respect to F is $100.

    Example 3. The facts are the same as Example (2), except that E 
reports its equity income in F without reduction for F's Federal income 
tax expense. The $40 of Federal income tax expense attributable to F is 
combined with E's Federal income tax expense. Assuming no other 
adjustments, E's adjusted net book income with respect to F is $100. 
Thus, E's adjusted net book income with respect to F will be the same 
regardless of whether E's equity income in F is reported before or after 
taxes.
    Example (4). A, a domestic corporation, uses a calendar year for 
both financial accounting and tax purposes. On January 1, 1987, A 
purchases 100 percent of F, a foreign corporation, for $100. F does not 
file a Federal income tax return and A does not recognize any taxable 
income with respect to F under section 951 (relating to controlled 
foreign corporations). In its applicable financial statement, A accounts 
for its investment in F under the equity method of accounting. Thus, A's 
initial investment in F is $100. During calendar year 1987, F has $50 of 
net book income but makes no dividend payments to A. Under the equity 
method of accounting, A's net book income includes the $50 of net book 
income attributable to A's net book investment in F. Thus, A's 
investment in F is increased to $150. Pursuant to paragraph (d)(6)(i)(C) 
of this section, A's net book income is adjusted to eliminate the $50 of 
net book income attributable to F. On January 1, 1988, A sells F for 
$150. Since A's investment in F under the equity method of accounting is 
$150, A's net book income for 1988 will not include any gain on the sale 
of F. However, pursuant to paragraph (d)(6)(iv), A's 1988 net book 
income must be increased by $50, the amount of net book income 
previously eliminated with respect to A's investment in F. The result 
would be the same if instead of accounting for its investment in F under 
the equity method of accounting, A and F prepare a consolidated 
financial statement.

    (7) Adjustments for foreign taxpayers with a United States trade or 
business--(i) In general. Pursuant to paragraph (b)(6) of this section, 
the book income adjustment with respect to a foreign taxpayer with a 
United States trade or business is computed based on the effectively 
connected net book income of the foreign taxpayer (as defined in 
paragraph (b)(6)(ii) of this section). The net book income amount 
reported on the applicable financial statement of the foreign taxpayer 
(as determined under paragraph (c)(5)(ii) of this section) must be 
adjusted to--
    (A) Include effectively connected net book income attributable to a 
trade or business conducted in the United States by the foreign taxpayer 
that is not reported on the applicable financial statement. Such amounts 
shall be determined from a financial statement (determined under 
paragraph (c) of this section and adjusted under the rules of this 
paragraph (d)) that would have qualified as an applicable financial 
statement of such excluded trade or business or upon effectively 
connected earnings and profits (if the rules of section (b)(6)(iii) of 
this section apply), and
    (B) Exclude any amount reported on such applicable financial 
statement that does not qualify as effectively connected net book 
income.

See the example in paragraph (d)(7)(ii) of this section.
    (ii) Example. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following example.

    Example. Foreign corporation A, a calendar year taxpayer for 
financial accounting and tax purposes, is incorporated in X. A actively 
conducts two real estate businesses, B and C, in the United States. B 
prepares a certified audited financial statement that it provides to its 
United States creditor. C does not prepare a financial statement. The 
certified audited financial statement prepared by B is treated as A's 
applicable financial statement under paragraph (c)(5)(ii) of this 
section. B's certified audited financial statement, in addition to 
amounts related to the conduct of its real estate business, also reports 
income received from its investment in United States securities, 
unrelated to its conduct of business in the United States that does not 
qualify as effectively connected net book income. In order to determine 
A's effectively connected net book income from the net book income 
reported on the applicable financial statement, such statement must be 
adjusted to exclude amounts attributable to

[[Page 437]]

the securities. In addition, book income or loss attributable to C, to 
the extent effectively connected to its business in the United States, 
must be included in the effectively connected net book income reported 
on B's financial statement. Since C does not have a financial statement, 
C's effectively connected net book income is determined by computing its 
effectively connected earnings and profits under paragraph (b)(6)(iii) 
of this section.

    (8) Adjustment for corporations subject to subchapter F. A 
corporation subject to tax under subchapter F of chapter 1 of the Code 
shall adjust its book income to exclude all items of income, loss or 
expense other than those relating to the calculation of unrelated 
business taxable income for purposes of section 512(a).
    (e) Special rules--(1) Cooperatives. For purposes of computing the 
book income adjustment, net book income of a cooperative to which 
section 1381 applies is reduced by patronage dividends and per-unit 
retain allocations under section 1382(b) that are paid by the 
cooperative to the extent such amounts are deductible for regular income 
tax and general alternative minimum tax purposes under section 1382, and 
not otherwise taken into account in determining adjusted net book 
income.
    (2) Alaska Native Corporations. In computing the net book income of 
an Alaska Native Corporation, cost recovery and depletion are computed 
using the asset basis determined under section 21(c) of the Alaska 
Native Claims Settlement Act (43 U.S.C. 1620(c)). In addition, net book 
income is reduced by expenses payable under either section 7(i) or 
section 7(j) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 U.S.C. 1606 
(i) and (j)) only when deductions for such expenses are allowed for tax 
purposes.
    (3) Insurance companies. In the case of an insurance company whose 
applicable financial statement is a statement describing in paragraph 
(c)(1)(iii) of this section (relating to statements provided to a 
government regulator), net book income for purposes of the book income 
adjustment is the net income or loss from operations, after reduction 
for dividends paid to policyholders, but without reduction for Federal 
income taxes.
    (4) Estimating the book income adjustment for purposes of the 
estimated tax liability. See Sec. 1.6655-7 for special rules for 
estimating the corporate alternative minimum tax book income adjustment 
under the annualization exception.

[T.D. 8307, 55 FR 33676, Aug. 17, 1990]

Regulations Applicable to Taxable Years Beginning in 1969 and Ending in 
                                  1970


<R05>
Sec. 1.56A-1  Imposition of tax.

    (a) In general. Section 56(a) imposes an income tax on the items of 
tax preference (as defined in Sec. 1.57-1) of all persons other than 
persons specifically exempt from the taxes imposed by chapter 1. The 
items of tax preference represent income of a person which either is not 
subject to current taxation by reason of temporary exclusion (such as 
stock options) or by reason of an acceleration of deductions (such as 
accelerated depreciation) or is sheltered from full taxation by reason 
of certain deductions (such as percentage depletion) or by reason of a 
special rate of tax (such as the rate of tax on corporate capital 
gains). The tax imposed by section 56 is in addition to the other taxes 
imposed by chapter 1.
    (b) Computation of tax. The amount of such tax is 10 percent of the 
excess (referred to herein as ``the minimum tax base'') of--
    (1) The sum of the taxpayer's items of tax preference for such year 
in excess of the taxpayer's minimum tax exemption (determined under 
Sec. 1.58-1) for such year, over
    (2) The sum of:
    (i) The taxes imposed for such year under chapter 1 other than the 
taxes imposed by section 56 (relating to minimum tax for tax 
preferences), by section 531 (relating to accumulated earnings tax), or 
by section 541 (relating to personal holding company tax), reduced by 
the sum of the credits allowable under--
    (a) Section 33 (relating to taxes of foreign countries and 
possessions of the United States),
    (b) Section 37 (relating to retirement income),
    (c) Section 38 (relating to investment credit),

[[Page 438]]

    (d) Section 40 (relating to expenses of work incentive programs), 
and
    (e) Section 41 (relating to contributions to candidates for public 
office, and
    (ii) The tax carryovers to such taxable year (as described in 
Sec. 1.56A-5).
    (c) Special rule. For purposes of paragraph (b) of this section 
where for any taxable year in which a tax is imposed under section 667 
(relating to treatment of amounts deemed distributed by a trust in 
preceding years), that portion of the section 667 tax representing an 
increase in an earlier year's chapter 1 taxes (as recomputed), which 
taxes are allowed as a reduction in any such earlier year's minimum tax 
base, is not allowable as a reduction in the minimum tax base for the 
current taxable year. The remaining portion of the section 667 tax, 
representing the taxes imposed by section 56, section 531, and section 
541, is not allowable as a reduction in the minimum tax base for any 
taxable year. Similarly, taxes imposed under section 614(c)(4) (relating 
to increase in tax with respect to aggregation of certain mineral 
interests) or under section 1351(d) (relating to recoveries of foreign 
expropriation losses) for any taxable year are not allowed as a 
reduction in the minimum tax base for such taxable year to the extent 
they represent chapter 1 taxes which are allowed as a reduction in a 
minimum tax base for an earlier taxable year for purposes of the 
computations under section 614(c)(4) or section 1351(d) or to the extent 
they represent an increase in the tax imposed by section 56, section 
531, or section 541 in an earlier taxable year.

[T.D. 7564, 43 FR 40466, Sept. 12, 1978. Redesignated and amended by 
T.D. 8138, 52 FR 15309, Apr. 28, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.56A-2  Deferral of tax liability in case of certain net operating losses.

    (a) In general. Section 56(b) provides for the deferral of liability 
for the minimum tax where, for the taxable year, the taxpayer has--
    (1) A net operating loss for such taxable year any portion of which 
(under sec. 172) remains as a net operating loss carryover to a 
succeeding taxable year, and
    (2) Items of tax preference in excess of the minimum tax exemptions 
(hereinafter referred to as ``excess tax preferences'').

In such a case, an amount of tax equal to the lesser of the tax imposed 
under section 56(a) (after allowance of the retirement income credit to 
the extent that such credit cannot be used against the other taxes 
imposed by chapter 1) or 10 percent of the amount of the net operating 
loss carryover described in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph is 
deferred. Such amount is not treated as tax imposed in such taxable 
year, but is treated as tax imposed in the succeeding taxable year or 
years in which the net operating loss is used as provided in paragraphs 
(b) and (c) of this section. Deferral will result in the above case 
regardless of the character of the tax preference items. Thus, for 
example, if the taxpayer has $1,030,000 of items of tax preference, 
including the stock option item of tax preference, and a $750,000 net 
operating loss available for carryover to subsequent taxable years, the 
amount of tax imposed for the taxable year under section 56(a) is 
$100,000 and $75,000 is deferred by application of section 56(b). 
Therefore, only $25,000 is treated as tax imposed for the taxable year. 
The provisions of this section are applicable in the case of a net 
operating loss or comparable item such as an operations loss under 
section 812 and an unused loss as defined in section 825(b).
    (b) Year of liability. In any taxable year in which any portion of a 
net operating loss carryover attributable to the amount of excess tax 
preferences reduces taxable imcome (in the form of a net operating loss 
deduction), section 56(b)(2) treats as tax liability imposed in such 
taxable year an amount equal to 10 percent of such reduction. For this 
purpose, the portion of such net operating loss which is considered 
attributable to the amount of excess tax preferences is an amount equal 
to the lesser of such excess or the amount of the net operating loss 
carryover described in paragraph (a)(1) of this section. In no case, 
however, shall the total amount of tax imposed by reason of section 
56(b) in subsequent years exceed the amount of the tax that was deferred 
in the loss year.

[[Page 439]]

    (c) Priority of reduction. (1) If a portion of a net operating loss 
is attributable to an amount of excess tax preferences, such portion is 
considered to reduce taxable income in succeeding taxable years only 
after the other portion (if any) of such net operating loss is used to 
reduce taxable income. Accordingly, if the amount of a net operating 
loss which may be carried to succeeding taxable years is reduced because 
of a modification required to be made pursuant to section 172(b)(2), 
such reduction is to be considered to be first from that portion of the 
net operating loss that is attributable to excess tax preferences. If a 
portion of a net operating loss carryover which is attributable to an 
amount of excess tax preferences is not used to reduce taxable income in 
any succeeding taxable year, no minimum tax will be imposed with respect 
to such portion.
    (2) In the case of taxpayers with deductions attributable to foreign 
sources which are suspense preferences (as defined in paragraphs (c) 
(1)(ii) and (2)(ii) of Sec. 1.58-7), the amount of such deductions is 
not included in the portion of the net operating loss not attributable 
to excess tax preferences. The portion of the net operating loss 
attributable to excess tax preferences is increased by the amount of 
suspense preferences which are, in accordance with the provisions of 
Sec. 1.58-7(c), converted to actual items of tax preference (and not 
used against the minimum tax exemption of the loss year) in subsequent 
taxable years. The other portion of the net operating loss is increased 
by the amount of suspense preferences which reduce taxable income in 
subsequent taxable years but are not converted to actual items of tax 
preference (or are so converted but used against the minimum tax 
exemption of the loss year). See Sec. 1.58-7(c)(1)(iii) example 4.
    (d) Multiple net operating loss carryovers. In determining whether a 
net operating loss is used to reduce taxable income in a taxable year to 
which two or more net operating losses are carried, the ordering rules 
of section 172(b) and the regulations thereunder are to be applied. 
Thus, for example, the portion of a net operating loss carried over from 
an earlier taxable year which is attributable to an amount of excess tax 
preference is used to reduce taxable income in the carryover year before 
any portion of any other net operating loss carried over or back from a 
taxable year subsequent to the earlier taxable year.
    (e) Examples. The application of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. In 1970, A, a calendar year taxpayer, who is a single 
individual, has $180,000 of items of tax preference, a $150,000 net 
operating loss of which $100,000 may be carried forward, and no tax 
liability under chapter 1 without regard to the minimum tax. His minimum 
tax computed under section 56(a) is $15,000 (10 percent times ($180,000 
minus $30,000)). Under section 56(b)(1) an amount equal to the lesser of 
the amount determined under section 56(a) ($15,000) or 10 percent of the 
net operating loss which may be carried forward ($10,000) is treated as 
a deferred liability. Thus, his minimum tax liability for 1970 is $5,000 
($15,000 minimum tax under section 56(a) minus $10,000 deferred tax 
liability under section 56(b)). If, in 1971, he has $80,000 of taxable 
income before the deduction for the 1970 net operating loss, his minimum 
tax liability is $8,000 (10 percent of the amount by which the net 
operating loss carryforward from 1970 reduces taxable income) plus any 
minimum tax liability resulting from items of tax preference arising in 
1971. If, by reason of the modifications provided by section 172(b)(2), 
no portion of the 1970 net operating loss remains as a carryover from 
1971, no further minimum tax liability will result from the items of tax 
preference arising in 1970.

    Example 2. In 1970, A, a calendar year taxpayer who is a single 
individual, has $90,000 of items of tax preference, a $100,000 net 
operating loss available for carryover to future taxable years, no net 
operating loss carryovers from prior taxable years, and no tax liability 
under chapter 1 without regard to the minimum tax. His minimum tax 
computed under section 56(a) is $6,000 (10 percent times ($90,000 minus 
$30,000)). Under section 56(b)(1) an amount equal to the lesser of the 
amount determined under section 56(a) ($6,000) or 10 percent of the net 
operating loss subject to carryforward ($10,000) is treated as a 
deferred liability. Thus, A owes no minimum tax in 1970 and the entire 
$6,000 of minimum tax liability is deferred. Under section 56(b)(2), the 
portion of the net operating loss attributable to the excess tax 
preferences described in section 56(b)(1)(B) is $60,000.

    (a) In 1971, A has $25,000 of taxable income before the deduction 
for the 1970 net operating loss. Thus, in 1971, A has no minimum tax 
liability attributable to the items of tax

[[Page 440]]

preference arising in 1970 since, by application of section 56(b)(3), 
the portion of the 1970 net operating loss carryforward not attributable 
to the excess described in section 56(b)(1)(B), or $40,000, is 
considered applied against taxable income before the remaining portion.

    (b) In 1972, A has $50,000 of taxable income before the deduction 
for the remaining 1970 net operating loss. Thus, the first $15,000 of 
reduction in taxable income is considered as from the portion of the 
1970 net operating loss carryforward not attributable to the excess tax 
preferences described in section 56(b)(1)(B) and the remaining $35,000 
of reduction in taxable income is considered attributable to such 
excess. A's 1972 minimum tax attributable to items of tax preference 
arising in 1970 is, therefore, $3,500 (10 percent times $35,000).

    (c) In 1973, A has $80,000 of taxable income before the deduction 
for the 1970 net operating loss. The remaining $25,000 of the 1970 net 
operating loss carryforward is used to reduce taxable income in 1973. 
Thus, A's 1973 minimum tax liability attributable to items of tax 
preference arising in 1970 is $2,500 (10 percent times $25,000).

    Example 3. In 1971, M Corporation, a Western Hemisphere trade 
corporation (as defined in sec. 921), reporting on a calendar year basis 
has $20,000 of taxable income after all deductions including the Western 
Hemisphere trade deduction allowable under section 922 in the amount of 
$30,000. In 1970, M Corporation had a net operating loss of $100,000 all 
of which was available for carryover to 1971 and $60,000 of which was 
attributable to excess tax preferences. In computing the amount of the 
1970 net operating loss carried over to 1972 pursuant to section 172(b), 
the 1971 Western Hemisphere trade corporation deduction is not taken 
into account. Thus, M Corporation's recomputed income under section 
172(b) is $50,000 ($20,000 taxable income plus $30,000 Western 
Hemisphere trade corporation deduction). Pursuant to paragraph (c)(1) of 
this section, $20,000 of the $40,000 portion of the 1970 net operating 
loss not attributable to excess tax preferences is considered to reduce 
taxable income in 1971 and $30,000 of the $60,000 portion of the 1970 
net operating loss attributable to excess tax preferences is considered 
reduced pursuant to section 172(b)(2). Thus, M Corporation has no 1971 
minimum tax attributable to items of tax preference arising in 1970. Of 
the $50,000 remaining of the 1970 net operating loss, $30,000 is 
attributable to excess tax preference.

    Example 4. In 1972, A, a calendar year taxpayer who is a single 
individual, has $25,000 of taxable income resulting from $50,000 of net 
long-term capital gains. In 1971, A had a net operating loss of $100,000 
all of which is available to carryover to 1972 and $60,000 of which is 
attributable to excess tax preferences. By application of section 172(b) 
only $50,000 of the 1971 net operating loss is carried over to 1973. 
Pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section, $25,000 of the $40,000 
portion of the 1971 net operating loss not attributable to excess tax 
preferences is considered to reduce taxable income in 1972. Of the 
$50,000 remaining of the 1971 net operating loss, $15,000 is not 
attributable to excess tax preferences and $35,000 is attributable to 
excess tax preferences. Thus, the $25,000 section 1202 deduction, in 
effect, reduces the portion of the 1971 net operating loss attributable 
to excess tax preferences. Because a net operating loss carryover is 
reduced to the extent of any section 1202 deduction, section 1202 
deductions do not normally produce a tax benefit in such circumstances 
and, pursuant to Sec. 1.57-4, would not be treated as items of tax 
preference. However, in this case, to the extent the portion of the 1971 
net operating loss carryover attributable to excess tax preferences is 
reduced by reason of the section 1202 deduction, such deduction does 
result in a tax benefit to the taxpayer and is, therefore, treated as an 
item of tax preference in 1971. See Sec. 1.57-4(b)(2).

[T.D. 7564, 43 FR 40467, Sept. 12, 1978. Redesignated by T.D. 8138, 52 
FR 15309, Apr. 28, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.56A-3  Effective date.

    (a) In general. The minimum tax is effective for taxable years 
ending after December 31, 1969.
    (b) Taxable year beginning in 1969 and ending in 1970. In the case 
of a taxable year beginning in 1969 and ending in 1970, the amount of 
the minimum tax shall be an amount equal to the amount determined under 
section 56 multiplied by the following fraction:

Number of days in the taxable year ending after December 31, 
          1969<divide>Number of days in the entire taxable year.

Where, by reason of section 56(b) and Sec. 1.56A-2, tax initially 
imposed in a 1969-70 fiscal year is deferred until a subsequent taxable 
year or years, the amount of such tax liability in any subsequent 
taxable year is determined by application of the above fraction. Section 
21, relating to computation of tax in years where there is a change in 
rates, is not applicable to the initial imposition of the minimum tax 
for tax preferences. The applications of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following example:


[[Page 441]]


    Example. The taxpayer uses a June 30 fiscal year. For fiscal 1969-
1970 the taxpayer has $180,000 of items of tax preference and a $50,000 
net operating loss. In fiscal year 1970-1971, the taxpayer uses the full 
net operating loss carryover from 1969-1970 to reduce his taxable income 
by $50,000. Thus, without regard to the proration rules applicable under 
this section, the taxpayer's minimum tax liability for items of tax 
preference arising in 1969-1970 is $15,000, i.e., 10 
percent x ($180,000-$30,000), of which $5,000, i.e., 10 
percent x $50,000, is deferred until 1970-1971 under the principles of 
section 56(b) and section 1.56A-2. By application of the above formula 
the taxpayer's actual minimum tax liability is $4,958.90 in 1969-1970 
and $2,479.45 in 1970-1971 determined as follows:

1969-1970: 181/365 x $10,000
1970-1971: 181/365 x $5,000

[T.D. 7564, 43 FR 40468, Sept. 12, 1978. Redesignated and amended by 
T.D. 8138, 52 FR 15309, Apr. 28, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.56A-4  Certain taxpayers.

    For application of the minimum tax in the case of estates and 
trusts, electing small business corporations, common trust funds, 
regulated investment companies, real estate investment trusts, and 
partnerships, see Secs. 1.58-2 through 1.58-6.

[T.D. 7564, 43 FR 40468, Sept. 12, 1978. Redesignated by T.D. 8138, 52 
FR 15309, Apr. 28, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.56A-5  Tax carryovers.

    (a) In general. Section 56(c) provides a 7-year carryover of the 
excess of the taxes described in paragraph (1) of such section imposed 
during the taxable year over the items of tax preference described in 
paragraph (2) of such section for such taxable year for the purpose of 
reducing the amount subject to tax under section 56(a) in subsequent 
taxable years.
    (b) Computation of amount of carryover. The amount of tax carryover 
described in section 56(c) is the excess (if any) of--
    (1) The taxes imposed for the taxable year under chapter 1 other 
than taxes imposed by section 56 (relating to minimum tax for tax 
preferences), by section 531 (relating to accumulated earnings tax), or 
by section 541 (relating to personal holding company tax), reduced by 
the sum of the credits allowable under--
    (i) Section 33 (relating to taxes of foreign countries and 
possessions of the United States),
    (ii) Section 37 (relating to retirement income,
    (iii) Section 38 (relating to investment credit),
    (iv) Section 40 (relating to expenses of work incentive programs), 
and
    (v) Section 41 (relating to contributions to candidates for public 
office), over
    (2) The sum of the taxpayer's items of tax preference for such year 
in excess of the taxpayer's minimum tax exemption (determined under 
Sec. 1.58-1) for such year.

For purposes of section 56(c) and this section, taxes imposed in a 
taxable year ending on or before December 31, 1969, are not included in 
the taxes described in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph. In addition, 
the rules of paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.56A-1 are applicable in determining 
the taxable year for which taxes are imposed under chapter 1 for 
purposes of paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
    (c) Operation of carryover. Tax carryovers attributable to the 
taxable year shall be carried over to each of the 7 succeeding taxable 
years as follows:
    (1) To the first such succeeding taxable year to reduce in the 
manner described in paragraph (d) of this section the amount subject to 
tax under section 56(a) for such first succeeding taxable year and
    (2) To the extent such amount is not used as a reduction in the 
amount subject to tax under section 56(a) for such taxable year, such 
amount (if any) is carried over to each of the succeeding 6 taxable 
years but only to the extent such amount is not used to reduce the 
amount subject to tax under section 56(a) in taxable years intervening 
between the taxable year to which such amount is attributable and the 
taxable year to which such amount may otherwise be carried over.
    (d) Priority of reduction. Where tax carryovers attributable to two 
or more taxable years are carried over to a subsequent taxable year such 
amounts attributable to the earliest taxable year shall be used to 
reduce the amount subject to tax under section 56(a) for such

[[Page 442]]

subsequent taxable year before any such amounts attributable to a later 
taxable year.
    (e) Special rules--(1) Periods of less than 12 months. A fractional 
part of a year which is a taxable year under section 441(b) or 
7701(a)(23) is a taxable year for purposes of section 56(c) and this 
section.
    (2) Electing small business corporations. A taxable year for which a 
corporation is an electing small business corporation (as defined in 
section 1371(b)) shall be counted as a taxable year for purposes of 
determining the taxable years to which amounts which are available as a 
carryover under paragraph (a) of this section may be carried whether or 
not such carryovers arose in a year in which an election was in effect.
    (3) Husband and wife--(i) From joint to separate return. If a joint 
return is filed by a husband and wife in a taxable year or years to 
which a tax carryover is attributable but separate returns are filed in 
any subsequent taxable year to which such carryover may be carried over 
to reduce the amount subject to tax under section 56(a), such carryover 
described in paragraph (b) of this section shall be allocated between 
husband and wife for purposes of reducing the amount subject to tax 
under section 56(a) for such subsequent taxable year in accordance with 
the principles of Sec. 1.172-7(d).
    (ii) From separate to joint return. If separate returns are filed by 
a husband and wife in a taxable year or years in which a tax carryover 
is attributable but a joint return is filed in any subsequent taxable 
year to which such carryover may be carried over to reduce the amount 
subject to tax under section 56(a), such carryover shall be aggregated 
for purposes of reducing the amount subject to tax under section 56(a), 
for such subsequent taxable year.
    (4) Estates and trusts. In the case of the termination of an estate 
or trust, tax carryovers attributable to the estate or trust shall not 
be allowed to the beneficiaries succeeding to the property of the estate 
or trust.
    (5) Corporate acquisitions. In the case of a transaction to which 
section 381(a) applies, the acquiring corporation shall succeed to and 
take into account, as of the close of the date transfer the tax 
carryovers attributable to the distributor or distribution or transferor 
corporation. The portion of such carryovers which may be taken into 
account under paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of Sec. 1.56A-1 for any taxable year 
shall not exceed the excess of (i) the sum of the items of tax 
preference for such year resulting from the continuation of the business 
in which the distributor or transferor corporation was engaged at the 
time of such transaction and the items of tax preference not related to 
the continuation of such business which are directly attributable to the 
assets acquired from the distributor or transferor corporation over (ii) 
an amount which bears the same ratio to the acquiring corporation's 
minimum tax exemption for such year as the items of tax preference 
described in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph bears to all of the 
acquiring corporation's items of tax preference for such year. This item 
shall be taken into account by the acquiring corporation subject to the 
rules in section 381(b) and the regulations thereunder.
    (f) Suspense preferences. Where an item of tax preference which is a 
suspense preference (as defined in Sec. 1.58-7) arises in a taxable year 
in which tax carryovers may be used to reduce the minimum tax base (or 
in which such carryovers arise the minimum tax liability for that year 
and the tax carryovers to subsequent taxable years shall be recomputed 
upon the conversion of the suspense preference in a subsequent year. In 
lieu of the above, in all cases, since there is no difference in tax 
consequence, the recomputation may be accomplished by recomputing the 
minimum tax liability of the taxable year in which the suspense 
preference arose without reduction of the minimum tax base for the tax 
carryovers which have been used as a reduction in the minimum tax base 
in intervening taxable years. If such method is used, the minimum tax 
liability of the intervening year is not recomputed and any tax 
carryovers carried from the taxable year in which the suspense 
preference arose which remain as a carryover in the year of conversion 
are reduced, in the priority provided in paragraph (d) of this section, 
to the extent used to reduce an

[[Page 443]]

increase in the minimum tax base for the earlier year resulting from the 
conversion of the suspense preference.
    (g) Taxes imposed in a taxable year beginning in 1969 and ending in 
1970. In the case of a taxable year beginning in 1969 and ending in 1970 
the amount of the carryover determined under paragraph (b) of this 
section is reduced to an amount equal to the amount of such carryover 
(without regard to this paragraph) multiplied by the following fraction:

Number of days in taxable year ending after December 31, 1969 <divide> 
          Number of days in the entire taxable year.

    (h) Examples. The provisions of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. A is a single individual who uses a June 30 fiscal year. 
For fiscal 1968-1969, A had income tax liability under chapter 1 in the 
amount of $100,000. For fiscal 1969-1970, A had items of tax preference 
in the amount of $212,500 and income tax liability under chapter 1 
(other than taxes imposed under sections 56, 531, and 541) of $365,000.

    (a) The chapter 1 tax attributable to fiscal 1968-1969 is not 
available as a carryover under section 56(c) to reduce the amount 
subject to tax under section 56(a) since this tax arose in a taxable 
year ending on or before December 31, 1969.

    (b) A portion of the excess of chapter 1 tax over the amount subject 
to tax under section 56(a) attributable to fiscal year 1969-1970 is 
available as a carryover as provided in section 56(c) to reduce the 
amount subject to tax under section 56(a). The amount of this carryover 
is $91,000 computed as follows:

1. Carryover under paragraph (b) of this section:                       
  Chapter 1 taxes...........................................    $365,000
  Items of tax preference in excess of exemption............     182,500
                                                             -----------
    Total...................................................     182,500
2. Reduction pursuant to paragraph (g) of this section:                 
                                                                        


                       182/365 x $182,500=$91,000

    Example 2. A is a calendar year taxpayer who is a single individual. 
In 1972, A had chapter 1 income tax liability (other than taxes imposed 
under sections 56, 531, and 541) of $200,000 and $50,000 of items of tax 
preference. In 1973, A had chapter 1 income tax liability (other than 
taxes imposed under sections 56, 531, and 541) of $120,000 and $40,000 
of items of tax preference. In 1974, A had $400,000 of items of tax 
preference and no liability for tax under chapter 1 other than under 
section 56(a). Under section 56(c), the excess of the taxes described in 
paragraph (1) of that section arising in an earlier taxable year not 
used to reduce the amount subject to tax under section 56(a) for such 
taxable year can be carried over as provided in section 56(c) to reduce 
the amount subject to tax under section 56(a).

    (a) The amount of the carryover from 1972 is $180,000 computed as 
follows:

Carryover under paragraph (b) of this section:                          
  Chapter 1 taxes...........................................    $200,000
  Items of tax preference in excess of exemption............      20,000
                                                             -----------
    Total...................................................     180,000
                                                                        


    (b) The amount of the carryover from 1973 is $110,000 computed as 
follows:

Carryover under paragraph (b) of this section:                          
  Chapter 1 taxes...........................................    $120,000
  Items of tax preference in excess of exemption............      10,000
                                                             -----------
    Total...................................................     110,000
                                                                        


    (c) For 1974, the excess of taxes in the preceding taxable years is 
used to reduce the amount subject to tax under section 56(a). The amount 
of carryover attributable to excess taxes arising in 1972 is used before 
such excess arising in 1973. The amount of tax under section 56(a) is 
$8,000 computed as follows:

1974 tax preferences........................................    $400,000
Less exemption..............................................      30,000
                                                             -----------
                                                                 370,000
Less 1972 carryover.........................................     180,000
                                                             -----------
                                                                 190,000
Less 1973 carryover.........................................     110,000
                                                             -----------
1974 minimum tax base.......................................      80,000
                                                             ===========
1974 minimum tax ($80,000 x 10%)............................       8,000
                                                                        


    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 2 except that in 
1974 A had $300,000 of items of tax preference. The amount of the 
carryover for taxable years after 1974 is computed as follows:

1974 tax preferences........................................    $300,000
                                                             ===========
Less exemption..............................................      30,000
                                                             -----------
                                                                 270,000
Less 1972 carryover.........................................     180,000
                                                             -----------
                                                                  90,000
Less 1973 carryover.........................................      90,000
                                                             -----------
Minimum tax base............................................           0
1973 carryover..............................................     110,000
Amount used in 1974.........................................      90,000
                                                             -----------
Amount available for taxable years after 1974...............      20,000
                                                                        


[[Page 444]]

The $20,000 remaining of the 1973 carryover is available to reduce the 
amount subject to tax under section 56(a) in 1975 or other future 
taxable years as provided in section 56(c).

    Example 4. M Corporation is a calendar year taxpayer. N Corporation 
uses a June 30 fiscal year. For the fiscal year 1970-1971, N Corporation 
had excess chapter 1 tax liability as described in paragraph (a) of this 
section in the amount of $75,000. On January 1, 1972, M Corporation 
acquired N Corporation in a reorganization described in section 
368(a)(1)(A). N Corporation does not use any of such excess chapter 1 
tax liability to reduce the amount subject to tax under section 56(a) 
for the short taxable year beginning on July 1, 1971, and ending on 
December 31, 1971. Thus, the excess chapter 1 tax liability is available 
to M Corporation as a carryover under paragraph (a) of this section to 
reduce the amount subject to tax for the next 6 succeeding taxable years 
beginning with taxable year 1972 as provided in this section. In 
applying the carryover to 1972 and succeeding taxable years, the 
carryover of N Corporation subject to the limitation of Sec. 1.56A-
5(e)(4) is combined with any carryovers originating with M Corporation 
in 1970.

[T.D. 7564, 43 FR 40468, Sept. 12, 1978. Redesignated and amended by 
T.D. 8138, 52 FR 15309, Apr. 28, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.56(g)-0  Table of Contents.

    This section lists the paragraphs contained in Sec. 1.56(g)-1.

               Sec. 1.56(g)-1  Adjusted current earnings.

(a) Adjustment for adjusted current earnings.
    (1) Positive adjustment.
    (2) Negative adjustment.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Limitation on negative adjustments.
    (iii) Example.
    (3) Negative amounts.
    (4) Taxpayers subject to adjustment for adjusted current earnings.
    (5) General rule for applying Internal Revenue Code provisions in 
determining adjusted current earnings.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Example.
    (6) Definitions.
    (i) Pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income.
    (ii) Adjusted current earnings.
    (iii) Earnings and profits.
    (7) Application to foreign corporations.
(b) Depreciation allowed.
    (1) Property placed in service after 1989.
    (2) Property subject to new ACRS.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Rules for computing the depreciation deduction.
    (iii) Example.
    (3) Property subject to original ACRS.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Rules for computing the depreciation deduction.
    (iii) Example.
    (4) Special rule for certain section 168(f) property.
    (5) Certain property not subject to ACRS.
(c) Inclusion in adjusted current earnings of items included in earnings 
          and profits.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Certain amounts not taken into account in determining whether an 
item is permanently excluded.
    (3) Allowance of offsetting deductions.
    (4) Special rules.
    (i) Income from the discharge of indebtedness.
    (ii) Federal income tax refunds.
    (iii) Income earned on behalf of states and municipalities.
    (5) Treatment of life insurance contracts.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Inclusion of inside buildup.
    (iii) Calculation of income on the contract.
    (iv) Treatment of distributions under the life insurance contract.
    (v) Treatment of death benefits.
    (vi) Other rules.
    (A) Term life insurance contracts without net surrender values.
    (B) Life insurance contracts involving divided ownership.
    (vii) Examples.
    (6) Partial list of income items excluded from gross income but 
included in earnings and profits.
    (7) Partial list of items excluded from both pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income and adjusted current earnings.
(d) Disallowance of items not deductible in computing earnings and 
          profits.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Deductions for certain dividends received.
    (i) Certain amounts deducted under sections 243 and 245.
    (ii) Special rules.
    (A) Dividends received from a foreign sales corporation.
    (B) Dividends received from a section 936 corporation.
    (iii) Special rule for certain dividends received by certain 
cooperatives.
    (3) Partial list of items not deductible in computing earnings and 
profits.
    (4) Partial list of items deductible for purposes of computing both 
pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income and adjusted current 
earnings.
(e) Treatment of income items included, and deduction items not allowed, 
          in computing pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable 
          income.
(f) Certain other earnings and profits adjustments.

[[Page 445]]

    (1) Intangible drilling costs.
    (2) Certain amortization provisions do not apply.
    (3) LIFO recapture adjustment.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Beginning LIFO and FIFO inventory.
    (iii) Definitions.
    (A) LIFO recapture amount.
    (1) Definition.
    (2) Assets included.
    (B) FIFO method.
    (C) LIFO method.
    (D) Inventory amounts.
    (iv) Exchanges under sections 351 and 721.
    (v) Examples.
    (vi) Effective date.
    (4) Installment sales.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Exception for prior dispositions.
    (iii) Special rules for obligations to which section 453A applies.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Limitation on application of installment method.
    (C) Treatment of the ineligible portion.
    (D) Treatment of the eligible portion.
    (E) Coordination with the pledge rule.
    (F) Example.
(g) Disallowance of loss on exchange of debt pools. [Reserved].
(h) Policy acquisition expenses of life insurance companies.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Reasonably estimated life.
    (3) Reasonable allowance for amortization.
    (4) Safe harbor for public financial statements.
(i) [Reserved].
(j) Depletion.
(k) Treatment of certain ownership changes.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Definition of ownership change.
    (3) Determination of net unrealized built-in loss immediately before 
an ownership change.
    (4) Example.
(l) [Reserved].
(m) Adjusted current earnings of a foreign corporation.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Definitions.
    (i) Effectively connected pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable 
income.
    (ii) Effectively connected adjusted current earnings.
    (3) Rules to determine effectively connected pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income and effectively connected adjusted 
current earnings.
    (4) Certain exempt amounts.
(n) Adjustment for adjusted current earnings of consolidated groups.
    (1) Positive adjustments.
    (2) Negative adjustments.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Limitation on negative adjustments.
    (3) Definitions.
    (i) Consolidated pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income.
    (ii) Consolidated adjusted current earnings.
    (4) Example.
(o) [Reserved].
(p) Effective dates for corporate partners in partnerships.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Application of effective dates.
    (3) Example.
(q) Treatment of distributions of property to shareholders.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Examples.
(r) Elections to use simplified inventory methods to compute alternative 
          minimum tax.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Effect of election.
    (i) Inventories.
    (ii) Modifications required.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Negative modifications allowed.
    (iii) LIFO recapture adjustment.
    (3) Time and manner of making election.
    (i) Prospective election.
    (ii) Retroactive election.
    (iii) Taxpayers under examination.
    (A) In general.
    (1) Year of change under examination.
    (2) Other open years under examination.
    (B) Statement required.
    (C) Year of change.
    (D) Treatment of additional tax liability.
    (iv) Election as method of accounting.
    (v) Untimely election to use simplified inventory method.
    (4) Example.
    (5) Election to use alternative minimum tax inventories to compute 
adjusted current earnings.
(s) Adjustment for alternative tax energy preference deduction.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Example.

[T.D. 8340, 56 FR 11083, Mar. 15, 1991, as amended by T.D. 8454, 57 FR 
60476, Dec. 21, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 1.56(g)-1  Adjusted current earnings.

    (a) Adjustment for adjusted current earnings--(1) Positive 
adjustment. For taxable years beginning after December 31, 1989, the 
alternative minimum taxable income of any taxpayer described in 
paragraph (a)(4) of this section is increased by the adjustment for 
adjusted current earnings. The adjustment for adjusted current earnings 
is 75 percent of the excess, if any, of--
    (i) The adjusted current earnings (as defined in paragraph 
(a)(6)(ii) of this

[[Page 446]]

section) of the taxpayer for the taxable year over.
    (ii) The pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income (as 
defined in paragraph (a)(6)(i) of this section) of the taxpayer for the 
taxable year.
    (2) Negative adjustment--(i) In general. For taxable years beginning 
after December 31, 1989, the alternative minimum taxable income of any 
taxpayer is decreased, subject to the limitation of paragraph (a)(2)(ii) 
of this section, by 75 percent of the excess, if any, of pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income (as defined in paragraph (a)(6)(i) of 
this section), over adjusted current earnings (as defined in paragraph 
(a)(6)(ii) of this section).
    (ii) Limitation on negative adjustments. The amount of the negative 
adjustment for any taxable year is limited to the excess, if any, of--
    (A) The aggregate increases in alternative minimum taxable income in 
prior years under paragraph (a)(1) of this section over
    (B) The aggregate decreases in alternative minimum taxable income in 
prior years under this paragraph (a)(2).
    Any excess of pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income over 
adjusted current earnings that is not allowed as a negative adjustment 
for the taxable year because of the limitation in this paragraph 
(a)(2)(ii) is not applied to reduce any positive adjustment in any other 
taxable year.
    (iii) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (a)(2):

    (A) Corporation P is a calendar-year taxpayer and has pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income and adjusted current earnings in the 
following amounts for 1990 through 1993:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Pre-                
                                                 adjustment             
                                                alternative    Adjusted 
                     Year                         minimum      current  
                                                  taxable      earnings 
                                                   income               
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1990..........................................     $800,000     $700,000
1991..........................................      600,000      900,000
1992..........................................      500,000      400,000
1993..........................................      500,000      100,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (B) Under these facts, corporation P has the following positive and 
negative adjustments for adjusted current earnings:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Negative     Positive 
                     Year                        adjustment   adjustment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1990..........................................          0            0  
1991..........................................          0       $225,000
1992..........................................      $75,000          0  
1993..........................................      150,000          0  
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (C) In 1990, P has a potential negative adjustment (before the 
cumulative limitation) of $75,000 (75 percent of the $100,000 excess of 
pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income over adjusted current 
earnings). Nonetheless, P is not permitted a negative adjustment because 
P had no prior increases in its alternative minimum taxable income due 
to an adjustment for adjusted current earnings.
    (D) In 1991, P has a positive adjustment of $225,000 (75 percent of 
the $300,000 excess of adjusted current earnings over pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income). P is not allowed to use the prior 
year's excess of pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income over 
adjusted current earnings to reduce its 1991 positive adjustment.
    (E) In 1992, P is permitted a negative adjustment of $75,000, the 
full amount of 75 percent of the $100,000 excess of pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income over adjusted current earnings for 
the taxable year. This is because P's prior cumulative increases in 
alternative minimum taxable income due to the positive adjustments for 
adjusted current earnings exceed the negative adjustment for the year.
    (F) In 1993, P has a potential negative adjustment (before the 
cumulative limitation) of $300,000 (75 percent of the $400,000 excess of 
pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income over adjusted current 
earnings). P's net cumulative increases in alternative minimum taxable 
income due to the adjustment for adjusted current earnings are $150,000 
($225,000 increase in 1991, less $75,000 decrease in 1992). Thus, P's 
negative adjustment in 1993 is limited to $150,000. P may not use the 
remaining portion ($150,000) of the negative adjustment for 1993 to 
reduce positive adjustments in other taxable years.

    (3) Negative amounts. In determining whether an excess exists under 
paragraph (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section, a positive amount exceeds a 
negative amount by the sum of the absolute numbers, and a smaller 
negative amount exceeds a larger negative amount by the difference 
between the absolute numbers. Thus, for example, a positive amount of 
adjusted current earnings of $30 exceeds a negative amount (or loss) of 
pre-adjustment AMTI of $10 by the sum of the absolute numbers, or $40 
(30+10). Accordingly, the adjustment for adjusted current

[[Page 447]]

earnings would be 75 percent of $40, or $30. In contrast, a negative 
amount of adjusted current earnings of $10 exceeds a negative amount (or 
loss) of pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income of $30 by the 
difference between the absolute numbers, or $20 (30-10). Accordingly, 
the adjustment for adjusted current earnings would be 75 percent of $20, 
or $15.
    (4) Taxpayers subject to adjustment for adjusted current earnings.  
The adjustment for adjusted current earnings applies to any corporation 
other than--
    (i) An S corporation as defined in section 1361,
    (ii) A regulated investment company as defined in section 851,
    (iii) A real estate investment trust as defined in section 856, or
    (iv) A real estate mortgage investment conduit as defined in section 
860A.
    (5) General rule for applying Internal Revenue Code provisions in 
determining adjusted current earnings--(i) In general. Except as 
otherwise provided by regulations or other guidance issued by the 
Internal Revenue Service, all Internal Revenue Code provisions that 
apply in determining the regular taxable income of a taxpayer also apply 
in determining adjusted current earnings. For example, the rules of part 
V of subchapter P (relating to original issue discount and similar 
matters) of the Code apply in determining the amount (and the timing) of 
any interest income included in adjusted current earnings under this 
section. In applying Code provisions, however, the adjustments of 
section 56(g) and this section are also taken into account. For example, 
in applying the capitalization provisions of section 263A, the amount of 
depreciation to be capitalized is based on the amount of depreciation 
allowed in computing adjusted current earnings.
    (ii) Example.  The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (a)(5):

    (A) Corporation N is a calendar year manufacturer of golf clubs. N 
places new manufacturing equipment in service in 1990. The regular tax 
depreciation allowable for this equipment is $80,000; the pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income depreciation is $60,000; and the 
adjusted current earnings depreciation is $40,000. All of the golf clubs 
N produces in 1990 are unsold and are in ending inventory.
    (B) Pursuant to section 263A and Sec. 1.263A-1(e)(3)(ii)(I), N must 
capitalize the depreciation allowed for the year for the new 
manufacturing equipment in the ending inventory of golf clubs. Thus, 
when N sells the golf clubs (or is deemed to have sold them under its 
normal method of accounting), the cost of goods sold attributable to the 
capitalized depreciation will be $80,000 in computing regular taxable 
income; $60,000 in computing pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable 
income; and $40,000 in computing adjusted current earnings.

    (6) Definitions. The following terms have the following meanings for 
purpose of this section.
    (i) Pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income. Pre-
adjustment alternative minimum taxable income is the alternative minimum 
taxable income of the taxpayer for the taxable year, determined under 
section 55(b)(2), but without the adjustment for adjusted current 
earnings under section 56(g) and this section, without the alternative 
tax net operating loss deduction under section 56(a)(4), and without the 
alternative tax energy preference deduction under section 56(h).
    (ii) Adjusted current earnings. Adjusted current earnings is the 
pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income of the taxpayer for 
the taxable year, adjusted as provided in section 56(g) and this 
section. To the extent an amount is included (or deducted) in computing 
pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income for the taxable year 
(whether because an adjustment is made under section 56 or 58, because 
of a tax preference item under section 57, or because the item is 
reflected in taxable income), that amount is not again included (or 
deducted) in computing adjusted current earnings for the taxable year.
    (iii) Earnings and profits. Earnings and profits means current 
earnings and profits within the meaning of section 316(a)(2), that is, 
earnings and profits for the taxable year computed as of the close of 
the taxable year of the corporation without diminution by reason of any 
distributions made during the taxable year.
    (7) Application to foreign corporations. See paragraph (m) of this 
section for

[[Page 448]]

rules relating to the application of this section to foreign 
corporations.
    (b) Depreciation allowed.  The depreciation deduction allowed in 
computing adjusted current earnings is determined under the rules of 
this paragraph (b). Generally, the rules for computing the adjusted 
current earnings depreciation deduction differ depending on the taxable 
year in which the property is placed in service and the method used in 
computing the depreciation deduction for taxable income purposes. See 
Sec. 1.168(i)-1(k) for an election to use general asset accounts.
    (1) Property placed in service after 1989. The depreciation 
deduction for property placed in service in a taxable year beginning 
after December 31, 1989, is the amount determined by using the 
alternative depreciation system of section 168(g). This paragraph (b)(1) 
does not apply to property to which paragraph (b)(4) of this section 
applies (relating to certain property described in sections 168 (f)(1) 
through (f)(4)).
    (2) Property subject to new ACRS--(i) In general. This paragraph 
(b)(2) provides the rules for computing the depreciation deduction for 
property to which the amendments made by section 201 of the Tax Reform 
Act of 1986 (new ACRS) apply (generally property placed in service after 
December 31, 1986), and that is placed in service in a taxable year 
beginning before January 1, 1990. This paragraph (b)(2) does not apply 
to property described in paragraph (b)(4) of this section (relating to 
certain property described in sections 168 (f)(1) through (f)(4)) or to 
property described in paragraph (b)(5)(i) of this section (relating to 
certain churning transactions described in section 168(f)(5)).
    (ii) Rules for computing the depreciation deduction. The 
depreciation deduction for property described in this paragraph (b)(2) 
is the amount determined by using--
    (A) The adjusted basis of the property as determined in computing 
alternative minimum taxable income as of the close of the last taxable 
year beginning before January 1, 1990,
    (B) The straight-line method, and
    (C) The recovery period that consists of the remainder of the 
recovery period applicable to the property under the alternative 
depreciation system of section 168(g).

Thus, the recovery period begins on the first day of the first taxable 
year beginning after December 31, 1989, and ends on the last day of the 
recovery period that would have applied had the recovery period for the 
property originally been determined under section 168(g). In determining 
the recovery period that would have applied, the property is deemed 
placed in service on the date it was considered placed in service under 
the depreciation convention that would have applied to the property 
under section 168(d).
    (iii) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (b)(2).

    Example. Corporation X, a calendar-year taxpayer, purchases and 
places in service on August 1, 1987, computer-based telephone central 
office switching equipment. This is the only item of depreciable 
property X places in service during 1987. Thus, the applicable 
convention under section 168(d) is the half-year convention. As of 
December 31, 1989, the adjusted basis of the property used in computing 
alternative minimum taxable income is $42,000. The recovery period that 
would have applied to the property under section 168(g)(2) is 9.5 years 
(from July 1, 1987 to December 31, 1996). Thus, the recovery period for 
computing adjusted current earnings under section 56(g)(4)(A)(ii) and 
this paragraph (b)(2) begins on January 1, 1990, and ends on December 
31, 1996. X's 1990 depreciation deduction for computing adjusted current 
earnings is $6,000, determined under the straight-line method by 
dividing $42,000 (adjusted basis) by 7 (recovery period).

    (3) Property subject to original ACRS--(i) In general. This 
paragraph (b)(3) provides the rules for computing the depreciation 
deduction for property to which section 168 as in effect on the day 
before the date of enactment of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (original 
ACRS) applies and that is placed in service in a taxable year beginning 
before January 1, 1990 (generally property that was placed in service 
after December 31, 1980 and before January 1, 1987). In determining 
whether original ACRS applies to property, the fact that the unadjusted 
basis of the property is reduced or eliminated under section 
168(d)(4)(A)(i) of original ACRS is not taken into account. This 
paragraph

[[Page 449]]

(b)(3) does not apply to property described in paragraph (b)(4) or 
(b)(5)(i) of this section (relating to certain section 168(f) property).
    (ii) Rules for computing the depreciation deduction. The 
depreciation deduction for property described in this paragraph (b)(3) 
is the amount determined by using--
    (A) The adjusted basis of the property as determined in computing 
taxable income as of the close of the last taxable year beginning before 
January 1, 1990,
    (B) The straight-line method, and
    (C) The recovery period that consists of the remainder of the 
recovery period applicable to the property under the alternative 
depreciation system of section 168(g). Thus, the recovery period begins 
on the first day of the first taxable year beginning after December 31, 
1989, and ends on the last day of the recovery period that would have 
applied had the recovery period for the property originally been 
determined under section 168(g)(2). In determining the recovery period 
that would have applied, the property is deemed placed in service on the 
date it was considered placed in service under the depreciation 
convention that would have applied to the property under section 168(d) 
(without regard to section 168(d)(3)).
    (iii) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (b)(3).

    Example. Corporation Y, a calendar-year taxpayer, purchases and 
places in service on December 1, 1986, computer-based telephone central 
office switching equipment. The depreciation convention that would have 
applied to this property under section 168(d) (without regard to section 
168(d)(3)) is the half-year convention. As of Decembert 31, 1989, the 
adjusted basis of the property used in computing taxable income is 
$21,000. The recovery period for the property under section 168(g)(2) is 
9.5 years (from July 1, 1986 to December 31, 1995). Thus, the recovery 
period for computing adjusted current earnings under section 
56(g)(4)(A)(iii) and this paragraph (b)(3) begins on January 1, 1990, 
and ends on December 31, 1995. Y's 1990 depreciation deduction for 
computing adjusted current earnings is $3,500, determined under the 
straight-line method by dividing $21,000 (adjusted basis) by 6 (recovery 
period).

    (4) Special rule for certain section 168(f) property. The 
depreciation or amortization deduction for property described in section 
168(f) (1) through (4) is determined in the same manner as used in 
computing taxable income, without regard to when the property is placed 
in service.
    (5) Certain property not subject to ACRS. The depreciation or 
amortization deduction for property not described in paragraphs (b) (1) 
through (4) of this section is determined in the same manner as used in 
computing taxable income. Thus, this paragraph (b)(5) applies to--
    (i) Property placed in service after December 31, 1980, in a taxable 
year beginning before January 1, 1990, and that is excluded from the 
application of original ACRS or new ACRS by section 168(e)(4) of 
original ACRS or section 168(f)(5)(A)(i) of new ACRS, and
    (ii) Property placed in service before January 1, 1981.
    (c) Inclusion in adjusted current earnings of items included in 
earnings and profits--(1) In general. Except as otherwise provided in 
paragraph (c)(4) of this section, adjusted current earnings includes all 
income items that are permanently excluded from (i.e., not taken into 
account in determining) pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable 
income but that are taken into account in determining earnings and 
profits. An income item is considered taken into account in determining 
pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income without regard to the 
timing of its inclusion. Thus, this paragraph (c)(1) does not apply to 
any income item that is, has been, or will be included in pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income. For example, a taxpayer eligible to 
use the completed contract method of accounting for long-term 
construction contracts does not take income (or expenses) into account 
in determining pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income for 
taxable years before the taxable year the contract is completed. The 
taxpayer is required under section 312(n)(6) to include income (and 
expenses) in earnings and profits throughout the term of the contract 
under the percentage of completion method. This paragraph (c)(1) does 
not require the income on the contract to be included in

[[Page 450]]

adjusted current earnings, however, because the income will be taken 
into account in the taxable year the contract is completed and therefore 
is considered to be taken into account in determining pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income.
    (2) Certain amounts not taken into account in determining whether an 
item is permanently excluded. The fact that proceeds from an income item 
may eventually be reflected in pre-adjustment alternative minimum 
taxable income of another taxpayer on the liquidation or disposal of a 
business, or similar circumstances, is not taken into account in 
determining whether the item is permanently excluded from pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income. Thus, for example, a corporation's 
adjusted current earnings include interest excluded from pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income under section 103 even though the 
interest might eventually be reflected in the pre-adjustment alternative 
minimum taxable income of a corporate shareholder as gain on the 
liquidation of the corporation.
    (3) Allowance of offsetting deductions. In determining adjusted 
current earnings under this paragraph (c), a deduction is allowed for 
all items that relate to income required to be included in adjusted 
current earnings under this paragraph (c) and that would be deductible 
in computing pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income if the 
income items to which the items of deduction relate were included in 
pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income for any taxable year. 
For example, deductions disallowed under section 265(a)(2) for the costs 
of carrying tax-exempt obligations, the interest on which is excluded 
from pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income under section 103 
but is included in adjusted current earnings under this paragraph (c), 
are generally allowed as deductions in computing adjusted current 
earnings. Amounts deductible under this paragraph (c)(3) are taken into 
account using the taxpayer's method of accounting and are subject to any 
provisions or limitations of the Code that would have applied if the 
amounts had been deductible in determining pre-adjustment alternative 
minimum taxable income. For example, section 267(a)(2) may affect the 
timing of a deduction otherwise disallowed under section 265(a)(2).
    (4) Special rules. Adjusted current earnings does not include the 
following amounts.
    (i) Income from the discharge of indebtedness. Amounts that are 
excluded from gross income under section 108 of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 or any corresponding provision of prior law (including the 
Bankruptcy Tax Act of 1980, case law, income tax regulations and 
administrative pronouncements).
    (ii) Federal income tax refunds. Refunds of federal income taxes.
    (iii) Income earned on behalf of states and municipalities. Amounts 
that are excluded from gross income under section 115.
    (5) Treatment of life insurance contracts--(i) In general. This 
paragraph (c)(5) addresses the treatment of life insurance contracts in 
determining adjusted current earnings. These rules apply to life 
insurance contracts as defined in section 7702. Generally, death 
benefits under a life insurance contract are included in adjusted 
current earnings, and all other distributions (including surrenders) are 
taxed in accordance with the principles of section 72(e), taking into 
account the taxpayer's basis in the contract for purposes of adjusted 
current earnings. If the adjusted basis in the contract for purposes of 
adjusted current earnings exceeds the amount of death benefits received 
or the amount received when the contract is surrendered (increased by 
the amount of any outstanding policy loan), the resulting loss is 
allowed as a deduction under paragraph (c)(3) of this section in 
computing adjusted current earnings for the taxable year. In addition, 
undistributed income on the contract is included in adjusted current 
earnings as provided in paragraph (c)(5)(ii) of this section. Paragraph 
(c)(5)(vi)(A) of this section provides special rules for term insurance 
that has no net surrender value.
    (ii) Inclusion of inside buildup. Income on a life insurance 
contract with respect to a taxable year (or any shorter period either 
ending or beginning with

[[Page 451]]

the date of a distribution from the contract) is included in adjusted 
current earnings for the taxable year. Thus, income on the contract is 
calculated from the beginning of a taxable year to the date of any 
distribution, from immediately after any distribution to the date of the 
next distribution, and from the last distribution during the taxable 
year through the end of the taxable year. Income on a life insurance 
contract is not included in adjusted current earnings for any taxable 
year in which the insured dies or the contract is completely surrendered 
for its entire net surrender value. Solely for purposes of computing 
adjusted current earnings, the taxpayer's adjusted basis in the contract 
(as determined under section 72(e)(6)) is increased to reflect any 
positive income on the contract included in adjusted current earnings 
under this paragraph (c)(5)(ii). The manner in which the income on the 
contract is determined for adjusted current earnings purposes is 
prescribed in paragraph (c)(5)(iii) of this section. If the income on 
the contract determined under paragraph (c)(5)(iii) of this section is a 
negative amount, income on the contract is not included in adjusted 
current earnings and no deduction from adjusted current earnings is 
allowed for the negative amount.
    (iii) Calculation of income on the contract. For purposes of 
determining adjusted current earnings, the income on a life insurance 
contract for any period, including a taxable year, is the excess, if 
any, of--
    (A) The sum of the contract's net surrender value (as defined in 
section 7702(f)(2)(B)) at the end of the period, and any distributions 
under the contract during the period that, in accordance with the 
principles of section 72(e), are not taxed because they represent 
recoveries of the taxpayer's basis in the contract for adjusted current 
earnings, over
    (B) The sum of the contract's net surrender value at the end of the 
preceding period, and any premiums paid under the contract during the 
period.
    (iv) Treatment of distributions under the life insurance contract. 
Any distribution under a life insurance contract (whether a partial 
withdrawal or an amount received on complete surrender of the contract) 
is included in adjusted current earnings in accordance with the 
principles of section 72(e), taking into account the taxpayer's basis in 
the contract for purposes of computing adjusted current earnings. The 
taxpayer's basis in the contract is equal to the basis at the end of the 
immediately preceding period plus any premiums paid before the 
distribution. The taxpayer's basis in the contract for purposes of 
adjusted current earnings is reduced, in accordance with the principles 
of section 72(e), to the extent that the distribution is not included in 
adjusted current earnings because it represents a recovery of that 
basis.
    (v) Treatment of death benefits. The excess of the contractual death 
benefit of a life insurance contract over the taxpayer's adjusted basis 
in the contract for purposes of computing adjusted current earnings at 
the time of the insured's death is included in adjusted current earnings 
as provided by paragraph (c)(6)(i) of this section. The amount of the 
death benefit that is taken into account for adjusted current earnings 
includes the amount of any outstanding policy loan treated as forgiven 
or discharged by the insurance company upon the death of the insured.
    (vi) Other rules--(A) Term life insurance contract without net 
surrender values. Except as provided in this paragraph (c)(5)(vi), the 
requirements of paragraph (c)(5) of this section do not apply to term 
life insurance contracts that provide no net surrender value. Adjusted 
current earnings are reduced by any premiums paid under such a contract 
that are allocable to the taxable year. Any premiums paid that are not 
allocable to the taxable year must be included in the basis of the 
contract. The death benefit under such a term insurance contract is 
included in adjusted current earnings as provided by paragraph (c)(5)(v) 
of this section.
    (B) Life insurance contracts involving divided ownership. If the 
ownership of a life insurance contract is divided between different 
persons (for example, a split-dollar arrangement), the requirements of 
paragraph (c)(5) of this section apply to the separate ownership 
interests as though each interest were a separate contract.

[[Page 452]]

    (vii) Examples. The following examples illustrate the provisions of 
this paragraph (c)(5).

    Example 1. (i) On January 1, 1987, corporation X, a calendar year 
taxpayer, purchased a flexible premium life insurance contract with a 
death benefit of $100,000 and planned annual gross premiums of $2,200 
payable on January 1 of each year. The net surrender value of the 
contract at the end of 1987 and subsequent years, together with the 
cumulative premiums for the contract at the end of each year, are set 
forth in the following table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Year-end 
                                                 Cumulative      net    
                     Year                         premiums    surrender 
                                                    paid        value   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1987..........................................       $2,200       $2,420
1988..........................................        4,400        5,082
1989..........................................        6,600        8,010
1990..........................................        8,800       11,231
1991..........................................       11,000       14,774
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Under paragraph (c)(5)(ii) of this section, X must include 
$1,021 in adjusted current earnings for 1990. The inclusion is computed 
by subtracting from the net surrender value of the contract at the end 
of the taxable year ($11,231) the sum of the net surrender value of the 
contract at the end of the preceding taxable year ($8,010) plus the 
premiums paid during the taxable year ($2,200). See paragraph 
(c)(5)(iii) of this section. For purposes of determining adjusted 
current earnings, X's adjusted basis in the contract would be increased 
at the end of 1990 from $8,800 to $9,821 to reflect the $1,021 
inclusion. See paragraph (c)(5)(ii) of this section. The income under 
the contract attributable to taxable years prior to 1990 does not 
increase X's adjusted basis in the contract.
    (iii) For 1991, the income on the contract included in adjusted 
current earnings is determined in the same manner as the preceding year, 
and there is a corresponding increase in X's adjusted basis in the 
contract. Thus, for 1991, the income on the contract is $1,343, which is 
determined by subtracting from the net surrender value of the contract 
at the end of the taxable year ($14,774) the sum of the net surrender 
value at the end of the preceding taxable year ($11,231) plus the 
premiums paid during the taxable year ($2,200). At the end of 1991, X's 
adjusted basis in the contract for adjusted current earnings is $13,364, 
which reflects the basis of the contract at the beginning of 1991, 
increased by the premium paid during the year ($2,200) and the income on 
the contract that has been included in adjusted current earnings for the 
taxable year ($1,343).
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that, 
after the payment of the premium for 1991, the insured dies and X 
receives the $100,000 death benefit under the contract. Under paragraph 
(c)(5)(ii) of this section, no amount is included in adjusted current 
earnings for income on the contract for the taxable year in which the 
insured dies. Instead, under paragraph (c)(5)(v) of this section, X must 
include the adjusted current earnings for 1991 the excess of the death 
benefit ($100,000) over the adjusted basis in the contract for purposes 
of computing adjusted current earnings at the time of the insured's 
death ($12,021), which equals X's adjusted basis in the contract at the 
end of 1990 ($9,821), increased by X's premium payment for 1991 
($2,200).
    Example 3. (i) The facts are the same as in example 1, except that 
in addition to making the $2,200 planned premium payment for 1992, X 
receives a $16,200 distribution under the contract on February 1, 1992, 
leaving a net surrender value of $915 immediately following the 
distribution. On March 1, 1992, X pays an additional premium of $5,000 
under the contract. The net surrender value of the contract at the end 
of 1992 is $6,417.
    (ii) Treatment of the distribution. Under paragraph (c)(5)(iv) of 
this section, the $16,200 distribution in 1992 is included in adjusted 
current earnings as an amount taxable in accordance with the principles 
of section 72(e) to the extent that the distribution ($16,200) exceeds 
X's adjusted basis for adjusted current earnings, as determined at the 
end of the immediately preceding period, and including premiums paid 
through the period ending on the date of the distribution ($15,564). 
Thus, X must include $636 in adjusted current earnings for 1992 as an 
amount taxable in accordance with the principles of section 72(e).
    (iii) Determination of the income on the contract. Under paragraph 
(c)(5)(iii) of this section, for 1992, the income on the contract must 
be separately determined for the period beginning with the first day of 
the taxable year to the date of the distribution and for the period 
beginning immediately after the distribution to the end of the taxable 
year, using the contract's net surrender values at the beginning and end 
of each of these periods. The income on the contract for the period 
beginning on January 1, 1992 and ending on February 1, 1992 (the date of 
the distribution) is equal to the excess, if any, of (A) the sum of the 
net surrender value at the end of the period ($915) and the amount of 
the distribution that is allocable to X's basis in the contract for 
adjusted current earnings ($15,564), over (B) the sum of the net 
surrender value at the end of the preceding taxable year ($14,774) plus 
any premiums paid on the contract during the period ($2,200). Because 
the net result of this computation is a negative amount 
(($915+$15,564)-($14,774+$2,200)=-495), no income on the contract for 
the period ending with the date of the distribution is included in 
adjusted current earnings for 1992.

[[Page 453]]

    (iv) Under paragraph (c)(5)(ii), X must also determine the income on 
the contract for the period beginning immediately after the distribution 
through the end of the taxable year. The income on the contract for this 
period is $502, which is equal to the excess of the net surrender value 
at the end of the taxable year ($6,417) over the sum of the net 
surrender value at the end of the preceding period ($915), plus any 
premiums paid during the period ($5,000). At the end of 1992, X's 
adjusted basis in the contract for adjusted current earnings is $5,502, 
determined by adding the income on the contract ($502) and the premiums 
paid during the period ($5,000) to the basis at the end of the preceding 
period ($0).
    (v) Thus, X must include a total of $1,138 ($636+502) in adjusted 
current earnings for 1992. This inclusion reflects both the 
undistributed income on the contract for the taxable year plus the 
amount of income from distributions under the contract that is taxed in 
accordance with the principles of section 72(e) using X's adjusted basis 
in the contract for adjusted current earnings.

    (6) Partial list of income items excluded from gross income but 
included in earnings and profits. The following is a partial list of 
items that are permanently excluded from pre-adjustment alternative 
minimum taxable income but that are included in earnings and profits, 
and are therefore included in adjusted current earnings under this 
paragraph (c).
    (i) Proceeds of life insurance contracts that are excluded under 
section 101, to the extent provided in paragraph (c)(5)(v) or (c)(5)(vi) 
of this section.
    (ii) Interest that is excluded under section 103.
    (iii) Amounts received as compensation for injuries or sickness that 
are excluded under section 104.
    (iv) Income taxes of a lessor of property that are paid by a lessee 
and are excluded under section 110.
    (v) Income attributable to the recovery of an item deducted in 
computing earnings and profits in a prior year that is excluded under 
section 111.
    (vi) Amounts received as proceeds from sports programs that are 
excluded under section 114.
    (vii) Cost-sharing payments that are excluded under section 126, to 
the extent section 126(e) does not apply.
    (viii) Interest on loans used to acquire employer securities that is 
excluded under section 133.
    (ix) Financial assistance that is excluded under section 597.
    (x) Amounts that are excluded from pre-adjustment alternative 
minimum taxable income as a result of an election under section 831(b) 
(allowing certain insurance companies to compute their pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income using only their investment income).

Items described in paragraph (c)(1) of this section must be included in 
earnings and profits (and therefore in adjusted current earnings) even 
if they are not identified in this paragraph (c)(6). The Commissioner 
may identify additional items described in paragraph (c)(1) in other 
published guidance.
    (7) Partial list of items excluded from both pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income and adjusted current earnings. The 
following is a partial list of items that are excluded from both pre-
adjustment alternative minimum taxable income and adjusted current 
earnings, and for which no adjustment is allowed under this section.
    (i) The value of improvements made by a lessee to a lessor's 
property that is excluded from the lessor's income under section 109.
    (ii) contributions to the capital of a corporation by a non-
shareholder that are excluded from the corporation's income under 
section 118.

The Commissioner may identify additional items described in this 
paragraph (c)(7) in other published guidance.
    (d) Disallowance of items not deductible in computing earnings and 
profits--(1) In general. Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph 
(d), no deduction is allowed in computing adjusted current earnings for 
any items that are not taken into account in determining earnings and 
profits for any taxable year, even if the items are taken into account 
in determining pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income. These 
items therefore increase adjusted current earnings to the extent they 
are deducted in computing pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable 
income. An item of deduction is considered taken into account without 
regard to the timing of its deductibility in computing earnings and 
profits. Thus,

[[Page 454]]

to the extent an item is, has been, or will be deducted for purposes of 
determining earnings and profits, it does not increase adjusted current 
earnings in the taxable year in which it is deducted for purposes of 
determining pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income. For 
example, a deduction allowed (in determining pre-adjustment alternative 
minimum taxable income) under section 196 for unused research credits 
allowable under section 41 is taken into account in computing earnings 
and profits because the costs that gave rise to the credit were 
deductible in computing earnings and profits when incurred. Therefore, 
the deduction does not increase adjusted current earnings. As a further 
example, payments by a United States parent corporation with respect to 
employees of certain foreign subsidiaries, which are deductible under 
section 176, are considered contributions to the capital of the foreign 
subsidiary for purposes of computing earnings and profits. Although the 
payments are not deductible in computing the earnings and profits of the 
United States parent corporation in the year incurred, the payments do 
increase the parent's basis in its stock in the foreign subsidiary. This 
basis increase will reduce any gain the parent may later realize for 
purposes of computing earnings and profits on the disposition of the 
stock of the foreign subsidiary. Therefore, the amount of the payment by 
the parent is considered taken into account in computing the earnings 
and profits of the parent and does not increase adjusted current 
earnings. Thus, only deduction items that are never taken into account 
in computing earnings and profits are disallowed in computing adjusted 
current earnings under this paragraph (d).
    (2) Deductions for certain dividends received--(i) Certain amounts 
deducted under sections 243 and 245. Paragraph (d)(1) of this section 
does not apply to, and adjusted current earnings therefore are not 
increased by, amounts deducted under sections 243 and 245 that qualify 
as 100-percent deductible dividends under sections 243(a), 245(b) or 
245(c), or to any dividend received from a 20-percent owned corporation 
(as defined in section 243(c)(2)), to the extent that the dividend 
giving rise to the deductions is attributable to earnings of the paying 
corporation that are subject to federal income tax. Earnings are 
considered subject to federal income tax return (that is filed or, if 
not, that should be filed) of an entity subject to United States 
taxation, even if there is no resulting United States tax liability 
(e.g., because of net operating losses or tax credits, other than the 
credit provided for in section 936).
    (ii) Special rules--(A) Dividends received from a foreign sales 
corporation. The portion of a dividend received from a foreign sales 
corporation (FSC) that is classified as a 100-percent deductible 
dividend attributable to earnings of the FSC subject to federal income 
tax is that portion of the dividend distributed out of earnings and 
profits of the FSC attributable to non-exempt foreign trade income 
determined under either of the administrative pricing methods of section 
925(a) (1) or (2), and to non-exempt foreign trade income determined 
under section 925(a)(3) that is effectively connected with the conduct 
of a trade or business in the United States (determined without regard 
to section 921). If the FSC is a 20-percent owned corporation (as 
defined in section 243(c)(2)), an additional portion of that dividend is 
classified as being attributable to earnings of the FSC subject to 
federal income tax to the extent that the dividend is distributed out of 
earnings and profits of the FSC attributable to effectively connected 
income (as defined in section 245(c)(4)(B)). A FSC is defined in section 
922 and, for purposes of this paragraph, includes a small FSC and a 
former FSC. The ordering rules for distributions from a FSC set forth in 
Sec. 1.926(a)-1T(b)(1) apply to determine the classification of earnings 
and profits out of which a distribution has been made.
    (B) Dividends received from a section 936 corporation. For example, 
assume that a section 936 corporation earns $100 of income in its 
current taxable year, $10 of which is not eligible for the credit under 
section 936. If the section 936 corporation makes a distribution of $50 
during that year, $5 of that distribution ($10 of income not eligible 
for the section 936 credit divided by $100 of income, times $50 
distributed) is deemed to be attributable to earnings

[[Page 455]]

of the paying corporation that are subject to federal income tax.
    (iii) Special rule for certain dividends received by certain 
cooperatives. Paragraph (d)(1) of this section does not apply to, and 
adjusted current earnings do not include, any dividend received by any 
organization to which part I of subchapter T of the Code applies and 
that is engaged in the marketing of agricultural or horticultural 
products, if the dividend is paid by a FSC and is allowable as a 
deduction under section 245(c).
    (3) Partial list of items not deductible in computing earnings and 
profits. The following is a partial list of items that are not taken 
into account in computing earnings and profits and thus are not 
deductible in computing adjusted current earnings.
    (i) Unrecovered losses attributable to certain damages that are 
deductible under section 186, to the extent those damages were 
previously deducted in computing earnings and profits.
    (ii) The deduction for small life insurance companies allowed under 
section 806.
    (iii) Dividends deductible under the following sections of the Code:
    (A) Dividends received by corporations that are deductible under 
section 243, to the extent paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section does not 
apply.
    (B) Dividends received on certain preferred stock that are 
deductible under section 244.
    (C) Dividends received from certain foreign corporations that are 
deductible under section 245, to the extent neither paragraph (d)(2)(i) 
nor (d)(2)(iii) of this section applies.
    (D) Dividends paid on certain preferred stock of public utilities 
that are deductible under section 247.
    (E) Dividends paid to an employee stock ownership plan that are 
deductible under section 404(k).
    (F) Non-patronage dividends that are paid and deductible under 
section 1382(c)(1).

Items described in paragraph (d)(1) of this section are not taken into 
account in computing earnings and profits (and thus are not deductible 
in computing adjusted current earnings) even if they are not identified 
in this paragraph (d)(3). The Commissioner may identify additional items 
described in paragraph (d)(1) of this section in other published 
guidance.
    (4) Partial list of items deductible for purposes of computing both 
pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income and adjusted current 
earnings. The following is a partial list of items that are deductible 
for purposes of computing both pre-adjustment alternative minimum 
taxable income and adjusted current earnings, and for which no 
adjustment is allowed under this section.
    (i) Payments by a United States corporation with respect to 
employees of certain foreign corporations that are deductible under 
section 176.
    (ii) Dividends paid on deposits by thrift institutions that are 
deductible under section 591.
    (iii) Life insurance policyholder dividends that are deductible 
under section 808.
    (iv) Dividends paid by cooperatives that are deductible under 
sections 1382(b) or 1382(c)(2) and that are not paid with respect to 
stock.

The Commissioner may identify additional items described in this 
paragraph (d)(4) in other published guidance.
    (e) Treatment of income items included, and deduction items not 
allowed, in computing pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income. 
Adjusted current earnings includes any income item that is included in 
pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income, even if that income 
item is not included in earnings and profits for the taxable year. 
Except as specifically provided in paragraph (c)(3) or (c)(5) of this 
section, no deduction is allowed for an item in computing adjusted 
current earnings if the item is not deductible in computing pre-
adjustment alternative minimum taxable income for the taxable year, even 
if the item is deductible in computing earnings and profits for the 
year. Thus, for example, capital losses in excess of capital gains for 
the taxable year are not deductible in computing adjusted current 
earnings for the taxable year.
    (f) Certain other earnings and profits adjustments--(1) Intangible 
drilling costs. For purposes of computing adjusted current earnings, the 
amount allowable as a deduction for intangible drilling

[[Page 456]]

costs (as defined in section 263(c)) for amounts paid or incurred in 
taxable years beginning after December 31, 1989, is determined as 
provided in section 312(n)(2)(A). See section 56(h) for an additional 
adjustment to alternative minimum taxable income based on energy 
preferences for taxable years beginning after 1990.
    (2) Certain amortization provisions do not apply. For purposes of 
computing adjusted current earnings, sections 173 (relating to 
circulation expenditures) and 248 (relating to organizational 
expenditures) do not apply to amounts paid or incurred in taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1989. If an election is made under section 
59(e) to amortize circulation expenditures described in section 173 over 
a three-year period, the expenditures to which the election applies are 
deducted ratably over the three-year period for purposes of computing 
taxable income, pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income, and 
adjusted current earnings.
    (3) LIFO recapture adjustment--(i) In general. Adjusted current 
earnings are generally increased or decreased by the increase or 
decrease in the taxpayer's LIFO recapture amount (as defined in 
paragraph (f)(3)(iii)(A) of this section) as of the close of each 
taxable year.
    (ii) Beginning LIFO and FIFO inventory. For purposes of computing 
the increase or decrease in the LIFO recapture amount, the beginning 
LIFO and FIFO inventory amounts for the first taxable year beginning 
after December 31, 1989, are--
    (A) The ending LIFO inventory amount used in computing pre-
adjustment alternative minimum taxable income for the last year 
beginning before January 1, 1990; and
    (B) The ending FIFO inventory amount for the last year beginning 
before January 1, 1990, computed with the adjustments described in 
section 56 (other than the adjustment described in section 56(g)) and 
section 58, the items of tax preference described in section 57 and 
using the methods used in computing pre-adjustment alternative minimum 
taxable income.
    (iii) Definitions--(A) LIFO recapture amount--(1) Definition. The 
taxpayer's LIFO recapture amount is the excess, if any, of--
    (i) the inventory amount of its assets under the FIFO method, 
computed using the rules of this section; over
    (ii) the inventory amount of its assets under the LIFO method, 
computed using the rules of this section.
    (2) Assets included. Only the assets for which the taxpayer uses the 
LIFO method to compute pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income 
are taken into account in determining the LIFO recapture amount.
    (B) FIFO Method. For purposes of this paragraph, the LIFO method is 
the first in, first out method described in section 471, determined by 
using--
    (1) The retail method if that is the method the taxpayer uses in 
computing pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income; or
    (2) The lower of cost or market method for all other taxpayers.
    (C) LIFO method. The LIFO method is the last in, first out method 
authorized by section 472.
    (D) Inventory amounts. Except as otherwise provided, inventory 
amounts are computed using the methods used in computing pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income. To the extent inventory is treated 
as produced or acquired during taxable years beginning after December 
31, 1989, the inventory amount is determined with the adjustments 
described in sections 56 and 58 and the items of tax preference 
described in section 57. Thus, for example, the amount of depreciation 
to be capitalized under section 263A with respect to inventory produced 
in taxable years beginning after December 31, 1989, is based on the 
depreciation allowed under the rules of paragraph (b) of this section. 
See paragraph (a)(5) of this section.
    (iv) Exchanges under sections 351 and 721. For purposes of this 
section, any decrease in a transferor's LIFO recapture amount that 
occurs as a result of a transfer of inventories in an exchange to which 
section 351 or section 721 applies cannot be used to decrease the 
adjusted current earnings of the transferor. A decrease that is 
disallowed under the preceding sentence is instead carried over to 
reduce any LIFO recapture adjustment that the transferee (or its 
corporate partners, if section 721 applies) would otherwise

[[Page 457]]

make (in the absence of this paragraph (f)(3)(iv)) solely by reason of 
its carryover basis in inventories received in the section 351 or 
section 721 exchange. Nothing in this paragraph (f)(3)(iv), however, 
alters the computation of the LIFO recapture amount of the transferor or 
transferee as of the close of any taxable year.
    (v) Examples. The following examples illustrate the provisions of 
this paragraph (f)(3).


    Example 1. M Corporation, a calendar-year taxpayer, uses the LIFO 
method of accounting for its inventory for purposes of computing pre-
adjustment alternative minimum taxable income. M's ending LIFO inventory 
for all of its pools for purposes of computing pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income on December 31, 1989, is $300. M 
computes a $500 FIFO inventory amount on that date, after applying the 
provisions of section 263A along with the adjustments and preferences 
required in computing pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income. 
M's FIFO and LIFO ending inventory amounts at the close of its taxable 
years, its LIFO reserves, and its adjustment under this paragraph 
(f)(3), are as follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  1989         1990         1991         1992   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ending inventory:                                                                                               
    A. FIFO.................................................     \1\ $500         $360         $560         $600
    B. LIFO.................................................      \2\ 300          180          320          440
                                                             ---------------------------------------------------
LIFO recapture amount:                                                                                          
    A-B.....................................................          200          180          240          160
                                                             ===================================================
Change in LIFO recapture amount and adjustment under                                                            
 paragraph (f)(3)...........................................  ...........         (20)           60         (80)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Beginning FIFO inventory amount under paragraph (f)(3)(ii).                                                 
\2\ Beginning LIFO inventory amount under paragraph (f)(3)(ii).                                                 


    Example 2. (A) X Corporation, a calendar-year taxpayer, uses the 
LIFO method for purposes of computing pre-adjustment alternative minimum 
taxable income. X's LIFO recapture amount is $300 as of December 31, 
1992, and is $200 as of December 31, 1993. Immediately prior to 
calculating its LIFO recapture amount as of December 31, 1993, X 
transfers inventory with an adjusted current earnings (ACE) basis of 
$500 to Y Corporation in an exchange to which section 351 applies. X 
determines that the $100 decrease in its LIFO recapture amount occurred 
as a result of its transfer of inventories to Y in the section 351 
exchange. Thus, under paragraph (f)(3)(iv) of this section, X cannot 
decrease its adjusted current earnings by that amount. In computing its 
1994 LIFO recapture adjustment, X will use $200 as its LIFO recapture 
amount as of December 31, 1993, even though it was not entitled to 
reduce adjusted current earnings by the $100 decrease in its LIFO 
recapture amount in 1993.
    (B) For purposes of computing its ACE, Y takes a $500 carryover 
basis in the inventories received from X. If Y, a newly formed calendar-
year taxpayer, engages in no other inventory transactions in 1993 and 
adopts the LIFO inventory method on its 1993 tax return, it will have a 
LIFO recapture amount of $0 as of December 31, 1993 (because its FIFO 
inventory amount and its LIFO inventory amount are both $500). Assume 
that at December 31, 1994, Y has a LIFO recapture amount of $200 ($1,000 
FIFO inventory amount-$800 LIFO inventory amount). Under paragraph 
(f)(3)(i) of this section, Y computes a LIFO recapture adjustment for 
1994 of $200 ($200-$0). If any portion of Y's $200 LIFO recapture 
adjustment occurs solely by reason of its carryover basis in the 
inventories it received from X, Y reduces its $200 LIFO recapture 
adjustment by that portion under paragraph (f)(3)(iv). In any event, 
however, Y will use its $200 LIFO recapture amount as of December 31, 
1994, in computing its 1995 LIFO recapture adjustment.

    (vi) Effective date. Paragraph (f)(3) is effective for taxable years 
beginning after December 18, 1992. A taxpayer may choose to apply this 
paragraph, however, to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 
1989.
    (4) Installment sales--(i) In general. Adjusted current earnings are 
computed without regard to the installment method, except as provided in 
this paragraph (f)(4).
    (ii) Exception for prior dispositions. Paragraph (f)(4)(i) of this 
section does not apply to any disposition in a taxable year beginning 
before January 1, 1990, that is taken into account under the installment 
method for purposes of computing pre-adjustment alternative minimum 
taxable income. Thus, for

[[Page 458]]

any disposition in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 1990, the 
installment method applies in computing adjusted current earnings for 
taxable years beginning after December 31, 1989, to the same extent it 
applies in determining pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income 
for the taxable year.
    (iii) Special rules for obligations to which section 453A applies--
(A) In general. The following special rules apply to any installment 
sale occurring in a taxable year beginning after December 31, 1989, that 
results in an installment obligation to which section 453A(a)(1) applies 
and with respect to which preadjustment alternative minimum taxable 
income is determined under the installment method. As explained in 
paragraph (f)(4)(iii)(B) of this section, for purposes of computing 
adjusted current earnings, a portion of the contract price is eligible 
for the installment method, and the remainder of the contract price is 
not eligible for the installment method. Payments under the obligation 
are allocated pro-rata between the two accounting methods.
    (B) Limitation on application of installment method. Only a portion 
of the contract price of an installment sale described in paragraph 
(f)(4)(iii)(A) of this section is eligible to be accounted for under the 
installment method for purposes of computing adjusted current earnings. 
The portion eligible for the installment method is equal to the total 
contract price of the sale multiplied by the applicable percentage (as 
determined under section 453A(c)(4)) for the taxable year of the sale. 
The remainder of the contract price is not eligible to be accounted for 
under the installment method for purposes of computing adjusted current 
earnings. The gross profit ratio is determined without regard to this 
bifurcated treatment of the sale.
    (C) Treatment of the ineligible portion. The gain on the sale that 
is taken into account in the taxable year of the sale for purposes of 
computing adjusted current earnings is equal to the gross profit ratio 
multiplied by the entire portion of the contract price that is 
ineligible for the installment method.
    (D) Treatment of the eligible portion. For purposes of calculating 
adjusted current earnings, the amount of gain recognized in a taxable 
year on the portion of the contract price that is eligible for the 
installment method is equal to--
    (1) The amount of payments received during the taxable year, 
multiplied by
    (2) The applicable percentage for the taxable year of the sale, 
multiplied by
    (3) The gross profit ratio.
    (E) Coordination with the pledge rule. For purposes of determining 
the amount of payments received during the taxable year under paragraph 
(f)(4)(iii)(D), the rules of section 453A(d) (relating to the treatment 
of certain pledge proceeds as payments) apply. This includes the rules 
under section 453A(d)(3) that relate to treating later payments as 
receipts of amounts on which tax has already been paid.
    (F) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (f)(4)(iii):

    (1) On January 1, 1990, corporation A, a calendar-year taxpayer, 
sells a building with an adjusted basis for purposes of computing 
adjusted current earnings of $10 million, for $5 million and an 
installment obligation bearing adequate stated interest with a principal 
amount of $20 million. The installment obligation calls for 4 annual 
payments of $5 million on January 1 of 1991, 1992, 1993, and 1994. A 
does not elect out of the installment method, and disposes of no other 
property under the installment method during 1990. No gain with respect 
to the sale is recaptured pursuant to section 1250.
    (2) The gross profit percentage for purposes of computing adjusted 
current earnings on the sale is 60 percent, computed as follows: gross 
profit of $15 million ($25 million contract price less $10 million 
adjusted basis) divided by $25 million contract price. The applicable 
percentage on the sale is 75 percent, computed as follows: $15 million 
($20 million of installment obligations arising during and outstanding 
at the end of 1990 less $5 million) divided by $20 million of 
installment obligations arising during and outstanding at the end of 
1990. See section 453A(c)(4). The portion of the contract price eligible 
for accounting under the installment method for purposes of computing 
adjusted current earnings is $18.75 million, or $25 million total 
contract price times applicable percentage of 75 percent. The portion of 
the contract price ineligible for the installment method is $6.25 
million, or $25 million less $18.75 million.
    (3) In computing adjusted current earnings for 1990, A must include 
$3.75 million of the

[[Page 459]]

gain on the sale. This amount is equal to the portion of the contract 
price that is ineligible for the installment method times the gross 
profit ratio, or $6.25 million times 60 percent. A must also include 
$2.25 million of gain from the $5 million payment received in 1990. This 
amount is computed as follows: the eligible portion of the payment, 
$3.75 million ($5 million payment times the applicable percentage of 75 
percent), times the gross profit ratio of 60 percent. Thus, the total 
amount of gain from the sale that A must include in adjusted current 
earnings for 1990 is $6 million ($3.75 million of gain from the portion 
of the contract price that is not eligible for the installment method, 
plus $2.25 million of gain from the 1990 payment).
    (4) A does not pledge or otherwise accelerate payments on the note 
in any other taxable year. In computing adjusted current earnings for 
1991, 1992, 1993, and 1994, A therefore includes $2.25 million of gain 
on the installment sale, computed as follows: $5 million payment times 
the applicable percentage of 75 percent, times the gross profit ratio of 
60 percent.

    (g) Disallowance of loss on exchange of debt pools. [Reserved]
    (h) Policy acquisition expenses of life insurance companies--(1) In 
general. This paragraph (h) addresses the treatment of policy 
acquisition expenses of life insurance companies in determining adjusted 
current earnings. Policy acquisition expenses are those expenses that, 
under generally accepted accounting principles in effect at the time the 
expenses are incurred, are considered to vary with and to be primarily 
related to the acquisition of new and renewal insurance policies. 
Generally, these acquisition expenses must be capitalized and amortized 
for purposes of adjusted current earnings over the reasonably estimated 
life of the acquired policy, using a method that provides a reasonable 
allowance for amortization. This method of amortization is treated as if 
it applied to all taxable years in determining the amount of policy 
acquisition expenses deducted for adjusted current earnings. The rules 
in this paragraph (h) apply to any life insurance company, as defined in 
section 816(a).
    (2) Reasonably estimated life. The reasonably estimated life of an 
acquired policy is determined based on the facts with respect to each 
policy (such as the age, sex, and health of the insured), and the 
company's experience (such as mortality, lapse rate and renewals) with 
similar policies. A company may treat as the reasonably estimated life 
of an acquired policy the period for amortizing expenses of the acquired 
policy that would be required by the Financial Accounting Standards 
Board (FASB) at the time the acquisition expenses are incurred. If the 
FASB has not established such a period, the period for amortizing 
acquisition expense of an acquired policy under guidelines issued by the 
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants in effect at the time 
the acquisition expenses are incurred may be treated as the reasonably 
estimated life of the acquired policy.
    (3) Reasonable allowance for amortization. For purposes of 
determining a reasonable allowance for amortization, a company may use a 
method that amortizes acquisition expenses in the same proportion that 
gross premiums and gross investment income for the taxable year bear to 
total anticipated receipts of gross premiums (including anticipated 
renewal premiums) and gross investment income to be realized over the 
reasonably estimated life of the policy.
    (4) Safe harbor for public financial statements. Any company that is 
required to file with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) a 
financial statement with respect to the taxable year will be treated as 
having complied with paragraph (h)(1) of this section if it accounts for 
acquisition expenses for adjusted current earnings purposes in the same 
manner as it accounts for those expenses on its financial statements 
filed with the SEC.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (j) Depletion. For purposes of computing adjusted current earnings, 
the allowance for depletion with respect to any property placed in 
service in a taxable year beginning after December 31, 1989 is 
determined under the cost depletion method of section 611.
    (k) Treatment of certain ownership changes--(1) In general. In the 
case of any corporation that has an ownership change as defined in 
paragraph (k)(2) of this section in a taxable year beginning after 
December 31, 1989, and that also has a net unrealized built-in loss (as 
defined in paragraph (k)(3) of this section) immediately before the 
ownership

[[Page 460]]

change, the adjusted basis of each asset of the corporation for purposes 
of computing adjusted current earnings following the ownership change 
shall be its proportionate share (determined on the basis of the 
respective fair market values of each asset) of the fair market value of 
the assets of the corporation immediately before the ownership change. 
The rules of Sec. 1.338(b)-2T(b), if otherwise applicable to the 
transaction, are applied in making this allocation of basis. If such 
rules apply, the limitations of Secs. 1.338(b)-2T(c) (1) and (2) also 
apply in allocating basis under this paragraph (k)(1).
    (2) Definition of ownership change. A corporation has an ownership 
change for purposes of section 56(g)(4)(G)(i) and this paragraph (k) if 
there is an ownership change under section 382(g) for purposes of 
computing the corporation's amount of taxable income that may be offset 
by pre-change losses or the regular tax liability that may be offset by 
pre-change credits. See Sec. 1.382-2T for rules to determine whether a 
corporation has an ownership change. Accordingly, in order for an 
ownership change to occur for purposes of this paragraph (k), a 
corporation must be a loss corporation as defined in Sec. 1.382-2(a)(1). 
In determining whether the corporation is a loss corporation, the 
determination of whether there is a net unrealized built-in loss is made 
by using the aggregate adjusted basis of the assets of the corporation 
used in computing taxable income. The aggregate adjusted basis of the 
corporation's assets for purposes of computing adjusted current earnings 
is not relevant in determining whether the corporation is a loss 
corporation. See part (iv) of the example in paragraph (k)(4) of this 
section.
    (3) Determination of net unrealized built-in loss immediately before 
an ownership change. In order to determine whether it has a net 
unrealized built-in loss for purposes of section 56(g)(4)(G)(ii) and 
paragraph (k)(1) of this section, a corporation that has an ownership 
change as defined in paragraph (k)(2) of this section must use the 
aggregate adjusted basis of its assets that it uses in computing its 
adjusted current earnings. The rules of section 382 (including sections 
382(h)(3)(B)(i) and 382(h)(8)) otherwise apply in determining whether 
the corporation has a net unrealized built-in loss.
    (4) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (k):

    (i) Individual A has owned all the issued and outstanding stock of 
corporation L for the past 5 years. A sells all of his stock in L to 
unrelated individual B. On the date of the sale, L owns the following 
assets (all numbers are in millions):

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Adjusted              
                                     Adjusted    basis for              
                                    basis for    computing   Fair market
              Asset                 computing     adjusted      value   
                                     taxable      current               
                                      income      earnings              
------------------------------------------------------------------------
x................................          $45          $50          $50
y................................           55           60           30
z................................           10           10           20
                                  --------------------------------------
                                          $110         $120         $100
------------------------------------------------------------------------

For purposes of computing taxable income, L has a $500 million net 
operating loss carryforward to the taxable year in which the sale 
occurs. Therefore, L is a loss corporation. As a result of the transfer 
of shares of L from A to B, L has had an ownership change.
    (ii) L has no net unrealized built-in loss for purposes of computing 
taxable income because the amount by which the aggregate adjusted basis 
of its assets for that purpose exceeds their fair market value is $10 
million, which is less than 15 percent of their fair market value and is 
not greater than $10 million. See section 381(h)(3)(B)(i). L, however, 
does have a net unrealized built-in loss for purposes of computing 
adjusted current earnings because the aggregate adjusted basis of its 
assets for the purpose exceeds their fair market value by $20 million, 
and that amount is greater than $10 million.
    (iii) Under paragraph (k)(1) of this section, L must restate the 
adjusted basis of its assets for purposes of computing adjusted current 
earnings to their fair market values, as follows (all numbers are in 
millions):

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 New    
                           Asset                               adjusted 
                                                                basis   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
x..........................................................          $50
y..........................................................           30
z..........................................................           20
------------------------------------------------------------------------

L must use these new adjusted bases for all purposes in determining 
adjusted current earnings, including computing depreciation and any gain 
or loss on disposition.
    (iv) If L did not have the net operating loss carryforward, and had 
no other loss or credit carryovers or other attributes described in 
Sec. 1.382-2(a)(1) for purposes of computing the

[[Page 461]]

amount of its taxable income that may be offset by pre-change losses or 
its regular tax liability that may be offset by pre-change credits, it 
would not have been a loss corporation on the date of the sale and 
therefore would not be treated as having had an ownership change for 
purposes of computing adjusted current earnings. This would be true even 
though L had a net unrealized built-in loss for purposes of computing 
adjusted current earnings. Therefore, this paragraph (k) would not have 
applied.

    (l) [Reserved]
    (m) Adjusted current earnings of a foreign corporation--(1) In 
general. The alternative minimum taxable income of a foreign corporation 
is increased by 75 percent of the excess of--
    (i) Its effectively connected adjusted current earnings for the 
taxable year; over
    (ii) Its effectively connected pre-adjustment alternative minimum 
taxable income for the taxable year.
    (2) Definitions--(i) Effectively connected pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income. Effectively connected pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income is the effectively connected taxable 
income of the foreign corporation for the taxable year, determined with 
the adjustments under sections 56 and 58 (except for the adjustment for 
adjusted current earnings, the alternative tax net operating loss and 
the alternative tax energy preference deduction) and increased by the 
tax preference items of section 57, but taking into account only items 
of income of the foreign corporation that are effectively connected (or 
treated as effectively connected) with the conduct of a trade or 
business in the United States, and any expense, loss or deduction that 
is properly allocated and apportioned to that income.
    (ii) Effectively connected adjusted current earnings. Effectively 
connected adjusted current earnings is the effectively connected pre-
adjustment alternative minimum taxable income of the foreign corporation 
for the taxable year, adjusted under section 56(g) and this section, but 
taking into account only items of income of the foreign corporation that 
are effectively connected (or treated as effectively connected) with the 
conduct of a trade or business in the United States, and any expense, 
loss or deduction that is properly allocated and apportioned to that 
income.
    (3) Rules to determine effectively connected pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income and effectively connected adjusted 
current earnings. The principles of section 864 (c) (and the regulations 
thereunder) and any other applicable provision of the Internal Revenue 
Code apply to determine whether items of income of the foreign 
corporation are effectively connected (or treated as effectively 
connected) with the conduct of a trade or business in the United States, 
and whether any expense, loss or deduction is properly allocated and 
apportioned to that income.
    (4) Certain exempt amounts. Effectively connected adjusted current 
earnings and effectively connected pre-adjustment alternative minimum 
taxable income do not include any item of income, or any expense, loss 
or deduction that is properly allocated and apportioned to income that 
is exempt from United States taxation under section 883 or an applicable 
income tax treaty. See section 894.
    (n) Adjustment for adjusted current earnings of consolidated 
groups--(1) Positive adjustments. For taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1989, the alternative minimum taxable income of a 
consolidated group (as defined in Sec. 1.1502-1T) is increased by 75 
percent of the excess, if any, of--
    (i) The consolidated adjusted current earnings for the taxable year, 
over
    (ii) The consolidated pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable 
income for the taxable year.
    (2) Negative adjustments--(i) In general. The alternative minimum 
taxable income of a consolidated group is decreased, subject to the 
limitation of paragraph (n)(2)(ii) of this section, by 75 percent of the 
excess, if any, of the consolidated pre-adjustment alternative minimum 
taxable income over consolidated adjusted current earnings.
    (ii) Limitation on negative adjustments. The amount of the negative 
adjustment for any taxable year shall be limited to the excess, if any, 
of--
    (A) The aggregate increases in the alternative minimum taxable 
income of the group in prior years under this section, over

[[Page 462]]

    (B) The aggregate decreases in the alternative minimum taxable 
income of the group in prior years under this section.
    (3) Definitions--(i) Consolidated pre-adjustment alternative minimum 
taxable income. Consolidated pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable 
income is the consolidated taxable income (as defined in Sec. 1.1502-11) 
of a consolidated group for the taxable year, determined with the 
adjustments provided in sections 56 and 58 (except for the adjustment 
for adjusted current earnings and the alternative tax net operating loss 
determined under section 56(a)(4)) and increased by the preference items 
described in section 57.
    (ii) Consolidated adjusted current earnings. The consolidated 
adjusted current earnings of a consolidated group is the consolidated 
pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income of the consolidated 
group for the taxable year, adjusted as provided in section 56(g) and 
this section.
    (4) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (n):

    (i) P is the common parent of a consolidated group. In 1990, the 
group has consolidated pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income 
of $1,400,000 and consolidated adjusted current earnings of $1,600,000. 
Thus, the group has a consolidated adjustment for adjusted current 
earnings for 1990 of $150,000 (75 percent of the $200,000 excess of 
consolidated adjusted current earnings over consolidated pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income), and alternative minimum taxable 
income of $1,550,000 ($1,400,000 plus $150,000).
    (ii) In 1991, the group has consolidated pre-adjustment alternative 
minimum taxable income of $1,500,000 and consolidated adjusted current 
earnings of $1,100,000. Thus, the group can reduce its alternative 
minimum taxable income by $150,000. The potential negative adjustment of 
$300,000 (75 percent of the $400,000 excess of consolidated pre-
adjustment alternative minimum taxable income over consolidated adjusted 
current earnings) is limited to the $150,000 consolidated adjustment for 
adjusted current earnings taken into account in 1990.

    (o) [Reserved]
    (p) Effective dates for corporate partners in partnerships--(1) In 
general. The provisions of this section apply to a corporate partner's 
distributive share of items of income and expense from a partnership for 
any taxable year of the partnership ending within or with any taxable 
year of the corporate partner beginning after December 31, 1989.
    (2) Application of effective dates. Solely for purposes of the 
effective date provisions of this section, a partnership event (such as 
placing property in service, paying or incurring a cost, or closing an 
installment sale) is deemed to occur on the last day of the 
partnership's taxable year.
    (3) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (p):

    (i) X is a calendar-year corporation that is a partner in P, an 
accrual-basis partnership with a taxable year ending March 31. During 
P's taxable year ending March 31, 1990, P earned ratably throughout the 
year interest income on tax-exempt obligations. In addition, P incurred 
intangible drilling costs in November 1989 and in February 1990.
    (ii) X's adjusted current earnings for 1990 includes X's 
distributive share of the interest on the tax-exempt obligations earned 
by P for its taxable year ending March 31, 1990. This is true even 
though P earned a portion of the interest prior to January 1, 1990.
    (iii) For purposes of computing X's adjusted current earnings for 
1990, the adjustment provided in paragraph (f)(1) of this section 
applies to X's distributive share of P's November 1989 and February 1990 
intangible drilling costs.

    (q) Treatment of distributions of property to shareholders--(1) In 
general. If a distribution of an item of property by a corporation with 
respect to its stock gives rise to more than one adjustment to earnings 
and profits under section 312, all of the adjustments with respect to 
that item of property (including the adjustment described in section 
312(c) with respect to liabilities to which the item is subject or which 
are assumed in connection with the distribution) are combined for 
purposes of determining the corporation's adjusted current earnings for 
the taxable year. If the amount included in pre-adjustment alternative 
minimum taxable income with respect to a distribution of an item of 
property exceeds the net increase in earnings and profits caused by the 
distribution, pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income is not 
reduced in computing adjusted current earnings. If the net increase in

[[Page 463]]

earnings and profits caused by a distribution of an item of property 
exceeds the amount included in pre-adjustment alternative minimum 
taxable income with respect to the distribution, that excess is added to 
pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income in computing adjusted 
current earnings.
    (2) Examples. The following examples illustrate the provisions of 
this paragraph (q).

    (i) Example 1. K corporation distributes property with a fair market 
value of $150 and an adjusted basis of $100. The adjusted basis is the 
same for purposes of computing taxable income, pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income, adjusted current earnings, and 
earnings and profits. Under section 312(a)(3), as modified by section 
312(b)(2), K decreases its earnings and profits by the fair market value 
of the property, or $150. Under section 312(b)(1), K increases its 
earnings and profits by the excess of the fair market value of the 
property over its adjusted basis, or $50. As a result of the 
distribution, there is a net decrease in K's earnings and profits of 
$100. K recognizes $50 of gain under section 311(b) as a result of the 
distribution as if K sold the property for $150. K thus has no amount 
permanently excluded from pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable 
income that is taken into account in determining current earnings and 
profits, and thus has no adjustment under paragraph (c)(1) of this 
section.
    (ii) Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that 
the distribution shareholder assumes a $190 liability in connection with 
the disribution. Under section 312(c)(1), K must adjust the adjustments 
to its earnings and profits under section 312 (a) and (b) to account for 
the liability the shareholder assumes. K adjusts the $100 net decrease 
in its earnings and profits to reflect the $190 liability, resulting in 
an increase in its earnings and profits of $90. Because section 
311(b)(2) makes the rules of section 336(b) apply, the fair market value 
of the property is not less than the amount of the liability, or $190. K 
therefore is treated as if it sold the property for $190, recognizing 
$90 of gain. K thus has no amount permanently excluded from pre-
adjustment alternative minimum taxable income that is taken into account 
in determining current earnings and profits, and thus has no adjustment 
under paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
    (r) Elections to use simplified inventory methods to compute 
alternative minimum tax--(1) In general. If a taxpayer makes an election 
under this paragraph (r) (and does not make the election in paragraph 
(r)(5) of this section), the rules of paragraph (r)(2) of this section 
apply in computing the taxpayer's pre-adjustment alternative minimum 
taxable income and adjusted current earnings.
    (2) Effect of election--(i) Inventories. The taxpayer's inventory 
amounts as determined for purposes of computing taxable income are used 
for purposes of computing pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable 
income and adjusted current earnings. Subject to the further 
modification described in paragraph (r)(2)(ii) of this section, the 
taxpayer's cost of sales as determined for purposes of computing taxable 
income is also used for purposes of computing pre-adjustment alternative 
minimum taxable income and adjusted current earnings.
    (ii) Modifications required--(A) In general. If a taxpayer makes an 
election under this paragraph (r), pre-adjustment alternative minimum 
taxable income and adjusted current earnings are computed with the 
modifications described in this paragraph. The items of adjustment under 
sections 56 and 58 and the items of tax preference under section 57 are 
computed without regard to the portion of those adjustments and 
preferences which, but for the election described in this paragraph, 
would have been capitalized in ending inventory. For example, pre-
adjustment alternative minimum taxable income is increased by the excess 
of the depreciation allowable for the taxable year under section 168 for 
purposes of computing taxable income (determined without regard to 
section 263A) over the depreciation allowable for the taxable year under 
section 56(a)(1) and section 57 for purposes of computing pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income (determined without regard to section 
263A). Similarly, adjusted current earnings is further increased by the 
excess of the depreciation allowable for the taxable year under section 
56(a)(1) and section 57 for purposes of computing pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income (determined without regard to section 
263A) over the depreciation allowable for the taxable year under section 
56(g)(4)(A) for purposes of computing adjusted current earnings 
(determined without regard to section 263A). Thus,

[[Page 464]]

the modifications described in the preceding sentence do not duplicate 
amounts that are taken into account in computing pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income. See paragraph (a)(6)(ii) of this 
section.
    (B) Negative modifications allowed. An election under this paragraph 
(r) does not affect the taxpayer's ability to make negative adjustments. 
Thus, if an election is made under this paragraph (r) and the amount of 
any adjustment under section 56 or 58, determined after modification 
under paragraph (r)(2)(ii)(A) of this section, is a negative amount, 
then this amount reduces pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable 
income or adjusted current earnings. However, no negative adjustment 
under this paragraph (r)(2)(ii)(B) is allowed for the items of tax 
preference under section 57.
    (iii) LIFO recapture adjustment. If a taxpayer makes an election 
under this paragraph (r) and uses the LIFO method for some assets, for 
purposes of computing the LIFO recapture adjustment under paragraph 
(f)(3) of this section for taxable years beginning after December 31, 
1989--
    (A) The LIFO inventory amount as determined for purposes of 
computing taxable income is used in lieu of the LIFO inventory amount as 
determined under paragraph (f)(3)(iii) of this section;
    (B) The FIFO inventory amount is computed without regard to the 
adjustments under sections 56 (including the adjustments of section 
56(g)(4)) and 58 and the items of tax preference of section 57; and
    (C) The beginning LIFO and FIFO inventory amounts under paragraph 
(f)(3)(ii) of this section are the ending LIFO inventory amount as 
determined for purposes of computing taxable income and the ending FIFO 
inventory amount computed without regard to the adjustments under 
sections 56 (including the adjustments of sections 56(g)(4)) and 58 and 
the items of tax preference of section 57 for the last taxable year 
beginning before January 1, 1990.
    (3) Time and manner of making election--(i) Prospective election. 
(A) A prospective election under this paragraph (r) may be made by any 
taxpayer--
    (1) That has computed pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable 
income and adjusted current earnings for all prior taxable years in 
accordance with the method described in this paragraph (r); or
    (2) That has not computed pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable 
income and adjusted current earnings for all prior tax years in 
accordance with the method described in this paragraph (r), but for 
which the use of the method described in this paragraph (r) for all 
prior taxable years would not have changed the taxpayer's tax liability 
(as shown on returns filed as of the date the election is made) for any 
prior taxable year for which the period of limitations under section 
6501(a) has not expired (as of the date the election is made).
    (B) A prospective election under this paragraph (r) may only be made 
by attaching a statement to the taxpayer's timely filed (including 
extensions) original Federal income tax return for any taxable year that 
is no later than its first taxable year to which this paragraph (r) 
applies and in which the taxpayer's tentative minimum tax (computed 
under the provisions of this paragraph (r)) exceeds its regular tax. 
However, in the case of a taxpayer described in paragraph 
(r)(3)(i)(A)(1) of this section that had tentative minimum tax in excess 
of its regular tax for any prior taxable year, the election may only be 
made by attaching a statement to its timely filed (including extensions) 
original Federal income tax return for the first taxable year ending 
after December 18, 1992. The statement must--
    (1) Give the name, address and employer identification number of the 
taxpayer; and
    (2) Identify the election as made under this paragraph (r).
    (C) The determination of whether a taxpayer is described in 
paragraph (r)(3)(i)(A)(2) of this section is to be made as of the time 
the taxpayer makes a prospective election in accordance with the 
procedures in paragraph (r)(3)(i)(B) of this section.
    (D) Any taxpayer described in paragraph (r)(3)(i)(A)(2) of this 
section that makes a prospective election will be

[[Page 465]]

deemed to have used the method described in this paragraph (r) in 
computing pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable income and adjusted 
current earnings for all prior taxable years.
    (ii) Retroactive election--(A) A retroactive election under this 
paragraph (r) may be made by any taxpayer not described in paragraph 
(r)(3)(i)(A) (1) or (2) of this section. Except as provided in paragraph 
(r)(3)(iii) of this section, a retroactive election may only be made by 
attaching a statement to the taxpayer's amended Federal income tax 
return for the earliest taxable year for which the period of limitations 
under section 6501(a) has not expired and which begins after December 
31, 1986. The amended return to which the election under this paragraph 
(r)(3)(ii) is attached must be filed no later than June 21, 1993.
    (B) The amended return must contain the statement described in 
paragraph (r)(3)(i)(B) of this section. In addition, the statement must 
contain a representation that the taxpayer will modify its pre-
adjustment alternative minimum taxable income and adjusted current 
earnings for all open taxable years in accordance with paragraph (r)(2) 
of this section. Upon this change in method of accounting, the taxpayer 
must include the entire adjustment required under section 481(a), if 
any, in preadjustment alternative minimum taxable income and adjusted 
current earnings on the amended return for the year of the election. The 
taxpayer must also reflect the method of accounting described in 
paragraph (r)(2) of this section on amended returns filed for all 
taxable years after the year of the election for which returns were 
originally filed before making the election (and for which the period of 
limitations under section 6501(a) has not expired).
    (C) Provided a taxpayer meets the requirements of this paragraph 
(r), any change in method of accounting arising as a result of making a 
retroactive election will be treated as made with the advance consent of 
the Commissioner.
    (D) Any retroactive election under this paragraph (r) that is made 
without filing amended returns required under this paragraph (r)(3)(ii) 
shall constitute a change in method of accounting made without the 
consent of the Commissioner.
    (iii) Taxpayers under examination--(A) In general. A taxpayer that 
wishes to make a retroactive election under section (r)(3)(ii) of this 
section may use the procedures in paragraph (r)(3)(iii)(A) (1) or (2) in 
lieu of filing an amended return for any taxable year that is under 
examination by the Internal Revenue Service.
    (1) Year of change under examination. If the year of the change is 
under examination at the time the taxpayer timely makes the election, 
the taxpayer may (in lieu of filing an amended return for the year of 
the change) furnish the written statement described in paragraph 
(r)(3)(iii)(B) of this section to the revenue agent responsible for 
examining the taxpayer's return no later than June 21, 1993. It is the 
taxpayer's responsibility to make a timely election either by furnishing 
the statement to the revenue agent or by filing amended returns by June 
21, 1993.
    (2) Other open years under examination. If any other year for which 
the taxpayer must modify its pre-adjustment alternative minimum taxable 
income and adjusted current earnings (see paragraph (r)(3)(ii)(B) of 
this section) is examined, the taxpayer may (in lieu of filing an 
amended return) furnish the amount of the conforming adjustment to the 
revenue agent responsible for examining the taxpayer's return. It is the 
taxpayer's responsibility to timely modify its pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income and adjusted current earnings for 
each year other than the year of change, either by furnishing the amount 
of the adjustment to the revenue agent or by filing amended returns.
    (B) Statement required. The statement required under paragraph 
(r)(3)(iii)(A)(1) of this section must include all of the items required 
under paragraph (r)(3)(ii)(B) of this section, as well as--
    (1) The caption ``Election to use regular tax inventories for AMT 
purposes;''
    (2) A description of the nature and amount of all items that would 
result in adjustments and that the taxpayer would have reported if the 
taxpayer

[[Page 466]]

had used the method described in this paragraph (r) for all prior 
taxable years for which the period of limitations under section 6501(a) 
has not expired and which begin after December 31, 1986; and
    (3) The following declaration signed by the person authorized to 
sign the return for the taxpayer: ``Under penalties of perjury, I 
declare that I have examined this written statement, and to the best of 
my knowledge and belief this written statement is true, correct, and 
complete.''
    (C) Year of change. The year of change is the earliest taxable year 
for which the period of limitations under section 6501(a) has not 
expired at the time the statement is submitted to the appropriate 
revenue agent and that begins after December 31, 1986. Thus, the 
adjustments required to be included on the statement must include any 
adjustment under section 481(a) determined as if the method described in 
this paragraph (r) had been used in all taxable years prior to the year 
of change that begin after December 31, 1986.
    (D) Treatment of additional tax liability. Any additional tax 
liability that results from the adjustments identified in the written 
statement described in paragraph (r)(3)(iii)(B) of this section is 
treated as an additional amount of tax shown on an amended return.
    (iv) Election as method of accounting. The elections provided in 
paragraphs (r)(3) (i) and (ii) of this section constitute either 
adoptions of, or changes in, methods of accounting. These elections, 
once made, may be revoked only with the consent of the Commissioner in 
accordance with the rules of section 446(e) and Sec. 1.446-1(e).
    (v) Untimely election to use simplified inventory method. If a 
taxpayer makes an election described in this paragraph (r) after the 
times set forth in paragraph (r)(3) (i) or (ii) of this section, the 
taxpayer must comply with the requirements of Sec. 1.446-1(e)(3) in 
order to secure the consent of the Commissioner to change to the method 
of accounting prescribed in this paragraph (r). The taxpayer generally 
will be subject to terms and conditions designed to place the taxpayer 
in a position no more favorable than a taxpayer that timely complied 
with paragraph (r)(3) (i) and (ii) of this section, whichever is 
applicable.
    (4) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (r).

    Example. (i) Corporation L is a calendar year manufacturer of 
baseball bats and uses the LIFO method of accounting for inventories. 
During 1987, 1988, and 1989, L's cost of goods sold in computing taxable 
income was as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       1987         1988         1989   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Beginning LIFO inventory.........      $3,000       $4,000       $5,000 
Purchases and other costs........       9,000        9,000        9,000 
Ending LIFO inventory............      (4,000)      (5,000)      (6,000)
                                  --------------------------------------
Cost of goods sold...............       8,000        8,000        8,000 
------------------------------------------------------------------------


    (ii) L has no preferences under section 57 during 1987, 1988, and 
1989. L's sole adjustment in computing alternative minimum tax during 
1987, 1988, and 1989 was the depreciation adjustment under section 
56(a)(1). Depreciation determined for both production and non-production 
assets under section 168 and under section 56(a)(1) during 1987, 1988, 
and 1989 was as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       1987         1988         1989   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Section 168 depreciation.........      $1,800       $1,800       $1,800 
Section 56(a)(1) depreciation....        (900)        (900)        (900)
                                  --------------------------------------
Depreciation difference..........         900          900          900 
Portion of difference capitalized                                       
 in the increase in inventory....        (100)        (100)        (100)
                                  --------------------------------------
Adjustment required under section                                       
 56(a)(1)........................         800          800          800 
------------------------------------------------------------------------



[[Page 467]]

    (iii) In computing taxable income, a portion of each year's section 
168 depreciation attributable to production assets is deducted currently 
and a portion is capitalized into the increase in ending inventory. For 
1987, 1988, and 1989, L computed alternative minimum tax by deducting 
the cost of goods sold which was reflected in taxable income ($8,000) in 
accordance with paragraph (r)(2)(i) of this section. For 1987, 1988, and 
1989, L also modified its adjustments under sections 56 and 58 and its 
preferences under section 57 to disregard the portion of any adjustment 
or preference that was capitalized in inventory. Thus, under section 
56(a)(1), L increased alternative minimum taxable income during each 
year by $900.
    (iv) L is eligible to make the election under paragraph (r)(1) of 
this section in accordance with paragraph (r)(3)(i) of this section (a 
prospective election).
    (v) L must compute its LIFO recapture adjustment for each year by 
reference to--
    (A) The FIFO inventory amount after applying the provisions of 
section 263A but before applying the adjustments of sections 56 and 58 
and the items of preference in section 57; and
    (B) The LIFO inventory amount used in computing taxable income.

    (5) Election to use alternative minimum tax inventories to compute 
adjusted current earnings. A taxpayer may elect under this paragraph 
(r)(5) to use the inventory amounts used to compute pre-adjustment 
alternative minimum taxable income in computing its adjusted current 
earnings. Rules similar to those of paragraphs (r)(2) and (r)(3) of this 
section apply for purposes of this election.
    (s) Adjustment for alternative tax energy preference deduction--(1) 
In general. For purposes of computing adjusted current earnings, any 
taxpayer claiming a deduction under section 56(h) must properly decrease 
basis by the portion of the deduction allowed under section 56(h) which 
is attributable to adjustments under section 56(g)(4). In taxable years 
following the taxable year in which the section 56(h) deduction is 
claimed, basis recovery (including amortization, depletion, and gain on 
sale) must properly take into account this basis reduction.
    (2) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (s):

    Example. Corporation A, a calendar year taxpayer, incurs $100 of 
intangible drilling costs on January 1, 1994 and as a result of these 
intangible drilling costs A claims a deduction under section 56(h) of 
$40. Assume that $20 of A's deduction under section 56(h) is 
attributable to the adjustment under paragraph (f)(1) of this section. A 
must reduce by $20 the amount of intangible drilling costs to be 
amortized under paragraph (f)(1) of this section in 1995 through 1998 
(the balance of the 60-month amortization period).

[T.D. 8340, 56 FR 11084, Mar. 15, 1991, as amended by T.D. 8352, 56 FR 
29433, June 27, 1991; T.D. 8454, 57 FR 60477, Dec. 21, 1992; T.D. 8482, 
58 FR 42207, Aug. 9, 1993; T.D. 8566, 59 FR 51371, Oct. 11, 1994]

                       Tax Preference Regulations


<R05>
Sec. 1.57-0  Scope.

    For purposes of the minimum tax for tax preferences (subtitle A, 
chapter I, part VI), the items of tax preference are:
    (a) Excess investment interest,
    (b) The excess of accelerated depreciation on section 1250 property 
over straight line depreciation,
    (c) The excess of accelerated depreciation on section 1245 property 
subject to a net lease over straight line depreciation,
    (d) The excess of the amortization deduction for certified pollution 
control facilities over the depreciation otherwise allowable,
    (e) The excess of the amortization deduction for railroad rolling 
stock over the depreciation otherwise allowable,
    (f) The excess of the fair market value of a share of stock received 
pursuant to a qualified or restricted stock option over the exercise 
price,
    (g) The excess of the addition to the reserve for losses on bad 
debts of financial institutions over the amount which have been 
allowable based on actual experience,
    (h) The excess of the percentage depletion deduction over the 
adjusted basis of the property, and
    (i) The capital gains deduction allowable under section 1202 or an 
equivalent amount in the case of corporations.

Accelerated depreciation on section 1245 property subject to a net lease 
and excess investment interest are not items of tax preference in the 
case of a corporation, other than a personal holding company (as defined 
in section 542) and an electing small business corporation (as defined 
in section 1371(b)).

[[Page 468]]

In addition, excess investment interest is an item of tax preference 
only for taxable years beginning before January 1, 1972. Rules for the 
determination of the items of tax preference are contained in 
Secs. 1.57-1 through 1.57-5. Generally, in the case of a nonresident 
alien or foreign corporation, the application of Secs. 1.57-1 through 
1.57-5 will be limited to cases in which the taxpayer has income 
effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business within the 
United States. Special rules for the treatment of items of tax 
preference in the case of certain entities and the treatment of items of 
tax preference relating to income from sources outside the United States 
are provided in section 58 and in Secs. 1.58-1 through 1.58-8.

[T.D. 7564, 43 FR 40470, Sept. 12, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 1.57-1  Items of tax preference defined.

    (a) [Reserved]
    (b) Accelerated depreciation on section 1250 property--(1) In 
general. Section 57(a)(2) provides that, with respect to each item of 
section 1250 property (as defined in section 1250(c)), there is to be 
included as an item of tax preference the amount by which the deduction 
allowable for the taxable year for depreciation or amortization exceeds 
the deduction which would have been allowable for the taxable year if 
the taxpayer had depreciated the property under the straight line method 
for each year of its useful life for which the taxpayer has held the 
property. The determination of the excess under section 57(a)(2) is made 
with respect to each separate item of section 1250 property. 
Accordingly, where the amount of depreciation which would have been 
allowable with respect to one item of section 1250 property if the 
taxpayer had originally used the straight line method exceeds the 
allowable depreciation or amortization with respect to such property, 
such excess may not be used to reduce the amount of the item of tax 
preference resulting from another item of section 1250 property.
    (2) Separate items of section 1250 property. The determination of 
what constitutes a separate item of section 1250 property is to be made 
on the facts and circumstances of each individual case. In general, each 
building (or component thereof, if the taxpayer uses the component 
method of computing depreciation) is a separate item of section 1250 
property. However, for purposes of this section, assets placed in a 
group, classified, or composite account are to be treated as a single 
item by a taxpayer, provided that such account contains only property 
placed in service during a single taxable year. In addition, two or more 
items may be treated as one item of section 1250 property for purposes 
of this paragraph where, with respect to each such item:
    (i) The period for which depreciation is taken begins on the same 
date, (ii) the same estimated useful life has continually been used for 
purposes of taking depreciation or amortization, and (iii) the same 
method (and rate) of depreciation or amortization has continually been 
used. For example, assume a taxpayer constructed a 40-unit rental 
townhouse development and began taking declining balance depreciation on 
all 40 units as of January 1, 1970, at a uniform rate and has 
consistently taken depreciation on all 40 units on this same basis. 
Although each townhouse is a separate item of section 1250 property, all 
40 townhouses may be treated as one item of section 1250 property for 
purposes of the minimum tax since the conditions of subdivisions (i), 
(ii), and (iii) of this subparagraph are met. This would be true even if 
the 40 townhouses comprised two 20-unit developments located apart from 
each other. However, if the taxpayer constructed an additional 
development or new section on the existing development for which he 
began taking depreciation on July 1, 1970, at a uniform rate for all the 
additional units, the additional units and the original units may not be 
treated as one item of section 1250 property since the condition of 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph is not met. Where a portion of an 
item of section 1250 property has been depreciated or amortized under a 
method (or rate) which is different from the method (or rate) under 
which the other portion or portions of such item have been depreciated 
or amortized, such portion is considered a separate item of section 1250 
property for purposes of this paragraph.

[[Page 469]]

    (3) Allowable depreciation or amortization. The phrase ``deduction 
allowable for the taxable year for exhaustion, wear and tear, 
obsolescence, or amortization'' and references in this paragraph to 
``allowable depreciation or amortization'' include deductions allowable 
for the taxable year under sections 162, 167, 212, or 611 for the 
depreciation or amortization of section 1250 property. Such phrase does 
not include depreciation allowable in the year in which the section 1250 
property is disposed of. For the determination of ``allowable 
depreciation or amortization'' for taxable years in which the taxpayer 
has taken no deduction, see Sec. 1.1016-3(a)(2).
    (4) Straight line depreciation. (i) For purposes of computing the 
depreciation which would have been allowable for the taxable year if the 
taxpayer had depreciated the property under the straight line method for 
each taxable year of its useful life, the taxpayer must use the same 
useful life and salvage value as was used for the first taxable year in 
which the taxpayer depreciated or amortized the property (subject to 
redeterminations made pursuant to Sec. 1.167(a)-1 (b) and (c)). If, 
however, for any taxable year, no useful life was used under the method 
of depreciation or amortization used or an artificial period was used, 
such as, for example, by application of section 167(k), or salvage value 
was not taken into account in determining the annual allowances, such 
as, for example, under the declining balance method, then, for purposes 
of computing the depreciation which would have been allowable under the 
straight line method for the taxable year--
    (a) There is to be used the useful life and salvage value which 
would have been proper if depreciation had actually been determined 
under the straight line method (without reference to an artificial life) 
throughout the period the property was held, and
    (b) Such useful life and such salvage value is to be determined by 
taking into account for each taxable year the same facts and 
circumstances as would have been taken into account if the taxpayer had 
used such method throughout the period the property was held.

If an election under Sec. 1.167(a)-11(f), Sec. 1.167(a)-12(e), or 
Sec. 1.167(a)-12(f) is applicable to the property, the salvage value of 
the property shall be determined in accordance with such election, and 
the asset depreciation period (or asset guideline period) applicable to 
the property pursuant to such election shall be considered to be the 
useful life of the property for the purposes of this section.
    (ii) Where the taxpayer acquires property in a transaction to which 
section 381(a) applies or from another member of an affiliated group 
during a consolidated return year and an ``accelerated'' method of 
depreciation as described in section 167(b) (2), (3), or (4) or section 
167(j)(1) (B) or (C) is permitted (see Sec. 1.381(c)(6)-1 and 
Sec. 1.1502-12(g)), the depreciation which would have been allowable 
under the straight line method is determined as if the property had been 
depreciated under the straight line method since depreciation was first 
taken on the property by the transferor of such property. In such cases, 
references in this paragraph to the period for which the property is 
held or useful life of the property are treated as including the period 
beginning with the commencement of the original use of the property.
    (iii) For purposes of section 57(a)(2), the straight line method 
includes the method of depreciation described in Sec. 1.167(b)-1 or any 
other method which provides for a uniform proration of the cost or other 
basis (less salvage value) of the property over the estimated useful 
life of the property to the taxpayer (in terms of years, hours of use, 
or other similar time units) or estimated number of units to be produced 
over the life of the property to the taxpayer. If a method other than 
the method described in Sec. 1.167(b)-1 is used, the estimated useful 
life or estimated units of production shall be determined in a manner 
consistent with subdivision (i) of this subparagraph.
    (iv) In the case of property constructed by or improvements made by 
a lessee, the useful life is to be determined in accordance with 
Sec. 1.167(a)-4.
    (5) Application for partial period. If an item is section 1250 
property for less

[[Page 470]]

than the entire taxable year, the allowable depreciation or amortization 
includes only the depreciation or amortization for that portion of the 
taxable year during which the item is section 1250 property and the 
amount of the depreciation which would have been allowable under the 
straight line method is determined only with regard to such portion of 
the taxable year.
    (6) No section 1250 and basis adjustment. No adjustment is to be 
made as a result of the minimum tax either to the basis of section 1250 
property or with respect to computations under section 1250.
    (7) Example. The principles of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following example:

    Example. The taxpayer's only item of section 1250 property is an 
office building with respect to which operations were commenced on 
January 1, 1971. The taxpayer depreciates the component parts of the 
building on the declining balance method. The useful life and costs of 
the component parts for depreciation purposes are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Salvage  
              Asset                Useful life      Cost        value   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Building shell...................           50     $400,000      $50,000
Partitions and walls.............           10       40,000  ...........
Ceilings.........................           10       20,000  ...........
Electrical system................           25       40,000        2,500
Heating and air-conditioning                                            
 system..........................           25       60,000        2,500
------------------------------------------------------------------------

For purposes of computing the item of tax preference under this 
paragraph for the taxpayer, the partitions, walls, and ceilings may be 
grouped together and the electrical, heating, and air-conditioning 
systems may be grouped together since the period for which depreciation 
is taken began with respect to the assets within these two groups on the 
same date and the assets within each group have continually had the same 
useful life and have continually been depreciated under the same method 
(and rate).
    (a) The taxpayer's 1971 item of tax preference under this paragraph 
would be determined as follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                               (1)                                      (2)             (3)             (4)     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Declining                                  
                      Item of 1250 property                           balance      Straight line   Excess of (2)
                                                                   depreciation    depreciation      over (3)   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Shell........................................................         $12,000          $7,000          $5,000
2. Partitions, walls, ceilings..................................           9,000           6,000           3,000
3. Electrical, heating and air-conditioning systems.............           6,000           3,800           2,200
                                                                 -----------------------------------------------
  1971 preference...............................................  ..............  ..............          10,200
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Assuming the above facts are the same for 1974, the taxpayer's 
1974 item of tax preference under this paragraph would be determined as 
follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                               (1)                                      (2)             (3)             (4)     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Declining                                  
                      Item of 1250 property                           balance      Straight line   Excess of (2)
                                                                   depreciation    depreciation      over (3)   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Shell........................................................         $10,952          $7,000          $3,952
2. Partitions, walls, ceilings..................................           5,529           6,000            None
3. Electrical, heating and air-conditioning systems.............           4,983           3,800           1,183
                                                                 -----------------------------------------------
  1974 preference...............................................  ..............  ..............           5,135
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Accelerated depreciation on section 1245 property subject to a 
net lease--(1) In general. Section 57(a)(3) provides that, with respect 
to each item of section 1245 property (as defined in section 1245(a)(3)) 
which is the subject of a net lease for the taxable year, there is to be 
included as an item of tax preference the amount by which the deduction 
allowable for the taxable year for depreciation or amortization exceeds 
the deduction which would have been allowable for the taxable year if 
the taxpayer had depreciated the property under the straight line method 
for each

[[Page 471]]

year of its useful life for which the taxpayer has held the property. 
Except as provided in paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section, the 
determination of the excess under section 57(a)(3) is made with respect 
to each separate item of section 1245 property. Accordingly, where the 
amount of depreciation which would have been allowable with respect to 
one item of section 1245 property if the taxpayer had originally used 
the straight line method exceeds the allowable depreciation or 
amortization with respect to such property, such excess may not be used 
to reduce the amount of the item of tax preference resulting from 
another item of section 1245 property.
    (2) Separate items of property. The determination of what 
constitutes a separate item of section 1245 property must be made on the 
facts and circumstances of each individual case. Such determination 
shall be made in a manner consistent with the principles expressed in 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section.
    (3) Allowable depreciation or amortization. The phrase ``deduction 
allowable for the taxable year for exhaustion, wear and tear, 
obsolescence, or amortization'' and references in this paragraph to 
``allowable depreciation or amortization'' include deductions allowable 
for the taxable year under sections 162, 167 (including depreciation 
allowable under section 167 by reason of section 179), 169, 184, 185, 
212, or 611 for the depreciation or amortization of section 1245 
property. Such phrase does not include depreciation allowable in the 
year in which the section 1245 property is disposed of. Amortization of 
certified pollution control facilities under section 169, and 
amortization of railroad rolling stock under section 184 are not to be 
treated as amortization for purposes of section 57(a)(3) to the extent 
such amounts are treated as an item of tax preference under section 
57(a) (4) or (5) (see paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section). For the 
determination of ``allowable depreciation or amortization'' for taxable 
years in which the taxpayer has taken no deduction, see Sec. 1.1016-
3(a)(2).
    (4) Straight line method of depreciation. The determination of the 
depreciation which would have been allowable under the straight line 
method shall be made in a manner consistent with paragraph (b)(4) of 
this section. Such amount shall include any amount allowable under 
section 167 by reason of section 179 (relating to additional first-year 
depreciation for small business).
    (5) Application for partial period. If an item is section 1245 
property for less than the entire taxable year or subject to a net lease 
for less than the entire taxable year the allowable depreciation or 
amortization includes only the depreciation or amortization for that 
portion of the taxable year during which the item was both section 1245 
property and subject to a net lease and the amount of the depreciation 
which would have been allowable under the straight line method is to be 
determined only with regard to such portion of the taxable year.
    (6) Net lease. Section 57(a)(3) applies only if the section 1245 
property is the subject of a net lease for all or part of the taxable 
year. See Sec. 1.57-3 for the determination of when an item is 
considered the subject of a net lease. p
    (7) No section 1245 and basis adjustment. No adjustment is to be 
made as a result of the minimum tax either to the basis of section 1245 
property or with respect to computations under section 1245.
    (8) Nonapplicability to corporations. Section 57(a)(3) does not 
apply to a corporation other than an electing small business corporation 
(as defined in section 1371(b)) and a personal holding company (as 
defined in section 542).
    (d) Amortization of certified pollution control facilities--(1) In 
general. Section 57(a)(4) provides that, with respect to each certified 
pollution control facility for which an election is in effect under 
section 169, there is to be included as an item of tax preference the 
amount by which the deduction allowable for the taxable year under such 
section exceeds the depreciation deduction which would otherwise be 
allowable under section 167. The determination under section 57(a)(4) is 
made with respect to each separate certified pollution control facility. 
Accordingly, where the amount of the depreciation deduction which would 
otherwise be allowable under section 167 with respect to one

[[Page 472]]

facility exceeds the allowable amortization deduction under section 169 
with respect to such facility, such excess may not be used to offset an 
item of tax preference resulting from another facility.
    (2) Separate facilities. The determination of what constitutes a 
separate facility must be made on the facts and circumstances of each 
individual case. Generally, each facility with respect to which a 
separate election is in effect under section 169 shall be treated as a 
separate facility for purposes of this paragraph. However, if the 
depreciation or amortization which would have been allowable without 
regard to section 169 with respect to any part of a facility is based on 
a different useful life, date placed in service, or method of 
depreciation or amortization from the other part or parts of such 
facility, such part is considered a separate facility for purposes of 
this paragraph. For example, if a building constitutes a certified 
pollution control facility and various component parts of the building 
have different useful lives, each group of component parts with the same 
useful life would be treated as a separate facility for purposes of this 
paragraph. Two or more facilities may be treated as one facility for 
purposes of this paragraph where, with respect to each such facility: 
(i) The initial amortization under section 169 commences on the same 
date, (ii) the facility is placed in service on the same date, (iii) the 
estimated useful life which would be the basis for depreciation or 
amortization other than under section 169 has continually been the same, 
and (iv) the method of depreciation or amortization which could have 
been used without regard to section 169 could have continually been the 
same.
    (3) Amount allowable under section 169. For purposes of the 
determination of the amount of the deduction allowable under section 
169, see section 169 and the regulations thereunder. Such amount, 
however, does not include amortization allowable in the year in which 
the pollution control facility is disposed of.
    (4) Otherwise allowable deduction. (i) The determination of the 
amount of the depreciation deduction otherwise allowable under section 
167 is made as if the taxpayer had depreciated the property under 
section 167 for each year of its useful life for which the property has 
been held. This amount may be determined under Sec. 1.167(a)-(11)(c) if 
the property is eligible property (as defined in Sec. 1.167(a)-11(b)(2)) 
and, during the taxable year in which the property was first placed in 
service, the taxpayer--
    (a) Has made an election under Sec. 1.167(a)-11(f) with respect to 
eligible property first placed in service in such taxable year, or
    (b) Has placed no eligible property in service other than property 
described in Sec. 1.167(a)-11(b)(5) (iii), (iv), or (v).

The amount determined pursuant to the preceding sentence shall be 
determined as if the taxpayer had depreciated the property in accordance 
with Sec. 1.167(a)-11 for all years to which such section applies and 
during which the taxpayer held the property. This amount may be 
determined under Sec. 1.167(a)-12(a)(5) if the property is qualified 
property (as defined in Sec. 1. 167(a)-12 (a)(3)) and the taxpayer has 
made an election with respect to such property under Sec. 1.167(a)-
12(e). If the taxpayer has made an election under Sec. 1.167(a)-12(f)(1) 
for a taxable year ending before January 1, 1971, this amount shall be 
determined for such year in accordance with such election. For purposes 
of this determination, any method selected by the taxpayer which would 
have been permissible under section 167 for such taxable year, including 
accelerated methods, may be used. Any additional amount which would have 
been allowable by reason of section 179 (relating to additional first-
year depreciation for small business) may be included provided such 
amount is reflected in the determination made under this paragraph in 
subsequent years.
    (ii) If a deduction for depreciation has not been taken by the 
taxpayer in any taxable year under section 167 with respect to the 
facility--
    (a) There is to be used the useful life and salvage value which 
would have been proper under section 167.
    (b) Such useful life and salvage value is determined by taking into 
account for each taxable year the same facts and circumstances as would 
have been

[[Page 473]]

taken into account if the taxpayer had used such method throughout the 
period the property has been held, and
    (c) The date the property is placed in service is, for purposes of 
this section, deemed to be the first day of the first month for which 
the amortization deduction is taken with respect to the facility under 
section 169.

If, prior to the date amortization begins under section 169, a deduction 
for depreciation has been taken by the taxpayer in any taxable year 
under section 167 with respect to the facility, the useful life, salvage 
value, etc., used for that purpose is deemed to be the appropriate 
useful life, salvage value, etc., for purposes of this paragraph, with 
such adjustments as are appropriate in light of the facts and 
circumstances which would have been taken into account since the time 
the last such depreciation deduction was taken, unless it is established 
by clear and convincing evidence that some other useful life, salvage 
value, or date the property is placed in service is more appropriate.
    (iii) For purposes of section 57(a)(4) and this paragraph, if the 
deduction for amortization or depreciation which would have been 
allowable had no election been made under section 169 would have been--
    (a) An amortization deduction based on the term of a leasehold or
    (b) A depreciation deduction determined by reference to section 611,

such deduction is to be deemed to be a deduction allowable under section 
167.
    (iv) If a facility is subject to amortization under section 169 for 
less than the entire taxable year, the otherwise allowable depreciation 
deduction under section 167 shall be determined only with regard to that 
portion of the taxable year during which the election under section 169 
is in effect.
    (v) If less than the entire adjusted basis of a facility is subject 
to amortization under section 169, the otherwise allowable depreciation 
deduction under section 167 shall be determined only with regard to that 
portion of the adjusted basis subject to amortization under section 169.
    (5) No section 1245 and basis adjustment. No adjustment is to be 
made as a result of the minimum tax either to the basis of a certified 
pollution control facility or with respect to computations under 
sections 1245.
    (6) Relationship to section 57(a)(3). See paragraph (c)(3) with 
respect to an adjustment in the amount treated as amortization under 
that provision where both paragraphs (3) and (4) of section 57(a) are 
applicable to the same item of property.
    (7) Example. The principles of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following example:

    Example. A calendar year taxpayer has a certified pollution control 
facility on which an election is in effect under section 169 commencing 
with January 1, 1971. No part of the facility is section 1250 property. 
The original basis of the facility is $100,000 of which $75,000 
constitutes amortizable basis. The useful life of the facility is 20 
years. The taxpayer depreciates the $25,000 portion of the facility 
which is not amortizable basis under the double declining method and 
began taking depreciation on January 1, 1971.
    (a) The taxpayer's 1971 item of tax preference under this paragraph 
would be determined as follows:

1. Amortization deduction...................................     $15,000
2. Depreciation deduction on amortizable basis (double                  
 declining method)..........................................       7,500
                                                             -----------
    1971 preference (excess of 1 over 2)....................       7,500
                                                                        


    (b) If the taxpayer terminated his election under section 169 in 
1972 effective as of July 1, 1972, the taxpayer's 1972 item of tax 
preference would be determined as follows:

1. Amortization deduction...................................      $7,500
2. Depreciation deduction on amortizable basis:                         
  Full year ($75,000 (original basis) less $7,500                       
   (``depreciation'' to 1-1-72) equals adjusted basis of                
   $67,500; multiplied by 0.10 (double declining rate)).....       6,750
                                                             ===========
  Portion of full year's depreciation attributable to                   
   amortization period (one-half)...........................       3,375
                                                             -----------
    1972 preference (excess of 1 over 2)....................       4,125
                                                                        


    (e) Amortization of railroad rolling stock--(1) In general. Section 
57(a)(5) provides that, with respect to each unit of railroad rolling 
stock for which an election is in effect under section 184, there is to 
be included as an item of tax preference the amount by which the 
deduction allowable for the taxable year under such section exceeds the 
depreciation deduction which would otherwise be allowable under section 
167. The determination under section

[[Page 474]]

57(a)(5) is made with respect to each separate unit of rolling stock. 
Accordingly, where the amount of the depreciation deduction which would 
otherwise be allowable under section 167 with respect to one unit 
exceeds the allowable amortization deduction under section 184 with 
respect to such unit, such excess may not be used to offset an item of 
tax preference resulting from another unit.
    (2) Separate units of rolling stock. The determination of what 
constitutes a separate unit of rolling stock must be made on the facts 
and circumstances of each individual case. Such determination shall be 
made in a manner consistent with the manner in which the comparable 
determination is made with respect to separate certified pollution 
control facilities under paragraph (d) (2) of this section.
    (3) Amount allowable under section 184. For purposes of the 
determination of the amount of the deduction allowable under section 
184, see section 184. Such amount, however, does not include 
amortization allowable in the year in which the rolling stock is 
disposed of.
    (4) Otherwise allowable deduction. The determination of the amount 
of the depreciation deduction otherwise allowable under section 167 is 
to be made in a manner consistent with the manner in which the 
comparable deduction with respect to certified pollution control 
facilities is determined under paragraph (d)(4) of this section.
    (5) No section 1245 or basis adjustment. No adjustment is to be made 
as a result of the minimum tax either to the basis of a unit of railroad 
rolling stock or with respect to computations under section 1245.
    (6) Relationship to section 57(a)(3). See paragraph (c)(3) of this 
section with respect to an adjustment in the amount treated as 
amortization under that provision where both paragraphs (3) and (5) of 
section 57(a) are applicable to the same item.
    (f) Stock options--(1) In general. Section 57(a)(6) provides that 
with respect to each transfer of a share of stock pursuant to the 
exercise of a qualified stock option or a restricted stock option, there 
shall be included by the transferee as an item of tax preference the 
amount by which the fair market value of the share at the time of 
exercise exceeds the option price. The stock option item of tax 
preference is subject to tax under section 56(a) in the taxable year of 
the transferee in which the transfer is made.
    (2) Definitions. See generally Sec. 1.421-7 (e), (f), and (g) for 
the definitions of ``option price,'' ``exercise,'' and ``transfer,'' 
respectively; however, in the case of a transfer of a share of stock 
pursuant to the exercise of a qualified stock option or a restricted 
stock option after the death of an employee by the estate of the 
decedent (or by a person who acquired the right to exercise such option 
by bequest or inheritance or by reason of the death of the decedent), 
the term ``option price'' shall, for purposes of this paragraph, include 
both the consideration paid by the estate (or such person) for such 
share of stock and so much of the basis of the option as is attributable 
to such share of stock. For the definition of a qualified stock option 
see section 422(b) and Sec. 1.422-2. For the definition of a restricted 
stock option see section 424(b) and Sec. 1.424-2. The definitions and 
special rules contained in section 425 and the regulations thereunder 
are applicable to this paragraph.
    (3) Fair market value. In accordance with the principles of section 
83(a)(1), the fair market value of a share of stock received pursuant to 
the exercise of a qualified or restricted stock option is to be 
determined without regard to restrictions (other than nonlapse 
restrictions within the meaning of Sec. 1.83-3(h)). Notwithstanding any 
valuation date given in section 83(a)(1), for purposes of this section, 
fair market value is determined as of the date the option is exercised.
    (4) Foreign source options. In the case of an option attributable to 
sources within any foreign country or possession, see section 58(g) and 
Sec. 1.58-8.
    (5) Inapplicability in certain cases. (i) Section 57(a)(6) is 
inapplicable if during the same taxable year in which stock is 
transferred pursuant to the exercise of an option, the transferee makes 
a disposition (within the meaning of section 425(c)) of such stock. In 
the case of a nonresident alien, section 57(a)(6) is inapplicable to the 
extent the stock option is attributable (in accordance with

[[Page 475]]

the principles of sections 861 through 863 and the regulations 
thereunder) to sources without the United States.
    (ii) Section 57(a)(6) is inapplicable if section 421(a) does not 
apply to the transfer because of employment requirements of section 
422(a)(2) or 424(a)(2).
    (6) Proportionate applicability. Where, by reason of section 422 
(b)(7) and (c)(3) (relating to percentage ownership limitations), only a 
portion of a transfer qualifies for application of section 421, the fair 
market value and option price shall be determined only with regard to 
that portion of the transfer which so qualifies.
    (7) No basis adjustment. No adjustment shall be made to the basis of 
the stock received pursuant to the exercise of a qualified or restricted 
stock option as a result of the minimum tax.
    (g) Reserves for losses on bad debts of financial institutions--(1) 
In general. Section 57(a)(7) provides that, in the case of a financial 
institution to which section 585 or 593 (both relating to reserves for 
losses on loans) applies, there shall be included as an item of tax 
preference the amount by which the deduction allowable for the taxable 
year for a reasonable addition to a reserve for bad debts exceeds the 
amount that would have been allowable had the institution maintained its 
bad debt reserve for all taxable years on the basis of the institution's 
actual experience.
    (2) Taxpayers covered. Section 57(a)(7) applies only to an 
institution (or organization) to which section 585 or 593 applies. See 
sections 585(a) and 593(a) and the regulations thereunder for a 
description of those institutions.
    (3) Allowable deduction. For purposes of this paragraph, the amount 
of the deduction allowable for the taxable year for a reasonable 
addition to a reserve for bad debts is the amount of the deduction 
allowed under section 166(c) by reference to section 585 or 593.
    (4) Actual experience. (i) For purposes of this paragraph, the 
determination of the amount which would have been allowable had the 
institution maintained its reserve for bad debts on the basis of actual 
experience is the amount determined under section 585(b)(3)(A) and the 
regulations thereunder. For this purpose, the beginning balance for the 
first taxable year ending in 1970 is the amount which bears the same 
ratio to loans outstanding at the beginning of the taxable year as (a) 
the total bad debts sustained during the 5 preceding taxable years, 
adjusted for recoveries of bad debts during such period, bears to (b) 
the sum of the loans outstanding at the close of such 5 taxable years. 
The taxpayer may, however, select a more appropriate balance based on 
its actual experience during a shorter period subject to the approval of 
the district director upon examination of the return provided there are 
unusual circumstances which indicate that such period is more indicative 
of the taxpayer's actual loss experience. Any such selection and 
approval shall be made in a manner consistent with the selection and 
approval of a bad debt reserve method under Sec. 1.166-1(b). In the case 
of an institution which has been in existence for less than 5 taxable 
years as of the beginning of the first taxable year ending in 1970, the 
above formula for determining the beginning balance is applied by 
substituting the number of taxable years for which the institution has 
been in existence as of the beginning of the taxable year for ``5'' each 
time it appears. If any taxable year utilized in the above formula for 
determining the beginning balance is a short taxable year the amount of 
the bad debts, adjusted for recoveries, for such taxable year is 
modified by dividing such amount by the number of days in the taxable 
year and multiplying the resulting amount by 365. The beginning balance 
for any subsequent taxable year is the amount of the beginning balance 
of the preceding taxable year, decreased by bad debt losses during such 
year, increased by recoveries of bad debts during such year and 
increased by the lower of the maximum amount determined under section 
585(b)(3)(A) for such year or the amount of the deduction allowed for 
such year. The application of this subdivision (i) may be illustrated by 
the following example:

    Example. The Y Bank, a calendar year taxpayer, uses the reserve 
method of acounting for bad debts. On December 31, 1969, Y determines 
the balance of its reserve for bad debts to be $70,000 under the 
percentage method. On the same date Y's 5-year moving average

[[Page 476]]

is $52,000. Y incurs net bad debt losses (bad debt losses less 
recoveries of bad debts) of $3,000 for each of the years 1970, 1971, and 
1972, which it charges to its reserve for bad debts. Y's 6-year moving 
averages computed under section 585(b)(3)(A) at the close of 1970, 1971, 
and 1972 are $50,000, $49,000, and $51,000, respectively. Y's preference 
items are computed as follows based upon additional facts assumed:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            1970       1971       1972  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Bad debt reserve--percentage method:                                 
  (a) Balance beginning of year                                         
   (closing balance prior year)........    $70,000    $70,000    $68,000
  (b) Net bad debts charged to reserve.      3,000      3,000      3,000
                                        --------------------------------
  (c) Subtotal.........................     67,000     67,000     65,000
  (d) Deduction allowed................      3,000      1,000      4,000
                                        --------------------------------
  (e) Balance end of year..............     70,000     68,000     69,000
2. Bad debt reserve--``actual                                           
 experience'':                                                          
  (a) Beginning balance (for 1970, 5-                                   
   year moving average; for other                                       
   years, closing balance prior year)..     52,000     50,000     48,000
  (b) Net bad debts charged to reserve.      3,000      3,000      3,000
                                        --------------------------------
  (c) Subtotal.........................     49,000     47,000     45,000
  (d) Maximum amount under section 585                                  
   (b)(3)(A) (6-year moving average                                     
   minus (c))..........................      1,000      2,000      6,000
  (e) Deduction allowed (line 1(d))....      3,000      1,000      4,000
  (f) Lower of (d) or (e)..............      1,000      1,000      4,000
                                        --------------------------------
  (g) Closing balance (line (c) + (f)).     50,000     48,000     49,000
3. Preference item under section                                        
 57(a)(7):                                                              
  (a) Deduction allowed................      3,000      1,000      4,000
  (b) Maximum amount under section                                      
   585(b)(3)(A)........................      1,000      2,000      6,000
                                        --------------------------------
  (c) Preference item (excess of (a)                                    
   over (b))...........................      2,000          0          0
------------------------------------------------------------------------


    (ii) In the case of a new institution whose first taxable year ends 
after 1969, its beginning balance for its reserve for bad debts, for 
purposes of this paragraph, is zero and its reasonable addition to the 
reserve for such taxable year is determined on the basis of the actual 
experience of similar institutions located in the area served by the 
taxpayer.
    (h) Depletion--(1) In general. Section 57(a)(8) provides that with 
respect to each property (as defined in section 614), there is to be 
included as an item of tax preference the amount by which the deduction 
allowable for the taxable year under section 611 for depletion for the 
property exceeds the adjusted basis of the property at the end of the 
taxable year (determined without regard to the depletion deduction for 
that taxable year). The determination under section 57(a)(8) is made 
with respect to each separate property. Thus, for example, if one 
mineral property has an adjusted basis remaining at the end of the 
taxable year, such basis may not be used to reduce the amount of an item 
of tax preference resulting from another mineral property.
    (2) Allowable depletion. For the determination of the amount of the 
deduction for depletion allowable for the taxable year see section 611 
and the regulations thereunder.
    (3) Adjusted basis. For the determination of the adjusted basis of 
the property at the end of the taxable year see section 1016 and the 
regulations thereunder.
    (4) No basis adjustment. No adjustment is to be made to the basis of 
property subject to depletion as a result ot the minimum tax.
    (i) Capital gains--(1) Taxpayers other than corporations. Section 
57(a)(9)(A) provides that, in the case of a taxpayer other than a 
corporation, there is to be included as an item of tax preference one-
half of the amount by which the taxpayer's net long-term capital gain 
for the taxable year exceeds the taxpayer's net short-term capital loss 
for the taxable year. For this purpose, for taxable years beginning 
after December 31, 1971, the taxpayer's net long-term capital gain does 
not include an amount equal to the deduction allowable under section 163 
(relating to interest expense) by reason of subsection (d)(1)(C) of that 
section, and the excess

[[Page 477]]

described in the preceding sentence is reduced by an amount equal to the 
reduction of disallowed interest expense by reason of section 
163(d)(2)(B). Furthermore, the net long-term capital gain of an estate 
or trust does not include capital gains described in section 642(c)(4). 
Included in the computation of the taxpayer's capital gains item of tax 
preference are amounts reportable by the taxpayer as distributive shares 
of gain or loss from partnerships, estates or trusts, electing small 
business corporations, common trust funds, etc. See section 58 and the 
regulations thereunder with respect to the above entities.

    Example. For 1971, A, a calendar year individual taxpayer, 
recognized $50,000 from the sale of securities held for more than 6 
months. In addition, A received a $15,000 dividend from X Fund, a 
regulated investment company, $12,000 of which was designated as a 
capital gain dividend by the company pursuant to section 852(b)(3)(C). 
The AB partnership recognized a gain of $20,000 from the sale of section 
1231 property held by the partnership. The AB partnership agreement 
provides that A is entitled to 50 percent of the income and gains of the 
partnership. A had net short-term capital loss for the year of $10,000. 
A's 1971 capital gains item of tax preference is computed as follows:

Capital gain recognized from securities.....................     $50,000
Capital gain dividend from regulated investment company.....      12,000
Distributive share of partnership capital gain..............      10,000
                                                             -----------
    Total net long-term capital gain........................      72,000
Less: net short-term capital loss...........................    (10,000)
                                                             -----------
Excess of net long-term capital gain over net short-term                
 capital loss...............................................      62,000
                                                             ===========
One-half of above excess....................................      31,000
                                                                        


    (2) Corporations. (i) Section 57(a)(9)(B) provides that in the case 
of corporations there is to be included as an item of tax preference 
with respect to a corporation's net section 1201 gain an amount equal to 
the product obtained by multiplying the excess of the net long-term 
capital gain over the net short-term capital loss by a fraction. The 
numerator of this fraction is the sum of the normal tax rate and the 
surtax rate under section 11 minus the alternative tax rate under 
section 1201(a) for the taxable year, and the denominator of the 
fraction is the sum of the normal tax rate and the surtax rate under 
section 11 for the taxable year. Included in the above computation are 
amounts reportable by the taxpayer as distributive shares of gain or 
loss from partnerships, estates or trusts, common trust funds, etc. In 
certain cases the amount of the net section 1201 gain which results in 
preferential treatment will be less than the amount determined by 
application of the statutory formula. Therefore, in lieu of the 
statutory formula, the capital gains item of tax preference for 
corporations may in all cases be determined by dividing--
    (a) The amount of tax which would have been imposed under section 11 
if section 1201(a) did not apply minus--
    (b) The amount of the taxes actually imposed

by the sum of the normal tax rate plus the surtax rate under section 11. 
In case of foreign source capital gains and losses which are not taken 
into account pursuant to sections 58(g)(2)(B) and 1.58-8, the amount 
determined in the preceding sentence shall be multiplied by a fraction 
the numerator of which is the corporation's net section 1201 gain 
without regard to such gains and losses which are not taken into account 
and the denominator of which is the corporation's net section 1201 gain. 
The computation of the corporate capital gains item of tax preference 
may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. For 1971, A, a calendar year corporate taxpayer, has 
ordinary income of $10,000 and net section 1201 gain of $50,000, none of 
which is subsection (d) gain (as defined in sec. 1201(d)) and none of 
which is attributable to foreign sources. A's 1971 capital gain item of 
tax preference may be computed as follows:

1. Tax under section 11:                                                
  Normal tax (0.22 x $60,000)...............................     $13,200
  Surtax (0.26 x $35,000)...................................       9,100
                                                             -----------
                                                                  22,300
2. Tax under section 1201:                                              
  (a) Normal tax on ordinary income (0.22 x $10,000)........      $2,200
  Tax on net section 1201 gain (0.30 x $50,000).     $15,000     $17,200
                                                 -----------------------
3. Excess...................................................       5,100
                                                             -----------
4. Normal tax rate plus surtax rate.........................         .48
5. Capital gains preference (line 3 divided by line 4)......      10,625
                                                                        



[[Page 478]]

    Example 2. For 1971, A, a calendar year corporate taxpayer, has a 
loss from operations of $30,000 and net section 1201 gain of $150,000, 
none of which is subsection (d) gain (as defined in section 1201(d)) and 
none of which is attributable to foreign sources. A's 1971 capital gain 
item of tax preference may be computed as follows:

1. Tax under section 11:                                                
  Normal tax (0.22 x $120,000)..............................     $26,400
  Surtax (0.26 x $95,000)...................................      24,700
                                                             -----------
                                                                  51,100
2. Tax under section 1201(a):                                           
  Normal tax on ordinary income.................        None            
  Tax on net section 1201 gain (0.30 x $150,000)      45,000      45,000
                                                             -----------
3. Excess...................................................       6,100
                                                             -----------
4. Normal tax rate plus surtax rate.........................         .48
5. Capital gain preference (line 3 divided by line 4).......      12,708
                                                                        


    (ii) In the case of organizations subject to the tax imposed by 
section 511(a), mutual savings banks conducting a life insurance 
business (see section 594), life insurance companies (as defined in 
section 801), mutual insurance companies to which part II of subchapter 
L applies, insurance companies to which part III of subchapter L 
applies, regulated investment companies subject to tax under part I of 
subchapter M, real estate investment trusts subject to tax under part II 
of subchapter M, or any other corporation not subject to the taxes 
imposed by sections 11 and 1201(a), the capital gains item of tax 
preference may be computed in accordance with subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph except that, in lieu of references to section 11, there is 
to be substituted the section which imposes the tax comparable to the 
tax imposed by section 11 and, in lieu of references to section 1201(a), 
there is to be substituted the section which imposes the alternative or 
special tax applicable to the capital gains of such corporation.
    (iii) For purposes of this paragraph, where the net section 1201 
gain is not in any event subject to the tax comparable to the normal tax 
and the surtax under section 11, such as in the case of regulated 
investment companies subject to tax under subchapter M, such comparable 
tax shall be computed as if it were applicable to net section 1201 gain 
to the extent such gain is subject to the tax comparable to the 
alternative tax under section 1201(a). Thus, in the case of a regulated 
investment company subject to tax under subchapter M, the tax comparable 
to the normal tax and the surtax would be the tax computed under section 
852(b)(1) determined as if the amount subject to tax under section 
852(b)(3) were included in investment company taxable income. The 
principles of this subdivision (iii) may be illustrated by the following 
example:

    Example. M, a calendar year regulated investment company, in 1971, 
has investment company taxable income (subject to tax under sec. 
852(b)(1)) of $125,000 and net long-term capital gain of $800,000. M 
company has no net short-term capital loss but has a deduction for 
dividends paid (determined with reference to capital gains only) of 
$700,000, M's 1971 capital gains item of tax preference is computed as 
follows:

1. Section 852(b)(1) tax computed as if                                 
 it were applicable to all income                                       
 including capital gains:                                               
    Amount subject to section 852(b)(1)...........   $125,000           
    Net section 1201 gain..............   $800,000                      
    Less: Dividends paid deduction.....    700,000                      
                                        -----------                     
    Net section 1201 gain subject to tax at the                         
     company level................................    100,000           
                                        -----------                     
                                                      225,000           
    Normal tax (0.22 x $225,000).............................    $49,500
    Surtax (0.26 x 200,000)..................................     52,000
                                        --------------------------------
                                                                 101,500
                                        ================================
2. Tax comparable to section 1201(a) tax section 852(b)(1) tax:         
    Normal tax (0.22 x 125,000)........    $27,500                      
    Surtax (0.26 x 100,000)............     26,000    $53,500           
                                        -----------                     
    Section 852(b)(3) tax (0.30 x 100,000)........     30,000           
                                                   -----------          

[[Page 479]]

                                                                        
                                                                 $83,500
                                                              ==========
3. Excess....................................................     18,000
                                                              ==========
4. Normal tax rate plus surtax rate..........................        .48
5. Capital gains preference (line 3 divided by line 4).......     37,500
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                        

    (iv) For the computation of the capital gains item of tax preference 
in the case of an electing small business corporation (as defined in 
section 1371(b)), see Sec. 1.58-4(c).
    (3) Nonresident aliens, foreign corporations. In the case of a 
nonresident alien individual or foreign corporation, there shall be 
included in computing the capital gains item of tax preference under 
section 57(a)(9) only those capital gains and losses included in the 
computation of income effectively connected with the conduct of a trade 
or business within the United States as provided in section 871(b) or 
882.

[T.D. 7564, 43 FR 40470, Sept. 12, 1978]
Secs. 1.57-2--1.57-3  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1.57-4  Limitation on amounts treated as items of tax preference for taxable years beginning before January 1, 1976.

    (a) In general. If in any taxable year beginning before January 1, 
1976, a taxpayer has deductions in excess of gross income and all or a 
part of any item of tax preference described in Sec. 1.57-1 results in 
no tax benefit due to modifications required under section 172(c) or 
section 172(b)(2) in computing the amount of the net operating loss or 
the net operating loss to be carried to a succeeding taxable year, then, 
for purposes of section 56(a)(1), the sum of the items of tax preference 
determined under section 57(a) (and Sec. 1.57-1) is to be limited as 
provided in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) Limitation. The sum of the items of tax preference, for purposes 
of section 56(a)(1) and Sec. 1.56A-1(a), is limited to an amount 
determined under subparagraphs (1) and (2) of this paragraph.
    (1) Loss year. If the taxpayer has no taxable income for the taxable 
year without regard to the net operating loss deduction, the amount of 
the limitation is equal to--
    (i) In cases where the taxpayer does not have a net operating loss 
for the taxable year, the amount of the recomputed income (as defined in 
paragraph (c) of this section) or
    (ii) In cases where the taxpayer has a net operating loss for the 
taxable year, the amount of the net operating loss (expressed as a 
positive amount) increased by the recomputed income or decreased by the 
recomputed loss for the taxable year (as defined in paragraph (c) of 
this section,

plus the amount of the taxpayer's stock option item of tax preference 
(as described in Sec. 1.57-1(f)).
    (2) Loss carryover and carryback years. Except in cases to which 
subparagraph (1)(ii) of this paragraph applies, if, in any taxable year 
to which a net operating loss is carried, a capital gains deduction is 
disallowed under section 172(b)(2) in computing the amount of such net 
operating loss which may be carried to succeeding taxable years, the 
amount of the limitation is equal to the amount, if any, by which the 
sum of the items of tax preference (computed with regard to subparagraph 
(1)(i) of this paragraph) exceeds the lesser of--
    (i) The amount by which such loss is reduced because of a 
disallowance of the capital gains deduction in such taxable year, or
    (ii) The capital gains deduction.

The amount determined pursuant to the preceding sentence shall be 
increased by the amount, if any, that such reduction is attributable to 
that portion of such a net operating loss described in section 
56(b)(1)(B) and Sec. 1.56A-2(a)(2) (relating to excess tax preferences).
    (c) Recomputed income or loss. For purposes of this section, the 
phrase ``recomputed income or loss'' means the taxable income or net 
operating loss for the taxable year computed without regard to the 
amounts described in Sec. 1.57-1 except paragraph (i)(2) of that

[[Page 480]]

section (relating to corporate capital gains) and without regard to the 
net operating loss deduction. For this purpose, the reference to the 
amounts described in Sec. 1.57-1 is a reference to that portion of the 
deduction allowable in computing taxable income under the appropriate 
section equal to the amount which is determined in each paragraph of 
Sec. 1.57-1. For example, the amount described in Sec. 1.57-1(h) 
(relating to excess of percentage depletion over basis) is that portion 
of the deduction allowable for depletion under section 611 which is 
equal to the amount determined under Sec. 1.57-1(h). For purposes of 
this paragraph, the amount described in Sec. 1.57-1(i)(1) (relating to 
capital gains) is to be considered as the amount of the deduction 
allowable for the taxable year under section 1202.
    (d) Determination of preferences reduced. When, pursuant to 
paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the sum of the items of tax preference 
(determined without regard to this section) are reduced, such reduction 
is first considered to be from the capital gains item of tax preference 
(described in Sec. 1.57-1(i)(1)) and each item of tax preference 
relating to a deduction disallowed in computing the net operating loss 
pursuant to section 172(d), pro rata. The balance of the reduction, if 
any, is considered to be from the remaining items of tax preference, pro 
rata. For purposes of this subparagraph, deductions not attributable to 
the taxpayer's trade or business which do not relate to items of tax 
preference are considered as being applied in reducing gross income not 
derived from such trade or business before such deductions which do 
relate to items of tax preferences.
    (e) Examples. The principles of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples in each of which the deduction for the personal 
exemption is disregarded and the taxpayer is an individual who is a 
calendar year taxpayer.

    Example 1. The taxpayer has the following items of income and 
deduction for 1970:

Gross income (all business income)..........................    $120,000
Deductions:                                                             
  Nonbusiness deductions....................................      30,000
  Items of tax preference (excess accelerated depreciation              
   on real property held in taxpayer's business)............      80,000
  Other business deductions.................................      50,000
                                                                        

Based on the above figures, the taxpayer has a net operating loss of 
$10,000 (business deductions of $130,000 less business income of 
$120,000, the nonbusiness deductions having been disallowed by reason of 
section 172(d)(4)). The limitation on the amount treated as items of tax 
preference is computed as follows:

Tax preferences..............................................    $80,000
                                                              ==========
Net operating loss................................    $10,000           
Recomputed income or loss:                                              
  Gross income.........................   $120,000                      
  Deductions other than tax preference                                  
   items...............................     80,000                      
                                        -----------                     
Recomputed income.................................     40,000           
                                                   -----------          
Sum of net operating loss and recomputed income...     50,000           
Stock options preference..........................          0           
                                                   -----------          
Limitation...................................................     50,000
                                                                        

Thus, the minimum tax computed under section 56(a) would be 10 percent 
of $20,000 (items of tax preference of $50,000 less the minimum tax 
exemption of $30,000), $1,000 of which would be deferred tax liability 
pursuant to section 56(b).

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example 1 except that the 
other business deductions are $130,000, resulting in a net operating 
loss of $90,000. The limitation on the amount treated as items of tax 
preference is computed as follows:

Tax preferences..............................................    $80,000
                                        ============                    
Net operating loss................................    $90,000           
Recomputed income or loss:                                              
  Gross income.........................   $120,000                      
  Deductions other than tax preference                                  
   items...............................    160,000                      
                                        ------------                    
                                          (40,000)                      
Disallowance of nonbusiness deductions                                  
 under sec. 172(d).....................     30,000                      
                                        -----------                     

[[Page 481]]

                                                                        
Recomputed loss...................................     10,000           
                                                   -----------          
Net operating loss less recomputed loss...........     80,000           
Stock options preference..........................          0           
                                                   -----------          
Limitation...................................................     80,000
                                                                        

Thus, the minimum tax computed under section 56(a) would be 10 percent 
of $50,000 (items of tax preference of $80,000 less the minimum tax 
exemption of $30,000), all of which will be deferred tax liability 
pursuant to section 56(b).

    Example 3. The taxpayer has the following items of income and 
deduction for 1970:

Gross income (all from business):                                       
Ordinary.....................................................    $50,000
  Net section 1201 gains.....................................    120,000
Deductions:                                                             
  Items of tax preference:                                              
    Excess amortization of certified pollution                          
     control facilities...........................    $45,000           
    Capital gains deduction.......................     60,000    105,000
                                                   -----------          
  Other business deductions............  .........  .........     75,000
                                                                        

In addition, the taxpayer has a $55,000 item of tax preference resulting 
from qualified stock options. Based on the above figures, the taxpayer 
has no taxable income and no net operating loss as the capital gains 
deduction is disallowed in determining the net operating loss pursuant 
to section 172(d). The limitation on the amount treated as items of tax 
preference is computed as follows:

Tax preferences..............................................   $160,000
                                        ============                    
Net operating loss................................          0           
Recomputed income or loss:                                              
  Gross income.........................   $170,000                      
  Deductions other than tax preference                                  
   items...............................     75,000                      
                                        ------------                    
Recomputed income.................................    $95,000           
  Plus: Stock options preference..................     55,000           
                                        -----------                     
Limitation...................................................    150,000
                                                                        

Thus, the minimum tax computed under section 56 would be 10 percent of 
$120,000 (items of tax preference of $150,000 less the minimum tax 
exemption of $30,000).

    Example 4. Assume the same facts as in example (3) except that the 
taxpayer has a net operating loss carryover from 1969 of $80,000. The 
taxpayer has $160,000 of tax preferences which are limited to $150,000 
pursuant to Sec. 1.57-4(b)(1). In order to determine the amount of the 
1969 net operating loss which remains as a carryover to 1971, the 1970 
taxable income is redetermined in accordance with section 172(b)(2) and 
the regulations thereunder, as follows:

Gross income--1970..........................................    $170,000
Deductions:                                                             
  Capital gains deduction disallowed business                           
   deductions...................................    $120,000     120,000
                                                 -----------------------
    Taxable income for section 172(b)(2)....................      50,000
                                                                        

Thus, the 1969 net operating loss which remains as a carryover to 1971 
is $30,000. Pursuant to paragraph (b)(2) of this section, the limitation 
on the amount treated as items of tax preference is computed as follows:

Items of tax preference computed with regard to Sec.  1.57-             
 4(b)(1) (per example (3))..................................    $150,000
Less: Lesser of capital gains deduction ($60,000) or amount             
 of reduction in carryover due to its disallowance ($50,000)      50,000
                                                 -------------          
    Limitation..............................................     100,000
                                                                        

Thus, the minimum tax computed under section 56 would be 10 percent of 
$70,000 (items of tax preference of $100,000 less the minimum tax 
exemption of $30,000).

    Example 5. The taxpayer has the following items of income and 
deduction for the taxable year 1970 without regard to any net operating 
loss deduction:

Gross income (all from business):                                       
  Ordinary........................................    $50,000           
  Net section 1201 gain...........................     40,000           
                                                     --------    $90,000
Deductions:                                                             
  Capital gains deduction.........................     20,000           
  Medical expenses ($4,100 actually paid but                            
   allowable only to the extent in excess of 3                          
   percent of adjusted gross income of $70,000)...      2,000           
  Other itemized deductions.......................     40,000           

[[Page 482]]

                                                                        
                                                     --------     62,000
                                                              ----------
    Taxable income (before net operating loss deduction).....     28,000
                                                                        

In addition, the taxpayer has an item of tax preference of $35,000 
resulting from qualified stock options. In 1973, the taxpayer has a net 
operating loss of $60,000 (no portion of which is attributable to excess 
tax preferences pursuant to Sec. 1.56A-2) which is carried back to 1970 
resulting in no taxable income in 1970. In order to determine the amount 
of the 1973 net operating loss which remains as a carryover to 1971, the 
1970 taxable income is redetermined, in accordance with section 
172(b)(2) and the regulations thereunder, as follows:

Gross income.................................................    $90,000
Deductions:                                                             
  Capital gains deduction disallowed..............                      
  Medical expenses ($4,100 actually paid but                            
   allowable only to the extent in excess of 3                          
   percent of adjusted gross income of $90,000)...     $1,400           
  Other itemized deductions.......................     40,000           
                                                     --------    $41,400
    Taxable income for section 172(b)(2)..........  .........     48,600
                                                                        

The limitation on the amount treated as items of tax preference is 
computed as follows:

Items of tax preference:                                                
  Capital gains.................................  ..........     $20,000
  Stock options.................................  ..........      35,000
                                                             -----------
                                                                  55,000
Less:                                                                   
  Lesser of capital gains deduction ($20,000) or amount of              
   reduction in carryover due to its disallowance ($20,600).    (20,000)
                                                 -------------          
    Limitation..............................................      35,000
                                                                        

Thus, the minimum tax for 1970 under section 56 would be 10 percent of 
$5,000 (items of tax preference of $35,000 less the minimum tax 
exemption of $30,000).

    Example 6. Assume the same facts as in example (5) except that the 
1973 net operating loss was $45,000. In this case, the $20,600 increase 
in the 1970 taxable income as redetermined, results in a decrease of 
$17,000 (i.e., the remaining 1973 net operating loss after an initial 
decrease of $28,000 resulting from the 1970 taxable income before 
redetermination). The limitation on the amount treated as items of tax 
preference is computed as follows:

Items of tax preference computed without regard to this                 
 section....................................................     $55,000
Less: Lesser of capital gains deduction ($20,000) or amount             
 of reduction in carryover due to its disallowance ($17,000)    (17,000)
                                                 -------------          
    Limitation..............................................      38,000
                                                                        

Thus, the minimum tax for 1970 under section 56 would be 10 percent of 
$8,000 (items of tax preference of $38,000 less the minimum tax 
exemption of $30,000).

    Example 7. The taxpayer has the following items of income and 
deduction for 1973 without regard to any net operating loss deduction:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Gross income (all from business):                                       
  Ordinary....................................     $100,000             
  Net section 1201 gains......................      120,000             
                                                 ----------     $220,000
Deductions:                                                             
Items of tax preference:                                                
  Excess amortization of certified pollution                            
   control facilities.........................       45,000             
  Capital gains deduction.....................       60,000             
                                               -------------            
                                                    105,000             
  Other business deductions...................       75,000             
                                                 ----------     $180,000
    Taxable income (before net operating loss deduction)...       40,000
                                                                        

In 1972, the taxpayer had a net operating loss of $70,000 which is 
carried forward to 1973; $20,000 of this net operating loss is 
attributable to excess tax preferences. In order to determine the amount 
of the 1972 net operating loss which remains as a carryover to 1974, the 
1973 taxable income is redetermined, in accordance with section 
172(b)(2) and the regulations thereunder, as follows:

Gross income................................................    $220,000
Deductions:                                                             
  Capital gains deduction...................................  Disallowed
  Business deductions.......................................     120,000
                                                 -------------          
    Taxable income per section 172(b)(2)....................     100,000
                                                                        

In this case, the $60,000 increase in the 1972 taxable income as 
redetermined and the $30,000 decrease in the amount of the 1973 net 
operating loss remaining as a carryover to 1974 (i.e., the remaining 
1972 net operating loss after an initial decrease of $40,000 resulting 
from the 1973 taxable income before redetermination) is entirely 
attributable to the disallowance of the capital gains deduction. The 
limitation on the amount treated as items of tax preference is computed 
as follows:

Items of tax preference computed without regard to this                 
 section:                                                               
  Capital gains.............................................     $60,000
  Excess amortization of certified pollution control                    
   facilities...............................................      45,000
                                                 -------------          
                                                                 105,000
Less: Lesser of capital gains deduction (60,000) or amount              
 of reduction in carryover due to its disallowance ($30,000)    (30,000)
                                                 -------------          

[[Page 483]]

                                                                        
                                                                  75,000
Plus: Amount of reduction of carryover (due to disallowance             
 of capital gains deduction) attributable to excess tax                 
 preferences................................................      20,000
                                                 -------------          
    Limitation..............................................      95,000
                                                                        

[T.D. 7564, 43 FR 40476, Sept. 12, 1978, as amended by T.D. 8138, 52 FR 
15309, Apr. 28, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.57-5  Records to be kept.

    (a) In general. The taxpayer shall have available permanent records 
of all the facts necessary to determine with reasonable accuracy the 
amounts described in Sec. 1.57-1. Such records shall include:
    (1) In the case of amounts described in paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.57-
1: the amount and nature of indebtedness outstanding for the taxable 
year and the date or dates on which each such indebtedness was incurred 
or renewed in any form; the amount expended for property held for 
investment during any taxable year during which such indebtedness was 
incurred or renewed; and the manner in which it was determined that 
property was or was not held for investment.
    (2) In the case of amounts described in paragraphs (b), (c), (d), 
(e), and (h) of Sec. 1.57-1:
    (i) The dates, and manner in which, the property was acquired and 
placed in service,
    (ii) The taxpayer's basis on the date the property was acquired and 
the manner in which the basis was determined,
    (iii) An estimate of the useful life (in terms of months, hours of 
use, etc., whichever is appropriate) of the property on the date placed 
in service or an estimate of the number of units to be produced by the 
property on the date the property is placed in service, whichever is 
appropriate, and the manner in which such estimate was determined,
    (iv) The amount and date of all adjustments by the taxpayer to the 
basis of the property and an explanation of the nature of such 
adjustments, and
    (v) In the case of property which has an adjusted basis reflecting 
adjustments taken by another taxpayer with respect to the property or 
taken by the taxpayer with respect to other property, the information 
described in paragraph (a)(2)(i) through (iv) of this section, with 
respect to such other property or other taxpayer.
    (3) In the case of amounts described in paragraph (f) of Sec. 1.57-
1, the fair market value of the shares of stock at the date of exercise 
of the option and the option price and the manner in which each was 
determined.
    (4) In the case of amounts described in paragraph (g) of Sec. 1.57-
1, the amount of debts written off and the amount of the loans 
outstanding for the taxable year and the 5 preceding taxable years or 
such shorter or longer period as is appropriate.
    (b) Net operating losses. The taxpayer shall have available 
permanent records for the first taxable year in which a portion of a net 
operating loss was attributable to items of tax preference (within the 
meaning of Sec. 1.56A-2 (b)) and each succeeding taxable year in which 
there is a net operating loss or a net operating loss carryover a 
portion of which is so attributable. Such records shall include all the 
facts necessary to determine with reasonable accuracy the amount of 
deferred tax liability under section 56, including the amount of the net 
operating loss in each taxable year in which there are items of tax 
preference in excess of the minimum tax exemption (as determined under 
Sec. 1.58-1), the amount of the items of tax preference for each such 
taxable year, the amount by which each such net operating loss reduces 
taxable income in any taxable year, and the amount by which each such 
net operating loss is reduced in any taxable year.

[T.D. 7564, 43 FR 40479, Sept. 12, 1978, as amended by T.D. 8138, 52 FR 
15309, Apr. 28, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.58-1  Minimum tax exemption.

    (a) In general. For purposes of the minimum tax for tax preferences 
(subtitle A, chapter 1A, part VI), the minimum tax exemption is $30,000 
except as otherwise provided in this section.
    (b) Husband and wife. In the case of a married individual filing a 
separate return, section 58(a) provides that the minimum tax exemption 
is $15,000. This rule applies without regard to whether the married 
individual is living together with or apart from his spouse and without 
regard to whether or not

[[Page 484]]

his spouse has any items of tax preference.
    (c) Members of controlled groups--(1) Amount of exemption--(i) 
General rule. Under section 58(b), if a corporation is a component 
member of a controlled group of corporations on December 31 (as defined 
in section 1563 (a) and (b) and the regulations thereunder), the minimum 
tax exemption for such taxable year which includes such December 31 is 
an amount equal to--
    (a) $30,000 divided by the number of corporations which are 
component members of such group on December 31, or
    (b) If an apportionment plan is adopted under subparagraph (3) of 
this paragraph, such portion of the $30,000 as is apportioned to such 
member in accordance with such plan.
    (ii) Consolidated returns. The minimum tax exemption of a controlled 
group all of whose component members join in the filing of a 
consolidated return is $30,000. If there are component members of the 
controlled group which do not join in the filing of a consolidated 
return, and there is no apportionment plan effective under subparagraph 
(3) of this paragraph apportioning the $30,000 among the component 
members filing the consolidated return and the other component members 
of the controlled group, each component member of the controlled group 
(including each component member which joins in filing the consolidated 
return) is treated as a separate corporation for purposes of equally 
apportioning the $30,000 amount under subdivision (i)(a) of this 
subparagraph. In such case, the minimum tax exemption of the 
corporations filing the consolidated return is the sum of the amounts 
apportioned to each component member which joins in the filing of the 
consolidated return.
    (2) Certain short taxable years. If the return of a corporation is 
for a short period which does not include a December 31, and such 
corporation is a component member of a controlled group of corporations 
with respect to such short period, the minimum tax exemption of such 
corporation for such short period is an amount equal to $30,000 divided 
by the number of corporations which are component members of such group 
on the last day of such short period. The minimum tax exemption so 
determined is also subject to the rules of section 443(d) (relating to 
reduction in the amount of the exemption for short periods) and the 
regulations thereunder. For purposes of this subparagraph, the term 
``short period'' does not include any period if the income for such 
period is required to be included in a consolidated return under 
Sec. 1.1502-76(b). The determination of whether a corporation is a 
component member of a controlled group of corporations on the last day 
of a short period is made by applying the definition of ``component 
member'' contained in section 1563(b) and Sec. 1.1563-1 as if the last 
day of such short period were a December 31.
    (3) Apportionment of minimum tax exemption--(i) Apportionment plan-- 
(a) In general. In the case of corporations which are component members 
of a controlled group of corporations on a December 31, a single minimum 
tax exemption may be apportioned among such members if all such members 
consent, in the manner provided in subdivision (ii) of this 
subparagraph, to an apportionment plan with respect to such December 31. 
Such plan must provide for the apportionment of a fixed dollar amount to 
one or more of such members, but in no event may the sum of the amount 
so apportioned exceed $30,000. An apportionment plan is not considered 
as adopted with respect to a particular December 31 until each component 
member which is required to consent to the plan under subdivision 
(ii)(a) of this subparagraph files the original of a statement described 
in such subdivision (or, the original of a statement incorporating its 
consent is filed on its behalf). In the case of a return filed before a 
plan is adopted, the minimum tax exemption for purposes of such return 
is to be equally apportioned in accordance with subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph. If a valid apportionment plan is adopted after the return is 
filed and within the time prescribed in (b) of this subdivision (i), 
such return must be amended (or a claim for refund should be made) to 
reflect the change from equal apportionment.
    (b) Time for adopting plan. A controlled group may adopt an 
apportionment plan with respect to a particular

[[Page 485]]

December 31 only if, at the time such plan is sought to be adopted, 
there is at least 1 year remaining in the statutory period (including 
any extensions thereof) for the assessment of the deficiency against any 
corporation the tax liability of which would be increased by the 
adoption of such plan. If there is less than 1 year remaining with 
respect to any such corporation, the district director or the director 
of the service center with whom such corporation files its income tax 
return will ordinarily, upon request, enter into an agreement to extend 
such statutory period for the limited purpose of assessing any 
deficiency against such corporation attributable to the adoption of such 
apportionment plan.
    (c) Years for which effective. (1) The amount apportioned to a 
component member of a controlled group of corporations in an 
apportionment plan adopted with respect to a particular December 31 
constitutes such member's minimum tax exemption for its taxable year 
including the particular December 31, and for all taxable years 
including succeeding December 31's, unless the apportionment plan is 
amended in accordance with subdivision (iii) of this subparagraph or is 
terminated under paragraph (c)(2) of this subdivision (i). Thus, the 
apportionment plan (including any amendments thereof) has a continuing 
effect and need not be renewed annually.
    (2) If an apportionment plan is adopted with respect to a particular 
December 31, such plan terminates with respect to a succeeding December 
31, if: the controlled group goes out of existence with respect to such 
succeeding December 31 within the meaning of paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 1.1562-5, any corporation which was a component member of such 
group on the particular December 31 is not a component member of such 
group on such succeeding December 31, or any corporation which was not a 
component member of such group on the particular December 31 is a 
component member of such group on such succeeding December 31. An 
apportionment plan, once terminated with respect to a December 31, is no 
longer effective. Accordingly, unless a new apportionment plan is 
adopted, the minimum tax exemption of the component members of the 
controlled group for their taxable years which include such December 31 
and all December 31's thereafter will be determined under subparagraph 
(1) of this paragraph.
    (3) If an apportionment plan is terminated with respect to a 
particular December 31 by reason of the addition or withdrawal of a 
component member, each corporation which is a component member of the 
controlled group on such particular December 31 must, on or before the 
date it files its income tax return for the taxable year which includes 
such particular December 31, notify the district director or the 
director of the service center with whom it files such return to such 
termination. If an apportionment plan is terminated with respect to a 
particular December 31 by reason of the controlled group going out of 
existence, each corporation which was a component member of the 
controlled group on the preceding December 31 must, on or before the 
date it files its income tax return for the taxable year which includes 
such particular December 31, notify the district director or the 
director of the service center with whom it files such return to such 
termination.
    (ii) Consents to plan--(a) General rule. (1) The consent of a 
component member (other than a wholly-owned subsidiary) to an 
apportionment plan with respect to a particular December 31 is to be 
made by means of a statement, signed by any person who is duly 
authorized to act on behalf of the consenting member, stating that such 
member consents to the apportionment plan with respect to such December 
31. The statement must set forth the name, address, taxpayer 
identification number, and taxable year of the consenting component 
member, the amount apportioned to such member under the plan, and the 
internal revenue district or service center where the original of the 
statement is to be filed. The consent of more than one component member 
may be incorporated in a single statement. The original of a statement 
of consent is to be filed with the district director or the director of 
the service center with whom the component member of the group on such 
December 31 which has the taxable

[[Page 486]]

year ending first on or after such date filed its return for such 
taxable year. If two or more component members have the same such 
taxable year, a statement of consent may be filed with the district 
director or the director of the service center with whom the return for 
any such taxable year is filed. The original of a statement of consent 
is to have attached thereto information (referred to in this subdivision 
as ``group identification'') setting forth the name, address, taxpayer 
identification number, and taxable year of each component member of the 
controlled group on such December 31 (including wholly-owned 
subsidiaries) and the amount apportioned to each such member under the 
plan. If more than one original statement is filed, a statement may 
incorporate the group identification by reference to the name, address, 
taxpayer identification number, and taxable year of the component member 
of the group which has attached such group identification to the 
original of its statement.
    (2) Each component member of the group on such December 31 (other 
than wholly-owned subsidiaries) must attach a copy of its consent (or a 
copy of the statement incorporating its consent) to the income tax 
return, amended return, or claim for refund filed with its district 
director or director of the service center for the taxable year 
including such date. Such copy must either have attached thereto 
information on group identification or must incorporate such information 
by reference to the name, address, taxpayer identification number, and 
taxable year of the component member of the group which has attached 
such information to its income tax return, amended return, or claim for 
refund filed with the same district director or director of the service 
center for the taxable year including such date.
    (b) Wholly-owned subsidiaries. (1) Each component member of a 
controlled group which is a wholly-owned subsidiary of such group with 
respect to a December 31 is deemed to consent to an apportionment plan 
with respect to such December 31, provided each component member of the 
group which is not a wholly-owned subsidiary consents to the plan. For 
purposes of this paragraph, a component member of a controlled group is 
considered to be a wholly-owned subsidiary of the group with respect to 
a December 31, if, on each day preceding such date and during its 
taxable year which includes such date, all of its stock is owned 
directly by one or more corporations which are component members of the 
group on such December 31.
    (2) Each wholly-owned subsidiary of a controlled group with respect 
to a December 31 must attach a statement containing the information 
which is required to be set forth in a statement of consent to an 
apportionment plan with respect to such December 31 to the income tax 
return, amended return, or claim for refund filed with its district 
director or director of the service center for the taxable year which 
includes such date. Such statement must either have attached thereto 
information on group identification or incorporate such information by 
reference to the name, address, taxpayer identification number, and 
taxable year of a component member of the group which has attached such 
information to its income tax return, amended return, or claim for 
refund filed with the same district director or director of the service 
center for the taxable year including such date.
    (iii) Amendment of plan. An apportionment plan adopted with respect 
to a December 31 by a controlled group of corporations may be amended 
with respect to such December 31 or with respect to any succeeding 
December 31 for which the plan is effective under subdivision (i)(c) of 
this subparagraph. An apportionment plan must be amended with respect to 
a particular December 31 and the amendments to the plan are effective 
only if adopted in accordance with the rules prescribed in this 
paragraph for the adoption of an original plan with respect to such 
December 31.
    (iv) Component members filing consolidated return. If the component 
members of a controlled group of corporations on a December 31 include 
corporations which join the filing of a consolidated return, the 
corporations filing the consolidated return are treated as a single 
component member for purposes of this subparagraph. Thus, for example, 
only

[[Page 487]]

one consent executed by the common parent to an apportionment plan filed 
pursuant to this section is required on behalf of the component members 
filing the consolidated return.
    (d) Estates and trusts. Section 58(c)(2) provides that, in the case 
of an estate or trust, the minimum tax exemption applicable to such 
estate or trust is an amount which bears the same ratio to $30,000 as 
the portion of the sum of the items of tax preference apportioned to the 
estate or trust bears to the full sum before apportionment. For example, 
if one-third of the sum of the items of tax preference of a trust are 
subject to tax at the trust level after apportionment under section 
58(c)(1) and Sec. 1.58-3, the trust's minimum tax exemption is $10,000. 
See Sec. 1.58-3 for rules with respect to the apportionment of items of 
tax preference of an estate or trust.
    (e) Short taxable year. See section 443(d) and Sec. 1.443-1(d) with 
respect to reduction in the amount of the minimum tax exemption in the 
case of a short taxable year.

[T.D. 7564, 43 FR 40479, Sept. 12, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 1.58-2  General rules for conduit entities; partnerships and partners.

    (a) General rules for conduit entities. Sections 1.58-3 through 
1.58-6 provide rules under which items of tax preference of an estate, 
trust, electing small business corporation, common trust fund, regulated 
investment company, or real estate investment trust (referred to in this 
paragraph as the ``conduit entity'') are treated as items of tax 
preference of the beneficiaries, shareholders, participants, etc. 
(referred to in this paragraph as the ``distributees''). Where an item 
of tax preference of a conduit entity is so apportioned to a 
distributee, the item of tax preference retains its character in the 
hands of the distributee and is adjusted to reflect:
    (1) The separate items of income and deduction of the distributee 
and (2) the tax status of the distributee as an individual, corporation, 
etc. For example, if a trust has $100,000 of capital gains for the 
taxable year, all of which are distributed to A, an individual, the item 
of tax preference apportioned to A under section 57(a)(9) (and 
Sec. 1.57-1(i)(1)) is $50,000. If, however, A had a net capital loss for 
the taxable year of $60,000 without regard to the distribution from the 
trust, the trust tax preference would be adjusted in the hands of A to 
reflect the separate items of income and deduction passed through to the 
distributee, or, in this case, to reflect the net section 1201 gain to A 
of $40,000. Thus, A's capital gains items of tax preference would be 
$20,000. By application of this rule, A, in effect, treats capital gains 
distributed to him from the trust the same as his other capital gains in 
computing his capital gains item of tax preference. If A had been a 
corporation, the trust tax preference would be adjusted both to reflect 
the capital loss and to reflect A's tax status by recomputing the 
capital gains item of tax preference (after adjustment for the capital 
loss) under section 57(a)(9)(B) and Sec. 1.57-1(i)(2). Similarly, if 
depreciation on section 1245 property subject to a net lease (as defined 
in section 57(a)(3) and Sec. 1.57-1(c)) is apportioned from a conduit 
entity to a corporation (other than a personal holding company or 
electing small business corporation), the amount so apportioned to the 
corporation is not treated as an item of tax preference to such 
corporation since such item is not an item of tax preference in the case 
of a corporation (other than a personal holding company or an electing 
small business corporation).
    (b) Partnerships and partners. (1) Section 701 provides that a 
partnership as such is not subject to the income tax imposed by chapter 
1. Thus, a partnership as such is not subject to the minimum tax for tax 
preferences. Section 702 provides that, in determining his income tax, 
each partner is to take into account separately his distributive share 
of certain items of income, deductions, etc. of the partnership and 
other items of income, gain, loss, deduction, or credit of the 
partnership to the extent provided by regulations prescribed by the 
Secretary or his delegate. Accordingly, each partner, in computing his 
items of tax preference, must take into account separately those items 
of income and deduction of the partnership which enter into the

[[Page 488]]

computation of the items of tax preference in accordance with 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph.
    (2) Pursuant to section 702, each partner must, solely for purposes 
of the minimum tax for tax preferences (to the extent not otherwise 
required to be taken into account separately under section 702 and the 
regulations thereunder), take into account separately in the manner 
provided in subchapter K and the regulations thereunder those items of 
income and deduction of the partnership which enter into the computation 
of the items of tax preference specified in section 57 and the 
regulations thereunder. A partner must, for this purpose, take into 
account separately his distributive share of:
    (i) Investment interest expense (as defined in section 57(b)(2)(D) 
determined at the partnership level;
    (ii) Investment income (as defined in section 57(b)(2)(B) determined 
at the partnership level;
    (iii) Investment expenses (as defined in section 57(b)(2)(C)) 
determined at the partnership level;
    (iv) With respect to each section 1250 property (as defined in 
section 1250(c)), the amount of the deduction allowable for the taxable 
year for exhaustion, wear and tear, obsolescence, or amortization and 
the deduction which would have been allowable for the taxable year had 
the property been depreciated under the straight line method each 
taxable year of its useful life (determined without regard to section 
167(k)) for which the partnership has held the property;
    (v) With respect to each item of section 1245 property (as defined 
in section 1245(a)(3)) which is subject to a net lease, the amount of 
the deduction allowable for exhaustion, wear and tear, obsolescence, or 
amortization and the deduction which would have been allowable for the 
taxable year had the property been depreciated under the straight line 
method for each taxable year of its useful life for which the 
partnership has held the property;
    (vi) With respect to each certified pollution control facility for 
which an election is in effect under section 169, the amount of the 
deduction allowable for the taxable year under such section and the 
deduction which would have been allowable under section 167 had no 
election been in effect under section 169;
    (vii) With respect to each unit of railroad rolling stock for which 
an election is in effect under section 184, the amount of the deduction 
allowable for the taxable year under such section and the deduction 
which would have been allowable under section 167 had no election been 
in effect under section 184;
    (viii) In the case of a partnership which is a financial institution 
to which section 585 or 593 applies, the amount of the deduction 
allowable for the taxable year for a reasonable addition to a reserve 
for bad debts and the amount of the deduction that would have been 
allowable for the taxable year had the institution maintained its bad 
debt reserve for all taxable years on the basis of actual experience; 
and
    (ix) With respect to each mineral property, the deduction for 
depletion allowable under section 611 for the taxable year and the 
adjusted basis of the property at the end of the taxable year 
(determined without regard to the depreciation deduction for the taxable 
year).

If, pursuant to section 743 (relating to optional adjustment to basis), 
the basis of partnership property is adjusted with respect to a 
transferee partner due to an election being in effect under section 754 
(relating to manner of electing optional adjustment), items representing 
amortization, depreciation, depletion, gain or loss, and the adjusted 
basis of property subject to depletion, described above, shall be 
adjusted to reflect the basis adjustment under section 743.
    (3) The minimum tax is effective for taxable years ending after 
December 31, 1969. Thus, subparagraph (2) of this paragraph is 
inapplicable in the case of items of income or deduction paid or accrued 
in a partnership's taxable year ending on or before December 31, 1969.

[T.D. 7564, 43 FR 40481, Sept. 12, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 1.58-3  Estates and trusts.

    (a) In general. (1) Section 58(c)(1) provides that the sum of the 
items of tax preference of an estate or trust shall be apportioned 
between the estate or

[[Page 489]]

trust and the beneficiary on the basis of the income of the estate or 
trust allocable to each. Income for this purpose is the income received 
or accrued by the trust or estate which is not subject to current 
taxation either in the hands of the trust or estate or the beneficiary 
by reason of an item of tax preference. The character of the amounts 
distributed is determined under section 652(b) or 662(b) and the 
regulations thereunder.
    (2) Additional computations required by reason of excess 
distributions are to be made in accordance with the principles of 
sections 665 through 669 and the regulations thereunder.
    (3) In the case of a charitable remainder annuity trust (as defined 
in section 664(d)(1) and Sec. 1.664-2) or a charitable remainder 
unitrust (as defined in section 664(d)(2) and Sec. 1.664-3), the 
determination of the income not subject to current taxation by reason of 
an item of tax preference is to be made as if such trust were generally 
subject to taxation. Where income of such a trust is not subject to 
current taxation in accordance with this section and is distributed to a 
beneficiary in a taxable year subsequent to the taxable year in which 
the trust received or accrued such income, the items of tax preference 
relating to such income are apportioned to the beneficiary in such 
subsequent year (without credit for minimum tax paid by the trust with 
respect to items of tax preference which are subject to the minimum tax 
by reason of section 664(c)).
    (4) Items of tax preference apportioned to a beneficiary pursuant to 
this section are to be taken into account by the beneficiary in his 
taxable year within or with which ends the taxable year of the estate or 
trust during which it has such items of tax preference.
    (5) Where a trust or estate has items of income or deduction which 
enter into the computation of the excess investment interest item of tax 
preference, but such items do not result in an item of tax preference at 
the trust or estate level, each beneficiary must take into account, in 
computing his excess investment interest, the portion of such items 
distributed to him. The determination of the portion of such items 
distributed to each beneficiary is made in accordance with the character 
rules of section 652(b) or 662(b) and the regulations thereunder.
    (6) Where, pursuant to subpart E of part 1 of subchapter J (sections 
671 through 678), the grantor of a trust or another person is treated as 
the owner of any portion of the trust, there shall be included in 
computing the items of tax preference of such person those items of 
income, deductions, and credits against tax of the trust which are 
attributable to that portion of the trust to the extent such items are 
taken into account under section 671 and the regulations thereunder. Any 
remaining portion of the trust is subject to the provisions of this 
section.
    (b) Examples. The principles of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples in each of which it is assumed that none of the 
distributions are accumulation distributions (see sections 665 through 
669 and the regulations thereunder):

    Example 1. Trust A, with one income beneficiary, has the following 
items of income and deduction without regard to the deduction for 
distributions:

Income:                                                                 
  Business income...........................................    $200,000
  Investment income.........................................      20,000
                                                             -----------
                                                                 220,000
                                                             ===========
Deductions:                                                             
  Business deductions (nonpreference).......................     100,000
  Investment interest expense...............................      80,000
                                                             -----------
                                                                 180,000
                                                                        

Based on the above figures, the trust has $100,000 of taxable income 
without regard to items which enter into the computation of excess 
investment interest and the deduction for distributions. The trust also 
has $60,000 of excess investment interests, resulting in $40,000 of 
distributable net income. Thus, $60,000 of the $100,000 of noninvestment 
income is not subject to current taxation by reason of the excess 
investment interest.
    (a) If $40,000 is distributed to the beneficiary, the beneficiary 
will normally be subject to tax on the full amount received and the 
``sheltered'' portion of the income will remain at the trust level. 
Thus, none of the excess investment interest item of tax preference is 
apportioned to the beneficiary.
    (b) If the beneficiary receives $65,000 from the trust, the 
beneficiary is still subject to

[[Page 490]]

tax on only $40,000 (the amount of the distributable net income) and 
thus, is considered to have received $25,000 of business income 
``sheltered'' by excess investment interest. Thus, $25,000 of the 
$60,000 of excess investment interest of the trust is apportioned to the 
beneficiary.

    Example 2. Trust B has $150,000 of net section 1201 gain.
    (a) If none of the gain is distributed to the beneficiaries, none of 
the capital gains item of tax preference is apportioned to the 
beneficiaries.
    (b) If all or a part of the gain is distributed to the 
beneficiaries, a proportionate part of the capital gains item of tax 
preference is apportioned to the beneficiaries. If any of the 
beneficiaries are corporations the capital gains item of tax preference 
is adjusted in the hands of the corporations as provided in Sec. 1.58-
2(a).

    Example 3. Trust C has taxable income of $200,000 computed without 
regard to depreciation on section 1250 property and the deduction for 
distributions. The depreciation on section 1250 property held by the 
trust is $160,000. The trust instrument provides for income to be 
retained by the trust in an amount equal to the depreciation on the 
property determined under the straight line method (which method has 
been used for this purpose for the entire period the trust has held the 
property) which, in this case is equal to $100,000. The $60,000 excess 
of the accelerated depreciation of $160,000 over the straight line 
amount which would have resulted had the property been depreciated under 
that method for the entire period for which the trust has held the 
property is an item of tax preference pursuant to section 57(a)(2). Of 
the remaining $100,000 of net income of the trust (after the reserve for 
depreciation), 80 percent is distributed to the beneficiaries. Pursuant 
to sections 167(h) and 642(e), 80 percent of the remaining $60,000 of 
depreciation deduction (or $48,000) is taken as a deduction directly by 
the beneficiaries and ``shelters'' the income received by the 
beneficiaries. Thus, the full $48,000 deduction taken by the 
beneficiaries is ``excess accelerated depreciation'' on section 1250 
property and is an item of tax preference in the hands of the 
beneficiaries. None of the remaining $12,000 of ``excess accelerated 
depreciation'' is apportioned to the beneficiaries since this amount 
``shelters'' income retained at the trust level.

    Example 4. G creates a trust the ordinary income of which is payable 
to his adult son. Ten years from the date of the transfer, corpus is to 
revert to G. G retains no other right or power which would cause him to 
be treated as an owner under subpart E of part 1 of subchapter J 
(section 671 and following). Under the terms of the trust instrument and 
applicable local law capital gains must be applied to corpus. During the 
taxable year 1970 the trust has $200,000 income from dividends and 
interest and a net long-term capital gain of $100,000. Since the capital 
gain is held or accumulated for future distribution to G, he is treated 
under section 677(a)(2) as an owner of a portion of the trust to which 
the gain is attributable. Therefore, he must include the capital gain in 
the computation of his taxable income in 1970 and the capital gain item 
of tax preference is treated as being directly received by G. 
Accordingly, no adjustment is made to the trust's minimum tax exemption 
by reason of the capital gain.

    Example 5. For its taxable year 1971 the trust referred to in 
example (4) has taxable income of $200,000 computed without regard to 
depreciation on section 1250 property and the deduction for 
distributions. The depreciation on section 1250 property held by the 
trust is $160,000. The trust instrument provides for income to be 
retained by the trust in an amount equal to the depreciation on the 
property determined for purposes of the Federal income tax. If the 
property had been depreciated under the straight line method for the 
entire period for which the trust held the property the resulting 
depreciation deduction would have been $100,000. The $60,000 excess is, 
therefore, an item of tax preference pursuant to section 57(a)(2) and 
Sec. 1.57-1(d). Since this amount of ``income'' is held or accumulated 
for future distributions to G, he is treated under section 677(a)(2) as 
an owner of a portion of the trust to which such income is attributable. 
Therefore, section 671 requires that in computing the tax liability of 
the grantor the income, deductions, and credits against tax of the trust 
which are attributable to such portion shall be taken into account. 
Thus, the grantor has received $160,000 of income and is entitled to a 
depreciation deduction in the same amount. The $60,000 item of tax 
preference resulting from the excess depreciation is treated as being 
directly received by G as he has directly received the income sheltered 
by that preference. Accordingly, no adjustment is made to the trust's 
minimum tax exemption by reason of such depreciation.

[T.D. 7564, 43 FR 40482, Sept. 12, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 1.58-3T  Treatment of non-alternative tax itemized deductions by trusts and estates and their beneficiaries in taxable years beginning after December 31, 
          1982 (temporary).

    For purposes of section 58(c), in taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1982, itemized deductions of a trust or estate which are 
not alternative tax itemized deductions (as defined in section 
55(e)(1)), shall be treated as items

[[Page 491]]

of tax preference and apportioned between trusts and their 
beneficiaries, and estates and their beneficiaries.

[T.D. 8083, 51 FR 15320, Apr. 23, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 1.58-4  Electing small business corporations.

    (a) In general. Section 58(d)(1) provides rules for the 
apportionment of the items of tax preference of an electing small 
business corporation among the shareholders of such corporation. Section 
58(d)(2) provides rules for the imposition of the minimum tax on an 
electing small business corporation with respect to certain capital 
gains. For purposes of section 58(d) and this section, the items of tax 
preference are computed at the corporate level as if section 57 
generally applied to the corporation. However, the items of tax 
preference so computed are treated as items of tax preference of the 
shareholders of such corporation and not as items of tax preference of 
such corporation (except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section). 
The items of tax preference specified in section 57(a)(1) and Sec. 1.57-
1(a) (excess investment interest) and section 57(a)(3) and Sec. 1.57-
1(c) (accelerated depreciation on section 1245 property subject to a net 
lease), while generally inapplicable to corporations, are included as 
items of tax preference in the case of an electing small business 
corporation.
    (b) Apportionment to shareholders. (1) The items of tax preference 
of an electing small business corporation, other than the capital gains 
item of tax preference described in paragraph (c) of this section, are 
apportioned pro rata among the shareholders of such corporation in a 
manner consistent with section 1374(c)(1). Thus, with respect to the 
items of tax preference of the electing small business corporation, 
there is to be treated as items of tax preference of each shareholder a 
pro rata share of such items computed as follows:
    (i) Divide the total amount of such items of tax preference of the 
corporation by the number of days in the taxable year of the 
corporation, thus determining the daily amount of such items of tax 
preference.
    (ii) Determine for each day the shareholder's portion of the daily 
amount of each such item of tax preference by applying to such amount 
the ratio which the stock owned by the shareholder on that day bears to 
the total stock outstanding on that day.
    (iii) Total the shareholder's daily portions of each such item of 
tax preference of the corporation for it taxable year.

Amounts taken into account by shareholders in accordance with this 
paragraph are considered to consist of a pro rata share of each item of 
tax preference of the corporation. Thus, for example, if the corporation 
has $50,000 of excess investment interest and $150,000 of excess 
accelerated depreciation on section 1250 property and a shareholder, in 
accordance with this paragraph, takes into account $60,000 of the total 
$200,000 of tax preference items of the corporation, one-fourth 
($50,000<divide>$200,000) of the $60,000, or $15,000, taken into account 
by the shareholder is considered excess investment interest and three-
fourths of the $60,000, or $45,000, is considered excess accelerated 
depreciation on section 1250 property.
    (2) Items of tax preference apportioned to a shareholder pursuant to 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph are taken into account by the 
shareholder for the shareholder's taxable year in which or with which 
the taxable year of the corporation ends, except that, in the case of 
the death of a shareholder during any taxable year of the corporation 
(during which the corporation is an electing small business 
corporation), the items of tax preference of the corporation for such 
taxable year are taken into account for the final taxable year of the 
shareholder.
    (c) Capital gains. (1) Capital gains of an electing small business 
corporation, other than those capital gains subject to tax under section 
1378, do not result in an item of tax preference at the corporate level 
since, in applying the formula specified in sections 57(a)(9)(B) and 
Sec. 1.57-1(i)(2), the rate of tax on capital gains (and the resulting 
tax) at the corporate level is zero. Under section 1375 (a) shareholders 
of an electing small business corporation take into account the capital 
gains of the corporation (including capital gains subject to tax under 
section 1378). Therefore, the computation of the capital

[[Page 492]]

gains item of tax preference at the shareholder level, with respect to 
such capital gains, is taken into account automatically by operation of 
section 57(a)(9) and Sec. 1.57-1(i). To avoid double inclusion of the 
capital gains item of tax preference by a shareholder with respect to 
capital gains subject to tax under section 1378, the capital gains item 
of tax preference which results at the corporate level by reason of 
section 58 (d)(2) is not treated under section 58 (d)(1) as an item of 
tax preference of the shareholders of the corporation.
    (2) The capital gains item of tax preference of an electing small 
business corporation subject to the tax imposed by section 1378 is the 
excess of the amount of tax computed under section 1378(b)(2) over the 
sum of--
    (i) The amount of tax that would be computed under section 
1378(b)(2) if the following amount were excluded:
    (a) That portion of the net section 1201 gain of the corporation 
described in section 1378(b)(1), or
    (b) If section 1378(c)(3) applies, that portion of the net section 
1201 gain attributable to the property described in section 1378(c)(3), 
and
    (ii) The amount of tax imposed under section 1378 divided by the sum 
of the normal tax rate and the surtax rate under section 11 for the 
taxable year.
    (3) The principles of this paragraph may be illustrated by the 
following example.

    Example. Corporation X is a calendar year taxpayer and an electing 
small business corporation. For its taxable year 1971 the corporation 
has net section 1201 gain of $650,000 and taxable income of $800,000 
(including the net section 1201 gain). Although X's election under 
section 1372(a) has been in effect for its three immediately preceding 
taxable years, X is subject to the tax imposed by section 1378 for 1971 
since it has net section 1201 gain (in the amount of $200,000) 
attributable to property with a substituted basis. The tax computed 
under section 1378(b)(1) is $187,500 (30 percent of ($650,000 minus 
$25,000)) and under section 1378(b)(2) is $377,500 (22 percent of 
$800,000 plus 26 percent of $775,000). By reason of the limitation 
imposed by section 1378(c) the tax actually imposed by section 1378 is 
$60,000 (30 percent of $200,000, the net section 1201 gain). The tax 
computed under section 1378(b)(2) with the modification required under 
subparagraph (2)(i) of this paragraph is $281,500 (22 percent of 
$600,000 plus 26 percent of $575,000). Thus, the 1971 capital gains item 
of tax preference X is $75,000 computed as follows:

1. Tax computed under 1378(b) (2)...........................    $377,500
2. Tax computed under 1378(b) (2) with modification.........     281,500
                                                             -----------
3. Excess...................................................      96,000
4. Tax actually imposed under 1378..........................      60,000
                                                             -----------
5. Difference...............................................      36,000
                                                             ===========
6. Normal tax rate plus surtax rate.........................         .48
7. Tax preference (line 5 divided by line 6)................     $75,000
                                                                        

In addition each shareholder of X will take into account his 
distributive share of the $650,000 of net section 1201 gain of X less 
the taxes paid by X under sections 56 and 1378 on the gain

[T.D. 7564, 43 FR 40483, Sept. 12, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 1.58-5  Common trust funds.

    Section 58(e) provides that each participant in a common trust fund 
(as defined in section 584 and the regulations thereunder) is to treat 
as items of tax preference his proportionate share of the items of tax 
preference of the fund computed as if the fund were an individual 
subject to the minimum tax. The participant's proportionate share of the 
items of tax preference of the fund is determined as if the participant 
had realized, or incurred, his pro rata share of items of income, gain, 
loss, or deduction of the fund directly from the source from which 
realized or incurred by the fund. The participant's pro rata share of 
such items is determined in a manner consistent with section 1.584-2(c). 
Items of tax preference apportioned to a participant pursuant to this 
paragraph are taken into account by the participant for the 
participant's taxable year in which or with which the taxable year of 
the trust ends.

[T.D. 7564, 43 FR 40484, Sept. 12, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 1.58-6  Regulated investment companies; real estate investment trusts.

    (a) In general. Section 58(f) provides rules with respect to the 
determination of the items of tax preference of regulated investment 
companies (as defined in section 851) and their shareholders and real 
estate investment trusts (as defined in section 856) and their 
shareholders, or holders of beneficial interest. In general, the items 
of tax preference of such companies and such trusts are determined at 
the company

[[Page 493]]

or trust level and the items of tax preference so determined (other than 
the capital gains item of tax preference (sections 57(a)(9) and 
Sec. 1.57-1(i)) and, in the case of a real estate investment trust, 
accelerated depreciation on section 1250 property (sections 57(a)(2) and 
Sec. 1.57-1(b)) are treated as items of tax preference of the 
shareholders, or holders of beneficial interest, in the same proportion 
that the dividends (other than capital gains dividends) paid to each 
such shareholder, or holder of beneficial interest, bear to the taxable 
income of such company or such trust determined without regard to the 
deduction for dividends paid. In no case, however, is such proportion to 
be considered in excess of 100 percent. For example, if a regulated 
investment company has items of tax preference of $500,000 for the 
taxable year, none of which resulted from capital gains, and distributes 
dividends in an amount equal to 90 percent of its taxable income, each 
shareholder treats his share of 90 percent of the company's items of tax 
preference, or (a proportionate share of) $450,000, as items of tax 
preference of the shareholder. The remaining $50,000 constitutes items 
of tax preference of the company. Amounts treated under this paragraph 
as items of tax preference of the shareholders, or holders of beneficial 
interest, are deemed to be derived proportionately from each item of tax 
preference of the company or trust, other than the capital gains item of 
tax preference and, in the case of a real estate investment trust, 
accelerated depreciation on section 1250 property. Such amounts are 
taken into account by the shareholders, or holders of beneficial 
interest, in the same taxable year in which the dividends on which the 
apportionment is based are includible in income. The minimum tax 
exemption of the trust or company shall not be reduced because a portion 
of the trust's or company's items of tax preference are allocated to the 
shareholders or holders of beneficial interests.
    (b) Capital gains. Section 58(g)(1) provides that a regulated 
investment company or real estate investment trust does not treat as an 
item of tax preference the capital gains item of tax preference under 
section 57(a)(9) (and Sec. 1.57-1(i)) to the extent that such item is 
attributable to amounts taken into income by the shareholders of such 
company under section 852(b)(3) or by the shareholders or holders of 
beneficial interest of such trust under section 857(b)(3). Thus, such a 
company or trust computes its capital gains item of tax preference on 
the basis of its net section 1201 gain less the sum of (1) the capital 
gains dividend (as defined in section 852(b)(3)(C) or 857(b)(3)(C)) for 
the taxable year of the company or trust plus (2), in the case of a 
regulated investment company, that portion of the undistributed capital 
gains designated, pursuant to section 852(b)(3)(D) and the regulations 
thereunder, by the company to be includible in the shareholder's return 
as long-term capital gains for the shareholders's taxable year in which 
the last day of the company's taxable years falls. Amounts treated under 
section 852(b)(3) or 857(b)(3) as long-term capital gains of 
shareholders, or holders of beneficial interest, are automatically 
included, pursuant to sections 57(a)(9) and 1.57-1(i), in the 
computation of the capital gains item of tax preference of the 
shareholders, or holders of beneficial interest.
    (c) Accelerated depreciation on section 1250 property. In the case 
of a real estate investment trust, all of the items of tax preference 
resulting from accelerated depreciation on section 1250 property held by 
the trust (section 57(a)(2) and Sec. 1.57-1(b)) are treated as items of 
tax preference of the trust, and, thus, none are treated as items of tax 
preference of the shareholder, or holder of beneficial interest.

[T.D. 7564, 43 FR 40484, Sept. 12, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 1.58-7  Tax preferences attributable to foreign sources; preferences other than capital gains and stock options.

    (a) In general. Section 58(g)(1) provides that except in the case of 
the stock options item of tax preference (section 57(a)(6) and 
Sec. 1.57-1(f)) and the capital gains item of tax preference (section 
57(a)(9) and Sec. 1.57-1(i)), items of tax preference which are 
attributable to sources within any foreign country or possession of the 
United States shall, for purposes of section 56, be

[[Page 494]]

taken into account only to the extent that such items reduce the tax 
imposed by chapter 1 (other than the minimum tax under section 56) on 
income derived from sources within the United States. Items of tax 
preference from sources within any foreign country or possession of the 
United States reduce the chapter 1 tax on income from sources within the 
United States to the extent the deduction relating to such preferences, 
in combination with other foreign deductions, exceed the income from 
such sources and, in effect, offset income from sources within the 
United States. Items of tax preference, for this purpose, are determined 
after application of Sec. 1.57-4 (relating to limitation on amounts 
treated as items of tax preference). In the case of a taxpayer who 
deducted foreign taxes under section 164 for a taxable year, the 
provisions of this section shall be applied (without regard to section 
275(a)(4)) as if he had elected the overall foreign tax credit 
limitation under section 904(a) (2) for such year.
    (b) Preferences attributable to foreign sources--(1) Preferences 
other than excess investment interest. Except in the case of excess 
investment interest (see subparagraph (2) of this paragraph), an item of 
tax preference to which this section applies is attributable to sources 
within a foreign country or possession of the United States to the 
extent such item is attributable to a deduction properly allocable or 
apportionable to an item or class of gross income from sources within a 
foreign country or possession of the United States under the principles 
of section 862(b), or section 863, and the regulations thereunder. 
Where, in the case of income partly from sources within the United 
States and partly from sources within a foreign country or possession of 
the United States, taxable income is computed before apportionment to 
domestic and foreign sources, and is then apportioned by processes or 
formulas of general apportionment (pursuant to section 863(b) and the 
regulations thereunder), deductions attributable to such taxable income 
are considered to be proportionately from sources within the United 
States and within the foreign country or possession of the United States 
on the same basis as taxable income.
    (2) Excess investment interest--(i) Per-country limitation. (a) In 
the case of a taxpayer on the per-country foreign tax credit limitation 
under section 904(a) for the taxable year, excess investment interest 
(as defined in section 57(b)(1)), and the resulting item of tax 
preference, is attributable to sources within a foreign country or a 
possession of the United States to the extent that investment interest 
expense attributable to income from sources within such foreign country 
or possession of the United States exceeds the net investment income 
from sources within such foreign country or such possession. For this 
purpose, net investment income from within a foreign country or 
possession of the United States is the excess (if any) of the investment 
income from sources within such country or possession over the 
investment expenses attributable to income from sources within such 
country or such possession. For the definition of investment interest 
expense see section 57(b)(2)(D); for the definition of investment income 
see section 57(b)(2)(B); for the definition of investment expense see 
section 57(b)(2)(C).
    (b) If the taxpayer's excess investment interest computed on a 
worldwide basis is less than the taxpayer's total separately determined 
excess investment interest (as defined in this subdivision (b)), the 
amount of the taxpayer's excess investment interest from each foreign 
country or possession is the amount which bears the same relationship to 
the taxpayer's excess investment interest from each such country or 
possession, determined without regard to this subdivision (b), as the 
taxpayer's worldwide excess investment interest bears to the taxpayer's 
total separately determined excess investment interest. For purposes of 
this subdivision (b), the taxpayer's total separately determined excess 
investment interest is the sum of the total excess investment interest 
determined without regard to this subdivision (b) plus the taxpayer's 
excess investment interest from sources within the United States 
determined in a manner consistent with (a) of this subdivision (i).

[[Page 495]]

    (ii) Overall limitation. In the case of a taxpayer who has elected 
the overall foreign tax credit limitation under section 904(a)(2) for 
the taxable year, excess investment interest (as defined in section 
57(b)(1)), and the resulting item of tax preference, is attributable to 
sources within any foreign country or possession of the United States to 
the extent that investment interest expense attributable to income from 
such sources exceeds the sum of (a) the net investment income from such 
sources plus (b) the excess, if any, of net investment income from 
sources within the United States over investment interest expense 
attributable to sources within the United States. For this purpose, net 
investment income from sources within any foreign country or possession 
of the United States is the excess (if any) of the investment income 
from all such sources over the investment expenses attributable to 
income from such sources. For the definition of investment interest 
expense see section 57(b)(2)(D) for the definition of investment income 
see section 57(b)(2)(B); for the definition of investment expense see 
section 57(b)(2)(C).
    (iii) Allocation of expenses. The determination of the investment 
interest expense and investment expenses attributable to a foreign 
country or possession of the United States is made in a manner 
consistent with subparagraph (1) of this paragraph.
    (iv) Attribution of certain interest deductions to foreign sources. 
Where net investment income from sources within any foreign country or 
possession has the effect of offsetting investment interest expense 
attributable to income from sources within the United States, the 
deductions for the investment interest expense so offset are, for 
purposes of Sec. 1.58-7(c) (relating to reduction in taxes on United 
States source income), treated as deductions attributable to income from 
sources within the foreign country or possession from which such net 
investment income is derived. Such an offset will occur where there is 
an excess of investment interest expense attributable to income from 
sources within the United States over net investment income from such 
sources and (a) in the case of a taxpayer on the per-country foreign tax 
credit limitation, an excess of net investment income from sources 
within a foreign country or possession of the United States over 
investment interest expense from within such foreign country or 
possession, or (b) in the case of a taxpayer who has elected the overall 
foreign tax credit limitation, there is an excess of net investment 
income from sources within foreign countries or possessions of the 
United States over investment interest expense attributable to income 
from within such sources.
    (v) Separate limitation on interest income. Where a taxpayer has 
income described in section 904(f)(2) (relating to interest income 
subject to the separate foreign tax credit limitation) or expenses 
attributable to such income, the determination of the excess investment 
interest resulting therefrom must be determined separately with respect 
to such income and the expenses properly allocable or apportionable 
thereto in the same manner as such determination is made in the case of 
a taxpayer on the per-country foreign tax credit limitation for the 
taxable year (see subdivision (i) of this subparagraph).
    (vi) Examples. The principles of this subparagraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples in each of which the taxpayer is 
an individual and a citizen of the United States:

    Example 1. The taxpayer's only items of income and deduction 
relating to excess investment interest are as follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    United                                      
                                                                    States      France      Germany      Total  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Investment income from sources within...........................   $150,000    $120,000    $180,000    $450,000 
Investment expenses relating to income from sources within......   (100,000)    (90,000)   (120,000)   (310,000)
                                                                 -----------------------------------------------
Net investment income...........................................     50,000      30,000      60,000     140,000 
Investment interest expense relating to income from sources                                                     
 within.........................................................   (110,000)    (70,000)    (50,000)   (230,000)
                                                                 -----------------------------------------------
(Excess) of investment interest expense over net investment                                                     
 income.........................................................    (60,000)    (40,000)    *10,000     (90,000)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Excess of net investment income over investment interest expense.                                              


[[Page 496]]

    (a) If the taxpayer has elected the overall foreign tax credit 
limitation, his excess investment interest from sources within any 
foreign countries or possessions of the United States determined under 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph is computed as follows:

Investment interest:                                                    
  French...........................   ($70,000)                         
  German...........................    (50,000)               ($120,000)
                                    ------------                        
Net investment income:                                                  
  Investment income:                                                    
    French.........................    120,000                          
    German.........................    180,000     $300,000             
                                    ------------                        
Less:                                                                   
  Investment expenses:                                                  
    French.........................    (90,000)                         
    German.........................   (120,000)    (210,000)     90,000 
                                    ------------------------------------
  Excess of U.S. net income over                                        
   investment interest expenses:                                        
      Total foreign excess                                              
       investment interest.........  ..........  ...........    (30,000)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                        

    (b) If the taxpayer is on the per-country foreign tax credit 
limitation, his excess investment interest from France and Germany 
determined under subdivision (i)(a) of this subparagraph is $40,000 and 
zero, respectively. Since the taxpayer's worldwide excess investment 
interest ($90,000) is less than his total separately determined excess 
investment interest ($60,000 (United States) plus $40,000 (French) plus 
zero (German), or $100,000), the limitation in subdivision (i) (b) of 
this subparagraph applies and the excess investment interest 
attributable to France is limited as follows:

  Total worldwide excess ($90,000)/Total separately determined excess 
             ($100,000)  x  French excess ($40,000)=$36,000

The taxpayer's total excess investment interest attributable to sources 
within any foreign country or possession of the United States is, thus, 
$36,000 ($36,000 (French) plus zero (German)). The taxpayer's excess 
investment interest attributable to sources within the United States is 
$54,000

                      ($90,000/$100,000 x $60,000).

Since, in making the latter determination, $6,000 of the $60,000 of U.S. 
investment interest expense in excess of U.S. net investment income is, 
in effect, offset by German net investment income, for purposes of 
Sec. 1.58-7(c), $6,000 of interest deductions attributable to income 
from sources within the United States are, pursuant to subdivision (iv) 
of this subparagraph, treated as deductions attributable to income from 
sources within Germany.

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example (1) except that the 
items of income and deduction in Germany and the United States are 
reversed. The worldwide excess investment interest, thus, remains 
$90,000 and the items of income and deduction relating to excess 
investment interest are as follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    United                                      
                                                                    States      France      Germany      Total  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Investment income from sources within...........................   $180,000    $120,000    $150,000    $450,000 
Investment expenses relating to income from sources within......   (120,000)    (90,000)   (100,000)   (310,000)
                                                                 -----------------------------------------------
Net investment income...........................................     60,000      30,000      50,000     140,000 
Investment interest expense relating to income from sources                                                     
 within.........................................................    (50,000)    (70,000)   (110,000)   (230,000)
                                                                 -----------------------------------------------
(Excess) of investment interest expense over net investment                                                     
 income.........................................................     10,000     (40,000)    (60,000)    (90,000)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (a) If the taxpayer has elected the overall limitation, his excess 
investment interest from sources within any foreign countries or 
possessions of the United States determined under subdivision (ii) of 
this subparagraph is determined as follows:

Foreign investment interest:                                            
    French..........................   ($70,000)                        
    German..........................   (110,000)              ($180,000)
                                     ------------                       
Foreign net investment income:                                          
    French..........................    120,000                         

[[Page 497]]

                                                                        
    German..........................    150,000    $270,000             
                                     ------------                       
Less:                                                                   
  Investment expenses:                                                  
    French..........................    (90,000)                        
    German..........................   (100,000)   (190,000)     80,000 
                                     -----------------------------------
Excess of U.S. net investment income                                    
 over U.S. investment interest                                          
 expense............................  ..........  ..........     10,000 
                                                             -----------
Excess investment interest                                              
 attributable to foreign sources....  ..........  ..........    (90,000)
                                                                        

    (b) If the taxpayer has not elected the overall foreign tax credit 
limitation, his excess investment interest from France and Germany 
determined under subdivision (i) of this subparagraph (without regard to 
the limitation to worldwide excess investment interest) is $40,000 and 
$60,000 respectively, and his total separately determined excess 
investment interest is, thus, $10,000. Since the total separately 
determined excess would exceed the worldwide excess, the limitation to 
the worldwide excess in subdivision (i) applies and the excess 
investment interest is determined as follows:

France:

                   $90,000/$100,000 x $40,000=$36,000

Germany:

                   $90,000/$100,000 x $60,000=$54,000

Total excess investment interest attributable to sources within any 
          foreign countries and possessions--$90,000.

    Example 3. Assume the same facts as in example (1) except that the 
taxpayer, in addition has investment income, investment expenses, and 
investment interest subject to the separate limitation under section 
904(f).
    (a) If the taxpayer has elected the overall foreign tax credit 
limitation, his excess investment interest from sources within any 
foreign countries or possessions of the United States determined under 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph is the same as in (a) of example 
(1) of this subdivision (vi). He then treats such amount as separately 
determined excess investment interest attributable to a single foreign 
country as determined under subdivision (i) of this subparagraph and 
proceeds as in (b) of example (1) of this subdivision (vi) treating 
items of income and deduction subject to section 904(f) and from each 
separate foreign country or possession separately in making the 
additional determinations under subdivisions (i) and (iv) of this 
subparagraph.
    (b) If the taxpayer has not elected the overall foreign tax credit 
limitation, his excess investment interest from sources within any 
foreign country or possession of the United States would be determined 
in the same manner as in (b) of example (1) treating items of income and 
deduction which are subject to section 904(f) and from each separate 
foreign country or possession separately in making the determinations 
under subdivisions (i) and (iv) of this subparagraph.

    (c) Reduction in taxes on United States source income--(1) Overall 
limitation--(i) In general. If a taxpayer is on the overall foreign tax 
credit limitation under section 904(a)(2), the items of tax preference 
determined to be attributable to foreign sources under paragraph (b) of 
this section reduce the tax imposed by chapter 1 (other than the minimum 
tax imposed under section 56) on income from sources within the United 
States for the taxable year to the extent of the smallest of the 
following three amounts:
    (a) Items of tax preference (other than stock options and capital 
gains) attributable to sources within a foreign country or possession of 
the United States,
    (b) The excess (if any) of the total deductions properly allocable 
or apportionable to items or classes of gross income from sources within 
foreign countries and possessions of the United States over the gross 
income from such sources, or
    (c) Taxable income from sources within the United States.

See Sec. 1.58-7(b)(2)(iv) with respect to the attribution of certain 
interest deductions to foreign sources in cases involving the excess 
investment interest item of tax preference.
    (ii) Net operating loss. Where there is an overall net operating 
loss for the taxable year, to the extent that the lesser of the amounts 
determined under (a) or (b) of subdivision (i) of this subparagraph 
exceeds the taxpayer's taxable income from sources within the United 
States (and, therefore do not offset taxable income from sources within 
the United States for the taxable year) the amount of such excess is

[[Page 498]]

treated as ``suspense preferences.'' Suspense preferences are converted 
to actual items of tax preference, arising in the loss year and subject 
to the provisions of section 56, as the net operating loss is used in 
other taxable years, in the form of a net operating loss deduction under 
section 172, to offset taxable income from sources within the United 
States. Suspense preferences which, in other taxable years, reduce 
taxable income from sources within any foreign country or possession of 
the United States lose their character as suspense preferences and, 
thus, are never converted into actual items of tax preference. The 
amount of the suspense preferences which are converted into actual items 
of tax preference is equal to that portion of the net operating loss 
attributable to the suspense preferences which offset taxable income 
from sources within the United States in taxable years other than the 
loss year. The determination of the component parts of the net operating 
loss and the determination of the amount by which the portion of the net 
operating loss attributable to suspense preferences offsets taxable 
income from sources within the United States is made on a year-by-year 
basis in the same order as the net operating loss is used in accordance 
with section 172(b). Such determination is made by applying deductions 
attributable to U.S. source income first against such income and 
deductions attributable to foreign source income first against such 
foreign source income and in accordance with the following principles:
    (a) Deductions attributable to items or classes of gross income from 
sources within the United States offset taxable income from sources 
within the United States before any remaining portion of the net 
operating loss;
    (b) Deductions attributable to items or classes of gross income from 
sources within foreign countries or possessions of the United States 
offset taxable income from such sources before any remaining portion of 
the net operating loss;
    (c) Deductions described in (b) of the subdivision (ii) which are 
not suspense preferences (referred to in this subparagraph as ``other 
foreign deductions'') offset taxable income from sources within foreign 
countries and possessions of the United States before suspense 
preferences; and
    (d) Suspense preferences offset taxable income from sources within 
the United States before other foreign deductions.

For purposes of the above computations, taxable income is computed with 
the modifications specified in section 172(b)(2) or section 172(c), 
whichever is applicable. However, the amount of suspense preferences 
which are converted into actual items of tax preference in accordance 
with the above principles is reduced to the extent suspense preferences 
offset increases in taxable income from sources within the United States 
due to the modifications specified in section 172(b)(2) or section 
172(c). For this purpose, suspense preferences are considered to offset 
an increase in taxable income due to the section 172(b)(2) modifications 
only after reducing taxable income computed before the section 172(b)(2) 
or section 172(c) modifications.
    (iii) Examples. The principles of this subparagraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples. In each example the taxpayer is 
an individual citizen of the United States and has elected the overall 
foreign tax credit limitation. Personal deductions and exemptions are 
disregarded for purposes of these examples.
    Example 1. In 1974, the taxpayer has the following items of income 
and deduction:

United States taxable income:                                           
  Gross income......................  ..........   $750,000             
  Deductions........................  ..........   (250,000)   $500,000 
                                                 ------------           
Foreign source loss:                                                    
  Gross income......................  ..........    200,000             
  Deductions:                                                           
    Preference items (excess of                                         
     percentage depletion over                                          
     basis).........................   $550,000                         

[[Page 499]]

                                                                        
    Other...........................     50,000    (600,000)   (400,000)
                                     ------------------------           
Overall taxable income..............  ..........  ..........    100,000 
                                                                        

Pursuant to subdivision (i) of this subparagraph the smallest of (a) the 
items of tax preference attributable to the foreign sources ($550,000), 
(b) the foreign source loss ($400,000), or (c) the taxable income from 
sources within the United States ($500,000) reduces the tax imposed by 
chapter 1 (other than the minimum tax) on income from sources within the 
United States. Thus, $400,000 of the $550,000 of excess depletion is 
treated as an item of tax preference in 1974 subject to the minimum tax.

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example (1) except that the 
gross income from sources within the United States is $350,000 resulting 
in U.S. taxable income of $100,000 and an overall net operating loss of 
$300,000. Pursuant to subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, $100,000 of 
the $550,000 excess depletion would be treated as an item of tax 
preference in 1974 subject to the minimum tax. In addition, pursuant to 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph, the excess of the items of tax 
preference from foreign sources ($550,000) or the foreign source loss 
($400,000), whichever is less, over the U.S. taxable income ($100,000), 
or, in this example, $300,000, is treated as suspense preferences.
    (a) If, in 1971, the taxpayer's total items of income and deduction 
result in $350,000 of taxable income all of which is from sources within 
the United States, the entire $300,000 net operating loss, all of which 
is attributable to suspense preferences, is used to offset U.S. taxable 
income. Accordingly, the full $300,000 of suspense preferences are 
converted into actual items of tax preference arising in 1974 and are 
subject to tax under section 56.
    (b) If the $350,000 in 1971 is modified taxable income resulting 
from the denial of a section 1202 capital gains deduction of $175,000 by 
reason of section 172(b)(2), the $300,000, otherwise treated as actual 
items of tax preference, is reduced by $125,000, i.e., the extent to 
which the suspense preferences offset U.S. taxable income attributable 
to the increase in taxable income resulting from the denial of the 
section 1202 deduction.

    Example 3. In 1974, the taxpayer has the following items of income 
and deduction:

United States loss:                                                     
    Gross income....................  ..........    $75,000             
    Deductions......................  ..........   (225,000)            
                                      ..........   --------   ($150,000)
Foreign loss:                                                           
    Gross income....................  ..........    400,000             
    Deductions:                                                         
      Preference items (excess of                                       
       accelerated depreciation on                                      
       sec. 1250 property over                                          
       straight-line amount)........   $200,000                         
      Other.........................    550,000    (750,000)   (350,000)
                                     -----------------------------------
Overall net operating loss..........  ..........  ..........   (500,000)
                                                                        

Since the nonpreference deductions reduce the foreign source income 
before the preference portion, the $350,000 foreign source loss consists 
of $200,000 of suspense preferences and $150,000 of other deductions. In 
1971, 1972, and 1973 the taxpayer had taxable income from sources within 
the United 
States of $100,000, $200,000, and $300,000, respectively and taxable 
income from sources within foreign countries of $80,000 each year. Of 
the $200,000 of suspense preferences, $150,000 are converted into actual 
items of tax preference, subject to the minimum tax in 1974, determined 
as follows:

                                            [In thousands of dollars]                                           
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Taxable income                             Foreign deductions   
                                        ------------------------------                 -------------------------
           Year--Explanation                                           U.S. deductions    Suspense              
                                         U.S. source   Foreign source                   preferences     Other   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1971  End of year balance before                                                                                
 section 58(g) computations............         100               80              150          200          150 

[[Page 500]]

                                                                                                                
    1. U.S. deductions against U.S.                                                                             
     income............................        (100)  ...............  ...............  ...........  ...........
                                         ...........  ...............            (100)  ...........  ...........
    2. Other foreign deductions against                                                                         
     foreign income....................  ...........             (80)  ...............  ...........         (80)
1972  End of year balance before                                                                                
 section 58(g) computations............         200               80               50          200           70 
    1. U.S. deductions against U.S.                                                                             
     income............................         (50)  ...............             (50)  ...........  ...........
    2. Other foreign deductions against                                                                         
     foreign income....................  ...........             (70)  ...............  ...........         (70)
    3. Suspense preferences against                                                                             
     foreign income....................  ...........             (10)  ...............         (10)  ...........
    4. Suspense preferences against                                                                             
     U.S. income.......................       *(150)  ...............  ...............       *(150)  ...........
1973  End of year balance before                                                                                
 section 58(g) computations............         300               80   ...............          40   ...........
    1. U.S. deductions against U.S.                                                                             
     income............................  ...........  ...............  Not applicable   ...........  ...........
    2. Other foreign deductions against                                                                         
     foreign income....................  ...........  ...............  Not applicable   ...........  ...........
    3. Suspense preference against                                                                              
     foreign income....................  ...........             (40)  ...............         (40)  ...........
    4. Suspense preferences against                                                                             
     U.S. income.......................                                Not applicable                           
    Balances...........................         300               40   ...............  ...........  ...........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Suspense preferences converted to actual items of tax preference.                                              


    Example 4. In 1970, the taxpayer's total items of income and 
deduction, all of which are attributable to foreign sources, are as 
follows:

Foreign loss:                                                           
  Gross income..............................................    $400,000
  Deductions:                                                           
    Preferences (excess of accelerated                                  
     depreciation on section 1250 property over                         
     straight-line).............................    $200,000            
                                                 -----------------------
Net operating loss..........................................     350,000
                                                                        

Pursuant to subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, none of the 
preferences attributable to foreign sources reduce the tax imposed by 
chapter 1 (other than the minimum tax) on taxable income from sources 
within the United States. Pursuant to subdivision (ii) of this 
subparagraph, the $200,000 portion of the net operating loss resulting 
from the excess accelerated depreciation constitutes suspense 
preferences. No part of the net operating loss that is carried back to 
previous years is reduced in such previous years. In 1971 and 1972, the 
taxpayer's income (before the net operating loss deduction) consists of 
the following:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
1971 taxable income:                                                    
  United States.............................................    $160,000
  Foreign...................................................      70,000
                                                 -------------          
    Total...................................................     230,000
                                                 =============          
1972 taxable income:                                                    
  United States.............................................      25,000
  Foreign...................................................     105,000
                                                 -------------          
    Total...................................................     130,000
                                                                        


    (a) In 1971, the conversion of suspense preferences into actual 
items of tax preference under section 58(g) (and this paragraph) and the 
imposition of the minimum tax on 1970 items of tax preference under 
section 56(b) and (Sec. 1.56A-2) are determined as follows:

Conversion of suspense preferences:

[[Page 501]]



                                             1970 Net Operating Loss                                            
                                            [In thousands of dollars]                                           
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                        U.S.                                                            Other   
                                      taxable        Foreign        U.S. deductions       Suspense     foreign  
                                       income    taxable income                         preferences   deductions
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                          $160          $70      .....................        $200         $150 
                                   -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. U.S. deductions against U.S.                                  Not applicable.......                          
 income.                                                                                                        
2. Other foreign deductions         ...........          70      .....................  ...........         (70)
 against foreign income.                                                                                        
3. Suspense preference against                                   Not applicable.......                          
 foreign income.                                                                                                
4. Suspense preference against           *(160)  ..............  .....................        (160)  ...........
 U.S. income.                                                                                                   
                                   -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Balance to 1972...................................................................          40           80 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Suspense preferences converted into actual items of tax preference.                                            


    Imposition of minimum tax on 1970 items of tax preference:

                                             1970 Net Operating Loss                                            
                                            [In thousands of dollars]                                           
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                1971 taxable    Nonpreference      Preference        Suspense   
                                                   income          portion          portion          portion    
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                        $230             $150   ...............            $200 
                                             -------------------------------------------------------------------
1. 1971 conversion of suspense preferences                                                                      
 pursuant to sec. 58(g).....................  ...............           \1\30             $130             (160)
    Adjusted NOL............................  ...............             180              130               40 
2. Nonpreference portion against taxable                                                                        
 income.....................................            (180)            (180)  ...............  ...............
3. Preference portion against taxable income          \2\(50)  ...............             (50)  ...............
                                             -------------------------------------------------------------------
    Balance to 1972...........................................................              80               40 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\Represents the 1970 minimum tax exemption.                                                                   
\2\Imposition of 1970 minimum tax (10 pct x $50,000=$5,000).                                                    

    (b) In 1972, the conversion of suspense preferences into actual 
items of tax preferences under section 58(g) (and this paragraph) and 
the imposition of the minimum tax on 1970 items of tax preference under 
section 56(b) (and Sec. 1.56A-2) are determined as follows:

    Conversion of suspense preferences:

                                              1970 Net Operating Loss                                           
                                            [In thousands of dollars]                                           
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             U.S.                                                       Other   
                                           taxable    Foreign taxable  U.S. deductions    Suspense     foreign  
                                            income         income                       preferences   deductions
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                $25             $105   ...............         $40          $80 
                                        ------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. U.S. deduction against U.S. income..                                 Not applicable                          
2. Other foreign deductions against                                                                             
 foreign income........................  ...........             (80)  ...............  ...........         (80)
3. Suspense preferences against foreign                                                                         
 income................................  ...........             (25)  ...............         (25)  ...........
4. Suspense preference against U.S.                                                                             
 income................................      \1\(15)  ...............  ...............         (15)  ...........
                                        ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Balance............................          10   ...............  ...............  ...........  ...........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\Suspense preferences converted into actual items of tax preference.                                          


    Imposition of minimum tax on 1970 items of tax preference:

[[Page 502]]



                                             1970 Net Operating Loss                                            
                                            [In thousands of dollars]                                           
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                1972 taxable    Nonpreference      Preference        Suspense   
                                                   income          portion          portion          portion    
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                        $130   ...............             $80              $40 
                                             -------------------------------------------------------------------
1. 1972 conversion of suspense preferences                                                                      
 pursuant to sec. 58(g).....................  ...............             $25               15              (40)
    Adjusted NOL............................  ...............              25               95   ...............
2. Nonpreference portion against taxable                                                                        
 income.....................................             (25)             (25)  ...............  ...............
3. Preference portion against taxable income          \1\(95)  ...............             (95)  ...............
                                             -------------------------------------------------------------------
    Balance.................................              10   ...............  ...............  ...............
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\Imposition of 1970 minimum tax (10 pct x $95,000=$9,500).                                                    

    (2) Per-country limitation--(i) In general. If a taxpayer is on the 
per-country foreign tax credit limitation for the taxable year, the 
amount by which the items of tax preference to which this section 
applies reduce the tax imposed by chapter 1 (other than the minimum tax 
under section 56) on income from sources within the United States is 
determined separately with respect to each foreign country or possession 
of the United States. Such determination is made in a manner consistent 
with subparagraph (1) of this paragraph as modified in subdivision (ii) 
of this subparagraph. In applying subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph 
to a taxpayer on the per-country limitation, if the total potential 
preference amounts (as defined in this subdivision (i)) exceed the 
taxpayer's taxable income from sources within the United States, then, 
for purposes of subparagraph (1)(i)(c) of this paragraph (relating to 
the U.S. taxable income limitation on the amount treated as a reduction 
of U.S. taxable income), the taxable income from sources within the 
United States which is reduced by potential preference amounts with 
respect to each foreign country or possession is an amount which bears 
the same relationship to such income as the potential preference amount 
with respect to such foreign country or possession bears to the total of 
the potential preference amounts with respect to all foreign countries 
and possessions. For purposes of this subparagraph, the potential 
preference amount with respect to a foreign country or possession is the 
lesser of the amount of foreign source preference (described in 
subparagraph (1)(i)(a) of this paragraph) attributable to such country 
or possession or the amount of foreign source loss (described in 
subparagraph (1)(i)(b) of this paragraph) attributable to such country 
or possession.
    (ii) Net operating loss. Where there is an overall net operating 
loss for the taxable year and the total of the potential preference 
amounts with respect to all foreign countries and possessions exceeds 
the taxpayer's taxable income from sources within the United States, the 
amount of such excess is treated as ``suspense preferences''. The 
suspense preferences are converted into actual items of tax preference, 
arising in the loss year and subject to the provisions of section 56, as 
the net operating loss is used in other taxable years, in the form of a 
net operating loss deduction under section 172, to offset taxable income 
from sources within the United States. Suspense preferences attributable 
to a foreign country or possession which, in other taxable years, reduce 
taxable income from sources within such country or possession or offset 
taxable income from sources within any other foreign country or 
possession lose their character as suspense preferences and, thus, are 
never converted into actual items of tax preference. The amount of the 
suspense preferences which are converted into actual items of tax 
preference is equal to that portion of the net operating loss 
attributable to the suspense preferences which offsets taxable income 
from sources within the United States in taxable years other than the 
loss year. The determination of the component parts of the net operating 
loss and the determination of the amount by which the portion of the net 
operating

[[Page 503]]

loss attributable to the suspense preferences offsets taxable income 
from sources within the United States is made on a year-by-year basis in 
the same order as the net operating loss is used in accordance with 
section 172(b). Such determination is made by applying deductions 
attributable to United States source income first against such income 
and applying deductions attributable to income from sources within a 
foreign country or possession of the United States first against income 
from sources within such country or possession and in accordance with 
the following principles:
    (a) Deductions attributable to items or classes of gross income from 
sources within the United States offset taxable income from sources 
within the United States before any remaining deductions;
    (b) Deductions attributable to items or classes of gross income from 
sources within any foreign country or possession of the United States 
which are not suspense preferences (referred to in this paragraph as 
``other foreign deductions'') offset taxable income from sources within 
such country or possession before any remaining deductions;
    (c) Suspense preferences attributable to items or classes of gross 
income from sources within a foreign country or possession offset any 
remaining taxable income from sources within such foreign country or 
possession after application of (b) of this subdivision (ii) before any 
remaining deductions;
    (d) Suspense preferences from each foreign country and possession 
(remaining after application of (c) of this subdivision (ii)) offset 
taxable income from sources within the Unted States (remaining after 
application of (a) of this subdivision (ii)) before other foreign 
deductions pro rata on the basis of the total of such suspense 
preferences;
    (e) Other foreign deductions from each foreign country and 
possession (remaining after application of (b) of this subdivision (ii)) 
offset taxable income from sources within the United States (remaining 
after application (a) and (b) of this subdivision (ii)) pro rata on the 
basis of the total of such other foreign deductions;
    (f) Deductions attributable to income from sources within the United 
States (remaining after application of (a) of this subdivision (ii)) 
offset taxable income from sources within any foreign country or 
possession before any foreign deductions;
    (g) Other foreign deductions from each foreign country and 
possession (remaining after application of (b) and (e) of this 
subdivision (ii)) offset taxable income from sources within any other 
foreign countries or possessions (remaining after application of (f) of 
this subdivision (ii)) pro rata on the basis of the total of such other 
foreign deductions; and
    (h) Suspense preferences (remaining after the application of (c) and 
(d) of this subdivision (ii)) offset taxable income from sources within 
any foreign country or possession (remaining after the application of 
paragraphs (f) and (g) of this subdivision (ii)) pro rata on the basis 
of the total of such suspense preferences.

For purposes of the above computations, taxable income is computed with 
the modifications specifed in section 172(b)(2) or section 172(c), 
whichever is applicable. However, the amount of suspense preferences 
which are converted into actual items of tax preference in accordance 
with the above principles is reduced to the extent the suspense 
preferences offset increases in taxable income from sources within the 
United States due to the modifications specified in section 172(b)(2) or 
section 172(c). For this purpose, suspense preferences are considered to 
offset an increase in taxable income due to section 172(b)(2) or section 
172(c) modifications only after reducing taxable income computed before 
such modifications.
    (iii) Examples. The principles of this subparagraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples in each of which the per-country 
foreign tax credit limitation is applicable. For purposes of these 
examples, personal deductions and exemptions are disregarded.


[[Page 504]]


    Example (1). The taxpayer has the following items of income and 
deduction for the taxable year 1971:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                   United                               United  
                                                                   States       France      Germany     Kingdom 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gross income..................................................   $180,000     $165,000     $50,000     $75,000  
Deductions:                                                                                                     
  Preference..................................................  ...........  ...........  ..........    (45,000)
  Other.......................................................    (120,000)    (125,000)    (80,000)   (100,000)
                                                               -------------------------------------------------
    Taxable income (or loss)..................................      60,000       40,000     (30,000)    (70,000)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


    (a) Pursuant to subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, the potential 
preference amount in the case of the United Kingdom is the lesser of the 
preferences attributable to the United Kingdom ($45,000) or the excess 
of deductions over gross income from sources within the United Kingdom 
($70,000) and the potential preference amounts in the case of France and 
Germany are zero in both cases since the preferences attributable to 
both countries are zero. Since the total potential preference amounts 
($45,000) is less than the taxable income from sources within the United 
States ($60,000), no modification of U.S. taxable income is required. 
Thus, the amount by which the U.K. preferences reduce the tax on taxable 
income from sources within the United States, determined in a manner 
consistent with subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph, is the smallest 
of (1) the items of tax preference attributable to the United Kingdom 
($45,000), (2) the excess of deductions over gross income attributable 
to the United Kingdom ($70,000), or (3) taxable income from sources 
within the United States ($60,000). The full $45,000 of U.K. preference 
items are, therefore, taken into account as items of tax preference in 
1971 and subject to the minimum tax. Since there is no net operating 
loss, subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph does not apply.
    (b) If the French taxable income is $15,000 instead of $40,000, a 
$25,000 net operating loss (on a worldwide basis) results. The 
determination of the foreign preference items taken into account 
pursuant to subdivision (i) of this subparagraph is the same as in (a) 
of this example. Subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph again does not 
apply since the total potential preference amounts ($45,000) is less 
than the U.S. taxable income ($60,000).

    Example 2. For the taxable year 1972, the taxpayer has a net 
operating loss of $35,000 consisting of the following items of income 
and deduction:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                        United                              United              
                                                        States      France      Germany     Kingdom     Belgium 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gross income........................................   $250,000     $50,000     $60,000      $5,000     $45,000 
Deductions:                                                                                                     
  Preferences.......................................  ..........    (35,000)    (70,000)    (95,000)  ..........
  Other.............................................   (100,000)    (75,000)    (30,000)  ..........    (40,000)
                                                     -----------------------------------------------------------
    Taxable income (or loss)........................    150,000     (60,000)    (40,000)    (90,000)      5,000 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


    (a) Pursuant to subdivision (i) of this subparagraph the potential 
preference amount with respect to each country is the lesser of the 
amount shown as preferences with respect to such country or the amount 
of the loss from such country. Thus, the potential preference amounts in 
this case are:

France......................................................     $35,000
Germany.....................................................      40,000
United Kingdom..............................................      90,000
Belgium.....................................................           0
                                                             -----------
  Total.....................................................     165,000
                                                                        

Since the total of the potential preference amounts exceeds the U.S. 
taxable income, in applying the principles of subparagraph (1)(i) of 
this paragraph, U.S. taxable income which is reduced by potential 
preference amounts with respect to each country is a pro-rata amount 
based on the total potential preference amounts as follows:

France.....................................            (35,000/165,000 x
                                                      $150,000)--$31,818
Germany....................................            (40,000/165,000 x
                                                      $150,000)--$36,364
United Kingdom.............................            (90,000/165,000 x
                                                     $150,000)>--$81,818
Belgium....................................   (0/165,000 x $150,000)--$0
                                            ----------------------------
  Total....................................                     $150,000
                                                                        


[[Page 505]]

The amount by which the foreign preference items offset U.S. taxable 
income pursuant to subdivision (i) of this subparagraph is then 
determined as follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                        (a)             (b)             (c)             (d)     
                                                 ---------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                    Smallest of 
                                                    Preferences        Loss        U.S. taxable    (a), (b), or 
                                                                                      income            (c)     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
France..........................................         $35,000         $60,000         $81,818         $31,818
Germany.........................................          70,000          40,000          36,364          36,364
United Kingdom..................................          95,000          90,000          81,818          81,818
Belgium.........................................  ..............  ..............  ..............  ..............
                                                 ---------------------------------------------------------------
    Total.......................................  ..............  ..............  ..............         150,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Thus, $150,000 of the total foreign preference items will be taken into 
account pursuant to subdivision (i) of this subparagraph as items of tax 
preference in 1972 and subject to the provisions of section 56.
    (b) Pursuant to subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph, the 1972 net 
operating loss of $35,000 will consist of suspense preferences of 
$15,000 and other foreign deductions of $20,000 attributable to each 
foreign country as shown below and determined as follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Deductions                                    
                             -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Explanation                              France                  Germany            United             
                                United   ------------------------------------------------   Kingdom     Belgium 
                                States    Preferences    Other    Preferences    Other    preferences    other  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                               $100,000     $35,000     $75,000     $70,000     $30,000     $95,000     $40,000 
1. U.S. deductions against                                                                                      
 U.S. income ($250,000).....   (100,000)  ...........  .........  ...........  .........  ...........  .........
2. Other foreign deductions                                                                                     
 against foreign income (per-                                                                                   
 country) \1\...............  ..........  ...........   (50,000)  ...........   (30,000)  ...........   (40,000)
3. Suspense preferences                                                                                         
 against remaining foreign                                                                                      
 income (per-country).......  ..........  ...........  .........    (30,000)   .........     (5,000)   .........
4. Suspense preferences                                                                                         
 against remaining U.S.                                                                                         
 income:                                                                                                        
    France (35,000/165,000 x                                                                                    
      $150,000).............  ..........    (31,818)   .........  ...........  .........  ...........  .........
    Germany (40,000/165,000                                                                                     
     x  $150,000)...........  ..........  ...........  .........    (36,364)   .........  ...........  .........
    U.K. (90,000/165,000 x                                                                                      
     $150,000)..............  ..........  ...........  .........  ...........  .........    (81,818)   .........
5. Other foreign deductions                                                                                     
 against remaining U.S.                                                                                         
 income (0).................       (\2\)       (\2\)       (\2\)       (\2\)       (\2\)       (\2\)       (\2\)
6. U.S. deductions against                                                                                      
 other foreign income.......       (\2\)       (\2\)       (\2\)       (\2\)       (\2\)       (\2\)       (\2\)
7. Other foreign deductions                                                                                     
 against remaining foreign                                                                                      
 income ($5,000)............  ..........  ...........    (5,000)  ...........  .........  ...........  .........
8. Suspense preferences                                                                                         
 against remaining foreign                                                                                      
 income (0):                       (\2\)       (\2\)       (\2\)       (\2\)       (\2\)       (\2\)       (\2\)
      Balance (components of                                                                                    
       NOL).................  ..........      3,182      20,000       3,636    .........      8,182    .........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Foreign income amounts before step 2 are: France--$50,000; Germany--$60,000; United Kingdom--$5,000;        
  Belgium--$45,000.                                                                                             
\2\ Not applicable.                                                                                             


    Example 3. In 1973, the taxpayer has taxable income (computed 
without regard to the net operating loss deduction) from the following 
sources and in the following amounts:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                United  
            United States               France      Germany     Kingdom 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$100,000............................     $60,000     $20,000     $30,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------


    In addition, the taxpayer has a net operating loss deduction of 
$235,000 resulting from a 1972 net operating loss consisting of the 
following amounts:

Deductions attributable to income from sources within                   
 the United States......................................         $25,000
Suspense preferences attributable to income from sources                
 within France..........................................         $75,000
Deductions other than suspense preferences attributable                 
 to income from sources within France...................         $85,000
Deductions other than suspense preferences attributable                 
 to sources within the Netherlands......................         $50,000
                                                                        



[[Page 506]]

    (a) Pursuant to subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph, the converted 
suspense preferences and the remaining portions of the 1972 net 
operating loss carried over to 1974 are computed as follows:

                                            [In thousands of dollars]                                           
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            1973 income                        1972 net operating loss          
                               ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                French      French       Dutch  
                                 United   France  Germany   United   United    suspense      other       other  
                                 States                    Kingdom   States  preferences  deductions  deductions
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    100       60       20       30       25         75           85          50 
U.S. deductions against U.S.                                                                                    
 income.......................     (25)  .......  .......  .......     (25)  ...........  ..........  ..........
Other foreign deductions                                                                                        
 against foreign income (per-                                                                                   
 country).....................  .......     (60)  .......  .......  .......  ...........       (60)   ..........
Suspense preferences against                                                                                    
 remaining foreign income (per-                                                                                 
 country).....................    (\2\)    (\2\)    (\2\)    (\2\)    (\2\)      (\2\)        (\2\)       (\2\) 
Suspense preferences against                                                                                    
 remaining U.S. income........  (\1\75)  .......  .......  .......  .......       (75)    ..........  ..........
Other foreign deductions                                                                                        
 against remaining U.S. income    (\2\)    (\2\)    (\2\)    (\2\)    (\2\)      (\2\)        (\2\)       (\2\) 
U.S. deductions against                                                                                         
 remaining foreign income.....    (\2\)    (\2\)    (\2\)    (\2\)    (\2\)      (\2\)        (\2\)       (\2\) 
  Other foreign deductions                                                                                      
   against remaining foreign                                                                                    
   income:                                                                                                      
    French (25,000/75,000  x                                                                                    
     $50,000).................  .......  .......   (16.7)  .......  .......  ...........     (16.7)   ..........
    Dutch (50,000/75,000  x                                                                                     
     $50,000).................  .......  .......   (33.3)  .......  .......  ...........  ..........     (33.3) 
Suspense preferences against                                                                                    
 remaining foreign income.....    (\2\)    (\2\)    (\2\)    (\2\)    (\2\)      (\2\)        (\2\)       (\2\) 
Balance (1972 carryover to                                                                                      
 1974)........................  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  ...........        8.3        16.7 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Suspense preferences converted to actual items of tax preference.                                           
\2\ Not applicable.                                                                                             


    (b) If, in 1972, there had been no items of tax preference without 
regard to the suspense preferences, the conversion of the suspense 
preferences in 1973 would result in a 1972 minimum tax liability under 
section 56(a) of $4,500 (10 percent  x  ($75,000-$30,000)), all of which 
would have been deferred by reason of section 56(b). Further, by 
application of section 56(b) and Sec. 1.56A-2, $20,000 of the $45,000 
preference portion of the 1972 net operating loss would be treated as 
having reduced taxable income in 1973 resulting in the imposition in 
1973 of $2,000 of the deferred 1972 minimum tax liability.

    (3) Separate limitation under section 904(f). In the case of a 
taxpayer subject to the separate limitation on interest income under 
section 904(f), the provisions of this paragraph shall be applied in the 
same manner as in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph. If the taxpayer 
has elected the overall foreign tax credit limitation, subparagraph (2) 
of this paragraph shall be applied as if all income from sources within 
any foreign countries or possessions of the United States and deductions 
relating to income from such sources other than income or deductions 
subject to the separate limitation under section 904(f) were from a 
single foreign country.
    (4) Carryover of excess taxes. For rules relating to carryover of 
excess taxes described in paragraph (1) of section 56(c) when suspense 
preferences are converted to actual items of tax preference, see 
Sec. 1.56A-5(f).
    (5) Character of amounts. Where the amounts from sources within a 
foreign country or possession of the United States (or all such 
countries or possessions in the case of a taxpayer who has elected the 
overall foreign tax credit limitation) which are treated as reducing 
chapter 1 tax on income from sources within the United States or as 
suspense preferences are less than the total items of tax preference 
described in subparagraph (1)(i)(a) of this paragraph attributable to 
such sources, the amounts so treated are considered derived 
proportionately from each such item of tax preference.

[T.D. 7564, 43 FR 40484, Sept. 12, 1978, as amended by T.D. 8138, 52 FR 
15309, Apr. 28, 1987]

[[Page 507]]


<R05>
Sec. 1.58-8  Capital gains and stock options.

    (a) In general. Section 58(g)(2) provides that the items of tax 
preference specified in section 57(a)(6), and Sec. 1.57-1(b) (stock 
options), and section 57(a)(9), and Sec. 1.57-1(i) (capital gains), 
which are attributable to sources within any foreign country or 
possession of the United States shall not be taken into account as items 
of tax preference if, under the tax laws of such country or possession, 
preferential treatment is not accorded:
    (1) In the case of stock options, to the gain, profit, or other 
income realized from the transfer of shares of stock pursuant to the 
exercise of an option which is under United States tax law a qualified 
or restricted stock option (under section 422 or section 424); and
    (2) In the case of capital gains, to gain from the sale or exchange 
of capital assets (or property treated as capital assets under United 
States tax law).

Where capital gains are not accorded preferential treatment within a 
foreign country, capital losses as well as capital gains from such 
country are not taken into account for purposes of the minimum tax.
    (b) Source of capital gains and stock options. Generally, in 
determining whether the capital gain or stock option item of tax 
preference is attributable to sources within any foreign country or 
possession of the United States, the principles of sections 861-863 and 
the regulations thereunder are applied. Thus, the stock option item of 
tax preference, representing compensation for personal services, is 
attributable, in accordance with Sec. 1.861-4, to sources within the 
country in which the personal services were performed. Where the capital 
gain item of tax preference represents gain from the purchase and sale 
of personal property, such gain is attributable, in accordance with 
Sec. 1.861-7, entirely to sources within the country in which the 
property is sold. In accordance with paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.861-7, in 
any case in which the sales transaction is arranged in a particular 
manner for the primary purpose of tax avoidance, all factors of the 
transaction, such as negotiations, the execution of the agreement, the 
location of the property, and the place of payment, will be considered, 
and the sale will be treated as having been consummated at the place 
where the substance of the sale occurred.
    (c) Preferential treatment. For purposes of this section, gain, 
profit, or other income is accorded preferential treatment by a foreign 
country or possession of the United States if (1) recognition of the 
income, for foreign tax purposes, is deferred beyond the taxpayer's 
taxable year or comparable period for foreign tax purposes which 
coincides with the taxpayer's U.S. taxable year in cases where other 
items of profit, gain, or other income may not be deferred; (2) it is 
subject to tax at a lower effective rate (including no rate of tax) than 
other items of profit, gain, or other income, by means of a special rate 
of tax, artifical deductions, exemptions, exclusions, or similar 
reductions in the amount subject to tax; (3) it is subject to no 
significant amount of tax; or (4) the laws of the foreign country or 
possession by any other method provide tax treatment for such profit, 
gain, or other income more beneficial than the tax treatment otherwise 
accorded income by such country or possession. For the purpose of the 
preceding sentence, gain, profit, or other income is subject to no 
significant amount of tax if the amount of taxes imposed by the foreign 
country or possession of the United States is equal to less than 2.5 
percent of the gross amount of such income.
    (d) Examples. The principles of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. The Bahamas imposes no income tax on individuals or 
corporations, whether resident or nonresident. Since capital gains are 
subject to no tax in the Bahamas, capital gains are considered to be 
accorded preferential treatment and will be taken into account for 
purposes of the minimum tax.

    Example 2. In France, except in certain cases involving the sale of 
large blocks of stock, a nonresident individual is not subject to tax on 
isolated capital gains transactions. Since such capital gains are not 
subject to tax in France, they are considered to be accorded 
preferential treatment irrespective of the treatment accorded other 
capital gains

[[Page 508]]

in France and such gains will be taken into account for purposes of the 
minimum tax.

    Example 3. In Germany, in the case of the sale within 1 taxable year 
of 1 percent or more of the shares of a corporation in which an 
individual taxpayer is regarded as holding a substanital interest, the 
gains on the sale of the large block of stock will be taxed as 
extraordinary income at one-half the ordinary income tax rate. Since 
these gains are taxed as a reduced rate of tax in comparison to other 
income, they are considered to be accorded preferential treatment and 
will be taken into account for purposes of the minimum tax.

    Example 4. In Belgium, gains derived by an individual in the course 
of regular speculative transactions are taxed as ordinary income, but 
with an upper limit of 30 percent. Rates of tax on individuals in 
Belgium range from approximately 30 percent to approximately 60 percent. 
Since the gains on speculative transactions are taxed at a maximum rate 
which is more beneficial then the rates accorded to other income, such 
gains are considered to be accorded preferential treatment and will be 
taken into account for purposes of the minimum tax.

    Example 5. In France, gains derived by a company on the sale of 
fixed assets held for less than 2 years are treated as short-term gains. 
The excess of short-term gains in any fiscal year is taxed at the full 
company tax rate of 50 percent. However, this tax may be paid in equal 
portions over the 5 years immediately following the realization of such 
short-term gains. Since recognition of the short-term gains for tax 
purposes is subject to deferral over a 5-year period, such gains are 
considered to be accorded preferential treatment and will be taken into 
account for purposes of the minimum tax.

    Example 6. Also in France, in the case of the sale or exchange by a 
company of depreciable assets and nondepreciable asset owned for at 
least 2 years, the excess of long-term capital gains over long-term 
capital losses in a fiscal year is subject to an immediate tax at the 
reduced rate of 10 percent. Such excess, reduced by the 10-percent tax, 
is carried in a special reserve account on the taxpayer's books. If the 
excess is reinvested in other fixed asset within a stated period, no 
further tax is due. If the amounts in the special reserve are 
distributed, they will be treated as ordinary income for the fiscal year 
in which the distribution is made. Since such gains (other than those 
distributed in the same fiscal year they are realized) are subject to 
deferral or a reduced rate of tax, they are (except to the extent 
distributed in the year of realization) considered to be accorded 
preferential treatment and are taken into account for purposes of the 
minimum tax.

    Example 7. In Sweden, in the case of gains derived by an individual 
on the sale of shares or bonds held for 5 years or less, 25 percent of 
the gains are taxed if the holding period is 4 to 5 years, 50 percent of 
the gain is taxed if the holding period is 3 to 4 years, and 75 percent 
of the gain is taxed if the holding period is 2 to 3 years. The gain is 
fully taxable at ordinary income rates if held for less than 2 years. 
Thus, gains on shares or bonds held for 2 years or more are considered 
accorded preferential treatment in Sweden since they are either subject 
to exemption or treatment comparable to the U.S. capital gains deduction 
and are taxed at a reduced rate. Thus, such gains are taken into account 
for purposes of the minimum tax.

    Example 8. Pursuant to Article XIV of the United States-United 
Kingdom Income Tax Convention, a resident of the United States is exempt 
from United Kingdom tax on most capital gains. Since such capital gains 
are exempt from United Kingdom taxation, they are considered to be 
accorded preferential treatment and are taken into account for purposes 
of the minimum tax.

    Example 9. An individual resident of the United States, is desirous 
of selling his stock in a corporation listed on the New York Stock 
Exchange. He requests the stock certificates from his broker in the 
United States, travels to a foreign country, delivers the certificates 
to a broker in that country, and has the foreign broker execute the sale 
which takes place on the New York Stock Exchange. Since the sale was 
consummated in the United States, pursuant to paragraph (b) of this 
section and Sec. 1.861-7, the resulting capital gain item of tax 
preference is attributable to sources within the United States.

    Example 10. Two individuals, both residing in the United States, 
negotiate and reach agreement in New York City for the sale of stock of 
a closed corporation. Prior to the transfer of the stock, in order to 
avoid imposition of the minimum tax, both individuals travel to a 
foreign country which does not accord preferential treatment to capital 
gains, but imposes a 5-percent rate of income tax which would be fully 
creditable against U.S. tax under sections 901 and 904 if the capital 
gains were sourced in that country. The stock is actually transferred 
and consideration paid in the foreign country. Since the primary purpose 
of consummating the sale in the foreign country was the avoidance of 
tax, pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section, and Sec. 1.861-7(c), the 
resulting capital gain item of tax preference will be considered 
attributable to sources within the country in which the substance of 
sale took place or, in this case, the United States.

[T.D. 7564, 43 FR 40492, Sept. 12, 1978]

[[Page 509]]


<R05>
Sec. 1.58-9  Application of the tax benefit rule to the minimum tax for taxable years beginning prior to 1987.

    (a) In general. For purposes of computing the minimum tax liability 
imposed under section 56 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (Code), 
taxpayers are not liable for minimum tax on tax preference items that do 
not reduce the taxpayer's tax liability under subtitle A of the Code for 
the taxable year. In general, tax preference items that do not reduce 
tax liability under subtitle A for the taxable year are those from which 
no current tax benefit is derived because available credits would have 
reduced or eliminated the taxpayer's regular tax liability if the 
preference items had not been allowed in computing taxable income. 
However, any credits that, because of such preference items, are not 
needed for use against regular tax (``freed-up credits''), are required 
to be reduced under the rules of paragraph (c) of this section. For 
purposes of this section, a taxpayer's regular tax is the Federal income 
tax liability under subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Code, not including 
the minimum tax imposed by section 56. Unless otherwise noted, all 
references to Internal Revenue Code sections refer to the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1954.
    (b) Effective date. The rules of this section are effective May 5, 
1992, but only as they affect tax preference items that arise in taxable 
years beginning after December 31, 1976, and before January 1, 1987.
    (c) Adjustment of carryover credits--(1) In general. A taxpayer's 
freed-up credits must be reduced by the additional minimum tax that 
would have been imposed if a current tax benefit had been derived from 
preference items that did not actually produce a current tax benefit. 
The amount of this reduction shall be calculated in the following 
manner--
    (i) Determine the amount of freed-up credits;
    (ii) Determine the amount of tax preference items (if any) from 
which a current tax benefit was derived for the taxable year 
(``beneficial preferences''), and the amount of preferences from which 
no current tax benefit was derived for the taxable year (``non-
beneficial preferences''); and
    (iii) Determine the portion of the total minimum tax on all tax 
preference items for the taxable year that is attributable to the non-
beneficial preferences.
    The freed-up credits are then reduced by an amount equal to such 
portion of the minimum tax.
    (2) Determine freed-up credits. (i) To determine the freed-up 
credits for the taxable year, first determine the regular tax that would 
have been imposed for the taxable year if preference items had not been 
allowed in computing taxable income (``non-preference regular tax''). In 
the case of a taxpayer with the capital gain preference described in 
section 57(a)(9)(B), non-preference regular tax is computed without 
regard to section 1201 and without adding the section 57(a)(9)(B) 
preference amount to taxable income. Second, compute the amount of 
credits that would have been allowed to reduce the non-preference 
regular tax. The credits available to reduce non-preference regular tax 
shall include any freed-up credits from other taxable years, as reduced 
under paragraph (c)(5) of this section, that are carried to the current 
taxable year. Third, subtract the amount of credits that were actually 
allowed to reduce the regular tax for such taxable year from the amount 
of credits that would have been allowed to reduce non-preference regular 
tax. The result is the amount of the freed-up credits.
    (ii) The following examples illustrate the determination of freed-up 
credits. The first two examples assume that the foreign tax credits 
being used do not exceed the limitation under section 904.

    Example 1. In 1982 Corporation B has $17.6 million dollars in 
foreign tax credits available for the taxable year. If preference items 
were not allowed in determining regular tax, the regular tax would have 
been $10.2 million and foreign tax credits used to reduce regular tax 
would have been $10.2 million. Because of tax preference items, however, 
B's regular tax is $6.3 million and the amount of foreign tax credits 
actually used to reduce the regular tax is $6.3 million. The amount of 
freed-up foreign tax credits is $3.9 million ($10.2 million minus $6.3 
million).
    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Example 1 of paragraph 
(c)(2)(ii) of this section except that Corporation B has $7.2 million 
dollars in foreign tax credits. If preference items were not allowed, 
the non-preference regular tax would have been $10.2 million and

[[Page 510]]

the foreign tax credits used to reduce the regular tax would have been 
$7.2 million. Because of tax preference items, however, B's regular tax 
is $6.3 million, and the amount of foreign tax credits actually used to 
reduce the regular tax is $6.3 million. The amount of freed-up foreign 
tax credits is $.9 million ($7.2 million minus $6.3 million).
    Example 3. In 1983 Corporation C has $500,000 of investment tax 
credits available. If preference items were not allowed, non-preference 
regular tax would have been $690,000 and all $500,000 of investment tax 
credits would have been allowed to reduce non-preference regular tax 
liability. Because of tax preferences, however, C's actual regular tax 
is $439,750. As a result of the limitation under section 38(c), only 
$377,537 of the investment tax credits are allowed to reduce the actual 
regular tax. Freed-up credits are $122,463 ($500,000 minus $377,537).
    Example 4. In 1984 Corporation B has ordinary income of $20,000 and 
net section 1201 gain of $300,000, none of which is attributable to 
foreign sources. B has no other items of tax preference in 1984. B's 
non-preference regular tax for 1984 is $126,950, the amount of tax that 
would be imposed without regard to section 1201.

    (3) Determination of beneficial and non-beneficial preferences--(i) 
In general. The amount of tax preferences from which a current tax 
benefit is derived (``beneficial preferences'') and the amount from 
which no current tax benefit is derived (``non-beneficial preferences'') 
for the taxable year are determined as set forth below.
    (ii) Regular tax liability is the same regardless of preference 
items. (A) If the taxpayer's tax liability (after credits) would be the 
same regardless of whether preference items were allowed to reduce 
taxable income, then all of the taxpayer's preference items are non-
beneficial preference items.
    (B) The following example illustrates the rule set forth in 
paragraph (c)(3)(ii)(A) of this section. This example assumes that 
foreign tax credits being used do not exceed the limitation under 
section 904.

    Example. (i) In 1982 Corporation B has $17.6 million dollars in 
foreign tax credits available for the taxable year. If preference items 
were not allowed in determining regular tax, the regular tax would have 
been $10.2 million and foreign tax credits used to reduce regular tax 
would have been $10.2 million. Because of tax preference items, however, 
B's regular tax is $6.3 million and the amount of foreign tax credits 
actually used to reduce the regular tax is $6.3 million. The amount of 
freed-up foreign tax credits is $3.9 million ($10.2 million minus $6.3 
million).
    (ii) The total amount of B's tax preference items is $8.4 million. 
B's non-preference regular tax is $10.2 million and, reduced by foreign 
tax credits, is zero. B's actual regular tax is $6.3 million and, 
reduced by foreign tax credits, is zero. Since the amount of credits 
that would have been allowed to offset the non-preference regular tax 
would have reduced such tax to an amount ($0) equal to the actual 
regular tax liability ($0), B received a tax benefit from none of the 
$8.4 million of tax preferences and therefore all of these preferences 
are non-beneficial preferences.

    (iii) Regular tax liability differs because of preference items. If 
tax liability (after credits) is less because preference items are 
allowed to reduce taxable income, then some of these preference items 
have provided a current tax benefit. In such cases, the amount of 
beneficial and non-beneficial preferences are determined as follows:
    (A) Non-beneficial preferences. (1) The non-beneficial preferences 
are determined by converting the freed-up credits for such taxable year 
into an amount of taxable income. To make this conversion, freed-up 
credits are ``grossed up'' (i.e., divided by the regular tax marginal 
rate at which such credits would have offset non-preference regular tax) 
to determine the amount of tax preferences that freed up such credits. 
For purposes of this calculation, the 5-percent addition to tax provided 
by section 11(b) shall be included in determining the marginal rate. The 
aggregate of these grossed-up amounts is the total amount of non-
beneficial preferences for the taxable year.
    (2) The freed-up credits shall be grossed up beginning at the lowest 
marginal tax rate that would have applied to the additional taxable 
income arising if tax preferences were not allowed. Thus, the marginal 
tax rates at which the actual regular tax was imposed shall not be taken 
into account in grossing up freed-up credits, even if all or a portion 
of such tax is not offset by credits because of limitations on the 
allowance of such credits (such as the section 904 limit on foreign tax 
credits or the section 38(c) limit on investment tax credits). For 
example, if the first dollar of additional non-preference taxable income 
would have been taxed at a

[[Page 511]]

rate of 46 percent, then freed-up credits shall be grossed up at 46 
percent, even if regular tax imposed on taxable income at a 40-percent 
rate was not offset by credits because of the limitations on investment 
tax credits under section 38(c). See Examples 1 and 2 in paragraph (d) 
of this section for illustrations of the gross up of freed-up credits in 
cases where limitations apply to the amount of credit allowed to offset 
actual regular tax.
    (3) The following example illustrates the gross up of freed-up 
credits to determine non-beneficial preferences. This example assumes 
that foreign tax credits being used do not exceed the limitation under 
section 904.
    Example. (i) Corporation L has the following items for the 1985 
taxable year:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Actual taxable income...............................  ........   $90,000
Regular tax.........................................  ........    21,750
Available credits:                                                      
  Foreign tax credits for 1985......................   $15,000          
  Foreign tax credits carried forward from 1984.....    25,000          
  Investment tax credits carried forward from 1984..    20,000          
                                                     ----------         
                                                      ........    60,000
Credit allowed to offset actual regular tax:                            
  Foreign tax credits for 1985......................    15,000          
  Foreign tax credits carried forward from 1984.....     6,750          
                                                     ----------         
                                                                  21,750
Actual regular tax liability........................  ........         0
Preferences.........................................  ........   110,000
Taxable income for 1985 determined as though                            
 preferences were not allowed.......................  ........   200,000
Non-preference regular tax..........................  ........    71,750
Credits allowed to offset non-preference regular                        
 tax:                                                                   
  Foreign tax credits for 1985......................    15,000          
  Foreign tax credits carried forward from 1984.....    25,000          
  Investment tax credits carried forward from 1984..    20,000          
                                                     ----------         
                                                                  60,000
Non-preference regular tax liability................  ........    11,750
                                                                        

    (ii) The freed-up credits for 1985 are $38,250 ($60,000 minus 
$21,750). The non-preference regular tax of $71,750 is determined by 
applying the regular tax rates set forth in section 11(b) to the 
$200,000 of taxable income as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Taxable income                   Rate                        Tax      
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$25,000..........       X            .15          =            $3,750   
25,000...........       X            .18          =             4,500   
25,000...........       X            .30          =             7,500   
25,000...........       X            .40          =            10,000   
100,000..........       X            .46          =            46,000   
------------------                                     -----------------
$200,000.........                                             $71,750   
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Thus, for purposes of determining the non-beneficial 
preferences, freed-up credits are grossed up as follows: The credits 
allowed against the regular tax and the freed-up credits are treated as 
offsetting non-preference regular tax in the same order as such credits 
would have been allowed to offset such tax, beginning at the lowest 
marginal tax rate. The freed-up credits are grossed up beginning at the 
lowest marginal tax rate at which additional taxable income would have 
been taxed if preferences were not allowed. Thus, in this example freed-
up credits are grossed up beginning at 40 percent, and the amount of L's 
non-beneficial preferences for the 1985 taxable year is $84,456.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Credit                                             
                                                            allowed      Freed-up    Divided by          Non-   
                          Type                              against       credit      tax rate        beneficial
                                                          regular tax                                preferences
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FTC (85)................................................       $3,750  ...........          .15                 
    Do..................................................        4,500  ...........          .18                 
    Do..................................................        6,750  ...........          .30                 
FTC (84)................................................          750  ...........          .30                 
    Do..................................................        6,000  ...........          .40                 
    Do..................................................  ...........       $4,000          .40   =      $10,000
    Do..................................................  ...........       14,250          .46   =       30,978
ITC (84)................................................  ...........       20,000          .46   =       43,478
                                                         -------------------------------------------------------
                                                              $21,750      $38,250  ...........  ..      $84,456
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Foreign tax credit = FTC (year)
    Investment tax credit = ITC (year)
    (B) Beneficial preferences. The amount of beneficial preferences for 
the taxable year is computed by subtracting the non-beneficial 
preferences for the taxable year from the total amount of tax 
preferences for such year. This rule

[[Page 512]]

may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. Assume the same facts as in the Example in paragraph 
(c)(3)(iii)(A)(3) of this section. The amount of L's beneficial 
preferences for 1985 is $25,544 (total preferences of $110,000, minus 
non-beneficial preferences of $84,456).

    (4) Determine the minimum tax attributable to non-beneficial 
preferences. (i) The portion of the minimum tax that is attributable to 
the non-beneficial preferences is computed as follows--
    (A) Compute the minimum tax that would be imposed on all tax 
preference items for the taxable year if all of the preferences had 
produced a tax benefit.
    (B) Compute the minimum tax that would be imposed on the beneficial 
preferences if these were the taxpayer's only preferences. (This is the 
amount of minimum tax actually imposed for the taxable year.)
    (C) Subtract the amount computed in paragraph (c)(4)(i)(B) of this 
section from the amount computed in paragraph (c)(4)(i)(A) of this 
section. The result is the minimum tax attributable to the non-
beneficial preferences for the taxable year. This amount is sometimes 
referred to hereinafter as the ``credit reduction amount''.
    (ii) The following examples illustrate determination of the credit 
reduction amount. These examples assume that foreign tax credits being 
used do not exceed the limitation under section 904.

    Example 1. (i) In 1982 Corporation B has $17.6 million dollars in 
foreign tax credits available for the taxable year. If preference items 
were not allowed in determining regular tax, the regular tax would have 
been $10.2 million and foreign tax credits used to reduce regular tax 
would have been $10.2 million. Because of tax preference items, however, 
B's regular tax is $6.3 million and the amount of foreign tax credits 
actually used to reduce the regular tax is $6.3 million. The amount of 
freed-up foreign tax credits is $3.9 million ($10.2 million minus $6.3 
million).
    (ii) The total amount of B's tax preference items is $8.4 million. 
B's non-preference regular tax is $10.2 million and, reduced by foreign 
tax credits, is zero. B's actual regular tax is $6.3 million and, 
reduced by foreign tax credits, is zero. Since the amount of credits 
that would have been allowed to offset the non-preference regular tax 
would have reduced such tax to an amount ($0) equal to the actual 
regular tax liability ($0), B received a tax benefit from none of the 
$8.4 million of tax preferences and therefore all of these preferences 
are non-beneficial preferences.
    (iii) Since B has $8.4 million in total preference items and no 
regular tax liability, the minimum tax on that amount would be 
$1,258,500 (($8.4 million minus $10,000) multiplied by .15). None of the 
preference items is a beneficial preference. Thus, the minimum tax 
attributable to non-beneficial preferences (and therefore, the credit 
reduction amount) is $1,258,500.
    Example 2. (i) Corporation L has the following items for the 1985 
taxable year:

Actual taxable income...............................  ........   $90,000
Regular tax.........................................  ........    21,750
Available credits:                                                      
  Foreign tax credits for 1985......................   $15,000  ........
  Foreign tax credits carried forward from 1984.....    25,000  ........
  Investment tax credits carried forward from 1984..    20,000          
                                                     ----------         
                                                                 $60,000
Credit allowed to offset actual regular tax:                            
  Foreign tax credits for 1985......................   $15,000  ........
  Foreign tax credits carried forward from 1984.....     6,750          
                                                     ----------         
                                                                 $21,750
Actual regular tax liability........................  ........         0
Preferences.........................................  ........   110,000
Taxable income for 1985 determined as though                            
 preferences were not allowed.......................  ........   200,000
Non-preference regular tax..........................  ........    71,750
Credits allowed to offset non-preference regular                        
 tax:                                                                   
  Foreign tax credits for 1985......................   $15,000  ........
  Foreign tax credits carried forward from 1984.....    25,000  ........
  Investment tax credits carried forward from 1984..    20,000          
                                                     ----------         
                                                                 $60,000
Non-preference regular tax liability................  ........    11,750
                                                                        

    (ii) The freed-up credits for 1985 are $38,250 ($60,000 minus 
$21,750). The non-preference regular tax is $71,750. The amount of L's 
non-beneficial preferences for the 1985 taxable year is $84,456.
    (iii) The minimum tax on L's total preference items of $110,000 
would be $15,000 (($110,000 minus $10,000) multiplied by .15). Since the 
amount of non-beneficial preferences is $84,456, the amount of L's 
beneficial preferences for 1985 is $25,544 ($110,000 minus $84,456). The 
minimum tax on L's beneficial preferences of $25,544 is $2,332 (($25,544 
minus $10,000) multiplied by .15). (This is the amount of minimum tax 
imposed for 1985.) The minimum tax attributable to non-beneficial 
preference items (and therefore, the

[[Page 513]]

credit reduction amount) is $12,668 ($15,000 minus $2,332).

    (5) Reduction of freed-up credits--(i) In general. The freed-up 
credits are reduced by an amount equal to the minimum tax attributable 
to the non-beneficial preferences (``credit reduction amount''). If the 
taxpayer has only one type of freed-up credit (i.e., only investment tax 
credit or only foreign tax credit) and that credit was earned in only 
one year (the current year or a carryover year), then the credit is 
reduced by the credit reduction amount. This rule may be illustrated by 
the following example. This example assumes that foreign tax credits 
being used do not exceed the limitation under section 904.

    Example. (i) In 1982 Corporation B has $17.6 million dollars in 
foreign tax credits available for the taxable year. If preference items 
were not allowed in determining regular tax, the regular tax would have 
been $10.2 million and foreign tax credits used to reduce regular tax 
would have been $10.2 million. Because of tax preference items, however, 
B's regular tax is $6.3 million and the amount of foreign tax credits 
actually used to reduce the regular tax is $6.3 million. The amount of 
freed-up foreign tax credits is $3.9 million ($10.2 million minus $6.3 
million).
    (ii) The total amount of B's tax preference items is $8.4 million. 
B's non-preference regular tax is $10.2 million and, reduced by foreign 
tax credits, is zero. B's actual regular tax is $6.3 million and, 
reduced by foreign tax credits, is zero. Since the amount of credits 
that would have been allowed to offset the non-preference regular tax 
would have reduced such tax to an amount ($0) equal to the actual 
regular tax liability ($0), B received a tax benefit from none of the 
$8.4 million of tax preferences and therefore all of these preferences 
are non-beneficial preferences.
    (iii) Since B has $8.4 million in total preference items and no 
regular tax liability, the minimum tax on that amount would be 
$1,258,500 (($8.4 million minus $10,000) multiplied by .15). None of the 
preference items is a beneficial preference. Thus, the minimum tax 
attributable to nonbeneficial preferences (and therefore, the credit 
reduction amount is $1,258,500.
    (iv) All of the $3.9 million of freed-up credits are foreign tax 
credits that arise in the same year and that otherwise would be carried 
forward. Since the entire amount of B's tax preferences are non-
beneficial preferences, the minimum tax of $1,258,500 that would be 
imposed on the total tax preferences is the credit reduction amount. 
Thus, B's $3.9 million of freed-up foreign tax credits is reduced by 
$1,258,500. The foreign tax credit carryforward from 1982 is 
$10,041,500. This amount is the sum of $2,641,500 (the freed-up foreign 
tax credit of $3,900,000, reduced by the credit reduction amount of 
$1,258,500), plus $7.4 million (the foreign tax credit that would have 
been carried over even if tax preference items had not been allowed).

However, if the taxpayer has more than one type of freed-up credit, or 
the taxpayer's freed-up credits are from more than one taxable year, 
then the credit reduction amount must be allocated under the exact 
method described in paragraph (c)(5)(ii) of this section, unless an 
election is made under paragraph (c)(5)(iii) of this section to use the 
simplified method.
    (ii) Exact method. For each type of freed-up credits and for each 
taxable year within such type from which any such credits are earned, 
the amount of credit reduction shall be equal to the amount of minimum 
tax attributable to the non-beneficial preferences that freed up the 
credits for that type and taxable year. The amount of the credit 
reduction is computed by multiplying the amount of non-beneficial 
preferences which freed up credits for each type and taxable year by the 
minimum tax rate. For purposes of this computation, if the amount of the 
taxpayer's minimum tax exemption for the taxable year (as determined 
under section 56(a)) exceeds the amount of the taxpayer's beneficial 
preferences, such excess exemption shall reduce the amount of non-
beneficial preferences to be multiplied by the minimum tax rate. The 
non-beneficial preferences shall be reduced by any such excess exemption 
in the same order in which the credits that were freed up by such 
preferences would have been allowed to offset tax. Thus, for example, 
any excess exemption shall first reduce non-beneficial preferences that 
freed up foreign tax credits. Any such excess exemption remaining after 
reducing non-beneficial preferences that freed up foreign tax credits to 
zero would then be used to reduce the non-beneficial preferences that 
freed up investment tax credits.
    (iii) Simplified method--(A) Description of method. In lieu of the 
exact credit reduction method described in paragraph (c)(5)(ii) of this 
section, taxpayers may

[[Page 514]]

elect to use the simplified credit reduction method. Under the 
simplified credit reduction method, the amount of freed-up credits for 
each type of credit and for each taxable year in which such credit is 
earned is multiplied by a fraction. The numerator of the fraction is the 
total credit reduction amount as determined in paragraph (c)(4)(i)(C) of 
this section. The denominator is the total amount of freed-up credits as 
determined in paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section. The product of this 
multiplication is the amount of credit reduction for each type and 
taxable year of freed-up credit.
    (B) Election to use simplified method. A taxpayer may elect to use 
the simplified credit reduction method for all taxable years to which 
this section applies by attaching a statement indicating such an 
election on the amended Federal income tax return or returns applying 
the adjustments of this section. If an election is made for any taxable 
year, it must be made for all taxable years. Once an election has been 
made, it can be revoked only with the permission of the Commissioner. 
Similarly, once returns have been filed applying the exact credit 
reduction method, an election to apply the simplified method can be made 
only with the consent of the Commissioner.
    (iv) Effect of credit reduction on credit carryovers. Under both the 
exact method and the simplified method, the determination of credit 
carryovers to other taxable years is made on the basis of freed-up 
credits remaining after such reduction, plus any other unused credits. 
Thus, an amount of freed-up credits that is equal to the credit 
reduction amount shall not be allowed to reduce tax liability in any 
taxable year. Such disallowance is without regard to whether such 
credits would otherwise be allowed as a carryover. The freed-up credits, 
as reduced under this paragraph (c)(5), shall be carried over or carried 
back in applying this section in a carryover or carryback year. No 
minimum tax liability shall be due with respect to the non-beneficial 
preferences for any taxable year.
    (v) Examples. The following examples illustrate reduction of freed-
up credits.

    Example 1. (i) Corporation L has the following items for the 1985 
taxable year:

Actual taxable income...............................  ........   $90,000
Regular tax.........................................  ........    21,750
Available credits:                                                      
  Foreign tax credits for 1985......................   $15,000  ........
  Foreign tax credits carried forward from 1984.....    25,000  ........
  Investment tax credits carried forward from 1984..    20,000  ........
                                                     ----------         
                                                                  60,000
Credit allowed to offset actual regular tax:                            
  Foreign tax credits for 1985......................   $15,000  ........
  Foreign tax credits carried forward from 1984.....     6,750  ........
                                                     ----------         
                                                                  21,750
Actual regular tax liability........................              21,750
Preferences.........................................             110,000
Taxable income for 1985 determined as though                            
 preferences were not allowed.......................             200,000
Non-preference regular tax..........................              71,750
Credits allowed to offset non-preference regular                        
 tax:                                                           ........
  Foreign tax credits for 1985......................   $15,000  ........
  Foreign tax credits carried forward from 1984.....   $25,000  ........
  Investment tax credits carried forward from 1984..    20,000  ........
                                                     ----------         
                                                                  60,000
Non-preference regular tax liability................              11,750
                                                                        

    (ii) The freed-up credits for 1985 are $38,250 ($60,000 minus 
$21,750). The non-preference regular tax is $71,750. The amount of L's 
non-beneficial preferences for the 1985 taxable year is $84.456.
    (iii) The credit reduction amount for 1985 is $12,668, the amount of 
minimum tax attributable to L's non-beneficial preferences. This amount 
is allocated to reduce each category of freed-up credit and to each year 
from which such credit is carried over. L's $38,250 of freed-up credits 
consists of $18,250 of foreign tax credits carried forward from 1984, 
which were freed up by $40,978 of non-beneficial preferences, and 
$20,000 of investment tax credits carried forward from 1984, which were 
freed up by $43,478 of non-beneficial preferences.
    (iv) The apportionment of this credit reduction amount to each 
category of freed-up credit and each taxable year from which such 
credits are carried over is determined as follows under the exact credit 
reduction method:
    (A) Foreign tax credits carried forward from 1984:

Non-beneficial preferences that freed up 1984 FTC x .15=Credit reduction 
          of 1984 FTC

$40,978 x .15=$6,146


[[Page 515]]


    (B) Investment tax credits carried forward from 1984:

Non-beneficial preferences that freed up 1984 ITC x .15=Credit reduction 
          of 1984 ITC

$43,478 x .15=$6,522

Thus, the foreign tax credits from 1984 that are carried forward to 1986 
are $12,104 ($18,250 minus $6,146). The investment tax credits from 1984 
that are carried forward to 1986 are $13,478 ($20,000 minus $6,522).
    (v) The reduction of the freed-up credit under the simplified credit 
reduction method is as follows:
    (A) Foreign tax credit carried forward from 1984:


                                                                        
                                                Credit reduction amount 
 Freed-up foreign tax credits from 1984   x  ---------------------------
                                                 Total freed-up credit  
                                                                        

=Credit reduction allocated to freed-up foreign tax credits carried 
          forward from 1984


                                                                        
                $12,668                                                 
 $18,250   x  ----------  =   $6,044                                    
                $38,250                                                 
                                                                        

    (B) Investment tax credits carried forward from 1984:

                                                                        
                                                Credit reduction amount 
  Freed-up investment tax credits from    x  ---------------------------
                  1984                           Total freed-up credit  
                                                                        

=Credit reduction allocated to freed-up investment tax credit carried 
          forward from 1984


                                                                        
                                 $12,668                                
    $20,000           x     -----------------     =           $6,624    
                                 $38,250                                
                                                                        

Thus, under the simplified credit reduction method, L has $12,206 of 
foreign tax credits for 1984 ($18,250 minus $6,044) that are carried 
forward to 1986, and $13,376 of investment tax credits for 1984 ($20,000 
minus $6,624) that are carried forward to 1986.
    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Example 1 of this paragraph 
(c)(5)(v), except that the foreign tax credits available for use in 1985 
include $10,750 in credits carried forward from 1980 and $14,250 in 
credits carried forward from 1984, rather than $25,000 carried forward 
from 1984. Thus, $4,000 of the freed-up foreign tax credit is carried 
over from 1980. The other $14,250 of freed-up foreign tax credit is 
carried over from 1984. The non-beneficial preferences that freed up the 
1980 foreign tax credit are $10,000. The non-beneficial preferences that 
freed up the 1984 foreign tax credit are $30,978. Under the exact credit 
reduction method, the credit reduction amounts for each of these credits 
are determined as follows:
    (i) Foreign tax credit carried forward from 1980:

$10,000 x .15=$1,500

    (ii) Foreign tax credit carried forward from 1984:

$30,978 x .15=$4,646

Thus, the foreign tax credit from 1984 that is carried forward to 1986 
is $9,604 ($14,250 minus $4,646). Since the foreign tax credit from 1980 
expires after 1985, none of that credit is carried forward to 1986.

    (d) Examples. The following examples are comprehensive illustrations 
of the adjustments described in paragraph (c) of this section:
    Example 1. (i) This example illustrates the operation of the credit 
reduction adjustment when the amount of foreign tax credit allowed is 
subject to the overall limitation under section 904. For purposes of 
this example, assume that Corporation  x  has the following items for 
the 1984 taxable year:

Taxable income (determined as though preferences were not allowed) 
                                                                $140,000
From foreign sources..............................................70,000
Foreign tax credits from 1984......................................5,000
Foreign tax credits from 1983......................................7,000
Actual taxable income.............................................50,000
From foreign sources..............................................25,000

    (ii) The credit reduction adjustment and minimum tax liability for 
the taxable year are determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
1. Taxable income (determined as                                        
 though preferences were not                                            
 allowed)........................  ...........  ...........     $140,000
2. Tax preferences for 1984......  ...........  ...........       90,000
3. Taxable income (line 1 minus                                         
 line 2).........................  ...........  ...........       50,000
4. Regular tax on line 3 amount                                         
 (actual regular tax) before                                            
 credits:                                                               
    $25,000 x .15=$3,750                                                
     25,000 x .18=4,500..........  ...........  ...........        8,250

[[Page 516]]

                                                                        
5. Foreign tax credits allowed                                          
 against regular tax (limited to                                        
 50% of actual regular tax under                                        
 sec. 904)--1984 foreign tax                                            
 credits.........................  ...........  ...........        4,125
6. Regular tax after credits                                            
 (line 4 minus line 5)...........  ...........  ...........        4,125
7. Regular tax on line 1 amount                                         
 (non-preference regular tax)                                           
 before credits                                                         
    25,000 x .15=$3,750..........                                       
    25,000 x .18=4,500...........                                       
    25,000 x .3=7,500............                                       
    25,000 x .4=10,000...........                                       
    40,000 x .46=18,400..........  ...........  ...........       44,150
8. Foreign tax credits allowed                                          
 against non-preference regular                                         
 tax:                                                                   
    $5,000 (1984 foreign tax                                            
     credits)                                                           
    7,000 (1983 foreign tax                                             
     credits)....................  ...........  ...........       12,000
    (the allowed credits do not                                         
     exceed the section 904                                             
     limitation of $22,075)                                             
9. Non-preference regular tax                                           
 after credits (line 7 minus line                                       
 8)..............................  ...........  ...........       32,150
10. Freed-up credits (line 8                                            
 minus line 5):                                                         
    1984 foreign tax credits.....       $5,000                          
                                       (4,125)                          
                                  -------------                         
                                                       $875             
    1983 foreign tax credits.....       $7,000                          
                                             0                          
                                  -------------                         
                                                      7,000             
      Total......................  ...........       $7,875             
                                                                        

    11. Non-beneficial preferences are computed as set forth in the 
table below. Under this computation, non-beneficial preferences are 
considered to free up credits that would have offset non-preference 
regular tax beginning at the lowest tax rates at which income that was 
offset by tax preferences otherwise would have been subjet to regular 
tax. In this case, income that was offset by tax preferences would have 
been taxed beginning at the 30 per cent marginal tax rate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Non-   
                Type                  Freed-up   Divided by   beneficial
                                       credit     tax rate   preferences
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FTC (84)...........................        $875         .30       $2,917
FTC (83)...........................       6,625         .30       22,083
    Do.............................         375         .40          938
                                    ------------            ------------
                                          7,875                   25,938
                                    ============            ============
                                                                        
      Total non-beneficial preferences.....................       25,938
------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
12. Beneficial preferences (line 2 minus line 11).........        64,062
13. Minimum tax on total tax preferences ((line 2 minus                 
 the greater of line 6 or $10,000) x .15).................        12,000
14. Minimum tax on beneficial preferences ((line 12 minus               
 the greater of line 6 or $10,000) x .15).................         8,109
15. Credit reduction amount (line 13 minus line 14).......         3,891
16. Reduction of freed-up credits under the exact method                
 (subtotals of line 11 multiplied by .15):                              
  (a) 1984 foreign tax credits:                                         
    $2,917 x .15=$438                                                   
  (b) 1983 foreign tax credits:                                         
    ($22,083+$938)  x .15=$3,453                                        
  (c) Total credit reduction..............................         3,891
                                                                        

    Note: If X had elected to use the simplified credit reduction 
method, the amount of credit reduction would be determined by 
multiplying the amount of freed-up credit in each category and taxable 
year by the following ratio:

                                                                        
             credit reduction amount                   $3,891           
-------------------------------------------------  = ----------   =.494 
              total freed-up credit                    $7,875           
                                                                        


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(d) Under this method, the 1984 freed-up foreign tax                    
 credits would be reduced by $433 ($875 x .494)and the                  
 1983 freed-up foreign tax credits would be reduced by                  
 $3,458 ($7,000 x .494).                                                

[[Page 517]]

                                                                        
17. Freed-up credits after reduction under the exact                    
 method (line 10 subtotal minus line 16 subtotals):                     
  (a) 1984 foreign tax credits ($874 minus $438)........             437
  (b) 1983 foreign tax credits ($7,000 minus $3,453)....           3,547
  Thus, assuming that Corporation X did not elect to use the simplified 
method, Corporation X will carryover $437 of 1984 foreign tax credits to
 1985 and $3,547 of 1983 foreign tax credits to 1985. Had Corporation X 
 elected to use the simplified method, freed-up credits after reduction 
                          would be as follows:                          
  (a) 1984 foreign tax credits ($875 minus $433)........             442
  (b) 1983 foreign tax credits ($7,000 minus $3,458)....           3,542
Example 2. (i) Corporation X has the following items for                
 its 1985 taxable year:                                                 
Taxable income (determined as though preferences were                   
 not allowed)...........................................      $1,500,000
1984 investment tax credits.............................         400,000
1985 investment tax credits.............................         100,000
Actual taxable income...................................       1,000,000
(ii) The credit reduction and minimum tax of X for 1985                 
 are determined as follows:                                             
1. Taxable income determined as though..................      $1,500,000
2. Tax preferences for 1985.............................         500,000
3. Taxable income (line 1 minus line 2).................       1,000,000
4. Regular tax on line 3 amount (actual regular tax)                    
 before credits:........................................                
  $25,000 x .15=$3,750                                                  
  25,000 x .18=4,500                                                    
  25,000 x .30=7,500                                                    
  25,000 x .40=10,000                                                   
  900,000 x .46=414,000.................................         439,750
5. Investment tax credits allowed (limited under section                
 38 (c) to $25,000 of net tax liability, plus 85 percent                
 of net tax liability in excess of $25,000..............         377,537
6. Regular tax after credits (line 4 minus line 5)......          62,212
7. Regular tax on line 1 amount (non-preference regular                 
 tax) before credits:                                                   
  25,000 x .15=$3,750                                                   
  25,000 x .18=4,500                                                    
  25,000 x .30=7,500                                                    
  25,000 x .40=10,000                                                   
  900,000 x .46=414,000                                                 
  405,000 x .51=206,550                                                 
  95,000 x .46=43,700                                            690,000
8. Investment tax credits allowed against non-preference                
 regular tax............................................         500,000
9. Non-preference regular tax after credits (line 7                     
 minus line 8)..........................................         190,000
10. Freed-up credits (line 8 minus line 5):                             
  1984 investment tax credit............................        $400,000
                                                               (377,537)
                                                         ---------------
                                                                  22,463
  1985 investment tax credit............................        $100,000
                                                                   --0--
                                                         ---------------
                                                                 100,000
                                                         ---------------
      Total.............................................        $122,463
                                                         ===============
                                                                        

    11. Non-beneficial preferences are computed as set forth in the 
table below. Under this computation, non-beneficial preferences are 
considered to free up credits that would have offset non-preference 
regular tax beginning at the lowest tax rates at which income that was 
offset by tax preferences otherwise would have been subject to regular 
tax. In this case, income that was offset by tax preferences would have 
been taxed beginning at the 51 percent marginal tax rate. Although some 
of the income offset by preferences would be taxed at the 46 percent 
marginal rate (because taxable income in excess of $1,405,000 is not 
subject to the 5 percent addition to tax on taxable income in excess of 
$1 million), the 51 percent marginal rate is taken into account first.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Non-   
               Type                  Freed-up    Divided by   beneficial
                                      credit      tax rate   preferences
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ITC (84).........................      $22,463          .51      $44,045
ITC (85).........................      100,000          .51      196,078
                                  -------------             ------------
                                       122,463                   240,123
                                  =============             ============
                                                                        

[[Page 518]]

                                                                        
    Total non-beneficial                                                
     preferences.................                                240,123
------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
12. Beneficial preferences (line 2 minus line 11)..........      259,877
13. Minimum tax on total tax preferences ((line 2 minus the             
 greater of line 6 or $10,000) X .15)......................       65,668
14. Minimum tax on beneficial preferences ((line 12 minus               
 the greater of line 6 or $10,000) X .15...................       29,650
15. Credit reduction amount (line 13 minus line 14)........       36,018
16. Reduction of freed-up credits under the exact method                
 (subtotals of line 11 multiplied by .15):                              
  (a) 1984 investment tax credits:                                      
    $44,045  x  .15=$6,607                                              
  (b) 1985 investment tax credits:                                      
    $196,078  x  .15=$29,411                                            
  (c) Total credit reduction...............................       36,018
17. Fixed-up credits after reduction (assuming that                     
 Corporation X does not elect the simplified method):                   
  (a) 1984 investment credit ($22,463 minus $6,607)........       15,856
  (b) 1985 investment credit ($100,000 minus $29,411)......       70,589
                                                                        

    (e) Miscellaneous rules--(1) Investment Credit Recapture. If during 
any taxable year property to which section 47 applies is disposed of, 
then for purposes of determining any increase in tax under section 47 
for such year, the amount of any reduction under this section of freed-
up section 38 credit which was earned in the year the property was 
placed in service shall be treated as a credit that was allowed in a 
prior taxable year.

    Example. Corporation D places property in service in 1983 that 
generates investment tax credits of $10,000. D earns no other investment 
tax credits in 1983. None of the investment tax credits are used to 
reduce tax liability in 1983 or any prior years. In 1984, D uses $1,000 
of this credit to reduce regular tax liability. In addition, D has items 
of tax preferences in 1984. However, under section 58(h), D is not 
liable for minimum tax on any of these preference items because none of 
these preference items produces a tax benefit in 1984. As a result, an 
adjustment is made under the provisions of Sec. 1.58-9 and the 
investment tax credit carryforward from 1983 is reduced by $4,000. Thus, 
D has an investment tax credit carryforward of $5,000 that is 
attributable to the property placed in service in 1983. In 1986, the 
property is disposed of and the investment tax credits earned in 1983 
are recomputed as required under section 47. This recomputation results 
in a reduction of $6,000 of the investment tax credits earned in 1983. D 
must now adjust its 1983 investment tax credit carryforward under 
section 47(a)(6) by reducing this carryforward to zero. In addition, D 
has an additional tax liability of $1,000 for 1986.

    (2) Period of limitations; adjustments to tax liability. The 
adjustments described in this section shall, in general, apply for 
purposes of assessing deficiencies or claiming refunds of tax for any 
taxable year for which the tax liability is affected by the adjustments 
of this section, provided that the period of limitations under section 
6501 has not expired for such taxable year. Therefore, these adjustments 
generally apply for purposes of assessing deficiencies and refunding any 
overpayment of tax for all years for which the period of limitations has 
not expired regardless of whether the period of limitations has expired 
for the taxable year in which the non-beneficial preferences arose. 
However, the adjustments of this section do not apply to reduce 
otherwise allowable credits that were freed up by such non-beneficial 
preferences where:
    (i) The taxpayer paid minimum tax on all tax preference items 
arising in the taxable year in which the non-beneficial preferences 
arose;
    (ii) The taxpayer has not made a claim for a credit or refund for 
such minimum tax; and
    (iii) The period of limitations for claiming a credit or refund 
under section 6511 has expired for such taxable year.
    (A) Further, if--
    (1) the taxpayer never paid minimum tax attributable to non-
beneficial preferences;

[[Page 519]]

    (2) credits that were freed up by such preferences were used to 
reduce tax liability for a taxable year for which the period of 
limitations has expired; and
    (3) credits so used exceed the amount of credits that would have 
been available if the credit reduction required under this section with 
respect to such preferences had been made,
    (B) Then, the taxpayer shall be liable for the minimum tax equal to 
the amount of credits so used, provided the period of limitations has 
not expired for the taxable year in which preferences arose.
    (3) Claims for credit or refund. A taxpayer may claim a credit or 
refund of minimum tax that was made on non-beneficial preferences. 
However, such a claim for a credit or refund shall be disallowed to the 
extent that the taxpayer has reduced tax liability in a taxable year for 
which the period of limitations has expired by using freed-up credits in 
excess of the amount that would have been available if the credit 
reduction required under this section had been made. Such claim must be 
made by filing an amended return for the taxable year for which such 
minimum tax was paid. Further, if a claim for credit or refund is filed, 
amended returns must also be filed for any taxable year for which tax 
liability would be affected as a result of the reduction, under this 
section, of credits freed up by such non-beneficial preferences. See 
section 6511 and the regulations thereunder regarding the period of 
limitations for claiming a credit or refund.
    (4) Carryovers of foreign tax credit to taxable years after 1986. In 
the case of foreign tax credit carryforwards to taxable years beginning 
after December 31, 1986, reductions in such credits required under this 
section shall apply for purposes of computing the alternative minimum 
tax foreign tax credit under section 59(a) of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986 as well as for purposes of computing the foreign tax credit for 
regular tax purposes.
    (5) Credit Carrybacks. If credit carrybacks increase the amount of 
credits for a taxable year, the adjustments described in this section 
shall be recomputed taking into account the additional credits. This 
rule may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. (i) In 1981 corporation D has actual taxable income of 
$72,500 and regular tax before credits of $15,000. In computing actual 
regular taxable income, D made use of $36,739 of tax preference items, 
so that D's taxable income determined as though preference were not 
allowed would be $109,239. D's non-preference regular tax before credits 
is $30,000. D earns $25,000 of foreign tax credits in 1981, none of 
which exceed the limitation under section 904 determined using either 
actual regular taxable income or the non-preference taxable income. 
These credits reduce actual regular tax to zero ($0) and would have 
reduced non-preference regular tax to $5,000 ($30,000 minus $25,000). 
Thus, D has freed-up foreign tax credits from 1981 of $10,000 ($25,000 
minus $15,000). Pursuant to the adjustments required under this section, 
D determines that its credit reduction amount is $3,843 and reduces its 
freed-up credit (and its credit carryover) from 1981 to $6,157 ($10,000 
minus $3,843). D also pays minimum tax of $167 on $11,114 of beneficial 
preferences (($11,114 minus $10,000) multiplied by .15).
    (ii) In 1982 D earns additional foreign tax credits. After 
application of the foreign tax credit carryback rules, D would have 
$5,000 of 1982 foreign tax credits available for use in 1981. D must 
recalculate the adjustments required under this section by treating 
$5,000 of foreign tax credit from 1982 as carried back and (assuming 
that these credits do not exceed the limitation under section 904) used 
to reduce non-preference regular tax liability in 1981 to zero ($0). 
That is, $5,000 of the foreign tax credits earned in 1982 are treated as 
credits freed up because of D's tax preference items in 1981. Pursuant 
to the rules set forth herein, D must take into account the foreign tax 
credits from both 1981 and 1982 in determining to what extent a tax 
benefit was derived from the preference items used to determine actual 
regular tax liability in 1981 and in computing the credit reduction 
amount. When the $5,000 of foreign tax credits from 1982 are considered, 
all preferences become non-beneficial preferences, and the credit 
reduction amount is $4,010. Assuming that D elects the simplified 
method, the 1981 freed-up credits and the 1982 freed-up credits will 
each be reduced by the following percentage:

                                                                        
               $4,010 (credit reduction amount)                         
--------------------------------------------------------------  = .2673 
               $15,000 (total freed-up credits)                         
                                                                        

The 1981 freed-up foreign tax credits of $10,000 are thus reduced by 
$2,673 ($10,000 multiplied by .2673), to $7,327 and the 1982 freed-up 
foreign tax credits of $5,000 are reduced by $1,334 ($5,000 multiplied 
by .2673) to $3,666. D also files a claim for credit or refund of the 
$167 of minimum tax paid in 1981.

[[Page 520]]

    Example 2. In 1985 corporation E's non-preference regular taxable 
income was $25,000. E had no available credits. It paid zero in regular 
tax, however, because of $25,000 in preference items. E paid $2,250 of 
minimum tax on these preferences (($25,000 minus $10,000) multiplied by 
.15). In 1986, E has additional investment tax credits. After 
application of the investment tax credit carryback rules, E would have 
$1,000 investment tax credit from 1986 available for use in 1985. E must 
recompute the adjustments required under this section by treating $1,000 
of these 1986 investment tax credits as carried back and used to reduce 
non-preference regular tax liability for 1985. Pursuant to the rules of 
this section, all of these $1,000 of credits are freed-up credits. Non-
beneficial preferences are $6,667 ($1,000 grossed up at a 15 percent 
regular tax rate). Beneficial preferences are $18,333 ($25,000 minus 
$6,667). Minimum tax on all preferences would be $2,250 (($25,000 minus 
$10,000) multiplied by .15); minimum tax on beneficial preferences would 
be $1,250 (($18,333 minus $10,000) multiplied by .15). Minimum tax 
attributable to the non-beneficial preferences is thus $1,000 ($2,250 
minus $1,250), which is the credit reduction amount. E thus reduces the 
$1,000 of credits carried back to 1985 to zero. Under the rules of this 
section, the amount of minimum tax due for 1985 is redetermined. It is 
equal to the minimum tax on beneficial preferences, which, as described 
above, is $1,250. Because E paid minimum tax of $2,250 in 1985, E files 
a claim for credit or refund for $1,000 of the minimum tax paid in 1985.


    (f) Treatment of net operating losses. [Reserved]

[T.D. 8416, 57 FR 19255, May 5, 1992; 57 FR 24848, June 11, 1992]
Secs. 1.59--1.60  [Reserved]

[[Page 521]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  Table of OMB Control Numbers
  List of CFR Sections Affected


                                                                    Chap.

[[Page 523]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters

<R04>

                      (Revised as of April 1, 1997)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                          Title 2--[Reserved]

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  General Accounting Office (Parts 1--99)
        II  Federal Claims Collection Standards (General 
                Accounting Office--Department of Justice) (Parts 
                100--299)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
        IV  Advisory Committee on Federal Pay (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Part 2100)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)
      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Part 3201)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Part 3301)

[[Page 524]]

      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Part 3401)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Part 3601)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Part 3801)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Part 4301)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Part 4501)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Part 5001)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Part 5101)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Part 5201)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Part 5301)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Part 5501)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Part 5601)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Part 5701)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Part 5801)
         L  Department of Transportation (Part 6001)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Part 6201)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Part 6401)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Part 6701)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Part 
                6801)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Part 
                6901)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Part 7001)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Part 7101)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Part 7201)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Part 7301)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Part 
                7501)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Part 
                7601)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Part 7901)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Part 8101)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Part 
                8401)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Part 8601)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Part 8701)

                          Title 6--[Reserved]

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture
         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Consumer Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)

[[Page 525]]

       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of Finance and Management, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  [Reserved]
    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3400--
                3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)

[[Page 526]]

     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)
    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Immigration and Naturalization Service, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1--499)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)
       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Meat and Poultry 
                Inspection, Department of Agriculture (Parts 300--
                599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
        XI  United States Enrichment Corporation (Parts 1100--
                1199)
        XV  Office of the Federal Inspector for the Alaska Natural 
                Gas Transportation System (Parts 1500--1599)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)

[[Page 527]]

       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board (Parts 
                1500--1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700-1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)
       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Export Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)

[[Page 528]]

       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  United States Customs Service, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Employment Standards Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)

[[Page 529]]

      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)
        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 1000--1099)

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)
        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  United States Information Agency (Parts 500--599)
        VI  United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 700--799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board Regulations (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Board for International Broadcasting (Parts 1300--
                1399)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

[[Page 530]]

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)
        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs and Section 202 Direct Loan Program) 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--999)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)
        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1001)

[[Page 531]]

       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 1200--1299)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--799)

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 1--299)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--199)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)
      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

[[Page 532]]

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Minerals Management Service, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 200--299)
       III  Board of Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
        VI  Bureau of Mines, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                600--699)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)
      XXIX  Presidential Commission on the Assignment of Women in 
                the Armed Forces (Part 2900)

[[Page 533]]

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 
                Department of Education (Parts 700--799)
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100-1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

                        Title 35--Panama Canal

         I  Panama Canal Regulations (Parts 1--299)

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
       XIV  Assassination Records Review Board (Parts 1400-1499)

[[Page 534]]

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  Patent and Trademark Office, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--99)

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--799)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 61-1--61-999)
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System
       201  Federal Information Resources Management Regulation 
                (Parts 201-1--201-99) [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       301  Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)

[[Page 535]]

       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Parts 303-1--303-2)
       304  Payment from a Non-Federal Source for Travel Expenses 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)
        IV  Health Care Financing Administration, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200--499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)
       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10005)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services, 
                General Administration (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899)

[[Page 536]]

         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  ACTION (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)
       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXII  Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2299)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Department of Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300--
                399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  Agency for International Development (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)

[[Page 537]]

        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        19  United States Information Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)
        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        35  Panama Canal Commission (Parts 3500--3599)
        44  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 4400--4499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)
        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement (Parts 5300--5399)
        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Part 
                5452)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  General Services Administration Board of Contract 
                Appeals (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Research and Special Programs Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)

[[Page 538]]

       III  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)
         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)
        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)
         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            Acts Requiring Publication in the Federal Register
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR



[[Page 539]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR

<R04>

                      (Revised as of April 1, 1997)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or
                     Agency                               Chapter

ACTION                                            45, XII
Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Advanced Research Projects Agency                 32, I
Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental          5, VII
     Relations
Advisory Committee on Federal Pay                 5, IV
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development              22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Cooperative State Research, Education, and      7, XXXIV
       Extension Service
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy, Office of                               7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Finance and Management, Office of               7, XXX
  Food and Consumer Service                       7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Alaska Natural Gas Transportation System, Office  10, XV
     of the Federal Inspector
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of          27, I
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I

[[Page 540]]

Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX
Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
     Compliance Board
Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Armed Forces Retirement Home                      5, XI
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, United       22, VI
     States
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Assassination Records Review Board                36, XIV
Benefits Review Board                             20, VII
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase From People Who Are
Board for International Broadcasting              22, XIII
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee        45, XXII
     Commission
Civil Rights, Commission on                       45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Commerce Department                               44, IV
  Census Bureau                                   15, I`
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Export Administration, Bureau of                15, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Fishery Conservation and Management             50, VI
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office                     37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Cooperative State Research, Education, and        7, XXXIV
     Extension Service
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Customs Service, United States                    19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A
  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII
  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51
  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I

[[Page 541]]

  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Defense Mapping Agency                          32, I
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 2
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Mapping Agency                            32, I
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Enrichment Corporation, United States             10, XI
Environmental Protection Agency                   5, LIV; 40, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV
  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                25, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2
  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II
  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export Administration, Bureau of                  15, VII
Export-Import Bank of the United States           5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII
Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1
Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III

[[Page 542]]

Federal Claims Collection Standards               4, II
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 44
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II; 49, III
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Inspector for the Alaska Natural Gas      10, XV
     Transportation System, Office of
Federal Labor Relations Authority, and General    5, XIV; 22, XIV
     Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations 
     Authority
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Pay, Advisory Committee on                5, IV
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Property Management Regulations System    41, Subtitle C
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Finance and Management, Office of                 7, XXX
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Fishery Conservation and Management               50, VI
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Consumer Service                         7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX
Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Accounting Office                         4, I, II
General Services Administration                   5, LVII
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 101, 105
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
       of Certain Employees
  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302
  Travel Allowances                               41, 301

[[Page 543]]

Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Great Lakes Pilotage                              46, III
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          5, XLV; 45, Subtitle A
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Health Care Financing Administration            42, IV
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Health Care Financing Administration              42, IV
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      5, LXV; 24, Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Naturalization Service            8, I
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
     Secretary
Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V
Information Agency, United States                 22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General
  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Intergovernmental Relations, Advisory Commission  5, VII
     on
Interior Department
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  Minerals Management Service                     30, II
  Mines, Bureau of                                30, VI
  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III
  National Park Service                           36, I
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I

[[Page 544]]

  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board   30, III
       of
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, Agency for             22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
  International Development, Agency for           22, II; 48, 7
  Overseas Private Investment Corporation         5, XXXIII; 22, VII
International Fishing and Related Activities      50, III
International Investment, Office of               31, VIII
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                5, XXVIII; 28, I
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             4, II
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration and Naturalization Service          8, I
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII
  Benefits Review Board                           20, VII
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29
  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Relations and Cooperative      29, II
       Programs, Bureau of
  Labor-Management Programs, Office of            29, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration     29, XXV
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A
  Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of    41, 61; 20, IX
       the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Relations and Cooperative        29, II
     Programs, Bureau of
Labor-Management Programs, Office of              29, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II
Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minerals Management Service                       30, II
Mines, Bureau of                                  30, VI

[[Page 545]]

Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV
Monetary Offices                                  31, I
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National Archives and Records Administration      5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Bureau of Standards                      15, II
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National and Community Service, Corporation for   45, XXV
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 49, V
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Labor Relations Board                    29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV
National Mediation Board                          29, X
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       5, XLIII; 45, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
National Weather Service                          15, IX
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Panama Canal Commission                           48, 35
Panama Canal Regulations                          35, I
Patent and Trademark Office                       37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration       29, XXV
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
       Acquisition Regulation
  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Postal Rate Commission                            5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI

[[Page 546]]

President's Commission on White House             1, IV
     Fellowships
Presidential Commission on the Assignment of      32, XXIX
     Women in the Armed Forces
Presidential Documents                            3
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Refugee Resettlement, Office of                   45, IV
Regional Action Planning Commissions              13, V
Relocation Allowances                             41, 302
Research and Special Programs Administration      49, I
Rural Business-Cooperative Service                7, XVIII, XLII
Rural Development Administration                  7, XLII
Rural Housing Service                             7, XVIII, XXXV
Rural Telephone Bank                              7, XVI
Rural Utilities Service                           7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation     33, IV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of          32, XXIV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and     47, II
     National Security Council
Secret Service                                    31, IV
Securities and Exchange Commission                17, II
Selective Service System                          32, XVI
Small Business Administration                     13, I
Smithsonian Institution                           36, V
Social Security Administration                    20, III; 48, 23
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States        5, XI
Special Counsel, Office of                        5, VIII
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,    34, III
     Office of
Special Trustee for American Indians, Office of   25, VII
State Department                                  22, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 6
Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board of  30, III
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,       30, VII
     Office of
Surface Transportation Board                      49, X
Susquehanna River Basin Commission                18, VIII
Technology Administration                         15, XI
Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for        37, IV
Technology, Under Secretary for                   37, V
Tennessee Valley Authority                        5, LXIX; 18, XIII
Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board       12, XV
Thrift Supervision Office, Department of the      12, V
     Treasury
Trade Representative, United States, Office of    15, XX
Transportation, Department of                     5, L
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 63
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 12
  Federal Aviation Administration                 14, I
  Federal Highway Administration                  23, I, II; 49, III
  Federal Railroad Administration                 49, II
  Federal Transit Administration                  49, VI
  Maritime Administration                         46, II
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  23, II, III; 49, V
  Research and Special Programs Administration    49, I
  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation   33, IV
  Secretary of Transportation, Office of          14, II; 49, Subtitle A
  Surface Transportation Board                    49, X
Transportation, Office of                         7, XXXIII
Travel Allowances                                 41, 301
Treasury Department                               5, XXI; 17, IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of        27, I

[[Page 547]]

  Community Development Financial Institutions    12, XVIII
       Fund
  Comptroller of the Currency                     12, I
  Customs Service, United States                  19, I
  Engraving and Printing, Bureau of               31, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 10
  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center         31, VII
  Fiscal Service                                  31, II
  Foreign Assets Control, Office of               31, V
  Internal Revenue Service                        26, I
  International Investment, Office of             31, VIII
  Monetary Offices                                31, I
  Secret Service                                  31, IV
  Secretary of the Treasury, Office of            31, Subtitle A
  Thrift Supervision, Office of                   12, V
Truman, Harry S. Scholarship Foundation           45, XVIII
United States and Canada, International Joint     22, IV
     Commission
United States and Mexico, International Boundary  22, XI
     and Water Commission, United States Section
United States Enrichment Corporation              10, XI
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation      43, III
     Commission
Veterans Affairs Department                       38, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 8
Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of the  41, 61; 20, IX
     Assistant Secretary for
Vice President of the United States, Office of    32, XXVIII
Vocational and Adult Education, Office of         34, IV
Wage and Hour Division                            29, V
Water Resources Council                           18, VI
Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of         20, I
World Agricultural Outlook Board                  7, XXXVIII

[[Page 549]]

                                     

                                     


<R03>
                   Table of OMB Control NumbersSecs. 

<R04>

     PART 602--OMB CONTROL NUMBERS UNDER THE PAPERWORK REDUCTION ACT

Sec. 602.101  OMB Control numbers.

    (a) Purpose. This part collects and displays the control numbers 
assigned to collections of information in Internal Revenue Service 
regulations by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under the 
Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980. The Internal Revenue Service intends 
that this part (together with 26 CFR 601.9000) comply with the 
requirements of Secs. 1320.7(f), 1320.12, 1320.13, and 1320.14 of 5 CFR 
part 1320 (OMB regulations implementing the Paperwork Reduction Act), 
for the display of control numbers assigned by OMB to collections of 
information in Internal Revenue Service regulations. This part does not 
display control numbers assigned by the Office of Management and Budget 
to collections of information of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and 
Firearms.
    (b) Cross-reference. For display of control numbers assigned by the 
Office of Management and Budget to Internal Revenue Service collections 
of information in the Statement of Procedural Rules (26 CFR part 601), 
see 26 CFR 601.9000.
    (c) Display.


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Current OMB
     CFR part or section where identified and described      control No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.23-5.....................................................    1545-0074
1.25-1T....................................................    1545-0922
                                                               1545-0930
1.25-2T....................................................    1545-0922
                                                               1545-0930
1.25-3T....................................................    1545-0922
                                                               1545-0930
1.25-4T....................................................    1545-0922
1.25-5T....................................................    1545-0922
1.25-6T....................................................    1545-0922
1.25-7T....................................................    1545-0922
1.25-8T....................................................    1545-0922
1.28-1.....................................................    1545-0619
1.31-2.....................................................    1545-0074
1.32-2.....................................................    1545-0074
1.37-1.....................................................    1545-0074
1.37-3.....................................................    1545-0074
1.41-2.....................................................    1545-0619
1.41-3.....................................................    1545-0619
1.41-4A....................................................    1545-0074
1.41-4 (b) and (c).........................................    1545-0074
1.41-8(d)..................................................    1545-0732
1.41-9.....................................................    1545-0619
1.42-1T....................................................    1545-0984
                                                               1545-0988
1.42-2.....................................................    1545-1005
1.42-5.....................................................    1545-1291
1.42-6.....................................................    1545-1102
1.42-8.....................................................    1545-1102
1.42-10....................................................    1545-1102
1.42-13....................................................    1545-1357
1.42-14....................................................    1545-1423
1.43-3(a)(3)...............................................    1545-1292
1.43-3(b)(3)...............................................    1545-1292
1.44A-1....................................................    1545-0068
1.44A-3....................................................    1545-0074
1.44B-1....................................................    1545-0219
1.458-1....................................................    1545-0879
1.458-2....................................................    1545-0152
1.46-1.....................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0155
1.46-3.....................................................    1545-0155
1.46-4.....................................................    1545-0155
1.46-5.....................................................    1545-0155
1.46-6.....................................................    1545-0155
1.46-8.....................................................    1545-0155
1.46-9.....................................................    1545-0155
1.46-10....................................................    1545-0118
1.46-11....................................................    1545-0155
1.47-1.....................................................    1545-0166
                                                               1545-0155
1.47-3.....................................................    1545-0166
                                                               1545-0155
1.47-4.....................................................    1545-0123
1.47-5.....................................................    1545-0092
1.47-6.....................................................    1545-0099
1.48-3.....................................................    1545-0155
1.48-4.....................................................    1545-0808
                                                               1545-0155
1.48-5.....................................................    1545-0155
1.48-6.....................................................    1545-0155
1.48-12....................................................    1545-0155
1.50A-1....................................................    1545-0895
1.50A-2....................................................    1545-0895
1.50A-3....................................................    1545-0895
1.50A-4....................................................    1545-0895
1.50A-5....................................................    1545-0895

[[Page 550]]

                                                                        
1.50A-6....................................................    1545-0895
1.50A-7....................................................    1545-0895
1.50B-1....................................................    1545-0895
1.50B-2....................................................    1545-0895
1.50B-3....................................................    1545-0895
1.50B-4....................................................    1545-0895
1.50B-5....................................................    1545-0895
1.51-1.....................................................    1545-0219
                                                               1545-0241
                                                               1545-0244
                                                               1545-0797
1.52-2.....................................................    1545-0219
1.52-3.....................................................    1545-0219
1.56-1.....................................................    1545-0123
1.56(g)-1..................................................    1545-1233
1.56A-1....................................................    1545-0227
1.56A-2....................................................    1545-0227
1.56A-3....................................................    1545-0227
1.56A-4....................................................    1545-0227
1.56A-5....................................................    1545-0227
1.57-5.....................................................    1545-0227
1.58-1.....................................................    1545-0175
1.58-9(c)(5)(iii)(B).......................................    1545-1093
1.58-9(e)(3)...............................................    1545-1093
1.61-2.....................................................    1545-0771
1.61-2T....................................................    1545-0771
1.61-4.....................................................    1545-0187
1.61-15....................................................    1545-0074
1.62-2.....................................................    1545-1148
1.63-1.....................................................    1545-0074
1.67-2T....................................................    1545-0110
1.67-3T....................................................    1545-0118
1.67-3.....................................................    1545-1018
1.71-1T....................................................    1545-0074
1.72-4.....................................................    1545-0074
1.72-6.....................................................    1545-0074
1.72-9.....................................................    1545-0074
1.72-17....................................................    1545-0074
1.72-17A...................................................    1545-0074
1.72-18....................................................    1545-0074
1.74-1.....................................................    1545-1100
1.79-2.....................................................    1545-0074
1.79-3.....................................................    1545-0074
1.83-2.....................................................    1545-0074
1.83-5.....................................................    1545-0074
1.83-6.....................................................    1545-1448
1.103-10...................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0940
1.103-15AT.................................................    1545-0720
1.103-18...................................................    1545-1226
1.103(n)-2T................................................    1545-0874
1.103(n)-4T................................................    1545-0874
1.103A-2...................................................    1545-0720
1.105-4....................................................    1545-0074
1.105-5....................................................    1545-0074
1.105-6....................................................    1545-0074
1.108(a)-1.................................................    1545-0046
1.108(a)-2.................................................    1545-0046
1.108(c)-1.................................................    1545-1421
1.117-5....................................................    1545-0869
1.119-1....................................................    1545-0067
1.120-3....................................................    1545-0057
1.121-1....................................................    1545-0072
1.121-2....................................................    1545-0072
1.121-3....................................................    1545-0072
1.121-4....................................................    1545-0072
                                                               1545-0091
1.121-5....................................................    1545-0072
1.127-2....................................................    1545-0768
1.132-1T...................................................    1545-0771
1.132-2....................................................    1545-0771
1.132-2T...................................................    1545-0771
1.132-5....................................................    1545-0771
1.132-5T...................................................    1545-0771
                                                               1545-1098
1.141-1....................................................    1545-1451
1.141-12...................................................    1545-1451
1.142-2....................................................    1545-1451
1.148-0....................................................    1545-1098
1.148-1....................................................    1545-1098
1.148-2....................................................    1545-1098
                                                               1545-1347
1.148-3....................................................    1545-1098
                                                               1545-1347
1.148-4....................................................    1545-1098
                                                               1545-1347
1.148-5....................................................    1545-1098
1.148-6....................................................    1545-1098
                                                               1545-1451
1.148-7....................................................    1545-1098
1.148-7....................................................    1545-1347
1.148-8....................................................    1545-1098
1.148-11...................................................    1545-1098
1.148-11...................................................    1545-1347
1.149(e)-1.................................................    1545-0720
1.151-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.152-3....................................................    1545-0071
1.152-4....................................................    1545-0074
1.152-4T...................................................    1545-0074
1.162-1....................................................    1545-0139
1.162-2....................................................    1545-0139
1.162-3....................................................    1545-0139
1.162-4....................................................    1545-0139
1.162-5....................................................    1545-0139
1.162-6....................................................    1545-0139
1.162-7....................................................    1545-0139
1.162-8....................................................    1545-0139
1.162-9....................................................    1545-0139
1.162-10...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-11...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-12...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-13...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-14...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-15...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-16...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-17...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-18...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-19...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-20...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-27...................................................    1545-1466
1.163-5....................................................    1545-0786
                                                               1545-1132
1.163-8T...................................................    1545-0995
1.163-10T..................................................    1545-0074
1.163(d)-1.................................................    1545-1421
1.165-1....................................................    1545-0177
1.165-2....................................................    1545-0177
1.165-3....................................................    1545-0177
1.165-4....................................................    1545-0177
1.165-5....................................................    1545-0177
1.165-6....................................................    1545-0177
1.165-7....................................................    1545-0177
1.165-8....................................................    1545-0177
1.165-9....................................................    1545-0177
1.165-10...................................................    1545-0177
1.165-11...................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0177
                                                               1545-0786
1.165-12...................................................    1545-0786
1.166-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.166-2....................................................    1545-1254
1.166-4....................................................    1545-0123
1.166-10...................................................    1545-0123
1.167(a)-5T................................................    1545-1021

[[Page 551]]

                                                                        
1.167(a)-7.................................................    1545-0172
1.167(a)-11................................................    1545-0152
                                                               1545-0172
1.167(a)-12................................................    1545-0172
1.167(d)-1.................................................    1545-0172
1.167(e)-1.................................................    1545-0172
1.167(f)-11................................................    1545-0172
1.167(l)-1.................................................    1545-0172
1.168(d)-1.................................................    1545-1146
1.168(f)(8)-1T.............................................    1545-0923
1.168(i)-1.................................................    1545-1331
1.168-5....................................................    1545-0172
1.169-4....................................................    1545-0172
1.170-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.170-2....................................................    1545-0074
1.170-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.170A-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.170A-2...................................................    1545-0074
1.170A-4(A)(b).............................................    1545-0123
1.170A-8...................................................    1545-0074
1.170A-9...................................................    1545-0052
                                                               1545-0074
1.170A-11..................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0074
1.170A-12..................................................    1545-0020
                                                               1545-0074
1.170A-13..................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0754
                                                               1545-0908
                                                               1545-1431
1.170A-13(f)...............................................    1545-1464
1.170A-14..................................................    1545-0763
1.171-3....................................................    1545-0172
1.172-1....................................................    1545-0172
1.172-13...................................................    1545-0863
1.173-1....................................................    1545-0172
1.174-3....................................................    1545-0152
1.174-4....................................................    1545-0152
1.175-3....................................................    1545-0187
1.175-6....................................................    1545-0152
1.177-1....................................................    1545-0172
1.179-2....................................................    1545-1201
1.179-3....................................................    1545-1201
1.179-5....................................................    1545-0172
1.180-2....................................................    1545-0074
1.182-6....................................................    1545-0074
1.183-1....................................................    1545-0195
1.183-2....................................................    1545-0195
1.183-3....................................................    1545-0195
1.183-4....................................................    1545-0195
1.190-3....................................................    1545-0074
1.194-2....................................................    1545-0735
1.194-4....................................................    1545-0735
1.197-1T...................................................    1545-1425
1.213-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.215-1T...................................................    1545-0074
1.217-2....................................................    1545-0182
1.243-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.243-4....................................................    1545-0123
1.243-5....................................................    1545-0123
1.248-1....................................................    1545-0172
1.261-1....................................................    1545-1041
1.263(e)-1.................................................    1545-0123
1.263A-1...................................................    1545-0987
1.263A-1T..................................................    1545-0187
1.263A-2...................................................    1545-0987
1.263A-3...................................................    1545-0987
                                                               1545-0987
1.263A-8(b)(2)(iii)........................................    1545-1265
1.263A-9(d)(1).............................................    1545-1265
1.263A-9(f)(1)(ii).........................................    1545-1265
1.263A-9(f)(2)(iv).........................................    1545-1265
1.263A-9(g)(2)(iv)(C)......................................    1545-1265
1.263A-9(g)(3)(iv).........................................    1545-1265
1.265-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.265-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.266-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.267(f)-1.................................................    1545-0885
1.268-1....................................................    1545-0184
1.274-1....................................................    1545-0139
1.274-2....................................................    1545-0139
1.274-3....................................................    1545-0139
1.274-4....................................................    1545-0139
1.274-5A...................................................    1545-0139
                                                               1545-0771
1.274-5T...................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0172
                                                               1545-0771
1.274-6....................................................    1545-0139
                                                               1545-0771
1.274-6T...................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0771
1.274-7....................................................    1545-0139
1.274-8....................................................    1545-0139
1.279-6....................................................    1545-0123
1.280C-4...................................................    1545-1155
1.280F-3T..................................................    1545-0074
1.281-4....................................................    1545-0123
1.302-4....................................................    1545-0074
1.305-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.305-5....................................................    1545-1438
1.307-2....................................................    1545-0074
1.312-15...................................................    1545-0172
1.316-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.331-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.332-4....................................................    1545-0123
1.332-6....................................................    1545-0123
1.337(d)-1.................................................    1545-1160
1.337(d)-2.................................................    1545-1160
1.338-1....................................................    1545-1295
1.338(b)-1.................................................    1545-1295
1.338(h)(10)-1.............................................    1545-1295
1.341-7....................................................    1545-0123
1.351-3....................................................    1545-0074
1.355-5....................................................    1545-0123
1.362-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.367(a)-1T................................................    1545-0026
1.367(a)-2T................................................    1545-0026
1.367(a)-3.................................................    1545-0026
                                                               1545-1478
1.367(a)-3T................................................    1545-0026
1.367(a)-6T................................................    1545-0026
1.367(d)-1T................................................    1545-0026
1.367(e)-1T................................................    1545-1487
1.367(e)-2T................................................    1545-1124
1.368-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.371-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.371-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.374-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.381(b)-1.................................................    1545-0123
1.381(c)(4)-1..............................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0152
                                                               1545-0879
1.381(c)(5)-1..............................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0152
1.381(c)(6)-1..............................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0152
1.381(c)(8)-1..............................................    1545-0123
1.381(c)(10)-1.............................................    1545-0123
1.381(c)(11)-1(k)..........................................    1545-0123
1.381(c)(13)-1.............................................    1545-0123
1.381(c)(17)-1.............................................    1545-0045
1.381(c)(25)-1.............................................    1545-0045
1.382-1T...................................................    1545-0123

[[Page 552]]

                                                                        
1.382-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.382-2T...................................................    1545-0123
1.382-3....................................................    1545-1281
                                                               1545-1345
1.382-4....................................................    1545-1120
1.382-6....................................................    1545-1381
1.382-8T...................................................    1545-1437
1.382-9....................................................    1545-1260
                                                               1545-1120
                                                               1545-1275
                                                               1545-1324
1.382-91...................................................    1545-1260
                                                               1545-1324
1.383-1....................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-1120
1.401(a)-11................................................    1545-0710
1.401(a)-20................................................    1545-0928
1.401(a)-31................................................    1545-1341
1.401(a)-50................................................    1545-0710
1.401(a)(31)-1.............................................    1545-1341
1.401(b)-1.................................................    1545-0197
1.401(f)-1.................................................    1545-0710
1.401(k)-1.................................................    1545-1039
                                                               1545-1069
1.401-1....................................................    1545-0020
                                                               1545-0197
                                                               1545-0200
                                                               1545-0534
                                                               1545-0710
1.401-12(n)................................................    1545-0806
1.401-14...................................................    1545-0710
1.402(c)-2.................................................    1545-1341
1.402(f)-1.................................................    1545-1341
1.403(b)-1.................................................    1545-0710
1.403(b)-2.................................................    1545-1341
1.404(a)-4.................................................    1545-0710
1.404(a)-12................................................    1545-0710
1.404A-2...................................................    1545-0123
1.404A-6...................................................    1545-0123
1.408-2....................................................    1545-0390
1.408-5....................................................    1545-0747
1.408-6....................................................    1545-0203
                                                               1545-0390
1.408-7....................................................    1545-0119
1.410(a)-2.................................................    1545-0710
1.410(d)-1.................................................    1545-0710
1.411(a)-11T...............................................    1545-1471
1.411(d)-6T................................................    1545-1477
1.412(b)-5.................................................    1545-0710
1.412(c)(1)-2..............................................    1545-0710
1.412(c)(2)-1..............................................    1545-0710
1.412(c)(3)-2..............................................    1545-0710
1.414(c)-5.................................................    1545-0797
1.414(r)-1.................................................    1545-1221
1.415-2....................................................    1545-0710
1.415-6....................................................    1545-0710
1.417(e)-1T................................................    1545-1471
1.441-3T...................................................    1545-0134
1.442-1....................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0123
                                                               1545-0134
                                                               1545-0152
1.442-2T...................................................    1545-0134
1.442-3T...................................................    1545-0134
1.443-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.444-3T...................................................    1545-1036
1.446-1....................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0152
1.446-4(d).................................................    1545-1412
1.448-1(g).................................................    1545-0152
1.448-1(h).................................................    1545-0152
1.448-1(i).................................................    1545-0152
1.448-2T...................................................    1545-0152
1.451-1....................................................    1545-0091
1.451-3....................................................    1545-0152
                                                               1545-0736
1.451-4....................................................    1545-0123
1.451-5....................................................    1545-0074
1.451-6....................................................    1545-0074
1.451-7....................................................    1545-0074
1.453-1....................................................    1545-0152
1.453-2....................................................    1545-0152
1.453-8....................................................    1545-0152
                                                               1545-0228
1.453-10...................................................    1545-0152
1.453A-1...................................................    1545-0152
                                                               1545-1134
1.453A-2...................................................    1545-0152
                                                               1545-1134
1.453A-3...................................................    1545-0963
1.454-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.455-2....................................................    1545-0152
1.455-6....................................................    1545-0123
1.456-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.456-6....................................................    1545-0123
1.456-7....................................................    1545-0123
1.458-1....................................................    1545-0879
1.458-2....................................................    1545-0152
1.460-6....................................................    1545-1031
1.461-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.461-2....................................................    1545-0096
1.461-4....................................................    1545-0917
1.461-5....................................................    1545-0917
1.463-1T...................................................    1545-0916
1.465-1T...................................................    1545-0712
1.466-1T...................................................    1545-0152
1.466-4....................................................    1545-0152
1.468A-3...................................................    1545-1269
                                                               1545-1378
1.468A-4...................................................    1545-0954
1.468A-7...................................................    1545-0954
1.468A-8...................................................    1545-1269
1.468B-1(j)................................................    1545-1299
1.468B-2(k)................................................    1545-1299
1.468B-2(l)................................................    1545-1299
1.468B-3(b)................................................    1545-1299
1.468B-3(e)................................................    1545-1299
1.468B-5(b)................................................    1545-1299
1.469-1....................................................    1545-1008
1.469-2T...................................................    1545-0712
                                                               1545-1091
1.469-4T...................................................    1545-0985
                                                               1545-1037
1.471-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.471-5....................................................    1545-0123
1.471-6....................................................    1545-0123
1.471-8....................................................    1545-0123
1.471-11...................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0152
1.472-1....................................................    1545-0042
                                                               1545-0152
1.472-2....................................................    1545-0152
1.472-3....................................................    1545-0042
1.472-5....................................................    1545-0152
1.472-8....................................................    1545-0028
                                                               1545-0042
1.475(b)-4.................................................    1545-1496
1.481-4....................................................    1545-0152
1.481-5....................................................    1545-0152
1.482-1....................................................    1545-1364
1.482-4....................................................    1545-1364
1.482-7....................................................    1545-1364
1.501(a)-1.................................................    1545-0056
                                                               1545-0057

[[Page 553]]

                                                                        
1.501(c)(3)-1..............................................    1545-0056
1.501(c)(9)-5..............................................    1545-0047
1.501(c)(17)-3.............................................    1545-0047
1.501(e)-1.................................................    1545-0814
1.503(c)-1.................................................    1545-0047
                                                               1545-0052
1.505(c)-1T................................................    1545-0916
1.507-1....................................................    1545-0052
1.507-2....................................................    1545-0052
1.508-1....................................................    1545-0052
                                                               1545-0056
1.509(a)-3.................................................    1545-0047
1.509(a)-5.................................................    1545-0047
1.509(c)-1.................................................    1545-0052
1.512(a)-1.................................................    1545-0687
1.512(a)-4.................................................    1545-0047
                                                               1545-0687
1.521-1....................................................    1545-0051
                                                               1545-0058
1.527-2....................................................    1545-0129
1.527-5....................................................    1545-0129
1.527-6....................................................    1545-0129
1.527-9....................................................    1545-0129
1.528-8....................................................    1545-0127
1.533-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.534-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.542-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.545-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.545-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.547-2....................................................    1545-0045
                                                               1545-0123
1.547-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.551-4....................................................    1545-0074
1.552-3....................................................    1545-0099
1.552-4....................................................    1545-0099
1.552-5....................................................    1545-0099
1.556-2....................................................    1545-0704
1.561-1....................................................    1545-0044
1.561-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.562-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.563-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.564-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.565-1....................................................    1545-0043
                                                               1545-0123
1.565-2....................................................    1545-0043
1.565-3....................................................    1545-0043
1.565-5....................................................    1545-0043
1.565-6....................................................    1545-0043
1.585-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.585-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.585-8....................................................    1545-1290
1.586-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.593-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.593-6....................................................    1545-0123
1.593-6A...................................................    1545-0123
1.593-7....................................................    1545-0123
1.595-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.597-2....................................................    1545-1300
1.597-4....................................................    1545-1300
1.597-6....................................................    1545-1300
1.597-7....................................................    1545-1300
1.611-2....................................................    1545-0099
1.611-3....................................................    1545-0007
                                                               1545-0099
1.612-4....................................................    1545-0074
1.612-5....................................................    1545-0099
1.613-3....................................................    1545-0099
1.613-4....................................................    1545-0099
1.613-6....................................................    1545-0099
1.613-7....................................................    1545-0099
1.613A-3...................................................    1545-0919
1.613A-3(e)................................................    1545-1251
1.613A-3(l)................................................    1545-0919
1.613A-5...................................................    1545-0099
1.613A-6...................................................    1545-0099
1.614-2....................................................    1545-0099
1.614-3....................................................    1545-0099
1.614-5....................................................    1545-0099
1.614-6....................................................    1545-0099
1.614-8....................................................    1545-0099
1.617-1....................................................    1545-0099
1.617-3....................................................    1545-0099
1.617-4....................................................    1545-0099
1.631-1....................................................    1545-0007
1.631-2....................................................    1545-0007
1.641(b)-2.................................................    1545-0092
1.642(c)-1.................................................    1545-0092
1.642(c)-2.................................................    1545-0092
1.642(c)-5.................................................    1545-0074
1.642(c)-6.................................................    1545-0020
                                                               1545-0074
                                                               1545-0092
1.642(g)-1.................................................    1545-0092
1.642(i)-1.................................................    1545-0092
1.663(b)-2.................................................    1545-0092
1.664-1....................................................    1545-0196
1.664-2....................................................    1545-0196
1.664-3....................................................    1545-0196
1.664-4....................................................    1545-0020
                                                               1545-0196
1.665(a)-0A through                                                     
1.665(g)-2A................................................    1545-0192
1.666(d)-1A................................................    1545-0092
1.671-4....................................................    1545-1442
1.701-1....................................................    1545-0099
1.702-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.703-1....................................................    1545-0099
1.704-2....................................................    1545-1090
1.706-1....................................................    1545-0099
                                                               1545-0074
                                                               1545-0134
1.706-1T...................................................    1545-0099
1.707-3(c)(2)..............................................    1545-1243
1.707-5(a)(7)(ii)..........................................    1545-1243
1.707-6(c).................................................    1545-1243
1.707-8....................................................    1545-1243
1.708-1....................................................    1545-0099
1.732-1....................................................    1545-0099
1.736-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.743-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.751-1....................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0099
                                                               1545-0941
1.752-5....................................................    1545-1090
1.754-1....................................................    1545-0099
1.755-1....................................................    1545-0099
1.755-2T...................................................    1545-1021
1.761-2....................................................    1545-1338
1.801-1....................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0128
1.801-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.801-5....................................................    1545-0128
1.801-8....................................................    1545-0128
1.804-4....................................................    1545-0128
1.811-2....................................................    1545-0128
1.812-2....................................................    1545-0128
1.815-6....................................................    1545-0128
1.818-4....................................................    1545-0128
1.818-5....................................................    1545-0128
1.818-8....................................................    1545-0128
1.819-2....................................................    1545-0128
1.821-1....................................................    1545-1027
1.821-3....................................................    1545-1027
1.821-4....................................................    1545-1027

[[Page 554]]

                                                                        
1.822-5....................................................    1545-1027
1.822-6....................................................    1545-1027
1.822-8....................................................    1545-1027
1.822-9....................................................    1545-1027
1.823-2....................................................    1545-1027
1.823-5....................................................    1545-1027
1.823-6....................................................    1545-1027
1.825-1....................................................    1545-1027
1.826-1....................................................    1545-1027
1.826-2....................................................    1545-1027
1.826-3....................................................    1545-1027
1.826-4....................................................    1545-1027
1.826-6....................................................    1545-1027
1.831-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.831-4....................................................    1545-0123
1.832-4....................................................    1545-1227
1.832-5....................................................    1545-0123
1.848-2(g)(8)..............................................    1545-1287
1.848-2(h)(3)..............................................    1545-1287
1.848-2(i)(4)..............................................    1545-1287
1.851-2....................................................    1545-1010
1.851-4....................................................    1545-0123
1.852-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.852-4....................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0145
1.852-6....................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0144
1.852-7....................................................    1545-0074
1.852-9....................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0123
                                                               1545-0144
                                                               1545-0145
1.852-11...................................................    1545-1094
1.853-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.853-4....................................................    1545-0123
1.854-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.855-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.856-2....................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-1004
1.856-6....................................................    1545-0123
1.856-7....................................................    1545-0123
1.856-8....................................................    1545-0123
1.857-8....................................................    1545-0123
1.857-9....................................................    1545-0074
1.858-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.860-2....................................................    1545-0045
1.860-4....................................................    1545-0045
                                                               1545-1054
                                                               1545-1057
1.860E-2(a)(5).............................................    1545-1276
1.860E-2(a)(7).............................................    1545-1276
1.860E-2(b)(2).............................................    1545-1276
1.861-2....................................................    1545-0089
1.861-3....................................................    1545-0089
1.861-8....................................................    1545-0126
1.861-8(e)(6) and (g)......................................    1545-1224
1.861-9T...................................................    1545-0121
                                                               1545-1072
1.863-1....................................................    1545-1476
1.863-3....................................................    1545-1467
1.863-3A...................................................    1545-0126
1.863-4....................................................    1545-0126
1.863-7....................................................    1545-0132
1.864-4....................................................    1545-0126
1.871-1....................................................    1545-0096
1.871-6....................................................    1545-0795
1.871-7....................................................    1545-0089
1.871-10...................................................    1545-0089
                                                               1545-0165
1.874-1....................................................    1545-0089
1.881-4....................................................    1545-1440
1.882-4....................................................    1545-0126
1.884-0....................................................    1545-1070
1.884-1....................................................    1545-1070
1.884-2....................................................    1545-1070
1.884-2T...................................................    1545-0126
                                                               1545-1070
1.884-4....................................................    1545-1070
1.884-5....................................................    1545-1070
1.892-1T...................................................    1545-1053
1.892-2T...................................................    1545-1053
1.892-3T...................................................    1545-1053
1.892-4T...................................................    1545-1053
1.892-5T...................................................    1545-1053
1.892-6T...................................................    1545-1053
1.892-7T...................................................    1545-1053
1.897-2....................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0902
1.897-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.897-5T...................................................    1545-0902
1.897-6T...................................................    1545-0902
1.901-2....................................................    1545-0746
1.901-2A...................................................    1545-0746
1.901-3....................................................    1545-0122
1.902-1....................................................    1545-0122
                                                               1545-1458
1.904-1....................................................    1545-0121
                                                               1545-0122
1.904-2....................................................    1545-0121
                                                               1545-0122
1.904-3....................................................    1545-0121
1.904-4....................................................    1545-0121
1.904-5....................................................    1545-0121
1.904(f)-1.................................................    1545-0121
                                                               1545-0122
1.904(f)-2.................................................    1545-0121
1.904(f)-3.................................................    1545-0121
1.904(f)-4.................................................    1545-0121
1.904(f)-5.................................................    1545-0121
1.904(f)-6.................................................    1545-0121
1.904(f)-7.................................................    1545-1127
1.905-2....................................................    1545-0122
1.905-3T...................................................    1545-1056
1.905-4T...................................................    1545-1056
1.905-5T...................................................    1545-1056
1.911-1....................................................    1545-0067
                                                               1545-0070
1.911-2....................................................    1545-0067
                                                               1545-0070
1.911-3....................................................    1545-0067
                                                               1545-0070
1.911-4....................................................    1545-0067
                                                               1545-0070
1.911-5....................................................    1545-0067
                                                               1545-0070
1.911-6....................................................    1545-0067
                                                               1545-0070
1.911-7....................................................    1545-0067
                                                               1545-0070
1.913-13...................................................    1545-0067
1.921-1T...................................................    1545-0190
                                                               1545-0884
                                                               1545-0935
                                                               1545-0939
1.921-2....................................................    1545-0884
1.921-3T...................................................    1545-0935
1.923-1T...................................................    1545-0935
1.924(a)-1T................................................    1545-0935
1.925(a)-1T................................................    1545-0935
1.925(b)-1T................................................    1545-0935
1.926(a)-1T................................................    1545-0935
1.927(a)-1T................................................    1545-0935
1.927(b)-1T................................................    1545-0935
1.927(d)-1.................................................    1545-0884

[[Page 555]]

                                                                        
1.927(d)-2T................................................    1545-0935
1.927(e)-1T................................................    1545-0935
1.927(e)-2T................................................    1545-0935
1.927(f)-1.................................................    1545-0884
1.931-1....................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0123
1.934-1....................................................    1545-0782
1.935-1....................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0087
                                                               1545-0803
1.936-1....................................................    1545-0215
                                                               1545-0217
1.936-4....................................................    1545-0215
1.936-5....................................................    1545-0704
1.936-6....................................................    1545-0215
1.936-7....................................................    1545-0215
1.936-10(c)................................................    1545-1138
1.952-2....................................................    1545-0126
1.953-2....................................................    1545-0126
1.954-1....................................................    1545-1068
1.954-2....................................................    1545-1068
1.955-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.955-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.955A-2...................................................    1545-0755
1.955A-3...................................................    1545-0755
1.956-1....................................................    1545-0704
1.956-2....................................................    1545-0704
1.959-1....................................................    1545-0704
1.959-2....................................................    1545-0704
1.960-1....................................................    1545-0122
1.962-2....................................................    1545-0704
1.962-3....................................................    1545-0704
1.962-4....................................................    1545-0704
1.964-1....................................................    1545-0126
                                                               1545-0704
                                                               1545-1072
1.964-3....................................................    1545-0126
1.970-2....................................................    1545-0126
1.985-2....................................................    1545-1051
                                                               1545-1131
1.985-3....................................................    1545-1051
1.988-0....................................................    1545-1131
1.988-1....................................................    1545-1131
1.988-2....................................................    1545-1131
1.988-3....................................................    1545-1131
1.988-4....................................................    1545-1131
1.988-5....................................................    1545-1131
1.992-1....................................................    1545-0190
                                                               1545-0938
1.992-2....................................................    1545-0190
                                                               1545-0884
                                                               1545-0938
1.992-3....................................................    1545-0190
                                                               1545-0938
1.992-4....................................................    1545-0190
                                                               1545-0938
1.993-3....................................................    1545-0938
1.993-4....................................................    1545-0938
1.994-1....................................................    1545-0938
1.995-5....................................................    1545-0938
1.1012-1...................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-1139
1.1014-4...................................................    1545-0184
1.1015-1...................................................    1545-0020
1.1017-2...................................................    1545-0028
                                                               1545-0046
1.1031(d)-1T...............................................    1545-1021
1.1033(a)-2................................................    1545-0184
1.1033(g)-1................................................    1545-0184
1.1034-1...................................................    1545-0072
1.1039-1...................................................    1545-0184
1.1041-1T..................................................    1545-0074
1.1042-1T..................................................    1545-0916
1.1044(a)-1................................................    1545-1421
1.1060-1T..................................................    1545-1021
1.1071-1...................................................    1545-0184
1.1071-4...................................................    1545-0184
1.1081-4...................................................    1545-0028
                                                               1545-0046
                                                               1545-0123
1.1081-11..................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0123
1.1082-1...................................................    1545-0046
1.1082-2...................................................    1545-0046
1.1082-3...................................................    1545-0046
                                                               1545-0184
1.1082-4...................................................    1545-0046
1.1082-5...................................................    1545-0046
1.1082-6...................................................    1545-0046
1.1083-1...................................................    1545-0123
1.1092(b)-1T...............................................    1545-0644
1.1092(b)-2T...............................................    1545-0644
1.1092(b)-3T...............................................    1545-0644
1.1092(b)-4T...............................................    1545-0644
1.1092(b)-5T...............................................    1545-0644
1.1211-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.1212-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.1221-2...................................................    1545-1403
1.1221-2(d)(2)(iv).........................................    1545-1480
1.1221-2(e)(5).............................................    1545-1480
1.1221-2(g)(5)(ii).........................................    1545-1480
1.1221-2(g)(6)(ii).........................................    1545-1480
1.1221-2(g)(6)(iii)........................................    1545-1480
1.1221-2T(c)...............................................    1545-1403
1.1231-1...................................................    1545-0177
                                                               1545-0184
1.1231-2...................................................    1545-0177
                                                               1545-0184
1.1231-2...................................................    1545-0074
1.1232-3...................................................    1545-0074
1.1237-1...................................................    1545-0184
1.1239-1...................................................    1545-0091
1.1242-1...................................................    1545-0184
1.1243-1...................................................    1545-0123
1.1244(e)-1................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-1447
1.1245-1...................................................    1545-0184
1.1245-2...................................................    1545-0184
1.1245-3...................................................    1545-0184
1.1245-4...................................................    1545-0184
1.1245-5...................................................    1545-0184
1.1245-6...................................................    1545-0184
1.1247-1...................................................    1545-0122
1.1247-2...................................................    1545-0122
1.1247-4...................................................    1545-0122
1.1247-5...................................................    1545-0122
1.1248-7...................................................    1545-0074
1.1250-1...................................................    1545-0184
1.1250-2...................................................    1545-0184
1.1250-3...................................................    1545-0184
1.1250-4...................................................    1545-0184
1.1250-5...................................................    1545-0184
1.1251-1...................................................    1545-0184
1.1251-2...................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0184
1.1251-3...................................................    1545-0184
1.1251-4...................................................    1545-0184
1.1252-1...................................................    1545-0184
1.1252-2...................................................    1545-0184
1.1254-1(c)(3).............................................    1545-1352
1.1254-4...................................................    1545-1493
1.1254-5(d)(2).............................................    1545-1352
1.1258-1...................................................    1545-1452
1.1272-3...................................................    1545-1353

[[Page 556]]

                                                                        
1.1273-2(h)(2).............................................    1545-1353
1.1274-3(d)................................................    1545-1353
1.1274-5(b)................................................    1545-1353
1.1274A-1(c)...............................................    1545-1353
1.1275-2...................................................    1545-1450
1.1275-3...................................................    1545-0887
                                                               1545-1353
                                                               1545-1450
1.1275-4...................................................    1545-1450
1.1275-6...................................................    1545-1450
1.1287-1...................................................    1545-0786
1.1291-9...................................................    1545-1507
1.1291-10..................................................    1545-1507
                                                               1545-1304
1.1294-1T..................................................    1545-1002
                                                               1545-1028
1.1295-1T..................................................    1545-1028
1.1297-3T..................................................    1545-1028
1.1311(a)-1................................................    1545-0074
1.1361-1...................................................    1545-0731
1.1362-1...................................................    1545-1308
1.1362-2...................................................    1545-1308
1.1362-3...................................................    1545-1308
1.1362-4...................................................    1545-1308
1.1362-5...................................................    1545-1308
1.1362-6...................................................    1545-1308
1.1362-7...................................................    1545-1308
1.1367-1(f)................................................    1545-1139
1.1368-1(f)(2).............................................    1545-1139
1.1368-1(f)(3).............................................    1545-1139
1.1368-1(f)(4).............................................    1545-1139
1.1368-1(g)(2).............................................    1545-1139
1.1374-1A..................................................    1545-0130
1.1377-1...................................................    1545-1462
1.1383-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.1385-1...................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0098
1.1388-1...................................................    1545-0118
                                                               1545-0123
1.1398-1...................................................    1545-1375
1.1398-2...................................................    1545-1375
1.1402(a)-2................................................    1545-0074
1.1402(a)-5................................................    1545-0074
1.1402(a)-11...............................................    1545-0074
1.1402(a)-15...............................................    1545-0074
1.1402(a)-16...............................................    1545-0074
1.1402(b)-1................................................    1545-0171
1.1402(c)-2................................................    1545-0074
1.1402(e)(1)-1.............................................    1545-0074
1.1402(e)(2)-1.............................................    1545-0074
1.1402(e)-1A...............................................    1545-0168
1.1402(e)-2A...............................................    1545-0168
1.1402(e)-3A...............................................    1545-0168
1.1402(e)-4A...............................................    1545-0168
1.1402(e)-5A...............................................    1545-0168
1.1402(f)-1................................................    1545-0074
1.1402(h)-1................................................    1545-0064
1.1441-2...................................................    1545-0795
1.1441-3...................................................    1545-0165
                                                               1545-0795
1.1441-5...................................................    1545-0096
                                                               1545-0795
1.1441-6...................................................    1545-0055
                                                               1545-0795
1.1441-7...................................................    1545-0795
1.1441-8T..................................................    1545-1053
1.1443-1...................................................    1545-0096
1.1445-1...................................................    1545-0902
1.1445-2...................................................    1545-0902
                                                               1545-1060
1.1445-3...................................................    1545-0902
                                                               1545-1060
1.1445-4...................................................    1545-0902
1.1445-5...................................................    1545-0902
1.1445-6...................................................    1545-0902
                                                               1545-1060
1.1445-7...................................................    1545-0902
1.1445-8...................................................    1545-0096
1.1445-9T..................................................    1545-0902
1.1445-10T.................................................    1545-0902
1.1451-1...................................................    1545-0054
1.1451-2...................................................    1545-0054
1.1461-1...................................................    1545-0054
                                                               1545-0055
                                                               1545-0795
1.1461-2...................................................    1545-0054
                                                               1545-0055
                                                               1545-0096
                                                               1545-0795
1.1461-3...................................................    1545-0054
                                                               1545-0055
                                                               1545-0096
                                                               1545-0795
1.1461-4...................................................    1545-0054
                                                               1545-0055
                                                               1545-0096
1.1462-1...................................................    1545-0795
1.1492-1...................................................    1545-0026
1.1494-1...................................................    1545-0026
1.1502-5...................................................    1545-0257
1.1502-9...................................................    1545-0121
1.1502-13..................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0885
                                                               1545-1161
                                                               1545-1433
1.1502-16..................................................    1545-0123
1.1502-18..................................................    1545-0123
1.1502-19..................................................    1545-0123
1.1502-20..................................................    1545-1160
1.1502-21T.................................................    1545-1237
1.1502-31..................................................    1545-1344
1.1502-32..................................................    1545-1344
1.1502-33..................................................    1545-1344
1.1502-47..................................................    1545-0123
1.1502-75..................................................    1545-0025
                                                               1545-0123
                                                               1545-0133
                                                               1545-0152
1.1502-76..................................................    1545-1344
1.1502-77..................................................    1545-0123
1.1502-77T.................................................    1545-1046
1.1502-78..................................................    1545-0582
1.1502-95T.................................................    1545-1218
1.1503-2A..................................................    1545-1083
1.1552-1...................................................    1545-0123
1.1561-3...................................................    1545-0123
1.1563-1...................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0797
1.1563-3...................................................    1545-0123
1.6001-1...................................................    1545-0058
                                                               1545-0074
                                                               1545-0099
                                                               1545-0123
                                                               1545-0865
1.6011-1...................................................    1545-0055
                                                               1545-0074
                                                               1545-0085
                                                               1545-0089
                                                               1545-0090
                                                               1545-0091
                                                               1545-0096
                                                               1545-0121
                                                               1545-0458
                                                               1545-0666

[[Page 557]]

                                                                        
                                                               1545-0675
                                                               1545-0908
1.6011-2...................................................    1545-0055
                                                               1545-0938
1.6011-3...................................................    1545-0238
                                                               1545-0239
1.6012-1...................................................    1545-0067
                                                               1545-0085
                                                               1545-0089
                                                               1545-0675
                                                               1545-0074
1.6012-2...................................................    1545-0047
                                                               1545-0051
                                                               1545-0067
                                                               1545-0123
                                                               1545-0126
                                                               1545-0130
                                                               1545-0128
                                                               1545-0175
                                                               1545-0687
                                                               1545-0890
                                                               1545-1023
                                                               1545-1027
1.6012-3...................................................    1545-0047
                                                               1545-0067
                                                               1545-0092
                                                               1545-0196
                                                               1545-0687
1.6012-4...................................................    1545-0067
1.6012-5...................................................    1545-0067
                                                               1545-0967
                                                               1545-0970
                                                               1545-0991
                                                               1545-0936
                                                               1545-1023
                                                               1545-1033
                                                               1545-1079
1.6012-6...................................................    1545-0067
1.6012-7T..................................................    1545-1348
                                                               1545-0089
                                                               1545-0129
1.6013-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.6013-2...................................................    1545-0091
1.6013-6...................................................    1545-0074
1.6013-7...................................................    1545-0074
1.6015(a)-1................................................    1545-0087
1.6015(b)-1................................................    1545-0087
1.6015(d)-1................................................    1545-0087
1.6015(e)-1................................................    1545-0087
1.6015(f)-1................................................    1545-0087
1.6015(g)-1................................................    1545-0087
1.6015(h)-1................................................    1545-0087
1.6015(i)-1................................................    1545-0087
1.6017-1...................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0087
                                                               1545-0090
1.6031(b)-1T...............................................    1545-0099
1.6031(c)-1T...............................................    1545-0099
1.6031-1...................................................    1545-0099
                                                               1545-0970
1.6032-1...................................................    1545-0099
1.6033-2...................................................    1545-0047
                                                               1545-0049
                                                               1545-0052
                                                               1545-0092
                                                               1545-0687
                                                               1545-1150
1.6033-3...................................................    1545-0052
1.6034-1...................................................    1545-0092
                                                               1545-0094
1.6035-1...................................................    1545-0704
1.6035-2...................................................    1545-0704
1.6035-3...................................................    1545-0704
1.6037-1...................................................    1545-0130
                                                               1545-1023
1.6038-2...................................................    1545-0704
                                                               1545-0805
                                                               1545-1317
1.6038A-2..................................................    1545-1191
1.6038A-3..................................................    1545-1191
                                                               1545-1440
1.6038B-1T.................................................    1545-0026
1.6039-2...................................................    1545-0820
1.6041-1...................................................    1545-0008
                                                               1545-0108
                                                               1545-0112
                                                               1545-0115
                                                               1545-0120
                                                               1545-0295
                                                               1545-0350
                                                               1545-0367
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0441
                                                               1545-0957
1.6041-2...................................................    1545-0008
                                                               1545-0119
                                                               1545-0350
                                                               1545-0441
1.6041-3...................................................    1545-1148
1.6041-4...................................................    1545-0115
                                                               1545-0295
                                                               1545-0367
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0957
1.6041-5...................................................    1545-0295
                                                               1545-0367
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0957
1.6041-6...................................................    1545-0008
                                                               1545-0115
1.6041-7...................................................    1545-0112
                                                               1545-0295
                                                               1545-0350
                                                               1545-0367
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0441
                                                               1545-0957
1.6042-1...................................................    1545-0110
1.6042-2...................................................    1545-0110
                                                               1545-0295
                                                               1545-0367
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0957
1.6042-3...................................................    1545-0295
                                                               1545-0367
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0957
1.6042-4...................................................    1545-0110
1.6043-1...................................................    1545-0041
1.6043-2...................................................    1545-0041
                                                               1545-0110
                                                               1545-0295
                                                               1545-0387
1.6043-3...................................................    1545-0047
1.6044-1...................................................    1545-0118
1.6044-2...................................................    1545-0118
1.6044-3...................................................    1545-0118
1.6044-4...................................................    1545-0118
1.6044-5...................................................    1545-0118
1.6045-1...................................................    1545-0715
1.6045-2...................................................    1545-0115
1.6045-4...................................................    1545-1085
1.6046-1...................................................    1545-0704
                                                               1545-0794

[[Page 558]]

                                                                        
                                                               1545-1317
1.6046-2...................................................    1545-0704
1.6046-3...................................................    1545-0704
1.6047-1...................................................    1545-0119
                                                               1545-0295
                                                               1545-0387
1.6049-1...................................................    1545-0112
                                                               1545-0117
                                                               1545-0295
                                                               1545-0367
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0597
                                                               1545-0957
1.6049-2...................................................    1545-0117
1.6049-3...................................................    1545-0117
1.6049-4...................................................    1545-0096
                                                               1545-0112
                                                               1545-0117
                                                               1545-1018
                                                               1545-1050
1.6049-5...................................................    1545-0096
                                                               1545-0112
                                                               1545-0117
1.6049-6...................................................    1545-0096
1.6049-7...................................................    1545-1018
1.6049-7T..................................................    1545-0112
                                                               1545-0117
                                                               1545-0118
1.6050A-1..................................................    1545-0115
1.6050B-1..................................................    1545-0120
1.6050D-1..................................................    1545-0120
                                                               1545-0232
1.6050E-1..................................................    1545-0120
1.6050H-1..................................................    1545-0901
                                                               1545-1380
1.6050H-2..................................................    1545-0901
                                                               1545-1339
                                                               1545-1380
1.6050H-1T.................................................    1545-0901
1.6050I-2..................................................    1545-1449
1.6050J-1T.................................................    1545-0877
1.6050K-1..................................................    1545-0941
1.6050P-1..................................................    1545-1419
1.6050P-1T.................................................    1545-1419
1.6052-1...................................................    1545-0008
1.6052-2...................................................    1545-0008
1.6060-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.6061-1...................................................    1545-0123
1.6061-2T..................................................    1545-1348
1.6062-1...................................................    1545-0123
1.6063-1...................................................    1545-0123
1.6065-1...................................................    1545-0123
1.6071-1...................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0810
1.6072-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.6072-2...................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0807
1.6073-1...................................................    1545-0087
1.6073-2...................................................    1545-0087
1.6073-3...................................................    1545-0087
1.6073-4...................................................    1545-0087
1.6074-1...................................................    1545-0123
1.6074-2...................................................    1545-0123
1.6081-1...................................................    1545-0066
                                                               1545-0148
                                                               1545-0233
                                                               1545-1057
                                                               1545-1081
1.6081-2...................................................    1545-0148
                                                               1545-1054
                                                               1545-1036
1.6081-3...................................................    1545-0233
1.6081-4...................................................    1545-0188
                                                               1545-1479
6081-6.....................................................    1545-0148
                                                               1545-1054
6081-7.....................................................    1545-0148
                                                               1545-1054
1.6091-3...................................................    1545-0089
1.6107-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.6109-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.6109-2...................................................    1545-0074
1.6115-1...................................................    1545-1464
1.6151-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.6152-1...................................................    1545-0135
                                                               1545-0233
1.6153-1...................................................    1545-0087
1.6153-4...................................................    1545-0087
1.6154-2...................................................    1545-0257
1.6154-3...................................................    1545-0135
1.6154-5...................................................    1545-0976
1.6161-1...................................................    1545-0087
1.6162-1...................................................    1545-0087
1.6164-1...................................................    1545-0135
1.6164-2...................................................    1545-0135
1.6164-3...................................................    1545-0135
1.6164-5...................................................    1545-0135
1.6164-6...................................................    1545-0135
1.6164-7...................................................    1545-0135
1.6164-8...................................................    1545-0135
1.6164-9...................................................    1545-0135
1.6302-1...................................................    1545-0257
1.6302-2...................................................    1545-0098
                                                               1545-0257
1.6411-1...................................................    1545-0098
                                                               1545-0135
                                                               1545-0582
1.6411-2...................................................    1545-0098
                                                               1545-0582
1.6411-3...................................................    1545-0098
                                                               1545-0582
1.6411-4...................................................    1545-0582
1.6414-1...................................................    1545-0096
1.6425-1...................................................    1545-0170
1.6425-2...................................................    1545-0170
1.6425-3...................................................    1545-0170
1.6654-1...................................................    1545-0087
                                                               1545-0140
1.6654-2...................................................    1545-0087
1.6654-3...................................................    1545-0087
1.6654-4...................................................    1545-0087
1.6655-1...................................................    1545-0142
1.6655-2...................................................    1545-0142
1.6655-3...................................................    1545-0142
1.6655-7...................................................    1545-0123
1.6655(e)-1................................................    1545-1421
1.6661-3...................................................    1545-0988
                                                               1545-1031
1.6661-4...................................................    1545-0739
1.6662-3(c)................................................    1545-0889
1.6662-4(e) and (f)........................................    1545-0889
1.6662-6...................................................    1545-1426
1.6694-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.6694-2...................................................    1545-0074
1.6694-2(c)................................................    1545-1231
1.6694-3(e)................................................    1545-1231
1.6695-1...................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-1385
1.6696-1...................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0240
1.6851-1...................................................    1545-0086
                                                               1545-0138
1.6851-2...................................................    1545-0086
                                                               1545-0138

[[Page 559]]

                                                                        
1.7476-1...................................................    1545-0197
1.7476-2...................................................    1545-0197
1.7519-2T..................................................    1545-1036
1.7520-1...................................................    1545-1343
1.7520-2...................................................    1545-1343
1.7520-3...................................................    1545-1343
1.7520-4...................................................    1545-1343
1.9100-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.9101-1...................................................    1545-0008
2.1-4......................................................    1545-0123
2.1-5......................................................    1545-0123
2.1-6......................................................    1545-0123
2.1-10.....................................................    1545-0123
2.1-11.....................................................    1545-0123
2.1-12.....................................................    1545-0123
2.1-13.....................................................    1545-0123
2.1-20.....................................................    1545-0123
2.1-22.....................................................    1545-0123
2.1-26.....................................................    1545-0123
3.2........................................................    1545-0123
4.954-1....................................................    1545-1068
4.954-2....................................................    1545-1068
5.6411-1...................................................    1545-0098
                                                               1545-0582
                                                               1545-0042
                                                               1545-0074
                                                               1545-0129
                                                               1545-0172
                                                               1545-0619
5c.44F-1...................................................    1545-0619
5c.128-1...................................................    1545-0123
5c.168(f)(8)-1.............................................    1545-0123
5c.168(f)(8)-2.............................................    1545-0123
5c.168(f)(8)-6.............................................    1545-0123
5c.168(f)(8)-8.............................................    1545-0123
5c.305-1...................................................    1545-0110
5c.442-1...................................................    1545-0152
5f.103-1...................................................    1545-0720
5f.103-3...................................................    1545-0720
5f.6045-1..................................................    1545-0715
6a.103A-2..................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0720
6a.103A-3..................................................    1545-0720
7.367(b)-1.................................................    1545-0026
7.367(b)-3.................................................    1545-0026
7.367(b)-7.................................................    1545-0026
7.367(b)-9.................................................    1545-0026
7.367(b)-10................................................    1545-0026
7.465-1....................................................    1545-0712
7.465-2....................................................    1545-0712
7.465-3....................................................    1545-0712
7.465-4....................................................    1545-0712
7.465-5....................................................    1545-0712
7.936-1....................................................    1545-0217
7.999-1....................................................    1545-0216
7.6039A-1..................................................    1545-0015
7.6041-1...................................................    1545-0115
11.410-1...................................................    1545-0710
11.412(c)-7................................................    1545-0710
11.412(c)-11...............................................    1545-0710
12.7.......................................................    1545-0190
12.8.......................................................    1545-0191
12.9.......................................................    1545-0195
14a.422A-1.................................................    1545-0123
15A.453-1..................................................    1545-0228
16.3-1.....................................................    1545-0159
16A.126-2..................................................    1545-0074
16A.1255-1.................................................    1545-0184
16A.1255-2.................................................    1545-0184
18.1371-1..................................................    1545-0130
18.1378-1..................................................    1545-0130
18.1379-1..................................................    1545-0130
18.1379-2..................................................    1545-0130
20.2011-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.2014-5..................................................    1545-0015
                                                               1545-0260
20.2014-6..................................................    1545-0015
20.2016-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.2031-2..................................................    1545-0015
20.2031-3..................................................    1545-0015
20.2031-4..................................................    1545-0015
20.2031-6..................................................    1545-0015
20.2031-7..................................................    1545-0020
20.2031-10.................................................    1545-0015
20.2032-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.2032A-3.................................................    1545-0015
20.2032A-4.................................................    1545-0015
20.2032A-8.................................................    1545-0015
20.2039-4..................................................    1545-0015
20.2051-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.2053-3..................................................    1545-0015
20.2053-9..................................................    1545-0015
20.2053-10.................................................    1545-0015
20.2055-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.2055-2..................................................    1545-0015
                                                               1545-0092
20.2055-3..................................................    1545-0015
20.2056(b)-4...............................................    1545-0015
20.2056(b)-7...............................................    1545-0015
20.2056A-2.................................................    1545-1443
20.2056A-3.................................................    1545-1360
20.2056A-4.................................................    1545-1360
20.2056A-10................................................    1545-1360
20.2106-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.2106-2..................................................    1545-0015
20.2204-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.2204-2..................................................    1545-0015
20.6001-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.6011-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.6018-1..................................................    1545-0015
                                                               1545-0531
20.6018-2..................................................    1545-0015
20.6018-3..................................................    1545-0015
20.6018-4..................................................    1545-0015
                                                               1545-0022
20.6036-2..................................................    1545-0015
20.6061-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.6065-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.6075-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.6081-1..................................................    1545-0015
                                                               1545-0181
20.6091-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.6161-1..................................................    1545-0015
                                                               1545-0181
20.6161-2..................................................    1545-0015
                                                               1545-0181
20.6163-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.6166-1..................................................    1545-0181
20.6166A-1.................................................    1545-0015
20.6166A-3.................................................    1545-0015
20.6324A-1.................................................    1545-0754
20.7520-1..................................................    1545-1343
20.7520-2..................................................    1545-1343
20.7520-3..................................................    1545-1343
20.7520-4..................................................    1545-1343
22.0.......................................................    1545-0015
25.2511-2..................................................    1545-0020
25.2512-2..................................................    1545-0020
25.2512-3..................................................    1545-0020
25.2512-5..................................................    1545-0020
25.2512-9..................................................    1545-0020
25.2513-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.2513-2..................................................    1545-0020
                                                               1545-0021

[[Page 560]]

                                                                        
25.2513-3..................................................    1545-0020
25.2518-2..................................................    1545-0959
25.2522(a)-1...............................................    1545-0196
25.2522(c)-3...............................................    1545-0020
                                                               1545-0196
25.2523(a)-1...............................................    1545-0020
                                                               1545-0196
25.2523(f)-1...............................................    1545-0015
25.2701-2..................................................    1545-1241
25.2701-4..................................................    1545-1241
25.2701-5..................................................    1545-1273
25.2702-6..................................................    1545-1273
25.6001-1..................................................    1545-0020
                                                               1545-0022
25.6011-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.6019-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.6019-2..................................................    1545-0020
25.6019-3..................................................    1545-0020
25.6019-4..................................................    1545-0020
25.6061-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.6065-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.6075-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.6081-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.6091-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.6091-2..................................................    1545-0020
25.6151-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.6161-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.7520-1..................................................    1545-1343
25.7520-2..................................................    1545-1343
25.7520-3..................................................    1545-1343
25.7520-4..................................................    1545-1343
26.2601-1..................................................    1545-0985
26.2632-1..................................................    1545-0985
26.2642-1..................................................    1545-0985
26.2642-2..................................................    1545-0985
26.2642-3..................................................    1545-0985
26.2642-4..................................................    1545-0985
26.2652-2..................................................    1545-0985
26.2662-1..................................................    1545-0015
                                                               1545-0985
26.2662-2..................................................    1545-0985
31.3102-3..................................................    1545-0029
                                                               1545-0059
                                                               1545-0065
31.3121(b)(19)-1...........................................    1545-0029
31.3121(d)-1...............................................    1545-0004
31.3121(i)-1...............................................    1545-0034
31.3121(k)-4...............................................    1545-0137
31.3121(r)-1...............................................    1545-0029
31.3121(s)-1...............................................    1545-0029
31.3302(a)-2...............................................    1545-0028
31.3302(a)-3...............................................    1545-0028
31.3302(b)-2...............................................    1545-0028
31.3302(e)-1...............................................    1545-0028
31.3306(c)(18)-1...........................................    1545-0029
31.3401(a)-1...............................................    1545-0029
31.3401(a)(6)-1............................................    1545-0029
                                                               1545-0096
                                                               1545-0795
31.3401(a)(7)-1............................................    1545-0029
31.3401(a)(8)(A)-1 ........................................    1545-0029
                                                               1545-0666
31.3401(a)(8)(C)-1 ........................................    1545-0029
31.3401(a)(15)-1...........................................    1545-0182
31.3401(c)-1...............................................    1545-0004
31.3402(b)-1...............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(c)-1...............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(f)(1)-1............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(f)(2)-1............................................    1545-0010
                                                               1545-0410
31.3402(f)(3)-1............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(f)(4)-1............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(f)(4)-2............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(f)(5)-1............................................    1545-0010
                                                               1545-1435
31.3402(h)(1)-1............................................    1545-0029
31.3402(h)(3)-1............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(h)(3)-1............................................    1545-0029
31.3402(h)(4)-1............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(i)-(1).............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(i)-(2).............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(k)-1...............................................    1545-0065
31.3402(l)-(1).............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(m)-(1).............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(n)-(1).............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(o)-2...............................................    1545-0415
31.3402(o)-3...............................................    1545-0008
                                                               1545-0010
                                                               1545-0415
                                                               1545-0717
31.3402(p)-1...............................................    1545-0415
                                                               1545-0717
31.3402(q)-1...............................................    1545-0238
                                                               1545-0239
31.3404-1..................................................    1545-0029
31.3405(c)-1...............................................    1545-1341
31.3406(a)-1...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(a)-2...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(a)-3...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(a)-4...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(2)-1............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(2)-2............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(2)-3............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(2)-4............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(2)-5............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(3)-1............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(3)-2............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(3)-3............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(3)-4............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(4)-1............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(c)-1...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(d)-1...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(d)-2...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(d)-3...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(d)-4...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(d)-5...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(e)-1...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(f)-1...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(g)-1...............................................    1545-0096
                                                               1545-0112
31.3406(g)-2...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(g)-3...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(h)-1...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(h)-2...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(h)-3...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(i)-1...............................................    1545-0112
31.3501(a)-1T..............................................    1545-0771
31.3503-1..................................................    1545-0024
31.3504-1..................................................    1545-0029
31.6001-1..................................................    1545-0798
31.6001-2..................................................    1545-0034
                                                               1545-0798
31.6001-3..................................................    1545-0798
31.6001-4..................................................    1545-0028
31.6001-5..................................................    1545-0798
31.6001-6..................................................    1545-0029
                                                               1459-0798
31.6011(a)-1...............................................    1545-0029
                                                               1545-0034
                                                               1545-0035
                                                               1545-0059
                                                               1545-0074
                                                               1545-0718
                                                               1545-0256

[[Page 561]]

                                                                        
31.6011(a)-2...............................................    1545-0001
                                                               1545-0002
31.6011(a)-3...............................................    1545-0028
31.6011(a)-3A..............................................    1545-0955
31.6011(a)-4...............................................    1545-0034
                                                               1545-0035
                                                               1545-0718
                                                               1545-1413
31.6011(a)-5...............................................    1545-0718
                                                               1545-0028
31.6011(a)-6...............................................    1545-0028
31.6011(a)-7...............................................    1545-0074
31.6011(a)-8...............................................    1545-0028
31.6011(a)-9...............................................    1545-0028
31.6011(a)-10..............................................    1545-0112
31.6011(b)-1...............................................    1545-0003
31.6011(b)-2...............................................    1545-0029
31.6051-1..................................................    1545-0008
                                                               1545-0182
                                                               1545-0458
31.6051-2..................................................    1545-0008
31.6051-3..................................................    1545-0008
31.6053-1..................................................    1545-0029
                                                               1545-0062
                                                               1545-0064
                                                               1545-0065
31.6053-2..................................................    1545-0008
31.6053-3..................................................    1545-0065
                                                               1545-0714
31.6053-4..................................................    1545-0065
31.6065(a)-1...............................................    1545-0029
31.6071(a)-1...............................................    1545-0001
                                                               1545-0028
                                                               1545-0029
31.6071(a)-1A..............................................    1545-0955
31.6081(a)-1...............................................    1545-0008
                                                               1545-0028
31.6091-1..................................................    1545-0028
                                                               1545-0029
31.6157-1..................................................    1545-0955
31.6205-1..................................................    1545-0029
31.6301(c)-1AT.............................................    1545-0035
                                                               1545-0112
                                                               1545-0257
31.6302-1..................................................    1545-1413
31.6302-2..................................................    1545-1413
31.6302-3..................................................    1545-1413
31.6302-4..................................................    1545-1413
31.6302(c)-2...............................................    1545-0001
                                                               1545-0257
31.6302(c)-2A..............................................    1545-0955
31.6302(c)-3...............................................    1545-0257
31.6402(a)-2...............................................    1545-0256
31.6413(a)-1...............................................    1545-0029
31.6413(a)-2...............................................    1545-0029
                                                               1545-0256
31.6413(c)-1...............................................    1545-0029
                                                               1545-0171
31.6414-1..................................................    1545-0029
32.1.......................................................    1545-0029
                                                               1545-0415
32.2.......................................................    1545-0029
35a.3406-2.................................................    1545-0112
35a.9999-3.................................................    1545-0112
35a.9999-5.................................................    1545-0029
36.3121(l)(1)-1............................................    1545-0137
36.3121(l)(1)-2............................................    1545-0137
36.3121(l)(3)-1............................................    1545-0123
36.3121(1)(7)-1............................................    1545-0123
36.3121(1)(10)-1...........................................    1545-0029
36.3121(1)(10)-3...........................................    1545-0029
36.3121(1)(10)-4...........................................    1545-0257
40.6302(c)-3(b)(2)(ii).....................................    1545-1296
40.6302(c)-3(b)(2)(iii)....................................    1545-1296
40.6302(c)-3(e)............................................    1545-1296
40.6302(c)-3(f)(2)(ii).....................................    1545-1296
41.4481-1..................................................    1545-0143
41.4481-1T.................................................    1545-0143
41.4481-2..................................................    1545-0143
41.4482(b)-1T..............................................    1545-0143
41.4483-3..................................................    1545-0143
41.6001-1..................................................    1545-0143
41.6001-2..................................................    1545-0143
41.6001-3..................................................    1545-0143
41.6071(a)-1...............................................    1545-0143
41.6081(a)-1...............................................    1545-0143
41.6091-1..................................................    1545-0143
41.6109-1..................................................    1545-0143
41.6151(a)-1...............................................    1545-0143
41.6156-1..................................................    1545-0143
41.6161(a)(1)-1............................................    1545-0143
44.4401-1..................................................    1545-0235
44.4403-1..................................................    1545-0235
44.4412-1..................................................    1545-0236
44.4901-1..................................................    1545-0236
44.4905-1..................................................    1545-0236
44.4905-2..................................................    1545-0236
44.6001-1..................................................    1545-0235
44.6011(a)-1...............................................    1545-0235
                                                               1545-0236
44.6071-1..................................................    1545-0235
44.6091-1..................................................    1545-0235
44.6151-1..................................................    1545-0235
44.6419-1..................................................    1545-0235
44.6419-1..................................................    1545-0235
44.6419-2..................................................    1545-0235
46.4371-4..................................................    1545-0023
46.4374-1..................................................    1545-0023
46.4701-1..................................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-0257
48.4041-4..................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-5..................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-6..................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-7..................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-9..................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-10.................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-11.................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-12.................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-13.................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-18.................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-19.................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-20.................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-21.................................................    1545-1270
48.4042-2..................................................    1545-0023
48.4061(a)-1...............................................    1545-0023
48.4061(a)-2...............................................    1545-0023
48.4061(b)-3...............................................    1545-0023
48.4064-1..................................................    1545-0014
                                                               1545-0242
48.4071-1..................................................    1545-0023
48.4073-1..................................................    1545-0023
48.4073-3..................................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-1074
                                                               1545-1087
48.4081-2(c)(3)............................................    1545-1270
48.4081-3(d)(2)(iii).......................................    1545-1270
48.4081-3(e)(2)(ii)........................................    1545-1270
48.4081-3(f)(2)(ii)........................................    1545-1270
48.4081-4(b)(2)(ii)........................................    1545-1270
48.4081-4(b)(3)(i).........................................    1545-1270
48.4081-4(c)...............................................    1545-1270
48.4081-6(c)(1)(ii)........................................    1545-1270
48.4081-7..................................................    1545-1270
48.4081-9..................................................    1545-1270

[[Page 562]]

                                                                        
48.4082-2..................................................    1545-1418
48.4101-1..................................................    1545-1418
48.4101-2..................................................    1545-1418
48.4161(a)-1...............................................    1545-0723
48.4161(a)-2...............................................    1545-0723
48.4161(a)-3...............................................    1545-0723
48.4161(b)-1...............................................    1545-0723
                                                               1545-0723
48.4216(a)-2...............................................    1545-0023
48.4216(a)-3...............................................    1545-0023
48.4216(c)-1...............................................    1545-0023
48.4221-1..................................................    1545-0023
48.4221-2..................................................    1545-0023
48.4221-3..................................................    1545-0023
48.4221-4..................................................    1545-0023
48.4221-5..................................................    1545-0023
48.4221-6..................................................    1545-0023
48.4221-7..................................................    1545-0023
48.4222(a)-1...............................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-0014
48.4222(b)-1...............................................    1545-0023
48.4223-1..................................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-0723
                                                               1545-0723
                                                               1545-0723
                                                               1545-0257
48.6302(c)-1...............................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-0257
48.6412-1..................................................    1545-0723
48.6416(a)-1...............................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-0723
48.6416(a)-2...............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(a)-3...............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(2)-3............................................    1545-1087
48.6416(b)(1)-1............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(1)-2............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(1)-3............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(1)-4............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(2)-1............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(2)-2............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(2)-3............................................    1545-0723
                                                               1545-1087
48.6416(b)(2)-4............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(3)-1............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(3)-2............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(3)-3............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(4)-1............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(5)-1............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(c)-1...............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(e)-1...............................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-0723
48.6416(f)-1...............................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-0723
48.6416(g)-1...............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(h)-1...............................................    1545-0723
48.6420(c)-2...............................................    1545-0023
48.6420(f)-1...............................................    1545-0023
48.6420-1..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6420-2..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6420-3..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6420-4..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6420-5..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6420-6..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6420-7..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6421-0..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6421-1..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6421-2..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6421-3..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6421-4..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6421-5..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6421-6..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6421-7..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6424-0..................................................    1545-0723
48.6424-1..................................................    1545-0723
48.6424-2..................................................    1545-0723
48.6424-3..................................................    1545-0723
48.6424-4..................................................    1545-0723
48.6424-5..................................................    1545-0723
48.6424-6..................................................    1545-0723
48.6427-0..................................................    1545-0723
48.6427-1..................................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6427-2..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6427-3..................................................    1545-0723
48.6427-4..................................................    1545-0723
48.6427-5..................................................    1545-0723
48.6427-8..................................................    1545-1418
48.6427-9..................................................    1545-1418
49.4251-1..................................................    1545-1075
49.4251-2..................................................    1545-1075
49.4253-3..................................................    1545-0023
49.4253-4..................................................    1545-0023
49.4264(b)-1...............................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-0226
                                                               1545-0226
                                                               1545-0912
                                                               1545-0912
                                                               1545-0257
                                                               1545-0230
                                                               1545-0224
                                                               1545-0225
                                                               1545-0224
                                                               1545-0230
49.4271-1(d)...............................................    1545-0685
52.4682-1(b)(2)(iii).......................................    1545-1153
52.4682-2(b)...............................................    1545-1153
                                                               1545-1361
52.4682-2(d)...............................................    1545-1153
                                                               1545-1361
52.4682-3(c)(2)............................................    1545-1153
52.4682-3(g)...............................................    1545-1153
52.4682-4(f)...............................................    1545-1153
                                                               1545-0257
52.4682-5(d)...............................................    1545-1361
52.4682-5(f)...............................................    1545-1361
53.4940-1..................................................    1545-0052
                                                               1545-0196
53.4942(a)-1...............................................    1545-0052
53.4942(a)-2...............................................    1545-0052
53.4942(a)-3...............................................    1545-0052
53.4942(b)-3...............................................    1545-0052
53.4945-1..................................................    1545-0052
53.4945-4..................................................    1545-0052
53.4945-5..................................................    1545-0052
53.4945-6..................................................    1545-0052
53.4947-1..................................................    1545-0196
53.4947-2..................................................    1545-0196

[[Page 563]]

                                                                        
53.4948-1..................................................    1545-0052
53.4961-2..................................................    1545-0024
53.4963-1..................................................    1545-0024
53.6001-1..................................................    1545-0052
53.6011-1..................................................    1545-0049
                                                               1545-0052
                                                               1545-0092
                                                               1545-0196
53.6065-1..................................................    1545-0052
53.6071-1..................................................    1545-0049
53.6081-1..................................................    1545-0066
                                                               1545-0148
53.6161-1..................................................    1545-0575
54.4972-1..................................................    1545-0197
54.4975-7..................................................    1545-0575
54.4977-1T.................................................    1545-0771
54.4981A-1T................................................    1545-0203
54.6011-1..................................................    1545-0575
54.6011-1T.................................................    1545-0575
55.6001-1..................................................    1545-0123
55.6011-1..................................................    1545-0999
                                                               1545-0123
                                                               1545-1016
55.6061-1..................................................    1545-0999
55.6071-1..................................................    1545-0999
56.4911-6..................................................    1545-0052
56.4911-7..................................................    1545-0052
56.4911-9..................................................    1545-0052
56.4911-10.................................................    1545-0052
56.6001-1..................................................    1545-1049
56.6011-1..................................................    1545-1049
56.6081-1..................................................    1545-1049
56.6161-1..................................................    1545-1049
                                                               1545-0257
145.4051-1.................................................    1545-0745
145.4052-1.................................................    1545-0120
                                                               1545-0745
                                                               1545-1076
145.4061-1.................................................    1545-0745
                                                               1545-0257
                                                               1545-0230
                                                               1545-0224
156.6001-1.................................................    1545-1049
156.6011-1.................................................    1545-1049
156.6081-1.................................................    1545-1049
156.6161-1.................................................    1545-1049
301.6011-2.................................................    1545-0225
                                                               1545-0350
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0441
                                                               1545-0957
301.6017-1.................................................    1545-0090
301.6034-1.................................................    1545-0092
301.6035-1.................................................    1545-0123
301.6036-1.................................................    1545-0013
                                                               1545-0773
301.6047-1.................................................    1545-0367
                                                               1545-0957
301.6057-1.................................................    1545-0710
301.6057-2.................................................    1545-0710
301.6058-1.................................................    1545-0710
301.6059-1.................................................    1545-0710
301.6103(c)-1..............................................    1545-0280
301.6104(a)-1..............................................    1545-0495
301.6104(a)-5..............................................    1545-0056
301.6104(a)-6..............................................    1545-0056
301.6104(b)-1..............................................    1545-0094
                                                               1545-0742
301.6104(d)-1..............................................    1545-0092
301.6109-1.................................................    1545-0003
                                                               1545-0295
                                                               1545-0367
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0957
                                                               1545-1461
301.6110-3.................................................    1545-0074
301.6110-5.................................................    1545-0074
301.6111-1T................................................    1545-0865
                                                               1545-0881
301.6112-1T................................................    1545-0865
301.6222(a)-2T.............................................    1545-0790
301.6222(b)-1T.............................................    1545-0790
301.6222(b)-2T.............................................    1545-0790
301.6222(b)-3T.............................................    1545-0790
301.6227(b)-1T.............................................    1545-0790
                                                               1545-0790
301.6231(a)(7)-1...........................................    1545-0790
301.6241-1T................................................    1545-0130
301.6316-4.................................................    1545-0074
301.6316-5.................................................    1545-0074
301.6316-6.................................................    1545-0074
301.6316-7.................................................    1545-0029
301.6324A-1................................................    1545-0015
301.6361-1.................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0024
301.6361-2.................................................    1545-0024
301.6361-3.................................................    1545-0074
301.6402-2.................................................    1545-0024
                                                               1545-0073
                                                               1545-0091
301.6402-3.................................................    1545-0055
                                                               1545-0073
                                                               1545-0091
                                                               1545-0132
301.6402-5.................................................    1545-0928
301.6404-1.................................................    1545-0024
301.6404-2T................................................    1545-0024
301.6404-3.................................................    1545-0024
301.6405-1.................................................    1545-0024
301.6501(c)-1..............................................    1545-1241
301.6501(d)-1..............................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0430
301.6501(o)-2..............................................    1545-0728
301.6511(d)-1..............................................    1545-0582
                                                               1545-0024
301.6511(d)-2..............................................    1545-0582
                                                               1545-0024
301.6511(d)-3..............................................    1545-0024
                                                               1545-0582
301.6652-2.................................................    1545-0092
301.6656-1.................................................    1545-0794
301.6656-2.................................................    1545-0794
301.6685-1.................................................    1545-0092
301.6689-1T................................................    1545-1056
301.6707-1T................................................    1545-0865
                                                               1545-0881
301.6708-1T................................................    1545-0865
301.6712-1.................................................    1545-1126
301.6723-1A(d).............................................    1545-0909
301.6903-1.................................................    1545-0013
301.6905-1.................................................    1545-0074
301.7001-1.................................................    1545-0123
301.7101-1.................................................    1545-1029
301.7207-1.................................................    1545-0092
301.7216-2.................................................    1545-0074
301.7216-2(o)..............................................    1545-1209
301.7425-3.................................................    1545-0854
301.7430-2(c)..............................................    1545-1356
301.7507-8.................................................    1545-0123
301.7507-9.................................................    1545-0123
301.7513-1.................................................    1545-0429
301.7517-1.................................................    1545-0015
301.7605-1.................................................    1545-0795
301.7623-1.................................................    1545-0409

[[Page 564]]

                                                                        
301.7654-1.................................................    1545-0803
301.7701-3.................................................    1545-1486
301.7701-4.................................................    1545-1465
301.7701-16................................................    1545-0795
301.7701(b)-1..............................................    1545-0089
301.7701(b)-2..............................................    1545-0089
301.7701(b)-3..............................................    1545-0089
301.7701(b)-4..............................................    1545-0089
301.7701(b)-5..............................................    1545-0089
301.7701(b)-6..............................................    1545-0089
301.7701(b)-7..............................................    1545-0089
301.7701(b)-9..............................................    1545-0089
301.7805-1.................................................    1545-0805
301.9001-1.................................................    1545-0220
301.9001-2T................................................    1545-1488
301.9001-3T................................................    1545-1488
301.9100-4T................................................    1545-0016
                                                               1545-0042
                                                               1545-0074
                                                               1545-0129
                                                               1545-0172
                                                               1545-0619
301.9100-6T................................................    1545-0872
301.9100-7T................................................    1545-0982
301.9100-8.................................................    1545-1112
301.9100-11T...............................................    1545-0123
301.9100-12T...............................................    1545-0026
                                                               1545-0074
                                                               1545-0172
                                                               1545-1027
301.9100-13T...............................................    1545-0046
301.9100-14T...............................................    1545-0046
301.9100-15T...............................................    1545-0046
301.9100-16T...............................................    1545-0152
302.1-7....................................................    1545-0024
305.7701-1.................................................    1545-0823
305.7871-1.................................................    1545-0823
404.6048-1.................................................    1545-0160
420.0-1....................................................    1545-0710
Part 502...................................................    1545-0844
Part 503...................................................    1545-0837
Part 509...................................................    1545-0846
Part 513...................................................    1545-0834
Part 514...................................................    1545-0845
Part 516...................................................    1545-0841
Part 517...................................................    1545-0849
Part 520...................................................    1545-0833
Part 521...................................................    1545-0848
601.104....................................................    1545-0233
601.105....................................................    1545-0091
601.201....................................................    1545-0019
                                                               1545-0819
601.204....................................................    1545-0152
601.401....................................................    1545-0257
601.504....................................................    1545-0150
601.601....................................................    1545-0800
601.602....................................................    1545-0295
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0957
601.702....................................................    1545-0429
------------------------------------------------------------------------

(26 U.S.C. 7805)

[T.D. 8011, 50 FR 10222, Mar. 14, 1985]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting 
Sec. 602.101, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Findings Aids 
section of 26 CFR part 600-end.

    Effective Date Note: By T.D. 8712, at 62 FR 2275, Jan. 16, 1997, in 
Sec. 602.1, the table in paragraph (c) was amended by adding entries for 
Secs. 1.141-1, 1.141-12, 1,142-2 and 1.148-6, effective May 16, 1997.

[[Page 565]]


<R03>
List of CFR Sections Affected

<R04>

All changes to sections of part 1 (Secs. 1.0 to 1.60) of title 26 of the 
Code of Federal Regulations which were made by documents published in 
the Federal Register since January 1, 1986, are enumerated in the 
following list. Entries indicate the nature of the changes effected. 
Page numbers refer to Federal Register pages. The user should consult 
the entries for chapters and parts as well as sections for revisions.
For the period before January 1, 1986, see the ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected, 1949-1963, 1964-1972, and 1973-1985,'' published in seven 
separate volumes.

                                  1986

26 CFR
                                                                   51 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
1  Authority citation amended......................................18777
    Proclamation...................................................45105
1.46-6  (b)(2)(i), (3), and (4)(ii) revised........................18777
1.58-3T  Added (temporary).........................................15320

                                  1987

26 CFR
                                                                   52 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
1  Authority citation amended.....................................10744,
12162, 15308, 23433, 24999, 29674, 30358, 31994, 33809, 35415, 42098, 
48409, 48526, 48995
    Proclamation...................................................18562
1.1(i)-1T  Added (temporary).......................................33579
    Corrected......................................................36133
1.23-1  Redesignated from 1.44C-1; (a), (b), (d)(2) (i) and (ii), 
        and (e) amended; (c) revised; (d)(3) (i) through (x) 
        redesignated as (d)(4)(ii) (A) through (J); new (d)(3) and 
        (4)(i) added; new (d)(4)(ii) heading and introductory text 
        amended....................................................26669
1.23-2  Redesignated from 1.44C-2; introductory text, (a)(1) (i) 
        and (iii), (b)(1) and flush text following (2), (c)(4), 
        (d)(3), (4) (iv) and (viii), (e)(1)(iii) and flush text 
        following (iii) and (2), (f) (1) and (4), (g) and (h) 
        amended; (i) added.........................................26670
1.23-3  Redesignated from 1.44C-3; (a)(1), (b), (d), (e), (h)(1) 
        (i) and (ii), (2), (3) and (4) Example 2, (j)(2) Example 
        and (k) introductory text amended; (c) and (j)(1) revised 
                                                                   26672
1.23-4  Redesignated from 1.44C-4..................................26672
1.23-5  Redesignated from 1.44C-5; (a) (1) through (5), (b)(1) and 
        (c) amended................................................26672
1.23-6  Redesignated from 1.44C-6; (a)(1) and (e) amended..........26673
1.32-1T  Added (temporary).........................................22302
    Technical correction...........................................23398
1.42-1T  Added (temporary).........................................23433
    (d)(8)(i), (ii)(B) and (e)(2) corrected........................24583
1.42-2T  Added (temporary).........................................42099
    (d)(2)(xii) corrected..........................................44672

[[Page 566]]

1.44C-1  Redesignated as 1.23-1; (a), (b), (d)(2) (i) and (ii), 
        and (e) amended; (c) revised; (d)(3) (i) through (x) 
        redesignated as (d)(4)(ii) (A) through (J); new (d)(3) and 
        (4)(i) added; new (d)(4)(ii) heading and introductory text 
        amended....................................................26669
1.44C-2  Redesignated as 1.23-2; introductory text, (a)(1) (i) and 
        (iii), (b)(1) and flush text following (2), (c)(4), 
        (d)(3), (4) (iv) and (viii), (e)(1)(iii) and flush text 
        following (iii) and (2), (f) (1) and (4), (g) and (h) 
        amended; (i) added.........................................26670
1.44C-3  Redesignated as 1.23-3; (a)(1), (b), (d), (e), (h)(1) (i) 
        and (ii), (2), (3), and (4) Example 2, (j)(2) Example and 
        (k) introductory text amended; (c) and (j)(1) revised......26672
1.44C-4  Redesignated as 1.23-4....................................26672
1.44C-5  Redesignated as 1.23-5; (a) (1) through (5), (b)(1) and 
        (c) amended................................................26672
1.44C-6  Redesignated as 1.23-6; (a)(1) and (e) amended............26673
1.48-9  (c)(10), (d) and (e) revised...............................27337
1.56-1  Redesignated as 1.56A-1 and (b)(2)(ii) amended.............15309
1.56-2  Redesignated as 1.56A-2....................................15309
1.56-3  Redesignated as 1-56A-3 and (b) and Example amended........15309
1.56-4  Redesignated as 1.56A-4....................................15309
1.56-5  Redesignated as 1.56A-5 and (b)(2) flush text, (e)(5), and 
        (h) Example (4) amended....................................15309
1.56A-1  Redesignated from 1.56-1 and (b)(2)(ii) amended...........15309
1.56-0T  Added (temporary).........................................15309
1.56-1T  Added (temporary).........................................15310
1.56A-2  Redesignated from 1.56-2..................................15309
1.56A-3  Redesignated from 1.56-3 and (b) and Example amended......15309
1.56A-4  Redesignated from 1.56-4..................................15309
1.56A-5  Redesignated from 1.56-5 and (b)(2) flush text, (e)(5), 
        and (h) Example (4) amended................................15309
1.57-4  (b) introductory text and (2)(ii) flush text and (e) 
        Example (5) amended........................................15309
1.57-5  (b) amended................................................15309
1.58-7  (c)(1)(iii) Example (4), (c)(2) Example (3), and (c)(4) 
        amended....................................................15309

                                  1988

26 CFR
                                                                   53 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
1  Authority citation amended......................................4967,
5698, 6605, 6618, 6803, 7507, 8749, 9873, 12002, 12008, 12679, 16079, 
16216, 18278, 19693, 20311, 20613, 20616, 22166, 23613, 26054, 27039, 
27491, 29881, 32219, 32385, 33461, 34050, 34490, 34719, 34731, 35474, 
38710
    Authority citation corrected....................................8302
1.28-0  Added......................................................38710
    (d)(5)(iv)(D) correctly revised; (d)(5)(iv)(E) correctly added
                                                                   40879
1.28-1  Added......................................................38711
    (d)(1)(ii)(A) corrected........................................40879
    (b)(4), (c)(1)(iii) and (2), (d)(1)(i)(B), (ii)(D), (iii), 
(2)(iii)(E), (4)(i), (5)(iii), (iv)(C), and (6)(iii)(A) corrected 
                                                                   41013
1.32-1T  Removed...................................................32219
1.46-1  (g)(6) and (n) Examples (6) and (7) added...................6618
    (a)(2) and (d) revised; (e)(5) and (q) added...................39591
1.46-3  (a)(1) amended..............................................6618
1.46-5  Added.......................................................6618
    (h)(4), (j)(7) Example, and (p)(3) Example (2) corrected.......11162
1.47-1  (a)(1)(i) amended; (g) added................................6625
1.47-3  (g) redesignated as (g)(1); new (g)(1) heading and (2) 
        added.......................................................6625
1.48-1  (h)(1)(iii) and (2)(iv) added..............................39592
1.48-8  (a)(3)(iii) revised........................................12678
1.48-12  Added.....................................................39592

[[Page 567]]

    (c)(3)(ii)(A)(2) and (8)(i) corrected..........................43866
1.52-1  (c)(1) (i) and (ii), (d)(1)(i) and (g) amended; (d)(1)(ii) 
        flush text and (h) added....................................6605
    (h)(2)(i) corrected.............................................8302
    (c)(1) (i) and (ii) and (d)(1)(i) corrected....................16408
1.56-0T  (b)(6) redesignated as (b)(7); new (b)(6) and (d)(7) 
        added; (c)(5)(ii) revised (temporary)......................15202
1.56-1T  (b)(2) (iii) and (iv), (4) (i), (iii), and (iv) and 
        (c)(1)(ii) and (4) amended; (b)(6) redesignated as (b)(7); 
        new (b) (6) and (7) Examples (9) through (14), (c)(5)(ii) 
        text and (6) Examples (15) through (21) and (d)(7) added 
                                                                   15202

                                  1989

26 CFR
                                                                   54 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
1  Authority citation amended......................................3005,
8730, 10981, 19366, 20532, 20800, 28582, 31673, 37317, 38666, 46375, 
46376, 47980, 50369, 51024, 52934
    Authority citation corrected............................13978, 39174
    Technical correction...........................................41962
1.41-0--1.41-8  Redesignated as 1.41-0A--1.41-8A and undesignated 
        center heading added; new 1.41-0--1.41-8 and new 
        undesignated center heading added....................21204-21211
1.41-0A--1.41-8A  Redesignated from 1.41-0--1.41-8 and new 
        undesignated center heading added..........................21204
1.41-0A  (a) amended...............................................21204
1.41-1A  Amended...................................................21204
1.41-9  Added......................................................21213
1.58-9T  Added (temporary).........................................19366

                                  1990

26 CFR
                                                                   55 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
1  Authority citation amended.......................................731,
2512, 2514, 2376, 3213, 9422, 9432, 21189, 33674, 35587, 41665, 
41670,42004, 49031, 50176, 50553, 51284, 51691
    Corrected (temporary)...........................................7891
1.40-1  Revised.....................................................8948
1.42-0  Added......................................................21189
1.42-1  Removed....................................................21189
1.42-2  Added......................................................21189
    (c)(1) corrected...............................................25973
1.42-2T  Removed...................................................21191
1.56-0  Redesignated from 1.56-0T and revised......................33675
1.56-0T  Redesignated as 1.56-0 and revised........................33675
1.56-1  Redesignated from 1.56-1T and revised...............33675, 33676
1.56-1T  Redesignated as 1.56-1 and revised.................33675, 33676

                                  1991

26 CFR
                                                                   56 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
1  Authority citation amended......................................1362,
    3034, 3977, 11063, 11083, 11095, 28060, 29433, 38340, 47389, 47605, 
           47614, 47641, 47662, 48434, 48734, 49515, 63431, 67176, 67489
    Authority citation corrected...................................65684
1.42-3  Added......................................................48734
1.43.3T  Added (temporary).........................................67177
1.56(g)-0  Added...................................................11083
1.56(g)-1  Added...................................................11084
    (k)(2) and (4) amended.........................................29433
1.56A-1--1.56A-5  Undesignated center heading added................11083
1.57--1.60  Undesignated center heading added......................11083

                                  1992

26 CFR
                                                                   57 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
1  Authority citation amended.........345, 1870, 3132, 6555, 9177, 9211, 
         10740, 10994, 12210, 12419, 13022, 14795, 15241, 19255, 20748, 
         20977, 22649, 24749, 36002, 38282, 38596, 40121, 40321, 40843, 
         41649, 44978, 45711, 48981, 53032, 54923, 55448, 58984, 60988, 
                                61298, 61316, 61800, 61808, 61812, 61818

[[Page 568]]

    Technical correction........5054, 21152, 21855, 21894, 31754, 47994, 
                                                                   57280
    Authority citation corrected....................................6352
1.32-1  Redesignated from 1.43-1...................................54923
1.32-2  Redesignated from 1.43-2...................................54923
1.42-4  Added......................................................24749
1.42-5  Added; eff. 6-30-93........................................40121
    (c)(1)(vii), (c)(3), (e)(2) and (f)(1)(ii) corrected...........57280
1.43-0  Added......................................................54923
1.43-1  Redesignated as 1.32-1; new 1.43-1 added...................54923
1.43-2  Redesignated as 1.32-2.....................................54923
    Added..........................................................54925
1.43-3  Redesignated from 1.43-3T; (a)(3)(ii)(B) and (e) removed; 
        (a)(3)(i)(C)(2) and (ii)(C) redesignated as 
        (a)(3)(i)(C)(3) and (ii)(B); heading, (a)(3)(i)(C)(1), new 
        (a)(3)(i)(C)(3) and (ii)(B) amended; new (a)(3)(i)(C)(2), 
        (ii)(C) and (D) added; (a)(3)(ii)(A) revised...............54927
1.43.3T  (b)(3)(ii) and (c)(3)(ii) corrected........................6074
    (a)(3)(i)(D)(2), (ii) introductory text and (c)(2) corrected 
                                                                    6353
    Redesignated as 1.43-3.........................................54927
1.43-4  Added......................................................54927
1.43-5  Added......................................................54930
1.43-6  Added......................................................54930
1.43-7  Added......................................................54930
1.56(g)-0  Amended.................................................60476
1.56(g)-1  (a)(6)(i) and (d)(2)(ii)(B) revised; (a)(7), (f)(3), 
        (m), (r) and (s) added.....................................60477
1.58-9  Added......................................................19255
    (c)(3)(iii)(A)(3)(iii), (d) Example 1, Example 2 and (e)(2)(i) 
corrected..........................................................24848
1.58-9T  Removed...................................................19262

                                  1993

26 CFR
                                                                   58 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
1  Authority citation amended.........232, 236, 4080, 5271, 5929, 13411, 
         18149, 19060, 25557, 33515, 33764, 34885, 42206, 54039, 67678, 
                                              68300, 68303, 68749, 68757
    Technical correction.......................7988, 13413, 16350, 29028
    Authority citation corrected............................11099, 15089
    Heading revised..............................
</pre></body></html>
