<html><body><pre>
[Title 49 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - October 1, 2004 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]



[[Page i]]


<R02>
          49


          Parts 400 to 599

                         Revised as of October 1, 2004


          Transportation
          
          <R03>


________________________

          Containing a codification of documents of general 
          applicability and future effect

          As of October 1, 2004
          With Ancillaries
                    Published by
                    Office of the Federal Register
                    National Archives and Records
                    Administration
                    A Special Edition of the Federal Register

[[Page ii]]






                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                            WASHINGTON : 2004



  For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing 
                                  Office
  Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC area 
                              (202) 512-1800
      Fax: (202) 512-2250 Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-0001

[[Page iii]]



<R02>
                            Table of Contents


<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................       v

  Title 49:
    Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to Transportation 
      (Continued)
          Chapter IV--Coast Guard, Department of Homeland 
          Security                                                   5
          Chapter V--National Highway Traffic Safety 
          Administration, Department of Transportation              19
  Finding Aids:
      Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference........    1151
      Table of CFR Titles and Chapters........................    1165
      Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR......    1183
      List of CFR Sections Affected...........................    1193

[[Page iv]]





                     ----------------------------

                     Cite this Code: CFR
                     To cite the regulations in 
                       this volume use title, 
                       part and section number. 
                       Thus, 49 CFR 450.1 refers 
                       to title 49, part 450, 
                       section 1.

                     ----------------------------

[[Page v]]



                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1

    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, October 1, 2004), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 2001, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, or 1986-2000, published in 11 separate 
volumes. For the period beginning January 1, 2001, a ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

    What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was 
established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the 
requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring 
to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be 
valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal 
effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as 
if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)). 
This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force 
of law.
    What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the 
Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when 
the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which 
approval is based are:
    (a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of 
material published in the Federal Register.
    (b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent 
necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative 
process.
    (c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for 
publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
    Properly approved incorporations by reference in this volume are 
listed in the Finding Aids at the end of this volume.
    What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If 
you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed in 
the Finding Aids of this volume as an approved incorporation by 
reference, please contact the agency that issued the regulation 
containing that incorporation. If, after contacting the agency, you find 
the material is not available, please notify the Director of the Federal 
Register, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington DC 
20408, or call (202) 741-6010.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Statutory 
Authorities and Agency Rules (Table I). A list of CFR titles, chapters, 
and parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are 
also included in this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.
    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.
    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

[[Page vii]]


REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-741-6000 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC 20408 or e-mail 
fedreg.info@nara.gov.

SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call toll free, 
866-512-1800 or DC area, 202-512-1800, M-F, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or 
fax your order to 202-512-2250, 24 hours a day. For payment by check, 
write to the Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders, P.O. Box 
371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. For GPO Customer Service call 202-
512-1803.

ELECTRONIC SERVICES

    The full text of the Code of Federal Regulations, the LSA (List of 
CFR Sections Affected), The United States Government Manual, the Federal 
Register, Public Laws, Public Papers, Weekly Compilation of Presidential 
Documents and the Privacy Act Compilation are available in electronic 
format at www.access.gpo.gov/nara (``GPO Access''). For more 
information, contact Electronic Information Dissemination Services, U.S. 
Government Printing Office. Phone 202-512-1530, or 888-293-6498 (toll-
free). E-mail, gpoaccess@gpo.gov.
    The Office of the Federal Register also offers a free service on the 
National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) World Wide Web 
site for public law numbers, Federal Register finding aids, and related 
information. Connect to NARA's web site at www.archives.gov/federal--
register. The NARA site also contains links to GPO Access.

                              Raymond A. Mosley,
                                    Director,
                          Office of the Federal Register.

October 1, 2004.

[[Page ix]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 49--Transportation is composed of eight volumes. The parts in 
these volumes are arranged in the following order: Parts 1-99, parts 
100-185, parts 186-199, parts 200-399, parts 400-599, parts 600-999, 
parts 1000-1199, part 1200 to End. The first volume (parts 1-99) 
contains current regulations issued under subtitle A--Office of the 
Secretary of Transportation; the second volume (parts 100-185) and the 
third volume (parts 186-199) contain the current regulations issued 
under chapter I--Research and Special Programs Administration (DOT); the 
fourth volume (parts 200-399) contains the current regulations issued 
under chapter II--Federal Railroad Administration (DOT), and chapter 
III--Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (DOT); the fifth volume 
(parts 400-599) contains the current regulations issued under chapter 
IV--Coast Guard (DHS), chapter V--National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration (DOT); the sixth volume (parts 600-999) contains the 
current regulations issued under chapter VI--Federal Transit 
Administration (DOT), chapter VII--National Railroad Passenger 
Corporation (AMTRAK), and chapter VIII--National Transportation Safety 
Board; the seventh volume (parts 1000-1199) contains the current 
regulations issued under chapter X--Surface Transportation Board and the 
eigth volume (part 1200 to End) contains the current regulations issued 
under chapter X--Surface Transportation Board, chapter XI--Bureau of 
Transportation Statistics, and chapter XII--Transportation Security 
Administration, Department of Transportation. The contents of these 
volumes represent all current regulations codified under this title of 
the CFR as of October 1, 2004.

    In the volume containing parts 100-185, see Sec.  172.101 for the 
Hazardous Materials Table. The Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards 
appear in part 571.

    For this volume, Ruth Green was Chief Editor. The Code of Federal 
Regulations publication program is under the direction of Frances D. 
McDonald, assisted by Alomha S. Morris.

[[Page x]]

<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>


[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                        TITLE 49--TRANSPORTATION




                  (This book contains parts 400 to 599)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Part

  SUBTITLE B--Other Regulations Relating To Transportation (Continued)

chapter iv--Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security....         450

chapter v--National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
  Department of Transportation..............................         501

[[Page 3]]

  Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating To Transportation (Continued)

[[Page 5]]


<R02>
        CHAPTER IV--COAST GUARD, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY




  --------------------------------------------------------------------

                         SUBCHAPTER A [RESERVED]
            SUBCHAPTER B--SAFETY APPROVAL OF CARGO CONTAINERS
Part                                                                Page
450             General.....................................           7
451             Testing and approval of containers..........          10
452             Examination of containers...................          13
453             Control and enforcement.....................          16

[[Page 7]]


<R03>
                         SUBCHAPTER A [RESERVED]




<R03>
            SUBCHAPTER B_SAFETY APPROVAL OF CARGO CONTAINERS




<R03>
PART 450_GENERAL--Table of Contents




                      Subpart A_General Provisions

Sec.
450.1 Purpose.
450.3 Definitions.
450.5 General requirements and applicability.
450.7 Marking.

       Subpart B_Procedures for Delegation to Approval Authorities

450.11 Application for delegation of authority.
450.12 Criteria for selection of Approval Authorities.
450.13 Granting of delegation.
450.14 Conditions of delegation.
450.15 Termination of delegation.
450.16 Withdrawal of delegation.

    Authority: Sec. 4, 91 Stat 1475 (46 U.S.C. 1503); Department of 
Homeland Security Delegation No. 0170.1.


<R04>
                      Subpart A_General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 450.1  Purpose.

    This subchapter establishes requirements and procedures for safety 
approval and periodic examination of cargo containers used in 
international transport, as defined in the International Safe Container 
Act.

[45 FR 37213, June 2, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 450.3  Definitions.

    (a) In this subchapter: (1) Approval Authority means a delegate of 
the Commandant authorized to approve containers within the terms of the 
convention, the International Safe Container Act and this subchapter.
    (2) Container means an article of transport equipment:
    (i) Of a permanent character and suitable for a repeated use.
    (ii) Specially design to facilitate the transport of goods, by one 
or more modes of transport, without intermediate reloading.
    (iii) Designed to be secured and readily handled, having corner 
fittings for these purposes.
    (iv) Of a size that the area enclosed by the four outer bottom 
corners is either:
    (A) At least 14 sq.m. (150 sq.ft.), or
    (B) At least 7 sq.m. (75 sq.ft.) if it has top corner fittings.
    (v) The term container includes neither vehicles nor packaging; 
however, containers when carried on chassis are included.
    (3) Convention means the International Convention for Safe 
Containers (CSC) done at Geneva, December 2, 1972 and ratified by the 
United States on January 3, 1978.
    (4) District Commander means the Coast Guard officer designated by 
the Commandant to command a Coast Guard District.
    (5) New Container means a container, the construction of which began 
on or after September 6, 1977.
    (6) Existing Container means a container that is not a new 
container.

[45 FR 37213, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 450.5  General requirements and applicability.

    (a) Every owner of a new or existing container used or offered for 
movement in international transport shall have the container approved in 
accordance with the procedures established by the Administration of any 
contracting party to the convention, except that existing containers 
need not be approved until September 6, 1982.
    (b) Every owner of an approved container used or offered for 
movement in international transport who:
    (1) Is domiciled in the United States and has the head office in the 
United States, or
    (2) Is domiciled in a country which is not a contracting party to 
the convention but has the principal office in the United States, shall 
have the container periodically examined in accordance with part 452 of 
this subchapter.

[[Page 8]]

    (c) Every owner of an approved container used or offered for 
movement in international transport who:
    (1) Is domiciled in the United States but has the principal office 
in the jurisdiction of another contracting party to the convention, or
    (2) Is domiciled in the jurisdiction of another contracting party to 
the convention but has the principal office in the United States, but 
elects to have the container examined in accordance with the procedures 
prescribed by the United States, shall conform to part 452 of this 
subchapter.
    (d) Every owner of an approved container used or offered for 
movement in international transport who is neither domiciled in nor has 
the principal office in the jurisdiction of a contracting party to the 
convention, but elects to have the container examined in accordance with 
procedures prescribed by the United States, shall conform to part 452 of 
this subchapter.

[45 FR 37213, June 2, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 450.7  Marking.

    (a) On each container that construction begins on or after January 
1, 1984, all maximum gross weight markings on the container must be 
consistent with the maximum gross weight information on the safety 
approval plate.
    (b) On each container that construction begins before January 1, 
1984, all maximum gross weight markings on the container must be 
consistent with the gross weight information on the safety approval 
plate no later than January 1, 1989.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under OMB control 
number 2115-0094)

[49 FR 15562, Apr. 19, 1984]


<R04>
       Subpart B_Procedure for Delegation to Approval Authorities


<R05>
Sec. 450.11  Application for delegation of authority.

    (a) Any person or organization seeking delegation of authority to 
act as an Approval Authority may apply to the Commandant, (G-MSO), U.S. 
Coast Guard, Washington, DC 20593. Each application must be signed and 
certified by the applicant or, if the applicant is an organization, by 
an authorized officer of the organization. A list of delegated approval 
authorities may be obtained from the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (b) The application must include the following information:
    (1) Name and address, including place of incorporation, if a 
corporation.
    (2) A description of the organization, including the ownership, 
managerial structure, organizational components and directly affiliated 
agencies and their functions utilized for supporting technical services.
    (3) A listing of the basic technical services offered.
    (4) A general description of the geographic area served.
    (5) A general description of the clients being served or intended to 
be served.
    (6) A description of the types of work performed by the applicant in 
the past, noting the amount and extent of such work performed within the 
previous three years.
    (7) A description of the personnel to be utilized, indicating 
general background and qualifications, particularly for the surveyors to 
be involved in the actual witnessing of tests.
    (8) A description of its means of assuring continued competence of 
its personnel.
    (9) A detailed schedule of the fees proposed to be charged for the 
approval service.
    (10) Evidence of financial stability.
    (11) At least three business references who will furnish information 
regarding work performed by the applicant.
    (12) A statement that the Coast Guard may inspect the applicant's 
facilities and records of approvals under the convention and these 
regulations.
    (c) The application may contain any additional information the 
applicant deems to be pertinent.
    (d) The applicant must furnish any additional information to 
evaluate the applicant's qualifications, if requested by the Chief, 
Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (G-MSO), U.S. Coast 
Guard.
    (e) Applications from foreign nationals or organizations must 
contain an affidavit stating that the agency responsible for 
implementing the Convention in their country has delegated to the 
applicant an approval authority,

[[Page 9]]

and that it also delegates similar authority to United States citizens 
or organizations having delegations from the United States. The 
affidavit must also contain the name and address of the agency to which 
U.S. citizens or organizations must apply for delegation as an approval 
authority.

[45 FR 37213, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 450.12  Criteria for selection of Approval Authorities.

    (a) The Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (G-
MSO), U.S. Coast Guard selects persons or organizations in accordance 
with the following criteria:
    (1) The person or organization is independent of manufacturers and 
owners in that:
    (i) It has sufficient breadth of interest or activity, so that the 
loss or award of a specific contract to approve containers would not be 
a substantial factor in the financial well-being of the organization.
    (ii) The employment status of the personnel of the organization is 
free from influence or control of manufacturers, owners, operators or 
lessors of containers.
    (2) The person or organization has demonstrated the ability to 
competently carry out the procedures required for approval.
    (3) The person or organization has an acceptable degree of financial 
security.

[45 FR 37213, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 450.13  Granting of delegation.

    (a) The Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (G-
MSO), U.S. Coast Guard acts on applications for delegation within 60 
days of receipt.
    (b) If an applicant for delegation does not provide sufficient 
information with regard to all the criteria for delegation, the Chief, 
Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (G-MSO), U.S. Coast 
Guard denies the application. A denial of an application on this basis 
is without prejudice to the submission of a new or amended application.
    (c) If an applicant satisfies all the criteria for delegation the 
Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (G-MSO), U.S. 
Coast Guard sends the applicant a letter of delegation, and assigns to 
the Approval Authority an alphabetic Approval Authority identification 
code.
    (d) If an applicant fails to satisfy all the criteria for 
delegation, the Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards 
(G-MSO), U.S. Coast Guard gives the applicant written notice of denial 
of his application. The notice contains all the reasons for the denial. 
The applicant may contest the denial by submitting additional oral or 
written evidence in support of its qualifications. Upon review of the 
evidence, the Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (G-
MSO), U.S. Coast Guard notifies the applicant of the final decision.

[45 FR 37213, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 450.14  Conditions of delegation.

    (a) The following conditions are part of every delegation: (1) The 
Approval Authority shall use only testing equipment that it has 
determined by inspection to be suitable for the purpose.
    (2) All approval numbers issued by the Approval Authority must 
contain the identification code, assigned to the Approval Authority by 
the Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (G-MSO), U.S. 
Coast Guard.
    (3) Each Approval Authority shall maintain the following records for 
a period of at least 15 years from the date of approval. (When the 
Approval Authority's delegation is withdrawn before such time, the 
records relating to the approvals issued within the prior 15 years must 
be turned over to the Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental 
Standards (G-MSO), U.S. Coast Guard):
    (i) Each notice of approval issued.
    (ii) A copy of the application and final approved drawings (if 
applicable) to which each approval refers.
    (iii) The manufacturer's serial numbers and the owner's 
identification numbers of all containers covered by each approval.

[[Page 10]]

    (4) Each Approval Authority shall establish and make available to 
the public a schedule of fees for the approval services performed under 
these regulations. The fees must not be disproportionate to the costs 
(including transportation expense, if any) actually incurred.
    (5) The Approval Authority shall grant the Coast Guard the right to 
inspect records and shall cooperate in the conduct of such inspections.
    (6) The Approval Authority shall comply with any other term or 
condition stated in its letter of delegation.

[45 FR 37213, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 450.15  Termination of delegation.

    (a) An Approval Authority may voluntarily terminate its delegation 
by giving written notice of its intent to the Chief, Office of Operating 
and Environmental Standards (G-MSO), U.S. Coast Guard. This notice must 
contain the date on which the termination is to be effective.

[45 FR 37213, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 450.16  Withdrawal of delegation.

    (a) The Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (G-
MSO), U.S. Coast Guard withdraws a delegation if: (1) It is determined 
that the application for delegation contained a material 
misrepresentation.
    (2) An Approval Authority fails to comply with a condition of 
delegation.
    (3) An Approval Authority is incompetent.
    (b) When a delegation is withdrawn, the Chief, Office of Operating 
and Environmental Standards (G-MSO), U.S. Coast Guard gives to the 
Approval Authority:
    (1) Written notice of the facts or conduct believed to warrant the 
withdrawal.
    (2) Opportunity to submit oral or written evidence.
    (3) Opportunity to demonstrate or achieve compliance with the 
applicable requirement.

[45 FR 37213, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R03>
PART 451_TESTING AND APPROVAL OF CONTAINERS--Table of Contents




                Subpart A_Approval of Existing Containers

Sec.
451.1 Application for approval.
451.3 Action by Approval Authority.
451.5 Resubmission or appeal.
451.7 Alternative approval of existing containers.

                  Subpart B_Approval of New Containers

451.11 Application for approval-general.
451.12 Application for approval by design type.
451.13 Action by approval authority-approval by design type.
451.14 Alternative approval of new containers by design type.
451.15 Application for individual approval.
451.16 Action by approval authority-individual approval.
451.18 Review of denials of approval.

                     Subpart C_Safety Approval Plate

451.21 Safety approval plate required.
451.23 Plate specifications.
451.25 Required information.

    Authority: Sec. 4, 91 Stat 1475 (46 U.S.C. 1503); Department of 
Homeland Security Delegation No. 0170.1.

    Source: 45 FR 37214, June 2, 1980, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                Subpart A_Approval of Existing Containers


<R05>
Sec. 451.1  Application for approval.

    (a) Any owner of an existing container may apply for approval to the 
Commandant (G-MSO), U.S. Coast Guard, Washington, DC 20593 or to any 
Approval Authority.
    (b) Each application must include the following for each container:
    (1) Date and place of manufacture.
    (2) Manufacturer's identification number, if available.
    (3) Maximum operating gross weight capacity.

[[Page 11]]

    (4) Allowable stacking weight for 1.8G (1.8xGross weight in 
kilograms or pounds).

    Note: This value is the total load the container is designed to 
support when subjected to a vertical acceleration of 1.8G.

    (5) A statement that the owner possesses documentary evidence that:
    (i) Container of this type has been safely used in marine or inland 
transport for a period of at least two years; or
    (ii) The container was manufactured to a design type which had been 
tested and found to comply with the technical conditions set out in 
Annex II to the convention with the exception of those technical 
conditions relating to the end-wall and side-wall strength tests; or
    (iii) The container was constructed to standards that were 
equivalent to the technical conditions set out in Annex II to the 
convention with the exception of those technical conditions relating to 
end-wall and side-wall strength tests.
    (6) A certification by the owner, or, if the owner is a corporation, 
partnership or unincorporated association, by a person authorized to 
make such statements for the organization, that the information provided 
in the application is true and correct.

[45 FR 37214, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 451.3  Action by Approval Authority.

    (a) The Approval Authority (or the Chief, Office of Operating and 
Environmental Standards (G-MSO), U.S. Coast Guard, if the application 
was submitted to the Coast Guard) issues to the owner a notice of 
approval or notifies the owner in writing that approval is denied, 
setting forth the deficiencies causing denial. Notification of approval 
entitles the owner to affix a safety approval plate to each container 
after an examination of each container concerned has been carried out in 
accordance with part 452 of this subchapter. In the case of an 
application submitted to the Coast Guard, the Chief, Office of Operating 
and Environmental Standards (G-MSO), U.S. Coast Guard acts on the 
application within 30 days of receipt of the application.

[45 FR 37214, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 451.5  Resubmission or appeal.

    (a) Upon receipt of a denial of approval for certain containers, an 
owner may correct the noted deficiencies and resubmit the application 
without prejudice.
    (b) An applicant aggrieved by a decision of an approval authority 
may obtain review of the decision by the Chief, Office of Operating and 
Environmental Standards (G-MSO), U.S. Coast Guard. The decision of the 
Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (G-MSO), U.S. 
Coast Guard is a final agency action.

[45 FR 37214, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 451.7  Alternative approval of existing containers.

    (a) Existing containers that do not qualify for approval under this 
subpart may be presented for approval under the provisions of subpart B 
of this part. For such containers, the requirements of subpart B of this 
part, relating to the end and sidewall strength tests, do not apply. 
Upon showing that the containers have performed satisfactorily in 
service, the applicant may omit the presentation of drawings and 
testing, other than the lifting and floor strength test, if permitted by 
the approval authority.

[45 FR 37214, June 2, 1980, as amended at 69 FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R04>
                  Subpart B_Approval of New Containers


<R05>
Sec. 451.11  Application for approval-general.

    (a) An owner of a new container, or a manufacturer acting on behalf 
of an owner, may apply for approval to any approval authority.

[[Page 12]]


<R05>
Sec. 451.12  Application for approval by design type.

    (a) For approval of new containers by design type, each application 
must include the following:
    (1) Engineering drawings and plans showing platform, end framing, 
welds and hardware, connections of cross-members, top and bottom rails, 
roof bows, detailed subassemblies of major structural components and 
attachments, and any other plans and drawings required by the approval 
authority.
    (2) Design and material specifications including type and size of 
materials. Material specifications of the safety approval plate must 
also be given.
    (3) The manufacturer's identification number assigned to each 
container in the type series.
    (4) The identification code assigned to each container in the series 
by the owner, lessee, or bailee responsible for maintenance.
    (5) The written assurance from the manufacturer, that the 
manufacturer will:
    (i) Produce to the approval authority such containers as the 
approval authority may wish to examine;
    (ii) Advise the approval authority of any change in the design or 
specification and await its approval before affixing the Safety Approval 
Plate to the container;
    (iii) Affix the Safety Approval Plate to each container in the 
design type and to no others;
    (iv) Keep a record of containers manufactured to the approved design 
type containing at least the manufacturer's identification numbers, date 
of delivery, and names and addresses of customers to whom the containers 
are delivered; and
    (v) Supply to the approval authority the information contained in 
paragraphs (a)(3) and (4) of this section if not available at the time 
of original application.
    (6) A statement as to whether this design type has been examined by 
any approval authority previously and judged unacceptable. Affirmative 
statements must be documented with the name of the approving authority, 
the reason for nonacceptance, and the nature of modifications made to 
the design type.

[45 FR 37214, June 2, 1980, as amended at 69 FR 58353, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 451.13  Action by approval authority-approval by design type.

    (a) The approval authority arranges with the manufacturer, with 
notification to the owner, to witness the prototype tests required by 
the convention, and to examine any number of containers that the 
approval authority considers appropriate. Upon witnessing successful 
completion of prototype tests and examination of several containers the 
approval authority issues to the owner, a notice of approval which 
authorizes the attachment of safety approval plates to the containers. 
Absence of individual inspections will not relieve the manufacturer of 
any responsibility to maintain proper quality control. If a prototype 
container fails to pass the tests, the approval authority may require 
testing of as many further representative containers as necessary to 
ensure the adequacy of the design.


<R05>
Sec. 451.14  Alternative approval of new containers by design type.

    (a) New containers manufactured before June 16, 1978 without being 
approved under the preceding section may be approved by submission to an 
approval authority of an application corresponding to that required 
under Sec. 451.1(b) for existing containers. All new containers so 
approved must have safety approval plates affixed and receive their 
first periodic examination in accordance with the procedures prescribed 
in Sec. 452.3 by January 1, 1985.

[47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 451.15  Application for individual approval.

    (a) For approval of new containers by individual approval, each 
application must include the following:
    (1) The manufacturer's identification number.
    (2) The identification code of the owner, lessee, or bailee 
responsible for maintenance of the container.

[[Page 13]]


<R05>
Sec. 451.16  Action by approval authority-individual approval.

    (a) The approval authority arranges with the manufacturer or owner 
to witness testing in accordance with Annex II to the convention. Upon 
witnessing successful completion of the tests, the approval authority 
issues to the owner a notice of approval that authorizes the attachment 
of a safety approval plate.


<R05>
Sec. 451.18  Review of denials of approval.

    (a) An applicant aggrieved by a decision of an approval authority 
may obtain review of the decision by the Chief, Office of Operating and 
Environmental Standards (G-MSO), U.S. Coast Guard. The decision of the 
Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (G-MSO), U.S. 
Coast Guard is a final agency action.

[45 FR 37214, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58353, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R04>
                     Subpart C_Safety Approval Plate


<R05>
Sec. 451.21  Safety approval plate required.

    (a) The safety approval plate must be supplied by the owner or 
manufacturer.


<R05>
Sec. 451.23  Plate specifications.

    (a) The safety approval plate must be of the size and in the format 
specified in the appendix to Annex I to the convention.
    (b) The safety approval plate must be:
    (1) Designed to withstand and remain legible after a 15 minute 
exposure to a medium intensity fire producing a temperature of 1,000 
[deg]F (540 [deg]C), when mounted on the specified material of 
construction of the container.
    (2) Designed to resist the corrosive effects of its environment, 
both at sea and ashore, so as to remain legible for the working life of 
the container.
    (3) Designed to have a legible life expectancy equal to or greater 
than the life expectancy of the container to which the plate is affixed.


<R05>
Sec. 451.25  Required information.

    (a) The safety approval number appearing on line 1 of the safety 
approval plate must be of the form ``USA/(approval number, which 
includes the approval authority identification code)/(year in which 
approval was granted).''
    (b) The date upon which approval was granted must be the same for 
all containers of a design-type or type-series covered by one notice of 
approval.
    (c) The safety approval number must be the same for all containers 
of a design-type or type-series covered by one notice of approval.
    (d) The owner's International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
alpha numeric identification numbers may be used in place of the 
manufacturer's identification numbers on line 3 of the safety approval 
plate. If owner's identification numbers are used and the manufacturer's 
are available, the owner shall keep records correlating the owner's 
identification numbers used with the manufacturer's number. If a 
container marked with owner's identification numbers changes ownership, 
and the owner's identification number is changed as a result, the new 
owner must add the new owner's identification number, following the 
original owner's identification number on line 3 of the safety approval 
plate. In the event that the new owner's identification number cannot be 
legibly added to line 3 of the safety approval plate following the 
original owner's identification number, the new owner is authorized to 
put a new safety approval plate on the freight container provided that 
all the information contained on the original safety approval plate is 
retained in the owners files.


<R03>
PART 452_EXAMINATION OF CONTAINERS--Table of Contents




Sec.
452.1 Periodic examination required.
452.3 Elements of periodic examinations.
452.5 Examinations made in conjunction with other inspections.
452.7 Continuous examination program.
452.9 Elements of a continuous examination program.

    Authority: Sec. 4, 91 Stat 1475 (46 U.S.C. 1503); Department of 
Homeland Security Delegation No. 0170.1.

[[Page 14]]


<R05>
Sec. 452.1  Periodic examination required.

    (a) Except as provided for in Sec. 452.7, each owner of an approved 
container subject to this part shall examine the container or have it 
examined in accordance with the procedures prescribed in Sec. 452.3 at 
intervals of not more than 30 months, except that for containers 
approved as new containers, the interval from the date of manufacture to 
the date of the first examination must not exceed five years. For 
containers approved, examined and plated as existing containers before 
January 1, 1985 and containers approved and plated as new containers 
before January 1, 1985, the subsequent examination must be carried out 
in accordance with the following schedule:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Date of initial plating               Subsequent examination
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Existing containers before Sept. 30, 1981  Before Jan. 1986.
 and new containers before Dec. 31, 1978.
Existing containers between Oct. 1, 1981   Before May 1986.
 and Sept. 30, 1982 and new containers
 between Jan. 1, 1979 and Dec. 31, 1979.
Existing containers between Oct. 1, 1982   Before Sept. 1986.
 and Sept. 30, 1983 and new containers
 between Jan. 1, 1980 and Dec. 31, 1980.
Existing containers between Oct. 1, 1983   Before Jan. 1987.
 and Dec. 31, 1984 and new containers
 between Jan. 1, 1981 and Dec. 31, 1981.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Note: Containers plated under Sec. 451.14 are considered existing 
containers in the above schedule.

    (b) Upon completion of an examination required by this part, the 
owner shall mark on the safety approval plate, or on the container 
itself as close as practicable to the safety approval plate, the month 
and year before which the container must next be examined. This marking 
must be on all containers by January 1, 1987. The marking may be by a 
decal, sticker, stencil, or other means so long as it is capable of 
remaining legible for at least 24 months. Affixing such a marking to a 
container that has not been examined in accordance with Sec. 452.3 
constitutes a misrepresentation in a matter within the jurisdiction of 
an agency of the United States, and makes the owner punishable under 18 
U.S.C. 1001.
    (c) The owner of containers subject to this section shall have those 
containers examined in accordance with the program prescribed in this 
section regardless of whether the examinations are preformed within or 
outside the United States.

[45 FR 37216, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 49 
FR 15562, Apr. 19, 1984; 69 FR 58353, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 452.3  Elements of periodic examinations.

    (a) Periodic examinations required by Sec. 452.1 must conform to 
the following minimum requirements:
    (1) Each examination must include a detailed visual inspection for 
defects such as cracks, failures, corrosion, missing or deteriorated 
fasteners, and any other safety related deficiency or damage which could 
place any person in danger. Any such deficiencies disclosed by the 
examination must be corrected by the owner before the container is 
continued in service.
    (2) Each examination must take into account the particular 
characteristics of various kinds of containers and materials of 
construction.
    (3) Each examination must be performed by qualified personnel, 
trained and experienced in the detection of container structural damage.
    (4) The examinations must be scheduled so as to allow adequate time 
for thorough performance.
    (5) Each examination must apply owner established or industry 
accepted pass/fail criteria to determine whether a container has any 
deficiency that must be remedied before the container is returned to 
service.
    (b) Examinations must be documented, and the records retained by the 
owner, until the next examination is completed and recorded. The records 
must include, in addition to identification of the container, a record 
of the date of last examination and a means of identifying the examiner. 
The records must be maintained in an office under the control of the 
owner and be made available for inspection by the Coast Guard upon 
demand. If the original records are maintained outside the United 
States, its territories or possessions, supplementary records must be 
available in written or data processing

[[Page 15]]

form to be produced on demand of the Commandant or his representative.

[45 FR 37216, June 2, 1980; as amended at 69 FR 58353, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 452.5  Examinations made in conjunction with other inspections.

    (a) Periodic examinations may be made in conjunction with or as part 
of routine change-of-custody inspections, or in any other manner 
convenient to the owner so long as the examinations conform to the 
requirements of Sec. 452.3.

[45 FR 37216, June 2, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 452.7  Continuous examination program.

    (a) In lieu of a periodic examination under Sec. 452.1, each owner 
of an approved container meeting Sec. 450.5 may examine the container 
or have it examined using an approved continuous examination program. An 
owner must submit the continuous examination program for approval to the 
Commandant (G-MSO), United States Coast Guard, 2100 Second Street, SW., 
Washington, DC 20593. When submitting a continuous examination program 
for approval the owner must show the continuous examination complies 
with Sec. 452.9.
    (b) The owner must mark the container with the letters ``ACEP/USA/
(year continuous examination program is approved)'' to indicate the 
container is being periodically examined under an approved continuous 
examination program. This marking must be as close as practicable to the 
safety approval plate. This marking must be on all containers covered by 
a continuous examination program by January 1, 1987.
    (c) The owner of containers subject to this section shall have those 
containers examined in accordance with the program prescribed in this 
section regardless of whether the examinations are performed within or 
outside the United States.

(The information collection requirements contained in paragraphs (a) and 
(b) have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget under OMB 
control number 1625-0024)

[49 FR 15562, Apr. 19, 1984, as amended at 69 FR 58353, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 452.9  Elements of a continuous examination program.

    (a) Examinations required by Sec. 452.7 must conform to the 
following minimum requirements:
    (1) A thorough examination that must include a detailed visual 
inspection for defects such as cracks, failures, corrosion, missing or 
deteriorated fasteners, and any other safety related deficiency or 
damage that could place any person in danger. Any such deficiencies 
disclosed by the examination must be corrected by the owner before the 
container is continued in service. A thorough examination must be done 
each time a container undergoes a major repair, refurbishment or on-
hire/off-hire interchange. In no case is the time period between 
thorough examinations to exceed 30 months.
    (2) Each thorough examination must be performed by qualified 
personnel, trained and experienced in the detection of container 
structural damage.
    (3) Each thorough examination must apply owner established or 
industry accepted pass/fail criteria to determine whether a container 
has any deficiency that must be remedied before the container is 
returned to service.
    (b) Thorough examinations must be documented, and the records 
retained by the owner, until the next examination is completed and 
recorded. The records must include, in addition to identification of the 
container, a record of the date of last examination and a means of 
identifying the examiner. The records must be maintained in an office 
under the control of the owner and be made available for inspection by 
the Coast Guard upon demand. If the original records are maintained 
outside the United States, its territories or possessions, supplementary 
records must be available in written or data processing form to be 
produced on demand of the Commandant or his representative.

(The information collection requirements contained in paragraph (b) have 
been approved by the Office of Management and Budget under OMB control 
number 1625-0024)

[49 FR 15562, Apr. 19, 1984, as amended at 69 FR 58353, Sept. 30, 2004]

[[Page 16]]


<R03>
PART 453_CONTROL AND ENFORCEMENT--Table of Contents




Sec.
453.1 Unsafe and noncomplying containers subject to detention or 
          control.
453.3 Detention orders and other orders.
453.5 Termination of detention orders and other orders.
453.7 Appeal provisions.

    Authority: Sec. 4, 91 Stat 1475 (46 U.S.C. 1503); Department of 
Homeland Security Delegation No. 0170.1.


<R05>
Sec. 453.1  Unsafe and noncomplying containers subject to detention or control.

    (a) Any container used in or offered for movement in international 
transport which does not have a valid safety approval plate attached to 
it is subject to detention or other control by a District Commander or 
Captain of the Port. However, upon receipt of evidence that a container 
which does not have a valid safety approval plate attached to it meets 
the standards of the convention, the District Commander or Captain of 
the Port may authorize limited movement of such container under 
conditions he deems appropriate. This paragraph becomes effective on 
January 3, 1979 for new containers and on January 1, 1985 for existing 
containers.
    (b) If a District Commander or Captain of the Port finds that a 
container used in or offered for movement in international transport, 
even though it has a valid safety approval plate attached to it, is in a 
condition that creates an obvious risk to safety, he issues a detention 
order causing the container to be removed from service until it is 
restored to a safe condition. In addition to removing a container from 
transport, a detention order may require any special handling, including 
unloading prior to movement, necessary to ensure safety.
    (c) If a District Commander or Captain of the Port finds that a 
container used or offered for movement in international transport has 
not been timely examined, the District Commander or Captain of the Port 
affixes to the container, at a place on the container where it will be 
readily noticeable to anyone loading or unloading the container, a mark 
or tag indicating that the container must be examined before being 
reloaded and again used in international transport. The mark or tag 
affixed by the District Commander or Captain of the Port indicates the 
place and the date on which it was affixed, and is capable of remaining 
legible and in place for at least 12 months. Such mark or tag must not 
be removed until the container is examined in accordance with Sec. 
452.3 of this subchapter. If a District Commander or Captain of the Port 
finds that container marked or tagged as provided for in this paragraph 
was reloaded and used or offered for movement in international transport 
without having been examined, the District Commander or Captain of the 
Port issues a detention order causing the container to be removed from 
service until it is brought into compliance.

[45 FR 37217, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 453.3  Detention orders and other orders.

    (a) The terms of any detention order or other order issued under 
Sec. 453.1, to the maximum extent practicable, make provisions to avoid 
loss or damage to cargo.
    (b) Written notice of any detention order or other order issued 
under Sec. 453.1 is given immediately to the terminal operator, 
stevedore, or other person having actual control over the container 
involved. Prompt notification is also given to the owner of the 
container, or his agent. The notification identifies the container 
involved, its location, and describes the condition which gave rise to 
the order.

[45 FR 37217, June 2, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 453.5  Termination of detention orders and other orders.

    (a) When a container, which is the subject of a detention order or 
other order, is restored to a safe condition or otherwise brought into 
compliance, it must be examined in accordance with Sec. 452.3 and a new 
re-examination date marked on the container in accordance with Sec. 
452.1(b) of this subchapter.
    (b) The owner or the owner's agent shall notify the District 
Commander or Captain of the Port who issue the order, in writing, that 
the container

[[Page 17]]

has been brought into compliance. Upon giving such notice, the owner, or 
his agent, may return the container to service.

[45 FR 37217, June 2, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 453.7  Appeal provisions.

    (a) The owner, his agent, or the custodian of a container subject to 
a detention order or other order, may petition the Chief, Office of 
Operating and Environmental Standards (G-MSO), U.S. Coast Guard to 
review that order.
    (b) The Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (G-
MSO), U.S. Coast Guard requires independent surveys to determine the 
extent of deficiencies, if necessary. Upon completion of his review, 
including review of the results of any required independent surveys, the 
Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (G-MSO), U.S. 
Coast Guard affirms, sets aside, or modifies the order.
    (c) The owner of a container is liable for any costs incident to a 
petition for review including any independent surveys, and for any other 
costs incident to or resulting from detention or other control of a 
container.
    (d) Unless otherwise determined by the Chief, Office of Operating 
and Environmental Standards (G-MSO), U.S. Coast Guard, a detention order 
or other order remains in effect pending the outcome of any petition or 
appeal of that order.
    (e) The Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (G-
MSO), U.S. Coast Guard acts on all appeals within ten days of receipt.

[45 FR 37217, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58353, Sept. 30, 2004]

[[Page 19]]


<R02>
                   CHAPTER V--NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC
                    SAFETY ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT
                            OF TRANSPORTATION




  --------------------------------------------------------------------
Part                                                                Page
501             Organization and delegation of powers and 
                    duties..................................          23
509             OMB control numbers for information 
                    collection requirements.................          28
510             Information gathering powers................          28
511             Adjudicative procedures.....................          34
512             Confidential business information...........          60
520             Procedures for considering environmental 
                    impacts.................................          68
523             Vehicle classification......................          84
525             Exemptions from average fuel economy 
                    standards...............................          86
526             Petitions and plans for relief under the 
                    Automobile Fuel Efficiency Act of 1980..          90
529             Manufacturers of multistage automobiles.....          92
531             Passenger automobile average fuel economy 
                    standards...............................          95
533             Light truck fuel economy standards..........          98
535             3-year carryforward and carryback of credits 
                    for light trucks........................         100
537             Automotive fuel economy reports.............         101
538             Manufacturing incentives for alternative 
                    fuel vehicles...........................         107
541             Federal motor vehicle theft prevention 
                    standard................................         109
542             Procedures for selecting lines to be covered 
                    by the theft prevention standard........         118
543             Exemption from vehicle theft prevention 
                    standard................................         122
544             Insurer reporting requirements..............         125
551             Procedural rules............................         130
552             Petitions for rulemaking, defect, and 
                    noncompliance orders....................         132
553             Rulemaking procedures.......................         136
554             Standards enforcement and defects 
                    investigation...........................         147
555             Temporary exemption from motor vehicle 
                    safety and bumper standards.............         149

[[Page 20]]

556             Exemption for inconsequential defect or 
                    noncompliance...........................         154
557             Petitions for hearings on notification and 
                    remedy of defects.......................         156
564             Replaceable light source information........         157
565             Vehicle identification number requirements..         161
566             Manufacturer identification.................         166
567             Certification...............................         167
568             Vehicles manufactured in two or more stages.         174
569             Regrooved tires.............................         177
570             Vehicle in use inspection standards.........         178
571             Federal motor vehicle safety standards......         189
572             Anthropomorphic test devices................         828
573             Defect and noncompliance responsibility and 
                    reports.................................         948
574             Tire identification and recordkeeping.......         961
575             Consumer information........................         975
576             Record retention............................        1003
577             Defect and noncompliance notification.......        1004
578             Civil and criminal penalties................        1014
579             Reporting of information and communications 
                    about potential defects.................        1018
580             Odometer disclosure requirements............        1041
581             Bumper standard.............................        1050
582             Insurance cost information regulation.......        1054
583             Automobile parts content labeling...........        1055
585             Advanced air bag phase-in reporting 
                    requirements............................        1067
586             Fuel system integrity upgrade phase-in 
                    reporting requirements..................        1069
587             Deformable barriers.........................        1071
588             Child restraint systems recordkeeping 
                    requirements............................        1080
589             Upper interior component head impact 
                    protection phase-in reporting 
                    requirements............................        1081
590             [Reserved]
591             Importation of vehicles and equipment 
                    subject to Federal safety, bumper and 
                    theft prevention standards..............        1083
592             Registered importers of vehicles not 
                    originally manufactured to conform to 
                    the Federal motor vehicle safety 
                    standards...............................        1094
593             Determinations that a vehicle not originally 
                    manufactured to conform to the Federal 
                    motor vehicle safety standards is 
                    eligible for importation................        1107
594             Schedule of fees authorized by 49 U.S.C. 
                    30141...................................        1124
595             Retrofit on-off switches for air bags.......        1128

[[Page 21]]

596             Child restraint anchorage system phase-in 
                    reporting requirements..................        1144
597             Tires for motor vehicles with a GVWR of 
                    10,000 pounds or less phase-in reporting 
                    requirements............................        1146
598-599         [Reserved]

Cross Reference: See 23 CFR, chapter I, subchapter G, Federal Highway 
  Administration, Department of Transportation, for regulations on the 
  certification of vehicle size and weight enforcement and the 
  certification of speed limit enforcement.

[[Page 23]]


<R03>
PART 501_ORGANIZATION AND DELEGATION OF POWERS AND DUTIES--Table of Contents




Sec.
501.1 Purpose.
501.2 General.
501.3 Organization and general responsibilities.
501.4 Succession to Administrator.
501.5 Exercise of authority.
501.6 Secretary's reservations of authority.
501.7 Administrator's reservations of authority.
501.8 Delegations.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. secs. 105 and 322, delegation of authority at 
49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 53 FR 26258, July 12, 1988, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 501.1  Purpose.

    This part describes the organization of the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration (NHTSA) through Associate Administrator, Regional 
Administrator and Staff Office Director levels and provides for the 
performance of duties imposed on, and the exercise of powers vested in, 
the Administrator of the NHTSA (hereafter referred to as the 
``Administrator'').


<R05>
Sec. 501.2  General.

    The Administrator is delegated authority by the Secretary of 
Transportation (49 CFR 1.50) to:
    (a) Carry out the following chapters or sections of Title 49 of the 
United States Code:
    (1) Chapter 301--Motor Vehicle Safety.
    (2) Chapter 303--National Driver Register.
    (3) Chapter 305--National Automobile Title Information System.
    (4) Chapter 321--General.
    (5) Chapter 323--Consumer Information.
    (6) Chapter 325--Bumper Standards.
    (7) Chapter 327--Odometers.
    (8) Chapter 329--Automobile Fuel Economy.
    (9) Chapter 331--Theft Prevention.
    (10) Section 20134(a), with respect to the laws administered by the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administrator pertaining to highway, 
traffic and motor vehicle safety.
    (b) Carry out 23 U.S.C. chapter 4, HIGHWAY SAFETY, as amended, 
except for section 409 and activities relating to highway design, 
construction and maintenance, traffic control devices, identification 
and surveillance of accident locations, and highway-related aspects of 
pedestrian and bicycle safety.
    (c) Exercise the authority vested in the Secretary by section 210(2) 
of the Clean Air Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 7544(2)).
    (d) Carry out the Act of July 14, 1960, as amended (23 U.S.C. 313 
note).
    (e) Administer the following sections of Title 23, United States 
Code, with the concurrence of the Federal Highway Administrator:
    (1) Section 141, as it relates to certification of the enforcement 
of speed limits.
    (2) Section 153.
    (3) Section 154(a), (b), (d), and (e).
    (4) Section 158.
    (f) Carry out the consultation functions vested in the Secretary by 
Executive Order 11912 (3 CFR, 1976 Comp., p. 114), as amended.

[60 FR 43029, Aug. 18, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 501.3  Organization and general responsibilities.

    The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration consists of a 
headquarters organization located in Washington, DC, and a unified field 
organization consisting of ten geographic regions. The organization of, 
and general spheres of responsibility within, the NHTSA are as follows:
    (a) Office of the Administrator--(1) Administrator. (i) Represents 
the Department and is the principal advisor to the Secretary in all 
matters related to chapters 301, 303, 305, 321, 323, 325, 327, 329, and 
331 of Title 49 U.S.C.; 23 U.S.C. chapter 4, except section 409; as each 
relates to highway safety, sections 141, 153, 154(a), (b), (d) and (e), 
and 158 of Title 23 U.S.C.; and such other authorities as are delegated 
by the Secretary of Transportation (49 CFR 1.50);
    (ii) Establishes NHTSA program policies, objectives, and priorities 
and directs development of action plans to accomplish the NHTSA mission;
    (iii) Directs, controls, and evaluates the organization, program 
activities,

[[Page 24]]

performance of NHTSA staff, program and field offices;
    (iv) Approves broad legislative, budgetary, fiscal and program 
proposals and plans; and
    (v) Takes management actions of major significance, such as those 
relating to changes in basic organization pattern, appointment of key 
personnel, allocation of resources, and matters of special political or 
public interest or sensitivity.
    (2) Deputy Administrator. Assists the Administrator in discharging 
responsibilities. Directs and coordinates the Administration's 
management and operational programs, and related policies and procedures 
at headquarters and in the field. Provides policy direction and 
executive direction to the Associate Administrator for State and 
Community Services.
    (3) [Reserved]
    (4) Director, Executive Secretariat. Provides a central facilitative 
staff that administers an executive correspondence program and maintains 
policy files for the Administrator and Deputy Administrator, and 
services and support to committees as designated by the Administrator.
    (5) Director, Office of Civil Rights. As principal staff advisor to 
the Administrator and Deputy Administrator on all matters pertaining to 
civil rights, acts as Director of Equal Employment Opportunity, 
Contracts Compliance Officer and Title VI (Civil Rights Act of 1964) 
Coordinator; assures Administration-wide compliance with related laws, 
Executive Orders, regulations and policies; and provides assistance to 
the Office of the Secretary in investigating and adjudicating formal 
complaints of discrimination.
    (6) Director, Intergovernmental Affairs. As the principal advisor to 
the Administrator and Deputy Administrator on all intergovernmental 
matters, including communications with Congress, communicates agency 
policy and coordinates with the Chief Counsel on legislative issues 
affecting the agency.
    (b) Chief Counsel. As chief legal officer, provides legal services 
for the Administrator and the Administration; prepares litigation for 
the Administration; effects rulemaking actions; issues subpoenas; and 
serves as coordinator on legislative affairs.
    (c) Senior Associate Administrators--(1) Senior Associate 
Administrator for Policy and Operations. As the principal advisor to the 
Administrator and Deputy Administrator with regard to core 
administrative and support services, provides direction and internal 
management and mission support for such activities. Provides executive 
direction over the Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and 
Analysis, the Associate Administrator for Administration, the Associate 
Administrator for Planning, Evaluation and Budget, the Chief Information 
Officer and the Office of Communications and Consumer Information.
    (2) Senior Associate Administrator for Vehicle Safety. As the 
principal advisor to the Administrator and Deputy Administrator with 
regard to rulemaking, enforcement and applied research, provides 
direction and internal management and mission support for such 
activities. Provides executive direction over the Associate 
Administrator for Rulemaking, the Associate Administrator for 
Enforcement, and the Associate Administrator for Applied Research.
    (3) Senior Associate Administrator for Traffic Injury Control. As 
the principal advisor to the Administrator and Deputy Administrator with 
regard to programs to reduce traffic injury, provides direction and 
internal management and mission support for such activities. Provides 
executive direction over the Associate Administrator for Program 
Development and Delivery and the Associate Administrator for Injury 
Control Operations and Resources.

[53 FR 26258, July 12, 1988, as amended at 58 FR 12545, Mar. 5, 1993; 60 
FR 15504, Mar. 24, 1995; 60 FR 43029, Aug. 18, 1995; 67 FR 44083, 44085, 
July 1, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 501.4  Succession to Administrator.

    The following officials, in the order indicated, shall act in 
accordance with the requirements of 5 U.S.C. 3346-3349 as Administrator 
of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, in the case of 
the absence or disability or in the case of a vacancy in the office of 
the Administrator, until a successor is appointed:

[[Page 25]]

    (a) Deputy Administrator;
    (b) Chief Counsel;
    (c) Senior Associate Administrator for Policy and Operations;
    (d) Senior Associate Administrator for Vehicle Safety; and
    (e) Senior Associate Administrator for Traffic Injury Control.

[67 FR 44085, July 1, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 501.5  Exercise of authority.

    (a) All authorities lawfully vested in the Administrator and 
reserved to him/her in this Regulation or other NHTSA directives may be 
exercised by the Deputy Administrator and, in the absence of both 
Officials, by the Executive Director, unless specifically prohibited.
    (b) In exercising the powers and performing the duties delegated by 
this part, officers of the NHTSA and their delegates are governed by 
applicable laws, executive orders, regulations, and other directives, 
and by policies, objectives, plans, standards, procedures, and 
limitations as may be issued from time to time by or on behalf of the 
Secretary of Transportation, the Administrator, Deputy Administrator and 
Executive Director or, with respect to matters under their 
jurisdictions, by or on behalf of the Associate Administrators, Regional 
Administrators, and Directors of Staff Offices.
    (c) Each officer to whom authority is delegated by this part may 
redelegate and authorize successive redelegations of that authority 
subject to any conditions the officer prescribes. Redelegations of 
authority shall be in written form and shall be published in the Federal 
Register when they affect the public.
    (d) Each officer to whom authority is delegated will administer and 
perform the functions described in the officer's respective functional 
statements.

[53 FR 26258, July 12, 1988, as amended at 58 FR 12545, Mar. 5, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 501.6  Secretary's reservations of authority.

    The authorities reserved to the Secretary of Transportation are set 
forth in subpart 1.44 of part 1 and in part 95 of the regulations of the 
Office of the Secretary of Transportation in subtitle A of this title 
(49 CFR parts 1 and 95).


<R05>
Sec. 501.7  Administrator's reservations of authority.

    The delegations of authority in this part do not extend to the 
following authority which is reserved to the Administrator and, in those 
instances when the office of the Administrator is vacant due to death or 
resignation, or when the Administrator is absent as provided by Sec. 
501.5(a), to the Deputy Administrator or Executive Director:
    (a) The authority under chapter 301--Motor Vehicle Safety--of Title 
49 of the United States Code to:
    (1) Issue, amend, or revoke final federal motor vehicle safety 
standards and regulations;
    (2) Make final decisions concerning alleged safety-related defects 
and noncompliances with Federal motor vehicle safety standards;
    (3) Grant or renew temporary exemptions from federal motor vehicle 
safety standards; and
    (4) Grant or deny appeals from determinations upon petitions for 
inconsequential defect or noncompliance.
    (b) The authority under 23 U.S.C. chapter 4, as amended, to:
    (1) Apportion authorization amounts and distribute obligation 
limitations for State and community highway safety programs under 23 
U.S.C. 402;
    (2) Approve the initial awarding of alcohol incentive grants to the 
States authorized under 23 U.S.C. 408, and drunk driving prevention 
grants to the States authorized under 23 U.S.C. 410;
    (3) Issue, amend, or revoke uniform State and community highway 
safety guidelines, and, with the concurrence of the Federal Highway 
Administrator, designate priority highway safety programs, under 23 
U.S.C. 402;
    (4) Fix the rate of compensation for non-government members of 
agency sponsored committees which are entitled to compensation.
    (c) The authority under chapters 321, 323, 325, and 329 of Title 49 
of the United States Code to:
    (1) Issue, amend, or revoke final rules and regulations, except for 
final rules issued under section 32902(d); and
    (2) Assess civil penalties and approve manufacturer fuel economy 
credit plans under chapter 329.
    (d) The authority under sections 141, 153, 154 and 158 of Title 23 
of the United

[[Page 26]]

States Code, with the concurrence of the Federal Highway Administrator, 
to disapprove any State certification or to impose any sanction or 
transfer on a State for violations of the National Maximum Speed Limit, 
Safety Belt and Motorcycle Helmet Use Requirements, or the National 
Minimum Drinking Age.

[60 FR 43030, Aug. 18, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 501.8  Delegations.

    (a) Deputy Administrator. The Deputy Administrator is delegated 
authority to act for the Administrator, except where specifically 
limited by law, order, regulation, or instructions of the Administrator. 
The Deputy Administrator is delegated authority to provide executive 
direction to the Associate Administrator for State and Community 
Services and the Director of International Harmonization, and assist the 
Administrator in providing executive direction to all organizational 
elements of NHTSA.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) Director, Office of Civil Rights. The Director, Office of Civil 
Rights is delegated authority to:
    (1) Act as the NHTSA Director of Equal Employment Opportunity.
    (2) Act as NHTSA Contracts Compliance Officer.
    (3) Act as NHTSA coordinator for matters under Title VI of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.), Executive Order 12250 (3 
CFR, 1980 Comp., p. 298), and regulations of the Department of Justice.
    (d) Chief Counsel. The Chief Counsel is delegated authority to:
    (1) Exercise the powers and perform the duties of the Administrator 
with respect to setting of odometer regulations authorized under 49 
U.S.C. chapter 327, and with respect to providing technical assistance 
and granting extensions of time to the states under 49 U.S.C. 32705.
    (2) Establish the legal sufficiency of all investigations conducted 
under the authority of the following chapters of Title 49 of the United 
States Code: chapter 301; chapter 323; chapter 325; chapter 327; chapter 
329; and chapter 331, and to compromise any civil penalty or monetary 
settlement in an amount of $25,000 or less resulting from a violation of 
any of these chapters.
    (3) Exercise the powers of the Administrator under 49 U.S.C. 30166 
(c), (g), (h), (i), and (k).
    (4) Issue subpoenas, after notice to the Administrator, for the 
attendance of witnesses and production of documents pursuant to chapters 
301, 323, 325, 327, 329, and 331 of Title 49 of the United States Code.
    (5) Issue authoritative interpretations of the statutes administered 
by NHTSA and the regulations issued by the agency.
    (e) Senior Associate Administrator for Policy and Operations. The 
Senior Associate Administrator for Policy and operations is delegated 
authority for executive direction of the Associate Administrator for 
Advanced Research and Analysis; the Associate Administrator for 
Administration; the Associate Administrator for Planning, Evaluation, 
and Budget; the Chief Information Officer; and the Director of 
Communications and Consumer Information. To carry out this direction, 
the Senior Associate Administrator for Policy and Operations is 
delegated authority, except for authority reserved to the Administrator, 
to direct the NHTSA planning and evaluation system in conjunction with 
Departmental requirement and planning goals; to coordinate the 
development of the Administrator's plans, policies, budget, and 
programs, and analyses of their expected impact, and their evaluation in 
terms of the degree of goal achievement; and to perform independent 
analyses of proposed Administration regulatory, grant, legislative, and 
program activities. Except for authority reserved to the Senior 
Associate Administrator for Vehicle Safety, the Senior Associate 
Administrator for Policy and Operations is delegated authority to 
develop and conduct research and development programs and projects 
necessary to support the purposes of Chapters 301, 323, 325, 327, 329, 
and 331 of title 49, United States Code, and Chapter 4 of title 23, 
United States Code, as amended, in coordination with the Senior 
Associate Administrator for Vehicle Safety and the Chief Counsel. The 
Senior Associate Administrator for Policy and Operations is also 
delegated authority to

[[Page 27]]

exercise procurement authority with respect to NHTSA requirements; 
administer and conduct NHTSA's personnel management activities; 
administer NHTSA financial management programs, including systems of 
funds control and accounts of all financial transactions; and conduct 
administrative management services in support of NHTSA missions and 
programs.
    (f) Senior Associate Administrator for Vehicle Safety. The Senior 
Associate Administrator for Vehicle Safety is delegated authority for 
executive direction of the Associate Administrator for Rulemaking, the 
Associate Administrator for Enforcement and the Associate Administrator 
for Applied Research. The Senior Associate Administrator for Vehicle 
Safety exercises executive direction with respect to the setting of 
standards and regulations for motor vehicle safety, fuel economy, theft 
prevention, consumer information, and odometer fraud. To carry out this 
direction, the Senior Associate Administrator for Vehicle Safety is 
delegated authority, except for authority reserved to the Administrator 
or the Chief Counsel, to exercise the powers and perform the duties of 
the Administrator with respect to the setting of motor vehicle safety 
and theft prevention standards, average fuel economy standards, 
procedural regulations, and the development of consumer information and 
odometer fraud regulations authorized under Chapters 301, 323, 325, 327, 
329, and 331 of title 49, United States Code. Except for authority 
reserved to the Senior Associate Administrator for Policy and 
Operations, the Senior Associate Administrator for Vehicle Safety is 
delegated authority to develop and conduct research and development 
programs and projects necessary to support the purposes of Chapters 301, 
323, 325, 327, 329, and 331 of title 49, United States Code, and Chapter 
4 of title 23, United States Code, as amended, in coordination with the 
appropriate Associate Administrators, and the Chief Counsel. The Senior 
Associate Administrator for Vehicle Safety is also delegated authority 
to respond to a manufacturer's petition for exemption from 49 U.S.C. 
Chapter 301's notification and remedy requirements in connection with a 
defect or noncompliance concerning labeling errors; extend comment 
periods (both self-initiated and in response to a petition for extension 
of time) for noncontroversial rulemakings; make technical amendments or 
corrections to a final rule; extend the effective date of a 
noncontroversial final rule; administer the NHTSA enforcement program 
for all laws, standards, and regulations pertinent to vehicle safety, 
fuel economy, theft prevention, damageability, consumer information and 
odometer fraud, authorized under Chapters 301, 323, 325, 327, 329, and 
331 of title 49, United States Code; issue regulations relating to the 
importation of motor vehicles under sections 30141 through 30147 of 
title 49, United States Code; and grant and deny petitions for import 
eligibility determinations submitted to NHTSA by motor vehicle 
manufacturers and registered importers under 49 U.S.C. 30141.
    (g) Senior Associate Administrator for Traffic Injury Control. The 
Senior Associate Administrator for Traffic Injury Control is delegated 
authority for executive direction of the Associate Administrator for 
Program Development and Delivery and the Associate Administrator for 
Injury Control Operations and Resources. To carry out this direction, 
the Senior Associate Administrator for Traffic Injury Control is 
delegated authority, except for authority reserved to the Administrator, 
over programs with respect to: Chapter 4 of title 23, United States 
Code, as amended; the authority vested by section 210(2) of the Clean 
Air Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 7544(2)); the authority vested by 49 
U.S.C. 20134(a), with respect to the laws administered by the 
Administrator pertaining to highway, traffic, and motor vehicle safety; 
the Act of July 14, 1960, as amended (23 U.S.C. 313 note) and 49 U.S.C. 
Chapter 303; the authority vested by section 157(g) of title 23, United 
States Code; the authority vested by sections 153, 154, 157(except 
paragraph (g)), 161, 163, and 164 of title 23, United States Code, with 
the concurrence of the Federal Highway Administrator; and secton 209 of 
the Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 1978 (23 U.S.C. 401 note) 
as delegated by the Secretary in Sec. 501.2(i). The Senior

[[Page 28]]

Associate Administrator for Traffic Injury Control is also delegated 
authority to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the 
Administrator with respect to State and community highway safety 
programs under 23 U.S.C. 402, including approval and disapproval of 
State highway safety plans and final vouchers, in accordance with the 
procedural requirements of the Administration; to approve the awarding 
of alcohol incentive grants to the States under 23 U.S.C. 408 and drunk 
driving prevention grants under 23 U.S.C. 410, for years subsequent to 
the initial awarding of such grants by the Administrator; as appropriate 
for activities benefiting states and communities; and to implement 23 
U.S.C. 403.
    (h) Director, Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance, Enforcement. The 
Director, Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance, Enforcement, is delegated 
authority to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the 
Administrator with respect to granting and denying petitions for import 
eligibility decisions submitted to NHTSA by motor vehicle manufacturers 
and registered importers under 49 U.S.C. 30141(a)(1).

[60 FR 43030, Aug. 18, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 26469, May 28, 1996; 67 
FR 44084, 44085, July 1, 2002]


<R03>
PART 509_OMB CONTROL NUMBERS FOR INFORMATION COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS--Table 
of Contents




Sec.
509.1 Purpose.
509.2 Display.

    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 3507.


<R05>
Sec. 509.1  Purpose.

    This part collects and displays the control numbers assigned to 
information collection requirements of NHTSA by the Office of Management 
and Budget (OMB). NHTSA intends that this part comply with the 
requirements of 44 U.S.C. 3507(f), which mandates that agencies display 
a current control number assigned by the Director of the OMB for each 
agency information collection requirement.

[48 FR 51310, Nov. 8, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 509.2  Display.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
  49 CFR part or section containing information collection   OMB control
                        requirement                              No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part 512...................................................    2127-0025
Part 537...................................................    2127-0019
Part 538...................................................    2127-0554
Part 541...................................................    2127-0510
Part 542...................................................    2127-0539
Part 543...................................................    2127-0542
Part 544...................................................    2127-0547
Section 551.45.............................................    2127-0040
Part 552 and Part 527......................................    2127-0046
Part 556...................................................    2127-0045
Part 557...................................................    2127-0039
Part 566...................................................    2127-0043
Consolidated owners' manual requirements for vehicles and      2127-0541
 equipment (Sec. Sec. 571.126, 571.205 571.208, 571.210,
 and 575.105)..............................................
Consolidatd labeling requirements for tires and rims (parts    2127-0503
 569 and 574, Sec. Sec. 571.109, 571.110, 571.117,
 571,119, and 571.120).....................................
Consolidated VIN and Theft Prevention Standard and Labeling    2127-0510
 Requirements (parts 541, 565, 567 and Sec. 571.115).....
Consolidated lighting requirements (part 564 and Sec. 2127-0563
 571.108)..................................................
Section 571.106............................................    2127-0052
Section 571.116............................................    2127-0521
Section 571.125............................................    2127-0506
Section 571.205............................................    2127-0038
Section 571.209............................................    2127-0512
Section 571.213............................................    2127-0511
Section 571.214............................................    2127-0558
Section 571.217............................................    2127-0505
Section 571.218............................................    2127-0518
Part 573...................................................    2127-0004
Part 574...................................................    2127-0050
Part 575 excluding UTQGS...................................    2127-0049
Section 575.104 (UTQGS)....................................    2127-0519
Part 576...................................................    2127-0042
Part 580...................................................    2127-0047
Part 585...................................................    2127-0535
Parts 591 and 592..........................................    2127-0002
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[57 FR 21215, May 19, 1992]


<R03>
PART 510_INFORMATION GATHERING POWERS--Table of Contents




Sec.
510.1 Scope and purpose.
510.2 Definitions.
510.3 Compulsory process, the service thereof, claims for confidential 
          treatment, and terms of compliance.
510.4 Subpoenas, generally.
510.5 Information gathering hearings.
510.6 Administrative depositions.
510.7 General or special orders.
510.8 Written requests for the production of documents and things.
510.9 Motions to modify, limit, or quash process.
510.10 Supplementation of responses to process.
510.11 Fees.
510.12 Remedies for failure to comply with compulsory process.


[[Page 29]]


    Authority: Secs. 112 and 119, National Traffic and Motor Vehicle 
Safety Act 1966, as amended (15 U.S.C. 1401 and 1407); secs. 104, 204, 
414, and 505, Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, as amended 
(15 U.S.C. 1914, 1944, 1990d, and 2005); delegation of authority (49 CFR 
1.51).

    Source: 45 FR 29042, May 1, 1980, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 510.1  Scope and purpose.

    This rule governs the use of the information gathering powers of the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration contained in section 112 
of the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966, as amended 
15 U.S.C. 1401, and sections 104, 204, 414, and 505 of the Motor Vehicle 
Information and Cost Savings Act, as amended 15 U.S.C. 1914, 1944, 
1990d, and 2005.


<R05>
Sec. 510.2  Definitions.

    (a) NHTSA means the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
    (b) Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration.
    (c) Chief Counsel means the Chief Counsel of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration.
    (d) Deputy Administrator means the Deputy Administrator of the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
    (e) Person includes agents, officers, and employees of sole 
proprietorships, partnerships, corporations, and other entities.

[45 FR 29042, May 1, 1980; 45 FR 32001, May 15, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 510.3  Compulsory process, the service thereof, claims for confidential 
treatment, and terms of compliance.

    (a) NHTSA may use any of the following means to conduct 
investigations, inspections, or inquiries to obtain information to carry 
out its functions under the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety 
Act of 1966, as amended, 15 U.S.C. 1381 et seq., and the Motor Vehicle 
Information and Cost Savings Act, as amended, 15 U.S.C. 1901 et seq.:
    (1) Subpoenas;
    (2) Information gathering hearings;
    (3) Administrative depositions;
    (4) General or special orders; and
    (5) Written requests for the production of documents and things.
    (b) A person, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or 
other entity served with compulsory process under this part shall be 
provided with the following information at the time of the service:
    (1) The name of the person, sole proprietorship, partnership, 
corporation, or other entity to which the process is addressed;
    (2) The statutory provision under which the compulsory process is 
issued;
    (3) The date, time, and place of return;
    (4) A brief statement of the subject matter of the investigation, 
inspection, or inquiry; and
    (5) In the case of a subpoena duces tecum or a written request for 
the production of documents and things, a reasonably specific 
description of the documents or things to be produced.
    (c) Service of the compulsory processes specified in paragraph (a) 
of this section is effected:
    (1) By personal service upon the person, agent-in-charge, or agent 
designated to receive process under 15 U.S.C. 1399(e) of the sole 
proprietorship, partnership, corporation or other entity being 
investigated, inspected, or inquired of; or
    (2) By mail (registered or certified) or delivery to the last known 
residence or business address of such person or agent.
    (d) The date of service of any compulsory process specified in 
paragraph (a) of this section is the date on which the process is mailed 
by the agency, or delivered in person, as the case may be. Whenever a 
period is prescribed for compliance with compulsory process, and the 
process is served upon the party by mail, 3 days are added to the 
period.
    (e)(1) Any person, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or 
other entity submitting information or producing documents or things in 
response to any compulsory process issued under this part may request 
confidential treatment for all or part of that information or for those 
documents or things.
    (2)(i) Except as provided in paragraph (e)(2)(ii) of this section, 
requests for

[[Page 30]]

confidentiality shall be in writing, and addressed to the Chief Counsel.
    (ii) Requests for confidentiality made during an information 
gathering hearing or an administrative deposition may be made orally to 
the presiding officer. Any oral request for confidentiality shall be 
supplemented by a written request, and this written request must be 
addressed to the Chief Counsel and received by NHTSA within five days of 
the date of the oral request.
    (iii) A written request for confidentiality under paragraph (e) of 
this section shall specify the information, documents, or things which 
are to be kept confidential, specify the grounds upon which the claim is 
based, provide such information as may be necessary to permit the NHTSA 
to determine whether the claim is valid, and specify the period of time 
for which confidential treatment is requested.
    (f) The Chief Counsel, or his or her delegate, is authorized to 
negotiate and approve the terms of satisfactory compliance with any 
compulsory process issued under this part.


<R05>
Sec. 510.4  Subpoenas, generally.

    NHTSA may issue to any person, sole proprietorship, partnership, 
corporation, or other entity a subpoena requiring the production of 
documents or things (subpoena duces tecum) and testimony of witnesses 
(subpoena ad testificandum), or both, relating to any matter under 
investigation or the subject of any inquiry. Subpoenas are issued by the 
Chief Counsel. When a person, sole proprietorship, partnership, 
corporation, or other entity is served with a subpoena ad testificandum 
under this part, the subpoena will describe with reasonable 
particularity the matters on which the testimony is required. In 
response to a subpoena ad testificandum, the sole proprietorship, 
partnership, corporation, or other entity so named shall designate one 
or more officers, directors, or managing agents, or other persons who 
consent to testify on its behalf, and set forth, for each person 
designated, the matters on which he or she will testify. The persons so 
designated shall testify as to matters known or reasonably available to 
the entity.

[53 FR 26261, July 12, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 510.5  Information gathering hearings.

    (a) NHTSA may issue a subpoena to compel any person, sole 
proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or other entity to provide 
information at an information gathering hearing. The subpoenas are used 
for the purpose of obtaining testimony from a witness under oath and 
obtaining relevant documents and things. The Administrator, or a NHTSA 
employee designated by the Administrator, presides at the hearing. 
Information gathering hearings are open to the public unless the 
presiding officer rules otherwise, and the hearings are stenographically 
reported.
    (b) In addition to the presiding officer, one or more other persons 
may comprise the panel. Each member of the panel may question any 
witness at the hearing. No person who is not a member of the panel may 
ask questions of a witness. However, any person may submit to the panel, 
in writing, proposed questions to be asked of a witness. A member of the 
panel may pose these questions to the witness if that member deems the 
questions useful and appropriate. Proposed questions may be submitted to 
the panel at any time before or during the course of the hearing.
    (c) The stenographic record of each witness's testimony will be 
available to the public, unless the testimony was not given publicly and 
the witness requests confidential treatment for some or all of his or 
her testimony. When an oral request for confidential treatment is made 
during the course of a witness's testimony, the presiding officer may 
order the hearing closed to the public at that point and continue the 
questioning of the witness, or may note the request for confidentiality 
and direct the witness not to answer the question at that time, but 
require the witness to answer the question in writing within some 
specified period, or take such other action as the presiding officer 
deems appropriate. If a request for confidential treatment is made, the 
release of the record is governed by the

[[Page 31]]

applicable laws or regulations relating to the handling of allegedly 
confidential information. To the extent that some or all of a witness's 
testimony is not publicly available, that witness may procure a copy of 
his or her testimony as recorded upon payment of lawfully prescribed 
costs.
    (d)(1) Any person who is required by subpoena or designated by an 
entity that is required by subpoena to provide information at an 
information gathering hearing conducted under this section may be 
accompanied, represented, and advised by counsel. Any member of the bar 
of a Federal court or the courts of any State or Territory of the United 
States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or the District of Columbia, 
and any representative, official, or employee of the sole 
proprietorship, partnership, corporation or other entity under subpoena 
may act as counsel.
    (2) A witness appearing in response to subpoena may confer in 
confidence with his or her counsel or representative concerning any 
questions asked of the witness. If such witness, counsel, or 
representative objects to a question, he or she shall state the 
objection and basis therefor on the record.
    (e) The presiding officer at an information gathering hearing takes 
all necessary action to regulate the course of the hearing, to avoid 
delay, and to assure that reasonable standards of orderly and ethical 
conduct are maintained. In any case in which counsel for or a 
representative of a witness has refused to comply with the presiding 
officer's directions, or to adhere to reasonable standards of orderly 
and ethical conduct in the course of a hearing, the presiding officer 
states on the record the reasons given, if any, for the refusal and, if 
the presiding officer is someone other than the Administrator, 
immediately reports the refusal to the Administrator. The Administrator 
thereupon takes such action as the circumstances warrant.
    (f) Where appropriate, the procedures established in this subsection 
may be utilized in informal hearings conducted by NHTSA pursuant to its 
authority under sections 152 and 156 of the Safety Act (15 U.S.C. 1412, 
1416) to receive data, views and arguments concerning alleged safety-
related defects. The rights accorded to witnesses in this subsection may 
also be accorded to witnesses who appear voluntarily at such hearings.


<R05>
Sec. 510.6  Administrative depositions.

    (a) NHTSA may issue a subpoena to compel any person, sole 
proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or other entity to provide 
information as a witness at an administrative deposition. These 
depositions are for the purpose of obtaining information from the 
witness under oath and receiving documents and things relevant to an 
agency investigation. These depositions shall be taken before an officer 
authorized to administer oaths by the laws of the United States or of 
the place where the deposition is taken. Unless otherwise ordered by the 
Administrator, administrative depositions are closed to the public.
    (b) Any person who is required by subpoena or designated by an 
entity that is required by subpoena to produce documents or things or to 
give testimony as a witness at an administrative deposition conducted 
under this section may be accompanied, represented, and advised by 
counsel. Any member of the bar or a Federal court or the courts of any 
State or Territory of the United States, the Commonwealth of Puerto 
Rico, or the District of Columbia and any representative, official, or 
employee of the person, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, 
or other entity under subpoena may act as counsel.
    (c) During an administrative deposition:
    (1) The presiding officer before whom the deposition is to be taken 
puts the witness on oath and personally, or by someone acting under his 
or her direction and in his or her presence, records the testimony of 
the witness. The testimony is stenographically reported.
    (2) After NHTSA has examined the witness at the deposition, that 
witness' counsel or representative may examine the witness. NHTSA may 
then reexamine the witness and the witness' counsel or representative 
may reexamine the witness and so forth, as appropriate.
    (3) A witness appearing in response to a subpoena may confer in 
confidence

[[Page 32]]

with his or her counsel or representative concerning any questions asked 
of the witness. If such witness, counsel, or representative objects to a 
question, he or she shall state the objection and the basis therefor on 
the record.
    (4) Objections to the qualifications of the officer taking the 
deposition, or to the manner of taking it, or to the evidence presented, 
and any other objection to the proceedings shall be noted by the officer 
on the record, and shall be treated as continuing. Evidence objected to 
shall be taken subject to the objections. Errors and irregularities 
occurring at a deposition in the manner of the taking of the deposition, 
in the form of questions or answers, or in the oath or affirmation, and 
errors of any kind which might be obviated, removed, or cured if 
promptly presented shall be deemed to be waived unless reasonable 
objection is made thereto at the taking of the deposition.
    (5) If the witness refuses to answer any question or answers 
evasively, or if the witness or his or her counsel engages in conduct 
likely to delay or obstruct the administrative deposition, such refusal, 
evasive answer or conduct shall be a failure to comply with the subpoena 
issued to the witness.
    (6) Upon completion of the examination of a witness, the witness may 
clarify on the record any of his or her answers.
    (d) The transcript of the testimony of a witness who testified in 
response to a subpoena at an administrative deposition is submitted to 
the witness for signature, unless the witness waives the right to sign 
the transcript. If a witness desires to make any changes in the form or 
substance contained in the transcript, the witness shall submit, 
together with the transcript, a separate document setting forth the 
changes and stating the reasons for such changes. If the deposition is 
not signed by the witness within 30 days of its submission to the 
witness, or such other period as the NHTSA may designate, the officer 
before whom the deposition was taken or a NHTSA employee signs the 
transcript and states on the record the fact of the waiver of the right 
to sign or the fact of the witness' unavailability or inability or 
refusal to sign together with the reasons, if any, given therefor.
    (e) The transcript of the testimony of a witness will be inspected 
by NHTSA to determine if there are any errors in the transcription of 
the questions posed to the witness and the testimony in response to 
those questions. If NHTSA discovers any errors, it notes that fact and 
forwards the notation of errors together with the transcript to the 
witness, requesting the witness to stipulate that the transcript is in 
error and that the corrections made by NHTSA are accurate. If the 
witness will not make this stipulation, NHTSA may make a motion to the 
presiding officer to include its notation of error and its corrections 
in the record along with the version of the testimony signed by the 
witness.
    (f)(1) Upon payment of lawfully prescribed costs, any person who is 
required by subpoena or designated by a sole proprietorship, 
partnership, corporation, or other entity that is required by subpoena 
to appear as a witness at an administrative deposition may procure a 
copy of the deposition as recorded, except that in a nonpublic 
investigatory proceeding, the witness may, for good cause, be limited to 
an inspection of the record of the deposition.
    (2) A copy of the record of the deposition may be furnished to the 
witness without charge or at a reduced charge if the Associate 
Administrator for Administration determines that waiver of the fee is in 
the public interest because furnishing the copy can be considered as 
primarily benefitting the general public. Any witness who seeks a waiver 
of the copying charge may apply in writing to the Associate 
Administrator for Administration, and shall state the reasons justifying 
waiver of the fee in the application.
    (g) The testimony obtained in an adminstrative deposition may be 
used or considered by the NHTSA in any of its activities, and may be 
used or offered into evidence in any administrative proceeding in 
accordance with the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 554, or in any judicial 
proceeding.

[[Page 33]]


<R05>
Sec. 510.7  General or special orders.

    The NHTSA may require by the issuance of general or special orders 
any person, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or other 
entity to file with the NHTSA, in such form as NHTSA may prescribe, 
periodic or special reports or answers in writing to specific questions. 
The responses to general or special orders will provide NHTSA with such 
information as it may require, including, but not limited to, 
information relating to the organization of that person, sole 
proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or other entity, its business, 
conduct, practices, management, and relation to any other person or 
entity. General or special orders which are required to be answered 
under oath are issued by the Chief Counsel. Any general or special order 
issued under this section contains the information specified in Sec. 
510.3(b). Reports and answers filed in response to general or special 
orders must be made under oath, or otherwise, as NHTSA may prescribe.


<R05>
Sec. 510.8  Written requests for the production of documents and things.

    The NHTSA may, by the issuance of a written request for the 
production of documents and things, require any person, sole 
proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or other entity to produce 
documents or things. A written request for the production of documents 
and things may be issued alone, or as a part of a general or special 
order issued under Sec. 510.7. Written requests for the production of 
documents and things are issued by the Chief Counsel. Any written 
request for the production of documents and things issued under this 
section shall contain the information specified in Sec. 510.3(b).


<R05>
Sec. 510.9  Motions to modify, limit, or quash process.

    (a)(1) Any person, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or 
other entity served with a subpoena issued under Sec. 510.4 may file 
with the Deputy Administrator a motion to modify, limit, or quash that 
subpoena. If there is no Deputy Administrator, or the Deputy 
Administrator is not available, such motions shall be filed with and 
decided by the Associate Administrator for Administration. A motion to 
modify, limit, or quash must be filed not later than 15 days after the 
service of the process or five days before the return date specified in 
the process, whichever is earlier, except that, if the process is served 
within five days of its return date, such motion may be filed at any 
time before the return date. Any motion must set forth the grounds and 
theories of why and how the party believes the process should be 
modified, limited, or quashed and must contain all facts and arguments 
which support those grounds and theories.
    (2) The Deputy Administrator may, upon receiving a motion filed 
pursuant to paragraph (a)(1) of this section:
    (i) Deny the motion;
    (ii) Modify the return date of the subpoena;
    (iii) Modify, limit or quash the subpoena;
    (iv) Condition granting the motion upon certain requirements; or
    (v) Take any other action he or she believes to be appropriate in 
the circumstances.
    (3) The Office of the Deputy Administrator serves the decision on 
the motion on the moving party or the counsel or representative of the 
moving party. This service may be made by personal service, by 
registered or certified mail, or by reading a copy of the decision to 
the moving party or the counsel or representative of the moving party.
    (4) A denial of any motion properly filed under this section shall 
be in writing, and shall contain a brief statement of the facts involved 
and the conclusions drawn from those facts by the Deputy Administrator.
    (b) The Deputy Administrator's decision on the motion to modify, 
limit, or quash, filed under paragraph (a) of this section is not 
subject to reconsideration by NHTSA.


<R05>
Sec. 510.10  Supplementation of responses to process.

    (a) A person, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or 
other entity which has provided NHTSA with information under this part, 
which information was complete and accurate at the time the information 
was given to NHTSA, is not required to supplement

[[Page 34]]

that information in the light of after acquired information, except:
    (1) The person or entity to whom the process is addressed shall 
supplement the response with respect to any question directly addressed 
to the identity and location of persons having knowledge of information 
obtainable under this part.
    (2) The person or entity to whom the process is addressed shall 
seasonably amend a prior response if that person or entity obtains 
information upon the basis of which the person or entity knows that the 
response was incorrect when made or the person or entity knows that the 
response, though correct when made, is no longer true and the 
circumstances are such that a failure to amend the response is in 
substance a knowing concealment.
    (b) The requirement to supplement information set forth in paragraph 
(a) of this section terminates when:
    (1) The compulsory process stated that it was issued in connection 
with a contemplated rulemaking action, and a final rule is issued on 
that subject or a notice is issued announcing that the rulemaking action 
has been suspended or terminated.
    (2) The compulsory process stated that it was issued in connection 
with an enforcement investigation, and the investigation is closed.
    (3) The compulsory process does not state that it is issued in 
connection with a specific rulemaking action or enforcement 
investigation, and 18 months have passed since the date of the original 
response.
    (c) This section in no way limits NHTSA's authority to obtain 
supplemental information by specific demands through the means specified 
in Sec. 510.3.


<R05>
Sec. 510.11  Fees.

    Any person compelled to appear in person in response to a subpoena 
issued under this part at an information gathering hearing or an 
administrative deposition is paid the same attendance and mileage fees 
as are paid witnesses in the courts of the United States, in accordance 
with title 28, U.S.C., section 1821.


<R05>
Sec. 510.12  Remedies for failure to comply with compulsory process.

    Any failure to comply with compulsory process authorized by law and 
issued under this part is a violation of this part. In the event of such 
failure to comply, NHTSA may take appropriate action pursuant to the 
authority conferred by the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act 
or the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, as appropriate, 
including institution of judicial proceedings to enforce the order and 
to collect civil penalties.


<R03>
PART 511_ADJUDICATIVE PROCEDURES--Table of Contents




     Subpart A_Scope of Rules; Nature of Adjudicative Proceedings, 
                               Definitions

Sec.
511.1 Scope of the rules.
511.2 Nature of adjudicative proceedings.
511.3 Definitions.

       Subpart B_Pleadings; Form; Execution; Service of Documents

511.11 Commencement of proceedings.
511.12 Answer.
511.13 Amendments and supplemental pleadings.
511.14 Form and filing of documents.
511.15 Time.
511.16 Service.
511.17 Public participation.
511.18 Joinder of proceedings.

Subpart C_Prehearing Procedures; Motions; Interlocutory Appeals; Summary 
                          Judgment; Settlement

511.21 Prehearing conferences.
511.22 Prehearing briefs.
511.23 Motions.
511.24 Interlocutory appeals.
511.25 Summary decision and order.
511.26 Settlement.

                 Subpart D_Discovery; Compulsory Process

511.31 General provisions governing discovery.
511.32 Written interrogatories to parties.
511.33 Production of documents and things.
511.34 Requests for admission.
511.35 Testimony upon oral examination.
511.36 Motions to compel discovery.
511.37 Sanctions for failure to comply with order.
511.38 Subpoenas.

[[Page 35]]

511.39 Orders requiring witnesses to testify or provide other 
          information and granting immunity.

                           Subpart E_Hearings

511.41 General rules.
511.42 Powers and duties of Presiding Officer.
511.43 Evidence.
511.44 Expert witnesses.
511.45 In camera materials.
511.46 Proposed findings, conclusions, and order.
511.47 Record.
511.48 Official docket.
511.49 Fees.

                           Subpart F_Decision

511.51 Initial decision.
511.52 Adoption of initial decision.
511.53 Appeal from initial decision.
511.54 Review of initial decision in absence of appeal.
511.55 Final decision on appeal or review.
511.56 Reconsideration.
511.57 Effective date of order.

  Subpart G_Settlement Procedure in Cases of Violation of Average Fuel 
                            Economy Standards

511.61 Purpose.
511.62 Definitions.
511.63 Criteria for settlement.
511.64 Petitions for settlement; timing, contents.
511.65 Public comment.
511.66 Confidential business information.
511.67 Settlement order.

               Subpart H_Appearances; Standards of Conduct

511.71 Who may make appearances.
511.72 Authority for representation.
511.73 Written appearances.
511.74 Attorneys.
511.75 Persons not attorneys.
511.76 Qualifications and standards of conduct.
511.77 Restrictions as to former members and employees.
511.78 Prohibited communications.

Appendix I to Part 511--Final Prehearing Order

    Authority: 15 U.S.C. 2002; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
     Subpart A_Scope of Rules; Nature of Adjudicative Proceedings, 
                               Definitions


<R05>
Sec. 511.1  Scope of the rules.

    This part establishes rules of practice and procedure for 
adjudicative proceedings conducted pursuant to section 508(a)(2) of the 
Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15 U.S.C. Pub. L. 94-
163, 89 Stat. 911, section 2008(a)(2)), which are required by statute to 
be determined on the record after opportunity for a public hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 511.2  Nature of adjudicative proceedings.

    Adjudicative proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with title 
5, U.S.C., sections 551 through 559 and this part. It is the policy of 
the agency that adjudicative proceedings shall be conducted 
expeditiously and with due regard to the rights and interests of all 
persons affected, and to the public interest. Therefore, the presiding 
officer and all parties shall make every effort at each stage of a 
proceeding to avoid unnecessary delay.


<R05>
Sec. 511.3  Definitions.

    (a) As used in this part:
    (1) The term application means an ex parte request by a party for an 
order that may be granted or denied without opportunity for response by 
any other party.
    (2) The term NHTSA means the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration.
    (3) The term Administrator means the Administrator of the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
    (4) The term Complaint Counsel means prosecuting counsel for the 
NHTSA.
    (5) The term motion means a request by a party for a ruling or order 
that may be granted or denied only after opportunity for response by 
each affected party.
    (6) The term party means the NHTSA, and any person named as a 
respondent in a proceeding governed by this part.
    (7) The term person means any individual, partnership, corporation, 
association, public or private organization, or Federal, State or 
municipal governmental entity.

[[Page 36]]

    (8) The term petition means a written request, made by a person or a 
party and addressed to the Presiding Officer or the Administrator, that 
the addressee take some action.
    (9) The term Presiding Officer means the person who conducts an 
adjudicative hearing under this part, who shall be an administrative law 
judge qualified under title 5, U.S.C., section 3105 and assigned by the 
Chief Administrative Law Judge, Office of Hearings, United States 
Department of Transportation.
    (10) The term Respondent means any person against whom a complaint 
has been issued.
    (11) The term Office of Hearings means the Officer of Hearings, 
Department of Transportation.
    (12) The term staff means the staff of the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration.
    (13) The term Chief Administrative Law Judge means the Chief 
Administrative Law Judge of the Office of Hearings, Department of 
Transportation.
    (14) The term Docket Section means the Docket Section, Office of the 
Secretary of Transportation.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15782, May 3, 1988]


<R04>
       Subpart B_Pleadings; Form; Execution; Service of Documents


<R05>
Sec. 511.11  Commencement of proceedings.

    (a) Notice of institution of an enforcement proceeding. An 
adjudicative proceeding under this part is commenced by the issuance of 
a complaint by the NHTSA.
    (b) Form and content of complaint. The complaint shall be signed by 
the Complaint Counsel and shall contain the following:
    (1) Recital of the legal authority for instituting the proceeding, 
with specific designation of the statutory provisions involved in each 
allegation.
    (2) Identification of each respondent.
    (3) A clear and concise statement of the charges, sufficient to 
inform each respondent with reasonable definiteness of the factual basis 
of the allegations of violation. A list and summary of documentary 
evidence supporting the charges shall be attached.
    (4) A statement of the civil penalty which the Complaint Counsel 
believes is in the public interest, or which is required by law. In the 
case of civil penalties assessed for violations of section 507(3) of the 
Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15 U.S.C. 2007(3)), the 
amount of such penalty shall be calculated from the time of the alleged 
violation. In the case of civil penalties assessed for violations of 
section 507 (1) or (2) of that Act, any monetary credits available to 
offset those civil penalties shall be specified.
    (5) The right of the respondent to a hearing on the alleged 
violations.
    (c) Notice to the public. Once a complaint is issued, notice of it 
shall be immediately submitted to the Federal Register for publication. 
The notice in the Federal Register shall briefly describe the nature of 
the proceeding and state that petitions to participate in the proceeding 
must be filed no later than the first prehearing conference.


<R05>
Sec. 511.12  Answer.

    (a) Time for filing. A respondent shall have twenty (20) days after 
service of a complaint within which to file an answer.
    (b) Content of answer. An answer shall conform to the following:
    (1) Request for hearing. Respondent shall state whether it requests 
a full, adjudicatory hearing or whether it desires to proceed on the 
basis of written submissions. If a hearing is requested, respondent 
shall specify those issues on which a hearing is desired.
    (2) Contested allegations. An answer in which the allegations of a 
complaint are contested shall contain:
    (i) Specific admission or denial of each allegation in the 
complaint. If the respondent is without knowledge or information 
sufficient to form a belief as to the truth of an allegation, respondent 
shall so state. Such a statement shall have the effect of a denial. 
Denials shall fairly meet the substance of the allegations denied. 
Allegations not thus answered shall be deemed to have been admitted.
    (ii) A concise statement of the factual and/or legal defenses to 
each allegation of the complaint.
    (3) Admitted allegations. If the respondent admits or fails to deny 
any

[[Page 37]]

factual allegation, he or she shall be deemed to have waived a hearing 
as to such allegation.
    (c) Default. Failure of the respondent to file an answer within the 
time provided (or within an extended time, if provided), shall be deemed 
to constitute a waiver of the right to appear and contest the 
allegations set forth in the complaint and to authorize the Presiding 
Officer to make such findings of fact as are reasonable under the 
circumstances.


<R05>
Sec. 511.13  Amendments and supplemental pleadings.

    Whenever determination of a controversy on the merits will be 
facilitated thereby, the Presiding Officer upon motion, may allow 
appropriate amendments and supplemental pleadings which do not unduly 
broaden the issues in the proceeding or cause undue delay.


<R05>
Sec. 511.14  Form and filing of documents.

    (a) Filing. Except as otherwise provided, all documents submitted to 
the Administrator or a Presiding Officer shall be filed with the Docket 
Section, Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation, Room 
4107, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. Documents may be 
filed in person or by mail and shall be deemed filed on the day of 
filing or mailing.
    (b) Caption. Every document shall contain a caption setting forth 
the name of the action in connection with which it is filed, the docket 
number, and the title of the document.
    (c) Copies. An original and nine (9) copies of all documents shall 
be filed. Documents may be reproduced by printing or any other process, 
provided that all copies filed are clear and legible.
    (d) Signature. (1) The original of each document filed shall be 
signed by a representative of record for the party; or in the case of 
parties not represented, by the party; or by a partner, officer, or 
regular employee of any corporation, partnership, or association, who 
files an appearance on behalf of the party.
    (2) The act of signing a document constitutes a representation by 
the signer that the signer has read it; that to the best of the signer's 
knowledge, information and belief, the statements made in it are true; 
and that it is not filed for purposes of delay.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15782, May 3, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 511.15  Time.

    (a) Computation. In computing any period of time prescribed or 
allowed by the rules in this part, the day of the act, event, or default 
from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be 
included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included, 
unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday, in which event 
the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, a 
Sunday, or a legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or 
allowed is less than 7 days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal 
holidays shall be excluded in the computation. As used in this part, 
``legal holiday'' includes New Year's Day, Washington's Birthday, 
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veteran's Day, 
Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and any other day appointed as a 
holiday by the President or the Congress of the United States.
    (b) Additional time after service by mail. Whenever a party is 
required or permitted to do an act within a prescribed period after 
service of a document and the document is served by mail, three (3) days 
shall be added to the prescribed period.
    (c) Extensions. For good cause shown, the Presiding Officer may 
extend any time limit prescribed or allowed under this part or by order 
of the Administrator or the Presiding Officer, except those governing 
the filing of interlocutory appeals and appeals from Initial Decisions 
and those expressly requiring the Administrator's action. Except as 
otherwise provided by law, the Administrator, for good cause shown, may 
extend any time limit prescribed under this part, or by order of the 
Administrator or the Presiding Officer. A party or participant may 
petition the Presiding Officer or the Administrator, as appropriate, for 
an extension under this paragraph. Such a petition shall be filed prior 
to the occurrence of the

[[Page 38]]

time limit which is the subject of the petition.


<R05>
Sec. 511.16  Service.

    (a) Mandatory service. Every document filed with the Office of 
Hearings shall be served upon all parties and participants to a 
proceeding, i.e., Complaint Counsel, respondent(s), and participants, 
and upon the Presiding Officer.
    (b) Service of complaint, ruling, order, decision, or subpoena. 
Service of a complaint, ruling, order, decision, or subpoena may be 
effected as follows:
    (1) By registered or certified mail. A copy of the document shall be 
addressed to the person, partnership, corporation or unincorporated 
association to be served at his or its residence or principal office or 
place of business; registered or certified; and mailed; or
    (2) By delivery to an individual. A copy of the document may be 
delivered to the person to be served; or to a member of the partnership 
to be served; or to the president, secretary, or other executive 
officer, or a director of the corporation or unincorporated association 
to be served; or to an agent authorized by appointment or by law to 
receive service; or
    (3) By delivery to an address. A copy of the document may be left at 
the principal office or place of business of the person, partnership, 
corporation, unincorporated association, or authorized agent with an 
officer, a managing or general agent; or it may be left with a person of 
suitable age and discretion residing therein, at the residence of the 
person or of a member of the partnership or of an executive officer, 
director, or agent of the corporation or unincorporated association to 
be served.
    (c) Service of documents with prescribed response periods. When 
service of a document starts the running of a prescribed period of time 
for the submission of a responsive document or the occurrence of an 
event, the document shall be served as provided in paragraph (b) of this 
section.
    (d) Service of other documents. All documents other than those 
specified in paragraph (c) of this section may be served as provided in 
paragraph (b) of this section, or by ordinary first-class mail, properly 
addressed, postage prepaid.
    (e) Service on a representative. When a party has appeared by an 
attorney or other representative, service upon that attorney or other 
representative shall constitute service on the party.
    (f) Certificate of service. The original of every document filed 
with the agency and required to be served upon all parties to a 
proceeding shall be accompanied by a certificate of service signed by 
the party making service, stating that such service has been made upon 
each party to the proceeding. Certificates of service may be in 
substantially the following form:

    I hereby certify that I have this day served the foregoing document 
upon all parties of record in this proceeding by mailing, postage 
prepaid (or by delivering in person) a copy to each such party.
    Dated at -------------------- this ---- day of --------------------, 
19----.

(Signature)_____________________________________________________________
For_____________________________________________________________________

    (g) Date of service. The date of service of a document shall be the 
date on which the document is deposited in the United States mail or is 
delivered in person.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15783, May 3, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 511.17  Public participation.

    Participant Status. Any person interested in a proceeding commenced 
pursuant to Sec. 511.11 who desires to participate in the proceeding, 
shall file with the Docket Section a notice of intention to participate 
in the proceeding and shall serve a copy of such notice on each party to 
the proceeding. A notice of intention to participate shall be filed not 
later than the commencement of the hearing. Untimely filings will not be 
accepted absent a determination by the Presiding Officer that the person 
making the request has made a substantial showing of good cause for 
failure to file on time. Any person who files a notice to participate in 
the proceeding as a nonparty shall be known as a ``participant'' and 
shall have the rights specified in Sec. 511.41(d).

[53 FR 15783, May 3, 1988]

[[Page 39]]


<R05>
Sec. 511.18  Joinder of proceedings.

    Two or more matters which have been scheduled for adjudicative 
proceedings, and which involve one or more common questions of law or 
fact, may be consolidated for the purpose of hearing, appeal or the 
Administrator's review. A motion for consolidation for the purpose of 
hearing may be filed with the Presiding Officer by any party to such 
proceedings not later than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. A 
motion for consolidation for the purpose of appeal may be filed by any 
party to such proceedings within 10 days after issuance of the Initial 
Decision. A motion to consolidate shall be served upon all parties to 
all proceedings whose joinder is contemplated. The proceedings may be 
consolidated where to do so would tend to avoid unnecessary costs or 
delay. Such consolidation may also be ordered upon the initiative of the 
Presiding Officer or the Administrator, as appropriate. The Presiding 
Officer may order separate hearings on any issue where to do so would 
promote economy or convenience or would avoid prejudice to a party.


<R04>
Subpart C_Prehearing Procedures; Motions; Interlocutory Appeals; Summary 
                          Judgment; Settlement


<R05>
Sec. 511.21  Prehearing conferences.

    (a) When held. (1) A prehearing conference shall be held in person 
or by conference telephone call, except in unusual circumstances, 
approximately fifty (50) days after publication in the Federal Register 
of the complaint, upon ten (10) days notice to all parties and 
participants, to consider any or all the following:
    (i) Motions for consolidation of proceedings;
    (ii) Identification, simplification and clarification of the issues;
    (iii) Necessity or desirability of amending the pleadings;
    (iv) Stipulations and admissions of fact and of the content and 
authenticity of documents;
    (v) Oppositions to notices of oral examination;
    (vi) Motions for protective orders to limit or modify discovery;
    (vii) Issuance of subpoenas to compel the appearance of witnesses 
and the production of documents;
    (viii) Limitation of the number of witnesses, particularly the 
avoidance of duplicate expert witnesses;
    (ix) Matters of which official notice will be taken and matters 
which may be resolved by reliance upon findings of other Federal 
agencies; and
    (x) Other matters which may expedite the conduct of the hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 511.22  Prehearing briefs.

    Not later ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the parties shall, 
except when ordered otherwise by the Presiding Officer in unusual 
circumstances, simultaneously serve and file prehearing briefs, which 
shall set forth (a) a statement of the facts expected to be proved, and 
of the anticipated order of proof; (b) a statement of the issues and the 
legal argument in support of the party's contentions with respect to 
each issue; and (c) a table of authorities with a designation by 
asterisk of the principal authorities relied upon.


<R05>
Sec. 511.23  Motions.

    (a) Presentations and dispositions. During the time a proceeding is 
before a Presiding Officer, all motions, whether oral or written, except 
those filed under Sec. 511.42(e), shall be addressed to the Presiding 
Officer, who shall rule upon them promptly after affording an 
opportunity for response.
    (b) Written motions. All written motions shall state the particular 
order, ruling, or action desired and the grounds therefor. If a motion 
is supported by memoranda, affidavits or other documents, they shall be 
served and filed with the motion. All motions shall contain a proposed 
order setting forth the relief sought. All written motions shall be 
filed with the Executive Secretary and served on all parties, and all 
motions addressed to the Administrator shall be in writing.
    (c) Responses. Within ten (10) days after service of any written 
motion or petition or within such longer or shorter time as may be 
designated by these Rules or by the Presiding Officer or the 
Administrator, the opposing party or parties shall file a written 
response to

[[Page 40]]

such motion. Where a motion would affect only a single party, or an 
identifiable group of parties, the Presiding Officer or Administrator 
may limit the response to the motion to the affected party or parties. 
Failure to respond to a written motion may, in the discretion of the 
Presiding Officer be deemed as consent to the granting of the relief 
sought in the motion. The moving party shall have no right to reply, 
except as permitted by the Presiding Officer or the Administrator.
    (d) Rulings on motions for dismissal. When a motion to dismiss a 
complaint or motion for other relief is granted with the result that the 
proceeding before the Presiding Officer is terminated, the Presiding 
Officer shall issue an Initial Decision and Order thereon in accordance 
with the provisions of Sec. 511.51. If such a motion is granted as to 
all issues alleged in the complaint in regard to some, but not all, of 
the respondents, or is granted as to any part of the allegations in 
regard to any or all of the respondents, the Presiding Officer shall 
enter an order on the record and consider the remaining issues in the 
Initial Decision. The Presiding Officer may elect to defer ruling on a 
motion to dismiss until the close of the case.


<R05>
Sec. 511.24  Interlocutory appeals.

    (a) General. Rulings of the Presiding Officer may not be appealed to 
the Administrator prior to the Initial Decision, except as provided 
herein.
    (b) Exceptions--(1) Interlocutory appeals to Administrator. The 
Administrator may, in his or her discretion, entertain interlocutory 
appeals where a ruling of the Presiding Officer:
    (i) Requires the production or disclosure of records claimed to be 
confidential;
    (ii) Requires the testimony of a supervisory official of the agency 
other than one especially cognizant of the facts of the matter in 
adjudication;
    (iii) Excludes an attorney from participation in a proceeding 
pursuant to Sec. 511.42(b).
    (2) Procedures for interlocutory appeals. Within ten (10) days of 
issuance of a ruling, any party may petition the Administrator to 
entertain an interlocutory appeal on a ruling in the categories 
enumerated above. The petition shall not exceed fifteen (15) pages. Any 
other party may file a response to the petition within ten (10) days of 
its service. The response shall not exceed fifteen (15) pages. The 
Administrator shall thereupon act upon the petition, or the 
Administrator shall request such further briefing or oral presentation 
as he may deem necessary.
    (3) Interlocutory appeals from all other rulings--(i) Grounds. 
Interlocutory appeals from all other rulings by the Presiding Officer 
may proceed only upon motion to the Presiding Officer and a 
determination by the Presiding Officer in writing, with justification in 
support thereof, that the ruling involves a controlling question of law 
or policy as to which there is substantial ground for differences of 
opinion and that an immediate appeal from the ruling may materially 
advance the ultimate termination of the litigation, or that subsequent 
review will be an inadequate remedy.
    (ii) Form. If the Presiding Officer determines, in accordance with 
paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section that an interlocutory appeal may 
proceed, a petition for interlocutory appeal may be filed with and acted 
upon by the Administrator in accordance with paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section.
    (c) Proceedings not stayed. A petition for interlocutory appeal 
under this part shall not stay the proceedings before the Presiding 
Officer unless the Presiding Officer shall so order, except that a 
ruling of the Presiding Officer requiring the production of records 
claimed to be confidential shall be automatically stayed for a period of 
(10) days following the issuance of such ruling to allow an affected 
party the opportunity to file a petition for an interlocutory appeal 
pursuant to Sec. 511.24(b)(2). The filing of such a petition shall 
automatically extend the stay of such a ruling pending the 
Administrator's action on such petition.


<R05>
Sec. 511.25  Summary decision and order.

    (a) Motion. Any party may move, with a supporting memorandum, for a 
Summary Decision and Order in its favor upon all or any of the issues in 
controversy. Complaint Counsel may so move at any time after thirty (30)

[[Page 41]]

days following issuance of a complaint, and any other party may so move 
at any time after issuance of a complaint. Any such motion by any party 
shall be filed at least twenty (20) days before the date fixed for the 
adjudicatory hearing.
    (b) Response to motion. Any other party may, within ten (10) days 
after service of the motion, file a response thereto with a supporting 
memorandum.
    (c) Grounds. A Summary Decision and Order shall be granted if the 
pleadings and any testimony upon oral examination, answers to 
interrogatories, admissions, and/or affidavits show that there is no 
genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is 
entitled to a Summary Decision and Order as a matter of law.
    (d) Legal effect. A Summary Decision and Order upon all the issues 
being adjudicated shall constitute the Initial Decision of the Presiding 
Officer, and may be appealed to the Administrator in accordance with 
Sec. 511.53. A Summary Decision, interlocutory in character, may be 
rendered on fewer than all issues and may not be appealed prior to 
issuance of the Initial Decision, except in accordance with Sec. 
511.24.
    (e) Case not fully adjudicated on motion. A Summary Decision and 
Order that does not dispose of the whole case shall include a statement 
of those material facts as to which there is no substantial controversy, 
and of those material facts that are actually and in good faith 
controverted. The Summary Order shall direct such further proceedings as 
are just.


<R05>
Sec. 511.26  Settlement.

    (a) Applicability. This section applies only to cases of alleged 
violations of section 507(3) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost 
Savings Act, Pub. L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 911 (15 U.S.C. section 2007(3)). 
Settlement in other cases may be made only in accordance with subpart G 
of this part.
    (b) Availability. Any party shall have the opportunity to submit an 
offer of settlement to the Presiding Officer.
    (c) Form. Offers of settlement shall be in the form of a consent 
agreement and order, shall be signed by the party submitting the offer 
or his representative, and may be signed by any other party. Each offer 
of settlement shall be accompanied by a motion to transmit to the 
Administrator the proposed agreement and order, outlining the 
substantive provisions of the agreement, and the reasons why it should 
be accepted.
    (d) Contents. The proposed consent agreement and order which 
constitute the offer of settlement shall contain the following:
    (1) An admission of all jurisdictional facts;
    (2) An express waiver of further procedural steps, and of all rights 
to seek judicial review or otherwise to contest the validity of the 
order;
    (3) A description of the alleged noncompliance, or violation;
    (4) Provisions to the effect that the allegations of the complaint 
are resolved by the proposed consent agreement and order;
    (5) A listing of the acts or practices from which the respondent 
shall refrain;
    (6) A detailed statement of the corrective action(s) which the 
respondent shall excute and the civil penalty, if any, that respondent 
shall pay.
    (e) Transmittal. The Presiding Officer shall transmit to the 
Administrator for decision all offers of settlement and accompanying 
memoranda that meet the requirements enumerated in paragraph (d) of this 
section. The Presiding Officer may, but need not, recommend acceptance 
or rejection of such offers. Any party or participant may object to a 
proposed consent agreement by filing a motion and supporting memorandum 
with the Administrator.
    (f) Stay of proceedings. When an offer of settlement has been agreed 
to by the parties and has been transmitted to the Administrator, the 
proceedings shall be stayed until the Administrator has ruled on the 
offer. When an offer of settlement has been made and transmitted to the 
Administrator but has not been agreed to by all parties, the proceedings 
shall not be stayed pending the Administrator's decision on the offer.
    (g) Administrator's ruling. The Administrator will rule upon all 
transmitted

[[Page 42]]

offers of settlement. If the Administrator accepts the offer, the 
Administrator shall issue an appropriate order. The order shall become 
effective upon issuance. In determining whether to accept an offer of 
settlement, the Administrator will consider the gravity of the alleged 
violation, and any good faith efforts by the respondent to comply with 
applicable requirements.
    (h) Rejection. If the Administrator rejects an offer of settlement, 
the Administrator shall give written notice of that decision and the 
reasons therefor to the parties and the Presiding Officer. Promptly 
thereafter, the Presiding Officer shall issue an order notifying the 
parties of the resumption of the proceedings, including any 
modifications to the schedule resulting from the stay of the 
proceedings.
    (i) Effect of rejected offer. Rejected offers of settlement shall 
not be admissible in evidence over the objection of any signatory, nor 
shall the fact of the proposal of the offer be admissible in evidence.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15783, May 3, 1988]


<R04>
                 Subpart D_Discovery; Compulsory Process


<R05>
Sec. 511.31  General provisions governing discovery.

    (a) Applicability. The discovery rules established in this subpart 
are applicable to the discovery of information among the parties to a 
proceeding. Parties seeking information from persons not parties may do 
so by subpoena in accordance with Sec. 511.38.
    (b) Discovery methods. Parties may obtain discovery by one or more 
of the following methods: (1) Written interrogatories; (2) requests for 
production of documents or things; (3) requests for admissions; or (4) 
testimony upon oral examination. Unless the Presiding Officer otherwise 
orders under paragraph (d) of this section, the frequency of use of 
these methods is not limited.
    (c) Scope of discovery. The scope of discovery is as follows:
    (1) In general. Parties may obtain discovery regarding any matter 
not privileged, which is relevant to the subject matter involved in the 
proceedings, whether it relates to the claim or defense of the party 
seeking discovery or to the claim or defense of any other party. It is 
not ground for objection that the information sought will be 
inadmissible at the hearing if the information sought appears reasonably 
calculated to lead to the discovery of admissible evidence.
    (2) Exception. Parties may not obtain discovery of documents which 
accompanied the staff's recommendation as to whether a complaint should 
issue or of documents or portions thereof which would be exempt from 
discovery under Rule 26(b)(3) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
    (3) Hearing preparation: Experts. A party may obtain discovery of 
facts known and opinions held by experts, regardless of whether they are 
acquired or developed in anticipation of or for litigation. Such 
discovery may be had by any of the methods provided in paragraph (b) of 
this section.
    (d) Protective orders. Upon motion by a party or person and for good 
cause shown, the Presiding Officer may make any order which justice 
requires to protect such party or person from annoyance, embarrassment, 
competitive disadvantage, oppression or undue burden or expense, 
including one or more of the following: (1) That the discovery shall not 
be had; (2) that the discovery may be had only on specified terms and 
conditions, including a designation of the time and/or place; (3) that 
the discovery shall be had only by a method of discovery other than that 
selected by the party seeking discovery; (4) that certain matters shall 
not be inquired into, or that the scope of discovery shall be limited to 
certain matters; (5) that discovery shall be conducted with no one 
present except persons designated by the Presiding Officer; (6) that a 
trade secret or other confidential research, development, or commercial 
information shall not be disclosed or shall be disclosed only in a 
designated way or only to designated parties; and (7) that responses to 
discovery shall be placed in camera in accordance with Sec. 511.45.

If a motion for a protective order is denied in whole or in part, the 
Presiding Officer may, on such terms or conditions as are just, order 
that any party provide or permit discovery.

[[Page 43]]

    (e) Sequence and timing of discovery. Discovery may commence at any 
time after filing of the answer. Unless otherwise provided in these 
Rules or by order of the Presiding Officer, methods of discovery may be 
used in any sequence and the fact that a party is conducting discovery 
shall not operate to delay any other party's discovery.
    (f) Supplementation of responses. A party who has responded to a 
request for discovery shall supplement the response with information 
thereafter acquired.
    (g) Completion of discovery. All discovery shall be completed as 
soon as practical but in no case longer than one hundred fifty (150) 
days after issuance of a complaint unless otherwise ordered by the 
Presiding Officer in exceptional circumstances and for good cause shown. 
All discovery shall be served by a date which affords the party from 
whom discovery is sought the full response period provided by these 
Rules.
    (h) Service and filing of discovery. All discovery requests and 
written responses, and all notices of the taking of testimony, shall be 
filed with the Docket Section and served on all parties and the 
Presiding Officer.
    (i) Control of discovery. The use of these discovery procedures is 
subject to the control of the Presiding Officer, who may issue any just 
and appropriate order for the purpose of ensuring their timely 
completion.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15783, May 3, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 511.32  Written interrogatories to parties.

    (a) Availability; procedures for use. Any party may serve upon any 
other party written interrogatories to be answered by the party served 
or, if the party served is a public or private corporation or a 
partnership or association or governmental agency, by any officer or 
agent, who shall furnish such information as is available to the party. 
Interrogatories may, without leave of the Presiding Officer, be served 
upon any party after filing of the answer.
    (b) Procedures for response. Each interrogatory shall be answered 
separately and fully in writing under oath, unless it is objected to, in 
which event the reasons for objection shall be stated in lieu of an 
answer. The answers are to be signed by a responsible representative of 
the respondent and the objections signed by the representative making 
them. The party upon whom the interrogatories have been served shall 
serve a copy of the answers, and objections if any, within 30 days after 
service of the interrogatories. The Presiding Officer may allow a 
shorter or longer time for response. The party submitting the 
interrogatories may move for an order under Sec. 511.36 with respect to 
any objection to or other failure to answer an interrogatory.
    (c) Scope of interrogatories. Interrogatories may relate to any 
matters which can be inquired into under Sec. 511.31(c)(1), and the 
answers may be used to the extent permitted under this part. An 
interrogatory otherwise proper is not objectionable merely because an 
answer to the interrogatory would involve an opinion or contention that 
relates to fact or to the application of law to fact, but the Presiding 
Officer may order that such an interrogatory need not be answered until 
a later time.
    (d) Option to produce business records. Where the answer to an 
interrogatory may be derived or ascertained from the business records of 
the party upon whom the interrogatory has been served, or from an 
examination, audit or inspection of such business records, or from a 
compilation, abstract or summary based thereon, and the burden of 
deriving the answer is substantially the same for the party serving the 
interrogatory as for the party served, it is a sufficient answer to the 
interrogatory to specify the records from which the answer may be 
derived or ascertained and to afford to the party serving the 
interrogatory reasonable opportunity to examine, audit or inspect such 
records and to make copies, complications, abstracts, or summaries.


<R05>
Sec. 511.33  Production of documents and things.

    (a) Scope. Any party may serve upon any other party a request (1) to 
produce and permit the party making

[[Page 44]]

the request, or someone acting on behalf of that party, to inspect and 
copy any designated documents (including writings, drawings, graphs, 
charts, photographs, phono-records, and any other data-compilation from 
which information can be obtained, translated, if necessary, by the 
party in possession into reasonably usable form), or (2) to inspect and 
copy, test or sample tangible things which constitute or contain matters 
within the scope of Sec. 511.31(c)(1) and which are in the possession, 
custody or control of the party upon whom the request is served.
    (b) Procedure for request. The request may be served at any time 
after the filing of the answer without leave of the Presiding Officer. 
The request shall set forth the items to be inspected either by 
individual item or by category, and shall describe each item or category 
with reasonable particularity. The request shall specify a reasonable 
time, place and manner for making the inspection and performing the 
related acts.
    (c) Procedure for response. The party upon whom the request is 
served shall serve a written response within twenty (20) days after 
service of the request. The Presiding Officer may allow a shorter or 
longer time for response. The response shall state, with respect to each 
item or category requested, that inspection and related activities will 
be permitted as requested, unless the request is objected to, in which 
event the reasons for objection shall be stated. If objection is made to 
only part of an item or category, that part shall be so specified. The 
party submitting the request may move for an order under Sec. 511.36 
with respect to any objection to or other failure to respond to the 
request or any part thereof, or to any failure to permit inspection as 
requested.


<R05>
Sec. 511.34  Requests for admission.

    (a) Procedure for request. A party may serve upon any other party a 
written request for the admission, for the purposes of the pending 
proceeding only, of the truth of any matters within the scope of Sec. 
511.31(c)(1) set forth in the request that relate to statements or 
opinions of fact or of the application of law to fact, including the 
genuineness of documents described in the request. Copies of documents 
shall be served with the request unless they have been, or are otherwise 
furnished or made available for inspection and copying. The request may, 
without leave of the Presiding Officer, be served upon any party after 
filing of the answer. Each matter as to which an admission is requested 
shall be separately set forth.
    (b) Procedure for response. The matter as to which an admission is 
requested is deemed admitted unless within thirty (30) days after 
service of the request, or within such shorter or longer time as the 
Presiding Officer may allow, the party to whom the request is directed 
serves upon the party requesting the admission a written answer or 
objection addressed to the matter, signed by the party or the party's 
representatives. If objection is made, the reasons therefore shall be 
stated.

The answer shall specifically admit or deny the matter or set forth in 
detail the reasons why the answering party cannot truthfully admit or 
deny the matter. A denial shall fairly meet the substance of the 
requested admission. When good faith requires that a party qualify an 
answer or deny only a part of the matter as to which an admission is 
requested, the party shall specify the portion that is true and qualify 
or deny the remainder. An answering party may not give lack of 
information or knowledge as a reason for failure to admit or deny, 
unless the party states that he or she has made reasonable inquiry and 
that the information known or readily available to him or her is 
insufficient to enable him or her to admit or deny. A party who 
considers that a matter as to which an admission has been requested 
presents a genuine issue for hearing may not, on that ground alone, 
object to the request but may deny the matter or set forth reasons why 
the party cannot admit or deny it. The party who has requested an 
admission may move to determine the sufficiency of the answer or 
objection thereto in accordance with Sec. 511.36. If the Presiding 
Officer determines that an answer does not comply with the requirements 
of this section, he or she may order that the matter be deemed admitted 
or that an amended answer be served.

[[Page 45]]

    (c) Effect of admission. Any matter admitted under this section is 
conclusively established unless the Presiding Officer on motion permits 
withdrawal or amendment of such admission. The Presiding Officer may 
permit withdrawal or amendment when the presentation of the merits of 
the action will be served thereby and the party that obtained the 
admission fails to satisfy the Presiding Officer that withdrawal or 
amendment will prejudice that party in maintaining an action or defense 
on the merits.


<R05>
Sec. 511.35  Testimony upon oral examination.

    (a) When testimony may be taken. At any time after the answer is 
filed under Sec. 511.12, upon leave of the Presiding Officer and under 
such terms and conditions as the Presiding Officer may prescribe, any 
party may take the testimony of any other party, including the agents, 
employees, consultants or prospective witnesses of that party at a place 
convenient to the witness. The attendance of witnesses and the 
production of documents and things at the examination may be compelled 
by subpoena as provided in Sec. 511.38.
    (b) Notice of oral examination--(1) Examination of a party. A party 
desiring to examine another party to the proceeding shall, after 
obtaining leave from the Presiding Officer, serve written notice of the 
examination on all other parties and the Presiding Officer at least ten 
(10) days before the date of the examination. The notice shall state (i) 
the time and place for making the examination; (ii) the name and address 
of each person to be examined, if known, or if the name is not known, a 
general description sufficient to identify him; and (iii) the subject 
matter of the expected testimony. If a subpoena duces tecum is to be 
served on the person to be examined, the designation of the materials to 
be produced, as set forth in the subpoena, shall be attached to or 
included in the notice of examination.
    (2) Examination of a nonparty. A party desiring to examine a person 
who is not a party to the proceeding shall make application for a 
subpoena, in accordance with Sec. 511.38, to compel the attendance, 
testimony and/or production of documents by such person who is not a 
party. The party desiring such examination shall serve written notice of 
the examination on all other parties to the proceeding, after issuance 
of the subpoena by the Presiding Officer or a designated alternate.
    (3) Opposition to notice. A person served with a notice of 
examination may, within 3 days of the date of service, oppose, in 
writing, the examination. The Presiding Officer shall rule on the notice 
and any opposition and may order the taking of all noticed examinations, 
upon a showing of good cause therefor. The Presiding Officer may, for 
good cause shown, enlarge or shorten the time for the taking of an 
examination.
    (c) Persons before whom examinations may be taken. Examinations may 
be taken before any person authorized to administer oaths by the laws of 
the United States or of the place where the examination is held. No 
examination shall be taken before a person who is a relative or employee 
or attorney or representative of any party, or who is a relative or 
employee of such attorney or representative, or who is financially 
interested in the action.
    (d) Procedure--(1) Examination. Each witness shall be duly sworn, 
and all testimony shall be duly recorded. All parties or their 
representatives may be present and participate in the examination. 
Examination and cross-examination of witnesses may proceed as permitted 
at the hearing. Questions objected to shall be answered subject to the 
objections. Objections shall be in short form, and shall state the 
grounds relied upon. The questions propounded and the answers thereto, 
together with all objections made, shall be recorded by the official 
reporter before whom the examination is made. The original or a verified 
copy of all documents and things produced for inspection during the 
examination of the witness shall, upon a request of any party present, 
be marked for identification and annexed to the record of the 
examination.
    (2) Motion to terminate or limit examination. At any time during the 
examination, upon motion of any party or of the witness, and upon 
showing that the examination is being conducted in bad

[[Page 46]]

faith or in such manner as unreasonably to annoy, embarrass or oppress 
the witness or party, the Presiding Officer may, upon motion, order the 
party conducting the examination to terminate the examination, or may 
limit the scope and manner of the examination as provided in Sec. 
511.31(d).
    (3) Participation by parties not present. In lieu of attending an 
examination, any party may serve written questions in a sealed envelope 
on the party conducting the examination. That party shall transmit the 
envelope to the official reporter, who shall unseal it and propound the 
questions contained therein to the witness.
    (e) Transcription and filing of testimony--(1) Transcription. Upon 
request by any party, the testimony recorded at an examination shall be 
transcribed. When the testimony is fully transcribed, the transcript 
shall be submitted to the witness for examination and signing, and shall 
be read to or by the witness, unless such examination and signature are 
waived by the witness. Any change in form or substance which the witness 
desires to make shall be entered upon the transcript of the official 
reporter with a statement of the reasons given by the witness for making 
them. The transcript shall then be signed by the witness, unless the 
parties by stipulation waive the signing, or the witness is ill or 
cannot be found or refuses to sign. If the transcript is not signed by 
the witness within thirty (30) days of its submission to him, the 
official reporter shall sign it and state on the record the fact of the 
waiver of signature or of the illness or absence of the witness or the 
fact of the refusal to sign, together with a statement of the reasons 
therefor. The testimony may then be used as fully as though signed, in 
accordance with paragraph (i) of this section.
    (2) Certification and filing. The official reporter shall certify on 
the transcript that the witness was duly sworn and that the transcript 
is a true record of the testimony given and corrections made by the 
witness. The official reporter shall then seal the transcript in an 
envelope endorsed with the title and docket number of the action and 
marked ``Testimony of [name of witness]'' and shall promptly file the 
transcript with the Docket Section. The Presiding Officer shall notify 
all parties of the filing of the transcript and the Docket Section shall 
furnish a copy of the transcript to any party or to the witness upon 
payment of reasonable charges therefor.
    (f) Costs of examination. The party who notices the examination 
shall pay for the examination. The party who requests transcription of 
the examination shall pay for the transcription.
    (g) Failure to attend or to serve subpoena; expenses. If a party who 
notices an examination fails to attend and proceed therewith and another 
party attends in person or by a representative pursuant to the notice, 
the Presiding Officer may order the party who gave the notice to pay the 
attending party the reasonable expenses incurred. If a party who notices 
an examination fails to serve a subpoena upon the witness and as a 
result the witness does not attend, and if another party attends in 
person or by a representative because that party expects the examination 
to be made, the Presiding Officer may order the party who gave notice to 
pay the attending party the reasonable expenses incurred.
    (h) Examination to preserve testimony--(1) When available. By leave 
of the Presiding Officer, a party may examine a witness for the purpose 
of perpetuating the testimony of that witness. A party who wishes to 
conduct such an examination shall obtain prior leave of the Presiding 
Officer by filing a motion. The motion shall include a showing of 
substantial reason to believe that the testimony could not be presented 
at the hearing. If the Presiding Officer is satisfied that the 
perpetuation of the testimony may prevent a failure of justice or is 
otherwise reasonably necessary, he or she shall order that the 
deposition be taken.
    (2) Procedure. Notice of an examination to preserve testimony shall 
be served at least fifteen (15) days prior to the examination. The 
examination shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of 
paragraph (d) of this section. Any examination taken to preserve 
testimony shall be fully transcribed and filed in accordance with 
paragraph (e) of this section.

[[Page 47]]

    (i) Use of testimony obtained under this section. At the hearing or 
upon a motion or an interlocutory proceeding, any part or all of a 
deposition, so far as admissible under the rules of evidence applied as 
though the witness were then present and testifying, may be used against 
any party who was present or represented at the taking of the deposition 
or who had reasonable notice thereof, in accordance with any of the 
following provisions:
    (1) Any deposition may be used by any party for the purpose of 
contradicting or impeaching the testimony of the deponent as a witness.
    (2) The deposition of a party or of a person who at the time of the 
taking of his testimony was an officer, director or managing agent of a 
party may be used against that party for any purpose.
    (3) The deposition of a witness, whether or not a party, may be used 
by any party for any purpose if the Presiding Officer finds:
    (i) That the witness is dead; or
    (ii) That the witness is at a greater distance than 100 miles from 
the place of the hearing, or is out of the United States, unless it 
appears that the absence of the witness was procured by the party 
offering the deposition; or
    (iii) That the witness is unable to attend or testify because of 
age, illness, infirmity, or imprisonment; or
    (iv) That the party offering the deposition has been unable to 
procure the attendance of the witness by subpoena; or
    (v) Upon application and notice, that such exceptional circumstances 
exist as to make it desirable, in the interest of justice and with due 
regard to the importance of presenting the testimony of witnesses orally 
in open court, to allow the deposition to be used.
    (4) If only part of a deposition is offered in evidence by a party, 
an adverse party may require him to introduce any other part which ought 
in fairness to be considered with the part introduced, and any party may 
introduce any other parts.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15783, May 3, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 511.36  Motions to compel discovery.

    If a party fails to respond to discovery, in whole or in part, the 
party seeking discovery may move within twenty (20) days for an order 
compelling an answer, or compelling inspection or production of 
documents, or otherwise compelling discovery. For purposes of this 
subsection, an evasive or incomplete response is to be treated as a 
failure to respond. If the motion is granted, the Presiding Officer 
shall issue an order compelling discovery. If the motion is denied in 
whole or in part, the Presiding Officer may make such protective order 
as he or she would have been empowered to make on a motion pursuant to 
Sec. 511.31(d). When making oral examinations, the discovering party 
shall continue the examination to the extent possible with respect to 
other areas of inquiry before moving to compel discovery.


<R05>
Sec. 511.37  Sanctions for failure to comply with order.

    If a party fails to obey an order to provide or permit discovery, 
the Presiding Officer may take such action as is just, including but not 
limited to the following:
    (a) Infer that the admission, testimony, document or other evidence 
would have been adverse to the party;
    (b) Order that for the purposes of the proceeding, the matters 
regarding which the order was made or any other designated facts shall 
be taken to be established in accordance with the claim of the party 
obtaining the order;
    (c) Order that the party withholding discovery not introduce into 
evidence or otherwise rely, in support of any claim or defense, upon the 
documents or other evidence withheld;
    (d) Order that the party withholding discovery not introduce into 
evidence or otherwise use at the hearing, information obtained in 
discovery;
    (e) Order that the party withholding discovery not be heard to 
object to introduction and use of secondary evidence to show what the 
withheld admission, testimony, documents, or other evidence would have 
shown;
    (f) Order that a pleading, or part of a pleading, or a motion or 
other submission by the party, concerning which the order was issued, be 
stricken, or

[[Page 48]]

that decision on the pleadings be rendered against the party, or both; 
and
    (g) Exclude the party or representative from proceedings, in 
accordance with Sec. 511.42(b).

Any such action may be taken by order at any point in the proceedings.


<R05>
Sec. 511.38  Subpoenas.

    (a) Availability. A subpoena shall be addressed to any party or any 
person not a party for the purpose of compelling attendance, testimony 
and production of documents at a hearing or oral examination.
    (b) Form. A subpoena shall identify the action with which it is 
connected; shall specify the person to whom it is addressed and the 
date, time and place for compliance with its provisions; and shall be 
issued by order of the Presiding Officer and signed by the Chief 
Counsel, or by the Presiding Officer. A subpoena duces tecum shall 
specify the books, papers, documents, or other materials or data-
compilations to be produced.
    (c) How obtained--(1) Content of application. An application for the 
issuance of a subpoena stating reasons shall be submitted in triplicate 
to the Presiding Officer.
    (2) Procedure of application. The original and two copies of the 
subpoena, marked ``original,'' ``duplicate'' and ``triplicate,'' shall 
accompany the application. The Presiding Officer shall rule upon an 
application for a subpoena ex parte, by issuing the subpoena or by 
issuing an order denying the application.
    (d) Issuance of a subpoena. The Presiding Officer shall issue a 
subpoena by signing and dating, or ordering the Chief Counsel to sign 
and date, each copy in the lower right-hand corner of the document. The 
``duplicate'' and ``triplicate'' copies of the subpoena shall be 
transmitted to the applicant for service in accordance with these Rules; 
the ``original'' copy shall be retained by or forwarded to the Chief 
Counsel for retention in the docket of the proceeding.
    (e) Service of a subpoena. A subpoena may be served in person or by 
certified mail, return receipt requested, as provided in Sec. 
511.16(b). Service shall be made by delivery of the signed ``duplicate'' 
copy to the person named therein.
    (f) Return of service. A person serving a subpoena shall promptly 
execute a return of service, stating the date, time, and manner of 
service. If service is effected by mail, the signed return receipt shall 
accompany the return of service. In case of failure to make service, a 
statement of the reasons for the failure shall be made. The 
``triplicate'' of the subpoena, bearing or accompanied by the return of 
service, shall be returned forthwith to the Chief Counsel after service 
has been completed.
    (g) Motion to quash or limit subpoena. Within five (5) days of 
receipt of a subpoena, the person against whom it is directed may file 
with the Presiding Officer a motion to quash, modify, or limit the 
subpoena, setting forth the reasons why the subpoena should be withdrawn 
or why it should be modified or limited in scope. Any such motion shall 
be answered within five (5) days of service, and shall be ruled on 
immediately thereafter. The order shall specify the date, if any, for 
compliance with the specifications of the subpoena and the reasons for 
the decision.
    (h) Consequences of failure to comply. In the event of failure to 
comply with a subpoena, the Presiding Officer may take any of the 
actions enumerated in Sec. 511.37 or may order any other appropriate 
relief to compensate for the withheld testimony, documents, or other 
materials. If in the opinon of the Presiding Officer such relief is 
insufficient, the Presiding Officer shall certify to the Administrator a 
request for judicial enforcement of the subpoena.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 26261, July 12, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 511.39  Orders requiring witnesses to testify or provide other 
information and granting immunity.

    (a) A party who desires the issuance of an order requiring a witness 
to testify or provide other information upon being granted immunity from 
prosecution under title 18, U.S.C., section 6002, may make a motion to 
that effect. The motion shall be made and ruled on in accordance with 
Sec. 511.22, and shall include a showing:

[[Page 49]]

    (1) That the testimony or other information sought from a witness or 
prospective witness may be necessary to the public interest; and
    (2) That such individual has refused or is likely to refuse to 
testify or provide such information on the basis of that individual's 
privilege against self-incrimination.
    (b) If the Presiding Officer determines that the witness' testimony 
appears necessary and that the privilege against self-incrimination may 
be invoked, he or she may certify to the Administrator a request that he 
or she obtain the approval of the Attorney General of the United States 
for the issuance of an order granting immunity.
    (c) Upon application to and approval of the Attorney General of the 
United States, and after the witness has invoked the privilege against 
self-incrimination, the Presiding Officer shall issue the order granting 
immunity unless he or she determines that the privilege was improperly 
invoked.
    (d) Failure of a witness to testify after a grant of immunity or 
after a denial of the issuance of an order granting immunity shall 
result in the imposition of appropriate sanctions as provided in Sec. 
511.37.


<R04>
                           Subpart E_Hearings


<R05>
Sec. 511.41  General rules.

    (a) Public hearings. All hearings pursuant to this part shall be 
public unless otherwise ordered by the Presiding Officer. Notice of the 
time and location of the hearing shall be served on each party and 
participant, and published in the Federal Register.
    (b) Expedition. Hearings shall proceed with all reasonable speed, 
insofar as practicable and with due regard to the convenience of the 
parties and shall continue without suspension until concluded, except in 
unusual circumstances.
    (c) Rights of parties. Every party shall have the right of timely 
notice and all other rights essential to a fair hearing, including, but 
not limited to, the rights to present evidence, to conduct such cross-
examination as may be necessary in the judgment of the Presiding Officer 
for a full and complete disclosure of the facts, and to be heard by 
objection, motion, brief, and argument.
    (d) Rights of participants. Every participant shall have the right 
to make a written or oral statement of position, file proposed findings 
of fact, conclusions of law and a posthearing brief, in accordance with 
Sec. 511.17(b).
    (e) Rights of witnesses. Any person compelled to testify in a 
proceeding in response to a subpoena may be accompanied, represented, 
and advised by counsel or other representative, and may obtain a 
transcript of his or her testimony at no cost.


<R05>
Sec. 511.42  Powers and duties of Presiding Officer.

    (a) General. A Presiding Officer shall have the duty to conduct 
full, fair, and impartial hearings, to take appropriate action to avoid 
unnecessary delay in the disposition of proceedings, and to maintain 
order. He or she shall have all powers necessary to that end, including 
the following powers:
    (1) To administer oaths and affirmations;
    (2) To compel discovery and to impose appropriate sanctions for 
failure to make discovery;
    (3) To issue subpoenas;
    (4) To rule upon offers of proof and receive relevant and probative 
evidence;
    (5) To regulate the course of the hearings and the conduct of the 
parties and their representatives therein;
    (6) To hold conferences for simplification of the issues, settlement 
of the proceedings, or any other proper purposes;
    (7) To consider and rule, orally or in writing, upon all procedural 
and other motions appropriate in an adjudicative proceeding;
    (8) To issue initial decisions, rulings, and orders, as appropriate;
    (9) To certify questions to the Administrator for determination; and
    (10) To take any action authorized in this part or in conformance 
with the provisions of title 5, U.S.C., sections 551 through 559.
    (b) Exclusion of parties by Presiding Officer. A Presiding Officer 
shall have the authority, for good cause stated on the record, to 
exclude from participation in a proceeding any party, participant,

[[Page 50]]

and/or representative who shall violate requirements of Sec. 511.76. 
Any party, participant and/or representative so excluded may appeal to 
the Administrator in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 511.23. If 
the representative of a party or participant is excluded, the hearing 
shall be suspended for a reasonable time so that the party or 
participant may obtain another representative.
    (c) Substitution of Presiding Officer. In the event of the 
substitution of a new Presiding Officer for the one originally 
designated, any motion predicated upon such substitution shall be made 
within five (5) days of the substitution.
    (d) Interference. In the performance of adjudicative functions, a 
Presiding Officer shall not be responsible to or subject to the 
supervision or direction of the Administrator or of any officer, 
employee, or agent engaged in the performance of investigative or 
prosecuting functions for NHTSA. All directions by the Administrator to 
a Presiding Officer concerning any adjudicative proceeding shall appear 
on and be made a part of the record.
    (e) Disqualification of Presiding Officer. (1) When a Presiding 
Officer deems himself or herself disqualified to preside in a particular 
proceeding, he or she shall withdraw by notice on the record and shall 
notify the Chief Administrative Law Judge of the withdrawal.
    (2) Whenever, for any reason, any party shall deem the Presiding 
Officer to be disqualified to preside, or to continue to preside, in a 
particular proceeding, that party may file with the Chief Administrative 
Law Judge a motion to disqualify and remove, supported by affidavit(s) 
setting forth the alleged grounds for disqualification. A copy of the 
motion and supporting affidavit(s) shall be served by the Chief 
Administrative Law Judge on the Presiding Officer whose removal is 
sought. The Presiding Officer shall have ten (10) days from service to 
reply in writing. Such motion shall not stay the proceeding unless 
otherwise ordered by the Presiding Officer or the Administrator. If the 
Presiding Officer does not disqualify himself or herself, the 
Administrator will determine the validity of the grounds alleged, either 
directly or on the report of another Presiding Officer appointed to 
conduct a hearing for that purpose, and shall in the event of 
disqualification take appropriate action, by assigning another Presiding 
Officer or requesting assignment of another Administrative Law Judge 
through the Office of Hearings.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15783, May 3, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 511.43  Evidence.

    (a) Applicability of Federal Rules of Evidence. The Federal Rules of 
Evidence shall apply to proceedings held under this part only as a 
general guide. The Presiding Officer may admit any relevent and 
probative evidence.
    (b) Burden of proof. (1) Complaint counsel shall have the burden of 
sustaining the allegations of any complaint.
    (2) Any party who is the proponent of a legal and/or factual 
proposition shall have the burden of sustaining the proposition.
    (c) Presumptions. A presumption imposes on the party against whom it 
is directed the burden of going forward with evidence to rebut or meet 
the presumption, but does not shift to such party the burden of proof in 
the sense of the risk of nonpersuasion, which remains throughout the 
hearing upon the party on whom it was originally cast.
    (d) Admissibility. All relevant and reliable evidence is admissible, 
but may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed 
by unfair prejudice or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, 
immateriality, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.
    (e) Official notice--(1) Definition. Official notice means use by 
the Presiding Officer of extra-record facts and legal conclusions drawn 
from those facts. An officially noticed fact or legal conclusion must be 
one not subject to reasonable dispute in that it is either (i) generally 
known within the jurisdiction of the Presiding Officer or (ii) known by 
the Presiding Officer in areas of his or her expertise; or (iii) capable 
of accurate and ready determination by resort to sources whose accuracy 
cannot reasonably be questioned.
    (2) Method of taking official notice. The Presiding Officer may at 
any time take

[[Page 51]]

official notice upon motion of any party or upon its own initiative. The 
record shall reflect the facts and conclusions which have been 
officially noticed.
    (3) Opportunity to challenge. Any party may upon application in 
writing rebut officially noticed facts and conclusions by supplementing 
the record. The Presiding Officer shall determine the permissible extent 
of this challenge; that is, whether to limit the party to presentation 
of written materials, whether to allow presentation of testimony, 
whether to allow cross-examination, or whether to allow oral argument. 
The Presiding Officer shall grant or deny the application on the record.
    (f) Objections and exceptions. Objections to evidence shall be 
timely interposed, shall appear on the record, and shall contain the 
grounds upon which they are based. Rulings on all objections, and the 
bases therefore, shall appear on the record. Formal exception to an 
adverse ruling is not required to preserve the question for appeal.
    (g) Offer of proof. When an objection to proffered testimony or 
documentary evidence is sustained, the sponsoring party may make a 
specific offer, either in writing or orally, of what the party expects 
to prove by the testimony or the document. When an offer of proof is 
made, any other party may make a specific offer, either in writing or 
orally, of what the party expects to present to rebut or contradict the 
offer of proof. Written offers of proof or of rebuttal, adequately 
marked for identification, shall accompany the record and be available 
for consideration by any reviewing authority.


<R05>
Sec. 511.44  Expert witnesses.

    (a) Definition. An expert witness is one who, by reason of 
education, training, experience, or profession, has peculiar knowlege 
concerning the matter of science or skill to which his or her testimony 
relates and from which he or she may draw inferences based upon 
hypothetically stated facts or from facts involving scientific or 
technical knowledge.
    (b) Method of presenting testimony of expert witness. Except as may 
be otherwise ordered by the Presiding Officer, a detailed written 
statement of the elements of the direct testimony of an expert witness 
shall be filed on the record and exchanged between the parties no later 
than 10 days preceding the commencement of the hearing. The statement 
must contain a full explanation of the methodology underlying any 
analysis, and a full disclosure of the basis of any opinion. The direct 
testimony of an expert witness shall not include points not contained in 
the written statement. A party may waive direct examination of an expert 
witness by indicating that the written statement be considered the 
testimony of the witness. In such a case, the written testimony shall be 
incorporated into the record and shall constitute the testimony of the 
witness.
    (c) Cross-examination and redirect examination of expert witness. 
Cross-examination, redirect examination, and re-cross-examination of an 
expert witness will proceed in due course based upon the written 
testimony and any amplifying oral testimony.
    (d) Failure to file and/or to exchange written statement. Failure to 
file and/or to exchange the written statement of an expert witness as 
provided in this section shall deprive the sponsoring party of the use 
of the expert witness and of the conclusions which that witness would 
have presented.


<R05>
Sec. 511.45  In camera materials.

    (a) Definition. In camera materials are documents, testimony, or 
other data which by order of the Presiding Officer or the Administrator, 
as appropriate under this part, are kept confidential and excluded from 
the public record. Only materials exempt under the Freedom of 
Information Act may be kept confidential and excluded from the public 
record. Pursuant to 49 CFR part 512, the Chief Counsel of the NHTSA is 
responsible for determining whether an alleged confidential business 
record is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act. The right of the 
Presiding Officer, the Administrator and reviewing courts to order 
disclosure of in camera materials is specifically reserved.
    (b) In camera treatment of documents and testimony. The Presiding 
Officer or the Administrator, as appropriate under this part, shall have 
authority,

[[Page 52]]

when good cause is found on the record, to order documents or testimony 
offered in evidence, whether admitted or rejected, to be received and 
preserved in camera. The order shall specify the length of time for in 
camera treatment and shall include:
    (1) A description of the documents and/or testimony;
    (2) The reasons for granting in camera treatment for the specified 
length of time.
    (c) Access and disclosure to parties. (1) The Administrator and 
Presiding Officer, and their immediate advisory staffs shall have 
complete access to all in camera materials. All other parties shall also 
have complete access to all in camera materials, except that these 
parties may seek access only in accordance with paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section when:
    (i) The in camera materials consist of information obtained by the 
government from persons not parties to the proceeding; or
    (ii) The in camera materials consist of information provided by one 
of the parties to the proceeding which is confidential as to the other 
parties to the proceeding.
    (2) Any party desiring access to and/or disclosure of the in camera 
materials specified in paragraph (c)(1) (i) and (ii) of this section for 
the preparation and presentation of that party's case shall make a 
motion which sets forth the justification therefor. The Presiding 
Officer or the Administrator, as appropriate under this part, may grant 
such motion on the record for substantial good cause shown and shall 
enter a protective order prohibiting unnecessary disclosure and 
requiring other necessary safeguards. The Presiding Officer or the 
Administrator, as appropriate, may examine the in camera materials and 
excise portions thereof before disclosing the materials to the moving 
party.
    (d) Segregation of in camera materials. In camera materials shall be 
segregated from the public record and protected from public view.
    (e) Public release of in camera materials. In camera materials 
constitute a part of the confidential records of the NHTSA and shall not 
be released to the public until the expiration of in camera treatment.
    (f) Reference to in camera materials. In the submission of proposed 
findings, conclusions, briefs, or other documents, all parties shall 
refrain from disclosing specific details of in camera materials. Such 
refraining shall not preclude general references to such materials. To 
the extent that parties consider it necessary to include specific 
details of in camera materials, the references shall be incorporated 
into separate proposed findings, briefs, or other documents marked 
``CONFIDENTIAL, CONTAINS IN CAMERA MATERIAL,'' which shall be placed in 
camera and become part of the in camera record. These documents shall be 
served only on parties accorded access to the in camera materials in 
accordance with paragraph (c)(2) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 511.46  Proposed findings, conclusions, and order.

    Within a reasonable time after the closing of the record and receipt 
of the transcript, all parties and participants may, simultaneously, 
file post-hearing briefs, including proposed findings of fact, 
conclusions of law and a proposed order, together with reasons 
therefore. The Presiding Officer shall establish a date certain for the 
filing of the briefs, which shall not exceed 45 days after the close of 
the record except in unusual circumstances. The briefs shall be in 
writing, shall be served upon all parties, and shall contain adequate 
references to the record and authorities relied on. Replies shall be 
filed within fifteen (15) days of the date for the filing of briefs 
unless otherwise established by the Presiding Officer. The parties and 
participants may waive either or both submissions.


<R05>
Sec. 511.47  Record.

    (a) Reporting and transcription. Hearings shall be recorded and 
transcribed under the supervision of the Presiding Officer by a reporter 
appointed by the Administrator. The original transcript shall be a part 
of the record and the official transcript. Copies of transcripts are 
available from the reporter at a cost not to exceed the maximum rates 
fixed by contract between the NHTSA and the reporter.

[[Page 53]]

    (b) Corrections. Corrections of the official transcript may be made 
only when they involve errors affecting substance and then only in the 
manner herein provided. The Presiding Officer may order corrections, 
either on his or her own motion or on motion of any party. The Presiding 
Officer shall determine the corrections to be made and so order. 
Corrections shall be interlineated or otherwise inserted in the official 
transcript so as not to obliterate the original text.


<R05>
Sec. 511.48  Official docket.

    (a) The official docket in adjudicatory proceedings will be 
maintained in the Docket Section, Office of the Secretary, Room 4107, 
400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20590, and will be available for 
inspection during normal working hours (9:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m.) Monday 
through Friday.
    (b) Fees for production or disclosure of records contained in the 
official docket shall be levied as prescribed in the Department of 
Transportation's regulations on Public Availability of Information (49 
CFR part 7).

[53 FR 15783, May 3, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 511.49  Fees.

    (a) Witnesses. Any person compelled to appear in person in response 
to a subpoena or notice of oral examination shall be paid at least the 
same attendance and mileage fees as are paid witnesses in the courts of 
the United States, in accordance with title 28, U.S.C., section 1821.
    (b) Responsibility. The fees and mileage referred to in this section 
shall be paid by the party at whose instance witnesses appear.


<R04>
                           Subpart F_Decision


<R05>
Sec. 511.51  Initial decision.

    (a) When filed. The Presiding Officer shall endeavor to file an 
Initial Decision with the Administrator within sixty (60) days of the 
close of the record, the filing of post-hearing briefs, or the filing of 
replies thereto, whichever is latest.
    (b) Content. The Initial Decision shall be based upon a 
consideration of the entire record and it shall be supported by 
reliable, probative, and substantial evidence. It shall include:
    (1) Findings and conclusions, as well as the reasons or bases 
therefor, upon the material questions of fact, material issues of law, 
or discretion presented on the record, and should, where practicable, be 
accompanied by specific page citations to the record and to legal and 
other materials relied upon.
    (2) An appropriate order.
    (c) By whom made. The Initial Decision shall be made and filed by 
the Presiding Officer who presided over the hearing, unless otherwise 
ordered by the Administrator.
    (d) Reopening of proceeding by presiding officer; termination of 
jurisdiction. (1) At any time prior to or concomitant with the filing of 
the Initial Decision, the Presiding Officer may reopen the proceedings 
for the reception of further evidence.
    (2) Except for the correction of clerical errors, the jurisdiction 
of the Presiding Officer is terminated upon the filing of the Initial 
Decision, unless and until the proceeding is remanded to the Presiding 
Officer by the Administrator.


<R05>
Sec. 511.52  Adoption of initial decision.

    The Initial Decision and Order shall become the Final Decision and 
Order of the Administrator forty (40) days after issuance unless an 
appeal is noted and perfected or unless review is ordered by the 
Administrator. Upon the expiration of the fortieth day, the Executive 
Secretary shall prepare, sign and enter an order adopting the Initial 
Decision and Order.


<R05>
Sec. 511.53  Appeal from initial decision.

    (a) Who may file notice of intention. Any party may appeal an 
Initial Decision to the Administrator provided that within ten (10) days 
after issuance of the Initial Decision such party files and serves a 
notice of intention to appeal.
    (b) Appeal brief. The appeal shall be in the form of a brief, filed 
within forty (40) days after service of the Initial Decision, duly 
served upon all parties and participants. The appeal brief shall 
contain, in the order indicated, the following:

[[Page 54]]

    (1) A subject index of the matters in the brief, with page 
references, and a table of cases (alphabetically arranged), textbooks, 
statutes, and other material cited, with page references thereto;
    (2) A concise statement of the case;
    (3) A specification of the position urged;
    (4) The argument, presenting clearly the points of fact and law 
relied upon in support of the position on each question, with specific 
page references to the record and the legal or other material relied 
upon; and
    (5) A proposed form of order for the Administrator's consideration 
in lieu of the order contained in the Initial Decision.
    (c) Answering brief. Within thirty (30) days after service of the 
appeal brief upon all parties and participants, any party may file an 
answering brief which shall also contain a subject index, with page 
references, and a table of cases (alphabetically arranged), textbooks, 
statutes, and other material cited, with page references thereto. Such 
brief shall present clearly the points of fact and law relied upon in 
support of the position taken on each question, with specific page 
references to the record and legal or other material relied upon.
    (d) Participant's brief. Within thirty (30) days after service of 
the appeal brief upon all parties and participants, any participant may 
file an appeal brief which should contain a subject index, with page 
references, and a table of authorities being relied upon. Such brief 
shall present clearly the position taken by the participant on each 
question raised by the appellant(s).
    (e) Cross appeal. If a timely notice of appeal is filed by a party, 
any other party may file a notice of cross-appeal within ten (10) days 
of the date on which the first notice of appeal was filed. Cross-appeals 
shall be included in the answering brief and shall conform to the 
requirements for form, content and filing specified in paragraph (c) of 
this section. If an appeal is noticed but not perfected, no cross-appeal 
shall be permitted and the notice of cross-appeal shall be deemed void.
    (f) Reply brief. A reply brief shall be limited to rebuttal of 
matters in answering briefs, including matters raised in cross-appeals. 
A reply brief shall be filed and within fourteen (14) days after service 
of an answering brief, or on the day preceding the oral argument, 
whichever comes first.
    (g) Oral argument. The purpose of an oral argument is to emphasize 
and clarify the issues. Any party may request oral argument. The 
Administrator may order oral argument upon request or upon his or her 
own initiative. All oral arguments shall be reported and transcribed.


<R05>
Sec. 511.54  Review of initial decision in absence of appeal.

    The Administrator may, by order, review a case not otherwise 
appealed by a party. Thereupon the parties shall and participants may 
file briefs in accordance with Sec. 511.53(b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) 
except that the Administrator may, in his or her discretion, establish a 
different briefing schedule in his or her order. Any such order shall 
issue within forty (40) days of issuance of the Initial Decision. The 
order shall set forth the issues which the Administrator will review.


<R05>
Sec. 511.55  Final decision on appeal or review.

    (a) Upon appeal from or review of an Initial Decision, the 
Administrator shall consider such parts of the record as are cited or as 
may be necessary to resolve the issues presented and, in addition, 
shall, to the extent necessary or desirable, exercise all the powers 
which he or she could have exercised if he or she had made the Initial 
Decision.
    (b) In rendering his or her decision, the Administrator shall adopt, 
modify, or set aside the findings, conclusions, and order contained in 
the Initial Decision, and shall include in his or her Final Decision a 
statement of the reasons or bases for his or her action. The 
Administrator shall issue an order reflecting his or her Final Decision.


<R05>
Sec. 511.56  Reconsideration.

    Within twenty (20) days after issuance of a Final Decision and 
Order, any party may file with the Administrator a petition for 
reconsideration of such decision or order, setting forth the relief 
desired and the grounds in

[[Page 55]]

support thereof. Any party desiring to oppose such a petition shall file 
an answer thereto within ten (10) days after service of the petition. 
The filing of a petition for reconsideration shall not stay the 
effective date of the Decision and Order or toll the running of any 
statutory time period affecting the decision or order unless 
specifically so ordered by the Administrator.


<R05>
Sec. 511.57  Effective date of order.

    (a) Consent orders. An order which has been issued following 
acceptance of an offer of settlement in accordance with Sec. 511.26 
becomes effective upon issuance.
    (b) Litigated orders. All other orders become effective upon the 
expiration of the statutory period for court review specified in section 
508(c)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, title 
15, U.S.C. section 2008(c)(1), Pub. L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 911, or, if a 
petition for review has been filed, upon court affirmance of the 
Administrator's order.


<R04>
  Subpart G_Settlement Procedure in Cases of Violation of Average Fuel 
                            Economy Standards


<R05>
Sec. 511.61  Purpose.

    This subpart establishes the procedures and requirements necessary 
to obtain a settlement of a case of violation of section 507 (1) or (2) 
of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, as amended, Pub. 
L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 911 (15 U.S.C. section 2007(1)(2)). No settlement of 
such cases may be had except as in accordance with this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 511.62  Definitions.

    Average fuel economy standard means an average fuel economy standard 
established by or pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost 
Savings Act.
    Insolvency means the inability to meet expenses when due.
    Settlement means a compromise, modification, or remission of a civil 
penalty assessed under this part for a violation of an average fuel 
economy standard.


<R05>
Sec. 511.63  Criteria for settlement.

    Settlement of a case of violation of an average fuel economy 
standard is discretionary with the Administrator. The Administrator will 
consider settlement only to the extent:
    (a) Necessary to prevent the insolvency or bankruptcy of the person 
seeking settlement, or
    (b) That the violation of the average fuel economy standard 
resulted, as shown by the person seeking settlement, from an act of God, 
a strike, or fire, or
    (c) That modification of a civil penalty assessed under this part is 
necessary to prevent lessening of competition, as determined and as 
certified by the Federal Trade Commission under section 508(b)(4) of the 
Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, Pub. L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 
911 (15 U.S.C. section 2008(b)(4)).


<R05>
Sec. 511.64  Petitions for settlement; timing, contents.

    (a) A petition seeking settlement under this subpart must be filed 
within 30 days after the issuance of a final order assessing a civil 
penalty for a violation of an average fuel economy standard.
    (b)(1) A petition for settlement should be sufficient to allow the 
Administrator to determine that at least one of the criteria set out in 
Sec. 511.63 is satisfied, and that the public interest would be served 
by settlement.
    (2) A petition asserting that settlement is necessary to prevent 
bankruptcy or insolvency must include:
    (i) Copies of all pertinent financial records, auditor's reports, 
and documents that show that the imposition of a civil penalty would 
cause insolvency, or would cause a company to do an act of bankruptcy, 
and
    (ii) A payment schedule that would allow the petitioner to pay a 
civil penalty without resulting in insolvency or an act of bankruptcy.
    (3) A petition asserting that the violation of the average fuel 
economy standard was caused by an act of God, fire, or strike must 
describe corrective and ameliorative steps taken to mitigate the effects 
of the act of God, fire, or strike.

[[Page 56]]

    (4) A petition based on a certification by the Federal Trade 
Commission that modification of the civil penalty assessed is necessary 
to prevent a substantial lessening of competition must include a 
certified copy of:
    (i) The application to the Federal Trade Commission for a 
certification under section 508(b)(4) of the Motor Vehicle Information 
and Cost Savings Act, Pub. L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 911 (15 U.S.C. 
2008(b)(4)), and materials supporting the application.
    (ii) The administrative record of any Federal Trade Commission 
proceeding held in regard to the application, and
    (iii) The certification by the Federal Trade Commission.
    (c) It is the policy of the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration that unconditional settlements of violations of average 
fuel economy standards are not in the public interest, and absent 
special and extraordinary circumstances, will not be allowed. All 
petitions for settlement shall contain a section proposing conditions 
for settlement. Conditions for settlement can be specific acts designed 
to lead to the reduction of automotive fuel consumption, which the 
petitioner is not otherwise required to perform pursuant to any statute, 
regulation, or administrative or judicial order, such as sponsoring 
public education programs, advertising, accelerating commercial 
application of technology, accelerating technology development programs, 
or making public the results of privately performed studies, surveys, or 
research activities.


<R05>
Sec. 511.65  Public comment.

    Notice and opportunity for comment are provided to the public in 
regard to settlements under this part. Subject to Sec. 511.66, notice 
of receipt of a petition for settlement is published in the Federal 
Register, and a copy of such petitions and any supporting information is 
placed in a public docket. Any settlement agreed to by the Administrator 
shall be placed in the public docket for 30 days so that interested 
persons may comment thereon. No settlement is binding until the 
completion of that thirty day period.


<R05>
Sec. 511.66  Confidential business information.

    The Administrator shall have authority to segregate from the public 
docket and to protect from public view information in support of a 
petition for settlement which has been determined to be confidential 
business information. The provisions of 15 U.S.C. 2005(d) pertaining to 
discretionary release by the Administrator of and to limited disclosure 
of information determined to be confidential business information shall 
apply to this section.


<R05>
Sec. 511.67  Settlement order.

    If, in accordance with this subpart, the Administrator allows a 
settlement of a case of violation of an average fuel economy standard, 
an order of settlement shall be issued, setting out the terms of the 
settlement, and containing a brief discussion of the factors underlying 
the exercise of the Administrator's discretion in allowing the 
settlement, including a discussion of comments received under Sec. 
511.65. If the Administrator rejects a petition for settlement, the 
Administrator shall give written notice of the rejection and the reasons 
for the rejection to the parties and the Presiding Officer.

[53 FR 15783, May 3, 1988]


<R04>
               Subpart H_Appearances; Standards of Conduct


<R05>
Sec. 511.71  Who may make appearances.

    A party or participant may appear in person, or by a duly authorized 
officer, partner, regular employee, or other agent of this party or 
participant, or by or with counsel or other duly qualified 
representative, in any proceeding under this part.


<R05>
Sec. 511.72  Authority for representation.

    Any individual acting in a representative capacity in any 
adjudicative proceeding may be required by the Presiding Officer or the 
Administrator to show his or her authority to act in such capacity. A 
regular employee of a party who appears on behalf of the party shall be 
required by the Presiding Officer or the Administrator to show his or 
her authority to so appear.

[[Page 57]]


<R05>
Sec. 511.73  Written appearances.

    (a) Any person who appears in a proceeding shall file a written 
notice of appearance with the Executive Secretary or deliver a written 
notice of appearance to the reporter at the hearing, stating for whom 
the appearance is made and the name, address, and telephone number 
(including area code) of the person making the appearance and the date 
of the commencement of the appearance. The written appearance shall be 
made a part of the record.
    (b) Any person who has previously appeared in a proceeding may 
withdraw his or her appearance by filing a written notice of withdrawal 
of appearance with the Docket Section. The notice of withdrawal shall 
state the name, address, and telephone number (including area code) of 
the person withdrawing the appearance, for whom the appearance was made, 
and the effective date of the withdrawal of the appearance, and such 
notice of withdrawal shall be filed within five (5) days of the 
effective date of the withdrawal of the appearance.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15783, May 3, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 511.74  Attorneys.

    An attorney at law who is admitted to practice before the Federal 
courts or before the highest court of any State, the District of 
Columbia, or any territory or Commonwealth of the United States, may 
practice before the NHTSA. An attorney's own representation that he or 
she is in good standing before any of such courts shall be sufficient 
proof thereof, unless otherwise ordered by the Presiding Officer or the 
Administrator.


<R05>
Sec. 511.75  Persons not attorneys.

    (a) Any person who is not an attorney at law may be admitted to 
appear in an adjudicative proceeding if that person files proof to the 
satisfaction of the Presiding Officer that he or she possesses the 
necessary legal, technical or other qualifications to render valuable 
service in the proceeding and is otherwise competent to advise and 
assist in the presentation of matters in the proceedings. An application 
by a person not an attorney at law to appear in a proceeding shall be 
submitted in writing to the Docket Section, not later than thirty (30) 
days prior to the hearing in the proceedings. The application shall set 
forth the applicant's qualifications to appear in the proceedings.
    (b) No person who is not an attorney at law and whose application 
has not been approved shall be permitted to appear in the 
Administration's proceedings. However, this provision shall not apply to 
any person who appears before the NHTSA on his or her own behalf or on 
behalf of any corporation, partnership, or association of which the 
person is a partner, officer, or regular employee.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15784, May 3, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 511.76  Qualifications and standards of conduct.

    (a) The NHTSA expects all persons appearing in proceedings before it 
to act with integrity, with respect, and in an ethical manner. Business 
transacted before and with the NHTSA shall be in good faith.
    (b) To maintain orderly proceedings, the Presiding Officer or the 
Administrator, as appropriate under this part, may exclude parties, 
participants, and their representatives for refusal to comply with 
directions, continued use of dilatory tactics, refusal to adhere to 
reasonable standards of orderly and ethical conduct, failure to act in 
good faith, or violation of the prohibition against certain ex parte 
communications. The Presiding Officer may, in addition to the above 
sanctions, deny access to additional in camera materials when a party or 
participant publicly releases such materials without authorization.
    (c) An excluded party, participant, or representative thereof may 
petition the Administrator to entertain an interlocutory appeal in 
accordance with Sec. 511.24. If, after such appeal, the representative 
of a party or participant, is excluded, the hearing shall, at the 
request of the party or participant, be suspended for a reasonable time 
so that the party or participant may obtain another representative.

[[Page 58]]


<R05>
Sec. 511.77  Restrictions as to former members and employees.

    The postemployee restrictions applicable to former Administrators 
and NHTSA employees, as set forth in 18 U.S.C. 207, shall govern the 
activities of former Administrators and NHTSA employees in matters 
connected with their former duties and responsibilities.


<R05>
Sec. 511.78  Prohibited communications.

    (a) Applicability. This section is applicable during the period 
commencing with the date of issuance of a complaint and ending upon 
final NHTSA action in the matter.
    (b) Definitions. (1) ``Decision-maker'' means those NHTSA personnel 
who render decisions in adjudicative proceedings under this part, or who 
advise officials who render such decisions, including:
    (i) The Administrator,
    (ii) The Administrative Law Judges;
    (2) ``Ex parte communication'' means:
    (i) Any written communication other than a request for a status 
report on the proceeding made to a decisionmaker by any person other 
than a decisionmaker which is not served on all parties,
    (ii) Any oral communication other than a request for a status report 
on the proceeding made to a decisionmaker by any person other than a 
decisionmaker without advance notice to the parties to the proceeding 
and opportunity for them to be present.
    (c) Prohibited ex parte communications. Any oral or written ex parte 
communication relative to the merits of a proceeding under this part is 
a prohibited ex parte communication, except as provided in paragraph (d) 
of this section.
    (d) Permissible ex parte communications. The following 
communications shall not be prohibited under this section:
    (1) Ex parte communications authorized by statute or by this part.
    (2) Any staff communication concerning judicial review or judicial 
enforcement in any matter pending before or decided by the 
Administrator.
    (e) Procedures for handling prohibited ex parte communication. (1) 
Prohibited written ex parte communication. To the extent possible, a 
prohibited written ex parte communication received by any NHTSA employee 
shall be forwarded to the Docket Section rather than to a decisionmaker. 
A prohibited written ex parte communication which reaches a 
decisionmaker shall be forwarded by the decisionmaker to the Docket 
Section. If the circumstances in which a prohibited ex parte written 
communication was made are not apparent from the communication itself, a 
statement describing those circumstances shall be forwarded with the 
communication.
    (2) Prohibited oral ex parte communication. (i) If a prohibited oral 
ex parte communication is made to a decisionmaker, he or she shall 
advise the person making the communication that the communication is 
prohibited and shall terminate the discussion.
    (ii) In the event of a prohibited oral ex parte communication, the 
decisionmaker shall forward to the Docket Section a dated statement 
containing such of the following information as is known to him/her:
    (A) The title and docket number of the proceeding;
    (B) The name and address of the person making the communication and 
his/her relationship (if any) to the parties to the proceeding;
    (C) The date and time of the communication, its duration, and the 
circumstances (telephone call, personal interview, etc.) under which it 
was made;
    (D) A brief statement of the substance of the matters discussed;
    (E) Whether the person making the communication persisted in doing 
so after being advised that the communication was prohibited.
    (3) All communications and statements forwarded to the Docket 
Section under this section shall be placed in the public file which 
shall be associated with, but not made a part of, the record of the 
proceedings to which the communication or statement pertains.
    (4) Service on parties. The Administrator shall serve a copy of each 
communication and statement forwarded under this section on all parties 
to the proceedings. However, if the parties are numerous, or if other 
circumstances satisfy the Administrator that service of the 
communication or statement would be unduly burdensome, he or she

[[Page 59]]

may, in lieu of service, notify all parties in writing that the 
communication or statement has been made and filed and that it is 
available for inspection and copying.
    (5) Service on maker. The Administrator shall forward to the person 
who made the prohibited ex parte communication a copy of each 
communication or statement filed under this section.
    (f) Effect of ex parte communications. No prohibited ex parte 
communication shall be considered as part of the record for decision 
unless introduced into evidence by a party to the proceedings.
    (g) Sanctions. A party or participant who makes a prohibited ex 
parte communication, or who encourages or solicits another to make any 
such communication, may be subject to any appropriate sanction or 
sanctions, including, but not limited to, exclusion from the proceedings 
and adverse rulings on the issues which are the subject of the 
prohibited communication.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15784, May 3, 1988]

                   Appendix I--Final Prehearing Order

                              Case Caption

                         Final Prehearing Order

    A prehearing conference was held in this matter pursuant to Rule 21 
of the Administration's Rules of Practice for Adjudicative Proceedings, 
on the -------------------- day of --------------------, 19----, at ---- 
o'clock -- M.

    Counsel appeared as follows:

For the Administration staff:

xFor the Respondent(s):
Others:

    1. NATURE OF ACTION AND JURISDICTION.

               This is an action for --------------------

________________________________________________________________________

and the jurisdiction of the Administration is involved under Section --
-- of Title --. U.S.C. The jurisdiction of the Administration is (not) 
disputed. The questions of jurisdiction was decided as follows:

    2. STIPULATIONS AND STATEMENTS.

    The following stipulations and statements were submitted, attached 
to, and made a part of this order:
    (a) A comprehensive written stipulation or statement of all 
uncontested facts;
    (b) A concise summary of the ultimate facts as claimed by each 
party. (Complaint Counsel must set forth the claimed facts, 
specifically; for example, if violation is claimed, Complaint Counsel 
must assert specifically the acts of violation complained of; each 
respondent must reply with equal clarity and detail.)
    (c) Written stipulations or statements setting forth the 
qualifications of the expert witnesses to be called by each party;
    (d) A written list or lists of the witnesses whom each party will 
call, a written list or lists of the additional witnesses whom each 
party may call, and a statement of the subject on which each witness 
will testify;
    (e) An agreed statement of the contested issues of fact and of law, 
and/or separate statements by each party or any contested issues of fact 
and law not agreed to;
    (f) A list of all depositions to be read into evidence and 
statements of any objections thereto;
    (g) A list and brief description of any charts, graphs, models, 
schematic diagrams, and similar objects that will be used in opening 
statements or closing arguments, but will not be offered in evidence. If 
any other such objects are to be used by any party, they will be 
submitted to opposing counsel at least three days prior to hearing. If 
there is then any objection to their use, the dispute will be submitted 
to the Presiding Officer at least one day prior to hearing;
    (h) Written waivers of claims or defenses which have been abandoned 
by the parties.

The foregoing were modified at the pretrial conference as follows:

  [To be completed at the conference itself. If none, recite ``none'']

    3. COMPLAINT COUNSEL'S EVIDENCE.
    3.1 The following exhibits were offered by Complaint Counsel, 
received in evidence, and marked as follows:

      [Identification number and brief description of each exhibit]

The authenticity of these exhibits has been stipulated.
    3.2 The following exhibits were offered by the Complaint Counsel and 
marked for identification. There was reserved to the respondent(s) and 
party intervenors, if any, the right to object to their receipt in 
evidence on the grounds stated:

  [Identification number and brief description of each exhibit. State 
 briefly ground of objection, e.g., competency, relevancy, materiality]

    4. RESPONDENT'S EVIDENCE.

    4.1 The following exhibits were offered by the respondent(s), 
received in evidence, and marked as herein indicated:

[[Page 60]]

      [Identification number and brief description of each exhibit]

The authenticity of these exhibits has been stipulated.

    4.2 The following exhibits were offered by the respondent(s) and 
marked for identification. There was reserved to Complaint Counsel and 
party intervenors, if any, the right to object to their receipt in 
evidence on the grounds stated:
[Identification number and brief description of each exhibit. State 
briefly ground of objection, e.g., competency, relevancy, materiality]

    5. ADDITIONAL ACTIONS.

The following additional action was taken:

[Amendments to pleadings, agreements of the parties, disposition of 
motions, separation of issues of liability and remedy, etc., if 
necessary]

    6. LIMITATIONS AND RESERVATIONS.

    6.1 Each of the parties has the right to further supplement the list 
of witnesses not later than ten (10) days prior to trial by furnishing 
opposing counsel with the name and address of the witness and general 
subject matter of his or her testimony and filing a supplement to this 
pretrial order. Thereafter additional witnesses may be added only after 
application to the Presiding Officer, for good cause shown.
    6.2 Rebuttal witnesses not listed in the exhibits to this order may 
be called only if the necessity of their testimony could not reasonably 
be foreseen ten (10) days prior to trial. If it appears to counsel at 
any time before trial that such rebuttal witnesses will be called, 
notice will immediately be given to opposing counsel and the Presiding 
Officer.
    6.3 The probable length of hearing is -- days. The hearings will be 
commenced on the ---- day of ----------, 19----, at ---- o'clock -- M. 
at (location) ----------.
    6.4 Prehearing briefs will be filed not later than 5:00 p.m. on ----
----. (Insert date not later than ten (10) days prior to hearing.) All 
anticipated legal questions, including those relating to the 
admissibility of evidence, must be covered by prehearing briefs.
    This prehearing order has been formulated after a conference at 
which counsel for the respective parties appeared. Reasonable 
opportunity has been afforded counsel for corrections or additions prior 
to signing. It will control the course of the hearing, and it may not be 
amended except by consent of the parties and the Presiding Officer, or 
by order of the Presiding Officer to prevent manifest injustice.

________________________________________________________________________

(Presiding Officer's Name)
(Presiding Officer's Title)

APPROVED AS TO FORM AND SUBSTANCE

Date: ----------.

________________________________________________________________________

Complaint Counsel.

________________________________________________________________________

Attorney for Respondent(s).

    Note: Where intervenors appear pursuant to Sec. 511.17 the 
prehearing order may be suitably modified; the initial page may be 
modified to reflect the intervention.


<R03>
PART 512_CONFIDENTIAL BUSINESS INFORMATION--Table of Contents




                      Subpart A_General Provisions

Sec.
512.1 Purpose and scope.
512.2 Applicability.
512.3 Definitions.

                    Subpart B_Submission Requirements

512.4 When requesting confidentiality, what should I submit?
512.5 How many copies should I submit?
512.6 How should I prepare documents when submitting a claim for 
          confidentiality?
512.7 Where should I send the information for which I am requesting 
          confidentiality?
512.8 What supporting information should I submit with my request?

                    Subpart C_Additional Requirements

512.9 What are the requirements if the information comes from a third 
          party?
512.10 Duty to amend.
512.11 What if I need an extension of time?
512.12 What if I am submitting multiple items of information?
512.13 What are the consequences for noncompliance with this part?

                     Subpart D_Agency Determination

512.14 Who makes the confidentiality determination?
512.15 How will confidentiality determinations be made?
512.16 Class determinations.
512.17 How long should it take to determine whether information is 
          entitled to confidential treatment?
512.18 How will I be notified of the confidentiality determination?
512.19 What can I do if I disagree with the determination?

[[Page 61]]

  Subpart E_Agency Treatment of Information Claimed To Be Confidential

512.20 How does the agency treat information submitted pursuant to this 
          part before a confidentiality determination is made?
512.21 How is information submitted pursuant to this part treated once a 
          confidentiality determination is made?
512.22 Under what circumstances may NHTSA modify a grant of 
          confidentiality?
512.23 Under what circumstances may NHTSA publicly release confidential 
          information?

Appendix A to Part 512--Certificate in Support of Request for 
          Confidentiality
Appendix B to Part 512--General Class Determinations
Appendix C to Part 512--Early Warning Reporting Class Determinations
Appendix D to Part 512--OMB Clearance

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322; 5 U.S.C. 552; 49 U.S.C. 30166; 49 U.S.C. 
30167; 49 U.S.C. 32307; 49 U.S.C. 32505; 49 U.S.C. 32708; 49 U.S.C. 
32910; 49 U.S.C. 33116; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 68 FR 44228, July 28, 2003, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                      Subpart A_General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 512.1  Purpose and scope.

    The purpose of this part is to establish the procedures and 
standards by which NHTSA will consider claims that information submitted 
to the agency is entitled to confidential treatment under 5 U.S.C. 
552(b), most often because it constitutes confidential business 
information as described in 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(4), and to address the 
treatment of information determined to be entitled to confidential 
treatment.


<R05>
Sec. 512.2  Applicability.

    (a) This part applies to all information submitted to NHTSA, except 
as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, for which a determination 
is sought that the material is entitled to confidential treatment under 
5 U.S.C. 552(b), most often because it constitutes confidential business 
information as described in 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(4), and should be withheld 
from public disclosure.
    (b) Information received as part of the procurement process is 
subject to the Federal Acquisition Regulation, 48 CFR Chapter 1, as well 
as this part. In any case of conflict between the Federal Acquisition 
Regulation and this part, the provisions of the Federal Acquisition 
Regulation prevail.


<R05>
Sec. 512.3  Definitions.

    Whenever used in this part:
    (a) Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration.
    (b) Chief Counsel means the Chief Counsel of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration.
    (c) Confidential business information means trade secrets or 
commercial or financial information that is privileged or confidential, 
as described in 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(4).
    (1) A trade secret is a secret, commercially valuable plan, formula, 
process, or device that is used for the making, preparing, compounding, 
or processing of trade commodities and that can be said to be the end 
product of either innovation or substantial effort.
    (2) Commercial or financial information is considered confidential 
if it has not been publicly disclosed and:
    (i) If the information was required to be submitted and its release 
is likely to impair the Government's ability to obtain necessary 
information in the future, or is likely to cause substantial harm to the 
competitive position of the person from whom the information was 
obtained; or
    (ii) if the information was voluntarily submitted and is the kind of 
information that is customarily not released to the public by the person 
from whom it was obtained.
    (d) NHTSA means the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
    (e) ``Substantial competitive harm'' includes ``significant 
competitive damage'' under Chapter 329 of Title 49 of the United States 
Code, Automobile Fuel Economy, 49 U.S.C. 32910(c).

[[Page 62]]


<R04>
                    Subpart B_Submission Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 512.4  When requesting confidentiality, what should I submit?

    Any person submitting information to NHTSA, other than information 
in a class identified in Appendix C of this Part, and requesting that 
the information be withheld from public disclosure pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 
552(b) shall submit the following:
    (a) The materials for which confidentiality is being requested, in 
conformance with Sec. Sec. 512.5, 512.6, and 512.7 of this part;
    (b) The Certificate, in the form set out in Appendix A to this part;
    (c) Supporting information, in conformance with Sec. 512.8; and
    (d) Any request for an extension of time, made in accordance with 
Sec. 512.11.


<R05>
Sec. 512.5  How many copies should I submit?

    (a) Except as provided for in subsection (c), a person must send the 
following in hard copy or electronic format to the Chief Counsel when 
making a claim for confidential treatment covering submitted material:
    (1) A complete copy of the submission, and
    (2) A copy of the submission containing only the portions for which 
no claim of confidential treatment is made and from which those portions 
for which confidential treatment is claimed has been redacted, and
    (3) Either a second complete copy of the submission or, 
alternatively, those portions of the submission containing the material 
for which confidential treatment is claimed and any additional 
information the submitter deems important to the Chief Counsel's 
consideration of the claim.
    (4) If submitted in electronic format, a copy of any special 
software required to review materials for which confidential treatment 
is requested and user instructions must also be provided.
    (b) A person filing comments to a rulemaking action must 
additionally submit to the rulemaking docket a copy of the submission 
containing only the portions for which no claim of confidential 
treatment is made and from which those portions for which confidential 
treatment is claimed has been redacted.
    (c) Any person submitting blueprints or engineering drawings need 
only provide an original version with their submission.


<R05>
Sec. 512.6  How should I prepare documents when submitting a claim 
for confidentiality?

    (a) Information claimed to be confidential must be clearly 
identified to enable the agency to distinguish between those portions of 
the submission claimed to constitute confidential business information 
and those portions for which no such claim is made.
    (b) The word ``CONFIDENTIAL'' must appear on the top of each page 
containing information claimed to be confidential.
    (1) If an entire page is claimed to be confidential, the submitter 
must indicate clearly that the entire page is claimed to be 
confidential.
    (2) If the information for which confidentiality is being requested 
is contained within a page, the submitter shall enclose each item of 
information that is claimed to be confidential within brackets: ``[ ].''
    (3) If submitted in electronic format, a comparable method to of 
identifying the information claimed to be confidential may be used. If 
submitted on CD-ROM or other format, the item containing the information 
shall be labeled as containing confidential information.


<R05>
Sec. 512.7  Where should I send the information for which I am requesting 
confidentiality?

    A claim for confidential treatment must be submitted in accordance 
with the provisions of this regulation to the Chief Counsel of the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Room 5219, 400 Seventh 
Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590.


<R05>
Sec. 512.8  What supporting information should I submit with my request?

    When requesting confidentiality, the submitter shall:
    (a) Describe the information for which confidentiality is being 
requested;

[[Page 63]]

    (b) Identify the confidentiality standard(s) under which the 
confidentiality request should be evaluated, in accordance with Sec. 
512.15;
    (c) Justify the basis for the claim of confidentiality under the 
confidentiality standard(s) identified pursuant to paragraph (b) of this 
section by describing:
    (1) Why the information qualifies as a trade secret, if the basis 
for confidentiality is that the information is a trade secret;
    (2) What the harmful effects of disclosure would be and why the 
effects should be viewed as substantial, if the claim for 
confidentiality is based upon substantial competitive harm;
    (3) What significant NHTSA interests will be impaired by disclosure 
of the information and why disclosure is likely to impair such 
interests, if the claim for confidentiality is based upon impairment to 
government interests;
    (4) What measures have been taken by the submitter to ensure that 
the information is not customarily disclosed or otherwise made available 
to the public, if the basis for confidentiality is that the information 
is voluntarily submitted; and
    (5) The information is otherwise entitled to protection, pursuant to 
5 U.S.C. 552(b).
    (d) Indicate if any items of information fall within any of the 
class determinations included in Appendix B to this Part;
    (e) Indicate the time period during which confidential treatment is 
sought; and
    (f) State the name, address, and telephone number of the person to 
whom NHTSA's response and any inquiries should be directed.


<R04>
                    Subpart C_Additional Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 512.9  What are the requirements if the information comes from a 
third party?

    Where confidentiality is claimed for information obtained by the 
submitter from a third party, such as a supplier, the submitter is 
responsible for obtaining from the third party the information that is 
necessary to comply with Sec. 512.4 of this part, including a 
certificate in the form set out in Appendix A to this Part.


<R05>
Sec. 512.10  Duty to amend.

    The submitter shall promptly amend any supporting information 
provided under Sec. 512.4 if the submitter obtains information upon the 
basis of which the submitter knows that the supporting information was 
incorrect when provided, or that the supporting information, though 
correct when provided to the agency, is no longer correct and the 
circumstances are such that a failure to amend the supporting 
information is in substance a knowing concealment.


<R05>
Sec. 512.11  What if I need an extension of time?

    If a person is unable to submit the necessary information required 
under Sec. 512.4 at the time the claimed confidential information is 
submitted to NHTSA, then that person may request an extension of time. 
Any request for an extension shall explain the reason for the extension 
of time and the length of time requested.


<R05>
Sec. 512.12  What if I am submitting multiple items of information?

    Any certificate provided under Sec. 512.4(b) of this part, and any 
supporting information provided under Sec. 512.4(c) of this part, may 
be used to support a claim for confidential treatment of more than one 
item of information. However, general or nonspecific assertions or 
analysis may be insufficient to form an adequate basis for the agency to 
find that the information is entitled to confidential treatment, and may 
result in the denial of the claim.


<R05>
Sec. 512.13  What are the consequences for noncompliance with this part?

    (a) If the submitter fails to comply with Sec. 512.4 of this part 
at the time the information is submitted to NHTSA or does not request an 
extension of time under Sec. 512.11, the claim for confidentiality may 
be waived, unless the agency is notified or otherwise becomes aware of 
the claim before the information is disclosed to the public. If the 
information is placed in a public docket or file, such placement is 
disclosure to

[[Page 64]]

the public within the meaning of this part and may preclude any claim 
for confidential treatment. The Chief Counsel may notify a submitter of 
information or, if applicable, a third party from whom the information 
was obtained, of inadequacies regarding a claim for confidential 
treatment and may allow the submitter or third party additional time to 
supplement the submission, but has no obligation to provide either 
notice or additional time.
    (b) If the submitter does not provide the certificate required under 
Sec. 512.4(b) of this part or any supporting information required under 
Sec. 512.4(c) of this part, or if the information is insufficient to 
establish that the information should be afforded confidential treatment 
under the confidentiality standards set out in Sec. 512.15 of this 
part, a request that such information be treated confidentially may be 
denied. The Chief Counsel may notify a submitter of information of 
inadequacies in the supporting information and may allow the submitter 
additional time to supplement the showing, but has no obligation to 
provide either notice or additional time.


<R04>
                     Subpart D_Agency Determination


<R05>
Sec. 512.14  Who makes the confidentiality determination?

    The Chief Counsel will determine whether an item of information will 
be afforded confidential treatment under this part.


<R05>
Sec. 512.15  How will confidentiality determinations be made?

    Information may be afforded confidential treatment if the Chief 
Counsel determines that:
    (a) The information is a trade secret;
    (b) Public disclosure of the information would be likely to cause 
substantial harm to the competitive position of the submitter;
    (c) Public disclosure of the information would be likely to impair 
NHTSA's ability to obtain necessary information in the future;
    (d) The information was provided to NHTSA voluntarily and was not 
customarily released to the public by the person from whom it was 
obtained; or
    (e) The information is otherwise entitled to protection, pursuant to 
5 U.S.C. 552(b).


<R05>
Sec. 512.16  Class determinations.

    (a) The Chief Counsel may issue class determinations of categories 
of information to be entitled to confidential treatment if the Chief 
Counsel determines that one or more characteristics common to each item 
of information in that class, will, in most cases, result in identical 
treatment, and further that it is appropriate to treat all such items as 
a class for one or more purposes under this part. Once a class 
determination is made, the Chief Counsel will publish the new class 
determination in the Federal Register.
    (b) The Chief Counsel may amend, modify, or terminate any class 
determination established under this section. These changes will be 
published in the Federal Register.
    (c) Class determinations made by the Chief Counsel are listed in 
Appendices B and C to this Part.
    (d) A class determination may state that all of the information in 
the class:
    (1) Is or is not governed by a particular section of this part or by 
a particular set of substantive criteria of this part;
    (2) Satisfies one or more of the applicable substantive criteria; or
    (3) Satisfies one or more of the substantive criteria, but only for 
a certain period of time.


<R05>
Sec. 512.17  How long should it take to determine whether information is 
entitled to confidential treatment?

    (a) When information claimed to be confidential is requested under 
the Freedom of Information Act, the determination will be made within 
twenty (20) working days after NHTSA receives such a request or within 
thirty (30) working days in unusual circumstances as provided under 5 
U.S.C. 552(a)(6)(A). However, these time periods may be extended by the 
Chief Counsel for good cause shown or on request from any person. An 
extension will be made in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a)(6)(A), and 
will be accompanied by a written statement setting out the reasons for 
the extension.

[[Page 65]]

    (b) When information claimed to be confidential is not requested 
under the Freedom of Information Act, the determination of 
confidentiality will be made within a reasonable period of time, at the 
discretion of the Chief Counsel.


<R05>
Sec. 512.18  How will I be notified of the confidentiality determination?

    (a) If a request for confidential treatment is granted, the 
submitter of the information will be notified in writing of the 
determination and of any appropriate limitations.
    (b) If a request for confidential treatment is denied in whole or in 
part, the submitter of the information will be notified in writing of 
the determination, and the reasons for the denial, by certified mail, 
return receipt requested. The information may be made available to the 
public twenty (20) working days after the submitter of the information 
has received notice of the denial, unless a request for reconsideration 
is filed. The information may be released publicly on an earlier date, 
if the Chief Counsel determines in writing that the public interest 
requires that the information be made available to the public on such 
date.


<R05>
Sec. 512.19  What can I do if I disagree with the determination?

    (a) A submitter of information whose request for confidential 
treatment is denied in whole or in part, may petition for 
reconsideration of that decision. Petitions for reconsideration shall be 
addressed to and received by the Chief Counsel prior to the date on 
which the information would otherwise be made available to the public. 
The determination by the Chief Counsel upon such petition for 
reconsideration shall be administratively final.
    (b) If a person is unable to submit a petition for reconsideration 
within twenty (20) working days of receiving notice that a claim for 
confidential treatment was denied, that person may submit a request for 
an extension of time. The Chief Counsel must receive any request for an 
extension of time before the date on which the information would be made 
available to the public, and the request must be accompanied by an 
explanation describing the reason for the request and the length of time 
requested. The Chief Counsel will determine whether to grant or deny the 
extension and the length of the extension.
    (c) If a petition for reconsideration is granted, the petitioner 
will be notified in writing of the determination and of any appropriate 
limitations.
    (d) If a petition for reconsideration is denied in whole or in part, 
or if a request for an extension is denied, the petitioner will be 
notified in writing of the denial, and the reasons for the denial, and 
will be informed that the information will be made available to the 
public not less than twenty (20) working days after the petitioner has 
received notice of the denial. The information may be released publicly 
on an earlier date, if the Administrator determines in writing that the 
public interest requires that the information be made available to the 
public on such date.


<R04>
  Subpart E_Agency Treatment of Information Claimed To Be Confidential


<R05>
Sec. 512.20  How does the agency treat information submitted pursuant to 
this part before a confidentiality determination is made?

    (a) Information received by NHTSA, for which a properly filed 
confidentiality request is submitted, will be kept confidential until 
the Chief Counsel makes a determination regarding its confidentiality. 
Such information will not be disclosed publicly, except in accordance 
with this part.
    (b) Redacted copies of documents submitted to NHTSA under this part 
will be disclosed to the public.


<R05>
Sec. 512.21  How is information submitted pursuant to this part treated 
once a confidentiality determination is made?

    (a) Once the Chief Counsel makes a determination regarding the 
confidentiality of the submitted information, all materials determined 
not to be entitled to confidential protection will be disclosed to the 
public in accordance with the determination, unless a timely petition 
for reconsideration is received by the agency.

[[Page 66]]

    (b) Upon receipt of a timely petition for reconsideration under 
Sec. 512.19 of this part, the submitted information will remain 
confidential, pending a determination regarding the petition.
    (c) Should the Chief Counsel, after considering a petition for 
reconsideration, decide that information is not entitled to confidential 
treatment, the agency may make the information available after twenty 
(20) working days after the submitter has received notice of that 
decision from the Chief Counsel unless the agency receives direction 
from a court not to release the information.

[68 FR 44228, July 28, 2003, as amended at 69 FR 21425, Apr. 21, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 512.22  Under what circumstances may NHTSA modify a grant of 
confidentiality?

    (a) The Chief Counsel may modify a grant of confidentiality based 
upon:
    (1) Newly discovered or changed facts;
    (2) A change in the applicable law;
    (3) A change in class determination, pursuant to Sec. 512.16;
    (4) The passage of time; or
    (5) A finding that the prior determination is erroneous.
    (b) If the Chief Counsel believes that an earlier determination of 
confidentiality should be modified based on one or more of the factors 
listed in paragraph (a) of this section, the submitter of the 
information will be notified in writing that the Chief Counsel has 
modified its earlier determination and of the reasons for the 
modification, and will be informed that the information will be made 
available to the public in not less than twenty (20) working days from 
the date of receipt of the notice of modification. The information may 
be released publicly on an earlier date, if the Administrator determines 
in writing that the public interest requires that the information be 
made available to the public on such date. The submitter may seek 
reconsideration of the modification, pursuant to Sec. 512.19.


<R05>
Sec. 512.23  Under what circumstances may NHTSA publicly release 
confidential information?

    (a) Information that has been claimed or determined to be 
confidential under this part may be disclosed to the public by the 
Administrator notwithstanding such claim or determination, if disclosure 
would be in the public interest as follows:
    (1) Information obtained under chapter 325, 327, 329 or 331 of title 
49 of the United States Code (formerly under the Motor Vehicle 
Information and Cost Savings Act) may be disclosed when that information 
is relevant to a proceeding under the chapter under which the 
information was obtained.
    (2) Information obtained under chapter 301 of title 49 of the United 
States Code (49 U.S.C. Sec. 30101 et seq.), relating to the 
establishment, amendment, or modification of Federal motor vehicle 
safety standards, may be disclosed when relevant to a proceeding under 
the chapter.
    (3) Except as specified in the next sentence, information obtained 
under Chapter 301 of title 49 of the United States Code (49 U.S.C. 30101 
et seq.), related to a possible defect or noncompliance, shall be 
disclosed when the Administrator decides the information will assist in 
carrying out sections 30117(b) and 30118 through 30121 of title 49 or is 
required to be disclosed under 30118(a) of title 49, except as provided 
in paragraph (a)(4) of this section.
    (4) No information will be disclosed under paragraph (a) of this 
section unless the submitter of the information is given written notice 
of the Administrator's intention to disclose information under this 
section. Written notice will be given at least twenty (20) working days 
before the day of release, unless the Administrator finds that shorter 
notice is in the public interest. The notice under this paragraph will 
include a statement of the Administrator's reasons for deciding to 
disclose the information, and will afford the submitter of the 
information an opportunity to comment on the contemplated release of the 
information. The Administrator may also give notice of the contemplated 
release of information to other persons and may allow these persons the 
opportunity to comment. In making the determination to release 
information pursuant to this section, the Administrator will consider 
ways to release the information that will

[[Page 67]]

cause the least possible adverse effects to the submitter.
    (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, information 
that has been determined or claimed to be confidential may be released:
    (1) To a committee of Congress;
    (2) Pursuant to an order of a court of competent jurisdiction;
    (3) To the Office of the Secretary, U.S. Department of 
Transportation and other Executive branch offices or other Federal 
agencies in accordance with applicable laws;
    (4) With the consent of the submitter of the information; and
    (5) To contractors, if necessary for the performance of a contract 
with the agency or any Federal agency, with specific prohibitions on 
further release of the information.

     Appendix A to Part 512--Certificate in Support of Request for 
                             Confidentiality

          Certificate in Support of Request for Confidentiality

    I ----------, pursuant to the provisions of 49 CFR part 512, state 
as follows:
    (1) I am (official's name, title) and I am authorized by (company) 
to execute this certificate on its behalf;
    (2) I certify that the information contained in (pertinent 
document(s)) is confidential and proprietary data and is being submitted 
with the claim that it is entitled to confidential treatment under 5 
U.S.C. 552(b)(4) (as incorporated by reference in and modified by the 
statute under which the information is being submitted);
    (3) I hereby request that the information contained in (pertinent 
document(s)) be protected for (requested period of time);
    (4) This certification is based on the information provided by the 
responsible (company) personnel who have authority in the normal course 
of business to release the information for which a claim of 
confidentiality has been made to ascertain whether such information has 
ever been released outside (company);
    (5) Based upon that information, to the best of my knowledge, 
information and belief, the information for which (company) has claimed 
confidential treatment has never been released or become available 
outside (company); (except as hereinafter specified);
    (6) I make no representations beyond those contained in this 
certificate and, in particular, I make no representations as to whether 
this information may become available outside (company) because of 
unauthorized or inadvertent disclosure (except as stated in paragraph 
5); and
    (7) I certify under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true 
and correct. Executed on this the ------ day of ------, ------. (If 
executed outside of the United States of America: I certify under 
penalty of perjury under the laws of the United States of America that 
the foregoing is true and correct). (signature of official)

          Appendix B to Part 512--General Class Determinations

    The Chief Counsel has determined that the following types of 
information would presumptively be likely to result in substantial 
competitive harm if disclosed to the public:
    (1) Blueprints and engineering drawings containing process and 
production data where the subject could not be manufactured without the 
blueprints or engineering drawings except after significant reverse 
engineering;
    (2) Future specific model plans (to be protected only until the date 
on which the specific model to which the plan pertains is first offered 
for sale); and
    (3) Future vehicle production or sales figures for specific models 
(to be protected only until the termination of the production period for 
the model year vehicle to which the information pertains).

[68 FR 44228, July 28, 2003, as amended at 69 FR 21425, Apr. 21, 2004]

  Appendix C to Part 512--Early Warning Reporting Class Determinations

    (a) The Chief Counsel has determined that the following information 
required to be submitted to the agency under 49 CFR 579, subpart C, will 
cause substantial competitive harm and will impair the government's 
ability to obtain this information in the future if released:
    (1) Reports and data relating to warranty claim information;
    (2) Reports and data relating to field reports, including dealer 
reports and hard copy reports;
    (3) Reports and data relating to consumer complaints; and
    (4) Lists of common green identifiers.
    (b) In addition, the Chief Counsel has determined that the following 
information required to be submitted to the agency under 49 CFR 579, 
subpart C, will cause substantial competitive harm if released: Reports 
of production numbers for child restraint systems, tires, and vehicles 
other than light vehicles, as defined in 49 CFR 579.4(c).
    (c) The Chief Counsel has determined that the disclosure of the last 
six (6) characters, when disclosed along with the first eleven

[[Page 68]]

(11) characters, of vehicle identification numbers reported in 
information on incidents involving death or injury pursuant to the 
reporting of early warning information requirements of 49 CFR part 579 
will constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy 
within the meaning of 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(6).

[68 FR 44228, July 28, 2003, as amended at 69 FR 21425, Apr. 21, 2004]

                  Appendix D to Part 512--OMB Clearance

    The OMB clearance number for this regulation is 2127-0025.


<R03>
PART 520_PROCEDURES FOR CONSIDERING ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS--Table 
of Contents




                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
520.1 Purpose and scope.
520.2 Policy.
520.3 Definitions.
520.4 Applicability.
520.5 Guidelines for identifying major actions significantly affecting 
          the environment.

                          Subpart B_Procedures

520.21 Preparation of environmental reviews, negative declarations, and 
          notices of intent.
520.22 Maintenance of a list of actions.
520.23 Preparation of draft environmental impact statements.
520.24 Internal processing of draft environmental impact statements.
520.25 External review of draft environmental impact statements.
520.26 Public hearings.
520.27 Legislative actions.
520.28 Preparation of final environmental impact statements.
520.29 Internal review of final environmental impact statements.
520.30 Availability of final environmental impact statements.
520.31 Amendments or supplements.
520.32 Emergency action procedures.
520.33 Timing of proposed NHTSA actions.
520.34 Comments on environmental statements prepared by other agencies.

Attachment 1 to Part 520--Form and Content of Statement
Attachment 2 to Part 520--Areas of Environmental Impact and Federal 
          Agencies and Federal-State Agencies with Jurisdiction by Law 
          or Special Expertise to Comment Thereon [Note]
Attachment 3 to Part 520--Offices Within Federal Agencies and Federal-
          State Agencies for Information Regarding the Agencies' Impact 
          Statements for Which Comments are Requested [Note]
Attachment 4 to Part 520--State and Local Agency Review of Impact 
          Statements

    Authority: Secs. 102(2)(A), 102(2)(C), Pub. L. 91-190, 83 Stat. 853 
(42 U.S.C. 4332); secs. 2(b), 4(f), Pub. L. 89-670, 80 Stat. 931 (49 
U.S.C. 1651(b), 1653(f)); E.O. 11514, 35 FR 4247; 40 CFR part 1500; DOT 
Order 5610.1B, 39 FR 35234; delegations of authority at 49 CFR 1.45, 
1.51.

    Source: 40 FR 52396, Nov. 10, 1975, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 520.1  Purpose and scope.

    (a) Section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 
1969 (83 Stat. 853; 42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C)), as implemented by Executive 
Order 11514 (3 CFR, 1966-1970 Comp., p. 902) and the Council on 
Environmental Quality's Guidelines of April 23, 1971 (36 FR 7724), 
requires that all agencies of the Federal Government prepare detailed 
environmental statements on proposals for legislation and other major 
Federal actions significantly affecting the quality of the human 
environment. The purpose of the Act is to build into the agency 
decision-making process careful consideration of all environmental 
aspects of proposed actions.
    (b) This part specifies National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration (NHTSA) procedures for conducting environmental 
assessments and reviews, and for the preparation of environmental impact 
statements on proposals for legislation and other major agency actions 
significantly affecting the quality of the human environment.


<R05>
Sec. 520.2  Policy.

    The agency will strive to carry out the full intent and purpose of 
the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 and related orders and 
statutes, and take positive steps to avoid any action which could 
adversely affect the quality of the human environment.


<R05>
Sec. 520.3  Definitions.

    (a) Environmental assessment is a written analysis describing the 
environmental impact of a proposed or ongoing agency action, submitted 
to the agency

[[Page 69]]

either by its grantees or contractors, or by any person outside the 
agency as part of any program or project proposal within the scope of 
activities listed in Sec. 520.4(b).
    (b) Environmental review is a formal evaluation undertaken by the 
agency, culminating in a brief document (the environmental review 
report), to determine whether a proposed or ongoing NHTSA action may 
have a significant impact on the environment. The review document will 
be included in the proposed or ongoing agency action, and either support 
a negative declaration or recommend the preparation of a draft 
environmental impact statement.
    (c) Draft environmental impact statement (DEIS) means a preliminary 
statement on the environmental impact of a proposed or ongoing NHTSA 
action which is circulated for comment and review within and outside 
NHTSA.
    (d) Final environmental impact statement (FEIS) means a detailed 
statement which, pursuant to section 102(2)(C) of the National 
Environmental Policy Act, identifies and analyzes the anticipated 
environmental impact of a proposed or ongoing NHTSA action.
    (e) Negative declaration means a statement prepared subsequent to an 
environmental review, which states that a proposed or ongoing NHTSA 
action will have no significant environmental impact and therefore does 
not require a draft or final environmental impact statement.


<R05>
Sec. 520.4  Applicability.

    (a) Scope. This part applies to all elements of NHTSA, including the 
Regional Offices.
    (b) Actions covered. Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this 
section, this part applies to the following agency actions and such 
actions and proposals as may be sponsored jointly with another agency:
    (1) New and continuing programs and projects; budget proposals; 
legislative proposals by the agency; requests for appropriations; 
reports on legislation initiated elsewhere where the agency has primary 
responsibility for the subject matter involved; and any renewals or 
reapprovals of the foregoing;
    (2) Research, development, and demonstration projects; formal 
approvals of work plans; and associated contracts;
    (3) Rulemaking and regulatory actions, including Notices of Proposed 
Rulemaking (NPRM); requests for procurement (RFP); requests for grants 
(Annual Work Programs); and contracts;
    (4) All grants, loans or other financial assistance for use in State 
and Community projects;
    (5) Annual State Highway Safety Work Programs;
    (6) Construction; leases; purchases; operation of Federal 
facilities; and
    (7) Any other activity, project, or action likely to have a 
significant effect on the environment.
    (c) Continuing actions. This part applies to any action enumerated 
in paragraph (b) of this section, even though such actions arise from a 
project or program initiated prior to enactment of the National 
Environmental Policy Act on January 1, 1970.
    (d) Environmental assessments. Within the scope of activities listed 
in Sec. 520.4(b), any person outside the agency submitting a program or 
project proposal may be requested to prepare an environmental assessment 
of such proposed action to be included in his submission to the agency.
    (e) Exceptions. (1) Assistance in the form of general revenue 
sharing funds, distributed under the State and Local Fiscal Assistance 
Act of 1972, 31 U.S.C. 1221, with no control by the NHTSA over the 
subsequent use of such funds;
    (2) Personnel actions;
    (3) Administrative procurements (e.g., general supplies) and 
contracts for personal services;
    (4) Legislative proposals originating in another agency and relating 
to matters not within NHTSA's primary areas of responsibility;
    (5) Project amendments (e.g., increases in costs) which have no 
environmental significance; and
    (6) Minor agency actions that are determined by the official 
responsible for the actions to be of such limited scope that they 
clearly will not have a significant effect on the quality of the human 
environment.

[[Page 70]]

    (f) Consolidation of statements. Proposed actions (and alternatives 
thereto) having substantially similar environmental impacts may be 
covered by a single environmental review and environmental impact 
statement or negative declaration.


<R05>
Sec. 520.5  Guidelines for identifying major actions significantly 
affecting the environment.

    (a) General guidelines. The phrase, ``major Federal actions 
significantly affecting the quality of the human environment,'' as used 
in this part, shall be construed with a view to the overall, cumulative 
impact of the actions, other Federal projects or actions in the area, 
and any further contemplated or anticipated actions. Therefore, an 
environmental impact statement should be prepared in any of the 
following situations:
    (1) Proposed actions which are localized in their impact but which 
have a potential for significantly affecting the environment;
    (2) Any proposed action which is likely to be controversial on 
environmental grounds;
    (3) Any proposed action which has unclear but potentially 
significant environmental consequences.
    (b) Specific guidelines. While a precise definition of environmental 
significance that is valid in all contexts is not possible, any of the 
following actions should ordinarily be considered as significantly 
affecting the quality of the human environment:
    (1) Any matter falling under section 4(f) of the Department of 
Transportation Act (49 U.S.C. 1653(f)) and section 138 of Federal-aid 
highway legislation (23 U.S.C. 138), requiring the use of any publicly 
owned land from a park, recreation area, or wildlife and waterfowl 
refuge of national, State, or local significance as determined by the 
Federal, State, or local officials having jurisdiction thereof, or any 
land from an historic site of national, State, or local significance;
    (2) Any matter falling under section 106 of the National Historic 
Preservation Act of 1966 (16 U.S.C. 470(f)), requiring consideration of 
the effect of the proposed action on any building included in the 
National Register of Historic Preservation and reasonable opportunity 
for the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation to comment on such 
action;
    (3) Any action that is likely to affect the preservation and 
enhancement of sites of historical, architectural, or archaeological 
significance;
    (4) Any action that is likely to be highly controversial regarding 
relocation housing;
    (5) Any action that (i) divides or disrupts an established 
community, disrupts orderly, planned development, or is inconsistent 
with plans or goals that have been adopted by the community in which the 
project is located; or (ii) causes significantly increased congestion;
    (6) Any action that (i) involves inconsistency with any Federal, 
State, or local law or administrative determination relating to the 
environment; (ii) has a significantly detrimental impact on air or water 
quality or on ambient noise levels for adjoining areas; (iii) involves a 
possibility of contamination of a public water supply system; or (iv) 
affects ground water, flooding, erosion, or sedimentation;
    (7) Any action that may directly or indirectly result in a 
significant increase in noise levels, either within a motor vehicle's 
closed environment or upon nearby areas;
    (8) Any action that may directly or indirectly result in a 
significant increase in the energy or fuel necessary to operate a motor 
vehicle, including but not limited to the following: (i) Actions which 
may directly or indirectly result in a significant increase in the 
weight of a motor vehicle; and (ii) actions which may directly or 
indirectly result in a significant adverse effect upon the aerodynamic 
drag of a motor vehicle;
    (9) Any action that may directly or indirectly result in a 
significant increase in the amount of harmful emissions resulting from 
the operation of a motor vehicle;
    (10) Any action that may directly or indirectly result in a 
significant increase in either the use of or the exposure to toxic or 
hazardous materials in the manufacture, operation, or disposal of motor 
vehicles or motor vehicle equipment;

[[Page 71]]

    (11) Any action that may directly or indirectly result in a 
significant increase in the problem of solid waste, as in the disposal 
of motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment;
    (12) Any action that may directly or indirectly result in a 
significant depletion of scarce natural resources associated with the 
manufacture or operation of motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment; 
and
    (13) Any other action that causes significant environment impact by 
directly or indirectly affecting human beings through adverse impacts on 
the environment.
    (c) Research activities. (1) In accord-ance with DOT Order 5610.1B, 
the Assistant Secretary for Systems Development and Technology (TST) 
will prepare, with the concurrence of the NHTSA, proposed procedures for 
assessing the environmental consequences of research activities. Until 
final procedures are promulgated, the following factors are to be 
considered for periodic evaluation to determine when an environmental 
statement is required for such programs:
    (i) The magnitude of Federal investment in the program;
    (ii) The likelihood of widespread application of the technology;
    (iii) The degree of environmental impact which would occur if the 
technology were widely applied; and
    (iv) The extent to which continued investment in the new technology 
is likely to restrict future alternatives.
    (2) The statement or environmental review culminating in a negative 
declaration must be written late enough in the development process to 
contain meaningful information, but early enough so that this 
information can practically serve as an input in the decision-making 
process. Where it is anticipated that an environmental impact statement 
may ultimately be required but its preparation is still premature, the 
office shall prepare a publicly available record briefly setting forth 
the reasons for its determination that a statement is not yet necessary. 
This record shall be updated at least quarterly, or as may be necessary 
when significant new information becomes available concerning the 
potential environmental impact of the program. In any case, a statement 
or environmental review culminating in a negative declaration must be 
prepared before research activities have reached a state of investment 
or commitment to implementation likely to determine subsequent 
development or restrict later alternatives. Statements on technology 
research and development programs shall include an analysis not only of 
alternative forms of the same technology that might reduce any adverse 
environmental impacts but also of alternative technologies that would 
serve the same function as the technology under consideration. Efforts 
shall be made to involve other Federal agencies and interested groups 
with relevant expertise in the preparation of such statements because 
the impacts and alternatives to be considered are likely to be less well 
defined than in other types of statements.


<R04>
                          Subpart B_Procedures


<R05>
Sec. 520.21  Preparation of environmental reviews, negative declarations, 
and notices of intent.

    (a) General responsibilities--(1) Associate Administrators and Chief 
Counsel. Each Associate Administrator and the Chief Counsel is 
responsible for determining, in accordance with Subpart A, whether the 
projects and activities under his jurisdiction require an environmental 
review, and for preparing all such reviews, negative declarations, and 
notices of intent.
    (2) Regional Administrators. Each Regional Administrator, in 
consultation with the Governor's Representative, is responsible for 
determining, in accordance with Subpart A, whether proposed State 
activities in his Region, as stated in Annual Work Programs, require an 
environmental review, and for the preparing all such reviews, negative 
declarations, and notices of intent.
    (3) Associate Administrator for Planning and Evaluation. The 
Associate Administrator for Planning and Evaluation may request in 
accordance with the requirements of this order, that the appropriate 
Associate Administrator or Regional Administrator prepare an 
Environmental review or Environmental Impact Statement for any proposed 
or continuing NHTSA action, or comment

[[Page 72]]

on any environmental statement prepared by other agencies.
    (b) Coordination. Coordination with appropriate local, State and 
Federal agencies should be accomplished during the early stages by the 
responsible official to assist in identifying areas of significance and 
concern. Existing procedures, including those established under the 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Revised Circular A-95, should be 
used to the greatest extent practicable to accomplish this early 
coordination.
    (c) Applicants. (1) Each applicant for a grant, loan, or other 
financial assistance for use in State and community projects may be 
requested to submit, with the original application, an environmental 
assessment of the proposed project.
    (2) Under OMB Revised Circular A-95, ``Evaluation, Review, and 
Coordination of Federal Assistance Programs and Projects,'' and DOT 
4600.4B, ``Evaluation, Review and Coordination of DOT Assistance 
Programs and Projects,'' dated February 27, 1974, a grant applicant must 
notify the clearinghouse of its intention to apply for Federal program 
assistance. The notification must solicit comments on the project and 
its impacts from appropriate State and local agencies. Since it is the 
NHTSA's policy to assure that (i) interested parties and Federal, State, 
and local agencies receive early notification of the decision to prepare 
an environmental impact statement, and (ii) their comments on the 
environmental effects of the proposed Federal action are solicited at an 
early stage in the preparation of the draft impact statement, this early 
notification requirement may be met by a grant applicant by sending the 
notification to interested parties and agencies at the same time it is 
sent to the clearinghouse.
    (d) Consultants. Consultants may prepare background or preliminary 
material and assist in preparing a draft or final environmental 
statement for which the NHTSA takes responsibility. Care should be 
exercised in selecting consultants, and in reviewing their work, to 
insure complete and objective consideration of all relevant project 
impacts and alternatives, particularly if the consultant may expect 
further contracts based on the outcome of the environmental decision.
    (e) Environmental review report. The environmental review shall 
culminate in a brief written report of the same title, which shall be 
included in the proposed or ongoing agency action, and which:
    (1) Describes the proposed or ongoing NHTSA action, the environment 
affected, and the anticipated benefits;
    (2) Evaluates the potential environmental impact, including those 
adverse impacts which cannot be avoided, should the proposal be 
implemented or the action continued;
    (3) Assesses the alternatives to the proposed or ongoing action and 
their potential environmental impact;
    (4) Evaluates the cumulative and long-term environmental effects of 
the proposed or ongoing action;
    (5) Describes the irreversible and irretrievable commitments of 
resources involved in the proposal's implementation or the action's 
continuance;
    (6) Identifies any known or potential conflicts with State, 
regional, or local plans and programs;
    (7) Weighs and analyzes the anticipated benefits against the 
environmental and other costs of the proposed or ongoing action in a 
manner which reflects similar comparisons of reasonably available 
alternatives; and
    (8) Concludes with a negative declaration or recommends the 
preparation of a DEIS.
    (f) Negative declarations. (1) If the responsible official judges 
that the environmental impact of a proposed or ongoing action under his 
jurisdiction will not significantly affect the quality of the human 
environment, the following declaration will be included in the 
environmental review report:

It is the judgment of this agency, based on available information, that 
no significant environmental impact will result from execution of this 
action.

    (2) A DEIS may be changed to a negative declaration if the public 
review process indicates that the proposal or ongoing action will not 
have a significant effect upon the environment.
    (3) An index of all negative declarations and a copy of each 
environmental review report shall be retained by the

[[Page 73]]

responsible official under whose jurisdiction it was prepared and shall 
be made available for public inspection upon request.
    (g) Notice of intent to prepare a draft environmental impact 
statement. If the responsible official under whose jurisdiction an 
environmental review is prepared determines that the proposed or ongoing 
action could have a potentially significant effect on the quality of the 
environment, he shall: coordinate with the Associate Administrator for 
Planning and Evaluation and the Chief Counsel, transmit to appropriate 
Federal, State and local agencies and have published in the Federal 
Register a notice of intent to prepare an environmental statement as 
soon as is practicable after the determination to prepare such a 
statement.


<R05>
Sec. 520.22  Maintenance of a list of actions.

    (a) The Associate Administrator for Planning and Evaluation shall be 
responsible for the preparation and maintenance of a list of actions for 
which draft or final environmental impact statements have been or are to 
be prepared. This list shall be on file with the Associate Administrator 
for Planning and Evaluation and shall be available for public inspection 
in the Docket Section upon request. A copy of the initial list and its 
updatings at the end of each calendar quarter shall be transmitted by 
the Associate Administrator for Planning and Evaluation to TES and CEQ.
    (b) If a determination is made that an environmental statement is 
not necessary for a proposed action (1) which has been identified as 
normally requiring preparation of a statement, (2) which is similar to 
actions for which a significant number of statements have been prepared, 
(3) which the agency has previously announced would be the subject of a 
statement, or (4) for which the official responsible for such proposal 
has made a negative determination in response to a request from the CEQ, 
a record briefly setting forth the decision and the reasons for that 
determination shall be prepared by the responsible official. Such a 
record of negative determinations and any evaluations made pursuant to 
Sec. 520.21 which conclude that preparation of a statement is not yet 
timely shall be prepared by the responsible official, submitted to the 
Associate Administrator for Planning and Evaluation, and made available 
by the Associate Administrator for Planning and Evaluation in the same 
manner as provided in paragraph (a) of this section for lists of 
statements under preparation.


<R05>
Sec. 520.23  Preparation of draft environmental impact statements.

    (a) Planning stage. (1) When a DEIS is to be prepared, the 
responsible official shall promptly initiate its preparation and develop 
a schedule in consultation with the Associate Administrator for Planning 
and Evaluation, to assure completion prior to the first significant 
point of decision in the program or project development process.
    (2) The environmental impacts of proposed activities should be 
initially assessed concurrently with the initial technical and economic 
studies.
    (3) Section 102(2)(A) of NEPA requires each Federal agency to 
utilize a ``systematic, interdisciplinary approach'' to plans and 
programs affecting the environment. To assure that all environmental 
impacts are identified and assessed, all relevant disciplines should be 
represented. If the necessary disciplines are not represented on the 
staff of the applicant or NHTSA, it is appropriate to use professional 
services available in other Federal, State or local agencies, 
universities, or consulting firms. The use of the interdisciplinary 
approach should not be limited to the environmental statement. This 
approach should also be used in the early planning stages to help assure 
a systematic evaluation of reasonable alternative courses of action and 
their potential social, economic, and environmental consequences.
    (b) Form and content requirements. Attachment 1 of this order 
prescribes the form and content requirements to be followed for each 
draft and final environmental impact statement. The DEIS must fulfill 
and satisfy, to the fullest extent possible at the time it is prepared, 
the requirements established for final statements.

[[Page 74]]

    (c) Lead agency. CEQ guidelines provide that when more than one 
Federal agency (1) directly sponsors an action, or is directly involved 
in an action through funding, licenses, or permits, or (2) is involved 
in a group of actions directly related to each other because of their 
functional interdependence and geographical proximity, consideration 
should be given to preparing one statement for all the Federal actions 
involved. Agencies in such cases should consider the designation of a 
single ``lead agency'' to assume supervisory responsibility for 
preparation of a joint statement. Where a lead agency prepares the 
statement, the other agencies involved should provide assistance with 
respect to their areas of jurisdiction and expertise. The statement 
should contain an evaluation of the full range of Federal actions 
involved, should reflect the views of all participating agencies, and 
should be prepared before major or irreversible actions have been taken 
by any of the participating agencies. Some relevant factors in 
determining an appropriate lead agency are: The time sequence in which 
the agencies become involved, the magnitude of their respective 
involvement, and their relative expertise with respect to the project's 
environmental effects. Questions concerning ``lead agency'' decisions 
should be raised with CEQ through TES. For projects serving and 
primarily involving land owned by or under the jurisdiction of another 
Federal agency, that agency may be the appropriate lead agency.
    (d) Applicants. Where the agency requests an applicant for financial 
assistance or other agency approval to submit an environmental 
assessment, the responsible official will (1) assist the applicant by 
outlining the information required, and (2) in all cases make his own 
evaluation of the environmental issues involved and take responsibility 
for the scope and content of draft and final environmental statements.


<R05>
Sec. 520.24  Internal processing of draft environmental impact statements.

    Before circulating a DEIS for external review, the official 
responsible for the DEIS shall receive the concurrence of the Associate 
Administrator for Planning and Evaluation and the Chief Counsel; and 
prepare a memorandum for approval by the Administrator which shall:
    (a) Set forth the basis on which it was determined that a 
potentially significant environmental effect exists;
    (b) Attach the DEIS;
    (c) Identify the Federal, State, and local agencies and private 
sources from which comments on the DEIS are proposed to be solicited 
(see Attachment 2); \1\ and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Filed as part of the original document.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) Include a recommendation on whether a public hearing on the 
proposed action should be held.


<R05>
Sec. 520.25  External review of draft environmental impact statements.

    (a) Requirements. The official responsible for the DEIS shall:
    (1) Transmit 5 copies of the DEIS to the CEQ and 2 copies to TES;
    (2) Solicit comments from all Federal, State, and local agencies 
which have jurisdiction by law or special expertise with respect to the 
possible environmental impact involved, and from the public (see 
Attachment 2); and
    (3) Inform the public and interested parties of the availability of 
the DEIS and provide copies as appropriate; and
    (4) Allow a comment period of not less than 45 days from the Friday 
of the week following receipt of the draft impact statement by CEQ. 
Requests for extensions shall be granted whenever possible, and 
particularly when warranted by the magnitude and complexity of the 
statement or the extent of citizen interest.
    (b) Procedures--(1) Federal and Federal-State agency review. (i) The 
DEIS shall be circulated for review to the Federal and Federal-State 
agencies with special expertise or jurisdiction by law with regard to 
the potential environmental impact involved. These agencies and their 
relevant areas of expertise are identified in Attachment 2.
    (ii) For actions within the jurisdiction of the Environmental 
Protection Agency (air or water quality, solid wastes, pesticides, 
radiation standards, noise), the DEIS shall be sent to EPA.
    (iii) For actions which would affect any property that is included 
in the

[[Page 75]]

National Register of Historic Preservation, the DEIS should be sent to 
the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation and the State Liaison 
Office for Historic Preservation.
    (2) State and local review. Where a review of the proposed action by 
State and local agencies authorized to develop and enforce environmental 
stand-ards is relevant, comments are to be solicited directly from such 
agencies with known responsibilities in environmental matters, and shall 
be obtained as follows:
    (i) Where review of direct Federal development projects, and of 
projects assisted under programs listed in Attachment D to revised OMB 
Circular A-95 (as implemented by DOT 4600.4B ``Evaluation, Review and 
Coordination of DOT Assistance Programs and Projects'', dated February 
27, 1974), takes place prior to preparation of an environmental 
statement, comments of the reviewing agencies on the environmental 
effects of the proposed project are inputs to the environmental 
statement. These comments shall be attached to the draft statement when 
it is circulated for review and copies of the draft shall be sent to 
those who commented. A-05 clearinghouses or other agencies designated by 
the Governor may also secure comments on environmental statements. In 
all cases, copies of the draft environmental statements shall be sent to 
clearinghouses and to the applicant whose project is the subject of the 
statement.
    (ii) Comments shall be directly obtained from appropriate State and 
local agencies, except where review is secured by agreement through A-95 
clearinghouses, unless the Governor of the appropriate State has 
designated some other point for obtaining his review. Instructions for 
obtaining the views of such agencies are contained in the joint OMB-CEQ 
memorandum (see Attachment 4). Comments shall be solicited from 
municipalities and counties on all projects located therein.
    (iii) State and local review of NHTSA procedures, regulations, and 
policies for administering Federal programs of assistance to State and 
local governments shall be obtained pursuant to procedures established 
by OMB Circular No. A-85.
    (iv) Generally, environmental statements on legislative and budget 
proposals may be excluded from State and local review.
    (3) General public review. (i) At the time the DEIS is circulated to 
Federal, State, and local agencies, public availability of the DEIS for 
comment and review will be announced by the CEQ in the Federal Register. 
Copies of the DEIS should be sent to known interested parties, and press 
releases should be sent to local news media advising where the DEIS is 
available and how copies may be obtained. The Office of Public Affairs 
and Consumer Services shall maintain a list of groups, including 
conservation organizations and motor vehicle manufacturers, known to be 
interested in the agency's activities, and directly notify such groups 
of the availability of the DEIS or send them a copy as soon as it has 
been prepared.
    (ii) A DEIS should be available to the public at least 30 days prior 
to the time of a public hearing on the DEIS.
    (iii) Copies of the DEIS will be made available at the NHTSA Docket 
Section, Room 5109, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590, and, 
where appropriate, NHTSA Regional Offices, at the offices of any 
applicants or grantees, at appropriate State, regional, and metropolitan 
clearing houses, and local public libraries, and furnished to public and 
private organizations and individuals with special expertise with 
respect to the potential environmental impact involved, and to those 
with an interest in the action who request an opportunity to comment. 
Copies to be made available to the public shall be provided without 
charge to the extent practicable, or at a fee which is not more than the 
actual cost of reproducing copies required to be sent to other Federal 
agencies, including the CEQ.
    (iv) A copy of the DEIS should in all cases be sent to any applicant 
whose project is the subject of the statement.
    (v) If a DEIS is changed to a negative declaration as a result of 
the public review process, all agencies and individuals that received 
copies and/or commented on the DEIS must be informed that a negative 
declaration was substituted for the DEIS and given a brief

[[Page 76]]

explanation of the reason for such substitution.
    (c) Utilization of comments. Comments received on the draft 
statement, and inputs (in summary form, if appropriate) from the 
processes for citizen participation, shall accompany the environmental 
statement through the normal internal project or program review process.


<R05>
Sec. 520.26  Public hearings.

    (a) A public hearing on a proposed or ongoing action covered by a 
DEIS shall be held upon the determination by the official responsible 
for such action, in consultation with the Associate Administrator for 
Planning and Evaluation, that a public hearing would be appropriate and 
in the public interest. In deciding whether a public hearing is 
appropriate, the responsible official should consider:
    (1) The magnitude of the proposal in terms of economic costs, the 
geographic area involved, and the uniqueness or size of the commitment 
of the resources involved;
    (2) The degree of interest in the proposal, as evidenced by requests 
from the public and from Federal, State, and local authorities that a 
hearing be held;
    (3) The likelihood that information will be presented at the hearing 
which will be of assistance to the agency in fulfilling its 
responsibilities under the NEPA;
    (4) The extent to which public involvement already has been achieved 
through other means, such as earlier public hearings, meetings with 
citizen representatives, and/or written comments on the proposed action; 
and
    (5) The extent of potential environmental impact.
    (b) If it is determined that a public hearing is to be held in 
accordance with paragraph (a) of this section, the official responsible 
for the action shall both announce the hearing through newspaper 
articles, direct notification to interested parties, and clearinghouses, 
and cause a notice to be issued in the Federal Register at least 30 days 
prior to the time of such hearing:
    (1) Identifying the subject matter of the hearing;
    (2) Announcing the date, time, and place of the hearing and the 
procedures to be followed; and
    (3) Announcing the availability of the DEIS and any other 
information, as appropriate, for public inspection at one or more 
locations in the area affected by the action.


<R05>
Sec. 520.27  Legislative actions.

    (a) A DEIS on both legislative proposals and reports for which NHTSA 
either develops the Departmental position or originates the legislation 
will be cleared with TES, filed with CEQ, and submitted to the Office of 
Management and Budget through the normal DOT and NHTSA legislative 
process.
    (b) The preparation, circulation, and filing of the environmental 
statement shall be in accordance with OMB Bulletin 72-6, ``Proposed 
Federal Actions Affecting the Environment.''
    (c) A DEIS and any comments that have been received should be 
available to the Congress and to the public for consideration in 
connection with the proposed legislation or report on proposed 
legislation. In cases where the scheduling of Congressional hearings on 
recommendations or reports on proposals for legislation which the 
Department has forwarded to the Congress does not allow adequate time 
for the completion of a FEIS, a DEIS may be furnished to the Congress 
and made available to the public pending transmittal of the comments as 
received and the final text.


<R05>
Sec. 520.28  Preparation of final environmental impact statements.

    (a) If the action is to go forward and the DEIS has not been changed 
to a negative declaration, as soon as practicable after the expiration 
of the comment period and hearing process, if any, the official 
responsible for the action shall prepare a final environmental impact 
statement (FEIS), taking into account all comments received and issues 
raised during such period and process.
    (b) The FEIS shall conform to the guidelines for form and content in 
Attachment 1.

[[Page 77]]

    (c) The FEIS shall then be submitted to the Chief Counsel by the 
official responsible for the action, for determination of legal 
sufficiency.


<R05>
Sec. 520.29  Internal review of final environmental impact statements.

    (a) Upon completion of the review for legal sufficiency of the FEIS, 
the Chief Counsel shall transmit 2 copies of the FEIS to TES for 
concurrence. Unless other notification is provided within 2 weeks after 
receipt in TES, the statement will be considered concurred in by TES.
    (b) After concurrence by TES, the FEIS will be transmitted by the 
Chief Counsel to the Administrator for approval.
    (c) If an action requires the personal approval of the Secretary or 
Deputy Secretary pursuant to a request by them or by TES, TGC, or the 
NHTSA office originating the action, the final environmental statement 
shall be accompanied by a brief cover memorandum requesting the 
Secretary's or Deputy Secretary's approval of the action.
    (1) The memorandum shall have signature lines for the concurrence of 
the Assistant Secretary for Environment, Safety, and Consumer Affairs, 
the General Counsel, and the Deputy Secretary, and for the approval of 
the Secretary or Deputy Secretary.
    (2) TES, in conjunction with the Executive Secretary, is responsible 
for informing the Assistant Secretary for Congressional and 
Intergovernmental Affairs and the Office of Public Affairs of the 
Secretary's decisions so that they, in coordination with the operating 
administrations or other Secretarial Offices involved, may take the 
appropriate actions.


<R05>
Sec. 520.30  Availability of final environmental impact statements.

    (a) Pending final approval and filing with CEQ, a proposed FEIS may 
be made available to the public and Federal, State, or local agencies if 
it carries a notation that it is not approved and filed.
    (b) After approval by the Administrator, the Associate Administrator 
for Planning and Evaluation will send 5 copies of the FEIS (together 
with comments) to the CEQ; individual copies with comments attached to 
the EPA and all Federal, State, and local agencies and members of the 
public who submitted comments on the DEIS or requested copies of the 
FEIS. If the length of the statement or the number of comments make this 
distribution requirement highly impractical, TES should be consulted to 
consider an alternative arrangement.
    (c) Copies of the FEIS will be made available in the NHTSA Docket 
Section, Room 5109, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20590, and, 
where appropriate, NHTSA Regional Offices, at the offices of any 
applicants or grantees, and at appropriate State, regional, and 
metropolitan clearinghouses and, where the impact is localized, public 
libraries.
    (d) The official responsible for the action shall, upon request, 
make available copies of the FEIS and substantive comments received on 
the DEIS without charge to the extent practicable, or at a fee which is 
not more than the actual cost of reproducing copies.

(Authority: Secs. 102(a)(A), 102(2)(C), Pub. L. 91-190, 83 Stat. 853 (42 
U.S.C. 4332); secs. 2(b), 4(f), Pub. L. 89-670, 80 Stat. 931 (49 U.S.C. 
1651(b), 1653(f); E. O. 11514, 35 FR 4247; 40 CFR Part 1500; DOT Order 
5610.1B, 39 FR 35234; delegations of authority at 49 CFR 1.45, 1.50 and 
501.7)

[40 FR 52396, Nov. 10, 1975, as amended at 48 FR 44081, Sept. 27, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 520.31  Amendments or supplements.

    A draft or final environmental impact statement may be amended or 
supplemented. Supplements or amendments should be considered when 
substantial changes are made in the proposed or ongoing action that will 
introduce a new or changed environmental effect of significance to the 
quality of the environment, or significant new information becomes 
available concerning its environmental aspects. In such cases, the 
supplement or amendment shall be processed in consultation with TES with 
respect to the need for, or desirability of, recirculating the statement 
for the appropriate period. TES concurrence must be secured before 
issuance.

[[Page 78]]


<R05>
Sec. 520.32  Emergency action procedures.

    The CEQ Guidelines allow modification of requirements in case of a 
national emergency, a disaster or similar great urgency. The processing 
times may be reduced, or if the emergency situation warrants, 
preparation and processing of a DEIS, FEIS, or negative declaration may 
be abbreviated. Such procedural changes, however, should be requested 
only for those projects where the need for immediate action requires 
processing in other than the normal manner.


<R05>
Sec. 520.33  Timing of proposed NHTSA actions.

    To the maximum extent practicable, no administrative action (i.e., 
any proposed action to be taken by the agency other than agency 
proposals for legislation to Congress, budget proposals, or agency 
reports on legislation) subject to this part and covered by an 
environmental impact statement shall be taken sooner than 90 days after 
a DEIS has been circulated for comment, furnished to the CEQ, and made 
public. Neither shall such administrative action be taken sooner than 30 
days after the FEIS (together with comments) has been filed with CEQ, 
and made available to commenting agencies and the public. If the FEIS is 
filed within 90 days after a DEIS has been circulated for comment, 
furnished to the CEQ and made public, the 30-day period and 90-day 
period may run concurrently to the extent that they overlap. The 90-day 
time period is measured from the date of publication in the Federal 
Register of the list of weekly filings of environmental impact 
statements with the CEQ, but the 30-day period is computed from the date 
of receipt by the CEQ.


<R05>
Sec. 520.34  Comments on environmental statements prepared by other 
agencies.

    (a) All requests for NHTSA's views on a DEIS or a proposed action 
undergoing environmental review by another agency will be transmitted to 
the Associate Administrator for Planning and Evaluation for action or 
referral to TES where appropriate. Offices within NHTSA may be requested 
by the Associate Administrator for Planning and Evaluation to supply any 
pertinent information and comments for a coordinated agency response.
    (b) NHTSA's comments and the comments of any offices responding to a 
request by the Associate Administrator for Planning and Evaluation 
should be organized in a manner consistent with the structure of an 
environmental review set out in Sec. 520.21(e). NHTSA programs that are 
environmentally related to the proposed action under review should be 
identified so interrelationships may receive due consideration.
    (c) Copies of NHTSA's comments on environmental statements prepared 
by other agencies shall be distributed as follows:
    (1) The original and 1 copy to the requesting agency;
    (2) 1 copy to TES-70; and
    (3) 5 copies to CEQ.
    (d) Requests by the public for copies should be referred to the 
agency originating the statement.

               Attachment 1--Form and Content of Statement

    1. Form. a. Each statement will be headed as follows:

      department of transportation national highway traffic safety 
                             administration

    (Draft) Environmental Impact Statement Pursuant to section 
102(2)(C), Pub. L. 91-190; 83 Stat. 853; 42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C).
    b. The heading specified above shall be modified to indicate that 
the statement also covers sections 4(f) of the DOT Act or 106 of the 
National Historic Preservation Act, when appropriate.
    c. Each statement will, as a minimum, contain sections corresponding 
to paragraph 3 herein, supplemented as necessary to cover other matters 
provided in this Attachment.
    d. The format for the summary to accompany draft and final 
environmental statements is as follows:

                                 summary

    (Check one) ( ) Draft ( ) Final; Department of Transportation, 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Name, address, and 
telephone number of individual who can be contacted for additional 
information about the proposed action or the statement. (Note: DOT Order 
2100.2 prescribes procedures for reporting public contacts in 
rulemaking.)
    (1) Name of Action. (Check one) ( ) Administrative Action. ( ) 
Legislative Action.

[[Page 79]]

    (2) Brief description of action indicating what States (and 
counties) are particularly affected.
    (3) Summary of environmental impact and adverse environmental 
effects.
    (4) List alternatives considered.
    (5)(a) (For draft statements) List all Federal, State, and local 
agencies from which comments have been requested.
    (b) (For final statements) List all Federal, State, and local 
agencies and other sources from which written comments have been 
received.
    (6) Dates the draft statement and the final statement if issued were 
made available to the Council on Environmental Quality and the public.
    2. Guidance as to content of statement. The following paragraphs of 
this Attachment are intended to be considered, where relevant, as 
guidance regarding the content of environmental statements. This 
guidance is expected to be supplemented by research reports, guidance on 
methodology, and other material from the literature as may be pertinent 
to evaluation of relevant environmental factors.
    3. General content. The following points are to be covered:
    a. A description of the proposed Federal action (e.g., ``The 
proposed Federal action is approval of a grant application to construct 
* * *''), a statement of its purpose, and a description of the 
environment affected, including information, summary technical data, and 
maps and diagrams where relevant, adequate to permit an assessment of 
potential environmental impact by commenting offices and the public.
    (1) Highly technical and specialized analyses and data should 
generally be avoided in the body of the draft impact statement. Such 
materials should be appropriately summarized in the body of the 
environmental statement and attached as appendices or footnoted with 
adequate bibliographic references.
    (2) The statement should succinctly describe the environment of the 
area affected as it exists prior to a proposed action, including other 
related Federal activities in the area, their interrelationships, and 
cumulative environmental impact. The amount of detail provided in such 
descriptions should be commensurate with the extent and expected impact 
of the action, and with the amount of information required at the 
particular level of decision making (planning, feasibility, design, 
etc.). In order to insure accurate descriptions and environmental 
considerations, site visits should be made where appropriate.
    (3) The statement should identify, as appropriate, population and 
growth characteristics of the affected area and any population and 
growth assumptions used to justify the project or program or to 
determine secondary population and growth impacts resulting from the 
proposed action and its alternatives (see paragraph 3c(2)). In 
discussing these population aspects, the statement should give 
consideration to using the rates of growth in the region of the project 
contained in the projection compiled for the Water Resources Council by 
the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the Department of Commerce and the 
Economic Research Service of the Department of Agriculture (the OBERS 
projection).
    (4) The sources of data used to identify, quantify, or evaluate any 
or all environmental consequences must be expressly noted.
    b. The relationship of the proposed action and how it may conform to 
or conflict with adopted or proposed land use plans, policies, controls, 
and goals and objectives as have been promulgated by affected 
communities. Where a conflict or inconsistency exists, the statement 
should describe the extent of reconciliation and the reasons for 
proceeding notwithstanding the absence of full reconciliation.
    c. The probable impact of the proposed action on the environment. 
(1) This requires assessment of the positive and negative effects of the 
proposed action is it affects both national and international human 
environment. The attention given to different environmental factors will 
vary according to the nature, scale, and location of proposed actions. 
Among factors to be considered should be the potential effect of the 
action on such aspects of the environment as those listed in Attachment 
2, and in section 520.5(b), supra. Primary attention should be given in 
the statement to discussing those factors most evidently impacted by the 
proposed action.
    (2) Secondary and other foreseeable effects, as well as primary 
consequences for the environment, should be included in the analyses. 
Secondary effects, such as the impact on fuel consumption, emissions, or 
noise levels of automobiles or in the use of toxic or scarce materials, 
may be more substantial than the primary effects of the original action.
    d. Alternatives to the proposed action, including, where relevant, 
those not within the existing authority of the responsible preparing 
office. Section 102(2)(D) of NEPA requires the responsible agency to 
``study, develop, and describe appropriate alternatives to recommended 
courses of action in any proposal which involves unresolved conflicts 
concerning alternative uses of available resources.'' A rigorous 
exploration and an objective evaluation of the environmental impacts of 
all reasonable alternative actions, particularly those that might 
enhance environmental quality or avoid some or all of the adverse 
environmental effects, are essential. Sufficient analysis of such 
alternatives and their environmental benefits, costs, and risks should 
accompany the proposed action

[[Page 80]]

through the review process in order not to foreclose prematurely options 
which might enhance environmental quality or have less detrimental 
effects. Examples of such alternatives include: The alternatives of not 
taking any action or of postponing action pending further study; 
alternatives requiring actions of a significantly different nature which 
would provide similar benefits with different environmental impacts, 
e.g., low capital intensive improvements, mass transit alternatives to 
highway construction; alternatives related to different locations or 
designs or details of the proposed action which would present different 
environmental impacts. In each case, the analysis should be sufficiently 
detailed to reveal comparative evaluation of the environmental benefits, 
costs, and risks of the proposed action and each reasonable alternative. 
Where an existing impact statement already contains such an analysis its 
treatment of alternatives may be incorporated, provided such treatment 
is current and relevant to the precise purpose of the proposed action.
    e. Any probable adverse environmental effacts which cannot be 
avoided (such as water or air pollution, noise, undesirable land use 
patterns, or impacts on public parks and recreation areas, wildlife and 
waterfowl refuges, or on historic sites, damage to life systems, traffic 
congestion, threats to health, or other consequences adverse to the 
environmental goals set out in section 101(b) of NEPA). This should be a 
brief section summarizing in one place those effects discussed in 
paragraph 3c that are adverse and unavoidable under the proposed action. 
Included for purposes of contrast should be a clear statement of how all 
adverse effects will be mitigated. Where mitigating steps are included 
in the statement, the responsible official shall see that they are 
carried out.
    f. The relationship between local short-term uses of man's 
environment and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term 
productivity. This section should contain a brief discussion of the 
extent to which the proposed action involves tradeoffs between short-
term environmental gains at the expense of long-term losses, or vice 
versa, and a discussion of the extent to which the proposed action 
forecloses future options.
    g. Any irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources that 
would be involved in the proposed action should it be implemented. This 
requires identification of unavoidable impacts and the extent to which 
the action irreversibly curtails the range of potential uses of the 
environment. ``Resources'' means not only the labor and materials 
devoted to an action but also the natural and cultural resources lost or 
destroyed.
    h. An indication of what other interests and considerations of 
Federal policy are thought to offset the adverse environmental effects 
of the proposed action identified pursuant to subparagraphs (c) and (e) 
of this paragraph. The statement should also indicate the extent to 
which these stated countervailing benefits could be realized by 
following reasonable alternatives to the proposed action (as identified 
in subparagraph (d) of this paragraph) that would avoid some or all of 
the adverse environmental effects. In this connection if a cost-benefit 
analysis of the proposed action has been prepared, it, or a summary, 
should be attached to the environmental impact statement, and should 
clearly indicate the extent to which environmental costs have not been 
reflected in such analysis.
    i. A discussion of problems and objections raised by other Federal 
agencies, State and local entities, and citizens in the review process, 
and the disposition of the issues involved and the reasons therefor. 
(This section shall be added to the final environmental statement at the 
end of the review process.)
    (1) The draft and final statements should document issues raised 
through consultations with Federal, State, and local agencies with 
jurisdiction or special expertise and with citizens, of actions taken in 
response to comments, public hearings, and other citizens involvement 
proceedings.
    (2) Any unresolved environmental issues and efforts to resolve them, 
through further consultations or otherwise, should be identified in the 
final statement. For instance, where an agency comments that the 
statement has inadequate analysis or that the agency has reservations 
concerning the impacts, or believes that the impacts are too adverse for 
approval, either the issue should be resolved or the final statement 
should reflect efforts to resolve the issue and set forth any action 
that will result.
    (3) The statement should reflect that every effort was made to 
discover and discuss all major points of view on the environmental 
effects of the proposed action and alternatives in the draft statement. 
However, where opposing professional views and responsible opinion have 
been overlooked in the draft statement and are raised through the 
commenting process, the environmental effects of the action should be 
reviewed in light of those views. A meaningful reference should be made 
in the final statement to the existence of any responsible opposing view 
not adequately discussed in the draft statement indicating responses to 
the issues raised.
    (4) All substantive comments received on the draft (or summaries of 
responses from the public which have been exceptionally voluminous) 
should be attached to the final statement, whether or not each such 
comment is thought to merit individual discussion in the text of the 
statement.

[[Page 81]]

    j. Draft statement should indicate at appropriate points in the text 
any underlying studies, reports, and other information obtained and 
considered in preparing the statement, including any cost-benefit 
analyses prepared. In the case of documents not likely to be easily 
accessible (such as internal studies or reports), the statement should 
indicate how such information may be obtained. If such information is 
attached to the statement, care should be taken to insure that the 
statement remains an essentially self-contained instrument, capable of 
being understood by the reader without the need for undue cross 
reference.
    4. Publicly owned parklands, recreational areas, wildlife and 
waterfowl refuges and historic sites. The following points are to be 
covered:
    a. Description of ``any publicly owned land from a public park, 
recreational area or wildlife and waterfowl refuge'' or ``any land from 
an historic site'' affected or taken by the project. This includes its 
size, available activities, use, patronage, unique or irreplaceable 
qualities, relationship to other similarly used lands in the vicinity of 
the project, maps, plans, slides, photographs, and drawings showing a 
sufficient scale and detail the project. This also includes its impact 
on park, recreation, wildlife, or historic areas, and changes in 
vehicular or pedestrian access.
    b. Statement of the ``national, State or local significance'' of the 
entire park, recreational area, refuge, or historic site ``as determined 
by the Federal, State or local officials having jurisdiction thereof.''
    (1) In the absence of such a statement lands will be presumed to be 
significant. Any statement of ``insignificance'' by the official having 
jurisdiction is subject to review by the Department as to whether such 
statement is capricious.
    (2) Where Federal lands are administered for multiple uses, the 
Federal official having jurisdiction over the lands shall determine 
whether the subject lands are in fact being used for park, recreation, 
wildlife, waterfowl, or historic purposes.
    c. Similar data, as appropriate, for alternative designs and 
locations, including detailed cost estimates (with figures showing 
percentage differences in total project costs) and technical 
feasibility, and appropriate analysis of the alternatives, including any 
unique problems present and evidence that the cost or community 
disruptions resulting from alternative routes reach extraordinary 
magnitudes. This portion of the statement should demonstrate compliance 
with the Supreme Court's statement in the Overton Park case, as follows:
    [The] very existence of the statute indicates that protection of 
parkland was to be given paramount importance. The few green havens that 
are public parks were not to be lost unless there were truly unusual 
factors present in a particular case or the cost or community disruption 
resulting from alternative routes reached extraordinary magnitudes. If 
the statutes are to have any meaning, the Secretary cannot approve the 
destruction of parkland unless he finds that alternative routes present 
unique problems. 401 U.S. 402, 412 (1971).
    d. If there is no feasible and prudent alternative, description of 
all planning undertaken to minimize harm to the protected area and 
statement of actions taken or to be taken to implement this planning, 
including measures to maintain or enhance the natural beauty of the 
lands traversed.
    (1) Measures to minimize harm may include replacement of land and 
facilities, providing land or facilities, provision for functional 
replacement of the facility (see 49 CFR 25.267).
    (2) Design measures to minimize harm; e.g., tunneling, cut and 
cover, cut and fill, treatment of embankments, planting, screening, 
maintenance of pedestrian or bicycle paths and noise mitigation measures 
all reflecting utilization of appropriate interdisciplinary design 
personnel.
    e. Evidence of concurrence or description of efforts to obtain 
concurrence of Federal, State or local officials having jurisdiction 
over the section 4(f) property regarding the action proposed and the 
measures planned to minimize harm.
    f. If Federally-owned properties are involved in highway projects, 
the final statement shall include the action taken or an indication of 
the expected action after filing a map of the proposed use of the land 
or other appropriate documentation with the Secretary of the Department 
supervising the land (23 U.S.C. 317).
    g. If land acquired with Federal grant money (Department of Housing 
and Urban Development open space or Bureau of Outdoor Recreation land 
and water conservation funds) is involved, the final statement shall 
include appropriate communications with the grantor agency.
    h. TGC will determine application of section 4(f) to public 
interests in lands, such as easements, reversions, etc.
    i. A specific finding by the Administrator that there is no feasible 
and prudent alternative and that the proposal includes all possible 
planning to minimize harm to the ``4(f) area'' involved.
    5. Properties and sites of historic and cultural significance. The 
statement should document actions taken to preserve and enhance 
districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects of historical, 
architectural, archeological, or cultural significance affected by the 
action.
    a. Draft environmental statements should include identification, 
through consulting

[[Page 82]]

the National Register and applying the National Register Criteria (36 
CFR part 800), of properties that are included in or eligible for 
inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places that may be 
affected by the project. The National Register is published in its 
entirety each February in the Federal Register. Monthly additions and 
listings of eligible properties are published in the Federal Register 
the first Tuesday of each month. The Secretary of the Interior will 
advise, upon request, whether properties are eligible for the National 
Register.
    b. If application of the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation's 
(ACHP) Criteria of Effect (36 CFR part 800) indicates that the project 
will have an effect upon a property included in or eligible for 
inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places, the draft 
environmental statement should document the effect. Evaluation of the 
effect should be made in consultation with the State Historic 
Preservation Officer (SHPO) and in accordance with the ACHP's criteria 
of Adverse Effect (36 CFR part 800).
    c. Determinations of no adverse effect should be documented in the 
draft statement with evidence of the application of the ACHP's Criteria 
of Adverse Effect, the views of the appropriate State Historic 
Preservation Officer, and submission of the determination to the ACHP 
for review.
    d. If the project will have an adverse effect upon a property 
included in or eligible for inclusion in the National Register of 
Historic Places, the final environmental statement should include either 
an executed Memorandum of Agreement or comments from the Council after 
consideration of the project at a meeting of the ACHP and an account of 
actions to be taken in response to the comments of the ACHP. Procedures 
for obtaining a Memorandum of Agreement and the comments of the Council 
are found in 36 CFR part 800.
    e. To determine whether the project will have an effect on 
properties of State or local historical, architectural, archaeological, 
or cultural significance not included in or eligible for inclusion in 
the National Register, the responsible official should consult with the 
State Historic Preservation Officer, with the local official having 
jurisdiction of the property, and where appropriate, with historical 
societies, museums, or academic institutions having expertise with 
regard to the property. Use of land from historic properties of Federal, 
State and local significance as determined by the official having 
jurisdiction thereof involves section 4(f) of the DOT Act and 
documentation should include information necessary to consider a 4(f) 
determination (see paragraph 4).
    6. Impacts of the proposed action on the human environment involving 
community disruption and relocation. a. The statement should include a 
description of probable impact sufficient to enable an understanding of 
the extent of the environmental and social impact of the project 
alternatives and to consider whether relocation problems can be properly 
handled. This would include the following information obtainable by 
visual inspection of the proposed affected area and from secondary 
sources and community sources when available.
    (1) An estimate of the households to be displaced including the 
family characteristics (e.g., minorities, and income levels, tenure, the 
elderly, large families).
    (2) Impact on the human environment of an action which divides or 
disrupts an established community, including where pertinent, the effect 
of displacement on types of families and individuals affected, effect of 
streets cut off, separation of residences from community facilities, 
separation of residential areas.
    (3) Impact on the neighborhood and housing to which relocation is 
likely to take place (e.g., lack of sufficient housing for large 
families, doublings up).
    (4) An estimate of the businesses to be displaced, and the general 
effect of business dislocation on the economy of the community.
    (5) A discussion of relocation housing in the area and the ability 
to provide adequate relocation housing for the types of families to be 
displaced. If the resources are insufficient to meet the estimated 
displacement needs, a description of the actions proposed to remedy this 
situation including, if necessary, use of housing of last resort.
    (6) Results of consultation with local officials and community 
groups regarding the impacts to the community affected. Relocation 
agencies and staff and other social agencies can help to describe 
probable social impacts of this proposed action.
    (7) Where necessary, special relocation advisory services to be 
provided the elderly, handicapped and illiterate regarding 
interpretations of benefits, assistance in selecting replacement housing 
and consultation with respect to acquiring, leasing, and occupying 
replacement housing.
    b. This data should provide the preliminary basis for assurance of 
the availability of relocation housing as required by DOT 5620.1, 
Replacement Housing Policy, dated June 24, 1970, and 49 CFR 25.53.
    7. Considerations relating to pedestrians and bicyclists. Where 
appropriate, the statement should discuss impacts on and consideration 
to be given in the development of the project to pedestrian and bicycle 
access, movement and safety within the affected area, particularly in 
medium and high density commercial and residential areas.
    8. Other social impacts. The general social groups specially 
benefitted or harmed by the proposed action should be identified in the 
statement including the following:

[[Page 83]]

    a. Particular effects of a proposal on the elderly, handicapped, 
non-drivers, transit dependent, or minorities should be described to the 
extent reasonably predictable.
    b. How the proposal will facilitate or inhibit their access to jobs, 
educational facilities, religious institutions, health and welfare 
services, recreational facilities, social and cultural facilities, 
pedestrian movement facilities, and public transit services.
    9. Standards as to noise, air, and water pollution. The statement 
shall reflect sufficient analysis of the effects of the proposed action 
on attainment and maintenance of any environmental standards established 
by law or administrative determination (e.g., noise, ambient air 
quality, water quality) including the following documentation:
    a. With respect to water quality, there should be consultation with 
the agency responsible for the State water pollution control program as 
to conformity with standards and regulations regarding storm sewer 
discharge sedimentation control, and other non-point source discharges.
    b. The comments or determinations of the offices charged with 
administration of the State's implementation plan for air quality as to 
the consistency of the project with State plans for the implementation 
of ambient air quality standards.
    c. Conformity to adopted noise standards, compatible, if 
appropriate, with different land uses.
    10. Energy supply and natural resources development. Where 
applicable, the statement should reflect consideration of whether the 
project or program will have any effect on either the production or 
consumption of energy and other natural resources, and discuss such 
effects if they are significant.
    11. Flood hazard evaluation. When an alternative under consideration 
encroaches on a flood plain, the statement should include evidence that 
studies have been made and evidence of consultations with agencies with 
expertise have been carried out. Necessary measures to handle flood 
hazard problems should be described. In compliance with Executive Order 
11296, and Flood Hazard Guidelines for Federal Executive Agencies, 
promulgated by the Water Resources Council, or how such requirements can 
be met during project development.
    12. Considerations relating to wetlands or coastal zones. Where 
wetlands or coastal zones are involved, the statement should include:
    a. Information on location, types, and extent of wetlands areas 
which might be affected by the proposed action.
    b. An assessment of the impacts resulting from both construction and 
operation of the project on the wetlands and associated wildlife, and 
measures to minimize adverse impacts.
    c. A statement by the local representative of the Department of the 
Interior, and any other responsible officials with special expertise, 
setting forth his views on the impacts of the project on the wetlands, 
the worth of the particular wetlands areas involved to the community and 
to the Nation, and recommendations as to whether the proposed action 
should proceed, and, if applicable, along what alternative route.
    d. Where applicable, a discussion of how the proposed project 
relates to the State coastal zone management program for the particular 
State in which the project is to take place.
    13. Construction impacts. In general, adverse impacts during 
construction will be of less importance than long-term impacts of a 
proposal. Nonetheless, statements should appropriately address such 
matters as the following identifying any special problem areas:
    a. Noise impacts from construction and any specifications setting 
maximum noise levels.
    b. Disposal of spoil and effect on borrow areas and disposal sites 
(include specifications where special problems are involved).
    c. Measures to minimize effects on traffic and pedestrians.
    14. Land use and urban growth. The statement should include, to the 
extent relevant and predictable:
    a. The effect of the project on land use, development patterns, and 
urban growth.
    b. Where significant land use and development impacts are 
anticipated, identify public facilities needed to serve the new 
development and any problems or issues which would arise in connection 
with these facilities, and the comments of agencies that would provide 
these facilities.

  Attachment 2--Areas of Environmental Impact and Federal Agencies and 
Federal-State Agencies With Jurisdiction by Law or Special Expertise to 
                             Comment Thereon

    Editorial Note: Filed as part of the original document. For text see 
39 FR 32546, Sept. 30, 1975.

Attachment 3--Offices Within Federal Agencies and Federal-State Agencies 
  for Information Regarding the Agencies' Impact Statements for Which 
                         Comments Are Requested

    Editorial Note: Filed as part of the original document. For text see 
39 FR 35248, Sept. 30, 1975.

[[Page 84]]

    Attachment 4--State and Local Agency Review of Impact Statements

    1. OBM Revised Circular No. A-95 through its system of 
clearinghouses provides a means for securing the views of State and 
local environmental agencies, which can assist in the preparation of 
impact statements. Under A-95, review of the proposed project in the 
case of federally assisted projects (Part I of A-95) generally takes 
place prior to the preparation of the impact statement. Therefore, 
comments on the environmental effects of the proposed project that are 
secured during this stage of the A-95 process represent inputs to the 
environmental impact statement.
    2. In the case of direct Federal development (Part II of A-95), 
Federal agencies are required to consult with clearinghouses at the 
earliest practicable time in the planning of the project or activity. 
Where such consultation occurs prior to completion of the draft impact 
statement, comments relating to the environmental effects of the 
proposed action would also represent inputs to the environmental impact 
statement.
    3. In either case, whatever comments are made on environmental 
effects of proposed Federal or federally assisted projects by 
clearinghouses, or by State and local environmental agencies through 
clearinghouses, in the course of the A-95 review should be attached to 
the draft impact statement when it is circulated for review. Copies of 
the statement should be sent to the agencies making such comments. 
Whether those agencies then elect to comment again on the basis of the 
draft impact statement is a matter to be left to the discretion of the 
commenting agency depending on its resources, the significance of the 
project and the extent to which its earlier comments were considered in 
preparing the draft statement.
    4. The clearinghouses may also be used, by mutual agreement, for 
securing reviews of the draft environmental impact statement. However, 
the Federal agency may wish to deal directly with appropriate State or 
local agencies in the review of impact statements because the 
clearinghouses may be unwilling or unable to handle this phase of the 
process. In some cases, the Governor may have designated a specific 
agency, other than the clearinghouse, for securing reviews of impact 
statements. In any case, the clearinghouses should be sent copies of the 
impact statement.
    5. To aid clearinghouses in coordinating State and local comments, 
draft statements should include copies of State and local agency 
comments made earlier under the A-95 process and should indicate on the 
summary sheet those other agencies from which comments have been 
requested, as specified in Attachment 1.


<R03>
PART 523_VEHICLE CLASSIFICATION--Table of Contents




Sec.
523.1 Scope.
523.2 Definitions.
523.3 Automobile.
523.4 Passenger automobile.
523.5 Light truck.

    Authority: 15 U.S.C. 2002; 49 CFR 1.50.


<R05>
Sec. 523.1  Scope.

    This part establishes categories of vehicles that are subject to 
title V of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, 15 U.S.C. 
2001 et seq.

(Sec. 301, Pub. L. 94-163, 80 Stat. 901 (15 U.S.C. 2001))

[42 FR 38362, July 28, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 523.2  Definitions.

    Approach angle means the smallest angle, in a plane side view of an 
automobile, formed by the level surface on which the automobile is 
standing and a line tangent to the front tire static loaded radius arc 
and touching the underside of the automobile forward of the front tire.
    Axle clearance means the vertical distance from the level surface on 
which an automobile is standing to the lowest point on the axle 
differential of the automobile.
    Basic vehicle frontal area is used as defined in 40 CFR 86.079-2.
    Breakover angle means the supplement of the largest angle, in the 
plan side view of an automobile, that can be formed by two lines tangent 
to the front and rear static loaded radii arcs and intersecting at a 
point on the underside of the automobile.
    Cargo-carrying volume means the luggage capacity or cargo volume 
index, as appropriate, and as those terms are defined in 40 CFR 600.315, 
in the case of automobiles to which either of those terms apply. With 
respect to automobiles to which neither of those terms apply ``cargo-
carrying volume'' means the total volume in cubic feet rounded to the 
nearest 0.1 cubic feet of either an automobile's enclosed nonseating 
space that is intended primarily for carrying cargo and is not 
accessible from the passenger compartment, or the space intended 
primarily

[[Page 85]]

for carrying cargo bounded in the front by a vertical plane that is 
perpendicular to the longitudinal centerline of the automobile and 
passes through the rearmost point on the rearmost seat and elsewhere by 
the automobile's interior surfaces.
    Curb weight is defined the same as vehicle curb weight in 40 CFR 
part 86.
    Departure angle means the smallest angle, in a plane side view of an 
automobile, formed by the level surface on which the automobile is 
standing and a line tangent to the rear tire static loaded radius arc 
and touching the underside of the automobile rearward of the rear tire.
    Gross vehicle weight rating means the value specified by the 
manufacturer as the loaded weight of a single vehicle.
    Passenger-carrying volume means the sum of the front seat volume 
and, if any, rear seat volume, as defined in 40 CFR 600.315, in the case 
of automobiles to which that term applies. With respect to automobiles 
to which that term does not apply, ``passenger-carrying volume'' means 
the sum in cubic feet, rounded to the nearest 0.1 cubic feet, of the 
volume of a vehicle's front seat and seats to the rear of the front 
seat, as applicable, calculated as follows with the head room, shoulder 
room, and leg room dimensions determined in accordance with the 
procedures outlined in Society of Automotive Engineers Recommended 
Practice J1100a, Motor Vehicle Dimensions (Report of Human Factors 
Engineering Committee, Society of Automotive Engineers, approved 
September 1973 and last revised September 1975).
    (a) For front seat volume, divide 1,728 into the product of the 
following SAE dimensions, measured in inches to the nearest 0.1 inches, 
and round the quotient to the nearest 0.001 cubic feet.
    (1) H61-Effective head room--front.
    (2) W3-Shoulder room--front.
    (3) L34-Maximum effective leg room-accelerator.
    (b) For the volume of seats to the rear of the front seat, divide 
1,728 into the product of the following SAE dimensions, measured in 
inches to the nearest 0.1 inches, and rounded the quotient to the 
nearest 0.001 cubic feet.
    (1) H63-Effective head room--second.
    (2) W4-Shoulder room--second.
    (3) L51-Minimum effective leg room--second.
    Running clearance means the distance from the surface on which an 
automobile is standing to the lowest point on the automobile, excluding 
unsprung weight.
    Static loaded radius arc means a portion of a circle whose center is 
the center of a standard tire-rim combination of an automobile and whose 
radius is the distance from that center to the level surface on which 
the automobile is standing, measured with the automobile at curb weight, 
the wheel parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, and the 
tire inflated to the manufacturer's recommended pressure.
    Temporary living quarters means a space in the interior of an 
automobile in which people may temporarily live and which includes 
sleeping surfaces, such as beds, and household conveniences, such as a 
sink, stove, refrigerator, or toilet.

(Sec. 9, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 Stat. 981 (49 U.S.C. 1657); sec. 301, Pub. 
L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 901 (15 U.S.C. 2002); delegation of authority at 41 
FR 25015, June 22, 1976)

[42 FR 38362, July 28, 1977, as amended at 43 FR 12013, Mar. 23, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 523.3  Automobile.

    (a) An automobile is any 4-wheeled vehicle propelled by fuel which 
is manufactured primarily for use on public streets, roads, and highways 
(except any vehicle operated exclusively on a rail or rails), and that 
either--
    (1) Is rated at 6,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or less; or
    (2) Which--
    (i) Is rated more than 6,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, but less 
than 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight,
    (ii) Is a type of vehicle for which the Administrator determines, 
under paragraph (b) of this section, average fuel economy standards are 
feasible, and
    (iii)(A) Is a type of vehicle for which the Administrator 
determines, under paragraph (b) of this section, average fuel economy 
standards will result in significant energy conservation, or

[[Page 86]]

    (B) Is a type of vehicle which the Administrator determines, under 
paragraph (b) of this section, is substantially used for the same 
purposes as vehicles described in paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
    (b) The following vehicles rated at more than 6,000 pounds and less 
than 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight are determined to be 
automobiles:
    (1) Vehicles which would satisfy the criteria in Sec. 523.4 
(relating to passenger automobiles) but for their gross vehicle weight 
rating.
    (2) Vehicles which would satisfy the criteria in Sec. 523.5 
(relating to light trucks) but for their gross vehicle weight rating, 
and which
    (i) Have a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less,
    (ii) Have a curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less,
    (iii) Have a gross vehicle weight rating of 8,500 pounds or less, 
and
    (iv) Are manufactured during the 1980 model year or thereafter.

(Sec. 9, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 Stat. 981 (49 U.S.C. 1657); sec. 301, Pub. 
L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 901 (15 U.S.C. 2002); delegation of authority at 41 
FR 25015, June 22, 1976)

[42 FR 38362, July 28, 1977, as amended at 43 FR 12013, Mar. 23, 1978; 
44 FR 4493, Jan. 2, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 523.4  Passenger automobile.

    A passenger automobile is any automobile (other than an automobile 
capable of off-highway operation) manufactured primarily for use in the 
transportation of not more than 10 individuals.

(Sec. 301, Pub. L. 94-163, 80 Stat. 901 (15 U.S.C. 2001))

[42 FR 38362, July 28, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 523.5  Light truck.

    (a) A light truck is an automobile other than a passenger automobile 
which is either designed for off-highway operation, as described in 
paragraph (b) of this section, or designed to perform at least one of 
the following functions:
    (1) Transport more than 10 persons;
    (2) Provide temporary living quarters;
    (3) Transport property on an open bed;
    (4) Provide greater cargo-carrying than passenger-carrying volume; 
or
    (5) Permit expanded use of the automobile for cargo-carrying 
purposes or other nonpassenger-carrying purposes through the removal of 
seats by means installed for that purpose by the automobile's 
manufacturer or with simple tools, such as screwdrivers and wrenches, so 
as to create a flat, floor level, surface extending from the forwardmost 
point of installation of those seats to the rear of the automobile's 
interior.
    (b) An automobile capable of off-highway operation is an 
automobile--
    (1)(i) That has 4-wheel drive; or
    (ii) Is rated at more than 6,000 pounds gross vehicle weight; and
    (2) That has at least four of the following characteristics (see 
Figure 1) calculated when the automobile is at curb weight, on a level 
surface, with the front wheels parallel to the automobile's longitudinal 
centerline, and the tires inflated to the manufacturer's recommended 
pressure--
    (i) Approach angle of not less than 28 degrees.
    (ii) Breakover angle of not less than 14 degrees.
    (iii) Departure angle of not less than 20 degrees.
    (iv) Running clearance of not less than 20 centimeters.
    (v) Front and rear axle clearances of not less than 18 centimeters 
each.

(Sec. 9, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 Stat. 981 (49 U.S.C. 1657); sec. 301, Pub. 
L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 901 (15 U.S.C. 2002); delegation of authority at 41 
FR 25015, June 22, 1976)

[42 FR 38362, July 28, 1977, as amended at 43 FR 12013, Mar. 23, 1978; 
58 FR 18029, Apr. 7, 1993]


<R03>
PART 525_EXEMPTIONS FROM AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY STANDARDS--Table of Contents




Sec.
525.1 Scope.
525.2 Purpose.
525.3 Applicability.
525.4 Definitions.
525.5 Limitation on eligibility.
525.6 Requirements for petition.
525.7 Basis for petition.
525.8 Processing of petitions.
525.9 Duration of exemption.
525.10 Renewal of exemption.

[[Page 87]]

525.11 Termination of exemption; amendment of alternative average fuel 
          economy standard.
525.12 Public inspection of information.

    Authority: 15 U.S.C. 2002; 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 42 FR 38376, July 28, 1977, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 525.1  Scope.

    This part establishes procedures under section 502(c) of the Motor 
Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, as amended (15 U.S.C. 2002) 
for the submission and disposition of petitions filed by low volume 
manufacturers of passenger automobiles to exempt them from the average 
fuel economy standards for passenger automobiles and to establish 
alternative average fuel economy standards for those manufacturers.


<R05>
Sec. 525.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to provide content and format 
requirements for low volume manufacturers of passenger automobiles which 
desire to petition the Administrator for exemption from applicable 
average fuel economy standards and for establishment of appropriate 
alternative average fuel economy standards and to give interested 
persons an opportunity to present data, views and arguments on those 
petitions.


<R05>
Sec. 525.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to passenger automobile manufacturers.


<R05>
Sec. 525.4  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. (1) The terms fuel, manufacture, manufacturer, 
and model year, are used as defined in section 501 of the Act.
    (2) The terms average fuel economy, fuel economy, and model type are 
used as defined in 40 CFR 600.002-77.
    (3) The term automobile means a vehicle determined by the 
Administrator under 49 CFR part 523 to be an automobile.
    (4) The term passenger automobile means an automobile determined by 
the Administrator under 49 CFR part 523 to be a passenger automobile.
    (5) The term customs territory of the United States is used as 
defined in 19 U.S.C. 1202.
    (b) Other terms. (1) The term base level and vehicle configuration 
are used as defined in 40 CFR 600.002-77.
    (2) The term vehicle curb weight is used as defined in 40 CFR 
85.002.
    (3) The term interior volume index is used as defined in 40 CFR 
600.315-77.
    (4) The term frontal area is used as defined in 40 CFR 86.129-79.
    (5) The term basic engine is used as defined in 40 CFR 600.002-
77(a)(21).
    (6) The term designated seating position is defined in 49 CFR 571.3.
    (7) As used in this part, unless otherwise required by the context:
    Act means the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (Pub. 
L. 92-513), as amended by the Energy Policy and Conservation Act (Pub. 
L. 94-163);
    Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration;
    Affected model year means a model year for which an exemption and 
alternative average fuel economy standard are requested under this part;
    Production mix means the number of passenger automobiles, and their 
percentage of the petitioner's annual total production of passenger 
automobiles, in each vehicle configuration which a petitioner plans to 
manufacture in a model year; and
    Total drive ratio means the ratio of an automobile's engine 
rotational speed (in revolutions per minute) to the automobile's forward 
speed (in miles per hour).

(Sec. 301, Pub. L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 871 (15 U.S.C. 2002); delegation of 
authority at 41 FR 25015, June 22, 1976; sec. 9, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 
Stat. 981 (49 U.S.C. 1657))

[42 FR 38376, July 28, 1977, as amended at 44 FR 55579, Sept. 27, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 525.5  Limitation on eligibility.

    Any manufacturer that manufactures (whether or not in the customs 
territory of the United States) 10,000 or more passenger automobiles in 
the second model year preceding an affected model year or in the 
affected model year is ineligible for an exemption for that affected 
model year.


<R05>
Sec. 525.6  Requirements for petition.

    Each petition filed under this part must--

[[Page 88]]

    (a) Identify the model year or years for which exemption is 
requested;
    (b) Be submitted not later than 24 months before the beginning of 
the affected model year, unless good cause for later submission is 
shown;
    (c) Be submitted in three copies to: Administrator, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, Washington, DC 20590;
    (d) Be written in the English language;
    (e) State the full name, address, and title of the official 
responsible for preparing the petition, and the name and address of the 
manufacturer;
    (f) Set forth in full data, views and arguments of the petitioner 
supporting the exemption and alternative average fuel economy standard 
requested by the petitioner, including the information and data 
specified by Sec. 525.7 and the calculations and analyses used to 
develop that information and data. No documents may be incorporated by 
reference in a petition unless the documents are submitted with the 
petition;
    (g) Specify and segregate any part of the information and data 
submitted under this part that the petitioner wishes to have withheld 
from public disclosure in accordance with part 512 of this chapter.

(Sec. 301, Pub. L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 871 (15 U.S.C. 2002); delegation of 
authority at 41 FR 25015, June 22, 1976; sec. 9, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 
Stat. 981 (49 U.S.C. 1657))

[42 FR 38376, July 28, 1977, as amended at 44 FR 55579, Sept. 27, 1979; 
46 FR 2063, Jan. 8, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 525.7  Basis for petition.

    (a) The petitioner shall include the information specified in 
paragraphs (b) through (h) in its petition.
    (b) Whether the petitioner controls, is controlled by, or is under 
common control with another manufacturer of passenger automobiles, and 
if so, the nature of that control relationship, and the total number of 
passenger automobiles manufactured by such other manufacturer or 
manufacturers.
    (c) The total number of passenger automobiles manufactured or likely 
to be manufactured (whether or not in the customs territory of the 
United States) by the petitioner in the second model year immediately 
preceding each affected model year.
    (d) For each affected model year, the petitioner's projections of 
the most fuel efficient production mix of vehicle configurations and 
base levels of its passenger automobiles which the petitioner could sell 
in that model year, and a discussion demonstrating that these 
projections are reasonable. The discussion shall include information 
showing that the projections are consistent with--
    (1) The petitioner's annual total production and production mix of 
passenger automobiles manufactured or likely to be manufactured in each 
of the four model years immediately preceding that affected model year;
    (2) Its passenger automobile production capacity for that affected 
model year;
    (3) Its efforts to comply with that average fuel economy standard; 
and
    (4) Anticipated consumer demand in the United States for passenger 
automobiles during that affected model year.
    (e) For each affected model year, a description of the following 
features of each vehicle configuration of the petitioner's passenger 
automobiles to be manufactured in that affected model year;
    (1) Maximum overall body width, overall length, and overall height, 
determined in accordance with Motor Vehicle Dimensions SAE J1100a 
(report of Human Engineering Committee, approved September 1973, as 
revised September 1975);
    (2) Vehicle curb weight;
    (3) Number of designated seating positions and interior volume 
index;
    (4) Basic engine, displacement, and SAE rated net power, kilowatts;
    (5) Fuel metering system, including the number of carburetor 
barrels, if applicable;
    (6) Drive train configuration and total drive ratio;
    (7) Emission control system;
    (8) Dynamometer road load setting, determined in accordance with 40 
CFR part 86, and the method used to determine that setting, including 
information indicating whether the road load setting was adjusted to 
account for the

[[Page 89]]

presence of air conditioning and whether the setting was based on the 
use of radial ply tires; and
    (9) Use of synthetic lubricants, low viscosity lubricants, or 
lubricants with additives that affect friction characteristics in the 
crankcase, differential, and transmission of the vehicles tested under 
the requirements of 40 CFR parts 86 and 600. With respect to automobiles 
which will use these lubricants, indicate which one will be used and 
explain why that type was chosen. With respect to automobiles which will 
not use these lubricants, explain the reasons for not so doing.
    (f) For each affected model year, a fuel economy value for each 
vehicle configuration specified in 40 CFR 600.506(a)(2), base level, and 
model type of the petitioner's passenger automobiles to be manufactured 
in that affected model year calculated in accordance with subpart C of 
40 CFR part 600 and based on tests or analyses comparable to those 
prescribed or permitted under 40 CFR part 600 and a description of the 
test procedures or analytical methods.
    (g) For each affected model year, an average fuel economy figure for 
the petitioner's passenger automobiles to be manufactured in that 
affected model year calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 600.510(e) and 
based upon the fuel economy values provided under paragraph (f) of this 
section and upon the petitioner's production mix projected under 
paragraph (d) of this section for the affected model year.
    (h) Information demonstrating that the average fuel economy figure 
provided for each affected model year under paragraph (g) of this 
section is the maximum feasible average fuel economy achievable by the 
petitioner for that model year, including--
    (1) For each affected model year and each of the two model years 
immediately following the first affected model year, a description of 
the technological means selected by the petitioner for improving the 
average fuel economy of its automobiles to be manufactured in that model 
year.
    (2) A chronological description of the petitioner's past and planned 
efforts to implement the means described under paragraph (h)(1) of this 
section.
    (3) A description of the effect of other Federal motor vehicle 
standards on the fuel economy of the petitioner's automobiles.
    (4) For each affected model year, a discussion of the alternative 
and additional means considered but not selected by the petitioner that 
would have enabled its passenger automobiles to achieve a higher average 
fuel economy than is achievable with the means described under paragraph 
(h)(1) of this section. This discussion must include an explanation of 
the reasons the petitioner had for rejecting these additional and 
alternative means.
    (5) In the case of a petitioner which plans to increase the average 
fuel economy of its passenger automobiles to be manufactured in either 
of the two model years immediately following the first affected model 
year, an explanation of the petitioner's reasons for not making those 
increases in that affected model year.

(Sec. 301, Pub. L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 871 (15 U.S.C. 2002); delegation of 
authority at 41 FR 25015, June 22, 1976; sec. 9, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 
Stat. 981 (49 U.S.C. 1657))

[42 FR 38376, July 28, 1977, as amended at 44 FR 55579, Sept. 27, 1979; 
58 FR 18029, Apr. 7, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 525.8  Processing of petitions.

    (a) If a petition is found not to contain the information required 
by this part, the petition is informed about the areas of insufficiency 
and advised that the petition will not receive further consideration 
until the required information is submitted.
    (b) The Administrator may request the petitioner to provide 
information in addition to that required by this part.
    (c) The Administrator publishes a proposed decision in the Federal 
Register. The proposed decision indicates the proposed grant of the 
petition and establishment of an alternative average fuel economy 
standard, or the proposed denial of the petition, specifies the reasons 
for the proposal and invites written public comment on the proposal.
    (d) Any interested person may, upon written request to the 
Administrator not later than 15 days after the publication of a notice 
under paragraph (c)

[[Page 90]]

of this section, meet informally with an appropriate official of the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration to discuss the petition 
or notice.
    (e) After the conclusion of the period for public comment on the 
proposal, the Administrator publishes a final decision in the Federal 
Register. The final decision is based on the petition, written public 
comments, and other available information. The final decision sets forth 
the grant of the exemption and establishes an alternative average fuel 
economy standard or the denial of the petition, and the reasons for the 
decision.

(Sec. 301, Pub. L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 871 (15 U.S.C. 2002); delegation of 
authority at 41 FR 25015, June 22, 1976); sec. 9, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 
Stat. 981 (49 U.S.C. 1657))

[42 FR 38376, July 28, 1977, as amended at 44 FR 55579, Sept. 27, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 525.9  Duration of exemption.

    An exemption may be granted under this part for not more than three 
model years.


<R05>
Sec. 525.10  Renewal of exemption.

    A manufacturer exempted under this part may request renewal of its 
exemption by submitting a petition meeting the requirements of 
Sec. Sec. 525.6 and 525.7.


<R05>
Sec. 525.11  Termination of exemption; amendment of alternative average 
fuel economy standard.

    (a) Any exemption granted under this part for an affected model year 
does not apply to a manufacturer that is ineligible under Sec. 525.5 
for an exemption in that model year.
    (b) The administrator may initiate rulemaking either on his own 
motion or on petition by an interested person to terminate an exemption 
granted under this part or to amend an alternative average fuel economy 
standard established under this part.
    (c) Any interested persons may petition the Administrator to 
terminate an exemption granted under this part or to amend an 
alternative average fuel economy standard established under this part.


<R05>
Sec. 525.12  Public inspection of information.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b), any person may inspect 
available information relevant to a petition under this part, including 
the petition and any supporting data, memoranda of informal meetings 
with the petitioner or any other interested persons, and the notices 
regarding the petition, in the Docket Section of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration. Any person may obtain copies of the 
information available for inspection under this paragraph in accordance 
with Part 7 of the regulations of the Office of the Secretary of 
Transportation (49 CFR part 7).
    (b) Except for the release of confidential information authorized by 
section 505 of the Act and part 512 of this chapter, information made 
available for public inspection does not include information for which 
confidentiality is requested under Sec. 525.6(g) and is granted in 
accordance with Part 512 and sections 502 and 505 of the Act and section 
552(b) of title 5 of the U.S.C.

[46 FR 2063, Jan. 8, 1981]


<R03>
PART 526_PETITIONS AND PLANS FOR RELIEF UNDER THE AUTOMOBILE FUEL EFFICIENCY 
ACT OF 1980--Table of Contents




Sec.
526.1 General provisions.
526.2 U.S. production by foreign manufacturer.
526.3 Transfer of vehicle from non-domestic to domestic fleet.
526.4 [Reserved]
526.5 Earning offsetting monetary credits in future model years.

    Authority: 15 U.S.C. 2002 and 2003; delegation of authority at 49 
CFR 1.50.

    Source: 47 FR 7248, Feb. 18, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 526.1  General provisions.

    (a) Applicability. These regulations apply to petitions and plans 
submitted under the Automobile Fuel Efficiency Act of 1980, Pub. L. 96-
425, as codified in Title V of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost 
Savings Act, 15 U.S.C. 2001 et seq.

[[Page 91]]

    (b) Address. Each petition and plan submitted under the applicable 
provisions of sections 502 and 503 of the Motor Vehicle Information and 
Cost Savings Act must be addressed to the Administrator, National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., 
Washington DC 20590.
    (c) Authority and scope of relief. Each petition or plan must 
specify the specific provision of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost 
Savings Act under which relief is being sought. The petition or plan 
must also specify the model years for which relief is being sought.

[47 FR 7248, Feb. 18, 1982, as amended at 59 FR 25576, May 17, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 526.2  U.S. production by foreign manufacturer.

    Each petition filed under section 503(b)(3) of the Motor Vehicle 
Information and Cost Savings Act must contain the following information:
    (a) For each model type (as defined by the Environmental Protection 
Agency in 40 CFR part 600) planned by the petitioner to be sold in the 
United States (regardless of place of manufacture), and for each model 
year beginning with the year before the first one for which relief is 
sought by the petition through the last year covered by the petition, 
the following information based on the petitioner's current product plan 
and the assumption that the petition will be granted:
    (1) A description of the model type, including car line designation, 
engine displacement and type, transmission type, and average fuel 
economy;
    (2) U.S. sales projected for the model type;
    (3) The average percentage of the cost to the manufacturer of the 
model type which is attributable to value added in the United States or 
Canada, determined in accordance with 40 CFR 600.511-80, and the total 
manufacturing cost per vehicle; and
    (4) In the case of model types not offered for sale in the United 
States before the first year for which relief is sought in the petition 
or other model types for which expansions in production capacity are 
planned during the years covered by the petition, information (including 
any marketing surveys) indicating from where the additional sales will 
be captured. If sales are projected to be captured from U.S. 
manufacturers, the petition must provide an estimate of the employment 
impact on those manufacturers of the lost sales and the gain in 
employment for the petitioner and its U.S. suppliers.
    (b) The total number of persons employed in the United States by the 
petitioner, excluding non-motor vehicle industry related employees, for 
each model year covered by the petition and for the model year 
immediately prior to those years.
    (c) A description of how the petitioner's responses to paragraphs 
(a) and (b) of this section would differ if the petition were denied.

[47 FR 7248, Feb. 18, 1982, as amended at 59 FR 25576, May 17, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 526.3  Transfer of vehicle from non-domestic to domestic fleet.

    Each plan submitted under section 503(b)(4) of the Motor Vehicle 
Information and Cost Savings Act must contain the following information:
    (a) For each model year for which relief is sought in the plan and 
for each model type of automobile sought to be included by the submitter 
in its domestic fleet under the plan (i.e., those with at least 50 
percent but less than 75 percent U.S. or Canadian value added), provide 
the following information:
    (1) A description of the model type, including engine type and 
displacement, transmission class, car line designation, and fuel 
economy;
    (2) The projected U.S. sales of the model type;
    (3) The average total manufacturing cost per vehicle for the model 
type;
    (4) The percentage of the cost to the manufacturer attributable to 
value added in the United States or Canada for the model type:
    (b) For each year covered by the plan, a list of individual product 
actions (e.g., change from imported engine to domestically manufactured 
engine) which will increase the domestic content of the affected 
vehicles. For each action, provide the model year in which the action 
will take effect, a description of the nature of the action,

[[Page 92]]

and the percentage change in domestic content resulting from the action.

[47 FR 7248, Feb. 18, 1982, as amended at 59 FR 25576, May 17, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 526.4  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 526.5  Earning offsetting monetary credits in future model years.

    Each plan submitted under section 502(l) of the Motor Vehicle 
Information and Cost Savings Act must contain the following information:
    (a) Projected average fuel economy and production levels for the 
class of automobiles which may fail to comply with a fuel economy 
standard and for any other classes of automobiles from which credits may 
be transferred, for the current model year and for each model year 
thereafter ending with the last year covered by the plan.
    (b) A list and full description of each planned product action 
(e.g., new model, mix change) which will affect the average fuel economy 
of the class of automobiles subject to the credit earning plan, for each 
model year beginning with the current model year and ending with the 
last year covered by the credit earning plan.
    (c) The portion of the petitioner's fleet affected by each product 
action (e.g., all K-cars with 6-cylinder engines) and the number of 
affected vehicles.
    (d) The fuel economy effect of each product action specified under 
paragraph (b) of this section per affected vehicle.

[47 FR 7248, Feb. 18, 1982, as amended at 59 FR 25576, May 17, 1994]


<R03>
PART 529_MANUFACTURERS OF MULTISTAGE AUTOMOBILES--Table of Contents




Sec.
529.1 Scope and purpose.
529.2 Applicability.
529.3 Definitions.
529.4 Requirements for incomplete automobile manufacturers.
529.5 Requirements for intermediate manufacturers.
529.6 Requirements for final-stage manufacturers.

    Authority: Sec. 301, Pub. L. 94-163, 80 Stat. 901 (15 U.S.C. 2001); 
delegation of authority at 41 FR 25015, June 22, 1976.

    Source: 42 FR 38372, July 28, 1977, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 529.1  Scope and purpose.

    This part determines, in cases where more than one person is the 
manufacturer of an automobile, which person is to be treated as the 
manufacturer for purposes of compliance with Title V of the Motor 
Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, as amended (15 U.S.C. 2001 et 
seq.) and rules issued thereunder.


<R05>
Sec. 529.2  Applicability.

    This part applies to incomplete automobile manufacturers, 
intermediate manufacturers, and final-stage manufacturers of automobiles 
that are manufactured in two or more stages.


<R05>
Sec. 529.3  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. (1) The term automobile is used as defined in 
section 501 of the Act and in accordance with the determinations in 49 
CFR part 523.
    (2) The terms manufacture, manufacturer, and fuel economy are used 
as defined in section 501 of the Act.
    (b) Other terms. (1) Act means the Motor Vehicle Information and 
Cost Savings Act (Pub. L. 92-513), as amended by the Energy Policy and 
Conservation Act (Pub. L. 94-163).
    (2) Completed automobile means an automobile that requires no 
further manufacturing operations to perform its intended function, other 
than the addition of readily attachable components, such as mirrors or 
tire and rim assemblies, or minor finishing operations such as painting.
    (3) Curb weight is defined the same as vehicle curb weight in 40 CFR 
part 86.
    (4) Final-stage manufacturer means a person who performs such 
manufacturing operations on an incomplete automobile that it becomes a 
completed automobile.
    (5) Frontal area is used as defined in 40 CFR 86.079-2.
    (6) Incomplete automobile means an assemblage consisting, as a 
minimum, of frame and chassis structure, power train, steering system, 
suspension system, and braking system to the extent that those systems 
are to be part of the completed automobile, that requires further 
manufacturing operations,

[[Page 93]]

other than the addition of readily attachable components, such as 
mirrors or tire and rim assemblies, or minor finishing operations such 
as painting, to become a completed automobile.
    (7) Incomplete automobile manufacturer means a person who 
manufactures an incomplete automobile by assembling components none of 
which, taken separately, constitute a complete automobile.
    (8) Intermediate manufacturer means a person, other than the 
incomplete automobile manufacturer or the final-stage manufacturer, who 
performs manufacturing operations on an incomplete automobile.

[42 FR 38372, July 28, 1977, as amended at 42 FR 39983, Aug. 8, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 529.4  Requirements for incomplete automobile manufacturers.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, Sec. Sec. 
529.5 and 529.6, each incomplete automobile manufacturer is considered, 
with respect to multistage automobiles incorporating its incomplete 
automobiles, the manufacturer of the multistage automobiles for purposes 
of the requirements of Title V and rules issued thereunder.
    (b) Each incomplete automobile manufacturer shall furnish with each 
of its incomplete automobiles, when it is delivered to the subsequent 
manufacturer, (1) a document that contains the following information--
    (i) Name and mailing address of the incomplete automobile 
manufacturer.
    (ii) Month and year during which the incomplete automobile 
manufacturer performed its last manufacturing operation on the 
incomplete automobile.
    (iii) Identification of the incomplete automobile or group of 
incomplete automobiles to which the document applies. The identification 
may be by serial number or otherwise, but it must be sufficient to 
enable a subsequent manufacturer to ascertain positively that the 
document applies to a particular incomplete automobile even if the 
document is not attached to that automobile.
    (iv) Fuel economy values determined by the incomplete automobile 
manufacturer for the automobile in accordance with 40 CFR part 600 and a 
statement that a fuel economy label containing those values has been 
prepared in accordance with Environmental Protection Agency regulation 
by the manufacturer identified in the document.
    (v) Maximum curb weight that may not be exceeded by a subsequent 
manufacturer without invalidating the fuel economy values determined by 
the incomplete automobile manufacturer.
    (vi) Maximum frontal area that may not be exceeded by a subsequent 
manufacturer without invalidating the fuel economy values determined by 
the incomplete automobile manufacturer.
    (vii) Whether the fuel economy values have been computed with the 
road load horsepower set to take into account the presence of air 
conditioning.
    (2) A fuel economy label conforming with 40 CFR part 600.
    (c)(1) The incomplete automobile manufacturer shall either attach 
the document specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section to the 
incomplete automobile in such a manner that it will not be inadvertently 
detached or send that document directly to the subsequent manufacturer 
to which that automobile is delivered.
    (2)(i) If the incomplete automobile manufacturer places the portion 
of the body including the windshield and front seat side windows on the 
incomplete automobile, that manufacturer shall attach the fuel economy 
label specified in paragaph (b)(2) of this section to that automobile in 
accordance with 40 CFR part 600. If the incomplete automobile 
manufacturer does not place that portion of the body on the incomplete 
automobile, that manufacturer shall send that label directly to the 
subsequent manufacturer to which that automobile is delivered.
    (ii) Upon request by an intermediate or final-stage manufacturer for 
a copy of a fuel economy label that is required by paragraph (b)(2) of 
this section to have been prepared by the incomplete automobile 
manufacturer for one of its incomplete automobiles, identified by the 
requesting manufacturer in the same fashion as in the document specified 
in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the incomplete automobile 
manufacturer shall send that manufacturer a copy of the label.

[[Page 94]]


<R05>
Sec. 529.5  Requirements for intermediate manufacturers.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section and in Sec. 
529.6, each intermediate manufacturer whose manufacturing operations on 
an incomplete automobile cause it to exceed the maximum curb weight or 
maximum frontal area set forth in the document furnished it by the 
incomplete automobile manufacturer under Sec. 529.4(c)(1) or by a 
previous intermediate manufacturer under paragraph (b) of this section, 
as appropriate, is considered the manufacturer of the multistage 
automobile manufactured from that automobile for the purpose of the 
requirements of Title V and rules issued thereunder, other than that in 
part 537, Fuel Economy Reports.
    (b) Each intermediate manufacturer of an incomplete automobile shall 
furnish, in the manner specified in Sec. 529.4(c), to the subsequent 
manufacturer of that automobile the document required by Sec. 529.4(b) 
regarding that automobile. If any of the changes in the automobile made 
by the intermediate manufacturer affect the validity of the fuel economy 
values or other statement in the document or any addendum attached to 
the document by a previous manufacturer of the automobile, the 
intermediate manufacturer shall furnish an addendum to the document that 
contains its name and mailing address and an indication of all changes 
that should be made in the document to reflect changes that it made in 
the automobile.
    (c) Each intermediate manufacturer that is required by paragraph (b) 
of this section to furnish an addendum to a document required by Sec. 
529.4(b) shall, within 10 days after completing its manufacturing 
operations, send a copy of the document and addendum to the 
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and to the 
manufacturer previously considered under this part to be the 
manufacturer of the automobile.
    (d)(1) If the intermediate manufacturer's manufacturing operations 
on an incomplete automobile cause it to exceed the maximum curb weight 
or maximum frontal area set forth in the document furnished it by the 
incomplete automobile manufacturer under Sec. 529.4(c)(1) or a previous 
intermediate manufacturer under paragraph (b) of this section, as 
appropriate, that manufacturer shall prepare a new fuel economy label 
for that automobile in accordance with 40 CFR part 600.
    (2) If neither the intermediate manufacturer of an incomplete 
automobile nor any previous manufacturer of that automobile has placed 
the portion of the body including the windshield and front seat side 
windows on that automobile, the intermediate manufacturer shall send the 
fuel economy label furnished it by the incomplete automobile 
manufacturer under Sec. 529.4(c)(2)(i) or a previous intermediate 
manufacturer under paragraph (d)(2) of this section or prepared by it 
under paragraph (d)(1) of this section, as appropriate, directly to the 
subsequent manufacturer to which that automobile is delivered.
    (3) If the intermediate manufacturer places the portion of the body 
including the windshield and front seat side windows on the incomplete 
automobile, that manufacturer shall attach the fuel economy label 
furnished it under Sec. 529.4(c)(i) or paragraph (d)(2) of this section 
or the fuel economy label prepared by it under paragraph (d)(1) of this 
section, as appropriate, to that automobile in accordance with 40 CFR 
part 600.
    (4) The intermediate manufacturer shall attach to the incomplete 
automobile in accordance with 40 CFR part 600 a fuel economy label 
identical to the label that is required under this part to have been 
prepared by the manufacturer considered under this part to be the 
manufacturer of that automobile if:
    (i) The portion of the body including the windshield and front seat 
side windows was added to the incomplete automobile by a previous 
manufacturer;
    (ii) The intermediate manufacturer's manufacturing operations do not 
cause that automobile to exceed either of the maxima specified in 
paragraph (d)(1) of this section; and
    (iii) That label is not on that automobile when received by the 
intermediate manufacturer or is removed from that automobile while it is 
in the possession of that manufacturer.

[[Page 95]]

    (5) Upon request by a subsequent intermediate manufacturer or by a 
final-stage manufacturer for a copy of a fuel economy label prepared by 
the intermediate manufacturer under paragraph (d)(1) of this section for 
one of its incomplete automobiles, identified by the requesting 
manufacturer in the same fashion as in the document specified in Sec. 
529.4(b)(1), the intermediate manufacturer shall send that manufacturer 
a copy of that label.


<R05>
Sec. 529.6  Requirements for final-stage manufacturers.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, each final-
stage manufacturer whose manufacturing operations on an incomplete 
automobile cause the completed automobile to exceed the maximum curb 
weight or maximum frontal area set forth in the document specified in 
Sec. 529.4(b) and furnished it by the incomplete automobile 
manufacturer under Sec. 529.4(c)(1) or by the last intermediate 
manufacturer under Sec. 529.5(b), as appropriate, is considered the 
manufacturer of the completed automobile for the purpose of the 
requirements of Title V and rules issued thereunder, other than those in 
part 537, Fuel Economy Reports.
    (b) Each final-stage manufacturer that becomes the manufacturer of a 
multistage automobile under paragraph (a) of this section shall, within 
10 days after completing its manufacturing operations on that 
automobile, send written notification of its exceeding the curb weight 
or frontal area maximum to the Administrator of the Environmental 
Protection Agency and to the manufacturer previously considered under 
this part to be the manufacturer of the automobile.
    (c)(1) If the final-stage manufacturer becomes the manufacturer of a 
multistage automobile under paragraph (a)(1) of this section, that 
manufacturer shall prepare a new fuel economy label for that automobile 
in accordance with 40 CFR part 600.
    (2) If the final-stage manufacturer places the portion of the body 
including the windshield and front seat side windows on the incomplete 
automobile, that manufacturer shall attach the fuel economy label 
furnished by the incomplete automobile manufacturer under Sec. 
529.4(c)(2) or by the last intermediate manufacturer under Sec. 
529.5(d)(2) or the fuel economy label prepared by the final-stage 
manufacturer under paragraph (c)(1) of this section, as appropriate, to 
that automobile in accordance with 40 CFR part 600.
    (3) The final-stage manufacturer shall attach to the completed 
automobile in accordance with 40 CFR part 600 a fuel economy label 
identical to the label that is required under this part to have been 
prepared by the manufacturer considered under this part to be the 
manufacturer of that automobile if:
    (i) The portion of the body including the windshield and front seat 
side windows was added to the completed automobile by a previous 
manufacturer;
    (ii) The final-stage manufacturer's manufacturing operations do not 
cause that automobile to exceed either of the maxima specified in 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section; and
    (iii) That fuel economy label is not on that automobile when 
received by that manufacturer or is removed from that automobile while 
it is in the possession of that manufacturer.


<R03>
PART 531_PASSENGER AUTOMOBILE AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY STANDARDS--Table of 
Contents




Sec.
531.1 Scope.
531.2 Purpose.
531.3 Applicability.
531.4 Definitions.
531.5 Fuel economy standards.
531.6 Measurement and calculation procedures.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 32902, delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 42 FR 33552, June 30, 1977, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 531.1  Scope.

    This part establishes average fuel economy standards pursuant to 
section 502 (a) and (c) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost 
Savings Act, as amended, for passenger automobiles.

[43 FR 28204, June 29, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 531.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to increase the fuel economy of 
passenger

[[Page 96]]

automobiles by establishing minimum levels of average fuel economy for 
those vehicles.


<R05>
Sec. 531.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to manufacturers of passenger automobiles.


<R05>
Sec. 531.4  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. (1) The terms average fuel economy, 
manufacture, manufacturer, and model year are used as defined in section 
501 of the Act.
    (2) The terms automobile and passenger automobile are used as 
defined in section 501 of the Act and in accordance with the 
determination in part 523 of this chapter.
    (b) Other terms. As used in this part, unless otherwise required by 
the context--
    (1) Act means the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, as 
amended by Pub. L. 94-163.


<R05>
Sec. 531.5  Fuel economy standards.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, each 
manufacturer of passenger automobiles shall comply with the following 
standards in the model years specified:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Average
                                                                 fuel
                                                                economy
                         Model year                            standard
                                                              (miles per
                                                                gallon)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1978........................................................        18.0
1979........................................................        19.0
1980........................................................        20.0
1981........................................................        22.0
1982........................................................        24.0
1983........................................................        26.0
1984........................................................        27.0
1985........................................................        27.5
1986........................................................        26.0
1987........................................................        26.0
1988........................................................        26.0
1989........................................................        26.5
1990 and thereafter.........................................        27.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) The following manufacturers shall comply with the standards 
indicated below for the specified model years:
    (1) Avanti Motor Corporation.

                      Average Fuel Economy Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Miles per
                         Model year                             gallon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1978........................................................        16.1
1979........................................................        14.5
1980........................................................        15.8
1981........................................................        18.2
1982........................................................        18.2
1983........................................................        16.9
1984........................................................        16.9
1985........................................................        16.9
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) Rolls-Royce Motors, Inc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Average
                                                                 fuel
                                                                economy
                         Model year                            standard
                                                              (miles per
                                                                gallon)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1978........................................................        10.7
1979........................................................        10.8
1980........................................................        11.1
1981........................................................        10.7
1982........................................................        10.6
1983........................................................         9.9
1984........................................................        10.0
1985........................................................        10.0
1986........................................................        11.0
1987........................................................        11.2
1988........................................................        11.2
1989........................................................        11.2
1990........................................................        12.7
1991........................................................        12.7
1992........................................................        13.8
1993........................................................        13.8
1994........................................................        13.8
1995........................................................        14.6
1996........................................................        14.6
1997........................................................        15.1
1998........................................................        16.3
1999........................................................        16.3
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (3) Checker Motors Corporation.

                      Average Fuel Economy Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Miles per
                         Model year                             gallon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1978........................................................        17.6
1979........................................................        16.5
1980........................................................        18.5
1981........................................................        18.3
1982........................................................        18.4
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (4) Aston Martin Lagonda, Inc.

                      Average Fuel Economy Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Miles per
                         Model year                             gallon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1979........................................................        11.5
1980........................................................        12.1
1981........................................................        12.2
1982........................................................        12.2
1983........................................................        11.3
1984........................................................        11.3
1985........................................................        11.4
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (5) Excalibur Automobile Corporation.

[[Page 97]]



                      Average Fuel Economy Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Miles per
                         Model year                             gallon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1978........................................................        11.5
1979........................................................        11.5
1980........................................................        16.2
1981........................................................        17.9
1982........................................................        17.9
1983........................................................        16.6
1984........................................................        16.6
1985........................................................        16.6
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (6) Lotus Cars Ltd.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Average
                                                                 fuel
                                                               economy
                         Model year                            standard
                                                              (miles per
                                                               gallon)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1994.......................................................         24.2
1995.......................................................         23.3
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (7) Officine Alfieri Maserati, S.p.A.

                      Average Fuel Economy Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Miles per
                         Model year                             gallon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1978........................................................        12.5
1979........................................................        12.5
1980........................................................         9.5
1984........................................................        17.9
1985........................................................        16.8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (8) Lamborghini of North America.

                      Average Fuel Economy Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Miles per
                         Model year                             gallon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1983........................................................        13.7
1984........................................................        13.7
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (9) LondonCoach Co., Inc.

                      Average Fuel Economy Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Miles per
                         Model year                             gallon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1985........................................................        21.0
1986........................................................        21.0
1987........................................................        21.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (10) Automobili Lamborghini S.p.A./Vector Aeromotive Corporation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Average
                                                                 fuel
                                                                economy
                         Model year                            standard
                                                              (miles per
                                                                gallon)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1995........................................................        12.8
1996........................................................        12.6
1997........................................................        12.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (11) Dutcher Motors, Inc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Average
                                                                 fuel
                                                                economy
                         Model year                            standard
                                                              (miles per
                                                                gallon)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1986........................................................        16.0
1987........................................................        16.0
1988........................................................        16.0
1992........................................................        17.0
1993........................................................        17.0
1994........................................................        17.0
1995........................................................        17.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (12) MedNet, Inc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Average
                                                                 fuel
                                                                economy
                         Model year                            standard
                                                              (miles per
                                                                gallon)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1996........................................................        17.0
1997........................................................        17.0
1998........................................................        17.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (13) Vector Aeromotive Corporation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Average
                                                                 fuel
                                                                economy
                         Model year                            standard
                                                              (miles per
                                                                gallon)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1998........................................................        12.1
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (14) Qvale Automotive Group Srl.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Average
                                                                 fuel
                                                                economy
                         Model year                            standard
                                                              (miles per
                                                                gallon)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000........................................................        22.0
2001........................................................        22.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[43 FR 28204, June 29, 1978, as amended at 46 FR 18721, Mar. 26, 1981; 
47 FR 55685, Dec. 13, 1982; 51 FR 35620, Oct. 6, 1986; 53 FR 39302, Oct. 
6, 1988; 55 FR 12486, Apr. 4, 1990; 55 FR 34018, Aug. 21, 1990; 56 FR 
37479, Aug. 7, 1991; 60 FR 47878, Sept. 15, 1995; 61 FR 4370, Feb. 6, 
1996; 61 FR 67492, Dec. 23, 1996; 62 FR 17101, Apr. 9, 1997; 62 FR 
37154, July 11, 1997; 64 FR 12092, Mar. 11, 1999; 65 FR 58484, Sept. 29, 
2000]


<R05>
Sec. 531.6  Measurement and calculation procedures.

    (a) The average fuel economy of all passenger automobiles that are 
manufactured by a manufacturer in a model year shall be determined in 
accordance with procedures established by the Administrator of the 
Environmental Protection Agency under section 502(a)(1) of the Act and 
set forth in 40 CFR part 600.
    (b) A manufacturer that is eligible to elect a model year in which 
to include value added in Mexico as domestic

[[Page 98]]

value, under subparagraphs (B)(i) and (B)(iii) of 49 U.S.C. 32904(b)(3), 
shall notify the Administrators of the Environmental Protection Agency 
and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration of its election 
not later than 60 days before it begins production of automobiles for 
the model year. If an eligible manufacturer does not elect a model year 
before January 1, 2004, any value added in Mexico will be considered 
domestic value for automobiles manufactured in the next model year 
beginning after January 1, 2004, and in subsequent model years.

[42 FR 33552, June 30, 1977, as amended at 64 FR 27203, May 19, 1999]


<R03>
PART 533_LIGHT TRUCK FUEL ECONOMY STANDARDS--Table of Contents




Sec.
533.1 Scope.
533.2 Purpose.
533.3 Applicability.
533.4 Definitions.
533.5 Requirements.
533.6 Measurement and calculation procedures.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 32902; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.


<R05>
Sec. 533.1  Scope.

    This part establishes average fuel economy standards pursuant to 
section 502(b) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, as 
amended, for light trucks.

[42 FR 13807, Mar. 14, 1977, as amended at 43 FR 12013, Mar. 23, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 533.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to increase the fuel economy of light 
trucks by establishing minimum levels of average fuel economy for those 
vehicles.

[42 FR 13807, Mar. 14, 1977, as amended at 43 FR 12013, Mar. 23, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 533.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to manufacturers of light trucks.

[42 FR 13807, Mar. 14, 1977, as amended at 43 FR 12013, Mar. 23, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 533.4  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. (1) The terms average fuel economy, average 
fuel economy standard, fuel economy, import, manufacture, manufacturer, 
and model year are used as defined in section 501 of the Act.
    (2) The term automobile is used as defined in section 501 of the Act 
and in accordance with the determinations in part 523 of this chapter.
    (3) The term domestically manufactured is used as defined in section 
503(b)(2)(E) of the Act.
    (b) Other terms. As used in this part, unless otherwise required by 
the context--
    (1) Act means the Motor Vehicle Information Cost Savings Act, as 
amended by Pub. L. 94-163.
    (2) Light truck is used in accordance with the determinations in 
part 523 of this chapter.
    Captive import means with respect to a light truck, one which is not 
domestically manufactured but which is imported in the 1980 model year 
or thereafter by a manufacturer whose principal place of business is in 
the United States.
    4-wheel drive, general utility vehicle means a 4-wheel drive, 
general purpose automobile capable of off-highway operation that has a 
wheelbase of not more than 280 centimeters, and that has a body shape 
similar to 1977 Jeep CJ-5 or CJ-7, or the 1977 Toyota Land Cruiser.
    Basic engine means a unique combination of manufacturer, engine 
displacement, number of cylinders, fuel system (as distinguished by 
number of carburetor barrels or use of fuel injection), and catalyst 
usage.
    Limited product line light truck means a light truck manufactured by 
a manufacturer whose light truck fleet is powered exclusively by basic 
engines which are not also used in passenger automobiles.

[42 FR 13807, Mar. 14, 1977, as amended at 43 FR 12013, Mar. 23, 1978; 
43 FR 46547, Oct. 10, 1978; 58 FR 18029, Apr. 7, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 533.5  Requirements.

    (a) Each manufacturer of light trucks shall comply with the 
following average fuel economy standards, expressed in miles per gallon, 
in the model year specified as applicable:

[[Page 99]]



                                                     Table I
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                       2-wheel drive     4-wheel drive   Limited
                                                                       light trucks      light trucks    product
                             Model year                             ------------------------------------   line
                                                                     Captive           Captive            light
                                                                     imports   Other   imports   Other    trucks
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1979...............................................................  .......     17.2  .......     15.8  .......
1980...............................................................     16.0     16.0     14.0     14.0     14.0
1981...............................................................     16.7     16.7     15.0     15.0     14.5
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                                    Table II
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                   Combined      2-wheel drive    4-wheel drive
                                                                   standard       light trucks     light trucks
                          Model year                          --------------------------------------------------
                                                               Captive          Captive          Captive
                                                               imports  Others  imports  Others  imports  Others
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1982.........................................................     17.5    17.5     18.0    18.0     16.0    16.0
1983.........................................................     19.0    19.0     19.5    19.5     17.5    17.5
1984.........................................................     20.0    20.0     20.3    20.3     18.5    18.5
1985.........................................................     19.5    19.5     19.7    19.7     18.9    18.9
1986.........................................................     20.0    20.0     20.5    20.5     19.5    19.5
1987.........................................................     20.5    20.5     21.0    21.0     19.5    19.5
1988.........................................................     20.5    20.5     21.0    21.0     19.5    19.5
1989.........................................................     20.5    20.5     21.5    21.5     19.0    19.0
1990.........................................................     20.0    20.0     20.5    20.5     19.0    19.0
1991.........................................................     20.2    20.2     20.7    20.7     19.1    19.1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                Table III
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       Combined standard
                                                     -------------------
                     Model Year                        Captive
                                                       imports    Other
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1992................................................       20.2     20.2
1993................................................       20.4     20.4
1994................................................       20.5     20.5
1995................................................       20.6     20.6
------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                Table IV
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Model year                            Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1996........................................................        20.7
1997........................................................        20.7
1998........................................................        20.7
1999........................................................        20.7
2000........................................................        20.7
2001........................................................        20.7
2002........................................................        20.7
2003........................................................        20.7
2004........................................................        20.7
2005........................................................        21.0
2006........................................................        21.6
2007........................................................        22.2
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b)(1) For model year 1979, each manufacturer may:
    (i) Combine its 2- and 4-wheel drive light trucks and comply with 
the average fuel economy standard in paragraph (a) of this section for 
2-wheel drive light trucks; or
    (ii) Comply separately with the two standards specified in paragraph 
(a) of this section.
    (2) For model year 1979, the standard specified in paragraph (a) of 
this section for 4-wheel drive light trucks applies only to 4-wheel 
drive general utility vehicles. All other 4-wheel drive light trucks in 
that model year shall be included in the 2-wheel drive category for 
compliance purposes.
    (c) For model years 1980 and 1981, manufacturers of limited product 
line light trucks may:
    (1) Comply with the separate standard for limited product line light 
trucks, or
    (2) Comply with the other standards specified in Sec. 533.5(a), as 
applicable.
    (d) For model years 1982-91, each manufacture may:
    (1) Combine its 2- and 4-wheel drive light trucks (segregating 
captive import and other light trucks) and comply with the combined 
average fuel economy standard specified in paragraph (a) of this 
section; or
    (2) Comply separately with the 2-wheel drive standards and the 4-
wheel drive standards (segregating captive import and other light 
trucks) specified in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (e) For model year 1992, each manufacturer shall comply with the 
average fuel economy standard specified in paragraph (a) of this section 
(segregating captive import and other light trucks).
    (f) For model year 1996 and thereafter, each manufacturer shall 
combine its captive imports with its other light trucks and comply with 
the average fuel economy standard in paragraph (a) of this section.

[43 FR 12014, Mar. 23, 1978, as amended at 45 FR 20878, Mar. 31, 1980; 
47 FR 7250, Feb. 18, 1982; 47 FR 32721, July 29, 1982; 53 FR 11090, Apr. 
5, 1988; 55 FR 12497, Apr. 4, 1990; 56 FR 13784, Apr. 4, 1991; 58 FR 
18029, Apr. 7, 1993; 59 FR 16323, Apr. 6, 1994; 61 FR 14682, Apr. 3, 
1996; 62 FR 15860, Apr. 3, 1997; 63 FR 16701, Apr. 6, 1998; 64 FR 16862, 
Apr. 7, 1999; 65 FR 17778, Apr. 5, 2000; 66 FR 17516, Apr. 2, 2001; 67 
FR 16060, Apr. 4, 2002; 68 FR 16899, Apr. 7, 2003]

[[Page 100]]


<R05>
Sec. 533.6  Measurement and calculation procedures.

    (a) Any reference to a class of light trucks manufactured by a 
manufacturer shall be deemed--
    (1) To include all light trucks in that class manufactured by 
persons who control, are controlled by, or are under common control 
with, such manufacturer; and
    (2) To exclude all light trucks in that class manufactured (within 
the meaning of paragraph (a)(1) of this section) during a model year by 
such manufacturer which are exported prior to the expiration of 30 days 
following the end of such model year.
    (b) The average fuel economy of all nonpassenger automobiles that 
are manufactured by a manufacturer and are subject to Sec. 533.5(b) or 
to Sec. 533.5(c) shall be determined in accordance with procedures 
established by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency 
under section 503(a)(2) of the Act.

[42 FR 13807, Mar. 14, 1977, as amended at 43 FR 12013, Mar. 23, 1978]


<R03>
PART 535_3-YEAR CARRYFOR- WARD AND CARRYBACK OF CREDITS FOR LIGHT TRUCKS
--Table of Contents




Sec.
535.1 Scope.
535.2 Applicability.
535.3 Definitions.
535.4 3-year carryforward and carryback of credits.

    Authority: Sec. 9, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 Stat. 931 (49 U.S.C. 1657); 
sec. 301, Pub. L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 901 (15 U.S.C. 2001); sec. 6, Pub. L. 
96-425, 94 Stat. 1821 (15 U.S.C. 2002); delegation of authority at 49 
CFR 1.50.

    Source: 45 FR 83235, Dec. 19, 1980, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 535.1  Scope.

    This part establishes regulations governing 3-year carryforward and 
carryback of credits for manufacturers of light trucks.


<R05>
Sec. 535.2  Applicability.

    This part applies to manufacturers of light trucks.


<R05>
Sec. 535.3  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. The terms average fuel economy, average fuel 
economy standard, fuel economy, manufacture, manufacturer, and model 
year are used as defined in section 501 of the Act.
    (b) Other terms. (1) Act means the Motor Vehicle Information and 
Cost Savings Act, as amended by Pub. L. 94-163 and 96-425.
    (2) Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration.
    (3) The term light truck is used in accordance with the 
determinations in parts 523 and 533 of this chapter.
    (4) The term class of light trucks is used in accordance with the 
determinations in part 533 of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 535.4  3-year carryforward and carryback of credits

    (a) For purposes of this part, credits under this section shall be 
considered to be available to any manufacturer upon the completion of 
the model year in which such credits are earned under paragraph (b) of 
this section unless under paragraph (c) of this section the credits are 
made available for use at a time prior to the model year in which 
earned.
    (b) Whenever the average fuel economy for a class of light trucks 
manufactured by a manufacturer in a particular model year exceeds an 
applicable average fuel economy standard established in part 533 of this 
chapter, such manufacturer shall be entitled to credit, calculated under 
paragraph (c) of this section, which--
    (1) Shall be available to be taken into account with respect to the 
average fuel economy for the same class of light trucks of that 
manufacturer for any of the three consecutive model years immediately 
prior to the model year in which such manufacturer exceeds such 
applicable average fuel economy standard, and
    (2) To the extent that such credit is not so taken into account 
pursuant to paragraph (b)(1) of this section, shall be available to be 
taken into account with respect to the average fuel economy for the same 
class of light trucks of that manufacturer for any of the three 
consecutive model years immediately following the model year in which 
such

[[Page 101]]

manufacturer exceeds such applicable average fuel economy standard.
    (c)(1) At any time prior to the end of any model year, a 
manufacturer which has reason to believe that its average fuel economy 
for a class of light trucks will be below such applicable standard for 
that model year may submit a plan demonstrating that such manufacturer 
will earn sufficient credits under paragraph (b) of this section within 
the next 3 model years which when taken into account would allow the 
manufacturer to meet that standard for the model year involved.
    (2) Such credits shall be available for the model year involved 
subject to--
    (i) The Administrator approving such plan; and
    (ii) The manufacturer earning credits in accordance with such plan.
    (3) The Administrator approves any such plan unless the 
Administrator finds that it is unlikely that the plan will result in the 
manufacturer earning sufficient credits to allow the manufacturer to 
meet the standard for the model year involved.
    (4) The Administrator provides notice to any manufacturer in any 
case in which the average fuel economy of that manufacturer is below the 
applicable standard under part 533 of this chapter, after taking into 
account credits available under paragraph (b)(1) of this section, and 
affords the manufacturer a reasonable period (of not less than 60 days) 
in which to submit a plan under this paragraph.
    (d) The amount of credit to which a manufacturer is entitled under 
this section shall be equal to--
    (1) The number of tenths of a mile per gallon by which the average 
fuel economy for a class of light trucks manufactured by such 
manufacturer in the model year in which the credit is earned pursuant to 
this section exceeds the applicable average fuel economy standard 
established in part 533 of this chapter, multiplied by
    (2) The total number of light trucks in that class manufactured by 
such manufacturer during such model year.
    (e) The Administrator takes credits into account for any model year 
on the basis of the number of tenths of a mile per gallon by which the 
manufacturer involved was below an applicable average fuel economy 
standard for a class of light trucks for that model year and the volume 
of that class of light trucks manufactured that model year by the 
manufacturer. Credits may not be applied between class of light trucks, 
except as determined by the Administrator to account for changes made in 
the definitions of classes between model years. Credits once taken into 
account for any model year shall not thereafter be available for any 
other model year. Prior to taking any credit into account, the 
Administrator provides the manufacturer involved with written notice and 
reasonable opportunity to comment thereon.


<R03>
PART 537_AUTOMOTIVE FUEL ECONOMY REPORTS--Table of Contents




Sec.
537.1 Scope.
537.2 Purpose.
537.3 Applicability.
537.4 Definitions.
537.5 General requirements for reports.
537.6 General content of reports.
537.7 Pre-model year and mid-model year reports.
537.8 Supplementary reports.
537.9 Determination of fuel economy values and average fuel economy.
537.10 Incorporation by reference.
537.11 Public inspection of information.
537.12 Confidential information.

    Authority: 15 U.S.C. 2005; 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 47 FR 34986, Aug. 12, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 537.1  Scope.

    This part establishes requirements for automobile manufacturers to 
submit reports to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
regarding their efforts to improve automotive fuel economy.


<R05>
Sec. 537.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to obtain information to aid the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in valuating automobile 
manufacturers' plans for complying with average fuel economy standards 
and in preparing an annual review of the average fuel economy standards.

[[Page 102]]


<R05>
Sec. 537.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to automobile manufacturers, except for 
manufacturers subject to an alternate fuel economy standard under 
section 502(c) of the Act.


<R05>
Sec. 537.4  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. (1) The terms average fuel economy standard, 
fuel, manufacture, and model year are used as defined in section 501 of 
the Act.
    (2) The term manufacturer is used as defined in section 501 of the 
Act and in accordance with part 529 of this chapter.
    (3) The terms average fuel economy, fuel economy, and model type are 
used as defined in subpart A of 40 CFR part 600.
    (4) The terms automobile, automobile capable of off-highway 
operation, and passenger automobile are used as defined in section 501 
of the Act and in accordance with the determinations in part 523 of this 
chapter.
    (b) Other terms. (1) The term loaded vehicle weight is used as 
defined in subpart A of 40 CFR part 86.
    (2) The terms axle ratio, base level, body style, car line, combined 
fuel economy, engine code, equivalent test weight, gross vehicle weight, 
inertia weight, transmission class, and vehicle configuration are used 
as defined in subpart A of 40 CFR part 600.
    (3) The term light truck is used as defined in part 523 of this 
chapter and in accordance with determinations in that part.
    (4) The terms approach angle, axle clearance, brakeover angle, cargo 
carrying volume, departure angle, passenger carrying volume, running 
clearance, and temporary living quarters are used as defined in part 523 
of this chapter.
    (5) The term incomplete automobile manufacturer is used as defined 
in part 529 of this chapter.
    (6) As used in this part, unless otherwise required by the context:
    (i) Act means the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act 
(Pub. L. 92-513), as amended by the Energy Policy and Conservation Act 
(Pub. L. 94-163).
    (ii) Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration or the Administrator's delegate.
    (iii) Current model year means:
    (A) In the case of a pre-model year report, the full model year 
immediately following the period during which that report is required by 
Sec. 537.5(b) to be submitted.
    (B) In the case of a mid-model year report, the model year during 
which that report is required by Sec. 537.5(b) to be submitted.
    (iv) Average means a production-weighted harmonic average.
    (v) Total drive ratio means the ratio of an automobile's engine 
rotational speed (in revolutions per minute) to the automobile's forward 
speed (in miles per hour).


<R05>
Sec. 537.5  General requirements for reports.

    (a) For each current model year, each manufacturer shall submit a 
pre-model year report, a mid-model year report, and, as required by 
Sec. 537.8, supplementary reports.
    (b)(1) The pre-model year report required by this part for each 
current model year must be submitted during the month of December (e.g., 
the pre-model year report for the 1983 model year must be submitted 
during December, 1982).
    (2) The mid-model year report required by this part for each current 
model year must be submitted during the month of July (e.g., the mid-
model year report for the 1983 model year must be submitted during July 
1983).
    (3) Each supplementary report must be submitted in accordance with 
Sec. 537.8(c).
    (c) Each report required by this part must:
    (1) Identify the report as a pre-model year report, mid-model year 
report, or supplementary report as appropriate;
    (2) Identify the manufacturer submitting the report;
    (3) State the full name, title, and address of the official 
responsible for preparing the report;
    (4) Be submitted in 10 copies to: Administrator, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 
20590;
    (5) Identify the current model year;
    (6) Be written in the English language; and

[[Page 103]]

    (7)(i) Specify any part of the information or data in the report 
that the manufacturer believes should be withheld from public disclosure 
as trade secret or other confidential business information.
    (ii) With respect to each item of information or data requested by 
the manufacturer to be withheld under 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(4) and 15 U.S.C. 
2005(d)(1), the manufacturer shall:
    (A) Show that the item is within the scope of sections 552(b)(4) and 
2005(d)(1);
    (B) Show that disclosure of the item would result in significant 
competitive damage;
    (C) Specify the period during which the item must be withheld to 
avoid that damage; and
    (D) Show that earlier disclosure would result in that damage.
    (d) Each report required by this part must be based upon all 
information and data available to the manufacturer 30 days before the 
report is submitted to the Administrator.


<R05>
Sec. 537.6  General content of reports.

    (a) Pre-model year and mid-model year reports. Except as provided in 
paragraph (c) of this section, each pre-model year report and the mid-
model year report for each model year must contain the information 
required by Sec. 537.7(a).
    (b) Supplementary report. Each supplementary report must contain the 
information required by Sec. 537.8(b) (1), (2), or (3), as appropriate.
    (c) Exceptions. (1) The pre-model year report is not required to 
contain the information specified in Sec. 537.7 (b), (c) (1) and (2), 
or (c)(4) (xiv) and (xx) if that report is required to be submitted 
before the fifth day after the date by which the manufacturer must 
submit the preliminary determination of its average fuel economy for the 
current model year to the Environmental Protection Agency under 40 CFR 
600.506, when such determination is required. Each manufacturer that 
does not include information under the exception in the immediately 
preceding sentence shall indicate in its report the date by which it 
must submit that preliminary determination.
    (2) The pre-model year report and the mid-model year report 
submitted by an incomplete automobile manufacturer for any model year 
are not required to contain the information specified in Sec. 537.7 
(c)(4) (xv) through (xviii) and (c)(5). The information provided by the 
incomplete automobile manufacturer under Sec. 537.7(c) shall be 
according to base level instead of model type or carline.


<R05>
Sec. 537.7  Pre-model year and mid-model year reports.

    (a)(1) Provide the information required by paragraphs (b) and (c) of 
this section for the manufacturer's passenger automobiles for the 
current model year.
    (2) After providing the information required by paragraph (a)(1) of 
this section provide the information required by paragraphs (b) and (c) 
for this section of each class, as specified in part 533 of this 
chapter, of the manufacturer's light trucks for the current model year.
    (b) Projected average fuel economy. (1) State the projected average 
fuel economy for the manufacturer's automobiles determined in accordance 
with Sec. 537.9 and based upon the fuel economy values and projected 
sales figures provided under paragraph (c)(2) of this section.
    (2) State the projected final average fuel economy that the 
manufacturer anticipates having if changes implemented during the model 
year will cause that average to be different from the average fuel 
economy projected under paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
    (3) State whether the manufacturer believes that the projection it 
provides under paragraph (b)(2) of this section, or if it does not 
provide an average under that paragraph, the projection it provides 
under paragraph (b)(1) of this section sufficiently represents the 
manufacturer's average fuel economy for the current model year for the 
purposes of the Act. In the case of a manufacturer that believes that 
the projection is not sufficiently representative for those purposes, 
state the specific nature of any reason for the insufficiency and the 
specific additional testing or derivation of fuel economy values by 
analytical methods believed by the manufacturer necessary to eliminate 
the insufficiency and any plans of

[[Page 104]]

the manufacturer to undertake that testing or derivation voluntarily and 
submit the resulting data to the Environmental Protection Agency under 
40 CFR 600.509.
    (c) Model type and configuration fuel economy and technical 
information. (1) For each model type of the manufacturer's automobiles, 
provide the information specified in paragraph (c)(2) of this section in 
tabular form. List the model types in order of increasing average 
inertia weight from top to bottom down the left side of the table and 
list the information categories in the order specified in paragraph 
(c)(2) of this section from left to right across the top of the table.
    (2)(i) Combined fuel economy; and
    (ii) Projected sales for the current model year and total sales of 
all model types.
    (3) (Pre-model year report only.) For each vehicle configuration 
whose fuel economy was used to calculate the fuel economy values for a 
model type under paragraph (c)(2) of this section, provide the 
information specified in paragraph (c)(4) of this section either in 
tabular form or as a fixed format computer tape. If a tabular form is 
used then list the vehicle configurations, by model type in the order 
listed under paragraph (c)(2) of this section, from top to bottom down 
the left of the table and list the information categories across the top 
of the table from left to right in the order specified in paragraph 
(c)(4) of this section. Other formats (such as copies of EPA reports) 
which contain all the required information in a readily identifiable 
form are also acceptable. If a computer tape is used, any NHTSA approved 
fixed format structure may be used, but each vehicle configuration 
record should identify the manufacturer, model type, and for light 
trucks the drive wheel code, e.g., 2 or 4 wheel drive. At least the 
information categories specified here and in paragraph (c)(4) of this 
section must be provided, but if preferred the tape may contain any 
additional categories. Each computer tape record must contain all the 
required categories of information to enable direct reading and 
interpretation in the fixed format that was approved. There should be no 
titles, column headings, page numbers, or attachment numbers on the 
tape. It must be possible to directly calculate and produce the tables 
specified in paragraph (c)(1) of this section from the records on this 
tape.
    (4)(i) Loaded vehicle weight;
    (ii) Equivalent test weight;
    (iii) Engine displacement, liters;
    (iv) SAE net rated power, kilowatts;
    (v) SAE net horsepower;
    (vi) Engine code;
    (vii) Fuel system (number of carburetor barrels or, if fuel 
injection is used, so indicate);
    (viii) Emission control system;
    (ix) Transmission class;
    (x) Number of forward speeds;
    (xi) Existence of overdrive (indicate yes or no);
    (xii) Total drive ratio (N/V);
    (xiii) Axle ratio;
    (xiv) Combined fuel economy;
    (xv) Projected sales for the current model year;
    (xvi)(A) In the case of passenger automobiles:
    (1) Interior volume index, determined in accordance with subpart D 
of 40 CFR part 600, and
    (2) Body style;
    (B) In the case of light trucks:
    (1) Passenger-carrying volume, and
    (2) Cargo-carrying volume;
    (xvii) Performance of the function described in Sec. 523.5(a)(5) of 
this chapter (indicate yes or no);
    (xviii) Existence of temporary living quarters (indicate yes or no);
    (xix) Frontal area;
    (xx) Road load power at 50 miles per hour, if determined by the 
manufacturer for purposes other than compliance with this part to differ 
from the road load setting prescribed in 40 CFR 86.177-11(d);
    (xxi) Optional equipment which the manufacturer is required under 40 
CFR parts 86 and 600 to have actually installed on the vehicle 
configuration, or the weight of which must be included in the curb 
weight computation for the vehicle configuration, for fuel economy 
testing purposes.
    (5) For each model type of automobile which is classified as an 
automobile capable of off-highway operation under part 523 of this 
chapter, provide the following data:
    (i) Approach angle;

[[Page 105]]

    (ii) Departure angle;
    (iii) Breakover angle;
    (iv) Axle clearance;
    (v) Minimum running clearance; and
    (vi) Existence of 4-wheel drive (indicate yes or no).
    (6) The fuel economy values provided under paragraphs (c) (2) and 
(4) of this section shall be determined in accordance with Sec. 537.9.

[47 FR 34986, Aug. 12, 1982, as amended at 58 FR 18029, Apr. 7, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 537.8  Supplementary reports.

    (a)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, each 
manufacturer whose most recently submitted semiannual report contained 
an average fuel economy projection under Sec. 537.7(b)(2) or, if no 
average fuel economy was projected under that section, under Sec. 
537.7(b)(1), that was not less than the applicable average fuel economy 
standard and who now projects an average fuel economy which is less than 
the applicable standard shall file a supplementary report containing the 
information specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
    (2) Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, each 
manufacturer that determines that its average fuel economy for the 
current model year as projected under Sec. 537.7(b)(2) or, if no 
average fuel economy was projected under that section, as projected 
under Sec. 537.7(b)(1), is less representative than the manufacturer 
previously reported it to be under Sec. 537.7(b)(3), this section, or 
both, shall file a supplementary report containing the information 
specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section.
    (3) Each manufacturer whose pre-model year report omits any of the 
information specified in Sec. 537.7 (b), (c) (1) and (2), or (c)(4) 
(xvi) and (xxiv) shall file supplementary report containing the 
information specified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
    (b)(1) The supplementary report required by paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section must contain:
    (i) Such revisions of and additions to the information previously 
submitted by the manufacturer under this part regarding the automobiles 
whose projected average fuel economy has decreased as specified in 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section as are necessary--
    (A) To reflect the decrease and its cause;
    (B) To indicate a new projected average fuel economy based upon 
these additional measures.
    (ii) An explanation of the cause of the decrease in average fuel 
economy that led to the manufacturer's having to submit the 
supplementary report required by paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
    (2) The supplementary report required by paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section must contain:
    (i) A statement of the specific nature of and reason for the 
insufficiency in the representativeness of the projected average fuel 
economy;
    (ii) A statement of specific additional testing or derivation of 
fuel economy values by analytical methods believed by the manufacturer 
necessary to eliminate the insufficiency; and
    (iii) A description of any plans of the manufacturer to undertake 
that testing or derivation voluntarily and submit the resulting data to 
the Environmental Protection Agency under 40 CFR 600.509.
    (3) The supplementary report required by paragraph (a)(3) of this 
section must contain:
    (i) All of the information omitted from the pre-model year report 
under Sec. 537.6(c)(2); and
    (ii) Such revisions of and additions to the information submitted by 
the manufacturer in its pre-model year report regarding the automobiles 
produced during the current model year as are necessary to reflect the 
information provided under paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section.
    (c)(1) Each report required by paragraph (a) (1) or (2) of this 
section must be submitted in accordance with Sec. 537.5(c) not more 
than 45 days after the date on which the manufacturer determined, or 
could have, with reasonable diligence, determined that a report is 
required under paragraph (a) (1) or (2) of this section.
    (2) Each report required by paragraph (a)(3) of this section must be 
submitted in accordance with Sec. 537.5(c) not later than five days 
after the day by which the manufacturer is required to submit a 
preliminary calculation of its average fuel economy for the current 
model

[[Page 106]]

year to the Environmental Protection Agency under 40 CFR 600.506.
    (d) A supplementary report is not required to be submitted by the 
manufacturer under paragraph (a) (1) or (2) of this section:
    (1) With respect to information submitted under this part before the 
most recent semiannual report submitted by the manufacturer under this 
part, or
    (2) When the date specified in paragraph (c) of this section occurs:
    (i) During the 60-day period immediately preceding the day by which 
the mid-model year report for the current model year must be submitted 
by the manufacturer under this part, or
    (ii) After the day by which the pre-model year report for the model 
year immediately following the current model year must be submitted by 
the manufacturer under this part.


<R05>
Sec. 537.9  Determination of fuel economy values and average fuel economy.

    (a) Vehicle configuration fuel economy values. (1) For each vehicle 
configuration for which a fuel economy value is required under paragraph 
(c) of this section and has been determined and approved under 40 CFR 
part 600, the manufacturer shall submit that fuel economy value.
    (2) For each vehicle configuration specified in paragraph (a)(1) of 
this section for which a fuel economy value approved under 40 CFR part 
600, does not exist, but for which a fuel economy value determined under 
that part exists, the manufacturer shall submit that fuel economy value.
    (3) For each vehicle configuration specified in paragraph (a)(1) of 
this section for which a fuel economy value has been neither determined 
nor approved under 40 CFR part 600, the manufacturer shall submit a fuel 
economy value based on tests or analyses comparable to those prescribed 
or permitted under 40 CFR part 600 and a description of the test 
procedures or analytical methods used.
    (b) Base level and model type fuel economy values. For each base 
level and model type, the manufacturer shall submit a fuel economy value 
based on the values submitted under paragraph (a) of this section and 
calculated in the same manner as base level and model type fuel economy 
values are calculated for use under subpart F of 40 CFR part 600.
    (c) Average fuel economy. Average fuel economy must be based upon 
fuel economy values calculated under paragraph (b) of this section for 
each model type and must be calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 
600.506, using the configurations specified in 40 CFR 600.506(a)(2), 
except that fuel economy values for running changes and for new base 
levels are required only for those changes made or base levels added 
before the average fuel economy is required to be submitted under this 
part.


<R05>
Sec. 537.10  Incorporation by reference.

    (a) A manufacturer may incorporate by reference in a report required 
by this part any document other than a report, petition, or application, 
or portion thereof submitted to any Federal department or agency more 
than two model years before the current model year.
    (b) A manufacturer that incorporates by references a document not 
previously submitted to the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration shall append that document to the report.
    (c) A manufacturer that incorporates by reference a document shall 
clearly identify the document and, in the case of a document previously 
submitted to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
indicate the date on which and the person by whom the document was 
submitted to this agency.


<R05>
Sec. 537.11  Public inspection of information.

    Except as provided in Sec. 537.12, any person may inspect the 
information and data submitted by a manufacturer under this part in the 
docket section of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. 
Any person may obtain copies of the information available for inspection 
under this section in accordance with the regulations of the Secretary 
of Transportation in part 7 of this title.


<R05>
Sec. 537.12  Confidential information.

    (a) Information made available under Sec. 537.11 for public 
inspection does not

[[Page 107]]

include information for which confidentiality is requested under Sec. 
537.5(c)(7), is granted in accordance with section 505 of the Act and 
section 552(b) of Title 5 of the United States Code and is not 
subsequently released under paragraph (c) of this section in accordance 
with section 505 of the Act.
    (b) Denial of confidential treatment. When the Administrator denies 
a manufacturer's request under Sec. 537.5(c)(7) for confidential 
treatment of information, the Administrator gives the manufacturer 
written notice of the denial and reasons for it. Public disclosure of 
the information is not made until after the ten-day period immediately 
following the giving of the notice.
    (c) Release of confidential information. After giving written notice 
to a manufacturer and allowing ten days, when feasible, for the 
manufacturer to respond, the Administrator may make available for public 
inspection any information submitted under this part that is relevant to 
a proceeding under the Act, including information that was granted 
confidential treatment by the Administrator pursuant to a request by the 
manufacturer under Sec. 537.5(c)(7).


<R03>
PART 538_MANUFACTURING INCENTIVES FOR ALTERNATIVE FUEL VEHICLES--Table 
of Contents




Sec.
538.1 Scope.
538.2 Purpose.
538.3 Applicability.
538.4 Definitions.
538.5 Minimum driving range.
538.6 Measurement of driving range.
538.7 Petitions for reduction of minimum driving range.
538.8 Gallon Equivalents for Gaseous Fuels.
538.9 Dual fuel vehicle incentive.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 32901, 32905, and 32906; delegation of 
authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 61 FR 14511, Apr. 2, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 538.1  Scope.

    This part establishes minimum driving range criteria to aid in 
identifying passenger automobiles that are dual-fueled automobiles. It 
also establishes gallon equivalent measurements for gaseous fuels other 
than natural gas. This part also extends the dual-fuel incentive 
program.

[69 FR 7703, Feb. 19, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 538.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to specify one of the criteria in 49 
U.S.C. chapter 329 ``Automobile Fuel Economy'' for identifying dual-
fueled passenger automobiles that are manufactured in model years 1993 
through 2004. The fuel economy of a qualifying vehicle is calculated in 
a special manner so as to encourage its production as a way of 
facilitating a manufacturer's compliance with the Corporate Average Fuel 
Economy Standards set forth in part 531 of this chapter. The purpose is 
also to establish gallon equivalent measurements for gaseous fuels other 
than natural gas. This part also specifies the model years after 2004 in 
which the fuel economy of dual-fueled automobiles may be calculated 
under the special incentive provisions found in 49 U.S.C. 32905(b) and 
(d).

[69 FR 7703, Feb. 19, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 538.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to manufacturers of automobiles.


<R05>
Sec. 538.4  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. (1) The terms alternative fuel, alternative 
fueled automobile, and dual fueled automobile, are used as defined in 49 
U.S.C. 32901(a).
    (2) The terms automobile and passenger automobile, are used as 
defined in 49 U.S.C. 32901(a), and in accordance with the determinations 
in part 523 of this chapter.
    (3) The term manufacturer is used as defined in 49 U.S.C. 
32901(a)(13), and in accordance with part 529 of this chapter.
    (4) The term model year is used as defined in 49 U.S.C. 
32901(a)(15).
    (b)(1) Other terms. The terms average fuel economy, fuel economy, 
and model type are used as defined in subpart A of 40 CFR part 600.
    (2) The term EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.


<R05>
Sec. 538.5  Minimum driving range.

    (a) The minimum driving range that a passenger automobile must have 
in

[[Page 108]]

order to be treated as a dual fueled automobile pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 
32901(c) is 200 miles when operating on its nominal useable fuel tank 
capacity of the alternative fuel, except when the alternative fuel is 
electricity.
    (b) The minimum driving range that a passenger automobile using 
electricity as an alternative fuel must have in order to be treated as a 
dual fueled automobile pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 32901(c) is 7.5 miles on 
its nominal storage capacity of electricity when operated on the EPA 
urban test cycle and 10.2 miles on its nominal storage capacity of 
electricity when operated on the EPA highway test cycle.

[61 FR 14511, Apr. 2, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 66068, Dec. 1, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 538.6  Measurement of driving range.

    The driving range of a passenger automobile model type not using 
electricity as an alternative fuel is determined by multiplying the 
combined EPA urban/highway fuel economy rating when operating on the 
alternative fuel, by the nominal usable fuel tank capacity (in gallons), 
of the fuel tank containing the alternative fuel. The combined EPA 
urban/highway fuel economy rating is the value determined by the 
procedures established by the Administrator of the EPA under 49 U.S.C. 
32904 and set forth in 40 CFR part 600. The driving range of a passenger 
automobile model type using electricity as an alternative fuel is 
determined by operating the vehicle in the electric-only mode of 
operation through the EPA urban cycle on its nominal storage capacity of 
electricity and the EPA highway cycle on its nominal storage capacity of 
electricity. Passenger automobile types using electricity as an 
alternative fuel that have completed the EPA urban cycle after 
recharging and the EPA highway cycle after recharging shall be deemed to 
have met the minimum range requirement.

[63 FR 66069, Dec. 1, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 538.7  Petitions for reduction of minimum driving range.

    (a) A manufacturer of a model type of passenger automobile capable 
of operating on both electricity and either gasoline or diesel fuel may 
petition for a reduced minimum driving range for that model type in 
accordance with paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section.
    (b) Each petition shall:
    (1) Be addressed to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW, Washington, DC 20590.
    (2) Be submitted not later than the beginning of the first model 
year in which the petitioner seeks to have the model type treated as an 
electric dual fueled automobile.
    (3) Be written in the English language.
    (4) State the full name, address, and title of the official 
responsible for preparing the petition, and the name and address of the 
petitioner.
    (5) Set forth in full data, views, and arguments of the petitioner, 
including the information and data specified in paragraph (c) of this 
section, and the calculations and analyses used to develop that 
information and data. No documents may be incorporated by reference in a 
petition unless the documents are submitted with the petition.
    (6) Specify and segregate any part of the information and data 
submitted under this section that the petitioner wishes to have withheld 
from public disclosure in accordance with part 512 of this chapter.
    (c) Each petitioner shall include the following information in its 
petition:
    (1) Identification of the model type or types for which a lower 
driving range is sought under this section.
    (2) For each model type identified in accordance with paragraph 
(c)(1) of this section:
    (i) The driving range sought for that model type.
    (ii) The number of years for which that driving range is sought.
    (iii) A description of the model type, including car line 
designation, engine displacement and type, electric storage capacity, 
transmission type, and average fuel economy when operating on:
    (A) Electricity; and
    (B) Gasoline or diesel fuel.
    (iv) An explanation of why the petitioner cannot modify the model 
type so as to meet the generally applicable minimum range, including the 
steps taken by the petitioner to improve the

[[Page 109]]

minimum range of the vehicle, as well as additional steps that are 
technologically feasible, but have not been taken. The costs to the 
petitioner of taking these additional steps shall be included.
    (3) A discussion of why granting the petition would be consistent 
with the following factors:
    (i) The purposes of 49 U.S.C. chapter 329, including encouraging the 
development and widespread use of electricity as a transportation fuel 
by consumers, and the production of passenger automobiles capable of 
being operated on both electricity and gasoline/diesel fuel;
    (ii) Consumer acceptability;
    (iii) Economic practicability;
    (iv) Technology;
    (v) Environmental impact;
    (vi) Safety;
    (vii) Driveability; and
    (viii) Performance.
    (d) If a petition is found not to contain the information required 
by this section, the petitioner is informed about the areas of 
insufficiency and advised that the petition will not receive further 
consideration until the required information is received.
    (e) The Administrator may request the petitioner to provide 
information in addition to that required by this section.
    (f) The Administrator publishes in the Federal Register a notice of 
receipt for each petition containing the information required by this 
section. Any interested person may submit written comments regarding the 
petition.
    (g) In reaching a determination on a petition submitted under this 
section, the Administrator takes into account:
    (1) The purposes of 49 U.S.C. chapter 329, including encouraging the 
development and widespread use of alternative fuels as transportation 
fuels by consumers, and the production of alternative fuel powered motor 
vehicles;
    (2) Consumer acceptability;
    (3) Economic practicability;
    (4) Technology;
    (5) Environmental impact;
    (6) Safety;
    (7) Driveability; and
    (8) Performance.
    (h) If the Administrator grants the petition, the petitioner is 
notified in writing, specifying the reduced minimum driving range, and 
specifying the model years for which the reduced driving range applies. 
The Administrator also publishes a notice of the grant of the petition 
in the Federal Register and the reasons for the grant.
    (i) If the Administrator denies the petition, the petitioner is 
notified in writing. The Administrator also publishes a notice of the 
denial of the petition in the Federal Register and the reasons for the 
denial.

[63 FR 66069, Dec. 1, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 538.8  Gallon Equivalents for Gaseous Fuels.

    The gallon equivalent of gaseous fuels, for purposes of calculations 
made under 49 U.S.C. 32905, are listed in Table I:

    Table I--Gallon Equivalent Measurements for Gaseous Fuels per 100
                           Standard Cubic Feet
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Gallon
                         Fuel                              equivalent
                                                           measurement
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Compressed Natural Gas................................         0.823
Liquefied Natural Gas.................................         0.823
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grade HD-5)*.................         0.726
Hydrogen..............................................         0.259
Hythane (Hy5).........................................         0.741
------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Per gallon unit of measure.


<R05>
Sec. 538.9  Dual fuel vehicle incentive.

    The application of 49 U.S.C. 32905(b) and (d) to qualifying dual 
fuel vehicles is extended to the 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008 model years.

[69 FR 7703, Feb. 19, 2004]


<R03>
PART 541_FEDERAL MOTOR VEHICLE THEFT PREVENTION STANDARD--Table of Contents




Sec.
541.1 Scope.
541.2 Purpose.
541.3 Application.
541.4 Definitions.
541.5 Requirements for passenger motor vehicles.
541.6 Requirements for replacement parts.

Appendix A to Part 541--Lines Subject to the Requirements of This 
          Standard
Appendix A-I to Part 541--High-Theft Lines With Antitheft Devices Which

[[Page 110]]

          Are Exempted From the Parts-Marking Requirements of This 
          Standard Pursuant to 49 CFR Part 543
Appendix A-II to Part 541--High-Theft Lines With Antitheft Devices Which 
          Are Exempted in-Part From the Parts-Marking Requirements of 
          This Standard Pursuant to 49 CFR Part 543
Appendix B to Part 541--Passenger Motor Vehicle Lines (Except Light-Duty 
          Trucks) With Theft Rates Below the 1990/91 Median Theft Rate, 
          Subject to the Requirements of This Standard
Appendix C to Part 541--Criteria for Selecting Lines Likely to Have High 
          Theft Rates

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 33101, 33102, 33103, 33105; delegation of 
authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 50 FR 43190, Oct. 24, 1985, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 541.1  Scope.

    This standard specifies performance requirements for identifying 
numbers or symbols to be placed on major parts of certain passenger 
motor vehicles.


<R05>
Sec. 541.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this standard is to reduce the incidence of motor 
vehicle thefts by facilitating the tracing and recovery of parts from 
stolen vehicles.


<R05>
Sec. 541.3  Application.

    This standard applies to the following:
    (a) Passenger motor vehicle parts identified in Sec. 541.5(a) that 
are present:
    (1) In the passenger motor vehicle lines listed in appendix A of 
this part;
    (2) Beginning with model year 1997, in passenger motor vehicle lines 
which NHTSA has finally determined, pursuant to 49 CFR part 542, to be 
high theft based on the 1990/91 median theft rate; and
    (3) Beginning with model year 1997, in passenger motor vehicle lines 
listed in appendix B of this part.
    (b) Replacement parts for passenger motor vehicle lines described in 
Sec. 541.3(a) (1) and (2), if the part is identified in Sec. 541.5(a).

[59 FR 64168, Dec. 13, 1994]

    Effective Date Notes: 1. At 69 FR 17967, Apr. 6, 2004, Sec. 541.3 
was revised, effective Sept. 1, 2006. For the convenience of the user, 
the revised text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 541.3  Application.

    This standard applies to the following:
    (a) Passenger motor vehicle parts identified in Sec. 541.5(a) that 
are present:
    (1) In passenger cars and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
gross vehicle weight rating of 6,000 pounds or less; and
    (2) In light duty trucks that NHTSA has finally determined pursuant 
to 49 CFR part 542, to be high theft based on the 1990/91 median theft 
rate and listed in appendix A of this part.
    (3) In light duty trucks that NHTSA has finally determined pursuant 
to 49 CFR part 542, to have a majority of major parts interchangeable 
with those of a passenger motor vehicle identified in paragraphs (a)(1) 
and (2) of this section and listed in appendix B of this part.
    (b) Replacement parts for passenger motor vehicles described in 
paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) of this section, if the part is identified in 
Sec. 541.5(a).
    (c) This standard does not apply to passenger motor vehicle parts 
that are present in passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles, and 
light duty trucks manufactured by a motor vehicle manufacturer that 
manufactures fewer than 5,000 vehicles for sale in the United States 
each year.
    2. At 69 FR 34612, June 22, 2004, Sec. 541.3(a) as it appeared at 
69 FR 17967, Apr. 6, 2004 was corrected, effective Sept. 1, 2006. For 
the convenience of the user, the corrected text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 541.3  Application.

                                * * * * *

    (a) Passenger motor vehicle parts identified in Sec. 541.5(a) that 
are present:
    (1)(i) In passenger cars; and
    (ii) multipurpose passenger vehicles with a gross vehicle weight 
rating of 6,000 pounds or less; and
    (2) In light duty trucks with a gross vehicle weight rating of 6,000 
pounds or less, that NHTSA has finally determined pursuant to 49 CFR 
part 542, to be high theft based on the 1990/91 median theft rate and 
listed in appendix A of this part; and
    (3) In light duty trucks with a gross vehicle weight rating of 6,000 
pounds or less, that NHTSA has finally determined pursuant to 49 CFR 
part 542, to have a majority of major parts interchangeable with those 
of a passenger motor vehicle identified in Sec. 541.3(a)(1) and (2) and 
listed in appendix B of this part.

                                * * * * *

[[Page 111]]


<R05>
Sec. 541.4  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. All terms defined in 49 U.S.C. chapter 331 are 
used in accordance with their statutory meanings unless otherwise 
defined in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) Other definitions. (1) Interior surface means, with respect to a 
vehicle part, a surface that is not directly exposed to sun and 
precipitation.
    (2) Light-duty truck (LDT) means a motor vehicle, with motive power, 
except a trailer, designed primarily for the transportation of property 
or special purpose equipment, that is rated at 6,000 pounds gross 
vehicle weight or less.
    (3) Line means a name which a manufacturer applies to a group of 
motor vehicles of the same make which have the same body or chassis, or 
otherwise are similar in construction or design. A ``line'' may, for 
example, include 2-door, 4-door, station wagon, and hatchback vehicles 
of the same make.
    (4) 1990/91 median theft rate means 3.5826 thefts per thousand 
vehicles produced.
    (5) Multipurpose passenger vehicle (MPV) means a passenger motor 
vehicle which is constructed either on a truck chassis or with special 
features for occasional off-road operation and which is rated at 6,000 
pounds gross vehicle weight or less.
    (6) Passenger car is used as defined in Sec. 571.3 of this chapter.
    (7) VIN means the vehicle identification number required by part 565 
of this chapter.

[59 FR 64168, Dec. 13, 1994, as amended at 61 FR 29033, June 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 541.5  Requirements for passenger motor vehicles.

    (a) Each passenger motor vehicle subject to this standard must have 
an identifying number affixed or inscribed on each of the parts 
specified in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(18) inclusive, if the part is 
present on the passenger motor vehicle. In the case of passenger motor 
vehicles not originally manufactured to comply with applicable U.S. 
vehicle safety and bumper standards, each such motor vehicle subject to 
this standard must have an identifying number inscribed in a manner 
which conforms to paragraph (d)(2) of this section, on each of the parts 
specified in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(18), inclusive, if the part 
is present on the motor vehicle.

(1) Engine.
(2) Transmission.
(3) Right front fender.
(4) Left front fender.
(5) Hood.
(6) Right front door.
(7) Left front door.
(8) Right rear door.
(9) Left rear door.
(10) Sliding or cargo door(s).
(11) Front bumper.
(12) Rear bumper.
(13) Right rear quarter panel (passenger cars).
(14) Left rear quarter panel (passenger cars).
(15) Right-side assembly (MPVs).
(16) Left-side assembly (MPVs).
(17) Pickup box, and/or cargo box (LDTs).
(18) Rear door(s) (both doors in case of double doors), decklid, 
    tailgate, or hatchback (whichever is present).

    (b)(1) Except as provided in paragraphs (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this 
section, the number required to be inscribed or affixed by paragraph (a) 
shall be the VIN of the passenger motor vehicle.
    (2) In place of the VIN, manufacturers who were marking engines and/
or transmissions with a VIN derivative consisting of at least the last 
eight characters of the VIN on October 24, 1984, may continue to mark 
engines and/or transmissions with such VIN derivative.
    (3) In the case of passenger motor vehicles not originally 
manufactured to comply with U.S. vehicle safety and bumper standards, 
the number required to be inscribed by paragraph (a) of this section 
shall be the original vehicle identification number assigned to the 
motor vehicle by its original manufacturer in the country where the 
motor vehicle was originally produced or assembled.
    (c) The characteristics of the number required to be affixed or 
inscribed by paragraph (a) of this section shall satisfy the size and 
style requirements set forth for vehicle certification labels in Sec. 
567.4(g) of this chapter.

[[Page 112]]

    (d) The number required by paragraph (a) of this section must be 
affixed by means that comply with paragraph (d)(1) of this section or 
inscribed by means that comply with paragraph (d)(2) of this section.
    (1) Labels. (i) The number must be printed indelibly on a label, and 
the label must be permanently affixed to the passenger motor vehicle's 
part.
    (ii) The number must be placed on each part specified in paragraph 
(a) of this section in a location such that the number is, if 
practicable, on an interior surface of the part as installed on the 
vehicle and in a location where it:
    (A) Will not be damaged by the use of any tools necessary to 
install, adjust, or remove the part and any adjoining parts, or any 
portions thereof;
    (B) Is on a portion of the part not likely to be damaged in a 
collision; and
    (C) Will not be damaged or obscured during normal dealer preparation 
operations (including rustproofing and undercoating).
    (iii) The number must be placed on each part specified in paragraph 
(a) of this section in a location that is visible without further 
disassembly once the part has been removed from the vehicle.
    (iv) The number must be placed entirely within the target area 
specified by the original manufacturer for that part, pursuant to 
paragraph (e) of this section, on each part specified in paragraph (a) 
of this section.
    (v) Removal of the label must--
    (A) Cause the label to self-destruct by tearing or rendering the 
number on the label illegible, and
    (B) Discernibly alter the appearance of that area of the part where 
the label was affixed by leaving residual parts of the label or adhesive 
in that area, so that investigators will have evidence that a label was 
originally present.
    (vi) Alteration of the number on the label must leave traces of the 
original number or otherwise visibly alter the appearance of the label 
material.
    (vii) The label and the number shall be resistant to counterfeiting.
    (viii) The logo or some other unique identifier of the vehicle 
manufacturer must be placed in the material of the label in a manner 
such that alteration or removal of the logo visibly alters the 
appearance of the label.
    (2) Other means of identification. (i) Removal or alteration of any 
portion of the number must visibly alter the appearance of the section 
of the vehicle part on which the identification is marked.
    (ii) The number must be placed on each part specified in paragraph 
(a) of this section in a location that is visible without further 
disassembly once the part has been removed from the vehicle.
    (iii) The number must be placed entirely within the target area 
specified by the original manufacturer for that part, pursuant to 
paragraph (e) of this section, on each part specified in paragraph (a) 
of this section.
    (e) Target areas. (1) Each manufacturer that is the original 
producer who installs or assembles the covered major parts on a line 
shall designate a target area for the identifying numbers to be marked 
on each part specified in paragraph (a) of this section for each of its 
lines subject to this standard. The target area shall not exceed 50 
percent of the surface area on the surface of the part on which the 
target area is located.
    (2) Each manufacturer subject to paragraph (e)(1) of this section 
shall, not later than 30 days before the line is introduced into 
commerce, inform NHTSA in writing of the target areas designated for 
each line listed in appendix A. The information should be submitted to: 
Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 
Seventh Street, SW, Washington, DC 20590.
    (3) The target areas designated by the original vehicle manufacturer 
for a part on a line shall be maintained for the duration of the 
production of such line, unless a restyling of the part makes it no 
longer practicable to mark the part within the original target area. If 
there is such a restyling, the original vehicle manufacturer shall 
inform NHTSA of that fact and the new target area, in accordance with 
the requirements of paragraph (e)(2) of this section.

[59 FR 64168, Dec. 13, 1994]

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 17967, Apr. 6, 2004, Sec. 541.5 was 
amended by revising the

[[Page 113]]

first sentence of paragraph (e)(2), effective Sept. 1, 2006. For the 
convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 541.5  Requirements for passenger motor vehicles.

                                * * * * *

    (e) * * *
    (2) Each manufacturer subject to paragraph (e)(1) of this section 
shall, not later than 30 days before the line is introduced into 
commerce, inform NHTSA in writing of the target areas designated for 
each line subject to this standard. * * *

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 541.6  Requirements for replacement parts.

    (a) Each replacement part for a part specified in Sec. 541.5(a) 
must have the registered trademark of the manufacturer of the 
replacement part, or some other unique identifier if the manufacturer 
does not have a registered trademark, and the letter ``R'' affixed or 
inscribed on such replacement part by means that comply with Sec. 
541.5(d), except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section. In the 
case of replacement parts subject to the marking requirements of this 
section, which were not originally manufactured for sale in the United 
States, the importer of the part shall inscribe its registered 
trademark, or some other unique identifier if the importer does not have 
a registered trademark, and the letter ``R'' on the part by means that 
comply with Sec. 541.5(d)(2), except as provided in paragraph (d) of 
this section.
    (b) A replacement part subject to paragraph (a) of this section 
shall not be marked pursuant to Sec. 541.5.
    (c) The trademark and the letter ``R'' required by paragraph (a) of 
this section must be at least one centimeter high.
    (d) The trademark and the letter ``R'' required by paragraph (a) of 
this section must be placed entirely within the target area specified by 
the vehicle manufacturer, pursuant to paragraph (e) of this section.
    (e) Target areas. (1) Each manufacturer that is the original 
producer or assembler of the vehicle for which the replacement part is 
designed shall designate a target area for the identifying symbols to be 
marked on each replacement part subject to the requirements of paragraph 
(a) of this section. Such target areas shall not exceed 25 percent of 
the surface area of the surface on which the replacement part marking 
will appear.
    (2) The boundaries of the target area designated under paragraph 
(e)(1) of this section shall be at least 10 centimeters at all points 
from the nearest boundaries of the target area designated for that part 
under Sec. 541.5(e) of this part.
    (3) Each manufacturer subject to paragraph (e)(1) of this section 
shall inform NHTSA in writing of the target areas designated for each 
replacement part subject to paragraph (a) of this section, at the same 
time as it informs the agency of the target area designated for the 
original equipment parts of the line, pursuant to Sec. 541.5(e)(2) of 
this part. The information should be submitted to: Administrator, 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., 
Washington, DC 20590.
    (4) The target area designated by the original vehicle manufacturer 
for the parts subject to the requirements of paragraph (a) of this 
section shall be maintained for the duration of the production of such 
replacement part, unless a restyling of the part makes it no longer 
practicable to mark the part within the original target area. If there 
is such a restyling, the original vehicle manufacturer shall inform 
NHTSA of that fact and the new target area, in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph (e)(3) of this section.
    (f) Each replacement part must bear the symbol ``DOT'' in letters at 
least one centimeter high within 5 centimeters of the trademark and of 
the letter ``R'', and entirely within the target area specified under 
paragraph (d) of this section. The symbol ``DOT'' constitutes the 
manufacturer's certification that the replacement part conforms to the 
applicable theft prevention standard, and shall be inscribed or affixed 
by means that comply with paragraph (a) of this section. In the case of 
replacement parts subject to the requirements of paragraph (a) of this 
section, which were not originally manufactured for sale in the United

[[Page 114]]

States, the importer shall inscribe the ``DOT'' symbol before the part 
is imported into the United States.

   Appendix A to Part 541--Lines Subject to the Requirements of This 
                                Standard

------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Manufacturer                         Subject lines
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALFA ROMEO........................  Milano 161
                                    164
BMW...............................  Z3
                                    Z8
CONSULIER.........................  Consulier GTP
DAEWOO............................  Korando
                                    Musso (MPV)
                                    Nubira (2000-2002)
DAIMLERCHRYSLER...................  Chrysler Cirrus
                                    Chrysler Fifth Avenue/Newport
                                    Chrysler Laser
                                    Chrysler LeBaron/Town & Country
                                    Chrysler LeBaron GTS
                                    Chrysler's TC
                                    Chrysler New Yorker Fifth Avenue
                                    Chrysler Sebring
                                    Dodge 600
                                    Dodge Aries
                                    Dodge Avenger
                                    Dodge Colt
                                    Dodge Daytona
                                    Dodge Diplomat
                                    Dodge Lancer
                                    Dodge Neon
                                    Dodge Shadow
                                    Dodge Stratus
                                    Dodge Stealth
                                    Eagle Summit
                                    Eagle Talon
                                    Jeep Cherokee (MPV)
                                    Jeep Liberty (MPV)
                                    Jeep Wrangler (MPV)
                                    Plymouth Caravelle
                                    Plymouth Colt
                                    Plymouth Laser
                                    Plymouth Gran Fury
                                    Plymouth Neon
                                    Plymouth Reliant
                                    Plymouth Sundance
                                    Plymouth Breeze
FERRARI...........................  Mondial 8
                                    328
FORD..............................  Ford Aspire
                                    Ford Escort
                                    Ford Probe
                                    Ford Thunderbird
                                    Lincoln Continental
                                    Lincoln Mark
                                    Mercury Capri
                                    Mercury Cougar
                                    Merkur Scorpio
                                    Merkur XR4Ti
GENERAL MOTORS....................  Buick Electra
                                    Buick Reatta
                                    Buick Skylark
                                    Chevrolet Nova
                                    Chevrolet Blazer (MPV)
                                    Chevrolet Prizm
                                    Chevrolet S-10 Pickup
                                    Geo Storm
                                    Chevrolet Tracker (MPV)
                                    GMC Jimmy (MPV)
                                    GMC Sonoma Pickup
                                    Oldsmobile Achieva (1997-1998)
                                    Oldsmobile Bravada
                                    Oldsmobile Cutlass
                                    Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme (1988-
                                     1997)
                                    Oldsmobile Intrigue
                                    Pontiac Fiero
                                    Saturn Sports Coupe (1991-2002)
HONDA.............................  Accord
                                    CRV (MPV)
                                    Odyssey (MPV)
                                    Passport
                                    Pilot (MPV)
                                    Prelude
                                    S2000
                                    Acura Integra
                                    Acura MDX (MPV)
                                    Acura RSX
HYUNDAI...........................  Accent
                                    Sonata
                                    Tiburon
ISUZU.............................  Amigo
                                    Impulse
                                    Rodeo
                                    Rodeo Sport
                                    Stylus
                                    Trooper/Trooper II
                                    VehiCross (MPV)
JAGUAR............................  XJ
KIA MOTORS........................  Optima
                                    Rio
                                    Sephia (1998-2002)
                                    Spectra
LOTUS.............................  Elan
MASERATI..........................  Biturbo
                                    Quattroporte
                                    228
MAZDA.............................  626 (1987-2002)
                                    MX-3
                                    MX-5 Miata
                                    MX-6
MERCEDES-BENZ.....................  190 D
                                    190 E
                                    260E (1987-1989)
                                    300 SE (1988-1991)
                                    300 TD (1987)
                                    300 SDL (1987)
                                    300 SEL
                                    350 SDL (1990-1991)
                                    420 SEL (1987-1991)
                                    560 SEL (1987-1991)
                                    560 SEC (1987-1991)
                                    560 SL
MITSUBISHI........................  Cordia
                                    Eclipse
                                    Lancer
                                    Mirage
                                    Montero (MPV)
                                    Montero Sport (MPV)
                                    Tredia
                                    3000GT
NISSAN............................  240SX
                                    Sentra/200SX
                                    Xterra
PEUGEOT...........................  405
PORSCHE...........................  924S
SUBARU............................  XT
                                    SVX
                                    Baja

[[Page 115]]

 
                                    Forester
                                    Legacy Outback (1995-2004)
SUZUKI............................  Aerio
                                    X90 (MPV)
                                    Sidekick (1997-1998)
                                    Vitara/Grand Vitara (MPV)
TOYOTA............................  Toyota 4-Runner (MPV)
                                    Toyota Avalon
                                    Toyota Camry
                                    Toyota Celica
                                    Toyota Corolla/Corolla Sport
                                    Toyota Echo
                                    Toyota Highlander (MPV)
                                    Toyota Matrix (MPV)
                                    Toyota MR2
                                    Toyota MR2 Spyder
                                    Toyota Prius
                                    Toyota RAV4 (MPV)
                                    Toyota Sienna (MPV)
                                    Toyota Tercel
                                    Lexus IS300
                                    Lexus LX470 (MPV)
                                    Lexus RX300 (MPV)
                                    Scion xA
                                    Scion xB
VOLKSWAGEN........................  Audi Quattro
                                    Volkswagen Scirocco
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[69 FR 9965, Mar. 3, 2004]

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 17967, Apr. 6, 2004, appendix A to 
part 541 was revised, effective Sept. 1, 2006. For the convenience of 
the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:

     Appendix A to Part 541--Light Duty Truck Lines Subject to the 
                      Requirements of This Standard

------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Manufacturer                         Subject lines
------------------------------------------------------------------------
General Motors............................  Chevrolet S-10 Pickup.
                                            GMC Sonoma Pickup.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Appendix A-I to Part 541--High-Theft Lines With Antitheft Devices Which 
   Are Exempted From the Parts-Marking Requirements of This Standard 
                       Pursuant to 49 CFR Part 543

------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Manufacturer                         Subject lines
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AUSTIN ROVER......................  Sterling
BMW...............................  MINI
                                    X5
                                    Z4
                                    3 Car Line
                                    5 Car Line
                                    6 Car Line \1\
                                    7 Car Line
                                    8 Car Line
DAIMLERCHRYSLER...................  Jeep Grand Cherokee
                                    Chrysler Conquest
                                    Chrysler Imperial
                                    Chrysler Town and Country MPV \2\
FORD..............................  Lincoln Town Car
                                    Mustang
                                    Mercury Sable (2001-2004)
                                    Mercury Grand Marquis
                                    Taurus (2000-2004)
GENERAL MOTORS....................  Buick LeSabre
                                    Buick Park Avenue
                                    Buick Regal/Century
                                    Buick Riviera
                                    Cadillac Allante
                                    Cadillac Deville
                                    Cadillac Seville
                                    Chevrolet Cavalier
                                    Chevrolet Classic \3\
                                    Chevrolet Corvette
                                    Chevrolet Impala/Monte Carlo
                                    Chevrolet Lumina/Monte Carlo (1996-
                                     1999)
                                    Chevrolet Malibu (2001-2003)
                                    Chevrolet Venture
                                    Oldsmobile Alero
                                    Oldsmobile Aurora
                                    Oldsmobile Toronado
                                    Pontiac Bonneville
                                    Pontiac Grand Am
                                    Pontiac Grand Prix
                                    Pontiac Sunfire
HONDA.............................  Acura CL
                                    Acura Legend (1991-1996)
                                    Acura NSX
                                    Acura RL
                                    Acura SLX
                                    Acura TL
                                    Acura Vigor (1992-1995)
ISUZU.............................  Axiom
                                    Impulse (1987-1991)
JAGUAR............................  XK
MAZDA.............................  6
                                    929
                                    RX-7
                                    Millenia
MERCEDES-BENZ.....................  124 Car Line (the models within this
                                     line are):
                                    260E
                                    300D
                                    300E
                                    300CE
                                    300TE
                                    400E
                                    500E
                                    129 Car Line (1993-2002)--the models
                                     within this line are:
                                    300SL
                                    500SL
                                    600SL
                                    SL320
                                    SL500
                                    SL600
                                    202 Car Line (the models within this
                                     line are):
                                    C220

[[Page 116]]

 
                                    C230
                                    C280
                                    C36
                                    C43
MITSUBISHI........................  Galant
                                    Starion
                                    Diamante
NISSAN............................  Nissan Altima
                                    Nissan Maxima
                                    Nissan Pathfinder
                                    Nissan 300ZX
                                    Infiniti G35
                                    Infiniti I30
                                    Infiniti J30
                                    Infiniti M30
                                    Infiniti M45
                                    Infiniti QX4
                                    Infiniti Q45
PORSCHE...........................  911
                                    928
                                    968
                                    986 Boxster
SAAB..............................  9-3
                                    900 (1994-1998)
                                    9000 (1989-1998)
TOYOTA............................  Toyota Supra
                                    Toyota Cressida
                                    Lexus ES
                                    Lexus GS
                                    Lexus LS
                                    Lexus SC
VOLKSWAGEN........................  Audi 5000S
                                    Audi 100/A6
                                    Audi 200/S4/S6
                                    Audi Allroad Quattro (MPV)
                                    Audi Cabriolet
                                    Volkswagen Cabrio
                                    Volkswagen Corrado
                                    Volkswagen Golf/GTI
                                    Volkswagen Jetta/Jetta III
                                    Volkswagen Passat
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Line exempted in full beginning with MY 2004.
\2\ Line exempted in full beginning with MY 2005.
\3\ The Chevrolet Malibu (produced from MY 1997-2003) was renamed the
  Chevrolet Classic beginning with MY 2004.


[69 FR 9965, Mar. 3, 2004]

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 17967, Apr. 6, 2004, appendix A-I to 
part 541 was amended by revising the title, effective Sept. 1, 2006. For 
the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:

    Appendix A-I to Part 541--Lines with Antitheft Devices Which are 
 Exempted From the Parts-Marking Requirements of This Standard Pursuant 
                           to 49 CFR Part 543



Appendix A-II to Part 541--High-Theft Lines With Antitheft Devices Which 
    Are Exempted In-Part From the Parts-Marking Requirements of This 
                  Standard Pursuant to 49 CFR Part 543

------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Manufacturers            Subject lines      Parts to be marked
------------------------------------------------------------------------
General Motors................  Cadillac Eldorado  Engine, Transmission.
                                Cadillac Concours  Engine, Transmission.
                                Oldsmobile Ninety- Engine, Transmission.
                                 Eight.
                                Pontiac Firebird.  Engine, Transmission.
                                Chevrolet Camaro.  Engine, Transmission.
                                Oldsmobile Eighty- Engine, Transmission.
                                 Eight.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[66 FR 40625, Aug. 3, 2001]

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 17967, Apr. 6, 2004, appendix A-II to 
part 541 was amended by revising the title, effective Sept. 1, 2006. For 
the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:

   Appendix A-II to Part 541--Lines with Antitheft Devices which are 
 Exempted in-Part from the Parts-Marking Requirements of this Standard 
                       Pursuant to 49 CFR Part 543



[[Page 117]]

Appendix B to Part 541--Passenger Motor Vehicle Lines (Except Light-Duty 
Trucks) With Theft Rates Below the 1990/91 Median Theft Rate, Subject to 
                    the Requirements of This Standard

------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Manufacturer                        Subject lines
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ford.....................................  Crown Victoria.
General Motors...........................  Chevrolet Astro (MPV).
                                           GMC Safari (MPV).
Honda....................................  Civic.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[66 FR 40625, Aug. 3, 2001]

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 17967, Apr. 6, 2004, appendix B to 
part 541 was revised, effective Sept. 1, 2006. For the convenience of 
the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:

 Appendix B to Part 541--Light Duty Truck Lines With Theft Rates below 
   the 1990/91 Median Theft Rate, Subject to the Requirements of This 
                                Standard

------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Manufacturer                         Subject lines
------------------------------------------------------------------------
None
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Appendix C to Part 541--Criteria for Selecting Lines Likely To Have High 
                               Theft Rates

                                  Scope

    These criteria specify the factors the Administrator will take into 
account in determining whether a new line is likely to have a high theft 
rate, and, therefore, whether such line will be subject to the 
requirements of this theft prevention standard.

                                 Purpose

    The purpose of these criteria is to enable the Administrator to 
select, by agreement with the manufacturer, if possible, those new lines 
which are likely to have high theft rates.

                               Application

    These criteria apply to lines of passenger motor vehicles initially 
introduced into commerce on or after January 1, 1983.

                               Methodology

    These criteria will be applied to each line initially introduced 
into commerce on or after January 1, 1983. The likely theft rate for 
such lines will be determined in relation to the national median theft 
rate for 1983 and 1984. If the line is determined to be likely to have a 
theft rate above the national median, the Administrator will select such 
line for coverage under this theft prevention standard.

                                Criteria

    1. Retail price of the vehicle line.
    2. Vehicle image or marketing strategy.
    3. Vehicle lines with which the new line is intended to compete, and 
the theft rates of such lines.
    4. Vehicle line(s), if any, which the new line is intended to 
replace, and the theft rate(s) of such line(s).
    5. Presence or absence of any new theft prevention devices or 
systems.
    6. Preliminary theft rate for the line, if it can be determined on 
the basis of currently available data.

    Effective Date Notes: 1. At 69 FR 17967, Apr. 6, 2004, appendix C to 
part 541 was amended by revising the title and the Application and 
Methodology sections, effective Sept. 1, 2006. For the convenience of 
the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:

 Appendix C to Part 541--Criteria for Selecting Light Duty Truck Lines 
                     Likely To Have High Theft Rates

                                * * * * *

                               Application

    These criteria apply to lines of passenger motor vehicles initially 
introduced into commerce on or after September 1, 2005.

                               Methodology

    These criteria will be applied to each line initially introduced 
into commerce on or after September 1, 2005. The likely theft rate for 
such lines will be determined in relation to the national median theft 
rate for 1990 and 1991. If the line is determined to be likely to have a 
theft rate above the national median, the Administrator will select such 
line for coverage under this theft prevention standard.

                                * * * * *

[[Page 118]]

    2. At 69 FR 34613, June 22, 2004, part 541, appendix C was corrected 
as it appeared at 69 FR 17967, Apr. 6, 2004, in the third column, the 
sentence under the subheading ``Application'' should read, ``These 
criteria apply to lines of passenger motor vehicles initially introduced 
into commerce on or after September 1, 2006.'' On page 17967, in the 
third column, the first sentence under the subheading ``Methodology'' 
was corrected to read, ldquo;These criteria will be applied to each line 
initially introduced into commerce on or after September 1, 2006''; 
effective Sept. 1, 2006.


<R03>
PART 542_PROCEDURES FOR SELECTING LINES TO BE COVERED BY THE THEFT 
PREVENTION STANDARD--Table of Contents




Sec.
542.1 Procedures for selecting new lines that are likely to have high or 
          low theft rates.
542.2 Procedures for selecting low theft new lines with a majority of 
          major parts interchangeable with those of a high theft line.

    Authority: 15 U.S.C. 2021, 2022, and 2023; delegation of authority 
at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 59 FR 21672, Apr. 26, 1994, unless otherwise noted.

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 17967, Apr. 6, 2004, the title of part 
542 was revised, effective Sept. 1, 2006. For the convenience of the 
user, the revised text is set forth as follows:


<R03>
PART 542_PROCEDURES FOR SELECTING LIGHT DUTY TRUCK LINES TO BE COVERED 
BY THE THEFT PREVENTION STANDARD


<R05>
Sec. 542.1  Procedures for selecting new lines that are likely to have 
high or low theft rates.

    (a) Scope. This section sets forth the procedures for motor vehicle 
manufacturers and NHTSA to follow in the determination of whether any 
new vehicle line is likely to have a theft rate above or below the 
median theft rate.
    (b) Application. These procedures apply to each manufacturer that 
plans to introduce a new line into commerce in the United States on or 
after April 24, 1986, and to each of those new lines.
    (c) Procedures. (1)(i) For each new line introduced before the 1997 
model year, each manufacturer uses the criteria in appendix C of part 
541 of this chapter to evaluate each new line and to conclude whether 
the new line is likely to have a theft rate above or below the median 
theft rate established for calendar years 1990 and 1991.
    (ii) For each new line to be introduced for the 1997 or subsequent 
model years, each manufacturer shall use the criteria in appendix C of 
part 541 of this chapter to evaluate each new line and to conclude 
whether the new line is likely to have a theft rate above or below the 
median theft rate.
    (2)(i) For each new line to be introduced before the 1997 model 
year, the manufacturer submits its evaluations and conclusions made 
under paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section, together with the underlying 
factual information, to NHTSA not less than 18 months before the date of 
introduction. The manufacturer may request a meeting with the agency to 
further explain the bases for its evaluations and conclusions.
    (ii) For each new line to be introduced for the 1997 or subsequent 
model years, the manufacturer shall submit its evaluations and 
conclusions made under paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this section, together 
with the underlying factual information, to NHTSA not less than 15 
months before the date of introduction. The manufacturer may request a 
meeting with the agency during this period to further explain the bases 
for its evaluations and conclusions.
    (3) Within 90 days after its receipt of the manufacturer's 
submission under paragraph (c)(2) of this section, the agency 
independently evaluates the new line using the criteria in appendix C of 
part 541 of this chapter and, on a preliminary basis, determines whether 
the new line should or should not be subject to Sec. 541.2 of this 
chapter. NHTSA informs the manufacturer by letter of the agency's 
evaluations and determinations, together with the factual information 
considered by the agency in making them.
    (4) The manufacturer may request the agency to reconsider any of its 
preliminary determinations made under paragraph (c)(3) of this section. 
The manufacturer shall submit its request to the agency within 30 days 
of its receipt of the letter under paragraph (c)(3) of this section. The 
request shall include the facts and arguments underlying the 
manufacturer's objections to

[[Page 119]]

the agency's preliminary determinations. During this 30-day period, the 
manufacturer may also request a meeting with the agency to discuss those 
objections.
    (5) Each of the agency's preliminary determinations under paragraph 
(c)(3) of this section shall become final 45 days after the agency sends 
the letter specified in paragraph (c)(3) of this section unless a 
request for reconsideration has been received in accordance with 
paragraph (c)(4) of this section. If such a request has been received, 
the agency makes its final determinations within 60 days of its receipt 
of the request. NHTSA informs the manufacturer by letter of those 
determinations and its response to the request for reconsideration.

    Effective Date Notes: 1. At 69 FR 17967, Apr. 6, 2004, Sec. 542.1 
was revised, effective Sept. 1, 2006. For the convenience of the user, 
the revised text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 542.1  Procedures for selecting new light duty truck lines that 
          are likely to have high or low theft rates.

    (a) Scope. This section sets forth the procedures for motor vehicle 
manufacturers and NHTSA to follow in the determination of whether any 
new light duty truck line is likely to have a theft rate above or below 
the 1990/91 median theft rate.
    (b) Application. These procedures apply to each manufacturer that 
plans to introduce a new light duty truck line into commerce in the 
United States on or after September 1, 2005, and to each of those new 
lines.
    (c) Procedures. (1) Each manufacturer shall use the criteria in 
Appendix C of part 541 of this chapter to evaluate each new light duty 
truck line and to conclude whether the new line is likely to have a 
theft rate above or below the 1990/91 median theft rate.
    (2) For each new light duty truck line, the manufacturer shall 
submit its evaluations and conclusions made under paragraph (c) of this 
section, together with the underlying factual information, to NHTSA not 
less than 15 months before the date of introduction. The manufacturer 
may request a meeting with the agency during this period to further 
explain the bases for its evaluations and conclusions.
    (3) Within 90 days after its receipt of the manufacturer's 
submission under paragraph (c)(2) of this section, the agency 
independently evaluates the new light duty truck line using the criteria 
in Appendix C of part 541 of this chapter and, on a preliminary basis, 
determines whether the new line should or should not be subject to Sec. 
541.2 of this chapter. NHTSA informs the manufacturer by letter of the 
agency's evaluations and determinations, together with the factual 
information considered by the agency in making them.
    (4) The manufacturer may request the agency to reconsider any of its 
preliminary determinations made under paragraph (c)(3) of this section. 
The manufacturer shall submit its request to the agency within 30 days 
of its receipt of the letter under paragraph (c)(3) of this section. The 
request shall include the facts and arguments underlying the 
manufacturer's objections to the agency's preliminary determinations. 
During this 30-day period, the manufacturer may also request a meeting 
with the agency to discuss those objections.
    (5) Each of the agency's preliminary determinations under paragraph 
(c)(3) of this section shall become final 45 days after the agency sends 
the letter specified in paragraph (c)(3) of this section unless a 
request for reconsideration has been received in accordance with 
paragraph (c)(4) of this section. If such a request has been received, 
the agency makes its final determinations within 60 days of its receipt 
of the request. NHTSA informs the manufacturer by letter of those 
determinations and its response to the request for reconsideration.
    2. On page 34613, June 22, 2004, Sec. 542.1(b) was corrected as it 
appeared at 69 FR 17968, Apr. 6, 2004, effective Sept. 1, 2006. For the 
convenience of the user, the corrected text is set forth follows:

Sec. 542.1  Procedures for selecting new light duty truck lines that 
          are likely to have high or low theft rates.

                                * * * * *

    (b) Application. These procedures apply to each manufacturer that 
plans to introduce a new light duty truck line into commerce in the 
United States on or after September 1, 2006, and to each of those new 
lines.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 542.2  Procedures for selecting low theft new lines with a majority 
of major parts interchangeable with those of a high theft line.

    (a) Scope. This section sets forth the procedures for motor vehicle 
manufacturers and NHTSA to follow in the determination of whether any 
new lines that will be likely to have a low theft rate have major parts 
interchangeable with a majority of the covered major parts of a line 
having or likely to have a high theft rate.
    (b) Application. These procedures apply to:

[[Page 120]]

    (1) Each manufacturer that pro duces--
    (i) At least one passenger motor vehicle line that has been or will 
be introduced into commerce in the United States and that has been 
listed in appendix A of part 541 of this chapter or that has been 
identified by the manufacturer or preliminarily or finally determined by 
NHTSA to be a high-theft line under Sec. 542.1, and
    (ii) At least one passenger motor vehicle line that will be 
introduced into commerce in the United States on or after April 24, 1986 
and that the manufacturer identifies as likely to have a theft rate 
below the median theft rate; and
    (2) Each of those likely submedian theft rate lines.
    (c) Procedures. (1)(i) For each new line that is to be introduced 
before the 1997 model year and that a manufacturer identifies under 
appendix C of part 541 of this chapter as likely to have a theft rate 
below the median rate, the manufacturer identifies how many and which of 
the major parts of that line will be interchangeable with the covered 
major parts of any other of its lines that has been listed in appendix A 
of part 541 of this chapter or identified by the manufacturer or 
preliminarily or finally determined by the agency to be a high theft 
line under Sec. 542.1.
    (ii) For each new line that is to be introduced in the 1997 or 
subsequent model years and that a manufacturer identifies under appendix 
C of part 541 of this chapter as likely to have a theft rate below the 
median rate, the manufacturer shall identify how many and which of the 
major parts of that line will be interchangeable with the covered major 
parts of any other of its lines that has been listed in appendix A of 
part 541 of this chapter or identified by the manufacturer or 
preliminarily or finally determined by the agency to be a high-theft 
line under Sec. 542.1.
    (2)(i) If the manufacturer concludes that a new line that is to be 
introduced before the 1997 model year has a likely submedian theft rate 
and will have major parts that are interchangeable with a majority of 
the covered major parts of a high theft line, the manufacturer 
determines whether all the vehicles of those lines with likely submedian 
theft rates and interchangeable parts will account for more than 90 
percent of the total annual production of all of the manufacturer's 
lines with those interchangeable parts.
    (ii) If the manufacturer concludes that a new line that is to be 
introduced for the 1997 or subsequent model years has a likely submedian 
theft rate and will have major parts that are interchangeable with a 
majority of the covered major parts of a high theft line, the 
manufacturer shall determine whether all the vehicles of those lines 
with likely submedian theft rates and interchangeable parts will account 
for more than 90 percent of the total annual production of all of the 
manufacturer's lines with those interchangeable parts.
    (3)(i) For new lines to be introduced before the 1997 model year, 
the manufacturer submits its evaluations and identifications made under 
paragraphs (c)(1)(i) and (2)(i) of this section, together with the 
underlying factual information, to NHTSA not less than 18 months before 
the date of introduction. During this period, the manufacturer may 
request a meeting with the agency to further explain the bases for its 
evaluations and conclusions.
    (ii) For new lines to be introduced for the 1997 and subsequent 
model years, the manufacturer shall submit its evaluations and 
conclusions made under paragraphs (c)(1)(ii) and (2)(ii) of this 
section, together with the underlying factual information, to NHTSA not 
less than 15 months before the date of introduction. During this period, 
the manufacturer may request a meeting with the agency to further 
explain the bases for its evaluations and conclusions.
    (4) Within 90 days after its receipt of the manufacturer's 
submission under paragraph (c)(3) of this section, the agency considers 
that submission, if any, and independently makes, on a preliminary 
basis, the determinations of those lines with likely submedian theft 
rates which should or should not be subject to Sec. 541.5 of this 
chapter. NHTSA informs the manufacturer by letter of the agency's 
preliminary determinations, together with the factual information 
considered by the agency in making them.

[[Page 121]]

    (5) The manufacturer may request the agency to reconsider any of its 
preliminary determinations made under paragraph (c)(4) of this section. 
The manufacturer must submit its request to the agency within 30 days of 
its receipt of the letter under paragraph (c)(4) of this section 
informing it of the agency's evaluations and preliminary determinations. 
The request must include the facts and arguments underlying the 
manufacturer's objections to the agency's preliminary determinations. 
During this 30-day period, the manufacturer may also request a meeting 
with the agency to discuss those objections.
    (6) Each of the agency's preliminary determinations made under 
paragraph (c)(4) of this section becomes final 45 days after the agency 
sends the letter specified in that paragraph unless a request for 
reconsideration has been received in accordance with paragraph (c)(5) of 
this section. If such a request has been received, the agency makes its 
final determinations within 60 days of its receipt of the request. NHTSA 
informs the manufacturer by letter of those determinations and its 
response to the request for reconsideration.

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 17968, Apr. 6, 2004, Sec. 542.2 was 
revised, effective Sept. 1, 2006. For the convenience of the user, the 
revised text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 542.2  Procedures for selecting low theft light duty truck lines 
          with a majority of major parts interchangeable with those of a 
          passenger motor vehicle line.

    (a) Scope. This section sets forth the procedures for motor vehicle 
manufacturers and NHTSA to follow in the determination of whether any 
light duty truck lines that have or are likely to have a low theft rate 
have major parts interchangeable with a majority of the covered major 
parts of a passenger motor vehicle line.
    (b) Application. These procedures apply to:
    (1) Each manufacturer that produces--
    (i) At least one passenger motor vehicle line identified in 49 CFR 
541.3(a)(1) and (2) that has been or will be introduced into commerce in 
the United States, and
    (ii) At least one light duty truck line that has been or will be 
introduced into commerce in the United States and that the manufacturer 
identifies as likely to have a theft rate below the median theft rate; 
and
    (2) Each of those likely sub-median theft rate light duty truck 
lines.
    (c) Procedures. (1) For each light duty truck line that a 
manufacturer identifies under appendix C of part 541 of this chapter as 
having or likely to have a theft rate below the median rate, the 
manufacturer identifies how many and which of the major parts of that 
line will be interchangeable with the covered major parts of any of its 
passenger motor vehicle lines.
    (2) If the manufacturer concludes that a light duty truck line that 
has or is likely to have a theft rate below the median theft rate has 
major parts that are interchangeable with a majority of the covered 
major parts of a passenger motor vehicle line, the manufacturer 
determines whether all the vehicles of those lines with sub-median or 
likely sub-median theft rates will account for more than 90 percent of 
the total annual production of all of the manufacturer's lines with 
those interchangeable parts.
    (3) The manufacturer submits its evaluations and conclusions made 
under paragraphs (c)(1) and (2) of this section, together with the 
underlying factual information, to NHTSA not less than 15 months before 
the date of introduction. During this period, the manufacturer may 
request a meeting with the agency to further explain the bases for its 
evaluations and conclusions.
    (4) Within 90 days after its receipt of the manufacturer's 
submission under paragraph (c)(3) of this section, NHTSA considers that 
submission, if any, and independently makes, on a preliminary basis, the 
determinations of those light duty truck lines with sub-median or likely 
sub-median theft rates which should or should not be subject to Sec. 
541.5 of this chapter. NHTSA informs the manufacturer by letter of the 
agency's preliminary determinations, together with the factual 
information considered by the agency in making them.
    (5) The manufacturer may request the agency to reconsider any of its 
preliminary determinations made under paragraph (c)(4) of this section. 
The manufacturer must submit its request to the agency within 30 days of 
its receipt of the letter under paragraph (c)(4) of this section 
informing it of the agency's evaluations and preliminary determinations. 
The request must include the facts and arguments underlying the 
manufacturer's objections to the agency's preliminary determinations. 
During this 30-day period, the manufacturer may also request a meeting 
with the agency to discuss those objections.
    (6) Each of the agency's preliminary determinations made under 
paragraph (c)(4) of this section becomes final 45 days after the agency 
sends the letter specified in that paragraph unless a request for 
reconsideration has been received in accordance with paragraph (c)(5) of 
this section. If such a request has been received, the agency makes its 
final determinations within 60 days of its receipt of the request. NHTSA 
informs the

[[Page 122]]

manufacturer by letter of those determinations and its response to the 
request for reconsideration.


<R03>
PART 543_EXEMPTION FROM VEHICLE THEFT PREVENTION STANDARD--Table of Contents




Sec.
543.1 Scope.
543.2 Purpose.
543.3 Application.
543.4 Definitions.
543.5 Petition: General requirements.
543.6 Petition: Specific content requirements.
543.7 Processing an exemption petition.
543.8 Duration of exemption.
543.9 Terminating or modifying an exemption.

    Authority: 15 U.S.C. 2025, delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 52 FR 33829, Sept. 8, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 543.1  Scope.

    This part establishes procedures under section 605 of the Motor 
Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15 U.S.C. 2025) for filing and 
processing petitions to exempt lines of passenger motor vehicles from 
part 541 of this chapter, and procedures for terminating or modifying an 
exemption.


<R05>
Sec. 543.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to specify the content and format of 
petitions which may be filed by manufacturers of passenger motor 
vehicles to obtain an exemption from the parts-marking requirements of 
the vehicle theft prevention standard for passenger motor vehicle lines 
which include, as standard equipment, an antitheft device if the agency 
concludes that the device is likely to be as effective in reducing and 
deterring motor vehicle theft as compliance with the parts-marking 
requirements. This part also provides the procedures that the agency 
will follow in processing those petitions and in terminating or 
modifying exemptions.


<R05>
Sec. 543.3  Application.

    This part applies to manufacturers of high-theft passenger motor 
vehicles; and to any interested person who seeks to have NHTSA terminate 
an exemption.

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 17968, Apr. 6, 2004, Sec. 543.3 was 
revised, effective Sept. 1, 2006. For the convenience of the user, the 
revised text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 543.3  Application.

    This part applies to manufacturers of passenger motor vehicles, and 
to any interested person who seeks to have NHTSA terminate an exemption.


<R05>
Sec. 543.4  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. All terms defined in sections 2, 601, and 605 
of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act are used in 
accordance with their statutory meanings unless otherwise defined in 
paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) Other definitions.
    Line or car line means a name which a manufacturer applies to a 
group of motor vehicles of the same make which have the same body or 
chassis, or otherwise are similar in construction or design. A ``line'' 
may, for example, include 2-door, 4-door, station wagon, and hatchback 
vehicles of the same make.
    NHTSA means the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.


<R05>
Sec. 543.5  Petition: General requirements.

    (a) For each model year through model year 1996, a manufacturer may 
petition NHTSA to grant exemptions for up to two additional lines of its 
passenger motor vehicles from the requirements of part 541 of this 
chapter. For each of model years 1997 through 2000, a manufacturer may 
petition NHTSA to grant an exemption for one additional line of its 
passenger motor vehicles from the requirements of part 541 of this 
chapter.
    (b) Each petition filed under this part for an exemption must--
    (1) Be written in the English language;
    (2) Be submitted in three copies to: Administrator, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 
20590;
    (3) State the full name and address of the petitioner, the nature of 
its organization (individual, partnership, corporation, etc.), and the 
name of the State or country under the laws of which it is organized;

[[Page 123]]

    (4) Be submitted at least 8 months before the commencement of 
production of the lines specified under paragraph (5) of Sec. 543.5(b) 
for the first model year in which the petitioner wishes those lines to 
be exempted, and identify that model year;
    (5) Identify the passenger motor vehicle line or lines for which 
exemption is sought;
    (6) Set forth in full the data, views, and arguments of the 
petitioner supporting the exemption, including the information specified 
in Sec. 543.6; and
    (7) Specify and segregate any part of the information and data 
submitted which the petitioner requests be withheld from public 
disclosure in accordance with part 512, Confidential Business 
Information, of this chapter.

[52 FR 33829, Sept. 8, 1987, as amended at 59 FR 10758, Mar. 8, 1994]

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 17968, Apr. 6, 2004, Sec. 543.5, was 
amended by revising paragraph (a), effective Sept. 1, 2006. For the 
convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 543.5  Petition: General requirements.

    (a) For each model year through model year 1996, a manufacturer may 
petition NHTSA to grant exemptions for up to two additional lines of its 
passenger motor vehicles from the requirements of part 541 of this 
chapter. For each model year after model year 1996, a manufacturer may 
petition NHTSA to grant an exemption for one additional line of its 
passenger motor vehicles from the requirements of part 541 of this 
chapter.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 543.6  Petition: Specific content requirements.

    (a) Each petition for exemption filed under this part must include:
    (1) A statement that an antitheft device will be installed as 
standard equipment on all vehicles in the line for which an exemption is 
sought;
    (2) A list naming each component in the antitheft system, and a 
diagram showing the location of each of those components within the 
vehicle;
    (3) A discussion that explains the means and process by which the 
device is activated and functions, including any aspect of the device 
designed to--
    (i) Facilitate or encourage its activation by motorists,
    (ii) Attract attention to the efforts of an unauthorized person to 
enter or move a vehicle by means other than a key,
    (iii) Prevent defeating or circumventing the device by an 
unauthorized person attempting to enter a vehicle by means other than a 
key,
    (iv) Prevent the operation of a vehicle which an unauthorized person 
has entered using means other than a key, and
    (v) Ensure the reliability and durability of the device;
    (4) The reasons for the petitioner's belief that the antitheft 
device will be effective in reducing and deterring motor vehicle theft, 
including any theft data and other data that are available to the 
petitioner and form a basis for that belief;
    (5) The reasons for the petitioner's belief that the agency should 
determine that the antitheft device is likely to be as effective as 
compliance with the parts-marking requirements of part 541 in reducing 
and deterring motor vehicle theft, including any statistical data that 
are available to the petitioner and form a basis for petitioner's belief 
that a line of passenger motor vehicles equipped with the antitheft 
device is likely to have a theft rate equal to or less than that of 
passenger motor vehicles of the same, or a similar, line which have 
parts marked in compliance with part 541.
    (b) Any petitioner submitting data under paragraph (a) (4) or (5) of 
this section shall submit an explanation of its belief that the data are 
sufficiently representative and reliable to warrant NHTSA's reliance 
upon them.

[52 FR 33829, Sept. 8, 1987, as amended at 59 FR 10758, Mar. 8, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 543.7  Processing an exemption petition.

    (a) NHTSA processes any complete petition. If a manufacturer submits 
a petition that does not contain all the information required by this 
part, NHTSA informs the manufacturer of the areas of insufficiency and 
advises the manufacturer that the agency does not process the petition 
until it receives the required information.

[[Page 124]]

    (b) The agency grants a petition for an exemption from the parts-
marking requirements of part 541 either in whole or in part, if it 
determines that, based upon substantial evidence, the standard equipment 
antitheft device is likely to be as effective in reducing and deterring 
motor vehicle theft as compliance with the parts-marking requirements of 
part 541.
    (c) The agency issues its decision either to grant or deny an 
exemption petition not later than 120 days after the date on which a 
complete petition is filed.
    (d) Any exemption granted under this part applies only to the 
vehicle line or lines that are the subject of the grant, and are 
equipped with the antitheft device on which the line's exemption was 
based.
    (e) An exemption granted under this part is effective for the model 
year beginning after the model year in which NHTSA issue the notice of 
exemption, unless the notice of exemption specifies a later model year.
    (f) NHTSA publishes a notice of its decision to grant or deny an 
exemption petition in the Federal Register, and notifies the petitioner 
in writing of the agency's decision.


<R05>
Sec. 543.8  Duration of exemption.

    Each exemption under this part continues in effect unless it is 
modified or terminated under Sec. 543.9, or the manufacturer ceases 
production of the exempted line.


<R05>
Sec. 543.9  Terminating or modifying an exemption.

    (a) On its own initiative or in response to a petition, NHTSA may 
commence a proceeding to terminate or modify any exemption granted under 
this part.
    (b) Any interested person may petition the agency to commence a 
proceeding to terminate or modify an exemption.
    (c)(1) In a petition to terminate an exemption, the petitioner must:
    (i) Identify the vehicle line or lines that are the subject of the 
exemption;
    (ii) State the reasons for petitioner's belief that the standard 
equipment antitheft device installed under the exemption is not as 
effective as compliance with the parts-marking requirements of part 541 
in reducing and deterring motor vehicle theft;
    (iii) Comply with Sec. 543.5, paragraphs (b) (1) through (3) and 
(7).
    (2) In a petition to modify an exemption, the petitioner must:
    (i) Identify the vehicle line or lines that are the subject of the 
exemption;
    (ii) Request permission to use an antitheft device similar to, but 
different from the standard equipment antitheft device which is 
installed under the exemption;
    (iii) Comply with Sec. 543.5, paragraphs (b) (1) through (3) and 
(7); and
    (iv) Provide the same information for the modified device that is 
required under Sec. 543.6 for a new device, except that the information 
specified by Sec. 543.6(a)(3) need by provided only to the extent that 
the modified device differs from the standard equipment antitheft device 
installed under the exemption.
    (d) NHTSA processes any complete petition. If a person submits a 
petition under this section that does not contain all the information 
required by it, NHTSA informs the manufacturer of the areas of 
insufficiency and advises the manufacturer that the agency does not 
process the petition until it receives the required information.
    (e) If NHTSA denies a petition requesting a proceeding to terminate 
or modify an exemption, the agency notifies the petitioner by letter.
    (f) If NHTSA commences a termination proceeding on its own 
initiative or in response to a petition, the agency provides the 
manufacturer of the exempted line with a copy of the petition, if any, a 
written statement of NHTSA's reasons for commencing the proceeding, and 
an opportunity to present its written views.
    (g)(1) The agency terminates an exemption if it determines that the 
antitheft device installed under the exemption has not been as effective 
as parts-marking in reducing and deterring motor vehicle theft.
    (2) Except as provided in paragraph (g)(3) of this section, a 
decision to terminate an exemption under this section takes effect on 
the later of the following dates:

[[Page 125]]

    (i) The last day of the model year in which NHTSA issues the 
termination decision, or
    (ii) Six months after the manufacturer receives written notice of 
the termination.
    (3) If a manufacturer shows good cause why terminating its exemption 
effective on a date later than the one specified in paragraph (g)(2) of 
this section is consistent with the public interest and the purposes of 
the Act, the agency may set such later date.
    (h)(1) The agency modifies an exemption if it detemines, based on 
substantial evidence, that the modified antitheft device described in 
the petition is likely to be as effective in reducing and deterring 
motor vehicle theft as compliance with the parts-marking requirements of 
part 541.
    (2)(i) Except as provided in paragraph (h)(2)(ii) of this section, a 
decision to modify an exemption under this section takes effect on the 
first day of the model year following the model year in which NHTSA 
issued the modification decision.
    (ii) If a manufacturer shows good cause why modifying its exemption 
effective on a date earlier than the one specified in paragraph 
(h)(2)(i) of this section is consistent with the public interest and the 
purposes of the Act, the agency may set such earlier date.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (j) NHTSA publishes notice in the Federal Register of any agency 
decision terminating or modifying an exemption, and notifies the 
affected manufacturer in writing.


<R03>
PART 544_INSURER REPORTING REQUIREMENTS--Table of Contents




Sec.
544.1 Scope.
544.2 Purpose.
544.3 Application.
544.4 Definitions.
544.5 General requirements for reports.
544.6 Contents of insurer reports.
544.7 Incorporating previously filed documents.

Appendix A to Part 544--Insurers of Motor Vehicle Insurance Policies 
          Subject to the Reporting Requirements in Each State in Which 
          They Do Business
Appendix B to Part 544--Issuers of Motor Vehicle Insurance Policies 
          Subject to the Reporting Requirements Only in Designated 
          States
Appendix C to Part 544--Motor Vehicle Rental and Leasing Companies 
          (Including Licensees and Franchisees) Subject to the Reporting 
          Requirements of Part 544

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 33112; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 52 FR 76, Jan. 2, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 544.1  Scope.

    This part sets forth requirements for insurers to report to the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration information about motor 
vehicle thefts and recoveries, the effects of the Federal motor vehicle 
theft prevention standard on those thefts and recoveries, and related 
insurance practices.


<R05>
Sec. 544.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of these reporting requirements in this part is to aid 
in implementing and evaluating the provisions of 49 U.S.C. Chapter 331 
Theft Prevention to prevent or discourage the theft of motor vehicles, 
to prevent or discourage the sale or distribution in interstate commerce 
of used parts removed from stolen motor vehicles, and to help reduce the 
cost to consumers of comprehensive insurance coverage for motor 
vehicles.

[62 FR 33756, June 23, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 544.3  Application.

    This part applies to the motor vehicle insurance policy issuers 
listed in appendices A or B, and to the motor vehicle rental and leasing 
companies listed in appendix C.

[55 FR 25609, June 22, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 544.4  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. All terms defined in 49 U.S.C. 33101 and 33112 
are used in accordance with their statutory meanings unless otherwise 
defined in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) Other definitions. (1) Comprehensive insurance coverage means 
the indemnification of motor vehicle owners by an insurer against losses 
due to fire, theft, robbery, pilferage, malicious mischief and 
vandalism, and damage

[[Page 126]]

resulting from floods, water, tornadoes, cyclones, or windstorms.
    (2) Gross vehicle weight rating is used as defined at Sec. 571.3 of 
this chapter.
    (3) Heavy truck means a truck with a gross vehicle weight rating of 
more than 10,000 pounds.
    (4) Light truck means a truck with a gross vehicle weight rating of 
10,000 pounds or less.
    (5) Major part means--
    (i) In the case of passenger motor vehicles, any part listed in 
Sec. 541.5(a) (1) through (14) of this chapter;
    (ii) In the case of light trucks, any part listed in Sec. 541.4(a) 
(1) through (14) of this chapter, or the cargo bed or transfer case;
    (iii) In the case of heavy trucks, any part listed in Sec. 541.5(a) 
(1) through (14) of this chapter, or the cargo bed, drive axle assembly, 
fifth wheel, sleeper, or the transfer case;
    (iv) In the case of multipurpose passenger vehicles, any part listed 
in Sec. 541.5(a) (1) through (14) of this chapter, or the cargo bed or 
transfer case; and
    (v) In the case of motorcycles, the crankcase, engine, frame, front 
fork, or transmission.
    (6) Motorcycle is used as defined at Sec. 571.3 of this chapter.
    (7) Motorcycle vehicle means a passenger motor vehicle, multipurpose 
passenger vehicle, truck, or motorcycle.
    (8) Multipurpose passenger vehicle is used as defined at Sec. 571.3 
of this chapter.
    (9) Recovery means regaining physical possession of a motor vehicle 
or a major portion of the superstructure of a motor vehicle with one or 
more major parts still attached to the superstructure, after that 
vehicle has been stolen.
    (10) Recovery-in-part means a recovery in which one or more of the 
recovered vehicle's major parts is missing at the time of recovery.
    (11) Recovery intact means a recovery with none of the recovered 
vehicle's major parts missing at the time of recovery, and with no 
apparent damage to any part of the motor vehicle other than those parts 
damaged in order to enter, start, and operate the vehicle, but with 
additional mileage and ordinary wear and tear.
    (12) Recovery-in-whole means a recovery with none of the recovered 
vehicle's major parts missing at the time of recovery, but with apparent 
damage to some part or parts of the vehicle in addition to those parts 
damaged in order to enter, start, and operate the vehicle.
    (13) Reporting period means the calendar year covered by a report 
submitted under this part.
    (14) Truck is used as defined at Sec. 571.3 of this chapter.
    (15)(i) In the case of insurers that issue motor vehicle insurance 
policies, vehicle theft means an actual physical removal of a motor 
vehicle without the permission of its owner, but does not include the 
removal of component parts, accessories, or personal belongings from a 
motor vehicle which is not moved.
    (ii) In the case of an insurer which has a fleet of 20 or more 
vehicles (other than a governmental entity) used primarily for rental or 
lease and not covered by theft insurance policies issued by insurers of 
motor vehicles, ``vehicle theft'' means an actual physical removal of a 
motor vehicle without the permission of its owner, or keeping possession 
of the motor vehicle without permission of its owner for a sufficient 
period of time so that the vehicle could have been reported as stolen to 
the State police in the State in which the vehicle was to have been 
returned. However, vehicle theft does not include the removal of 
component parts, accessories, or personal belongings from a motor 
vehicle which is not moved.

[52 FR 76, Jan. 2, 1987, as amended at 60 FR 33148, June 27, 1995; 61 FR 
41987, Aug. 13, 1996; 62 FR 33756, June 23, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 544.5  General requirements for reports.

    (a) Each insurer to which this part applies shall submit a report 
annually before October 25, beginning on October 25, 1986. This report 
shall contain the information required by Sec. 544.6 of this part for 
the calendar year 3 years previous to the year in which the report is 
filed (e.g., the report due before October 25, 2004 will contain the 
required information for the 2001 calendar year).

[[Page 127]]

    (b) Each report required by this part must:
    (1) Have a heading preceding its text that includes the words 
``Insurer Report'';
    (2) Identify the insurer, including all subsidiary companies, on 
whose behalf the report is submitted, and the designated agent, if any, 
submitting the report or that will submit further documents to complete 
the report;
    (3) Identify the State or States in which the insurer did business 
during the reporting period;
    (4) State the full name and title of the official responsible for 
preparing the report, and the address of the insurer;
    (5) Identify the reporting period covered by the report;
    (6) Be written in the English language;
    (7) Include a glossary defining all acronyms and terms of art used 
in the report, unless those acronyms and terms of art are defined 
immediately after they first appear in the report;
    (8) Be submitted in three copies to: Administrator, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 
20590; and
    (9) If the insurer wishes to submit certain information under a 
claim of confidentiality, be submitted in accordance with part 512 of 
this chapter.

[52 FR 76, Jan. 2, 1987, 60 FR 33149, June 27, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 
41987, Aug. 13, 1996; 62 FR 33756, June 23, 1997; 63 FR 70053, Dec. 18, 
1998; 65 FR 49507, Aug. 14, 2000; 66 FR 53733, Oct. 24, 2001; 67 FR 
46611, July 16, 2002; 68 FR 59135, Oct. 14, 2003; 69 FR 41976, July 13, 
2004]


<R05>
Sec. 544.6  Contents of insurer reports.

    (a)(1) In the case of insurers that issue motor vehicle insurance 
policies, provide the information specified in paragraphs (b) through 
(g) of this section for each State in which the insurer, including any 
subsidiary, did business during the reporting period if the insurer is 
listed in appendix A, or for each State listed after the insurer's name 
if the insurer is listed in appendix B.
    (2) In the case of a motor vehicle rental or leasing company listed 
in appendix C, provide the information specified in paragraphs (c), 
(d)(2)(iv), and (g) of this section for each vehicle type listed in 
paragraph (b) of this section, for each State in which the company, 
including any licensee, franchisee, or subsidiary, did business during 
the reporting period. The information for each listed company shall 
include all relevant information from any licensee, franchisee, or 
subsidiary.
    (b) For each of the following vehicle types, provide the information 
specified in paragraphs (c) through (g) of this section for all vehicles 
of that type insured by the insurer during the reporting period--
    (1) Passenger cars.
    (2) Multipurpose passenger vehicles.
    (3) Light trucks.
    (4) Heavy trucks.
    (5) Motorcycles.
    (c)(1) List the total number of vehicle thefts for vehicles 
manufactured in the 1983 or subsequent model years, subdivided into 
model year, model, make, and line, for this type of motor vehicle.
    (2) List the total number of recoveries for vehicles manufactured in 
the 1983 or subsequent model years, subdivided into model year, model, 
make, and line, for this type of motor vehicle. Beginning with the 
report due not later than October 25, 1987, for each of these subdivided 
number of recoveries, indicate how many were:
    (i) Recoveries intact;
    (ii) Recoveries-in-whole; and
    (iii) Recoveries-in-part.
    (3) Explain how the theft and recovery data set forth in response to 
paragraphs (c) (1) and (2) of this section were obtained by the insurer, 
and the steps taken by the insurer to ensure that these data are 
accurate and timely.
    (4) Explain the use made by the insurer of the information set forth 
in response to paragraphs (c) (1) and (2) of this section, including the 
extent to which such information is reported to national, public, and 
private entities (e.g., the Federal Bureau of Investigation and State 
and local police). If such reports are made, state the frequency and 
timing of the reporting.
    (d)(1) Provide the rating characteristics used by the insurer to 
establish the premiums it charges for comprehensive insurance coverage 
for this type of motor vehicle and the premium

[[Page 128]]

penalties for vehicles of this type considered by the insurer as more 
likely to be stolen. This requirement may be satisfied by furnishing the 
pertinent sections of the insurer's rate manual(s).
    (2) Provide the loss data used by the insurer to establish the 
premiums it charges for comprehensive insurance coverage for this type 
of motor vehicle and the premium penalties it charges for vehicles of 
this type it considers as more likely to be stolen. This requirement may 
be satisfied by providing the following:
    (i) The total number of comprehensive insurance claims paid by the 
insurer during the reporting period;
    (ii)(A) The total number of claims listed in (d)(2)(i) of this 
section that arose from a theft;
    (B) The insurer's best estimate of the percentage of the number 
listed in paragraph (d)(2)(ii)(A) of this section that arose from 
vehicle thefts, and an explanation of the basis for the estimate;
    (iii) The total amount (in dollars) paid out by the insurer during 
the reporting period in response to all the comprehensive claims filed 
by its policyholders;
    (iv)(A) In the case of insurers listed in appendix A or B, provide--
    (1) The total amount (in dollars) listed under paragraph (d)(2)(iii) 
of this section paid out by the insurer as a result of theft; and
    (2) The insurer's best estimate of the percentage of the dollar 
total listed in paragraph (d)(2)(iv)(A)(1) of this section that arose 
from vehicle thefts, and an explanation of the basis for the estimate;
    (B) In the case of other insurers subject to this part, the net 
losses suffered by the insurer (in dollars) as a result of vehicle 
theft;
    (v)(A) The total amount (in dollars) recovered by the insurer from 
the sale of recovered vehicles, major parts recovered not attached to 
the vehicle superstructure, or other recovered parts, after the insurer 
had made a payment listed under paragraph (d)(2)(iv) of this section.
    (B) The insurer's best estimate of the percentage of the dollar 
total listed in paragraph (d)(2)(v)(A) of this section that arose from 
vehicle thefts, and an explanation of the basis for the estimate;
    (vi) An identification of the vehicles for which the insurer charges 
comprehensive insurance premium penalties, because the insurer considers 
such vehicles as more likely to be stolen;
    (vii) The total number of comprehensive insurance claims paid by the 
insurer for each vehicle risk grouping identified in paragraph 
(d)(2)(vi) of this section during the reporting period, and the total 
amount (in dollars) paid out by the insurer in response to each of the 
listed claims totals; and
    (viii) The maximum premium adjustments (as a percentage of the basic 
comprehensive insurance premium) made for each vehicle risk grouping 
identified in paragraph (d)(2)(vi) of this section during the reporting 
period, as a result of the insurer's determination that such vehicles 
are more likely to be stolen.
    (3) Identify any other rating rules and plans used by the insurer to 
establish its comprehensive insurance premiums and premium penalties for 
motor vehicles it considers as more likely to be stolen, and explain how 
such rating rules and plans are used to establish the premiums and 
premium penalties.
    (4) Explain the basis for the insurer's comprehensive insurance 
premiums and the premium penalties charged for motor vehicles it 
considers as more likely to be stolen. This requirement may be satisfied 
by providing the pertinent sections of materials filed with State 
insurance regulatory officials and clearly indicating which information 
in those sections is being submitted in compliance with this paragraph.
    (e) List each action taken by the insurer to reduce the premiums it 
charges for comprehensive insurance coverage because of a reduction in 
thefts of this type of motor vehicle. For each action:
    (1) State the conditions that must be satisfied to receive such a 
reduction (e.g., installation of antitheft device, marking of vehicle in 
accordance with theft prevention standard, etc.);

[[Page 129]]

    (2) State the number of the insurer's policyholders and the total 
number of vehicles insured by the insurer that received this reduction; 
and
    (3) State the difference in average comprehensive insurance premiums 
for those policyholders that received this reduction versus those 
policyholders that did not receive the reduction.
    (f) In the case of an insurer that offered a reduction in its 
comprehensive insurance premiums for vehicles equipped with antitheft 
devices, provide:
    (1) The specific criteria used by the insurer to determine whether a 
vehicle is eligible for the reduction (original equipment antitheft 
device, passive antitheft device, etc.);
    (2) The total number of vehicle thefts for vehicles manufactured in 
the 1983 or subsequent model years that received a reduction under each 
listed criterion; and
    (3) The total number of recoveries of vehicles manufactured in the 
1983 or subsequent model years that received a reduction under each 
listed criterion. Beginning with the report due not later than October 
25, 1987, indicate how many of the total number of recoveries were--
    (i) Recoveries intact;
    (ii) Recoveries-in-whole; and
    (iii) Recoveries-in-part.
    (g)(1) List each action taken by the insurer to assist in deterring 
or reducing thefts of motor vehicles. For each action, describe the 
action and explain why the insurer believed it would be effective in 
deterring or reducing motor vehicle thefts.
    (2)(i) State the insurer's policy regarding the use of used parts to 
effect repairs paid for by the insurer on vehicles it insures. Indicate 
whether the insurer required, promoted, allowed, or forbade the use of 
used parts in those repairs.
    (ii) In the case of insurers requiring, promoting, or allowing the 
use of used parts to make repairs paid for by the insurer on vehicles it 
insures, indicate the precautions taken by or on behalf of the insurer 
to identify the origin of those used parts.

[52 FR 76, Jan. 2, 1987, as amended at 55 FR 25610, June 22, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 544.7  Incorporating previously filed documents.

    (a) In any report required by this part, an insurer may incorporate 
by reference any document or portion thereof previously filed with any 
Federal or State agency or department within the past four years.
    (b) An insurer that incorporates by reference a document not 
previously submitted to the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration shall append that document or the pertinent sections of 
that document to its report, and clearly indicate on the cover or first 
page of the document or pertinent section the regulatory requirement in 
response to which the document is being submitted.
    (c) An insurer that incorporates by reference a document shall 
clearly identify the document and the specific portions thereof sought 
to be incorporated, and, in the case of a document previously submitted 
to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, indicate the date 
on which the document was submitted to the agency and the person whose 
signature appeared on the document.

  Appendix A to Part 544--Insurers of Motor Vehicle Insurance Policies 
  Subject to the Reporting Requirements in Each State in Which They Do 
                                Business

Allstate Insurance Group
American Family Insurance Group
American International Group
California State Auto Association
CGU Group
CNA Insurance Companies
Erie Insurance Group
Berkshire Hathaway/GEICO Corporation Group
Great American P & C Group
Hartford Insurance Group
Liberty Mutual Insurance Companies
Metropolitan Life Auto & Home Group
Nationwide Group
Progressive Group
SAFECO Insurance Companies
State Farm Group
Travelers/Citigroup Company
USAA Group
Farmers Insurance Group

[69 FR 41976, July 13, 2004]

[[Page 130]]

  Appendix B to Part 544--Issuers of Motor Vehicle Insurance Policies 
     Subject to the Reporting Requirements Only in Designated States

Alfa Insurance Group (Alabama)
Arbella Mutual Insurance (Massachusetts)
Auto Club of Michigan Group (Michigan)
Commerce Group, Inc. (Massachusetts)
Kentucky Farm Bureau Group (Kentucky)
New Jersey Manufacturers Group (New Jersey)
Southern Farm Bureau Group (Arkansas, Mississippi)
Tennessee Farmers Companies (Tennessee)

[67 FR 46611, July 16, 2002]

   Appendix C to Part 544--Motor Vehicle Rental and Leasing Companies 
     (Including Licensees and Franchisees) Subject to the Reporting 
                        Requirements of Part 544

Alamo Rent-A-Car, Inc.
ANC Rental Corporation \1\
ARI (Automotive Resources International)
Avis, Rent-A-Car, Inc.
Budget Rent-A-Car Corporation
Dollar Rent-A-Car Systems, Inc.
Donlen Corporation
Enterprise Rent-A-Car
GE Capital Fleet Services
Hertz Rent-A-Car Division (subsidiary of the Hertz Corporation)
Lease Plan USA, Inc.
National Car Rental System, Inc.
PHH Vehicle Management Services
Ryder TRS
Thrifty Rental Car System Inc.
U-Haul International, Inc. (Subsidiary of AMERCO)
Wheels Inc.

    \1\ Indicates a newly listed company, which must file a report 
beginning with the report due October 25, 2004.

[69 FR 41976, July 13, 2004]


<R03>
PART 551_PROCEDURAL RULES--Table of Contents




                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
551.1 Scope.

Subpart B [Reserved]

                     Subpart C_Submittals in Writing

551.31 Form of communications.
551.33 Address of communications.
551.35 Subscription of communications.
551.37 Language of communications.

                  Subpart D_Service of Process; Agents

551.45 Service of process on foreign manufacturers and importers.

    Authority: Secs. 110(e), 119, 80 Stat. 719, 728 (15 U.S.C. 1399, 
1407); 23 U.S.C. 315, 401-404; delegation of authority, 31 FR 13952, 32 
FR 5606.

    Source: 33 FR 19700, Dec. 25, 1968, unless otherwise noted. 
Redesignated at 35 FR 5118, Mar. 26, 1970.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 551.1  Scope.

    This part contains rules of procedure generally applicable to the 
transaction of official business under the National Traffic and Motor 
Vehicle Safety Act of 1966, the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost 
Savings Act, and the Highway Safety Act of 1966. These rules apply in 
addition to the rules governing specific proceedings. In case of 
inconsistency with these general rules, the specific rules prevail.

[33 FR 19700, Dec. 25, 1968. Redesignated at 35 FR 5118, Mar. 26, 1970, 
and amended at 38 FR 20086, July 27, 1973]

Subpart B [Reserved]


<R04>
                     Subpart C_Submittals in Writing


<R05>
Sec. 551.31  Form of communications.

    Any communication in writing relating to official business 
(including formal documents) shall be on opaque and durable paper not 
larger than 9 by 14 inches in size. Tables, charts, or originals of 
other documents that are attached to communications shall be folded to 
this size, if possible. The left margin of communications shall be at 
least 1\1/2\ inches wide, and if a communication is bound, it shall be 
bound on the left side. All copies submitted shall be legible.


<R05>
Sec. 551.33  Address of communications.

    Unless otherwise specified, communications shall be addressed to the 
Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, U.S. 
Department of Transportation, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 
20590.

[[Page 131]]

Communications may not be addressed to a staff member's private address.

[36 FR 1147, Jan. 23, 1971; 38 FR 20086, July 27, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 551.35  Subscription of communications.

    Each communication shall be signed in ink and shall disclose the 
full legal name and the address of the person signing it and, if he is 
an agent, of his principal.


<R05>
Sec. 551.37  Language of communications.

    Communications and attachments thereto shall be in English. Any 
matter written in a foreign language will be considered only if 
accompanied by a translation into English. A translation shall bear a 
certificate by the translator certifying that he is qualified to make 
the translation; that the translation is complete except as otherwise 
clearly indicated; and that it is accurate to the best of the 
translator's knowledge and belief. The translator shall sign the 
certificate in ink and state his full legal name, occupation, and 
address.


<R04>
                  Subpart D_Service of Process; Agents


<R05>
Sec. 551.45  Service of process on foreign manufacturers and importers.

    (a) Designation of agent for service. Any manufacturer, assembler, 
or importer of motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment (hereinafter 
called manufacturer) before offering a motor vehicle or item of motor 
vehicle equipment for importation into the United States, shall 
designate a permanent resident of the United States as his agent upon 
whom service of all processes, notices, orders, decisions, and 
requirements may be made for him and on his behalf as provided in 
section 110(e) of the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 
1966 (80 Stat. 718) and in this section. The agent may be an individual, 
a firm, or a domestic corporation. Any number of manufacturers may 
designate the same person as agent.
    (b) Form and contents of designation. The designation shall be 
addressed to the Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation, 400 Seventh Street 
SW., Washington, DC 20590. It shall be in writing and dated; all 
signatures shall be in ink. The designation shall be made in legal form 
required to make it valid, and binding on the manufacturer, under the 
laws, corporate bylaws, or other requirements governing the making of 
the designation by the manufacturer at the place and time where it is 
made, and the person or persons signing the designation shall certify 
that it is so made. The designation shall disclose the full legal name, 
principal place of business, and mailing address of the manufacturer. If 
any of the products of the manufacturer do not bear his legal name, the 
marks, trade names, or other designations of origin which these products 
bear shall be stated in the designation. The designation of agent shall 
provide that it remains in effect until withdrawn or replaced by the 
manufacturer. The designation shall bear a declaration of acceptance 
duly signed by the designated agent. The full legal name and mailing 
address of the agent shall be stated. Designations are binding on the 
manufacturer even when not in compliance with all the requirements of 
this section, until rejected by the Administrator. The designated agent 
may not assign performance of his functions under the designation to 
another person.
    (c) Method of service. Service of any process, notice, order, 
requirement, or decision specified in section 110(e) of the National 
Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 may be made by registered 
or certified mail addressed to the agent, with return receipt requested, 
or in any other manner authorized by law. If service cannot be effected 
because the agent has died (or, if a firm or a corporation ceased to 
exist) or moved, or otherwise does not receive correctly addressed mail, 
service may be made by posting as provided in section 110(e).

[33 FR 19700, Dec. 25, 1968. Redesignated and amended at 35 FR 5118, 
Mar. 26, 1970; 36 FR 1147, Jan. 23, 1971; 48 FR 44081, Sept. 27, 1983]

[[Page 132]]


<R03>
PART 552_PETITIONS FOR RULEMAKING, DEFECT, AND NONCOMPLIANCE ORDERS
--Table of Contents




                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
552.1 Scope.
552.2 Purpose.
552.3 General.
552.4 Requirements for petition.
552.5 Improperly filed petitions.
552.6 Technical review.
552.7 Public meeting.
552.8 Notification of agency action on the petition.
552.9 Grant of petition.
552.10 Denial of petition.

   Subpart B_Petitions for Expedited Rulemaking to Establish Dynamic 
 Automatic Suppression System Test Procedures for Federal Motor Vehicle 
           Safety Standard No. 208, Occupant Crash Protection

552.11 Application.
552.12 Definitions.
552.13 Form of petition.
552.14 Content of petition.
552.15 Processing of petition.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 30111, 30118, 30162; delegation of authority at 
49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 40 FR 42014, Sept. 10, 1975, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 552.1  Scope.

    This part establishes procedures for the submission and disposition 
of petitions filed by interested persons pursuant to 49 U.S.C. Chapters 
301, 305, 321, 323, 325, 327, 329 and 331 to initiate rulemaking or to 
make a decision that a motor vehicle or item of replacement equipment 
does not comply with an applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standard 
or contains a defect which relates to motor vehicle safety.

[60 FR 17267, Apr. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 552.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to enable the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration to identify and respond on a timely basis to 
petitions for rulemaking or defect or noncompliance decisions, and to 
inform the public of the procedures following in response to such 
petitions.

[60 FR 17267, Apr. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 552.3  General.

    Any interested person may file with the Administrator a petition 
requesting him:
    (a) To commence a proceeding respecting the issuance, amendment or 
revocation of a motor vehicle safety standard, or
    (b) To commence a proceeding to decide whether to issue an order 
concerning the notification and remedy of a failure of a motor vehicle 
or item of replacement equipment to comply with an applicable motor 
vehicle safety standard or a defect in such vehicle or equipment that 
relates to motor vehicle safety.

[60 FR 17267, Apr. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 552.4  Requirements for petition.

    A petition filed under this part should be addressed and submitted 
to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 
Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20590. Each petition filed under 
this part must:
    (a) Be written in the English language;
    (b) Have, preceding its text, a heading that includes the word 
``Petition'';
    (c) Set forth facts which it is claimed establish that an order is 
necessary;
    (d) Set forth a brief description of the substance of the order 
which it is claimed should be issued; and
    (e) Contain the name and address of the petitioner.


<R05>
Sec. 552.5  Improperly filed petitions.

    (a) A petition that is not addressed as specified in Sec. 552.4, 
but that meets the other requirements of that section, will be treated 
as a properly filed petition, received as of the time it is discovered 
and identified.
    (b) A document that fails to conform to one or more of the 
requirements of Sec. 552.4(a) through (e) will not be treated as a 
petition under this part. Such a document will be treated according to 
the existing correspondence or other appropriate procedures of the 
NHTSA, and any suggestions contained in it

[[Page 133]]

will be considered at the discretion of the Administrator or his 
delegate.


<R05>
Sec. 552.6  Technical review.

    The appropriate Associate Administrator conducts a technical review 
of the petition. The technical review may consist of an analysis of the 
material submitted, together with information already in the possession 
of the agency. It may also include the collection of additional 
information, or a public meeting in accordance with Sec. 552.7.

[60 FR 17267, Apr. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 552.7  Public meeting.

    If the Associate Administrator decides that a public meeting on the 
subject of the petition would contribute to the determination whether to 
commence a proceeding, he issues a notice of public meeting for 
publication in the Federal Register to advise interested persons of the 
time, place, and subject matter of the public meeting and invite their 
participation. Interested persons may submit their views and evidence 
through oral or written presentations, or both. There is no cross 
examination of witnesses. A transcript of the meeting is kept and 
exhibits may be accepted as part of the transcript. Sections 556 and 557 
of title 5, U.S.C., do not apply to meetings held under this part. The 
Chief Counsel designates a member of his staff to serve as legal officer 
at the meeting.


<R05>
Sec. 552.8  Notification of agency action on the petition.

    After considering the technical review conducted under Sec. 552.6, 
and taking into account appropriate factors, which may include, among 
others, allocation of agency resources, agency priorities and the 
likelihood of success in litigation which might arise from the order, 
the Administrator will grant or deny the petition. NHTSA will notify the 
petitioner of the decision to grant or deny the petition within 120 days 
after its receipt of the petition.

[60 FR 17267, Apr. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 552.9  Grant of petition.

    (a) If a petition for rulemaking with respect to a motor vehicle 
safety standard is granted, a rulemaking proceeding is promptly 
commenced in accordance with applicable NHTSA and statutory procedures. 
The granting of such a petition and the commencement of a rulemaking 
proceeding does not signify, however, that the rule in question will be 
issued. A decision as to the issuance of the rule is made on the basis 
of all available information developed in the course of the rulemaking 
proceeding, in accordance with statutory criteria.
    (b) If a petition with respect to a noncompliance or a defect is 
granted, a proceeding to determine the existence of the noncompliance or 
defect is promptly commenced by the initiation of an investigation by 
the Office of Standards Enforcement or the Office of Defects 
Investigation, as appropriate.


<R05>
Sec. 552.10  Denial of petition.

    If a petition is denied, a Federal Register notice of the denial is 
issued within 45 days of the denial, setting forth the reasons for 
denial of the petition.


<R04>
   Subpart B_Petitions for Expedited Rulemaking to Establish Dynamic 
 Automatic Suppression System Test Procedures for Federal Motor Vehicle 
           Safety Standard No. 208, Occupant Crash Protection

    Source: 65 FR 30744, May 12, 2000, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 552.11  Application.

    This subpart establishes procedures for the submission and 
disposition of petitions filed by interested parties to initiate 
rulemaking to add a test procedure to 49 CFR 571.208, S28.


<R05>
Sec. 552.12  Definitions.

    For purposes of this subpart, the following definitions apply:
    (a) Dynamic automatic suppression system (DASS) means a portion of 
an air bag system that automatically controls whether or not the air bag 
deploys during a crash by:
    (1) Sensing the location of an occupant, moving or still, in 
relation to the air bag;

[[Page 134]]

    (2) Interpreting the occupant characteristics and location 
information to determine whether or not the air bag should deploy; and
    (3) Activating or suppressing the air bag system based on the 
interpretation of characteristics and occupant location information.
    (b) Automatic suppression zone (ASZ) means a three-dimensional zone 
adjacent to the air bag cover, specified by the vehicle manufacturer, 
where air bag deployment will be suppressed by the DASS if a vehicle 
occupant enters the zone under specified conditions.
    (c) Standard No. 208 means 49 CFR 571.208.


<R05>
Sec. 552.13  Form of petition.

    Each petition filed under this subpart shall--
    (a) Be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20590.
    (b) Be written in the English language.
    (c) State the name and address of the petitioner.
    (d) Set forth in full the data, views and arguments of the 
petitioner supporting the requested test procedure, including all of the 
content information specified by Sec. 552.14. Any documents 
incorporated by reference in the procedure shall be submitted with the 
petition.
    (e) Specify and segregate any part of the information and data 
submitted that the petitioner wishes to have withheld from public 
disclosure in accordance with Part 512 of this chapter including, if 
requested, the name and address of the petitioner.
    (f) Not request confidential treatment for the requested test 
procedure and, to the extent confidential treatment is requested 
concerning a particular DASS or data and analysis submitted in support 
of the petition, provide a general non-confidential description of the 
operation of the DASS and of the data and analysis supporting the 
petition.
    (g) Set forth a requested effective date and be submitted at least 
nine months before that date.


<R05>
Sec. 552.14  Content of petition.

    The petitioner shall provide the following information:
    (a) A set of proposed test procedures for S28.1, S28.2, S28.3, and 
S28.4 of Standard No. 208 which the petitioner believes are appropriate 
for assessing a particular DASS.
    (1) For S28.1 of Standard No. 208, the petitioner shall specify at 
least one specific position for the Part 572, subpart O 5th percentile 
female dummy that is:
    (i) Outside but adjacent to the ASZ, and
    (ii) Representative of an unbelted occupant position that is likely 
to occur during a frontal crash.
    (2) For S28.2 of Standard No. 208, the petitioner shall specify at 
least one specific position for the Part 572 Subpart P 3-year-old child 
dummy and at least one specific position for the Part 572 Subpart N 6-
year-old child dummy that are:
    (i) Outside but adjacent to the ASZ, and
    (ii) Representative of unbelted occupant positions that are likely 
to occur during a frontal crash where pre-crash braking occurs.
    (3) For S28.3 of Standard No. 208, the petitioner shall specify a 
procedure which tests the operation of the DASS by moving a test device 
toward the driver air bag in a manner that simulates the motion of an 
unbelted occupant during pre-crash braking or other pre-crash maneuver. 
The petitioner shall include a complete description, including drawings 
and instrumentation, of the test device employed in the proposed test. 
The petitioner shall include in the procedure a means for determining 
whether the driver air bag was suppressed before any portion of the 
specified test device entered the ASZ during the test. The procedure 
shall also include a means of determining when the specified test device 
occupies the ASZ.
    (4) For S28.4 of Standard No. 208, the petitioner shall specify a 
procedure which tests the operation of the DASS by moving a test device 
toward the passenger air bag in a manner that simulates the motion of an 
unbelted occupant during pre-crash braking or

[[Page 135]]

other pre-crash maneuver. The petitioner shall include a complete 
description, including drawings and instrumentation, of the test device 
employed in the proposed test. The petitioner shall include in the 
procedure a means for determining whether the passenger air bag was 
suppressed before any portion of the specified test device entered the 
ASZ during the test. The procedure shall also include a means of 
determining when the specified test device occupies the ASZ.
    (b) A complete description and explanation of the particular DASS 
that the petitioner believes will be appropriately assessed by the 
recommended test procedures. This shall include:
    (1) A description of the logic used by the DASS in determining 
whether to suppress the air bag or allow it to deploy. Such description 
shall include flow charts or similar materials outlining the operation 
of the system logic, the system reaction time, the time duration used to 
evaluate whether the air bag should be suppressed or deployed, changes, 
if any, in system performance based on the size of an occupant and 
vehicle speed, and a description of the size and shape of the zone where 
under similar circumstances and conditions the DASS may either allow or 
suppress deployment. Such description shall also address whether and how 
the DASS discriminates between an occupant's torso or head entering the 
ASZ as compared to an occupant's hand or arm, and whether and how the 
DASS discriminates between an occupant entering the ASZ and an inanimate 
object such as a newspaper or ball entering the ASZ.
    (2) Detailed specifications for the size and shape of the ASZ, 
including whether the suppression zone is designed to change size or 
shape depending on the vehicle speed, occupant size, or other factors.
    (c) Analysis and data supporting the appropriateness, repeatability, 
reproducibility and practicability of each of the proposed test 
procedures.
    (1) For the procedures proposed for inclusion in S28.1 and S28.2 of 
Standard No. 208, the petitioner shall provide the basis for the 
proposed dummy positions, including but not limited to, why the 
positions are representative of what is likely to occur in real world 
crashes.
    (2) For the procedures proposed for inclusion in S28.3 and S28.4 of 
Standard No. 208, the petitioner shall provide:
    (i) A complete explanation of the means used in the proposed test to 
ascertain whether the air bag is suppressed or activated during the 
test.
    (ii) A complete description of the means used to evaluate the 
ability of the DASS to detect and respond to an occupant moving toward 
an air bag, including the method used to move a test device toward an 
air bag at speeds representative of occupant movement during pre-crash 
braking or other pre-crash maneuver.
    (iii) The procedure used for locating the test device inside a test 
vehicle in preparation for testing, including an accounting of the 
reference points used to specify such location.
    (iv) An explanation of the methods used to measure the amount of 
time needed by a suppression system to suppress an air bag once a 
suppression triggering event occurs.
    (v) High speed film or video of at least two tests of the DASS using 
the proposed test procedure.
    (vi) Data generated from not less than two tests of the DASS using 
the proposed test procedure, including an account of the data streams 
monitored during testing and complete samples of these data streams from 
not less than two tests performed under the proposed procedure.
    (d) Analysis concerning the variety of potential DASS designs for 
which the requested test procedure is appropriate; e.g., whether the 
test procedures are appropriate only for the specific DASS design 
contemplated by the petitioner, for all DASS designs incorporating the 
same technologies, or for all DASS designs.


<R05>
Sec. 552.15  Processing of petition.

    (a) NHTSA will process any petition that contains the information 
specified by this subpart. If a petition fails to provide any of the 
information, NHTSA will not process the petition but will advise the 
petitioner of the information that shall be provided if the agency is to 
process the petition. The agency will seek to notify the petitioner of

[[Page 136]]

any such deficiency within 30 days after receipt of the petition.
    (b) At any time during the agency's consideration of a petition 
submitted under this Part, the Administrator may request the petitioner 
to provide additional supporting information and data and/or provide a 
demonstration of any of the requested test procedures. The agency will 
seek to make any such request within 60 days after receipt of the 
petition. Such demonstration may be at either an agency designated 
facility or one chosen by the petitioner, provided that, in either case, 
the facility shall be located in North America. If such a request is not 
honored to the satisfaction of the agency, the petition will not receive 
further consideration until the requested information is submitted.
    (c) The agency will publish in the Federal Register either a Notice 
of Proposed Rulemaking proposing adoption of the requested test 
procedures, possibly with changes and/or additions, or a notice denying 
the petition. The agency will seek to issue either notice within 120 
days after receipt of a complete petition. However, this time period may 
be extended by any time period during which the agency is awaiting 
additional information it requests from the petitioner or is awaiting a 
requested demonstration. The agency contemplates a 30 to 60 day comment 
period for any Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, and will endeavor to issue 
a final rule within 60 days thereafter.


<R03>
PART 553_RULEMAKING PROCEDURES--Table of Contents




                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
553.1 Applicability.
553.3 Definitions.
553.5 Regulatory docket.
553.7 Records.

               Subpart B_Procedures for Adoption of Rules

553.11 Initiation of rulemaking.
553.13 Notice of proposed rulemaking.
553.15 Contents of notices of proposed rulemaking.
553.17 Participation of interested persons.
553.19 Petitions for extension of time to comment.
553.21 Contents of written comments.
553.23 Consideration of comments received.
553.25 Additional rulemaking proceedings.
553.27 Hearings.
553.29 Adoption of final rules.
553.31-553.33 [Reserved]
553.35 Petitions for reconsideration.
553.37 Proceedings on petitions for reconsideration.
553.39 Effect of petition for reconsideration on time for seeking 
          judicial review.

Appendix A to Part 553--Statement of Policy: Action on Petitions for 
          Reconsideration
Appendix B to Part 553--Statement of Policy: Rulemakings Involving the 
          Assessment of the Functional Equivalence of Safety Standards
Appendix C to Part 553--Statement of Policy: Implementation of the 
          United Nations/Economic Commission for Europe (UN/ECE) 1998 
          Agreement on Global Technical Regulations--Agency Policy Goals 
          and Public Participation

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 1657, 30103, 30122, 30124, 30125, 30127, 
30146, 30162, 32303, 32502, 32504, 32505, 32705, 32901, 32902, 33102, 
33103, and 33107; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 60 FR 62222, Dec. 5, 1995, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 553.1  Applicability.

    This part prescribes rulemaking procedures that apply to the 
issuance, amendment, and revocation of rules pursuant to Title 49, 
Subtitle VI of the United States Code (49 U.S.C. 30101, et seq.).


<R05>
Sec. 553.3  Definitions.

    Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration or a person to whom he has delegated final 
authority in the matter concerned.
    Rule includes any order, regulation, or Federal motor vehicle safety 
standard issued under Title 49.
    Title 49 means 49 U.S.C. 30101, et seq.


<R05>
Sec. 553.5  Regulatory docket.

    (a) Information and data deemed relevant by the Administrator 
relating to rulemaking actions, including notices of proposed 
rulemaking; comments received in response to notices; petitions for 
rulemaking and reconsideration; denials of petitions for rulemaking and

[[Page 137]]

reconsideration; records of additional rulemaking proceedings under 
Sec. 553.25; and final rules are maintained in the Docket Room, 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., 
Washington, DC 20590.
    (b) Any person may examine any docketed material at the Docket Room 
at any time during regular business hours after the docket is 
established, except material ordered withheld from the public under 
applicable provisions of Title 49 and section 552(b) of title 5 of the 
U.S.C., and may obtain a copy of it upon payment of a fee.


<R05>
Sec. 553.7  Records.

    Records of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
relating to rulemaking proceedings are available for inspection as 
provided in section 552(b) of title 5 of the U.S.C. and Part 7 of the 
regulations of the Secretary of Transportation (Part 7 of this title).


<R04>
               Subpart B_Procedures for Adoption of Rules


<R05>
Sec. 553.11  Initiation of rulemaking.

    The Administrator may initiate rulemaking either on his own motion 
or on petition by any interested person after a determination in 
accordance with Part 552 of this title that grant of the petition is 
advisable. The Administrator may, in his discretion, also consider the 
recommendations of other agencies of the United States.


<R05>
Sec. 553.13  Notice of proposed rulemaking.

    Unless the Administrator, for good cause, finds that notice is 
impracticable, unnecessary, or contrary to the public interest, and 
incorporates that finding and a brief statement of the reasons for it in 
the rule, a notice of proposed rulemaking is issued and interested 
persons are invited to participate in the rulemaking proceedings under 
applicable provisions of Title 49.


<R05>
Sec. 553.15  Contents of notices of proposed rulemaking.

    (a) Each notice of proposed rulemaking is published in the Federal 
Register, unless all persons subject to it are named and are personally 
served with a copy of it.
    (b) Each notice, whether published in the Federal Register or 
personally served, includes
    (1) A statement of the time, place, and nature of the proposed 
rulemaking proceeding;
    (2) A reference to the authority under which it is issued;
    (3) A description of the subjects and issues involved or the 
substance and terms of the proposed rule;
    (4) A statement of the time within which written comments must be 
submitted; and
    (5) A statement of how and to what extent interested persons may 
participate in the proceedings.


<R05>
Sec. 553.17  Participation of interested persons.

    (a) Any interested person may participate in rulemaking proceeding 
by submitting comments in writing containing information, views or 
arguments.
    (b) In his discretion, the Administrator may invite any interested 
person to participate in the rulemaking procedures described in Sec. 
553.25.


<R05>
Sec. 553.19  Petitions for extension of time to comment.

    A petition for extension of the time to submit comments must be 
received not later than 15 days before expiration of the time stated in 
the notice. The petitions must be submitted to: Administrator, National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, U.S. Department of 
Transportation, 400 Seventh Street SW, Washington, DC, 20590. It is 
requested, but not required, that 10 copies be submitted. The filing of 
the petition does not automatically extend the time for petitioner's 
comments. Such a petition is granted only if the petitioner shows good 
cause for the extension, and if the extension is consistent with the 
public interest. If an extension is granted, it is granted to all 
persons, and it is published in the Federal Register.


<R05>
Sec. 553.21  Contents of written comments.

    All written comments shall be in English. Unless otherwise specified 
in a

[[Page 138]]

notice requesting comments, comments may not exceed 15 pages in length, 
but necessary attachments may be appended to the submission without 
regard to the 15-page limit. Any interested person shall submit as a 
part of his written comments all material that he considers relevant to 
any statement of fact made by him. Incorporation by reference should be 
avoided. However, if incorporation by reference is necessary, the 
incorporated material shall be identified with respect to document and 
page. It is requested, but not required, that 10 copies and attachments, 
if any, be submitted.


<R05>
Sec. 553.23  Consideration of comments received.

    All timely comments are considered before final action is taken on a 
rulemaking proposal. Late filed comments may be considered as far as 
practicable.


<R05>
Sec. 553.25  Additional rulemaking proceedings.

    The Administrator may initiate any further rulemaking proceedings 
that he finds necessary or desirable. For example, interested persons 
may be invited to make oral arguments, to participate in conferences 
between the Administrator or his representative and interested persons 
at which minutes of the conference are kept, to appear at informal 
hearings presided over by officials designated by the Administrator, at 
which a transcript or minutes are kept, or participate in any other 
proceeding to assure informed administrative action and to protect the 
public interest.


<R05>
Sec. 553.27  Hearings.

    (a) Sections 556 and 557 of title 5, United States Code, do not 
apply to hearings held under this part. Unless otherwise specified, 
hearings held under this part are informal, nonadversary, fact-finding 
proceedings, at which there are no formal pleadings or adverse parties. 
Any rule issued in a case in which an informal hearing is held is not 
necessarily based exclusively on the record of the hearing.
    (b) The Administrator designates a representative to conduct any 
hearing held under this part. The Chief Counsel designates a member of 
his staff to serve as legal officer at the hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 553.29  Adoption of final rules.

    Final rules are prepared by representatives of the office concerned 
and the Office of the Chief Counsel. The rule is then submitted to the 
Administrator for its consideration. If the Administrator adopts the 
rule, it is published in the Federal Register, unless all persons 
subject to it are named and are personally served with a copy of it.


<R05>
Sec. 553.31-553.33  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 553.35  Petitions for reconsideration.

    (a) Any interested person may petition the Administrator for 
reconsideration of any rule issued under this part. The petition shall 
be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW, Washington, DC, 20590. It is 
requested, but not required, that 10 copies be submitted. The petition 
must be received not later than 45 days after publication of the rule in 
the Federal Register. Petitions filed after that time will be considered 
as petitions filed under Part 552 of this chapter. The petition must 
contain a brief statement of the complaint and an explanation as to why 
compliance with the rule is not practicable, is unreasonable, or is not 
in the public interest. Unless otherwise specified in the final rule, 
the statement and explanation together may not exceed 15 pages in 
length, but necessary attachments may be appended to the submission 
without regard to the 15-page limit.
    (b) If the petitioner requests the consideration of additional 
facts, he must state the reason they were not presented to the 
Administrator within the prescribed time.
    (c) The Administrator does not consider repetitious petitions.
    (d) Unless the Administrator otherwise provides, the filing of a 
petition under this section does not stay the effectiveness of the rule.


<R05>
Sec. 553.37  Proceedings on petitions for reconsideration.

    The Administrator may grant or deny, in whole or in part, any 
petition

[[Page 139]]

for reconsideration without further proceedings. In the event he 
determines to reconsider any rule, he may issue a final decision on 
reconsideration without further proceedings, or he may provide such 
opportunity to submit comment or information and data as he deems 
appropriate. Whenever the Administrator determines that a petition 
should be granted or denied, he prepares a notice of the grant or denial 
of a petition for reconsideration, for issuance to the petitioner, and 
issues it to the petitioner. The Administrator may consolidate petitions 
relating to the same rule.


<R05>
Sec. 553.39  Effect of petition for reconsideration on time for seeking 
judicial review.

    The filing of a timely petition for reconsideration of any rule 
issued under this part postpones the expiration of the statutory period 
in which to seek judicial review of that rule only as to the petitioner, 
and not as to other interested persons. For the petitioner, the period 
for seeking judicial review will commence at the time the agency takes 
final action upon the petition for reconsideration.

[60 FR 63651, Dec. 12, 1995]

  Appendix A to Part 553--Statement of Policy: Action on Petitions for 
                             Reconsideration

    It is the policy of the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration to issue notice of the action taken on a petition for 
reconsideration within 90 days after the closing date for receipt of 
such petitions, unless it is found impracticable to take action within 
that time. In cases where it is so found and the delay beyond that 
period is expected to be substantial, notice of that fact, and the date 
by which it is expected that action will be taken, will be published in 
the Federal Register.

 Appendix B to Part 553--Statement of Policy: Rulemakings Involving The 
      Assessment of The Functional Equivalence of Safety Standards

    (a) Based on a comparison of the performance of vehicles or 
equipment, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) 
may tentatively determine that a foreign motor vehicle safety standard 
is better than or at least functionally equivalent to a Federal Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standard (FMVSS), either on its own motion or in 
connection with a petition for rulemaking by any interested party under 
49 CFR Part 552. Such determinations will be made in accordance with the 
process described in the flowchart in Figure 1 of this Appendix.
    (b) Under the process, if NHTSA decides that there is reason to 
believe that a foreign standard is better than or at least functionally 
equivalent to a FMVSS in accordance with the process, it will commence a 
rulemaking proceeding that may lead to the issuance of a proposal to add 
the foreign standard as an alternative compliance option to the FMVSS, 
to harmonize the FMVSS with the foreign standard or to upgrade the FMVSS 
to the level of the foreign standard, as appropriate. Such a proposal 
will request comment on the agency's tentative determination regarding 
relative benefits and functional equivalence as well as the proposed 
amendment. Final determinations regarding these matters will also be 
made in accordance with the analytical criteria in the flowchart.
    (c) As used in this appendix, the term ``standard'' refers to 
mandatory requirements and thus has the same meaning given the term 
``technical regulation'' in Annex 1 to the World Trade Organization 
Technical Barriers to Trade Agreement.

[[Page 140]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13MY98.017


[[Page 141]]



                        Explanation of Flowchart

                            A. Ultimate Goal

    The ultimate goal in comparing standards is to assess the real world 
safety performance of the covered vehicles or equipment. Particularly in 
the case of crashworthiness standards, the most reliable basis for 
making that assessment is fatality and injury data directly drawn from 
actual crashes. Accordingly, NHTSA will make appropriate efforts to 
ensure the availability of such data regarding crashes in the U.S.

                          B. Guiding Principles

                             Best Practices

    NHTSA pursues a ``best practices'' policy in comparing U.S. and 
foreign safety standards, i.e., NHTSA will propose to upgrade its 
standards if it tentatively concludes that a Country B standard offers 
greater benefits than the counterpart FMVSS, and if upgrading appears 
appropriate, considering the incremental costs and benefits and 
applicable statutory criteria. (For a discussion of another type of 
rulemaking proposal that may be considered in these circumstances, see 
the paragraph below on comparisons that indicate that a foreign 
standard's safety benefits are greater than those of the counterpart 
FMVSS.)

                              Conservatism

    1. NHTSA places priority on preserving the safety benefits of the 
FMVSSs.
    2. NHTSA can best preserve those benefits by being conservative in 
reaching any conclusion that a Country B standard is better than or at 
least functionally equivalent to the counterpart FMVSS. One reason for 
conservatism is that differences from vehicle model to vehicle model and 
manufacturer to manufacturer in margins of compliance may confound 
efforts to assess the relative benefits of two standards. Further, there 
may be circumstantial differences, such as special environmental 
conditions, driver demographics, driver behavior, occupant behavior 
(e.g., level of safety belt use), road conditions, size distribution of 
vehicle fleet (e.g., proportion of big versus small vehicles and 
disparity between extremes), that could influence real world safety 
benefits. These differences may result in a particular standard having a 
safety record in a foreign country that would not necessarily be 
repeated in the United States.

                         Best Available Evidence

    1. NHTSA will base its comparison of standards on the best available 
evidence. If available, estimates of real world safety benefits based on 
fatality and injury data directly drawn from actual crashes are the best 
evidence. If such data are not available, then estimates based on other 
information, such as compliance test data, may be used, although 
increased caution needs to be exercised in making judgment based on 
those estimates. If sufficient crash data regarding real world safety 
benefits are available, and a comparison of those benefits shows that 
the Country B standard is less beneficial than the counterpart Federal 
Motor Vehicle Safety Standard (FMVSS), NHTSA would avoid wasting 
resources making comparisons on the basis of less probative types of 
evidence.
    2. The types of benefits examined in comparing two standards might 
differ depending on whether the standards are crash avoidance standards 
or crashworthiness standards. Translating differences in performance (an 
input measure) into numbers of crashes or numbers of deaths and injuries 
(output measures) is more difficult in the case of crash avoidance 
standards. As a result, while the relative benefits of two 
crashworthiness standards would typically be assessed in terms of their 
impacts on deaths and injuries in crashes, the relative merits of two 
different crash avoidance standards might well be assessed in terms of 
their impact on vehicle or equipment performance.

                         Sufficiency of Evidence

    1. Many types of data are available for a comparison of two 
standards. Often there is an abundance of one type of data and little or 
no data from other sources. If insufficient data are available, and such 
data either cannot be generated through engineering analysis (e.g., real 
world safety benefits estimates), or conducting additional research and 
development is not cost effective, then NHTSA will stop consideration of 
such data and consider the other available data instead.
    2. The essentially horizontal, left-to-right path through the 
flowchart is intended to illustrate the sources of data that will be 
considered and provide a rough idea of the priority they will receive. 
Each step branches independently to the tentative determination of 
relative benefits and functional equivalency by its ``yes'' path. This 
may seem to preclude later steps once any ``yes'' path is encountered. 
In practice, however, all data sources will be considered to the extent 
that they are available before a final determination regarding these 
matters is made.

                               Reciprocity

    1. NHTSA will take steps to encourage reciprocity by other countries 
in the making of functional equivalence determinations.
    2. When NHTSA's comparison of standards indicates that one of the 
FMVSSs has benefits equal to or greater than the counterpart Country B 
standard, NHTSA may forward the results of that comparison to Country B

[[Page 142]]

and request that consideration be given by Country B to determining that 
the FMVSS is better than or at least functionally equivalent to the 
counterpart Country B standard, and to subsequently amending its 
standard accordingly.

             C. Agency Decisions in Which Flowchart Is Used

    This flowchart guides agency decisions in connection with a 
rulemaking proceeding that involves the issue of relative benefits and 
functional equivalence.
    1. Decision whether to grant a rulemaking petition. If the agency 
receives a petition for rulemaking based on a claim that one of Country 
B's standards is better than or at least functionally equivalent to one 
of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSSs), the agency will 
consider the merits of the petition in accordance with 49 CFR Part 552, 
Petitions for rulemaking, defect, and noncompliance orders, and with the 
functional equivalence process set forth in the flowchart. If it appears 
that there is reason to believe that Country B's standard provides 
safety benefits are greater than or at least equal to those of the 
FMVSS, the agency will likely grant the petition and commence a 
rulemaking proceeding.
    The agency emphasizes that its priority with respect to 
international harmonization is identifying and adopting those foreign 
safety standards that represent best practices. Accordingly, if resource 
limitations make it necessary to choose between competing petitions in 
granting or processing them, the agency would give priority to petitions 
asking the agency to upgrade one of its standards to the level of a 
superior foreign standard over petitions simply asking the agency to add 
a compliance alternative.
    2. Decision whether to issue a notice of proposed rulemaking. If 
NHTSA grants the petition, it will proceed, as in any other rulemaking 
regarding the FMVSSs, to determine whether amending an FMVSS would be 
appropriate under the applicable statutory criteria in chapter 301 of 
title 49, U.S.C. Following the process set forth in the flowchart, the 
agency will use data submitted by the petitioner, supplemented by data 
from other sources, to compare performance and tentatively determine 
whether Country B's standard specified in the petition is better than or 
at least functionally equivalent to the FMVSS specified in the petition.
    This comparison could have a variety of possible outcomes:
    a. The comparison may indicate that the foreign standard's safety 
benefits are less than those of the counterpart FMVSS. If NHTSA 
determines that the foreign standard results in fewer safety benefits 
than the counterpart FMVSS, it will terminate the rulemaking proceeding.
    b. The comparison may indicate that the foreign standard's safety 
benefits are approximately equal to those of the counterpart FMVSS. If 
the agency tentatively determines that the safety benefits of a foreign 
standard are approximately equal to those of a FMVSS, it will take one 
of two steps in most instances. One possibility is that it will develop 
a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPRM) proposing to amend the FMVSS by 
adding the foreign standard as an alternative to the existing 
requirements of the FMVSS. The other possibility is that the agency will 
develop an NPRM proposing to harmonize the FMVSS with the foreign 
standard. This second approach would enable NHTSA to maintain a single 
set of requirements and test procedures in its standard, thereby 
minimizing any drain on its enforcement resources. An additional 
possibility that might be considered in some instances would be 
``qualified functional equivalence.'' Under this third approach, the 
agency would regard Country B's standard to be functionally equivalent 
if it is supplemented by a specified requirement in the counterpart 
FMVSS.
    c. The comparison may indicate that the foreign standard's safety 
benefits are greater than those of the counterpart FMVSS. If NHTSA 
tentatively determines that the foreign standard results in greater 
safety benefits than the counterpart FMVSS, and if upgrading is 
appropriate, based on the incremental benefits and costs and applicable 
statutory criteria, the agency issues an NPRM proposing to upgrade the 
FMVSS to the level of Country B's std. If upgrading is not appropriate, 
NHTSA considers issuing an NPRM proposing to add the requirements of 
Country B's std to the FMVSS as an alternative compliance option. The 
proposal to add the compliance option would set forth the basis for the 
agency's conclusion that upgrading the FMVSS is inappropriate.
If NHTSA issues an NPRM, it would request comment on the tentative 
determination and the proposed amendment.
    3. Decision whether to issue a final rule. Any final decision to 
make a determination regarding relative benefits and functional 
equivalency and to amend the FMVSS will be made in accordance with the 
process in the flowchart and applicable law and only after careful 
consideration and analysis of the public comments.

[63 FR 26514, May 13, 1998]

[[Page 143]]

   Appendix C to Part 553--Statement of Policy: Implementation of the 
United Nations/Economic Commission for Europe (UN/ECE) 1998 Agreement on 
      Global Technical Regulations--Agency Policy Goals and Public 
                              Participation

 I. Agency Policy Goals for the 1998 Global Agreement and International 
                   Motor Vehicle Safety Harmonization

        A. Paramount Policy Goal Under the 1998 Global Agreement

    Continuously improve safety and seek high levels of safety, 
particularly by developing and adopting new global technical regulations 
reflecting consideration of current and anticipated technology and 
safety problems.

                          B. Other Policy Goals

    1. Adopt and maintain U.S. standards that fully meet the need in the 
U.S. for vehicle safety.
    2. Harmonize U.S. standards with those of other countries or 
regions, particularly by raising U.S. standards at least to the level of 
the best practices in those other safety standards.
    3. Enhance regulatory effectiveness through regulatory cooperation 
with other countries and regions, thereby providing greater safety 
protection with available government resources.

   II. Public Participation and the Establishing of Global Technical 
   Regulations for Motor Vehicle Safety, Theft, and Energy Efficiency

     A. Summary of the Process Under the 1998 Global Agreement for 
                Establishing Global Technical Regulations

                            1. Proposal Stage

    A Contracting Party submits a proposal for either a harmonized or 
new global technical regulation to the Executive Committee of the 1998 
Global Agreement (i.e., the Contracting Parties to the Agreement). If 
appropriate, the Committee then refers the proposal to a working party 
of experts to develop the technical elements of the regulation.

                         2. Recommendation Stage

    When a working party of experts recommends a harmonized or new 
global technical regulation, it sends a report and the recommended 
regulation to the Executive Committee. The Committee then determines 
whether the recommendations are adequate and considers the establishment 
of the recommended regulation.

                         3. Establishment Stage

    If the Executive Committee reaches consensus in favor of that 
recommended global technical regulation, the global technical regulation 
is established in the Global Registry.

                B. Notice of Annual Work Program of WP.29

    Each year, NHTSA will publish a notice concerning the motor vehicle 
safety, theft, and energy efficiency aspects of the annual program of 
work for the UN/ECE's World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle 
Regulations (WP.29). Each notice will include:
    1. A calendar of scheduled meetings of WP.29 participants and 
working parties of experts, and meetings of the Executive Committee; and
    2. A list of the global technical regulations that:
    a. Have been proposed and referred to a working party of experts, or
    b. Have been recommended by a working party of experts.

Periodically, the notice will also include a request for public comments 
on the subjects for which global technical regulations should be 
established under the 1998 Global Agreement. The agency will publish a 
subsequent notice identifying the priorities on which NHTSA will focus 
in the future under the 1998 Global Agreement.

                           C. Public Meetings

    NHTSA will hold periodic public meetings on its activities under the 
1998 Global Agreement. If the extent of recent and anticipated 
significant developments concerning those activities so warrant, NHTSA 
will hold a public meeting within the 60-day period before each of the 
three sessions of WP.29 held annually. At each of these public meetings, 
NHTSA will:
    1. Brief the public on the significant developments that occurred at 
the session of WP.29, the meetings of the working parties of experts and 
the meetings of the Executive Committee since the previous public 
meeting;
    2. Based on the availability of provisional agendas, inform the 
public about the significant issues to be addressed at upcoming session 
of WP.29 and meetings of the working parties of experts and any votes 
scheduled at the next session of the Executive Committee on recommended 
global technical regulations; and
    3. Invite public comment and questions concerning those past 
developments and upcoming issues and votes and the general positions 
that the U.S. could take regarding those votes, and concerning any other 
significant developments and upcoming matters relating to pending 
proposed or recommended global technical regulations.


[[Page 144]]


Appropriate agency officials will participate in the public meetings. 
These public meetings may be held separately from or in conjunction with 
the agency's quarterly meetings on its vehicle rulemaking and research 
and development programs. The agency may hold additional public 
meetings.

      D. Notices Concerning Individual Global Technical Regulations

   1. Notice Requesting Written Comment on Proposed Global Technical 
                               Regulations

    a. Proposals by the U.S. (See Figure 1.)
    Before submitting a draft U.S. proposal for a global technical 
regulation to WP.29, NHTSA will publish a notice requesting public 
comments on the draft proposed global technical regulation. In the case 
of a draft proposal for a harmonized global technical regulation, the 
notice will compare that regulation with any existing, comparable U.S. 
standard, including the relative impacts of the regulation and standard. 
In the case of a draft proposal for a new global technical regulation, 
the notice will generally discuss the problem addressed by the proposal, 
the rationale for the proposed approach for addressing the problem, and 
the impacts of the proposal. NHTSA will consider the public comments 
and, as it deems appropriate, revise the proposal and any of its 
supporting documentation and then submit the proposal to WP.29.
    b. Proposals by a Contracting Party other than the U.S. (See Figure 
2.)
    After a proposal by a Contracting Party other than the U.S. has been 
referred to a working party of experts and has been made available in 
English by WP.29, NHTSA will make the draft proposal available in the 
DOT docket (http://dms.dot.gov/). The agency will then publish a notice 
requesting public comment on the draft proposal and will consider the 
comments in developing a U.S. position on the proposal.

  2. Notice Requesting Written Comment on Recommended Global Technical 
                               Regulations

    If a working party of experts recommends a global technical 
regulation and sends a report and the recommended regulation to the 
Executive Committee, NHTSA will make an English language version of the 
report and the regulation available in the DOT docket (http://
dms.dot.gov/) after they are made available by WP.29. The agency will 
publish a notice requesting public comment on the report and regulation. 
Before participating in a vote of the Executive Committee regarding the 
establishment of the regulation, the agency will consider the comments 
and develop a U.S. position on the recommended technical regulation.

  3. Notice Requesting Written Comment on Established Global Technical 
                               Regulations

    If a global technical regulation is established in the Global 
Registry by a consensus vote of the Executive Committee, and if the U.S. 
voted for establishment, NHTSA will publish a notice requesting public 
comment on adopting the regulation as a U.S. standard. Any decision by 
NHTSA whether to issue a final rule adopting the regulation or to issue 
a notice terminating consideration of that regulation will be made in 
accordance with applicable U.S. law and only after careful consideration 
and analysis of public comments.

                      E. Availability of Documents

    As we obtain English versions of key documents relating to motor 
vehicle safety, theft or energy conservation that are generated under 
the 1998 Agreement (e.g., proposals referred to a working party of 
experts, and reports and recommendations issued by a working party), we 
will place them in the internet-accessible DOT docket (http://
dms.dot.gov/). Within the limits of available resources, we will also 
place the documents on an international activities page that will be 
included in our Website (http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/cars/rules/
international/index.html).

[[Page 145]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU00.000


[[Page 146]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU00.001


[65 FR 51245, Aug. 23, 2000]

[[Page 147]]


<R03>
PART 554_STANDARDS ENFORCEMENT AND DEFECTS INVESTIGATION--Table of 
Contents




Sec.
554.1 Scope.
554.2 Purpose.
554.3 Application.
554.4 Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance.
554.5 Office of Defects Investigation.
554.6 Opening an investigation.
554.7 Investigation priorities.
554.8 Monthly reports.
554.9 Availability of files.
554.10 Initial determinations and public meetings.
554.11 Final decisions.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 30102-103, 30111-112, 30117-121, 30162, 30165-
67; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 45 FR 10797, Feb. 19, 1980, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 554.1  Scope.

    This part establishes procedures for enforcing Federal motor vehicle 
safety standards and associated regulations, investigating possible 
safety-related defects, and making non-compliance and defect 
determinations.


<R05>
Sec. 554.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to inform interested persons of the 
procedures followed by the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration in order more fairly and effectively to implement 49 
U.S.C. Chapter 301.

[60 FR 17267, Apr. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 554.3  Application.

    This part applies to actions, investigations, and defect and 
noncompliance decisions of the National Highway traffic Safety 
Administration under 49 U.S.C. 30116, 30117, 30118, 30120 and 30165.

[60 FR 17267, Apr. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 554.4  Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance.

    The Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance, investigates compliance 
with Federal motor vehicle safety standards and associated regulations, 
and to this end may:
    (a) Verify that manufacturers certify compliance with all applicable 
safety standards;
    (b) Collect field reports from all sources;
    (c) Inspect manufacturers' certification test data and other 
supporting evidence, including dealer communications;
    (d) Inspect vehicles and equipment already in use or new vehicles 
and equipment at any stage of the manufacturing, distribution and sales 
chain;
    (e) Conduct selective compliance tests; and
    (f) Utilize other means necessary to conduct investigations.


<R05>
Sec. 554.5  Office of Defects Investigation.

    The Office of Defects Investigation conducts investigations to 
implement the provisions of the Act concerning the identification and 
correction of safety-related defects in motor vehicles and motor vehicle 
equipment. It elicits from every available source and evaluates on a 
continuing basis any information suggesting the existence of a safety-
related defect.


<R05>
Sec. 554.6  Opening an investigation.

    (a) A compliance or defect investigation is opened either on the 
motion of the Administrator or his delegate or on the granting of a 
petition of an interested party under part 552 of this chapter.
    (b) A manufacturer is notified immediately by telephone of any 
compliance test failure in order to enable the manufacturer to begin his 
own investigation. Notification is sent by mail at the beginning of any 
defect or noncompliance investigation.


<R05>
Sec. 554.7  Investigation priorities.

    (a) Compliance investigation priorities are reviewed annually and 
are set according to the following criteria:
    (1) Prior compliance test data;
    (2) Accident data;
    (3) Engineering analysis of vehicle and equipment designs;
    (4) Consumer complaints; and
    (5) Market share.
    (b) Defects inputs are reviewed periodically by an appropriate panel 
of engineers in consultation with the Office of Chief Counsel to 
determine whether a formal investigation should be opened by the Office 
of Defects Investigation.

[[Page 148]]


<R05>
Sec. 554.8  Monthly reports.

    (a) Compliance. A monthly compliance report is issued which lists 
investigations opened, closed, and pending during that month, identifies 
compliance test reports accepted, and indicates how individual reports 
may be obtained.
    (b) Defects. A monthly defects report is issued which lists 
investigations opened, closed, pending, and suspended during that month. 
An investigation may be designated ``suspended'' where the information 
available is insufficient to warrant further investigation. Suspended 
cases are automatically closed 60 days after appearing in a monthly 
report unless new information is received which justifies a different 
disposition.


<R05>
Sec. 554.9  Availability of files.

    All files of closed or suspended investigations are available for 
public inspection in the NHTSA Technical Reference Library. 
Communications between the agency and a manufacturer with respect to 
ongoing investigations are also available. Such files and communications 
may contain material which is considered confidential but has been 
determined to be necessary to the subject proceeding. Material which is 
considered confidential but has not been determined to be necessary to 
the subject proceeding will not be disclosed. Reproduction of entire 
public files or of individual documents can be arranged.


<R05>
Sec. 554.10  Initial determinations and public meetings.

    (a) An initial decision of failure to comply with safety standards 
or of a safety-related defect is made by the Administrator or his 
delegate based on the completed investigative file compiled by the 
appropriate office.
    (b) The decision is communicated to the manufacturer in a letter 
which makes available all information on which the decision is based. 
The letter advises the manufacturer of his right to present information, 
views, and arguments to establish that there is no defect or failure to 
comply or that the alleged defect does not affect motor vehicle safety. 
The letter also specifies the time and place of a public meeting for the 
presentation of arguments or sets a date by which written comments must 
be submitted. Submission of all information, whether at a public meeting 
or in written form, is normally scheduled about 30 days after the 
initial decision. The deadline for submission of information can be 
extended for good cause shown.
    (c) Public notice of an initial decision is made in a Federal 
Register notice that--
    (1) Identifies the motor vehicle or item of equipment and its 
manufacturer;
    (2) Summarizes the information on which the decision is based.
    (3) Gives the location of all information available for public 
examination; and
    (4) States the time and place of a public meeting or the deadline 
for written submission in which the manufacturer and interested persons 
may present information, views, and arguments respecting the decision.
    (d) A transcript of the public meeting is kept and exhibits may be 
offered. There is no cross-examination of witnesses.

[45 FR 10797, Feb. 19, 1980, as amended at 60 FR 17267, Apr. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 554.11  Final decisions.

    (a) The Administrator bases his final decision on the completed 
investigative file and on information, views, and arguments submitted at 
the public meeting.
    (b) If the Administrator decides that a failure to comply or a 
safety-related defect exists, he orders the manufacturer to furnish the 
notification specified in 49 U.S.C. 30118 and 30119 and to remedy the 
defect or failure to comply.
    (c) If the Administrator closes an investigation following an 
initial determination, without making a final determination that a 
failure to comply or a safety-related defect exists, he or she will so 
notify the manufacturer and publish a notice of that closing in the 
Federal Register.
    (d) A statement of the Administrator's final decision and the 
reasons for it appears in each completed public file.

[60 FR 17268, Apr. 5, 1995]

[[Page 149]]


<R03>
PART 555_TEMPORARY EXEMPTION FROM MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY AND BUMPER 
STANDARDS--Table of Contents




Sec.
555.1 Scope.
555.2 Purpose.
555.3 Application.
555.4 Definitions.
555.5 Application for exemption.
555.6 Basis for application.
555.7 Processing of applications.
555.8 Termination of temporary exemptions.
555.9 Temporary exemption labels.
555.10 Availability for public inspection.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 30113, 32502, Pub. L. 105-277; delegation of 
authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 38 FR 2694, Jan. 29, 1973, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 555.1  Scope.

    This part establishes requirements for the temporary exemption by 
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) of certain 
motor vehicles from compliance with one or more Federal motor vehicle 
safety standards in accordance with 49 U.S.C. 30113, and of certain 
passenger motor vehicles from compliance with all or part of a Federal 
bumper standard in accordance with 49 U.S.C. 32502.

[64 FR 2861, Jan. 19, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 555.2  Purpose.

    (a) The purpose of this part is to provide a means by which 
manufacturers of motor vehicles may obtain temporary exemptions from 
Federal motor vehicle safety standards on the basis of substantial 
economic hardship, facilitation of the development of new motor vehicle 
safety or low-emission engine features, or existence of an equivalent 
overall level of motor vehicle safety.
    (b) The purpose of this part is also to provide a means by which 
manufacturers of passenger motor vehicles may obtain a temporary 
exemption from compliance with all or part of a Federal bumper standard 
issued under part 581 of this chapter on a basis similar to that 
provided for exemptions from the Federal motor vehicle safety standards.

[38 FR 2694, Jan. 29, 1973, as amended at 64 FR 2861, Jan. 19, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 555.3  Application.

    This part applies to manufacturers of motor vehicles and passenger 
motor vehicles.

[64 FR 2861, Jan. 19, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 555.4  Definitions.

    Administrator means the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administrator or his delegate.
    Passenger motor vehicle means a motor vehicle with motive power 
designed to carry not more than 12 individuals, but does not include a 
truck not designed primarily to carry its operator or passengers, or a 
motorcycle.
    United States means the several States, the District of Columbia, 
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, the Canal 
Zone, and American Samoa.

[38 FR 2694, Jan. 29, 1973, as amended at 64 FR 2861, Jan. 19, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 555.5  Application for exemption.

    (a) A manufacturer of motor vehicles or passenger motor vehicles may 
apply to NHTSA for a temporary exemption from any Federal motor vehicle 
safety or bumper standard or for a renewal of any exemption on the bases 
of substantial economic hardship, making easier the development or field 
evaluation of new motor vehicle safety or impact protection, or low-
emission vehicle features, or that compliance with a standard would 
prevent it from selling a vehicle with an overall level of safety or 
impact protection at least equal to that of nonexempted vehicles.
    (b) Each application filed under this part for an exemption or its 
renewal must--
    (1) Be written in the English language;
    (2) Be submitted in three copies to: Administrator, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, Washington, DC 20590;
    (3) State the full name and address of the applicant, the nature of 
its organization (individual, partnership, corporation, etc.) and the 
name of the

[[Page 150]]

State or country under the laws of which it is organized;
    (4) State the number and title, and the text or substance of the 
standard or portion thereof from which the temporary exemption is 
sought, and the length of time desired for such exemption;
    (5) Set forth the basis for the application and the information 
required by Sec. 555.6(a), (b), (c), or (d) as appropriate.
    (6) Specify any part of the information and data submitted which 
petitioner requests be withheld from public disclosure in accordance 
with part 512 of this chapter.
    (i) The information and data which petitioner requests be withheld 
from public disclosure must be submitted in accordance with Sec. 512.4 
Asserting a claim for confidential information of this chapter.
    (ii) The petitioner's request for withholding from public disclosure 
must be accompanied by a certification in support as set forth in 
appendix A to part 512 of this chapter.
    (7) Set forth the reasons why the granting of the exemption would be 
in the public interest, and, as applicable, consistent with the 
objectives of 49 U.S.C. Chapter 301 or Chapter 325.
    (c) The knowing and willful submission of false, fictitious or 
fraudulent information will subject the petitioner to the civil and 
criminal penalties of 18 U.S.C. 1001.

[38 FR 2694, Jan. 29, 1973, as amended at 39 FR 5489, Feb. 13, 1974; 46 
FR 2063, Jan. 8, 1981; 63 FR 44173, Aug. 18, 1998; 64 FR 2861, Jan. 19, 
1999]


<R05>
Sec. 555.6  Basis for application.

    (a) If the basis of the application is that compliance with the 
standard would cause substantial economic hardship to a manufacturer 
that has tried to comply with the standard in good faith, the applicant 
shall provide the following information:
    (1) Engineering and financial information demonstrating in detail 
how compliance or failure to obtain an exemption would cause substantial 
economic hardship, including--
    (i) A list or description of each item of motor vehicle equipment 
that would have to be modified in order to achieve compliance;
    (ii) The itemized estimated cost to modify each such item of motor 
vehicle equipment if compliance were to be achieved--
    (A) As soon as possible,
    (B) At the end of a 1-year exemption period (if the petition is for 
1 year or more),
    (C) At the end of a 2-year exemption period (if the petition is for 
2 years or more),
    (D) At the end of a 3-year exemption period (if the petition is for 
3 years),
    (iii) The estimated price increase per vehicle to balance the total 
costs incurred pursuant to paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section and a 
statement of the anticipated effect of each such price increase;
    (iv) Corporate balance sheets and income statements for the three 
fiscal years immediately preceding the filing of the application;
    (v) Projected balance sheet and income statement for the fiscal year 
following a denial of the application; and
    (vi) A discussion of any other hardships (e.g., loss of market, 
difficulty of obtaining goods and services for compliance) that the 
petitioner desires the agency to consider.
    (2) A description of its efforts to comply with the standards, 
including--
    (i) A chronological analysis of such efforts showing its 
relationship to the rule making history of the standard from which 
exemption is sought;
    (ii) A discussion of alternate means of compliance considered and 
the reasons for rejection of each;
    (iii) A discussion of any other factors (e.g., the resources 
available to the petitioner, inability to procure goods and services 
necessary for compliance following a timely request) that the petitioner 
desires the NHTSA to consider in deciding whether the petitioner tried 
in good faith to comply with the standard;
    (iv) A description of the steps to be taken, while the exemption is 
in effect, and the estimated date by which full compliance will be 
achieved either by design changes or termination of production of 
nonconforming vehicles; and
    (v) The total number of motor vehicles produced by or on behalf of 
the petitioner in the 12-month period prior to filing the petition, and 
the inclusive

[[Page 151]]

dates of the period. (49 U.S.C. 30113(d) limits eligibility for 
exemption on the basis of economic hardship to manufacturers whose total 
motor vehicle production in the year preceding the filing of their 
applications does not exceed 10,000.)
    (b) If the basis of the application is that the exemption would make 
easier the development or field evaluation of a new motor vehicle safety 
or impact protection features providing a safety or impact protection 
level at least equal to that of the standard, the applicant shall 
provide the following information:
    (1) A description of the safety or impact protection features, and 
research, development, and testing documentation establishing the 
innovational nature of such features.
    (2) An analysis establishing that the level of safety or impact 
protection of the feature is equivalent to or exceeds the level of 
safety or impact protection established in the standard from which 
exemption is sought, including--
    (i) A detailed description of how a vehicle equipped with the safety 
or impact protection feature differs from one that complies with the 
standard;
    (ii) If applicant is presently manufacturing a vehicle conforming to 
the standard, the results of tests conducted to substantiate 
certification to the standard; and
    (iii) The results of tests conducted on the safety or impact 
protection features that demonstrates performance which meets or exceeds 
the requirements of the standard.
    (3) Substantiation that a temporary exemption would facilitate the 
development or field evaluation of the vehicle.
    (4) A statement whether, at the end of the exemption period, the 
manufacturer intends to conform to the standard, apply for a further 
exemption, or petition for rulemaking to amend the standard to 
incorporate the safety or impact protection features.
    (5) A statement that not more than 2,500 exempted vehicles will be 
sold in the United States in any 12-month period for which an exemption 
may be granted pursuant to this paragraph. An application for renewal of 
such an exemption shall also include the total number of exempted 
vehicles sold in the United States under the existing exemption.
    (c) If the basis of the application is that the exemption would make 
the development or field evaluation of a low-emission vehicle easier and 
would not unreasonably lower the safety or impact protection level of 
that vehicle, the applicant shall provide--
    (1) Substantiation that the vehicle is a low-emission vehicle as 
defined by 49 U.S.C. 30113(a).
    (2) Research, development, and testing documentation establishing 
that a temporary exemption would not unreasonably degrade the safety or 
impact protection of the vehicle, including--
    (i) A detailed description of how the motor vehicle equipped with 
the low-emission engine would, if exempted, differ from one that 
complies with the standard;
    (ii) If the applicant is presently manufacturing a vehicle 
conforming to the standard, the results of tests conducted to 
substantiate certification to the standard;
    (iii) The results of any tests conducted on the vehicle that 
demonstrate its failure to meet the standard, expressed as comparative 
performance levels; and
    (iv) Reasons why the failure to meet the standard does not 
unreasonably degrade the safety or impact protection of the vehicle.
    (3) Substantiation that a temporary exemption would facilitate the 
development or field evaluation of the vehicle.
    (4) A statement whether, at the end of the exemption period, the 
manufacturer intends to conform with the standard.
    (5) A statement that not more than 2,500 exempted vehicles will be 
sold in the United States in any 12-month period for which an exemption 
may be granted pursuant to this paragraph. An application for renewal of 
an exemption shall also include the total number of exempted vehicles 
sold in the United States under the existing exemption.
    (d) If the basis of the application is that the applicant is 
otherwise unable to sell a vehicle whose overall level of safety or 
impact protection is at least

[[Page 152]]

equal to that of a nonexempted vehicle, the applicant shall provide--
    (1) A detailed analysis of how the vehicle provides the overall 
level of safety or impact protection at least equal to that of 
nonexempted vehicles, including--
    (i) A detailed description of how the motor vehicle, if exempted, 
differs from one that conforms to the standard;
    (ii) A detailed description of any safety or impact protection 
features that the vehicle offers as standard equipment that are not 
required by the Federal motor vehicle safety or bumper standards;
    (iii) The results of any tests conducted on the vehicle 
demonstrating that it fails to meet the standard, expressed as 
comparative performance levels;
    (iv) The results of any tests conducted on the vehicle demonstrating 
that its overall level of safety or impact protection exceeds that which 
is achieved by conformity to the standards.
    (v) Other arguments that the overall level of safety or impact 
protection of the vehicle is at least equal to that of nonexempted 
vehicles.
    (2) Substantiation that compliance would prevent the sale of the 
vehicle.
    (3) A statement whether, at the end of the exemption period, the 
manufacturer intends to comply with the standard.
    (4) A statement that not more than 2,500 exempted vehicles will be 
sold in the United States in any 12-month period for which an exemption 
may be granted pursuant to this paragraph. An application for renewal of 
any exemption shall also include the total number of exempted vehicles 
sold in the United States under the existing exemption.

[38 FR 2694, Jan. 29, 1973, as amended at 39 FR 5489, Feb. 13, 1974; 63 
FR 44173, Aug. 18, 1998; 64 FR 2861, Jan. 19, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 555.7  Processing of applications.

    (a) The NHTSA publishes in the Federal Register, affording 
opportunity for comment, a notice of each application containing the 
information required by this part. However, if the NHTSA finds that an 
application does not contain the information required by this part, it 
so informs the applicant, pointing out the areas of insufficiency and 
stating that the application will not receive further consideration 
until the required information is submitted.
    (b) No public hearing, argument, or other formal proceeding is held 
directly on an application filed under this part before its disposition 
under this section.
    (c) Any interested person may, upon written request, appear 
informally before an appropriate official of the NHTSA to discuss an 
application for exemption or the action taken in response to a petition.
    (d) If the Administrator determines that the application does not 
contain adequate justification, he denies it and notifies the petitioner 
in writing. He also publishes in the Federal Register a notice of the 
denial and the reasons for it.
    (e) If the Administrator determines that the application contains 
adequate justification, he grants it, and notifies the petitioner in 
writing. He also publishes in the Federal Register a notice of the grant 
and the reasons for it.
    (f) Unless a later effective date is specified in the notice of the 
grant, a temporary exemption is effective upon publication of the notice 
in the Federal Register and exempts vehicles manufactured on and after 
the effective date.

[38 FR 2694, Jan. 29, 1973, as amended at 39 FR 5489, Feb. 13, 1974; 39 
FR 37988, Oct. 25, 1974; 64 FR 2861, 2862, Jan. 19, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 555.8  Termination of temporary exemptions.

    (a) A temporary exemption from a standard granted on the basis of 
substantial economic hardship terminates according to its terms but not 
later than 3 years after the date of issuance unless terminated sooner 
pursuant to paragraph (d) of this section.
    (b) A temporary exemption from a standard granted on a basis other 
than substantial economic hardship terminates according to its terms but 
not later than 2 years after the date of issuance unless terminated 
sooner pursuant to paragraph (d) of this section.

[[Page 153]]

    (c) Any interested person may petition for the termination or 
modification of an exemption granted under this part. The petition will 
be processed in accordance with the procedures of part 552 of this 
chapter.
    (d) The Administrator terminates or modifies a temporary exemption 
if he determines that--
    (1) The temporary exemption is no longer consistent with the public 
interest and the objectives of the Act; or
    (2) The temporary exemption was granted on the basis of false, 
fraudulent, or misleading representations or information.
    (e) If an application for renewal of a temporary exemption that 
meets the requirements of Sec. 555.5 has been filed not later than 60 
days before the termination date of an exemption, the exemption does not 
terminate until the Administrator grants or denies the application for 
renewal.
    (f) The Administrator publishes in the Federal Register a notice of:
    (1) An application for termination or modification of an exemption 
and the action taken in response to it; and
    (2) Any termination or modification of an exemption pursuant to the 
Administrator's own motion.

[38 FR 2694, Jan. 29, 1973, as amended at 39 FR 37989, Oct. 25, 1974; 40 
FR 42015, Sept. 10, 1975; 64 FR 2861, Jan. 19, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 555.9  Temporary exemption labels.

    A manufacturer of an exempted vehicle shall--
    (a) Submit to the Administrator, within 30 days after receiving 
notification of the grant of an exemption, a sample of the certification 
label required by part 567 of this chapter and paragraph (c) of this 
section;
    (b) Affix securely to the windshield or side window of each exempted 
vehicle a label in the English language containing the statement 
required by paragraph (c)(1) or (2) of this section, and with the words 
``Shown above'' omitted.
    (c) Meet all applicable requirements of part 567 of this chapter, 
except that--
    (1) The statement required by Sec. 567.4(g)(5) of this chapter 
shall end with the phrase ``except for Standards Nos. [listing the 
standards by number and title for which an exemption has been granted] 
exempted pursuant to NHTSA Exemption No. ----------------.''
    (2) Instead of the statement required by Sec. 567.5(c)(7)(iii), the 
following statement shall appear:

    THIS VEHICLE CONFORMS TO ALL APPLICABLE FEDERAL MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY 
(AND BUMPER) STANDARDS IN EFFECT IN [Month, Year] EXCEPT FOR STANDARD 
NOS. [Listing the standards by number and title for which an exemption 
has been granted] EXEMPTED PURSUANT TO NHTSA EXEMPTION NO. ------------.

(Secs. 114, 119, Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 (15 U.S.C. 1403, 1408); 
sec. 3, Pub. L. 92-548, 86 Stat. 1159 (15 U.S.C. 1410); secs. 102, 105, 
Pub. L. 92-513, 86 Stat. 947 (15 U.S.C. 1912, 1915); delegations of 
authority at 49 CFR 1.50 and 501.8)

[38 FR 2694, Jan. 29, 1973, as amended at 50 FR 10772, Mar. 18, 1985; 60 
FR 1750, Jan. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 555.10  Availability for public inspection.

    (a) Information relevant to an application under this part, 
including the application and supporting data, memoranda of informal 
meetings with the applicant or any other interested person, and the 
grant or denial of the application, is available for public inspection, 
except as specified in paragraph (b) of this section, in Room PL-401 
(Docket Management), 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. 
Copies of available information may be obtained, as provided in Part 7 
of the regulations of the Office of the Secretary of Transportation (49 
CFR part 7).
    (b) Except for the release of confidential information authorized by 
part 512 of this chapter, information made available for inspection 
under paragraph (a) shall not include materials not relevant to the 
petition for which confidentiality is requested and granted in 
accordance with 49 U.S.C. 30166 and 30167 and section 552(b) of title 5 
of the U.S.C.).

[38 FR 2694, Jan. 29, 1973, as amended at 46 FR 2064, Jan. 8, 1981; 48 
FR 44081, Sept. 27, 1983; 63 FR 44173, Aug. 18, 1998; 64 FR 2862, Jan. 
19, 1999]

[[Page 154]]


<R03>
PART 556_EXEMPTION FOR INCONSEQUENTIAL DEFECT OR NONCOMPLIANCE--Table 
of Contents




Sec.
556.1 Scope.
556.2 Purpose.
556.3 Application.
556.4 Petition for exemption.
556.5 Processing of petition.
556.6 Meetings.
556.7 Disposition of petition.
556.8 Rescission of decision.
556.9 Public inspection of relevant information.

    Authority: Sec. 157, Pub. L. 93-492, 88 Stat. 1470 (15 U.S.C. 1417); 
delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 42 FR 7145, Feb. 7, 1977, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 556.1  Scope.

    This part sets forth procedures, pursuant to section 157 of the Act, 
for exempting manufacturers of motor vehicles and replacement equipment 
from the Act's notice and remedy requirements when a defect or 
noncompliance is determined to be inconsequential as it relates to motor 
vehicle safety.


<R05>
Sec. 556.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to enable manufacturers of motor 
vehicles and replacement equipment to petition the NHTSA for exemption 
from the notification and remedy requirements of the Act due to the 
inconsequentiality of the defect or noncompliance as it relates to motor 
vehicle safety, and to give all interested persons an opportunity for 
presentation of data, views, and arguments on the issues of 
inconsequentiality.


<R05>
Sec. 556.3  Application.

    This part applies to manufacturers of motor vehicles and replacement 
equipment.


<R05>
Sec. 556.4  Petition for exemption.

    (a) A manufacturer who has determined the existence, in a motor 
vehicle or item of replacement equipment that he produces, of a defect 
related to motor vehicle safety or a noncompliance with an applicable 
Federal motor vehicle safety standard, or who has received notice of an 
initial determination by the NHTSA of the existence of a defect related 
to motor vehicle safety or a noncompliance, may petition for exemption 
from the Act's notification and remedy requirements on the grounds that 
the defect or noncompliance is inconsequential as it relates to motor 
vehicle safety.
    (b) Each petition submitted under this part shall--
    (1) Be written in the English language;
    (2) Be submitted in three copies to: Administrator, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, Washington, DC 20590;
    (3) State the full name and address of the applicant, the nature of 
its organization (e.g., individual, partnership, or corporation) and the 
name of the State or country under the laws of which it is organized.
    (4) Describe the motor vehicle or item of replacement equipment, 
including the number involved and the period of production, and the 
defect or noncompliance concerning which an exemption is sought; and
    (5) Set forth all data, views, and arguments of the petitioner 
supporting his petition.
    (6) Be accompanied by three copies of the report the manufacturer 
has submitted, or is submitting, to NHTSA in accordance with part 573 of 
this chapter, relating to its determination of the existence of safety 
related defect or noncompliance with an applicable safety standard that 
is the subject of the petition.
    (c) In the case of defects related to motor vehicle safety or 
noncompliances determined to exist by a manufacturer, petitions under 
this part must be submitted not later than 30 days after such 
determination. In the case of defects related to motor vehicle safety or 
noncompliances initially determined to exist by the NHTSA, petitions 
must be submitted not later than 30 days after notification of the 
determination has been received by the manufacturer. Such a petition 
will not constitute a concession by the manufacturer of, nor will it be 
considered relevant to, the existence of a defect

[[Page 155]]

related to motor vehicle safety or a nonconformity.

[42 FR 7145, Feb. 7, 1977, as amended at 56 FR 66376, Dec. 23, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 556.5  Processing of petition.

    (a) The NHTSA publishes a notice of each petition in the Federal 
Register. Such notice includes:
    (1) A brief summary of the petition;
    (2) A statement of the availability of the petition and other 
relevant information for public inspection; and
    (3)(i) In the case of a defect related to motor vehicle safety or a 
noncompliance determined to exist by the manufacturer, an invitation to 
interested persons to submit written data, views, and arguments 
concerning the petition, and, upon request by the petitioner or 
interested persons, a statement of the time and place of a public 
meeting at which such materials may be presented orally if any person so 
desires.
    (ii) In the case of a defect related to motor vehicle safety or a 
noncompliance initially determined to exist by the NHTSA, an invitation 
to interested persons to submit written data, views, and arguments 
concerning the petition or to submit such data, views, and arguments 
orally at the meeting held pursuant to section 152(a) of the Act 
following the initial determination, or at a separate meeting if deemed 
appropriate by the agency.


<R05>
Sec. 556.6  Meetings.

    (a) At a meeting held under this part, any interested person may 
make oral (as well as written) presentations of data, views, and 
arguments on the question whether the defect or noncompliance described 
in the Federal Register notice is inconsequential as it relates to motor 
vehicle safety.
    (b) Sections 556 and 557 of Title 5, U.S.C., do not apply to any 
meeting held under this part. Unless otherwise specified, any meeting 
held under this part is an informal, nonadversary, fact-finding 
proceeding, at which there are no formal pleadings or adverse parties. A 
decision to grant or deny a petition, after a meeting on such petition, 
is not necessarily based exclusively on the record of the meeting.
    (c) The Administrator designates a representative to conduct any 
meeting held under this part. The Chief Counsel designates a member of 
his staff to serve as legal officer at the meeting. A transcript of the 
proceeding is kept and exhibits may be kept as part of the transcript.


<R05>
Sec. 556.7  Disposition of petition.

    Notice of either a grant or denial of a petition for exemption from 
the notice and remedy requirements of the Act based upon the 
inconsequentiality of a defect or noncompliance is issued to the 
petitioner and published in the Federal Register. The effect of a grant 
of a petition is to relieve the manufacturer from any further 
responsibility to provide notice and remedy of the defect or 
noncompliance. The effect of a denial is to continue in force, as 
against a manufacturer, all duties contained in the Act relating to 
notice and remedy of the defect or noncompliance. Any interested person 
may appeal the grant or denial of a petition by submitting written data, 
views, or arguments to the Administrator.


<R05>
Sec. 556.8  Rescission of decision.

    The Administrator may rescind a grant or denial of an exemption 
issued under this part any time after the receipt of new data and notice 
and opportunity for comment thereon, in accordance with Sec. Sec. 556.5 
and 556.7.


<R05>
Sec. 556.9  Public inspection of relevant information.

    Information relevant to a petition under this part, including the 
petition and supporting data, memoranda of informal meetings with the 
petitioner or any other interested person concerning the petition, and 
the notice granting or denying the petition, are available for public 
inspection in the Docket Section, Room 5109, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. 
Copies of available information may be obtained in accordance with Part 
7 of the regulations of the Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
(49 CFR part 7).

(Authority: Sec. 104, Pub. L. 93-492, 88 Stat. 1470 (15 U.S.C. 1417))

[42 FR 7145, Feb. 7, 1977, as amended at 48 FR 44081, Sept. 27, 1983]

[[Page 156]]


<R03>
PART 557_PETITIONS FOR HEARINGS ON NOTIFICATION AND REMEDY OF DEFECTS
--Table of Contents




Sec.
557.1 Scope.
557.2 Purpose.
557.3 General.
557.4 Requirements for petition.
557.5 Improperly filed petitions.
557.6 Determination whether to hold a public hearing.
557.7 Public hearing.
557.8 Determination of manufacturer's obligation.

    Authority: Sec. 9, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 Stat. 931 (49 U.S.C. 1657); 
sec. 103, 119, Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 (15 U.S.C. 1392, 1407); sec. 
156, Pub. L. 93-492, 88 Stat. 1470 (15 U.S.C 1416); delegation of 
authority at 49 CFR 1.50).

    Source: 41 FR 56812, Dec. 30, 1976, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 557.1  Scope.

    This part establishes procedures under section 156 of the National 
Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966, as amended (88 Stat. 1470, 
15 U.S.C. 1416), for the submission and disposition of petitions filed 
by interested persons for hearings on the question of whether a 
manufacturer has reasonably met his obligation to notify owners, 
purchasers, and dealers of a safety-related defect or failure to comply 
with a Federal motor vehicle safety standard, or to remedy such defect 
or failure to comply. This part also establishes procedures for holding 
a hearing on these questions.


<R05>
Sec. 557.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to enable the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration to identify and respond on a timely basis to 
petitions for hearings on whether a manufacturer has reasonably met his 
obligation to notify or remedy, and to establish the procedures for such 
hearings.


<R05>
Sec. 557.3  General.

    Any interested person may file with the Administrator a petition 
requesting him to hold a hearing on--
    (a) Whether a manufacturer has reasonably met his obligation to 
notify owners, purchasers, and dealers of a safety-related defect in any 
motor vehicle or item of replacement equipment manufactured by him;
    (b) Whether a manufacturer has reasonably met his obligation to 
notify owners, purchasers, and dealers of a failure to comply with an 
applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standard in any motor vehicle or 
item of replacement equipment manufactured by him;
    (c) Whether the manufacturer has reasonably met his obligation to 
remedy a safety-related defect in any motor vehicle or item of 
replacement equipment manufactured by him; or
    (d) Whether the manufacturer has reasonably met his obligation to 
remedy a failure to comply with an applicable Federal motor vehicle 
safety standard in any motor vehicle or item of replacement equipment 
manufactured by him.


<R05>
Sec. 557.4  Requirements for petition.

    A petition filed under this part should be addressed and submitted 
to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 
Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. Each petition filed under 
this part must--
    (a) Be written in the English or Spanish language;
    (b) Have, preceding its text, the word ``Petition'';
    (c) Contain a brief statement concerning the alleged failure of a 
manufacturer to meet reasonably his obligation to notify or remedy;
    (d) Contain a brief summary of the data, views, or arguments that 
the petitioner wishes to present in a hearing on whether or not a 
manufacturer has reasonably met his obligations to notify or remedy;
    (e) Specifically request a hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 557.5  Improperly filed petitions.

    (a) A petition that is not addressed as specified in Sec. 557.4, 
but that meets the other requirements of that section, will be treated 
as a properly filed petition, received as of the time it is discovered 
and identified.
    (b) A document that fails to conform to one or more of the 
requirements of Sec. 557.4(a) (1) through (5) will not be treated as a 
petition under this part.

[[Page 157]]

Such a document will be treated according to the existing correspondence 
and other procedures of the NHTSA, and any information contained in it 
will be considered at the discretion of the Administrator.


<R05>
Sec. 557.6  Determination whether to hold a public hearing.

    (a) The Administrator considers the following factors in determining 
whether to hold a hearing:
    (1) The nature of the complaint;
    (2) The seriousness of the alleged breach of obligation to remedy;
    (3) The existence of similar complaints;
    (4) The ability of the NHTSA to resolve the problem without holding 
a hearing; and
    (5) Other pertinent matters.
    (b) If, after considering the above factors, the Administrator 
determines that a hearing should be held, the petition is granted. If it 
is determined that a hearing should not be held, the petition is denied. 
In either case, the petitioner is notified of the grant or denial not 
more than 60 days after receipt of the petition by the NHTSA.
    (c) If a petition submitted under this part is denied, a Federal 
Register notice of the denial is issued within 45 days of the denial, 
setting forth the reasons for it.
    (d) The Administrator may conduct a hearing under this part on his 
own motion.


<R05>
Sec. 557.7  Public hearing.

    If the Administrator decides that a public hearing under this part 
is necessary, he issues a notice of public hearing in the Federal 
Register, to advise interested persons of the time, place, and subject 
matter of the public hearing and invite their participation. Interested 
persons may submit their views through oral or written presentation, or 
both. There is no cross-examination of witnesses. A transcript of the 
hearing is kept and exhibits may be accepted as part of the transcript. 
Sections 556 and 557 of title 5, U.S.C., do not apply to hearings held 
under this part. When appropriate, the Chief Counsel designates a member 
of his staff to serve as legal officer at the hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 557.8  Determination of manufacturer's obligation.

    If the Administrator determines, on the basis of the information 
presented at a hearing or any other information that is available to 
him, that the manufacturer has not reasonably met his obligation to 
notify owners, dealers, and purchasers of a safety-related defect or 
failure to comply with a Federal motor vehicle safety standard or to 
remedy such defect or failure to comply, he orders the manufacturer to 
take specified action to comply with his obligation, consistent with the 
authority granted the Administrator by the Act.


<R03>
PART 564_REPLACEABLE LIGHT SOURCE INFORMATION--Table of Contents




Sec.
564.1 Scope.
564.2 Purposes.
564.3 Applicability.
564.4 Definitions.
564.5 Information filing; agency processing of filings.

Appendix A to Part 564--Information To Be Submitted for Replaceable 
          Light Sources
Appendix B to Part 564--Information to be Submitted for Long Life 
          Replaceable Light Sources of Limited Definition

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30117, 30166; delegation of 
authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 58 FR 3860, Jan. 12, 1993, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 564.1  Scope.

    This part requires the submission of dimensional, electrical 
specification, and marking/designation information, as specified in 
Appendix A and Appendix B of this part, for original equipment 
replaceable light sources used in motor vehicle headlighting systems.

[61 FR 20500, May 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 564.2  Purposes.

    The purposes of this part are achieved through its Appendices:
    (a) The purposes of Appendix A of this part are to ensure
    (1) The availability to replacement light source manufacturers of 
the manufacturing specifications of original

[[Page 158]]

equipment light sources so that replacement light sources are 
interchangeable with original equipment light sources and provide 
equivalent performance, and
    (2) That redesigned or newly developed light sources are designated 
as distinct, different, and noninterchangeable with previously existing 
light sources.
    (b) The purposes of Appendix B of this part are to ensure
    (1) That original equipment light sources are replaceable and that 
replacement light sources provide equivalent performance, and
    (2) That redesignated or newly developed light sources are 
designated as distinct, different, and noninterchangeable with 
previously existing light sources.

[61 FR 20500, May 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 564.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to replaceable light sources used as original 
equipment in motor vehicle headlighting systems.

[60 FR 14228, Mar. 16, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 564.4  Definitions.

    All terms defined in the Act and the regulations and standards 
issued under its authority are used as defined therein.


<R05>
Sec. 564.5  Information filing; agency processing of filings.

    (a) Each manufacturer of a motor vehicle, original equipment 
headlamp, or original equipment headlamp replaceable light source, which 
intends to manufacture a replaceable light source as original equipment 
or to incorporate a replaceable light source in its headlamps or motor 
vehicles, shall furnish the information specified in Appendix A. If the 
rated laboratory life of the light source is not less than 2,000 hours, 
the manufacturer shall furnish the information specified in either 
Appendix A or Appendix B of this part. Information shall be furnished 
to: Associate Administrator for Safety Performance Standards, National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW, 
Washington, D.C. 20590. Attention: Part 564--Replaceable Light Source 
Information (unless the agency has already filed such information in 
Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397).
    (b) The manufacturer shall submit such information not later than 60 
days before it intends to begin the manufacture of the replaceable light 
source to which the information applies, or to incorporate the light 
source into a headlamp or motor vehicle of its manufacture. Each 
submission shall consist of one original set of information and 10 
legible reproduced copies, all on 8\1/2\ by 11-inch paper.
    (c) The Associate Administrator promptly reviews each submission and 
informs the manufacturer not later than 30 days after its receipt 
whether the submission has been accepted. Upon acceptance, the Associate 
Administrator files the information in Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397. The 
Associate Administrator does not accept any submission that does not 
contain all the information specified in Appendix A or Appendix B of 
this part, or whose accompanying information indicates that any new 
light source which is the subject of a submission is interchangeable 
with any replaceable light source for which the agency has previously 
filed information in Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397.
    (d) A manufacturer may request modification of a light source for 
which information has previously been filed in Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397, 
and the submission shall be processed in the manner provided by Sec. 
564.5(c). A request for modification shall contain the following:
    (1) All the information specified in Appendix A or Appendix B of 
this part that is relevant to the modification requested,
    (2) The reason for the requested modification,
    (3) A statement that use of the light source as modified will not 
create a noncompliance with any requirement of Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standard No. 108 (49 CFR 571.108) when used to replace an unmodified 
light source in a headlamp certified by its manufacturer as conforming 
to all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards, together with 
reasons in support of the statement; and
    (4) Information demonstrating that the modification would not 
adversely

[[Page 159]]

affect interchangeability with the original light source.
    After review of the request for modification, the Associate 
Administrator may seek further information either from the manufacturer 
or through a notice published in the Federal Register requesting comment 
on whether a modified light source incorporating the changes requested 
will create a noncompliance with Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 108 
when substituted for an unmodified light source. If the Associate 
Administrator seeks comment public comment on a submission, (s)he shall 
publish a further notice stating whether (s)he has accepted or rejected 
the submission. If a submission is accepted, the Associate Administrator 
files the information in Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397. If a submission is 
rejected, a manufacturer may submit information with respect to it, as 
provided in paragraph 564.5(a), for consideration as a new light source 
after such changes as will ensure that it is not interchangeable with 
the light source for which modification was originally requested.
    (e) Information submitted under this section is made available by 
NHTSA for public inspection as soon as practicable after its receipt, 
but not later than the date on which a vehicle equipped with a new or 
revised replaceable light source is offered for sale.

[60 FR 14228, Mar. 16, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 20500, May 7, 1996; 63 
FR 42587, Aug. 10, 1998]

  Appendix A to Part 564--Information To Be Submitted for Replaceable 
                              Light Sources

 I. Filament or Discharge Arc Position Dimensions and Tolerances Using 
    Either Direct Filament or Discharge Arc Dimensions or the Three 
          Dimensional Filament or Discharge Arc Tolerance Box.

    A. Lower beam filament dimensions or filament tolerance box 
dimensions and relation of these to the bulb base reference plane and 
centerline.
    1. Axial location of the filament centerline or the filament 
tolerance box relative to the bulb base reference plane.
    2. Vertical location of the filament centerline or the filament 
tolerance box relative to the bulb base centerline.
    3. Transverse location of the filament centerline or the filament 
tolerance box relative to the bulb base centerline.
    4. Filament tolerance box dimensions, if used.
    B. Upper beam filament dimensions or the filament tolerance box 
dimensions, and relation of these to the bulb base reference plane and 
centerline.
    1. Axial location of the filament centerline or the filament 
tolerance box relative to the bulb base reference plane.
    2. Vertical location of the filament centerline or the filament 
tolerance box relative to the bulb base centerline.
    3. Transverse location of the filament centerline or the filament 
tolerance box relative to the bulb base centerline.
    4. Filament tolerance box dimensions, if used.
    C. If the replaceable light source has both a lower beam and an 
upper beam filament, the dimensional relationship between the two 
filament centerlines or the filament tolerance boxes may be provided 
instead of referencing the upper beam filament centerline or filament 
tolerance box to the bulb base centerline or reference plane.
    D. For a light source using excited gas mixtures as a filament, 
necessary fiducial information and specifications including electrode 
position dimensions and tolerance information that provide similar 
location and characteristics information required by paragraphs A, B, 
and C of this section I for light sources using a resistive type 
filament.

   II. Dimensions Pertaining to Filament Capsule and Capsule Supports

    A. Maximum length from bulb base reference plane to tip of filament 
capsule.
    B. Maximum radial distances from bulb base centerline to periphery 
of filament capsule and/or supports.
    C. Location of black cap relative to low beam filament centerline, 
filament tolerance box or other to-be-specified reference.
    D. Size, length, shape, or other pertinent features and dimensions 
for providing undistorted walls for the filament capsule.

       III. Bulb Base Interchangeability Dimensions and Tolerance

    A. Angular locations, diameters, key/keyway sizes, and any other 
interchangeability dimensions for indexing the bulb base in the bulb 
holder.
    B. Diameter, width, depth, and surface finish of seal groove, 
surface, or other pertinent sealing features.
    C. Diameter of the bulb base at the interface of the base and its 
perpendicular reference surface.
    D. Dimensions of features related to retention of the bulb base in 
the bulb holder such as tabs, keys, keyways, surfaces, etc.

[[Page 160]]

       IV. Bulb Holder Interchangeability Dimensions and Tolerance

    A. Mating angular locations, diameters, key/keyway sizes, and any 
other interchangeability dimensions for indexing the bulb base in the 
bulb holder.
    B. Mating diameter, width, depth, and surface finish of seal groove, 
surface, or other pertinent sealing features.
    C. Mating diameter of the bulb holder at the interface of the bulb 
base aperture and its perpendicular reference surface.
    D. Mating dimensions of features related to retention of the bulb 
base in the bulb holder such as tabs, keys, keyways, surfaces, etc.

 V. Wiring Harness Connector to Bulb Base Interchangeability Dimensions 
                             and Tolerances

    A. Maximum depth of harness connector insertion into bulb base.
    B. Location of electrical pins in bulb base.
    C. Dimensions of electrical pins in bulb base--length, diameter, 
width, thickness and etc.
    D. Fit of harness connector into bulb base providing all necessary 
dimensions, key/keyway controls, and dimensions, tapers etc.
    E. Dimensions and location of locking features for wiring harness 
connector to bulb base.
    F. Identification of upper beam, lower beam, and common terminals.

 VI. Seal Specifications (if replaceable light source is intended to be 
                        of a sealed base design)

    A. Type.
    B. Material.
    C. Dimensions.

     VII. Electrical Specifications for Each Filament at 12.8 Volts

    A. Maximum power (in watts).
    B. Luminous Flux with tolerance (in lumens) with black cap if so 
equipped, measured in accordance with the document: Illuminating 
Engineering Society of North America, LM-45; IES Approved Method for 
Electrical and Photometric Measurements of General Service Incandescent 
Filament Lamps (April 1980).

     VIII. Bulb Markings/Designation-- ANSI Number, ECE Identifier, 
     Manufacturer's Part Number, Individually or in Any Combination

  IX. All other information, dimensions or performance specifications 
    necessary for interchangeability, replaceability, or system test 
purposes not listed in sections I through VIII. If a ballast is required 
  for operation, a complete listing of the requirements and parameters 
between the light source and ballast, and ballast and the vehicle shall 
                            also be provided.

[58 FR 3860, Jan. 12, 1993, as amended at 61 FR 20500, 20501, May 7, 
1996]

   Appendix B to Part 564--Information to be Submitted for Long Life 
             Replaceable Light Sources of Limited Definition

 I. Filament or Discharge Arc Position Dimensions and Tolerances Using 
    Either Direct Filament or Discharge Arc Dimensions or the Three 
            Dimensional Filament Discharge Arc Tolerance Box.

    A. Lower beam filament or discharge arc dimensions or filament or 
discharge arc tolerance box dimensions and relation of these to the bulb 
base reference plane and centerline.
    1. Axial location of the filament or discharge arc centerline or the 
filament or discharge arc tolerance box relative to the bulb base 
reference plane.
    2. Vertical location of the filament or discharge arc centerline or 
the filament or discharge arc tolerance box relative to the bulb base 
centerline.
    3. Transverse location of the filament or discharge arc centerline 
or the filament or discharge arc tolerance box relative to the bulb base 
centerline.
    4. Filament or discharge arc tolerance box dimensions, if used.
    B. Upper beam filament or discharge arc dimensions or the filament 
or discharge arc tolerance box dimensions and relation of these to the 
bulb base reference plane and centerline.
    1. Axial location of the filament or discharge arc centerline or the 
filament or discharge arc tolerance box relative to the bulb base 
reference plane.
    2. Vertical location of the filament or discharge arc centerline or 
the filament or discharge arc tolerance box relative to the bulb base 
centerline.
    3. Transverse location of the filament or discharge arc centerline 
or the filament or discharge arc tolerance box relative to the bulb base 
centerline.
    4. Filament or discharge arc tolerance box dimensions, if used.

[[Page 161]]

    C. If the replaceable light source has both a lower beam and upper 
beam filament or discharge arc, the dimensional relationship between the 
two filament or discharge arc centerlines or the filament or discharge 
arc tolerance boxes may be provided instead of referencing the upper 
beam filament or discharge arc centerline or filament or discharge arc 
tolerance box to the bulb base centerline or reference plane.
    D. For a light source using excited gas mixtures as a filament, 
necessary fiducial information and specifications including electrode 
position dimensions, and tolerance information that provide similar 
location and characteristics information required by paragraphs A, B, 
and C of this section I for light sources using a resistive type 
filament.

       II. Bulb Base Interchangeability Dimensions and Tolerance.

    A. Angular locations, diameters, key/keyway sizes, and any other 
interchangeability dimensions for indexing the bulb base in the bulb 
holder.
    B. Diameter, width, depth, and surface finish of seal groove, 
surface, or other pertinent sealing features.
    C. Diameter of the bulb base at the interface of the base and its 
perpendicular reference surface.
    D. Dimensions of features related to retention of the bulb base in 
the bulb holder such as tabs, keys, keyways, surface, etc.

     III. Bulb Holder Interchangeability Dimensions and Tolerances.

    A. Mating angular locations, diameters, key/keyway sizes, any other 
interchangeability dimensions for indexing the bulb base in the bulb 
holder.
    B. Mating diameter, width, depth, and surface, or other pertinent 
sealing features.
    C. Mating diameter of the bulb holder at the interface of the bulb 
base aperture and its perpendicular reference surface.
    D. Mating dimensions of features related to retention of the bulb 
base in the bulb holder such as tabs, keys, keyways, surface, or any 
other characteristics necessary for mating dimensions.

IV. Electrical Specifications for Each Light Source that Operates With a 
     Ballast and Rated Life of the Light Source/Ballast Combination.

    A. Maximum power (in watts).
    B. Luminous Flux (in lumens).
    C. Rated laboratory life of the light source/ballast combination 
(not less than 2,000 hours).

V. Applicable to Light Sources that Operate With a Source Voltage Other 
 Than 12.8 Volts Direct Current, and When a Proprietary Ballast Must Be 
                       Used With the Light Source.

    A. Manufacturer's part number for the ballast.
    B. Any other characteristics necessary for system operation.

      VI. Bulb Markings/Designation-- ANSI Number, ECE Identifier, 
      Manufacturer's Part Number, Individual or in Any Combination.

VII. All other identification, dimensions or performance specifications 
 necessary for replaceability or systems test not listed in sections I 
                               through VI.

[61 FR 20500, May 7, 1996]


<R03>
PART 565_VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER REQUIREMENTS--Table of Contents




Sec.
565.1 Purpose and scope.
565.2 Applicability.
565.3 Definitions.
565.4 General requirements.
565.5 Motor vehicles imported into the United States.
565.6 Content requirements.
565.7 Reporting requirements.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30117, 30141, 30146, 30166, 
and 30168; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

[61 FR 29033, June 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 565.1  Purpose and scope.

    This part specifies the format, content and physical requirements 
for a vehicle identification number (VIN) system and its installation to 
simplify vehicle identification information retrieval and to increase 
the accuracy and efficiency of vehicle recall campaigns.


<R05>
Sec. 565.2  Applicability.

    This part applies to passenger cars, multipurpose passenger 
vehicles, trucks, buses, trailers (including trailer kits), incomplete 
vehicles, and motorcycles. Vehicles imported into the United States 
under 49 CFR 591.5(f), other than by the corporation responsible for the 
assembly of that vehicle or a subsidiary of such a corporation, are 
excluded from requirements of Sec. 565.4(b), Sec. 565.4(c), Sec. 
565.4(g), Sec. 565.4(h), Sec. 565.5 and Sec. 565.6.

[[Page 162]]


<R05>
Sec. 565.3  Definitions.

    (a) Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards Definitions. Unless 
otherwise indicated, all terms used in this part that are defined in 49 
CFR 571.3 are used as defined in 49 CFR 571.3.
    (b) Body type means the general configuration or shape of a vehicle 
distinguished by such characteristics as the number of doors or windows, 
cargo-carrying features and the roofline (e.g., sedan, fastback, 
hatchback).
    (c) Check digit means a single number or the letter X used to verify 
the accuracy of the transcription of the vehicle identification number.
    (d) Engine type means a power source with defined characteristics 
such as fuel utilized, number of cylinders, displacement, and net brake 
horsepower. The specific manufacturer and make shall be represented if 
the engine powers a passenger car or a multipurpose passenger vehicle, 
or truck with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4536 kg. (10,000 lbs.) or 
less.
    (e) Incomplete vehicle means an assemblage consisting, as a minimum, 
of frame and chassis structure, power train, steering system, suspension 
system and braking system, to the extent that those systems are to be 
part of the completed vehicle, that requires further manufacturing 
operations, other than the addition of readily attachable components, 
such as mirrors or tire and rim assemblies, or minor finishing 
operations such as painting, to become a completed vehicle.
    (f) Line means a name that a manufacturer applies to a family of 
vehicles within a make which have a degree of commonality in 
construction, such as body, chassis or cab type.
    (g) Make means a name that a manufacturer applies to a group of 
vehicles or engines.
    (h) Manufacturer means a person--
    (1) Manufacturing or assembling motor vehicles or motor vehicle 
equipment; or
    (2) Importing motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment for resale.
    (i) Model means a name that a manufacturer applies to a family of 
vehicles of the same type, make, line, series and body type.
    (j) Model Year means the year used to designate a discrete vehicle 
model, irrespective of the calendar year in which the vehicle was 
actually produced, so long as the actual period is less than two 
calendar years.
    (k) Plant of manufacture means the plant where the manufacturer 
affixes the VIN.
    (l) Series means a name that a manufacturer applies to a subdivision 
of a ``line'' denoting price, size or weight identification and that is 
used by the manufacturer for marketing purposes.
    (m) Trailer kit means a trailer that is fabricated and delivered in 
complete but unassembled form and that is designed to be assembled 
without special machinery or tools.
    (n) Type means a class of vehicle distinguished by common traits, 
including design and purpose. Passenger cars, multipurpose passenger 
vehicles, trucks, buses, trailers, incomplete vehicles and motorcycles 
are separate types.
    (o) VIN means a series of Arabic numbers and Roman letters that is 
assigned to a motor vehicle for identification purposes.


<R05>
Sec. 565.4  General requirements.

    (a) Each vehicle manufactured in one stage shall have a VIN that is 
assigned by the manufacturer. Each vehicle manufactured in more than one 
stage shall have a VIN assigned by the incomplete vehicle manufacturer. 
Vehicle alterers, as specified in 49 CFR 567.7, shall utilize the VIN 
assigned by the original manufacturer of the vehicle.
    (b) Each VIN shall consist of seventeen (17) characters.
    (c) A check digit shall be part of each VIN. The check digit shall 
appear in position nine (9) of the VIN, on the vehicle and on any 
transfer documents containing the VIN prepared by the manufacturer to be 
given to the first owner for purposes other than resale.
    (d) The VINs of any two vehicles manufactured within a 30-year 
period shall not be identical.
    (e) The VIN of each vehicle shall appear clearly and indelibly upon 
either a part of the vehicle, other than the glazing, that is not 
designed to be removed except for repair or upon a separate plate or 
label that is permanently affixed to such a part.

[[Page 163]]

    (f) The VIN for passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles and 
trucks of 4536 kg or less GVWR shall be located inside the passenger 
compartment. It shall be readable, without moving any part of the 
vehicle, through the vehicle glazing under daylight lighting conditions 
by an observer having 20/20 vision (Snellen) whose eye-point is located 
outside the vehicle adjacent to the left windshield pillar. Each 
character in the VIN subject to this paragraph shall have a minimum 
height of 4 mm.
    (g) Each character in each VIN shall be one of the letters in the 
set: [ABCDEFGHJKLMNPRSTUVWXYZ] or a numeral in the set: [0123456789] 
assigned according to the method given in Sec. 565.5.
    (h) All spaces provided for in the VIN must be occupied by a 
character specified in paragraph (g) of this section.
    (i) The type face utilized for each VIN shall consist of capital, 
sanserif characters.


<R05>
Sec. 565.5  Motor vehicles imported into the United States.

    (a) Importers shall utilize the VIN assigned by the original 
manufacturer of the motor vehicle.
    (b) A passenger car certified by a Registered Importer under 49 CFR 
part 592 shall have a plate or label that contains the following 
statement, in characters with a minimum height of 4 mm, with the 
identification number assigned by the original manufacturer provided in 
the blank: SUBSTITUTE FOR U.S. VIN: ------------ SEE PART 565. The plate 
or label shall conform to Sec. 565.4 (h) and (i). The plate or label 
shall be permanently affixed inside the passenger compartment. The plate 
or label shall be readable, without moving any part of the vehicle, 
through the vehicle glazing under daylight lighting conditions by an 
observer having 20/20 vision (Snellen) whose eye-point is located 
outside the vehicle adjacent to the left windshield pillar. It shall be 
located in such a manner as not to cover, obscure, or overlay any part 
of any identification number affixed by the original manufacturer. 
Passenger cars conforming to Canadian Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 115 
are exempt from this paragraph.


<R05>
Sec. 565.6  Content requirements.

    The VIN shall consist of four sections of characters which shall be 
grouped accordingly:
    (a) The first section shall consist of three characters that occupy 
positions one through three (1-3) in the VIN. This section shall 
uniquely identify the manufacturer, make and type of the motor vehicle 
if its manufacturer produces 500 or more motor vehicles of its type 
annually. If the manufacturer produces less than 500 motor vehicles of 
its type annually, these characters along with the third, fourth and 
fifth characters of the fourth section shall uniquely identify the 
manufacturer, make and type of the motor vehicle. These characters are 
assigned in accordance with Sec. 565.7(a).
    (b) The second section shall consist of five characters, which 
occupy positions four through eight (4-8) in the VIN. This section shall 
uniquely identify the attributes of the vehicle as specified in Table I. 
For passenger cars, and for multipurpose passenger vehicles and trucks 
with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4536 kg. (10,000 lbs.) or less, 
the first and second characters shall be alphabetic and the third and 
fourth characters shall be numeric. The fifth character may be either 
alphabetic or numeric. The characters utilized and their placement 
within the section may be determined by the manufacturer, but the 
specified attributes must be decipherable with information supplied by 
the manufacturer in accordance with Sec. 565.7(c). In submitting the 
required information to NHTSA relating to gross vehicle weight rating, 
the designations in Table II shall be used. The use of these 
designations within the VIN itself is not required. Tables I and II 
follow:

          Table I--Type of Vehicle and Information Decipherable

Passenger car: Line, series, body type, engine type and restraint system 
type.
Multipurpose passenger vehicle: Line, series, body type, engine type, 
gross vehicle weight rating.

[[Page 164]]

Truck: Model or line, series, chassis, cab type, engine type, brake 
system and gross vehicle weight rating.
Bus: Model or line, series, body type, engine type, and brake system
Trailer, including trailer kits and incomplete trailer: Type of trailer, 
body type, length and axle configuration.
Motorcycle: Type of motorcycle, line, engine type, and net brake 
horsepower.
Incomplete Vehicle other than a trailer: Model or line, series, cab 
type, engine type and brake system.

    Note to Table I: Engine net brake horsepower when encoded in the VIN 
shall differ by no more than 10 percent from the actual net brake 
horsepower; shall in the case of motorcycle with an actual net brake 
horsepower of 2 or less, be not more than 2; and shall be greater than 2 
in the case of a motorcycle with an actual brake horsepower greater than 
2.

              Table II--Gross Vehicle Weight Rating Classes

    Class A--Not greater than 1360 kg. (3,000 lbs.)
    Class B--Greater than 1360 kg. to 1814 kg. (3,001-4,000 lbs.)
    Class C--Greater than 1814 kg. to 2268 kg. (4,001-5,000 lbs.)
    Class D--Greater than 2268 kg. to 2722 kg. (5,001-6,000 lbs.)
    Class E--Greater than 2722 kg. to 3175 kg. (6,001-7,000 lbs.)
    Class F--Greater than 3175 kg. to 3629 kg. (7,001-8,000 lbs.)
    Class G--Greater than 3629 kg. to 4082 kg. (8,001-9,000 lbs.)
    Class H--Greater than 4082 kg. to 4536 kg. (9,001-10,000 lbs.)
    Class 3--Greater than 4536 kg. to 6350 kg. (10,001-14,000 lbs.)
    Class 4--Greater than 6350 kg. to 7257 kg. (14,001-16,000 lbs.)
    Class 5--Greater than 7257 kg. to 8845 kg. (16,001-19,500 lbs.)
    Class 6--Greater than 8845 kg. to 11793 kg. (19,501-26,000 lbs.)
    Class 7--Greater than 11793 kg. to 14968 kg.(26,001-33,000 lbs.)
    Class 8--Greater than 14968 kg. (33,001 lbs. and over)

    (c) The third section shall consist of one character, which occupies 
position nine (9) in the VIN. This section shall be the check digit 
whose purpose is to provide a means for verifying the accuracy of any 
VIN transcription. After all other characters in VIN have been 
determined by the manufacturer, the check digit shall be calculated by 
carrying out the mathematical computation specified in paragraphs (c) 
(1) through (4) of this section.
    (1) Assign to each number in the VIN its actual mathematical value 
and assign to each letter the value specified for it in Table III, as 
follows:

                       Table III--Assigned Values

A = 1
B = 2
C = 3
D = 4
E = 5
F = 6
G = 7
H = 8
J = 1
K = 2
L = 3
M = 4
N = 5
P = 7
R = 9
S = 2
T = 3
U = 4
V = 5
W = 6
X = 7
Y = 8
Z = 9

    (2) Multiply the assigned value for each character in the VIN by the 
position weight factor specified in Table IV, as follows:

                Table IV--VIN Position and Weight Factor

 1st...................................................................8
 2d....................................................................7
 3d....................................................................6
 4th...................................................................5
 5th...................................................................4
 6th...................................................................3
 7th...................................................................2
 8th..................................................................10
 9th.......................................................(check digit)
10th...................................................................9
11th...................................................................8
12th...................................................................7
13th...................................................................6
14th...................................................................5
15th...................................................................4
16th...................................................................3
17th...................................................................2

    (3) Add the resulting products and divide the total by 11.
    (4) The numerical remainder is the check digit. If the remainder is 
10 the

[[Page 165]]

letter ``X'' shall be used to designate the check digit. The correct 
numeric remainder, zero through nine (0-9) or the letter ``X,'' shall 
appear in VIN position nine (9).
    (5) A sample check digit calculation is shown in Table V as follows:

                                      Table V--Calculation of a Check Digit
VIN Position................................   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17
Sample VIN..................................   1   G   4   A   H   5   9   H  ..   5   G   1   1   8   3   4   1
                                                                               .
Assigned Value..............................   1   7   4   1   8   5   9   8  ..   5   7   1   1   8   3   4   1
                                                                               .
Weight Factor...............................   8   7   6   5   4   3   2  10   0   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2
Multiply Assigned value times weight factor.   8  49  24   5  32  15  18  80   0  45  56   7   6  40  12  12  2
 
Add products: 8+49+24+5+32+15+18+80+0+45+56+7+6+40+12+12+2 = 411
Divide by 11: 411/11 = 37 4/11
The remainder is 4; this is the check digit to be inserted in position nine (9) of the VIN

    (d) The fourth section shall consist of eight characters, which 
occupy positions ten through seventeen (10-17) of the VIN. The last five 
(5) characters of this section shall be numeric for passenger cars and 
for multipurpose passenger vehicles and trucks with a gross vehicle 
weight rating of 4536 kg. (10,000 lbs.) or less, and the last four (4) 
characters shall be numeric for all other vehicles.
    (1) The first character of the fourth section shall represent the 
vehicle model year. The year shall be designated as indicated in Table 
VI as follows:

                      Table VI--Year Codes for VIN
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Year                                 Code
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1980......................................................            A
1981......................................................            B
1982......................................................             C
1983......................................................            D
1984......................................................            E
1985......................................................            F
1986......................................................            G
1987......................................................            H
1988......................................................            J
1989......................................................            K
1990......................................................            L
1991......................................................            M
1992......................................................            N
1993......................................................            P
1994......................................................            R
1995......................................................            S
1996......................................................            T
1997......................................................            V
1998......................................................            W
1999......................................................            X
2000......................................................            Y
2001......................................................            1
2002......................................................            2
2003......................................................            3
2004......................................................            4
2005......................................................            5
2006......................................................            6
2007......................................................            7
2008......................................................            8
2009......................................................            9
2010......................................................            A
2011......................................................            B
2012......................................................             C
2013......................................................            D
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) The second character of the fourth section shall represent the 
plant of manufacture.
    (3) The third through the eighth characters of the fourth section 
shall represent the number sequentially assigned by the manufacturer in 
the production process if the manufacturer produces 500 or more vehicles 
of its type annually. If the manufacturer produces less than 500 motor 
vehicles of its type annually, the third, fourth and fifth characters of 
the fourth section, combined with the three characters of the first 
section, shall uniquely identify the manufacturer, make and type of the 
motor vehicle and the sixth, seventh, and eighth characters of the 
fourth section shall represent the number sequentially assigned by the 
manufacturer in the production process.


<R05>
Sec. 565.7  Reporting requirements.

    The information collection requirements contained in this part have 
been approved by the Office of Management and Budget under the 
provisions of the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.) and 
have been assigned OMB Control Number 2127-0510.
    (a) The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) has 
contracted with the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) to coordinate 
the assignment of manufacturer identifiers. Manufacturer identifiers 
will be supplied by SAE at no charge. All requests for assignments of 
manufacturer identifiers should be forwarded directly to: Society of 
Automotive Engineers,

[[Page 166]]

400 Commonwealth Avenue, Warrendale, Pennsylvania 15096, Attention: WMI 
Coordinator. Any requests for identifiers submitted to NHTSA will be 
forwarded to SAE. Manufacturers may request a specific identifier or may 
request only assignment of an identifier(s). SAE will review requests 
for specific identifiers to determine that they do not conflict with an 
identifier already assigned or block of identifiers already reserved. 
SAE will confirm the assignments in writing to the requester. Once 
confirmed by SAE, the identifier need not be resubmitted to NHTSA.
    (b) Manufacturers of vehicles subject to this part shall submit, 
either directly or through an agent, the unique identifier for each make 
and type of vehicle it manufactures at least 60 days before affixing the 
first VIN using the identifier. Manufacturers whose unique identifier 
appears in the fourth section of the VIN shall also submit the three 
characters of the first section that constitutes a part of their 
identifier.
    (c) Manufacturers of vehicles subject to the requirements of this 
part shall submit to NHTSA the information necessary to decipher the 
characters contained in its VINs. Amendments to this information shall 
be submitted to the agency for VINs containing an amended coding. The 
agency will not routinely provide written approvals of these 
submissions, but will contact the manufacturer should any corrections to 
these submissions be necessary.
    (d) The information required under paragraph (c) of this section 
shall be submitted at least 60 days prior to offering for sale the first 
vehicle identified by a VIN containing that information, or if 
information concerning vehicle characteristics sufficient to specify the 
VIN code is unavailable to the manufacturer by that date, then within 
one week after that information first becomes available. The information 
shall be addressed to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590, 
Attention: VIN Coordinator.


<R03>
PART 566_MANUFACTURER IDENTIFICATION--Table of Contents




Sec.
566.1 Scope.
566.2 Purpose.
566.3 Application.
566.4 Definitions.
566.5 Requirements.
566.6 Submittal of information.

    Authority: Secs. 112 and 119, National Traffic and Motor Vehicle 
Safety Act (15 U.S.C. 1401 and 1407); delegation of authority at 49 CFR 
1.50.


<R05>
Sec. 566.1  Scope.

    This part requires manufacturers of motor vehicles, and of motor 
vehicle equipment to which a motor vehicle safety standard applies, to 
submit identifying information and a description of the items they 
produce.

[36 FR 20978, Nov. 2, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 566.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to facilitate the regulation of 
manufacturers under the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act, 
and to aid in establishing a code numbering system for all regulated 
manufacturers.

[36 FR 20978, Nov. 2, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 566.3  Application.

    This part applies to all manufacturers of motor vehicles, and to 
manufacturers of motor vehicle equipment, other than tires, to which a 
motor vehicle safety standard applies (hereafter referred to as 
``covered equipment'').

[36 FR 22063, Nov. 19, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 566.4  Definitions.

    All terms defined in the Act and the rules and standards issued 
under its authority are used as defined therein. Specifically, 
incomplete vehicle, intermediate manufacturer, and final-stage 
manufacturer are used as defined in Part 568--Vehicles Manufactured in 
Two or More Stages.

(Authority: 15 U.S.C. 1392, 1397)

[37 FR 1364, Jan. 28, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 566.5  Requirements.

    Each manufacturer of motor vehicles, and each manufacturer of 
covered

[[Page 167]]

equipment, shall furnish the information specified in paragraphs (a) 
through (c) of this section to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20590.
    (a) Full individual, partnership, or corporate name of the 
manufacturer.
    (b) Residence address of the manufacturer and State of incorporation 
if applicable.
    (c) Description of each type of motor vehicle or of covered 
equipment manufactured by the manufacturer, including, for motor 
vehicles, the approximate ranges of gross vehicle weight ratings for 
each type.
    (1) Except as noted below, the description may be of general types, 
such as ``passenger cars'' or ``brake fluid.''
    (2) In the case of multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and 
trailers, the description shall be specific enough also to indicate the 
types of use for which the vehicles are intended, such as ``tank 
trailer,'' ``motor home,'' or ``cargo van.''
    (3) In the case of motor vehicles produced in two or more stages, if 
the manufacturer is an incomplete vehicle manufacturer, the description 
shall so state and include a description indicating the stage of 
completion of the vehicle and, where known, the types of use for which 
the vehicle is intended.

    Example: ``Incomplete vehicle manufacturer--Chassis-cab intended for 
completion as van-type truck.''


If the manufacturer is an intermediate manufacturer, or a final stage 
manufacturer, the description shall so state and include a brief 
description of the work performed.

    Example: ``Multipurpose passenger vehicles: Motor homes with GVWR 
from 8,000 to 12,000 pounds. Final-stage manufacturer--add body to bare 
chassis.''

(15 U.S.C. 1392, 1397)

[36 FR 20978, Nov. 2, 1971, as amended at 37 FR 1364, Jan. 28, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 566.6  Submittal of information.

    Each manufacturer required to submit information under Sec. 566.5 
shall submit the information not later than February 1, 1972. After that 
date, each person who begins to manufacture a type of motor vehicle or 
covered equipment for which he has not submitted the required 
information shall submit the information specified in paragraphs (a) 
through (c) of Sec. 566.5 not later than 30 days after he begins 
manufacture. Each manufacturer who has submitted required information 
shall keep his entry current, accurate and complete by submitting 
revised information not later than 30 days after the relevant changes in 
his business occur.

[36 FR 20978, Nov. 2, 1971, as amended at 53 FR 20119, June 2, 1988]


<R03>
PART 567_CERTIFICATION--Table of Contents




Sec.
567.1 Purpose.
567.2 Application.
567.3 Definitions.
567.4 Requirements for manufacturers of motor vehicles.
567.5 Requirements for manufacturers of vehicles manufactured in two or 
          more stages.
567.6 Requirements for persons who do not alter certified vehicles or do 
          so with readily attachable components.
567.7 Requirements for persons who alter certified vehicles.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30117, 30166, 32502, 32504, 
33101-33104, 33108, and 33109; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50

    Editorial Note: For a ruling concerning unavailable weight ratings, 
see 36 FR 25013, Dec. 28, 1971.


<R05>
Sec. 567.1  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to specify the content and location of, 
and other requirements for, the certification label or tag to be affixed 
to motor vehicles as required by section 114 of the National Traffic and 
Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 (15 U.S.C. 1403) (the Safety Act) and 
by sections 105(c)(1) and 606(c) of the Motor Vehicle Information and 
Cost Savings Act (15 U.S.C. 1915(c) and 2026(c)) (the Cost Savings Act), 
and to provide the consumer with information to assist him or her in 
determining which of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (part 
571 of this chapter) and Federal Theft Prevention Standards (part 541 of 
this chapter) (standards) are applicable to the vehicle.

[50 FR 43192, Oct. 24, 1985]

[[Page 168]]


<R05>
Sec. 567.2  Application.

    (a) This part applies to manufacturers and distributors of motor 
vehicles to which one or more standards are applicable.
    (b) In the case of imported motor vehicles, the requirement of 
affixing a label or tag applies to Registered Importers of vehicles 
admitted to the United States under 49 CFR 591.5(f) to which the 
required label or tag is not affixed.

[36 FR 7056, Apr. 14, 1971, as amended at 48 FR 46995, Oct. 17, 1983; 56 
FR 22356, May 15, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 567.3  Definitions.

    All terms that are defined in the Act and the rules and standards 
issued under its authority are used as defined therein. The term bumper 
has the meaning assigned to it in Title I of the Cost Savings Act and 
the rules and standards issued under its authority.
    Chassis-cab means an incomplete vehicle, with a completed occupant 
compartment, that requires only the addition of cargo-carrying, work-
performing, or load-bearing components to perform its intended 
functions.

[36 FR 7056, Apr. 14, 1971, as amended at 42 FR 37817, July 25, 1977; 43 
FR 21891, May 22, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 567.4  Requirements for manufacturers of motor vehicles.

    (a) Each manufacturer of motor vehicles (except vehicles 
manufactured in two or more stages) shall affix to each vehicle a label, 
of the type and in the manner described below, containing the statements 
specified in paragraph (g) of this section.
    (b) The label shall, unless riveted, be permanently affixed in such 
a manner that it cannot be removed without destroying or defacing it.
    (c) Except for trailers and motorcycles, the label shall be affixed 
to either the hinge pillar, door-latch post, or the door edge that meets 
the door-latch post, next to the driver's seating position, or if none 
of these locations is practicable, to the left side of the instrument 
panel. If that location is also not practicable, the label shall be 
affixed to the inward-facing surface of the door next to the driver's 
seating position. If none of the preceding locations is practicable, 
notification of that fact, together with drawings or photographs showing 
a suggested alternate location in the same general area, shall be 
submitted for approval to the Administrator, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, Washington, DC 20590. The location of the label 
shall be such that it is easily readable without moving any part of the 
vehicle except an outer door.
    (d) The label for trailers shall be affixed to a location on the 
forward half of the left side, such that it is easily readable from 
outside the vehicle without moving any part of the vehicle.
    (e) The label for motorcycles shall be affixed to a permanent member 
of the vehicle as close as is practicable to the intersection of the 
steering post with the handle bars, in a location such that it is easily 
readable without moving any part of the vehicle except the steering 
system.
    (f) The lettering on the label shall be of a color that contrasts 
with the background of the label.
    (g) The label shall contain the following statements, in the English 
language, lettered in block capitals and numerals not less than three 
thirty-seconds of an inch high, in the order shown:
    (1) Name of manufacturer: Except as provided in paragraphs (g)(1) 
(i), (ii), and (iii) of this section, the full corporate or individual 
name of the actual assembler of the vehicle shall be spelled out, except 
that such abbreviations as ``Co.'' or ``Inc.'' and their foreign 
equivalents, and the first and middle initials of individuals, may be 
used. The name of the manufacturer shall be preceded by the words 
``Manufactured By'' or ``Mfd By.'' In the case of imported vehicles, 
where the label required by this section is affixed by the Registered 
Importer, the name of the Registered Importer shall also be placed on 
the label in the manner described in this paragraph, directly below the 
name of the final assembler.
    (i) If a vehicle is assembled by a corporation that is controlled by 
another corporation that assumes responsibility for conformity with the 
standards, the name of the controlling corporation may be used.

[[Page 169]]

    (ii) If a vehicle is fabricated and delivered in complete but 
unassembled form, such that it is designed to be assembled without 
special machinery or tools, the fabricator of the vehicle may affix the 
label and name itself as the manufacturer for the purposes of this 
section.
    (iii) If a trailer is sold by a person who is not its manufacturer, 
but who is engaged in the manufacture of trailers and assumes legal 
responsibility for all duties and liabilities imposed by the Act with 
respect to that trailer, the name of that person may appear on the label 
as the manufacturer. In such a case the name shall be preceded by the 
words ``Responsible Manufacturer'' or ``Resp Mfr.''
    (2) Month and year of manufacture: This shall be the time during 
which work was completed at the place of main assembly of the vehicle. 
It may be spelled out, as ``June 1970'', or expressed in numerals, as 
``6/70.''
    (3) ``Gross Vehicle Weight Rating'' or ``GVWR,'' followed by the 
appropriate value in pounds, which shall not be less than the sum of the 
unloaded vehicle weight, rated cargo load, and 150 pounds times the 
vehicle's designated seating capacity. However, for school buses the 
minimum occupant weight allowance shall be 120 pounds.
    (4) ``Gross Axle Weight Rating'' or ``GAWR,'' followed by the 
appropriate value in pounds for each axle, identified in order from 
front to rear (e.g., front, first intermediate, second intermediate, 
rear). The ratings for any consecutive axles having indentical gross 
axle weight ratings when equipped with tires having the same tire size 
designation may, at the option of the manufacturer, be stated as a 
single value, with label indicating to which axles the ratings apply.

                      Examples of Combined Ratings

    GAWR: (a) All axles--4080 with 7.00-15 LT (D) tires.
    (b) Front--12,000 with 10.00-20(G) tires.
    First intermediate to rear--15,000 with 12.00-20(H) tires.

    (5) The statement: ``This vehicle conforms to all applicable Federal 
motor vehicle safety standards in effect on the date of manufacture 
shown above.'' The expression ``U.S.'' or ``U.S.A.'' may be inserted 
before the word ``Federal''.
    (i) In the case of passenger cars manufactured on or after September 
1, 1978, the expression ``and bumper'' shall be included in the 
statement following the word ``safety''.
    (ii) In the case of 1987 and subsequent model year passenger cars 
manufactured on or after April 24, 1986, the expression ``safety, 
bumper, and theft prevention'' shall be substituted in the statement for 
the word ``safety''.
    (iii) In the case of multipurpose passenger vehicles (MPVs) and 
trucks with a GVWR of 6,000 pounds or less manufactured on or after June 
11, 1999, the expression ``and theft prevention'' shall be included in 
the statement following the word ``safety''.
    (6) Vehicle identification number.
    (7) The type classification of the vehicle as defined in Sec. 571.3 
of this chapter (e.g., truck, MPV, bus, trailer).
    (h) Multiple GVWR-GAWR ratings. (1) (For passenger cars only) In 
cases where different tire sizes are offered as a customer option, a 
manufacturer may at his option list more than one set of values for GVWR 
and GAWR, in response to the requirements of paragraphs (g) (3) and (4) 
of this section. If the label shows more than one set of weight rating 
values, each value shall be followed by the phrase ``with ------ 
tires,'' inserting the proper tire size designations. A manufacturer may 
at his option list one or more tire sizes where only one set of weight 
ratings is provided.

                          Passenger Car Example

GVWR:
    4400 LB with G78-14B Tires, 4800 LB with H78-14B Tires.

GAWR:
    Front--2000 LB with G78-14B Tires at 24 psi, 2200 LB with H78-14B 
Tires at 24 psi.
    Rear--2400 LB with G78-14B Tires at 28 psi, 2600 LB with H78-14B 
Tires at 28 psi.

    (2) (For multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, buses, trailers, 
and motorcycles) The manufacturer may, at its option, list more than one 
GVWR-GAWR-tire-rim-combination on the label, as long as the listing 
conforms in content and format to the requirements for tire-rim-
inflation information set forth in Standard No. 120 of this chapter 
(Sec. 571.120).

[[Page 170]]

    (3) At the option of the manufacturer, additional GVWR-GAWR ratings 
for operation of the vehicle at reduced speeds may be listed at the 
bottom of the certification label following any information that is 
required to be listed.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (j) A manufacturer may, at his option, provide information 
concerning which tables in the document that accompanies the vehicle 
pursuant to Sec. 575.6(a) of this chapter apply to the vehicle. This 
information may not precede or interrupt the information required by 
paragraph (g) of this section.
    (k) In the case of passenger cars admitted to the United States 
under 49 CFR part 592 to which the label required by this section has 
not been affixed by the original producer or assembler of the passenger 
car, a label meeting the requirements of this paragraph shall be affixed 
by the importer before the vehicle is imported into the United States, 
if the car is from a line listed in Appendix A of 49 CFR Part 541. This 
label shall be in addition to, and not in place of, the label required 
by paragraphs (a) through (j), inclusive, of this section.
    (1) The label shall, unless riveted, be permanently affixed in such 
a manner that it cannot be removed without destroying or defacing it.
    (2) The label shall be affixed to either the hinge pillar, door-
latch post, or the door edge that meets the door-latch post, next to the 
driver's seating position, or, if none of these locations is 
practicable, to the left side of the instrument panel. If that location 
is also not practicable, the label shall be affixed to the inward-facing 
surface of the door next to the driver's seating position. The location 
of the label shall be such that it is easily readable without moving any 
part of the vehicle except an outer door.
    (3) The lettering on the label shall be of a color that contrasts 
with the background of the label.
    (4) The label shall contain the following statements, in the English 
language, lettered in block capitals and numerals not less than three 
thirty-seconds of an inch high, in the order shown:
    (i) Model year (if applicable) or year of manufacture and line of 
the vehicle, as reported by the manufacturer that produced or assembled 
the vehicle. ``Model year'' is used as defined in Sec. 565.3(h) of this 
chapter. ``Line'' is used as defined in Sec. 541.4 of this chapter.
    (ii) Name of the importer: The full corporate or individual name of 
the importer of the vehicle shall be spelled out, except that such 
abbreviations as ``Co.'' or ``Inc.'' and their foreign equivalents and 
the middle initial of individuals, may be used. The name of the importer 
shall be preceded by the words ``Imported By''.
    (iii) The statement: ``This vehicle conforms to the applicable 
Federal motor vehicle theft prevention standard in effect on the date of 
manufacture.''
    (l)(1) In the case of a passenger car imported into the United 
States under 49 CFR 591.5(f) which does not have an identification 
number that complies with 49 CFR 565.4 (b), (c), and (g) at the time of 
importation, the Registered Importer shall permanently affix a label to 
the vehicle in such a manner that, unless the label is riveted, it 
cannot be removed without being destroyed or defaced. The label shall be 
in addition to the label required by paragraph (a) of this section, and 
shall be affixed to the vehicle in a location specified in paragraph (c) 
of this section.
    (2) The label shall contain the following statement, in the English 
language, lettered in block capitals and numerals not less than 4 mm 
high, with the location on the vehicle of the original manufacturer's 
identification number provided in the blank: ORIGINAL MANUFACTURER'S 
IDENTIFICATION NUMBER SUBSTITUTING FOR U.S. VIN IS LOCATED ------------.

[36 FR 7056, Apr. 14, 1971, as amended at 36 FR 23572, Dec. 10, 1971; 41 
FR 3479, Jan. 23, 1976; 41 FR 13923, Apr. 1, 1976; 42 FR 7144, Feb. 7, 
1977; 42 FR 31162, June 20, 1977; 42 FR 37371, July 21, 1977; 42 FR 
37817, July 25, 1977; 50 FR 43192, Oct. 24, 1985; 52 FR 28562, July 31, 
1987; 54 FR 46256, Nov. 2, 1989; 56 FR 22356, May 15, 1991; 59 FR 64170, 
Dec. 13, 1994; 61 FR 29036, June 7, 1996; 64 FR 6817, Feb. 11, 1999]

    Effective Date Note: At 67 FR 69623, Nov. 18, 2002, Sec. 567.4 was 
amended by revising paragraph (h)(2), effective Sept. 1, 2003. At 68 FR 
33655, June 5, 2003, the effective date was delayed until Sept. 1, 2004. 
At 69 FR 31306, June

[[Page 171]]

3, 2004, the effective date was further delayed until Sept. 1, 2005. For 
the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 567.4  Requirements for manufacturers of motor vehicles.

                                * * * * *

    (h) * * *
    (2) (For multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, buses, trailers, 
and motorcycles) The manufacturer may, at its option, list more than one 
GVWR-GAWR-tire-rim combination on the label as long as the listing 
contains the tire-rim combination installed as original equipment on the 
vehicle by the vehicle manufacturer and conforms in content and format 
to the requirements for the tire-rim-inflation information set forth in 
Sec. 571.110, Sec. 571.120, Sec. 571.129 and Sec. 571.139 of this 
chapter.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 567.5  Requirements for manufacturers of vehicles manufactured in 
two or more stages.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, each 
manufacturer of a chassis-cab shall affix a label to each chassis-cab 
manufactured on or after July 25, 1978, in the location and form 
specified in Sec. 567.4, that contains the following statements to the 
extent that they are applicable.
    (1) ``This chassis-cab conforms to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standard Nos. ------.'' The statement shall be completed by inserting 
the numbers of the safety standards (e.g., 101, 207) to which the 
chassis-cab conforms.
    (2) ``This vehicle will conform to Standard Nos. ------ if it is 
completed in accordance with the instructions contained in the 
incomplete vehicle document furnished pursuant to 49 CFR part 568.'' The 
statement shall be completed by inserting the numbers of the safety 
standards conformity to which is substantially affected by both the 
design of the chassis-cab and the manner in which the vehicle is 
completed (i.e., the standards listed under category (ii) in Sec. 
568.4(a)(7) of this chapter).
    (3) ``Comformity to the other safety standards applicable to this 
vehicle when completed is not substantially affected by the design of 
the chassis-cab.''
    (4) Name of chassis-cab manufacturer preceded by the words 
``CHASSIS-CAB MANUFACTURED BY'' or ``CHASSIS-CAB MFD BY''.
    (5) Month and year of manufacture of chassis-cab. This may be 
spelled out, as in ``JUNE 1970'', or expressed in numerals, as in ``6/
70''. No preface is required.
    (b) Except as provided in paragraphs (e) and (f) of this section, 
each intermediate manufacturer of a vehicle manufactured in two or more 
stages shall affix a label, in the location and form specified in Sec. 
567.4, to each chassis-cab respecting which he is required by Sec. 
568.5 to furnish an addendum to the incomplete vehicle document 
described in Sec. 568.4. However, this paragraph applies only to 
chassis-cabs that have been certified by a chassis-cab manufacturer in 
accordance with paragraph (a) of this section. The label shall contain 
the following statements as appropriate.
    (1)(i) ``With respect to Standard Nos. ------, the instructions of 
prior manufacturers have been followed so that the chassis-cab now 
conforms to these standards.'' The statement shall be completed by 
inserting the numbers of all or less than all of the standards, and only 
those standards, respecting which the latest prior certification 
statement was in the form prescribed in paragraph (a)(2) or (b)(2) of 
this section.
    (ii) ``This chassis-cab conforms to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standard Nos. ------.'' The statement shall be completed by inserting 
the numbers of the other standards to which the chassis-cab conforms, 
excluding those standards respecting which the latest prior 
certification statement was in the form prescribed in paragraphs (a)(1), 
(b)(1)(i), or this paragraph.
    (2) ``This vehicle will conform to Standard Nos. ------ if it is 
completed in accordance with the instructions contained in the amended 
incomplete vehicle document furnished pursuant to 49 CFR part 568.'' The 
statement shall be completed by inserting the numbers of the standards 
conformity to which is substantially affected by both the design of the 
chassis-cab (as modified by the intermediate manufacturer) and the 
manner in which the vehicle is completed.

[[Page 172]]

    (3) ``Conformity to Standard Nos. ------ is no longer substantially 
affected by the design of this chassis-cab.'' The statement shall be 
completed by inserting the numbers of all or less than all of the 
standards, and only those standards, respecting which the latest prior 
certification statement was in the form prescribed in paragraphs (a) (1) 
and (2), (b)(1) (i) and (ii), or (b)(2) of this section.
    (4) Name of intermediate manufacturer, preceded by the words 
``INTERMEDIATE MANUFACTURE BY'' or ``INTERMEDIATE MFR BY''.
    (5) Month and year in which the intermediate manufacturer performed 
his last manufacturing operation on the chassis-cab. This may be spelled 
out, as ``JUNE 1970'', or expressed as numerals, as ``6/70''. No preface 
is required.
    (c) Except as provided in paragraphs (e) and (f) of this section, 
each final-stage manufacturer, as defined in Sec. 568.3 of Title 49 of 
the CFR, of a vehicle manufactured in two or more stages shall affix to 
each vehicle a label, of the type and in the manner and form described 
in Sec. 567.4 of this part, containing the following statements:
    (1) Name of final-stage manufacturer, preceded by the words 
``MANUFACTURED BY'' or ``MFD BY''.
    (2) Month and year in which final-stage manufacture is completed. 
This may be spelled out, as in ``JUNE 1970'', or expressed in numerals, 
as in ``6/70''. No preface is required.
    (3) Name of original manufacturer of the incomplete vehicle, 
preceded by the words ``INCOMPLETE VEHICLE MANUFACTURED BY'' or ``INC 
VEH MFD BY''. This item and item (4) may be omitted in cases where the 
incomplete vehicle was a chassis-cab.
    (4) Month and year in which the original manufacturer of the 
incomplete vehicle performed his last manufacturing operation on the 
incomplete vehicle, in the same form as paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section.
    (5) ``GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING'' or ``GVWR'', followed by the 
appropriate value in pounds, which shall not be less than the sum of the 
unloaded vehicle weight, rated cargo load, and 150 pounds times the 
vehicle's designated seating capacity. However, for school buses the 
minimum occupant weight allowance shall be 120 pounds.
    (6) ``GROSS AXLE WEIGHT RATING'' or ``GAWR'', followed by the 
appropriate value in pounds for each axle, identified in order from 
front to rear (e.g., front, first intermediate, second intermediate, 
rear). The ratings for any consecutive axles having identical gross axle 
weight ratings when equipped with tires having the same tire size 
designation may be stated as a single value, with the label indicating 
to which axles the rating apply.

                      Examples of Combined Ratings

    GAWR: (a) All axles--4080 with 7.00-15 LT(D) tires; (b) Front--
12,000 with 10.00-20(G) tires. First intermediate to rear--15,000 with 
12.00-20(H) tires.

    (7) One of the following statements as appropriate. Statements (i), 
(ii), and (iii) are alternative certification statements. Statement (i) 
may be used by manufacturers meeting the requirements described in the 
instruction portion of that paragraph. Statements (ii) and (iii) may be 
used by any final-stage manufacturer.
    (i) ``Conformity of the chassis-cab to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standards, which have been previously fully certified by the incomplete 
vehicle manufacturer or intermediate vehicle manufacturer, has not been 
affected by final-stage manufacture. The vehicle has been completed in 
accordance with the prior manufacturer's instructions, where applicable. 
This vehicle conforms to all other applicable Federal Motor Vehicle 
Safety Standards in effect in (month, year).''

The preceding statement shall be used only in cases in which the final-
stage manufacturer has:

(A) Not affected conformity to standards compliance with which has been 
fully certified by a chassis-cab manufacturer pursuant to paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section or by an intermediate manufacturer pursuant to 
paragraphs (b)(1)(i) or (b)(1)(ii) of this section, and (B) has 
completed the vehicle in accordance with the prior manufacturer's 
instructions in regard to standards listed, as appropriate, in a 
chassis-cab manufacturer's conditional statement under paragraph (a)(2) 
of this section or in an intermediate manufacturer's

[[Page 173]]

conditional statement under paragraph (b)(2) of this section. The date 
shown in the third sentence of the statement shall be not earlier than 
the manufacturing date of the incomplete vehicle, and not later than the 
date of completion of final-stage manufacture.
    (ii) ``Conformity of the chassis-cab to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standards Nos. ------ has not been affected by final stage manufacture. 
With respect to Standards Nos. ------------, the vehicle has been 
completed in accordance with the prior manufacturer's instructions. This 
vehicle conforms to all other applicable Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standards in effect in (month, year).''
    The first sentence of the preceding statement shall be completed by 
inserting the numbers of all or less than all of the standards, and only 
those standards, respecting which the latest prior certification 
statement was made by a chassis-cab manufacturer pursuant to paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section or by an intermediate manufacturer pursuant to 
paragraphs (b)(1)(i) or (b)(1)(ii) of this section. The second sentence 
of the statement shall be completed by inserting the numbers of all or 
less than all of the standards and only those standards, respecting 
which the latest prior certification statement was a chassis-cab 
manufacturer's conditional statement under paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section or an intermediate manufacturer's conditional statement under 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section. The date shown in the third sentence 
of the statement shall be not earlier than the manufacturing date of the 
incomplete vehicle, and not later than the date of completion of final-
stage manufacture.
    (iii) ``This vehicle conforms to all applicable Federal Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standards in effect in (month, year).''
    The date shown shall be not earlier than the manufacturing date of 
the incomplete vehicle and not later than the date of completion of 
final-stage manufacture.
    (8) Vehicle identification number.
    (9) The type classification of the vehicle as defined in Sec. 571.3 
of Title 49 of the CFR (e.g., truck, MPV, bus, trailer).
    (d) More than one set of figures for GVWR and GAWR, and one or more 
tire sizes, may be listed in satisfaction of the requirements of 
paragraphs (c) (5) and (6) of this section, as provided in Sec. 
567.4(h).
    (e) If an incomplete vehicle manufacturer assumes legal 
responsibility for all duties and liabilities imposed by the Act, with 
respect to the vehicle as finally manufactured, the incomplete vehicle 
manufacturer shall ensure that a label is affixed to the final vehicle 
in conformity with paragraph (c) of this section, except that the name 
of the incomplete vehicle manufacturer shall appear instead of the name 
of the final-stage manufacturer after the words ``MANUFACTURED BY'' or 
``MFD BY'' required by paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the additional 
manufacturer's name required by paragraph (c)(3) of this section shall 
be omitted, and the date required by paragraph (c)(4) of this section 
shall be preceded by the words ``INCOMPLETE VEHICLE MANUFACTURED'' or 
``INC VEH MFD.''
    (f) If an intermediate manufacturer of a vehicle assumes legal 
responsibility for all duties and liabilities imposed on manufacturers 
by the Act, with respect to the vehicle as finally manufactured, the 
intermediate manufacturer shall ensure that a label is affixed to the 
final vehicle in conformity with paragraph (c) of this section, except 
that the name of the intermediate manufacturer shall appear instead of 
the name of the final-stage manufacturer after the words ``MANUFACTURED 
BY'' or ``MFD BY'' required by paragraph (c)(1) of this section.

[42 FR 37817, July 25, 1977; 42 FR 46927, Sept. 19, 1977, as amended at 
43 FR 9605, Mar. 3, 1978; 43 FR 12014, Mar. 23, 1978; 43 FR 29124, July 
6, 1978; 48 FR 51309, Nov. 8, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 567.6  Requirements for persons who do not alter certified vehicles 
or do so with readily attachable components.

    A person who does not alter a motor vehicle or who alters such a 
vehicle only by the addition, substitution, or removal of readily 
attachable components such as mirrors or tires and rim assemblies, or 
minor finishing operations such as painting, in such a manner that the 
vehicle's stated weight

[[Page 174]]

ratings are still valid, need not affix a label to the vehicle, but 
shall allow a manufacturer's label that conforms to the requirements of 
this part to remain affixed to the vehicle. If such a person is a 
distributor of the motor vehicle, allowing the manufacturer's label to 
remain affixed to the vehicle shall satisfy the distributor's 
certification requirements under the Act.

[38 FR 15962, June 19, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 567.7  Requirements for persons who alter certified vehicles.

    A person who alters a vehicle that has previously been certified in 
accordance with Sec. 567.4 or Sec. 567.5, other than by the addition, 
substitution, or removal of readily attachable components such as 
mirrors or tire and rim assemblies, or minor finishing operations such 
as painting, or who alters the vehicle in such a manner that its stated 
weight ratings are no longer valid, before the first purchase of the 
vehicle in good faith for purposes other than resale, shall allow the 
original certification label to remain on the vehicle, and shall affix 
to the vehicle an additional label of the type and in the manner and 
form described in Sec. 567.4, containing the following information:
    (a) The statement: ``This vehicle was altered by (individual or 
corporate name) in (month and year in which alterations were completed) 
and as altered it conforms to all applicable Federal Motor Vehicle 
Safety Standards affected by the alteration and in effect in (month, 
year).'' The second date shall be no earlier than the manufacturing date 
of the original vehicle, and no later than the date alterations were 
completed.
    (1) In the case of passenger cars manufactured on or after January 
1, 2000, the expression ``safety, bumper, and theft prevention'' shall 
be substituted in the statement for the word ``safety''.
    (2) In the case of multipurpose passenger vehicles (MPVs) and trucks 
with a GVWR of 6,000 pounds or less manufactured on or after January 1, 
2000, the expression ``and theft prevention'' shall be included in the 
statement following the word ``safety''.
    (b) If the gross vehicle weight rating or any of the gross axle 
weight ratings of the vehicle as altered are different from those shown 
on the original certification label, the modified values shall be 
provided in the form specified in Sec. 567.4(g) (3) and (5).
    (c) If the vehicle as altered has a different type classification 
from that shown on the original certification label, the type as 
modified shall be provided.

[38 FR 15963, June 19, 1973, as amended at 43 FR 21891, May 22, 1978; 45 
FR 18929, Mar. 24, 1980; 64 FR 38595, July 19, 1999]


<R03>
PART 568_VEHICLES MANUFACTURED IN TWO OR MORE STAGES--Table of Contents




Sec.
568.1 Purpose and scope.
568.2 Application.
568.3 Definitions.
568.4 Requirements for incomplete vehicle manufacturers.
568.5 Requirements for intermediate manufacturers.
568.6 Requirements for final-stage manufacturers.
568.7 Requirements for manufacturers who assume legal responsibility for 
          the vehicle.
568.8 Requirements for persons who alter certified vehicles.

    Authority: Secs. 103, 112, 114, and 119, National Traffic and Motor 
Vehicle Safety Act (15 U.S.C. 1392, 1401, 1403, and 1407); delegation of 
authority at 49 CFR 1.50.


<R05>
Sec. 568.1  Purpose and scope.

    The purpose of this part is to prescribe the method by which 
manufacturers of vehicles manufactured in two or more stages shall 
ensure conformity of those vehicles with the Federal motor vehicle 
safety standards (``standards'') and other regulations issued under the 
National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act.

[36 FR 7057, Apr. 14, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 568.2  Application.

    This part applies to incomplete vehicle manufacturers, intermediate 
manufacturers, and final-stage manufacturers of vehicles manufactured in 
two or more stages.

[36 FR 7057, Apr. 14, 1971]

[[Page 175]]


<R05>
Sec. 568.3  Definitions.

    Completed vehicle means a vehicle that requires no further 
manufacturing operations to perform its intended function, other than 
the addition of readily attachable components, such as mirrors or tire 
and rim assemblies, or minor finishing operations such as painting.
    Final-stage manufacturer means a person who performs such 
manufacturing operations on an incomplete vehicle that it becomes a 
completed vehicle.
    Incomplete vehicle means an assemblage consisting, as a minimum, of 
frame and chassis structure, power train, steering system, suspension 
system, and braking system, to the extent that those systems are to be 
part of the completed vehicle, that requires further manufacturing 
operations, other than the addition of readily attachable components, 
such as mirrors or tire and rim assemblies, or minor finishing 
operations such as painting, to become a completed vehicle.
    Intermediate manufacturer means a person, other than the incomplete 
vehicle manufacturer or the final-stage manufacturer, who performs 
manufacturing operations on an incomplete vehicle.
    Incomplete vehicle manufacturer means a person who manufactures an 
incomplete vehicle by assembling components none of which, taken 
separately, constitute an incomplete vehicle.

[36 FR 7057, Apr. 14, 1971, as amended at 37 FR 10938, June 1, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 568.4  Requirements for incomplete vehicle manufacturers.

    (a) The incomplete vehicle manufacturer shall furnish with the 
incomplete vehicle, at or before the time of delivery, a document that 
contains the following statements, in the order shown, and any other 
information required by this chapter to be included therein.
    (1) Name and mailing address of the incomplete vehicle manufacturer.
    (2) Month and year during which the incomplete vehicle manufacturer 
performed his last manufacturing operation on the incomplete vehicle.
    (3) Identification of the incomplete vehicle(s) to which the 
document applies. The identification may be by serial number, groups of 
serial numbers, or otherwise, but it must be sufficient to ascertain 
positively that a document applies to a particular incomplete vehicle 
after the document has been removed from the vehicle.
    (4) Gross vehicle weight rating of the completed vehicle for which 
the incomplete vehicle is intended.
    (5) Gross axle weight rating for each axle of the completed vehicle, 
listed and identified in order from front to rear (e.g., front, first 
intermediate, second intermediate, rear). The ratings for any consective 
axles having identical gross axle weight ratings when equipped with 
tires having the same tire size designation may, at the option of the 
incomplete vehicle manufacturer, be stated as a single value, with the 
label indicating to which axles the ratings apply.

                       Example of Combined Ratings

    GAWR: (a) All axles--4080 with 7.00-15 LT(D) tires.
    (b) Front--12,000 with 10.00-20(G) tires.
    First intermediate to rear--15,000 with 12.00-20(H) tires.

    (6) Listing of the vehicle types as defined in Sec. 571.3 of this 
chapter (e.g., truck, MPV, bus, trailer) into which the incomplete 
vehicle may appropriately be manufactured.
    (7) Listing by number of each standard, in effect at the time of 
manufacture of the incomplete vehicle, that applies to any of the 
vehicle types listed in this paragraph (a)(6) of this section, followed 
in each case by one of the following three types of statement, as 
applicable:
    (i) A statement that the vehicle when completed will conform to the 
standard if no alterations are made in identified components of the 
incomplete vehicle.

    Example: 107--This vehicle when completed will conform to Standard 
107 (see Sec. 571.107 of this chapter), Reflecting Surfaces, if no 
alterations are made in the windshield wiper components or in the 
reflecting surfaces in the interior of the cab.

    (ii) A statement of specific conditions of final manufacture under 
which the manufacturer specifies that the completed vehicle will conform 
to the standard.


[[Page 176]]


    Example: 121--This vehicle when completed will conform to Standard 
121, Airbrake Systems (see Sec. 571.121 of this chapter), if it does 
not exceed any of the gross axle weight ratings, if the center of 
gravity at GVWR is not higher than nine feet above the ground, and if no 
alterations are made in any brake system component.

    (iii) A statement that conformity with the standard is not 
substantially affected by the design of the incomplete vehicle, and that 
the incomplete vehicle manufacturer makes no representation as to 
conformity with the standard.
    (b) The document shall be attached to the incomplete vehicle in such 
a manner that it will not be inadvertently detached, or alternatively, 
it may be sent directly to a final-stage manufacturer, intermediate 
manufacturer or purchaser for purposes other than resale to whom the 
incomplete vehicle is delivered.

[36 FR 7057, Apr. 14, 1971, as amended at 42 FR 31162, June 20, 1977; 42 
FR 37371, July 21, 1977; 42 FR 37816, July 25, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 568.5  Requirements for intermediate manufacturers.

    (a) Each intermediate manufacturer of an incomplete vehicle shall 
furnish the document required by Sec. 568.4 in the manner specified in 
that section. If any of the changes in the vehicle made by the 
intermediate manufacturer affect the validity of the statements in the 
document as provided to him he shall furnish an addendum to the document 
that contains his name and mailing address and an indication of all 
changes that should be made in the document to reflect changes that he 
made in the vehicle.
    (b) Each intermediate manufacturer shall, in accordance with Sec. 
567.5 of this chapter, affix a label to each chassis-cab respecting 
which he is required by paragraph (a) above to furnish an addendum to 
the document required by Sec. 568.4.

(Authority: Secs. 103, 108, 112, 114, 119, Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 
(15 U.S.C. 1392, 1397, 1401, 1403, 1407); delegation of authority at 49 
CFR 1.50)

[43 FR 9605, Mar. 9, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 568.6  Requirements for final-stage manufacturers.

    (a) Each final-stage manufacturer shall complete the vehicle in such 
a manner that it conforms to the standards in effect on the date of 
manufacture of the incomplete vehicle, the date of final completion, or 
a date between those two dates. This requirement shall, however, be 
superseded by any conflicting provisions of a standard that applies by 
its terms to vehicles manufactured in two or more stages.
    (b) Each final-stage manufacturer shall affix a label to the 
completed vehicle in accordance with Sec. 567.5 of this chapter.

[36 FR 7057, Apr. 14, 1971, as amended at 42 FR 37817, July 25, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 568.7  Requirements for manufacturers who assume legal responsibility 
for the vehicle.

    (a) If an incomplete vehicle manufacturer assumes legal 
responsibility for all duties and liabilities imposed on manufacturers 
by the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act (15 U.S.C. 1381 
through 1425) (hereafter referred to as the Act), with respect to the 
vehicle as finally manufactured, the requirements of Sec. Sec. 568.4, 
568.5 and 568.6(b) do not apply to that vehicle. In such a case, the 
incomplete vehicle manufacturer shall ensure that a label is affixed to 
the final vehicle in conformity with Sec. 567.5(e) of this chapter.
    (b) If an intermediate manufacturer of a vehicle assumes legal 
responsibility for all duties and liabilities imposed on manufacturers 
by the Act, with respect to the vehicle as finally manufactured, 
Sec. Sec. 568.5 and 568.6(b) do not apply to that vehicle. In such a 
case, the manufacturer assuming responsibility shall ensure that a label 
is affixed to the final vehicle in conformity with Sec. 567.5(f) of 
this chapter. The assumption of responsibility by an intermediate 
manufacturer does not, however, change the requirements for incomplete 
vehicle manufacturers in Sec. 568.4.

[36 FR 7057, Apr. 14, 1971, as amended at 42 FR 37817, July 25, 1977]

[[Page 177]]


<R05>
Sec. 568.8  Requirements for persons who alter certified vehicles.

    A person who alters a vehicle that has been previously certified in 
accordance with Sec. 567.4 or Sec. 567.5, other than by the addition, 
substitution, or removal of readily attachable components such as 
mirrors or tire and rim assemblies, or minor finishing operations such 
as painting, or who alters a vehicle in such a manner that its stated 
weight ratings are no longer valid, before the first purchase of the 
vehicle in good faith for purposes other than resale, shall ascertain 
that the vehicle as altered conforms to the standards which are affected 
by the alteration and are in effect on the original date of manufacture 
of the vehicle, the date of final completion, or a date between those 
two dates. That person shall certify the vehicle in accordance with 
Sec. 567.7 of this chapter.

[45 FR 18929, Mar. 24, 1980]


<R03>
PART 569_REGROOVED TIRES--Table of Contents




Sec.
569.1 Purpose and scope.
569.3 Definitions.
569.5 Applicability.
569.7 Requirements.
569.9 Labeling of regroovable tires.

    Authority: Secs. 119, 204, 80 Stat. 728, 729 (15 U.S.C. 1407, 1424); 
and Secretary's delegation of authority, 49 CFR 1.4(c).


<R05>
Sec. 569.1  Purpose and scope.

    This part sets forth the conditions under which regrooved and 
regroovable tires manufactured or regrooved after the effective date of 
the regulation may be sold, offered for sale, introduced for sale or 
delivered for introduction into interstate commerce.

[42 FR 21613, Apr. 28, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 569.3  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory definitions. All terms used in this part that are 
defined in section 102 of the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety 
Act of 1966 (15 U.S.C. 1391) are used as defined in the Act.
    (b) Motor Vehicle Safety Standard definitions. Unless otherwise 
indicated, all terms used in this part that are defined in the Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standards, part 571, of this subchapter (hereinafter 
``The Standards''), are used as defined therein without regard to the 
applicability of a standard in which a definition is contained.
    (c) Regroovable tire means a tire, either original tread or retread, 
designed and constructed with sufficient tread material to permit 
renewal of the tread pattern or the generation of a new tread pattern in 
a manner which conforms to this part.
    (d) Regrooved tire means a tire, either original tread or retread, 
on which the tread pattern has been renewed or a new tread has been 
produced by cutting into the tread of a worn tire to a depth equal to or 
deeper than the molded original groove depth.

[34 FR 1150, Jan. 24, 1969. Redesignated at 35 FR 5118, Mar. 26, 1970]


<R05>
Sec. 569.5  Applicability.

    (a) General. Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, 
this part applies to all motor vehicle regrooved or regroovable tires 
manufactured or regrooved after the effective date of the regulation.
    (b) Export. This part does not apply to regrooved or regroovable 
tires intended solely for export and so labeled or tagged.

[34 FR 1150, Jan. 24, 1969. Redesignated at 35 FR 5118, Mar. 26, 1970]


<R05>
Sec. 569.7  Requirements.

    (a) Regrooved tires. (1) Except as permitted by paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section, no person shall sell, offer for sale, or introduce or 
deliver for introduction into interstate commerce regrooved tires 
produced by removing rubber from the surface of a worn tire tread to 
generate a new tread pattern. Any person who regrooves tires and leases 
them to owners or operators of motor vehicles and any person who 
regrooves his own tires for use on motor vehicles is considered to be a 
person delivering for introduction into interstate commerce within the 
meaning of this part.
    (2) A regrooved tire may be sold, offered for sale, or introduced 
for sale or delivered for introduction into interstate commerce only if 
it conforms to each of the following requirements:

[[Page 178]]

    (i) The tire being regrooved shall be a regroovable tire;
    (ii) After regrooving, cord material below the grooves shall have a 
protective covering of tread material at least \3/32\-inch thick;
    (iii) After regrooving, the new grooves generated into the tread 
material and any residual original molded tread groove which is at or 
below the new regrooved depth shall have a minimum of 90 linear inches 
of tread edges per linear foot of the circumference;
    (iv) After regrooving, the new groove width generated into the tread 
material shall be a minimum of \3/16\-inch and a maximum of \5/16\-inch;
    (v) After regrooving, all new grooves cut into the tread shall 
provide unobstructed fluid escape passages; and
    (vi) After regrooving, the tire shall not contain any of the 
following defects, as determined by a visual examination of the tire 
either mounted on the rim, or dismounted, whichever is applicable:
    (A) Cracking which extends to the fabric,
    (B) Groove cracks or wear extending to the fabric, or
    (C) Evidence of ply, tread, or sidewall separation;
    (vii) If the tire is siped by cutting the tread surface without 
removing rubber, the tire cord material shall not be damaged as a result 
of the siping process, and no sipe shall be deeper than the original or 
retread groove depth.
    (b) Siped regroovable tires. No person shall sell, offer for sale, 
or introduce for sale or deliver for introduction into interstate 
commerce a regroovable tire that has been siped by cutting the tread 
surface without removing rubber if the tire cord material is damaged as 
a result of the siping process, or if the tire is siped deeper than the 
original or retread groove depth.

[39 FR 15039, Apr. 30, 1974, as amended at 42 FR 21613, Apr. 28, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 569.9  Labeling of regroovable tires.

    (a) Regroovable tires. After August 30, 1969, each tire designed and 
constructed for regrooving shall be labeled on both sidewalls with the 
word ``Regroovable'' molded on or into the tire in raised or recessed 
letters 0.025 to 0.040 inch. The word ``Regroovable'' shall be in 
letters 0.38 to 0.50 inch in height and not less than 4 inches and not 
more than 6 inches in length. The lettering shall be located in the 
sidewall of the tire between the maximum section width and the bead in 
an area which will not be obstructed by the rim flange.

[34 FR 1150, Jan. 24, 1969; 34 FR 1830, Feb. 7, 1969]


<R03>
PART 570_VEHICLE IN USE INSPECTION STANDARDS--Table of Contents




          Subpart A_Vehicles With GVWR of 10,000 Pounds or Less

Sec.
570.1 Scope.
570.2 Purpose.
570.3 Applicability.
570.4 Definitions.
570.5 Service brake system.
570.6 Brake power unit.
570.7 Steering systems.
570.8 Suspension systems.
570.9 Tires.
570.10 Wheel assemblies.

         Subpart B_Vehicles With GVWR of More Than 10,000 Pounds

570.51 Scope.
570.52 Purpose.
570.53 Applicability.
570.54 Definitions.
570.55 Hydraulic brake system.
570.56 Vacuum brake assist unit and vacuum brake system.
570.57 Air brake system and air-over-hydraulic brake subsystem.
570.58 Electric brake system.
570.59 Service brake system.
570.60 Steering system.
570.61 Suspension system.
570.62 Tires.
570.63 Wheel assemblies.

    Authority: Secs. 103, 108, 119, Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 (15 
U.S.C. 1392, 1397, 1407); delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.


<R04>
          Subpart A_Vehicles With GVWR of 10,000 Pounds or Less

    Source: 38 FR 23950, Sept. 5, 1973, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 570.1  Scope.

    This part specifies standards and procedures for inspection of 
hydraulic service brake systems, steering and

[[Page 179]]

suspension systems, and tire and wheel assemblies of motor vehicles in 
use.


<R05>
Sec. 570.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to establish criteria for the inspection 
of motor vehicles by State inspection systems, in order to reduce death 
and injuries attributable to failure or inadequate performance of motor 
vehicle systems.


<R05>
Sec. 570.3  Applicability.

    This part does not in itself impose requirements on any person. It 
is intended to be implemented by States through the highway safety 
program standards issued under the Highway Safety Act (23 U.S.C. 402) 
with respect to inspection of motor vehicles with gross vehicle weight 
rating of 10,000 pounds or less, except motorcycles or trailers.


<R05>
Sec. 570.4  Definitions.

    Unless otherwise indicated, all terms used in this part that are 
defined in 49 CFR part 571, Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, are used as 
defined in that part.


<R05>
Sec. 570.5  Service brake system.

    Unless otherwise noted, the force to be applied during inspection 
procedures to power-assisted and full-power brake systems is 25 lb, and 
to all other systems, 50 lb.
    (a) Failure indicator. The brake system failure indicator lamp, if 
part of a vehicle's original equipment, shall be operable. (This lamp is 
required by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 105, 49 CFR 
571.105, on every new passenger car manufactured on or after January 1, 
1968, and on other types of motor vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1975.)
    (1) Inspection procedure. Apply the parking brake and turn the 
ignition to start, or verify lamp operation by other means indicated by 
the vehicle manufacturer that the brake system failure indicator lamp is 
operable.
    (b) Brake system integrity. The brake system shall demonstrate 
integrity as indicated by no perceptible decrease in pedal height under 
a 125 pound force applied to the brake pedal or by no illumination of 
the brake system failure indicator lamp. The brake system shall 
withstand the application of force to the pedal without failure of any 
line or other part.
    (1) Inspection procedures. With the engine running on vehicles 
equipped with power brake systems, and the ignition turned to ``on'' in 
other vehicles, apply a force of 125 pounds to the brake pedal and hold 
for 10 seconds. Note any decrease in pedal height, and whether the lamp 
illuminates.
    (c) Brake pedal reserve. When the brake pedal is fully depressed, 
the distance that the pedal has traveled from its free position shall be 
not greater than 80 percent of the total distance from its free position 
to the floorboard or other object that restricts pedal travel.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Measure the distance (A) from the free 
pedal position to the floorboard or other object that restricts brake 
pedal travel. Depress the brake pedal, and with the force applied 
measure the distance (B) from the depressed pedal position to the 
floorboard or other object that restricts pedal travel.

Determine the percentage as

[(A-B)/A]x100.


The engine must be operating when power-assisted brakes are checked. The 
pedal reserve check is not required for vehicles equipped with full 
power (central hydraulic) brake systems, or to vehicles with brake 
systems designed to operate with greater than 80 percent pedal travel.
    (d) Service brake performance. Compliance with one of the following 
performance criteria will satisfy the requirements of this section. 
Verify that tire inflation pressure is within the limits recommended by 
vehicle manufacturer before conducting either of the following tests.
    (1) Roller-type or drive-on platform tests. The force applied by the 
brake on a front wheel or a rear wheel shall not differ by more than 20 
percent from the force applied by the brake on the other front wheel or 
the other rear wheel respectively.
    (i) Inspection procedure. The vehicle shall be tested on a drive-on 
platform, or a roller-type brake analyzer with the capability of 
measuring equalization. The test shall be conducted in

[[Page 180]]

accordance with the test equipment manufacturer's specifications. Note 
the left to right brake force variance.
    (2) Road test. The service brake system shall stop the vehicle in a 
distance of 25 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per hour without 
leaving a 12-foot-wide lane.
    (i) Inspection procedure. The road test shall be conducted on a 
level (not to exceed plus or minus one percent grade) dry, smooth, hard-
surfaced road that is free from loose material, oil, or grease. The 
service brakes shall be applied at a vehicle speed of 20 miles per hour 
and the vehicle shall be brought to a stop as specified. Measure the 
distance required to stop.
    (e) Brake hoses and assemblies. Brake hoses shall not be mounted so 
as to contact the vehicle body or chassis. Hoses shall not be cracked, 
chafed, or flattened. Protective devices, such as ``rub rings,'' shall 
not be considered part of the hose or tubing.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually, inspecting front brake 
hoses through all wheel positions from full left to full right for 
conditions indicated.
    Note: To inspect for paragraphs (f), (g), and (h) of this section, 
remove at a minimum one front wheel and one rear wheel.
    (f) Disc and drum condition. If the drum is embossed with a maximum 
safe diameter dimension or the rotor is embossed with a minimum safety 
thickness dimension, the drum or disc shall be within the appropriate 
specifications. These dimensions will be found on motor vehicles 
manufactured since January 1, 1971, and may be found on vehicles 
manufactured for several years prior to that time. If the drums and 
discs are not embossed, the drums and discs shall be within the 
manufacturer's specifications.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for condition indicated, 
measuring as necessary.
    (g) Friction materials. On each brake the thickness of the lining or 
pad shall not be less than one thirty-second of an inch over the rivet 
heads, or the brake shoe on bonded linings or pads. Brake linings and 
pads shall not have cracks or breaks that extend to rivet holes except 
minor cracks that do not impair attachment. Drum brake linings shall be 
securely attached to brake shoes. Disc brake pads shall be securely 
attached to shoe plates.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for conditions indicated, 
and measure height of rubbing surface of lining over rivet heads. 
Measure bonded lining thickness over shoe surface at the thinnest point 
on the lining or pad.
    (h) Structural and mechanical parts. Backing plates and caliper 
assemblies shall not be deformed or cracked. System parts shall not be 
broken, misaligned, missing, binding, or show evidence of severe wear. 
Automatic adjusters and other parts shall be assembled and installed 
correctly.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for conditions indicated.

[38 FR 23950, Sept. 5, 1973; 38 FR 25685, Sept. 14, 1973, as amended at 
39 FR 12868, Apr. 9, 1974; 39 FR 17321, May 15, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 570.6  Brake power unit.

    (a) Vacuum hoses shall not be collapsed, abraded, broken, improperly 
mounted, or audibly leaking. With residual vacuum exhausted and a 
constant 25 pound force on the brake pedal, the pedal shall fall 
slightly when the engine is started, demonstrating integrity of the 
power assist system. This test is not applicable to vehicles equipped 
with full power brake system as the service brake performance test shall 
be considered adequate test of system performance.
    (1) Inspection procedure. With engine running, examine hoses 
visually and aurally for conditions indicated. Stop engine and apply 
service brakes several times to destroy vacuum in system. Depress brake 
pedal with 25 pounds of force and while maintaining that force, start 
the engine. If brake pedal does not fall slightly under force when the 
engine starts, there is a malfunction in the power assist system.


<R05>
Sec. 570.7  Steering systems.

    (a) System play. Lash or free play in the steering system shall not 
exceed values shown in Table 1.
    (1) Inspection procedure. With the engine on and the wheels in the 
straight ahead position, turn the steering wheel in one direction until 
there is a perceptible movement of a front wheel. If a point on the 
steering wheel rim moves

[[Page 181]]

more than the value shown in Table 1 before perceptible return movement 
of the wheel under observation, there is excessive lash or free play in 
the steering system.

                Table 1--Steering System Free Play Values
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Lash
              Steering wheel diameter (inches)                 (inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
16 or less..................................................           2
18..........................................................      2\1/4\
20..........................................................      2\1/2\
22..........................................................      2\3/4\
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Linkage play. Free play in the steering linkage shall not exceed 
one-quarter of an inch.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Elevate the front end of the vehicle to 
load the ball joints. Insure that wheel bearings are correctly adjusted. 
Grasp the front and rear of a tire and attempt to turn the tire and 
wheel assembly left and right. If the free movement at the front or rear 
tread of the tire exceeds one-quarter inch there is excessive steering 
linkage play.
    (c) Free turning. Steering wheels shall turn freely through the 
limit of travel in both directions.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Turn off steering wheel through the limit 
of travel in both directions. Feel for binding or jamming in the 
steering gear mechanism.
    (d) Alignment. Toe-in and toe-out measurements shall not be greater 
than 1.5 times the value listed in the vehicle manufacturer's service 
specification for alignment setting.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Verify that toe-in or toe-out is not 
greater than 1.5 times the values listed in the vehicle manufacturer's 
service specification for alignment settings as measured by a bar-type 
scuff gauge or other toe-in measuring device. Values to convert toe-in 
readings in inches to scuff gauge readings in ft/mi side-slip for 
different wheel sizes are provided in Table I. Tire diameters used in 
computing scuff gauge readings are based on the average maximum tire 
dimensions of grown tires in service for typical wheel and tire 
assemblies.

                                           Table I--Toe-in Settings From Vehicle MFR's Service Specifications
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       Nominal                             Readings in feet per mile sideslip
                                                        tire   -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Wheel size (inches)                  diameter   \1/16\              \3/16\              \5/16\              \7/16\              \9/16\
                                                      (inches)     in     \1/8\ in     in     \1/4\ in     in     \3/8\ in     in     \1/2\ in     in
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
13..................................................      25.2      13.1      26.2      39.3      52.4      65.5      78.6      91.7     104.8     117.9
14..................................................      26.4      12.5      25.0      37.5      50.0      62.5      75.0      87.5     100.0     112.5
15..................................................      28.5      11.5      23.0      34.5      46.0      57.5      69.0      80.5      92.0     103.5
16..................................................      35.6       9.3      18.6      27.9      37.2      46.5      55.8      65.1      74.4      83.7
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (e) Power steering system. The power steering system shall not have 
cracked or slipping belts, or insufficient fluid in the reservoir.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine fluid reservoir and pump belts for 
conditions indicated.

[38 FR 23950, Sept. 5, 1973, as amended at 39 FR 12868, Apr. 9, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 570.8  Suspension systems.

    (a) Suspension condition. Ball joint seals shall not be cut or 
cracked. Structural parts shall not be bent or damaged. Stabilizer bars 
shall be connected. Springs shall not be broken, or extended above the 
vehicle manufacturer's design height. Spacers, if installed, shall be 
installed on both front springs, both rear springs, or on all four 
springs. Shock absorber mountings, shackles, and U-bolts shall be 
securely attached. Rubber bushings shall not be cracked, extruded out 
from or missing from suspension joints. Radius rods shall not be missing 
or damaged.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine front and rear end suspension 
parts for conditions indicated.
    (b) Shock absorber condition. There shall be no oil on the shock 
absorber housing attributable to leakage by the seal, and the vehicle 
shall not continue free rocking motion for more than two cycles.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine shock absorbers for oil leaking 
from within, then with vehicle on a level

[[Page 182]]

surface, push down on one end of vehicle and release. Note number of 
cycles of free rocking motion. Repeat procedure at other end of vehicle.

[38 FR 23950, Sept. 5, 1973, as amended at 44 FR 68470, Nov. 29, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 570.9  Tires.

    (a) Tread depth. The tread on each tire shall be not less than two 
thirty-seconds of an inch deep.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Passenger car tires have tread depth 
indicators that become exposed when tread depth is less than two thirty-
seconds of an inch. Inspect for indicators in any two adjacent major 
grooves at three locations spaced approximately equally around the 
outside of the tire. For vehicles other than passenger cars, it may be 
necessary to measure tread depth with a tread gauge.
    (b) Type. Vehicle shall be equipped with tires on the same axle that 
are matched in tire size designation, construction, and profile.
    (1) Inspection procedures. Examine visually. A major mismatch in 
tire size designation, construction, and profile between tires on the 
same axle, or a major deviation from the size as recommended by the 
manufacturer (e.g., as indicated on the glove box placard on 1968 and 
later passenger cars) are causes for rejection.
    (c) General condition. Tires shall be free from chunking, bumps, 
knots, or bulges evidencing cord, ply, or tread separation from the 
casing or other adjacent materials.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for conditions indicated.
    (d) Damage. Tire cords or belting materials shall not be exposed, 
either to the naked eye or when cuts or abrasions on the tire are 
probed.
    (1) Inspection procedures. Examine visually for conditions 
indicated, using a blunt instrument if necessary to probe cuts or 
abrasions.

[38 FR 23950, Sept. 5, 1973, as amended at 39 FR 12868, Apr. 9, 1974; 39 
FR 19781, June 4, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 570.10  Wheel assemblies.

    (a) Wheel integrity. A tire rim, wheel disc, or spider shall have no 
visible cracks, elongated bolt holes, or indication of repair by 
welding.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for conditions indicated.
    (b) Deformation. The lateral and radial runout of each rim bead area 
shall not exceed one-eighth of an inch of total indicated runout.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Using a runout indicator gauge, and a 
suitable stand, measure lateral and radial runout of rim bead through 
one full wheel revolution and note runout in excess of one-eighth of an 
inch.
    (c) Mounting. All wheel nuts and bolts shall be in place and tight.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Check wheel retention for conditions 
indicated.

[38 FR 23950, Sept. 5, 1973, as amended at 39 FR 12868, Apr. 9, 1974]


<R04>
         Subpart B_Vehicles With GVWR of More Than 10,000 Pounds

    Source: 39 FR 26027, July 16, 1974, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 570.51  Scope.

    This part specifies standards and procedures for the inspection of 
brake, steering and suspension systems, and tire and wheel assemblies, 
of motor vehicles in use with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 
10,000 pounds.


<R05>
Sec. 570.52  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to establish criteria for the inspection 
of motor vehicles through State inspection programs, in order to reduce 
deaths and injuries attributable to failure or inadequate performance of 
the motor vehicle systems covered by this part.


<R05>
Sec. 570.53  Applicability.

    This part does not in itself impose requirements on any person. It 
is intended to be implemented by States through the highway safety 
program standards issued under the Highway Safety Act (23 U.S.C. 402) 
with respect to inspection of motor vehicles with gross vehicle weight 
rating greater than 10,000 pounds, except mobile structure trailers.

[39 FR 28980, Aug. 13, 1974]

[[Page 183]]


<R05>
Sec. 570.54  Definitions.

    Unless otherwise indicated, all terms used in this part that are 
defined in part 571 of this chapter, Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, are 
used as defined in that part.
    Air-over-hydraulic brake subsystem means a subsystem of the air 
brake that uses compressed air to transmit a force from the driver 
control to a hydraulic brake system to actuate the service brakes.
    Electric brake system means a system that uses electric current to 
actuate the service brake.
    Vacuum brake system means a system that uses a vacuum and 
atmospheric pressure for transmitting a force from the driver control to 
the service brake, but does not include a system that uses vacuum only 
to assist the driver in applying muscular force to hydraulic or 
mechanical components.


<R05>
Sec. 570.55  Hydraulic brake system.

    The following requirements apply to vehicles with hydraulic brake 
systems.
    (a) Brake system failure indicator. The hydraulic brake system 
failure indicator lamp, if part of a vehicle's original equipment, shall 
be operable.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Apply the parking brake and turn the 
ignition to start to verify that the brake system failure indicator lamp 
is operable, or verify by other means recommended by the vehicle 
manufacturer.
    (b) Brake system integrity. The hydraulic brake system shall 
demonstrate integrity as indicated by no perceptible decrease in pedal 
height under a 125-pound force applied to the brake pedal and by no 
illumination of the brake system failure indicator lamp. The brake 
system shall withstand the application of force to the pedal without 
failure of any tube, hose or other part.
    (1) Inspection procedure. With the engine running in vehicles 
equipped with power brake systems and the ignition turned to ``on'' in 
other vehicles, apply a force of 125 pounds to the brake pedal and hold 
for 10 seconds. Note any additional decrease in pedal height after the 
initial decrease, and whether the brake system failure indicator lamp 
illuminates.
    (c) Brake pedal reserve. When the brake pedal is depressed with a 
force of 50 pounds, the distance that the pedal has traveled from its 
free position shall be not greater than 80 percent of the total distance 
from its free position to the floorboard or other object that restricts 
pedal travel. The brake pedal reserve test is not required for vehicles 
with brake systems designed by the original vehicle, manufacturer to 
operate with greater than 80 percent pedal travel.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Measure the distance (i) from the free 
pedal position to the floor board or other object that restricts brake 
pedal travel. Depress the brake pedal, and with the force applied 
measure the distance (ii) from the depressed pedal position to the floor 
board or other object that restricts pedal travel. Determine the pedal 
travel percentage as

[(A - B) / A] x 100


The engine must be operating when power-assisted brakes are checked.
    (d) Brake hoses, master cylinder, tubes and tube assemblies. 
Hydraulic brake hoses shall not be mounted so as to contact the vehicle 
body or chassis. Hoses shall not be cracked, chafed, or flattened. Brake 
tubes shall not be flattened or restricted. Brake hoses and tubes shall 
be attached or supported to prevent damage by vibration or abrasion. 
Master cylinder shall not show signs of leakage. Hose or tube protective 
rings or devices shall not be considered part of the hose or tubing.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually brake master cylinder, 
hoses and tubes, including front brake hoses, through all wheel 
positions from full left turn to full right turn for conditions 
indicated.

[39 FR 26027, July 16, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 5160, Feb. 4, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 570.56  Vacuum brake assist unit and vacuum brake system.

    The following requirements apply to vehicles with vacuum brake 
assist units and vacuum brake systems.
    (a) Vacuum brake assist unit integrity. The vacuum brake assist unit 
shall demonstrate integrity as indicated by a decrease in pedal height 
when the engine is started and a constant 50-pound force is maintained 
on the pedal.

[[Page 184]]

    (1) Inspection procedure. Stop the engine and apply service brake 
several times to destroy vacuum in system. Depress the brake pedal with 
50 pounds of force and while maintaining that force, start the engine. 
If the brake pedal does not move slightly under force when the engine 
starts, there is a malfunction in the power assist unit.
    (b) Low-vacuum indicator. If the vehicle has a low-vacuum indicator, 
the indicator activation level shall not be less than 8 inches of 
mercury.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Run the engine to evacuate the system 
fully. Shut off the engine and slowly reduce the vacuum in the system by 
moderate brake applications until the vehicle vacuum gauge reads 8 
inches of mercury. Observe the functioning of the low-vacuum indicator.
    (c) Vacuum brake system integrity. (1) The vacuum brake system shall 
demonstrate integrity by meeting the following requirements:
    (i) The vacuum brake system shall provide vacuum reserve to permit 
one service brake application with a brake pedal force of 50 pounds 
after the engine is turned off without actuating the low vacuum 
indicator.
    (ii) Trailer vacuum brakes shall operate in conjunction with the 
truck or truck tractor brake pedal.
    (2) Inspection procedure. (i) Check the trailer vacuum system by 
coupling trailer(s) to truck or truck tractor and opening trailer 
shutoff valves. Start the engine and after allowing approximately 1 
minute to build up the vacuum, apply and release the brake pedal. In the 
case of trailer brakes equipped with brake chamber rods, observe the 
chamber rod movement. Run the engine to re-establish maximum vacuum, 
then shut off the engine and apply the brakes with a 50-pound force on 
the brake pedal. Note the brake application and check for low-vacuum 
indicator activation.
    (ii) For a combination vehicle equipped with breakaway protection 
and no reservoir on the towing vehicle supply line, close the supply 
line shutoff valve and disconnect the supply line. Apply a 50-pound 
force to the brake pedal on the towing vehicle and release. Trailer 
brakes should remain in the applied position.
    (d) Vacuum system hoses, tubes and connections. Vacuum hoses, tubes 
and connections shall be in place and properly supported. Vacuum hoses 
shall not be collapsed, cracked or abraded.
    (1) Inspection procedure. With the engine running, examine hoses and 
tubes for the conditions indicated and note broken or missing clamps.


<R05>
Sec. 570.57  Air brake system and air-over-hydraulic brake subsystem.

    The following requirements apply to vehicles with air brake and air-
over-hydraulic brake systems. Trailer(s) must be coupled to a truck or 
truck-tractor for the purpose of this inspection, except as noted.
    (a) Air brake system integrity. The air brake system shall 
demonstrate integrity by meeting the following requirements:
    (1) With the vehicle in a stationary position, compressed air 
reserve shall be sufficient to permit one full service brake 
application, after the engine is stopped and with the system fully 
charged, without lowering reservoir pressure more than 20 percent below 
the initial reading.
    (2) The air brake system compressor shall increase the air pressure 
in the reservoir(s) from the level developed after the test prescribed 
in Sec. 570.57(a)(1) to the initial pressure noted before the full 
brake application, with the engine running at the manufacturer's maximum 
recommended number of revolutions per minute with the compressor 
governor in the cut-off position, in not more than 30 seconds for 
vehicles manufactured prior to March 1, 1975. For vehicles, manufactured 
on or after March 1, 1975, the time allowed for air pressure buildup 
shall not exceed 45 seconds.
    (3) The warning device (visual or audible) connected to the brake 
system air pressure source shall be activated when air pressure is 
lowered to an activating level that is not less than 50 psi. For 
vehicles manufactured to conform to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standard No. 121, the low-pressure indicator shall be activated when air 
pressure is lowered to an activating level that is not less than 60 psi.
    (4) The governor cut-in pressure shall be not lower than 80 psi, and 
the cut-

[[Page 185]]

out pressure shall be not higher than 135 psi, unless other values are 
recommended by the vehicle manufacturer.
    (5) Air brake pressure shall not drop more than 2 psi in 1 minute 
for single vehicles or more than 3 psi in 1 minute for combination 
vehicles, with the engine stopped and service brakes released. There may 
be an additional 1 psi drop per minute for each additional towed 
vehicle.
    (6) With the reservoir(s) fully charged, air pressure shall not drop 
more than 3 psi in 1 minute for single vehicles or more than 4 psi in 1 
minute for combination vehicles, with the engine stopped and service 
brakes fully applied. There may be an additional 1 psi drop per minute 
for each additional towed vehicle.
    (7) The compressor drive belt shall not be badly worn or frayed and 
belt-tension shall be sufficient to prevent slippage.

Inspection procedure. With the air system charged, open the drain cocks 
in the service and supply reservoir on the truck or truck-tractor. Note 
the pressure at which the visual or audible warning device connected to 
the low-pressure indicator is activated. Close the drain cocks, and, 
with the trailer(s) uncoupled, check air pressure buildup at the 
manufacturer's recommended engine speed. Observe the time required to 
raise the air pressure from 85 to 100 psi. Continue running the engine 
until the governor cuts out and note the pressure. Reduce engine speed 
to idle, couple the trailer(s), if applicable, and make a series of 
brake applications. Note the pressure at which the governor cuts in. 
Increased engine speed to fast idle and charge the system to its 
governed pressure. Stop the engine and record the pressure drop in psi 
per minute with brakes released and with brakes fully applied.
    (b) Air brake system hoses, tubes and connections. Air system tubes, 
hoses and connections shall not be restricted, cracked or improperly 
supported, and the air hose shall not be abraded.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Stop the engine and examine air hoses, 
tubes and connections visually for conditions specified.
    (c) Air-over-hydraulic brake subsystem integrity. The air-over-
hydraulic brake subsystem shall demonstrate integrity by meeting the 
following requirements:
    (1) The air brake system compressor shall increase the air pressure 
in the reservoir(s) from the level developed after the test prescribed 
in Sec. 570.57(a)(1) to the initial pressure noted before the full 
brake application, with the engine running at the manufacturer's 
recommended number of revolutions per minute and the compressor governor 
in the cut-out position, in not more than 30 seconds for vehicles 
manufactured prior to March 1, 1975. For vehicles manufactured on or 
after March 1, 1975, the time for air pressure build up shall not exceed 
45 seconds.
    (2) The warning device (visual or audible) connected to the brake 
system air pressure source shall be activated when the air pressure is 
lowered to not less than 50 psi.
    (3) The governor cut-in pressure shall be not lower than 80 psi, and 
the cut-out pressure shall not be higher than 135 psi, unless other 
values are recommended by the vehicle manufacturer.
    (4) Air brake pressure shall not drop more than 2 psi in 1 minute 
for single vehicles or more than 3 psi in 1 minute for combination 
vehicles, with the engine stopped and service brakes released. Allow a 
1-psi drop per minute for each additional towed vehicle.
    (5) With the reservoir(s) fully charged, air pressure shall not drop 
more than 3 psi in 1 minute for single vehicles or more than 4 psi in 1 
minute for combination vehicles, with the engine stopped and service 
brakes fully applied. Allow a 1-psi pressure drop in 1 minute for each 
additional towed vehicle.
    (6) The compressor drive belt shall not be badly worn or frayed and 
belt tension shall be sufficient to prevent slippage.

Inspection procedure. With the air system charged, open the drain cocks 
in the service and supply reservoir on the truck or truck-tractor. Note 
the pressure at which the visual or audible warning device connected to 
the low pressure indicator is activated. Close the drain cocks and, with 
the trailers uncoupled, check air pressure buildup

[[Page 186]]

at the manufacturer's recommended engine speed. Observe the time 
required to raise the air pressure from 85 to 100 psi. Continue running 
the engine until the governor cuts out and note the pressure. Reduce 
engine speed to idle, couple trailers, and make a series of brake 
applications. Note the pressure at which the governor cuts in. Increase 
engine speed to fast idle and charge the system to its governed 
pressure. Stop the engine and record the pressure drop in psi per minute 
with brakes released and with brakes fully applied.
    (d) Air-over-hydraulic brake subsystem hoses, master cylinder, tubes 
and connections. System tubes, hoses and connections shall not be 
cracked or improperly supported, the air and hydraulic hoses shall not 
be abraded and the master cylinder shall not show signs of leakage.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Stop the engine and examine air and 
hydraulic brake hoses, brake master cylinder, tubes and connections 
visually for conditions specified.

[39 FR 26027, July 16, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 5160, Feb. 4, 1975; 41 
FR 13924, Apr. 1, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 570.58  Electric brake system.

    (a) Electric brake system integrity. The average brake amperage 
value shall be not more than 20 percent above, and not less than 30 
percent below, the brake manufacturer's maximum current rating. In 
progressing from zero to maximum, the ammeter indication shall show no 
fluctuation evidencing a short circuit or other interruption of current.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Insert a low range (0 to 25 amperes for 
most 2- and 4-brake systems and 0 to 40 amperes for a 6-brake system) 
d.c. ammeter into the brake circuit between the controller and the 
brakes. With the controller in the ``off'' position, the ammeter should 
read zero. Gradually apply the controller to the ``full on'' position 
for a brief period (not to exceed 1 minute) and observe the maximum 
ammeter reading. Gradually return the controller to ``full off'' and 
observe return to zero amperes. Divide the maximum ammeter reading by 
the number of brakes and determine the brake amperage value.
    (b) Electric brake wiring condition. Electric brake wiring shall not 
be frayed. Wiring clips or brackets shall not be broken or missing. 
Terminal connections shall be clean. Conductor wire gauge shall not be 
below the brake manufacturer's minimum recommendation.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for conditions specified.


<R05>
Sec. 570.59  Service brake system.

    (a) Service brake performance. Compliance with any one of the 
following performance criteria will satisfy the requirements of this 
section. Verify that tire inflation pressure is within the limits 
recommended by the vehicle manufacturer before conducting either of the 
following tests.
    (1) Roller-type or drive-on platform tests. The force applied by the 
brake on a front wheel or a rear wheel shall not differ by more than 25 
percent from the force applied by the brake on the other front wheel or 
the other rear wheel respectively.
    (i) Inspection procedure. The vehicle shall be tested on a drive-on 
platform, or a roller-type brake analyzer with the capability of 
measuring equalization. The test shall be conducted in accordance with 
the test equipment manufacturer's specifications. Note the brake force 
variance.
    (2) Road test. The service brake system shall stop single unit 
vehicles, except truck-tractors, in a distance of not more than 35 feet, 
or combination vehicles and truck-tractors in a distance of not more 
than 40 feet, from a speed of 20 mph, without leaving a 12-foot-wide 
lane.
    (i) Inspection procedure. The road test shall be conducted on a 
level (not to exceed plus or minus 1 percent grade), dry, smooth, hard-
surfaced road that is free from loose material, oil or grease. The 
service brakes shall be applied at a vehicle speed of 20 mph and the 
vehicle shall be brought to a stop as specified. Measure the distance 
required to stop.
    Note: Inspect for paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) of this section on 
vehicles equipped with brake inspection ports or access openings, and 
when removal of wheel is not required.
    (b) Disc and drum condition. If the drum is embossed with a maximum 
safe diameter dimension or the rotor is

[[Page 187]]

embossed with a minimum safe thickness dimension, the drum or disc shall 
be within the appropriate specifications. These dimensions will 
generally be found on motor vehicles manufactured since January 1, 1971, 
and may be found on vehicles manufactured for several years prior to 
that time. If the drums and discs are not embossed, they shall be within 
the manufacturer's specifications.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for the condition 
indicated, measuring as necessary.
    (c) Friction materials. On each brake, the thickness of the lining 
or pad shall not be less than one thirty-second of an inch over the 
fastener, or one-sixteenth of an inch over the brake shoe on bonded 
linings or pads. Brake linings and pads shall not have cracks or breaks 
that extend to rivet holes except minor cracks that do not impair 
attachment. The wire in wire-backed lining shall not be visible on the 
friction surface. Drum brake linings shall be securely attached to brake 
shoes. Disc brake pads shall be securely attached to shoe plates.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for the conditions 
indicated, and measure the height of the rubbing surface of the lining 
over the fastener heads. Measure bonded lining thickness over the 
surface at the thinnest point on the lining or pad.
    (d) Structural and mechanical parts. Backing plates, brake spiders 
and caliper assemblies shall not be deformed or cracked. System parts 
shall not be broken, misaligned, missing, binding, or show evidence of 
severe wear. Automatic adjusters and other parts shall be assembled and 
installed correctly.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for conditions indicated.


<R05>
Sec. 570.60  Steering system.

    (a) System play. Lash or free play in the steering system shall not 
exceed the values shown in Table 2.
    (1) Inspection procedure. With the engine on and the steering axle 
wheels in the straight ahead position, turn the steering wheel in one 
direction until there is a perceptible movement of the wheel. If a point 
on the steering wheel rim moves more than the value shown in Table 1 
before perceptible return movement of the wheel under observation, there 
is excessive lash or free play in the steering system.

                Table 2. Steering Wheel Free Play Values
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Lash
              Steering wheel diameter (inches)                 (inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
16 or less..................................................           2
18..........................................................      2\1/4\
20..........................................................      2\1/2\
22..........................................................      2\3/4\
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Linkage play. Free play in the steering linkage shall not exceed 
the values shown in Table 3.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Elevate the front end of the vehicle to 
load the ball joints, if the vehicle is so equipped. Insure that wheel 
bearings are correctly adjusted. Grasp the front and rear of a tire and 
attempt to turn the tire and wheel assemble left and right. If the free 
movement at the front or rear tread of the tire exceeds the applicable 
value shown in Table 3, there is excessive steering linkage play.

             Table 3. Front Wheel Steering Linkage Free Play
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Play
         Nominal bead diameter or rim size (inches)            (inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
16 or less..................................................       \1/4\
16.01 through 18.00.........................................       \3/8\
18.01 or more...............................................       \1/2\
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Free turning. Steering wheels shall turn freely through the 
limit of travel in both directions.
    (1) Inspection procedure. With the engine running on a vehicle with 
power steering, or the steerable wheels elevated on a vehicle without 
power steering, turn the steering wheel through the limit of travel in 
both directions. Feel for binding or jamming in the steering gear 
mechanism.
    (d) Alignment. Toe-in or toe-out condition shall not be greater than 
1.5 times the values listed in the vehicle manufacturer's service 
specification for alignment setting.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Drive the vehicle over a sideslip 
indicator or measure with a tread gauge, and verify that the toe-in or 
toe-out is not greater than 1.5 times the values listed in the vehicle 
manufacturer's service specification.
    (e) Power steering system. The power steering system shall not have 
cracked,

[[Page 188]]

frayed or slipping belts, chafed or abrated hoses, show signs of leakage 
or have insufficient fluid in the reservoir.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine fluid reservoir, hoses and pump 
belts for the conditions indicated.
    Note: Inspection of the suspension system must not precede the 
service brake performance test.


<R05>
Sec. 570.61  Suspension system.

    (a) Suspension condition. Ball joint seals shall not be cut or 
cracked, other than superficial surface cracks. Ball joints and kingpins 
shall not be bent or damaged. Stabilizer bars shall be connected. 
Springs shall not be broken and coil springs shall not be extended by 
spacers. Shock absorber mountings, shackles, and U-bolts shall be 
securely attached. Rubber bushings shall not be cracked, extruded out 
from or missing from suspension joints. Radius rods shall not be missing 
or damaged.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine front and rear end suspension 
parts for the conditions indicated.
    (b) Shock absorber condition. There shall be no oil on the shock 
absorber housings attributable to leakage by the seal.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine shock absorbers for oil leakage 
from within.


<R05>
Sec. 570.62  Tires.

    (a) Tread depth. The tread shall be not less than four thirty-
seconds of an inch deep on each front tire of any vehicle other than a 
trailer and not less than two thirty-seconds of an inch on all other 
tires.
    (1) Inspection procedure. For tires with treadwear indicators, check 
for indicators in any two adjacent major grooves at three locations 
spaced approximately 120[deg] apart around the circumference of the 
tire. For tires without treadwear indicators, measure the tread depth 
with a suitable gauge or scale in two adjacent major grooves at 3 
locations spaced approximately 120[deg] apart around the circumference 
of the tire at the area of greatest wear.
    (b) Type. Vehicles should be equipped with tires on the same axle 
that are matched in construction and tire size designation, and dual 
tires shall be matched for overall diameter within one-half inch.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually. A mismatch in size and 
construction between tires on the same axle, or a major deviation from 
the size recommended by the vehicle or tire manufacturer, is a cause for 
rejection. On a dual-tire arrangement the diameter of one of the duals 
must be within one-half inch of the other as measured by a gauge block 
inserted between the tire and a caliper.
    (c) General condition. Tires shall be free from chunking, bumps, 
knots, or bulges evidencing cord, ply or tread separation from the 
casing.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for the conditions 
indicated.
    (d) Damage. Tire cords or belting materials shall not be exposed, 
either to the naked eye or when cuts on the tire are probed. 
Reinforcement repairs to the cord body are allowable on tires other than 
front-mounted tires.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for the conditions 
indicated, using a blunt instrument if necessary to probe cuts and 
abrasions.
    (e) Special purpose tires. Tires marked ``Not For Highway Use'' or 
``Farm Use Only'' or other such restrictions shall not be used on any 
motor vehicles operating on public highways.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for tires labeled with 
specific restrictions.


<R05>
Sec. 570.63  Wheel assemblies.

    (a) Wheel integrity. A tire rim, wheel disc or spider shall have no 
visible cracks, elongated bolt holes, or indications of in-service 
repair by welding.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for the conditions 
indicated.
    (b) Cast wheels. Cast wheels shall not be cracked or show evidence 
of excessive wear in the clamp area.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for the conditions 
indicated.
    (c) Mounting. All wheel nuts shall be in place and tight.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Check wheel retention for the conditions 
indicated.

[[Page 189]]


<R03>
PART 571_FEDERAL MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY STANDARDS--Table of Contents




                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
571.1 Scope.
571.3 Definitions.
571.4 Explanation of usage.
571.5 Matter incorporated by reference.
571.7 Applicability.
571.8 Effective date.
571.9 Separability.

            Subpart B_Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards

571.101 Standard No. 101; Controls and displays.
571.102 Standard No. 102; Transmission shift lever sequence, starter 
          interlock, and transmission braking effect.
571.103 Standard No. 103; Windshield defrosting and defogging systems.
571.104 Standard No. 104; Windshield wiping and washing systems.
571.105 Standard No. 105; Hydraulic and electric brake systems.
571.106 Standard No. 106; Brake hoses.
571.107 [Reserved]
571.108 Standard No. 108; Lamps, reflective devices, and associated 
          equipment.
571.109 Standard No. 109; New pneumatic tires.
571.110 Standard No. 110; Tire selection and rims.
571.111 Standard No. 111; Rearview mirrors.
571.112 [Reserved]
571.113 Standard No. 113; Hood latch system.
571.114 Standard No. 114; Theft protection.
571.115 [Reserved]
571.116 Standard No. 116; Motor vehicle brake fluids.
571.117 Standard No. 117; Retreaded pneumatic tires.
571.118 Standard No. 118; Power-operated window, partition, and roof 
          panel systems.
571.119 Standard No. 119; New pneumatic tires for vehicles other than 
          passenger cars.
571.120 Standard No. 120; Tire selection and rims for motor vehicles 
          other than passenger cars.
571.121 Standard No. 121; Air brake systems.
571.122 Standard No. 122; Motorcycle brake systems.
571.123 Standard No. 123; Motorcycle controls and displays.
571.124 Standard No. 124; Accelerator control systems.
571.125 Standard No. 125; Warning devices.
571.126-571.128 [Reserved]
571.129 Standard No. 129; New non-pneumatic tires for passenger cars.
571.131 Standard No. 131; School bus pedestrian safety devices.
571.135 Standard No. 135; Passenger car brake systems.
571.138 [Reserved]
571.139 Standard No. 139; New pneumatic tires for light vehicles.
571.201 Standard No. 201; Occupant protection in interior impact.
571.202 Standard No. 202; Head restraints.
571.203 Standard No. 203; Impact protection for the driver from the 
          steering control system.
571.204 Standard No. 204; Steering control rearward displacement.
571.205 Standard No. 205; Glazing materials.
571.206 Standard No. 206; Door locks and door retention components.
571.207 Standard No. 207; Seating systems.
571.208 Standard No. 208; Occupant crash protection.
571.208a Optional test procedures for vehicles manufactured between 
          January 27, 2004 and August 31, 2004.
571.209 Standard No. 209; Seat belt assemblies.
571.210 Standard No. 210; Seat belt assembly anchorages.
571.211 [Reserved]
571.212 Standard No. 212; Windshield mounting.
571.213 Standard No. 213; Child restraint systems.
571.214 Standard No. 214; Side impact protection.
571.215 [Reserved]
571.216 Standard No. 216; Roof crush resistance.
571.217 Standard No. 217; Bus emergency exits and window retention and 
          release.
571.218 Standard No. 218; Motorcycle helmets.
571.219 Standard No. 219; Windshield zone intrusion.
571.220 Standard No. 220; School bus rollover protection.
571.221 Standard No. 221; School bus body joint strength.
571.222 Standard No. 222; School bus passenger seating and crash 
          protection.
571.223 Standard No. 223; Rear impact guards.
571.224 Standard No. 224; Rear impact protection.
571.225 Standard No. 225; Child restraint anchorage systems.
571.301 Standard No. 301; Fuel system integrity.
571.302 Standard No. 302; Flammability of interior materials.
571.303 Standard No. 303; Fuel system integrity of compressed natural 
          gas vehicles.
571.304 Standard No. 304; Compressed natural gas fuel container 
          integrity.
571.305 Standard No. 305; Electric-powered vehicles: electrolyte 
          spillage and electrical shock protection.
571.401 Standard No. 401; Internal trunk release.

[[Page 190]]

571.403 Standard No. 403; Platform lift systems for motor vehicles.
571.404 Standard No. 404; Platform lift installations in motor vehicles.
571.500 Standard No. 500; Low-speed vehicles.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30166 and 30177; delegation 
of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Editorial Note: Nomenclature changes to part 571 appear at 69 FR 
18803, Apr. 9, 2004.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 571.1  Scope.

    This part contains the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards for 
motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment established under section 103 
of the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 (80 Stat. 
718).

[33 FR 19703, Dec. 25, 1968. Redesignated at 35 FR 5118, Mar. 26, 1970]


<R05>
Sec. 571.3  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory definitions. All terms defined in section 102 of the 
Act are used in their statutory meaning.
    (b) Other definitions. As used in this chapter--
    Act means the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 
(80 Stat. 718).
    Approved, unless used with reference to another person, means 
approved by the Secretary.
    Boat trailer means a trailer designed with cradle-type mountings to 
transport a boat and configured to permit launching of the boat from the 
rear of the trailer.
    Bus means a motor vehicle with motive power, except a trailer, 
designed for carrying more than 10 persons.
    Curb weight means the weight of a motor vehicle with standard 
equipment; maximum capacity of engine fuel, oil, and coolant; and, if so 
equipped, air conditioning and additional weight optional engine.
    Designated seating capacity means the number of designated seating 
positions provided.
    Designated seating position means any plan view location capable of 
accommodating a person at least as large as a 5th percentile adult 
female, if the overall seat configuration and design and vehicle design 
is such that the position is likely to be used as a seating position 
while the vehicle is in motion, except for auxiliary seating 
accommodations such as temporary or folding jump seats. Any bench or 
split-bench seat in a passenger car, truck or multipurpose passenger 
vehicle with a GVWR less than 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds), having 
greater than 127 centimeters (50 inches) of hip room (measured in 
accordance with SAE Standard J1100(a)) shall have not less than three 
designated seating positions, unless the seat design or vehicle design 
is such that the center position cannot be used for seating. For the 
sole purpose of determining the classification of any vehicle sold or 
introduced into interstate commerce for purposes that include carrying 
students to and from school or related events, any location in such 
vehicle intended for securement of an occupied wheelchair during vehicle 
operation shall be regarded as four designated seating positions.
    Driver means the occupant of a motor vehicle seated immediately 
behind the steering control system.
    Emergency brake means a mechanism designed to stop a motor vehicle 
after a failure of the service brake system.
    5th percentile adult female means a person possessing the dimensions 
and weight of the 5th percentile adult female specified for the total 
age group in Public Health Service Publication No. 1000, Series 11, No. 
8, ``Weight, Height, and Selected Body Dimensions of Adults.''
    Firefighting vehicle means a vehicle designed exclusively for the 
purpose of fighting fires.
    Fixed collision barrier means a flat, vertical, unyielding surface 
with the following characteristics:
    (1) The surface is sufficiently large that when struck by a tested 
vehicle, no portion of the vehicle projects or passes beyond the 
surface.
    (2) The approach is a horizontal surface that is large enough for 
the vehicle to attain a stable attitude during its approach to the 
barrier, and that does not restrict vehicle motion during impact.

[[Page 191]]

    (3) When struck by a vehicle, the surface and its supporting 
structure absorb no significant portion of the vehicle's kinetic energy, 
so that a performance requirement described in terms of impact with a 
fixed collision barrier must be met no matter how small an amount of 
energy is absorbed by the barrier.
    Forward control means a configuration in which more than half of the 
engine length is rearward of the foremost point of the windshield base 
and the steering wheel hub is in the forward quarter of the vehicle 
length.
    Full trailer means a trailer, except a pole trailer, that is 
equipped with two or more axles that support the entire weight of the 
trailer.
    Gross axle weight rating or GAWR means the value specified by the 
vehicle manufacturer as the load-carrying capacity of a single axle 
system, as measured at the tire-ground interfaces.
    Gross combination weight rating or GCWR means the value specified by 
the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a combination vehicle.
    Gross vehicle weight rating or GVWR means the value specified by the 
manufacturer as the loaded weight of a single vehicle.
    H point means the mechanically hinged hip point of a manikin which 
simulates the actual pivot center of the human torso and thigh, 
described in SAE Recommended Practice J826, ``Manikins for Use in 
Defining Vehicle Seating Accommodations,'' November 1962.
    Head impact area means all nonglazed surfaces of the interior of a 
vehicle that are statically contactable by a 6.5-inch diameter spherical 
head form of a measuring device having a pivot point to ``top-of-head'' 
dimension infinitely adjustable from 29 to 33 inches in accordance with 
the following procedure, or its graphic equivalent:
    (a) At each designated seating position, place the pivot point of 
the measuring device--
    (1) For seats that are adjustable fore and aft, at--
    (i) The seating reference point; and
    (ii) A point 5 inches horizontally forward of the seating reference 
point and vertically above the seating reference point an amount equal 
to the rise which results from a 5-inch forward adjustment of the seat 
or 0.75 inch; and
    (2) For seats that are not adjustable fore and aft, at the seating 
reference point.
    (b) With the pivot point to ``top-of-head'' dimension at each value 
allowed by the device and the interior dimensions of the vehicle, 
determine all contact points above the lower windshield glass line and 
forward of the seating reference point.
    (c) With the head form at each contact point, and with the device in 
a vertical position if no contact points exists for a particular 
adjusted length, pivot the measuring device forward and downward through 
all arcs in vertical planes to 90[deg] each side of the vertical 
longitudinal plane through the seating reference point, until the head 
form contacts an interior surface or until it is tangent to a horizontal 
plane 1 inch above the seating reference point, whichever occurs first.
    Interior compartment door means any door in the interior of the 
vehicle installed by the manufacturer as a cover for storage space 
normally used for personal effects.
    Longitudinal or longitudinally means parallel to the longitudinal 
centerline of the vehicle.
    Low-speed vehicle means a 4-wheeled motor vehicle, other than a 
truck, whose speed attainable in 1.6 km (1 mile) is more than 32 
kilometers per hour (20 miles per hour) and not more than 40 kilometers 
per hour (25 miles per hour) on a paved level surface.
    Motorcycle means a motor vehicle with motive power having a seat or 
saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than 
three wheels in contact with the ground.
    Motor-driven cycle means a motorcycle with a motor that produces 5-
brake horsepower or less.
    Multifunction school activity bus (MFSAB) means a school bus whose 
purposes do not include transporting students to and from home or school 
bus stops.
    Multipurpose passenger vehicle means a motor vehicle with motive 
power, except a low-speed vehicle or trailer, designed to carry 10 
persons or less which is constructed either on a truck chassis

[[Page 192]]

or with special features for occasional off-road operation.
    Open-body type vehicle means a vehicle having no occupant 
compartment top or an occupant compartment top that can be installed or 
removed by the user at his convenience.
    Outboard designated seating position means a designated seating 
position where a longitudinal vertical plane tangent to the outboard 
side of the seat cushion is less than 12 inches from the innermost point 
on the inside surface of the vehicle at a height between the design H-
point and the shoulder reference point (as shown in fig. 1 of Federal 
Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 210) and longitudinally between the 
front and rear edges of the seat cushion.
    Overall vehicle width means the nominal design dimension of the 
widest part of the vehicle, exclusive of signal lamps, marker lamps, 
outside rearview mirrors, flexible fender extensions, and mud flaps, 
determined with doors and windows closed and the wheels in the straight-
ahead position.
    Parking brake means a mechanism designed to prevent the movement of 
a stationary motor vehicle.
    Passenger car means a motor vehicle with motive power, except a low-
speed vehicle, multipurpose passenger vehicle, motorcycle, or trailer, 
designed for carrying 10 persons or less.
    Pelvic impact area means that area of the door or body side panel 
adjacent to any outboard designated seating position which is bounded by 
horizontal planes 7 inches above and 4 inches below the seating 
reference point and vertical transverse planes 8 inches forward and 2 
inches rearward of the seating reference point.
    Pole trailer means a motor vehicle without motive power designed to 
be drawn by another motor vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by 
means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the 
towing vehicle, for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such 
as poles, pipes, or structural members capable generally of sustaining 
themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
    School bus means a bus that is sold, or introduced in interstate 
commerce, for purposes that include carrying students to and from school 
or related events, but does not include a bus designed and sold for 
operation as a common carrier in urban transportation.
    Seating reference point (SgRP) means the unique design H-point, as 
defined in SAE J1100 (June 1984), which:
    (a) Establishes the rearmost normal design driving or riding 
position of each designated seating position, which includes 
consideration of all modes of adjustment, horizontal, vertical, and 
tilt, in a vehicle;
    (b) Has X, Y, and Z coordinates, as defined in SAE J1100 (June 
1984), established relative to the designed vehicle structure;
    (c) Simulates the position of the pivot center of the human torso 
and thigh; and
    (d) Is the reference point employed to position the two-dimensional 
drafting template with the 95th percentile leg described in SAE J826 
(May 1987), or, if the drafting template with the 95th percentile leg 
cannot be positioned in the seating position, is located with the seat 
in its most rearward adjustment position.
    Semitrailer means a trailer, except a pole trailer, so constructed 
that a substantial part of its weight rests upon or is carried by 
another motor vehicle.
    Service brake means the primary mechanism designed to stop a motor 
vehicle.
    Speed attainable in 1 mile means the speed attainable by 
accelerating at maximum rate from a standing start for 1 mile, on a 
level surface.
    Speed attainable in 2 miles means the speed attainable by 
accelerating at maximum rate from a standing start for 2 miles, on a 
level surface.
    Torso line means the line connecting the ``H'' point and the 
shoulder reference point as defined in SAE Recommended Practice J787g, 
``Motor Vehicle Seat Belt Anchorage,'' September 1966.
    Trailer means a motor vehicle with or without motive power, designed 
for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by another motor 
vehicle.
    Trailer converter dolly means a trailer chassis equipped with one or 
more axles, a lower half of a fifth wheel and a drawbar.

[[Page 193]]

    Truck means a motor vehicle with motive power, except a trailer, 
designed primarily for the transportation of property or special purpose 
equipment.
    Truck tractor means a truck designed primarily for drawing other 
motor vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a 
part of the weight of the vehicle and the load so drawn.
    Unloaded vehicle weight means the weight of a vehicle with maximum 
capacity of all fluids necessary for operation of the vehicle, but 
without cargo, occupants, or accessories that are ordinarily removed 
from the vehicle when they are not in use.
    95th percentile adult male means a person possessing the dimensions 
and weight of the 95th percentile adult male specified in Public Health 
Service Publication No. 1000, Series 11, No. 8, ``Weight, Height, and 
Selected Body Dimensions of Adults.''
    Vehicle fuel tank capacity means the tank's unusable capacity (i.e., 
the volume of fuel left at the bottom of the tank when the vehicle's 
fuel pump can no longer draw fuel from the tank) plus its usable 
capacity (i.e., the volume of fuel that can be pumped into the tank 
through the filler pipe with the vehicle on a level surface and with the 
unusable capacity already in the tank). The term does not include the 
vapor volume of the tank (i.e., the space above the fuel tank filler 
neck) nor the volume of the fuel tank filler neck.

[33 FR 19703, Dec. 25, 1968. Redesignated at 35 FR 5118, Mar. 26, 1970]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.3, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.

    Effective Date Note: At 67 FR 79439, Dec. 27, 2002, Sec. 571.3(b) 
was amended by adding the definition of ``motor home'', effective Dec. 
27, 2004. For the convenience of the user, the added text is set forth 
as follows:

Sec. 571.3  Definitions

                                * * * * *

    (b) * * *

                                * * * * *

    Motor home means a multi-purpose vehicle with motive power that is 
designed to provide temporary residential accommodations, as evidenced 
by the presence of at least four of the following facilities: Cooking; 
refrigeration or ice box; self-contained toilet; heating and/or air 
conditioning; a potable water supply system including a faucet and a 
sink; and a separate 110-125 volt electrical power supply and/or an LP 
gas supply.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 571.4  Explanation of usage.

    The word any, used in connection with a range of values or set of 
items in the requirements, conditions, and procedures of the standards 
or regulations in this chapter, means generally the totality of the 
items or values, any one of which may be selected by the Administration 
for testing, except where clearly specified otherwise.

    Examples: ``The vehicle shall meet the requirements of S4.1 when 
tested at any point between 18 and 22 inches above the ground.'' This 
means that the vehicle must be capable of meeting the specified 
requirements at every point between 18 and 22 inches above the ground. 
The test in question for a given vehicle may call for a single test (a 
single impact, for example), but the vehicle must meet the requirement 
at whatever point the Administration selects, within the specified 
range.
    ``Each tire shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this 
standard when mounted on any rim specified by the manufacturer as 
suitable for use with that tire.'' This means that, where the 
manufacturer specifies more than one rim as suitable for use with a 
tire, the tire must meet the requirements with whatever rim the 
Administration selects from the specified group.
    ``Any one of the items listed below may, at the option of the 
manufacturer, be substituted for the hardware specified in S4.1.'' Here 
the wording clearly indicates that the selection of items is at the 
manufacturer's option.

[36 FR 2511, Feb. 5, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 571.5  Matter incorporated by reference.

    (a) Incorporation. There are hereby incorporated, by reference, into 
this part, all materials referred to in any standard in subpart B of 
this part that are not set forth in full in the standard. These 
materials are thereby made part of this regulation. The Director of the

[[Page 194]]

Federal Register has approved the materials incorporated by reference. 
For materials subject to change, only the specific version approved by 
the Director of the Federal Register and specified in the standard are 
incorporated. A notice of any change in these materials will be 
published in the Federal Register. As a convenience to the reader, the 
materials incorporated by reference are listed in the Finding Aid Table 
found at the end of this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations.
    (b) Availability. The materials incorporated by reference, other 
than acts of Congress and matter published elsewhere in the Federal 
Register, are available as follows:
    (1) Standards of the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE). They are 
published by the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc. Information and 
copies may be obtained by writing to: Society of Automotive Engineers, 
Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, Pennsylvania 15096.
    (2) Standards of the American Society for Testing and Materials 
(ASTM). They are published by the American Society for Testing and 
Materials. Information and copies may be obtained by writing to: ASTM 
International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, PO Box C700, West Conshohocken, PA 
19428-2959.
    (3) Standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
They are published by the American National Standards Institute. 
Information and copies may be obtained by writing to: RESNA, 1700 North 
Moore St., Suite 1540, Arlington, VA 22209-1903.
    (4) Data on the Weight Height and Selected Body Dimensions of 
Adults. They are published by the National Center for Health Statistics, 
Centers for Disease Control (CDC). Information and copies may be 
obtained on the CDC web site at http://www.cdc.gov/nchs or by writing to 
National Division for Health Statistics, Division of Data Services, 
Hyattsville, MD 20782-2003.
    (5) Test Methods of the American Association of Textile Chemists and 
Colorists (AATCC). They are published by the American Association of 
Textile Chemists and Colorists. Information and copies may be obtained 
by writing to: AATCC, 1 Davis Dr., P.O. Box 12215, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709.
    (6) Test methods of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North 
America (IES). They are published by the Illuminating Engineering 
Society of North America. Information and copies may be obtained by 
writing to: IES, 120 Wall St., 7th Floor, New York, NY 10005.
    (7) Standards of Suppliers of Advanced Composite Materials 
Association (SACMA). They are published by Suppliers of Advanced 
Composite Materials Association. Information and copies may be obtained 
by writing to: Suppliers of Advanced Composite Materials Association, 
1600 Wilson Blvd., Suite 1008, Arlington, VA 22209.
    (8) Standards of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers 
(ASME). They are published by the American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers. Information and copies may be obtained by writing to: ASME, 
22 Law Drive, P.O. Box 2900, Fairfield, NJ 07007-2900.
    (9) Regulations of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe 
(ECE). They are published by the United Nations. Information and copies 
may be obtained by writing to: United Nations, Conference Services 
Division, Distribution and Sales Section, Office C.115-1, Palais des 
Nations, CH-1211, Geneva 10, Switzerland. Copies of Regulations also are 
available on the ECE internet web site: www.unece.org/trans/main/wp29/
wp29regs.html.
    (10) Child Restraint Systems Seat Assembly Drawing Package. Copies 
may be obtained by contacting: Leet-Melbrook, 18810 Woodfield Road, 
Gaithersburg, MD, 20879, telephone (301) 670-0090.
    (11) All of the above materials, as well as any other materials 
incorporated by reference, are available for inspection and copying at 
the Office of Vehicle Safety Standards, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. The 
materials are also available for inspection and copying at the National 
Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For information on the 
availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: 
http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/

[[Page 195]]

code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.

[33 FR 19704, Dec. 25, 1968. Redesignated at 35 FR 5118, Mar. 26, 1970, 
and amended at 35 FR 5120, Mar. 26, 1970; 36 FR 1148, Jan. 23, 1971; 41 
FR 52880, Dec. 2, 1976; 41 FR 56812, Dec. 30, 1976; 47 FR 7254, Feb. 18, 
1982; 48 FR 30141, June 30, 1983; 54 FR 20083, May 9, 1989; 59 FR 49021, 
Sept. 26, 1994; 60 FR 37843, July 24, 1995; 64 FR 45898, Aug. 23, 1999; 
67 FR 77193, Dec. 17, 2002; 68 FR 37654, June 24, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 571.7  Applicability.

    (a) General. Except as provided in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this 
section, each standard set forth in subpart B of this part applies 
according to its terms to all motor vehicles or items of motor vehicle 
equipment the manufacture of which is completed on or after the 
effective date of the standard.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) Military vehicles. No standard applies to a vehicle or item of 
equipment manufactured for, and sold directly to, the Armed Forces of 
the United States in conformity with contractual specifications.
    (d) Export. No standard applies to a vehicle or item of equipment in 
the circumstances provided in section 108(b)(5) of the Act (15 U.S.C. 
1397 (b)(5)).
    (e) Combining new and used components. When a new cab is used in the 
assembly of a truck, the truck will be considered newly manufactured for 
purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, the application of the 
requirements of this chapter, and the Act, unless the engine, 
transmission, and drive axle(s) (as a minimum) of the assembled vehicle 
are not new, and at least two of these components were taken from the 
same vehicle.
    (f) Combining new and used components in trailer manufacture. When 
new materials are used in the assembly of a trailer, the trailer will be 
considered newly manufactured for purposes of paragraph (a) of this 
section, the application of the requirements of this chapter, and the 
Act, unless, at a minimum, the trailer running gear assembly (axle(s), 
wheels, braking and suspension) is not new, and was taken from an 
existing trailer--
    (1) Whose identity is continued in the reassembled vehicle with 
respect to the Vehicle Identification Number; and
    (2) That is owned or leased by the user of the reassembled vehicle.

[33 FR 19703, Dec. 25, 1968. Redesignated at 35 FR 5118, Mar. 26, 1970, 
and amended at 36 FR 7855, Apr. 27, 1971; 38 FR 12808, May 16, 1973; 40 
FR 49341, Oct. 22, 1975; 41 FR 27074, July 1, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 571.8  Effective date.

    Notwithstanding the effective date provisions of the motor vehicle 
safety standards in this part, the effective date of any standard or 
amendment of a standard issued after September 1, 1971, to which 
firefighting vehicles must conform shall be, with respect to such 
vehicles, either 2 years after the date on which such standard or 
amendment is published in the rules and regulations section of the 
Federal Register, or the effective date specified in the notice, 
whichever is later, except as such standard or amendment may otherwise 
specifically provide with respect to firefighting vehicles.

[36 FR 13927, July 28, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 571.9  Separability.

    If any standard established in this part or its application to any 
person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the part and 
the application of that standard to other persons or circumstances is 
not affected thereby.

[33 FR 19705, Dec. 25, 1968. Redesignated at 35 FR 5118, Mar. 26, 1970]


<R04>
            Subpart B_Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards

    Source: 36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 571.101  Standard No. 101; Controls and displays.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for the location, 
identification, and illumination of motor vehicle controls and displays.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to ensure the 
accessibility and visibility of motor vehicle controls and displays and 
to facilitate their selection under daylight and nighttime conditions, 
in order to reduce the safety hazards caused by the diversion of the 
driver's attention from the driving

[[Page 196]]

task, and by mistakes in selecting controls.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses.
    S4. Definitions.
    Telltale means a display that indicates the actuation of a device, a 
correct or defective functioning or condition, or a failure to function.
    Gauge means a display that is listed in S5.1 or in Table 2 and is 
not a telltale.
    S5 Requirements. Each passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle, 
truck and bus manufactured with any control listed in S5.1 or in column 
1 of Table 1, and each passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle and 
truck or bus less than 4,536 kg. GVWR with any display listed in S5.1 or 
in column 1 of Table 2, shall meet the requirements of this standard for 
the location, identification, and illumination of such control or 
display.
    S5.1 Location. Under the conditions of S6, each of the following 
controls that is furnished shall be operable by the driver and each of 
the following displays that is furnished shall be visible to the driver. 
Under the conditions of S6, telltales are considered visible when 
activated.

                         Hand-Operated Controls

    (a) Steering wheel.
    (b) Horn.
    (c) Ignition.
    (d) Headlamp.
    (e) Taillamp.
    (f) Turn signal.
    (g) Illumination intensity.
    (h) Windshield wiper.
    (i) Windshield washer.
    (j) Manual transmission shift lever, except transfer case.
    (k) Windshield defrosting and defogging system.
    (l) Rear window defrosting and defogging system.
    (m) Manual choke.
    (n) Driver's sun visor.
    (o) Automatic vehicle speed system.
    (p) Highbeam.
    (q) Hazard warning signal.
    (r) Clearance lamps.
    (s) Hand throttle.
    (t) Identification lamps.

                         Foot-Operated Controls

    (a) Service brake.
    (b) Accelerator.
    (c) Clutch.
    (d) Highbeam.
    (e) Windshield washer.
    (f) Windshield wiper.

                                Displays

    (a) Speedometer.
    (b) Turn signal.
    (c) Gear position.
    (d) Brake failure warning.
    (e) Fuel.
    (f) Engine coolant temperature.
    (g) Oil.
    (h) Highbeam.
    (i) Electrical charge.

    S5.2 Identification.
    S5.2.1 Vehicle controls shall be identified as follows:
    (a) Except as specified in S5.2.1(b), any hand-operated control 
listed in column 1 of Table 1 that has a symbol designated for it in 
column 3 of that table shall be identified by either the symbol 
designated in column 3 (or symbol substantially similar in form to that 
shown in column 3) or the word or abbreviation shown in column 2 of that 
table. Any such control for which no symbol is shown in Table 1 shall be 
identified by the word or abbreviation shown in column 2. Words or 
symbols in addition to the required symbol, word or abbreviation may be 
used at the manufacturer's discretion for the purpose of clarity. Any 
such control for which column 2 of Table 1 and/or column 3 of Table 1 
specifies ``Mfr. Option'' shall be identified by the manufacturer's 
choice of a symbol, word or abbreviation, as indicated by that 
specification in column 2 and/or column 3. The identification shall be 
placed on or adjacent to the control. The identification shall, under 
the conditions of S6, be visible to the driver and, except as provided 
in S5.2.1.1, S5.2.1.2, and S5.2.1.3, appear to the driver perceptually 
upright.
    (b) S5.2.1(a) does not apply to a turn signal control which is 
operated in a plane essentially parallel to the face plane of the 
steering wheel in its normal driving position and which is located on 
the left side of the steering column so that it is the control on that 
side of the column nearest to the steering wheel face plane.
    S5.2.1.1 The identification of the following need not appear to the 
driver perceptually upright:

[[Page 197]]

    (a) A master lighting switch or headlamp and tail lamp control that 
adjusts control and display illumination by means of rotation, or any 
other rotating control that does not have an off position.
    (b) A horn control.
    S5.2.1.2 The identification of a rotating control other than one 
described by S5.2.1.1 shall appear to the driver perceptually upright 
when the control is in the off position.
    S5.2.1.3 The identification of an automatic vehicle speed control 
located on the steering wheel, including the steering wheel hub and 
spokes, need not appear to the driver perceptually upright except when 
the vehicle, aligned to the manufacturer's specifications, has its 
wheels positioned for the vehicle to travel in a straight forward 
direction.
    S5.2.2 Identification shall be provided for each function of any 
automatic vehicle speed system control and any heating and air 
conditioning system control, and for the extreme positions of any such 
control that regulates a function over a quantitative range. If this 
identification is not specified in Table 1 or 2, it shall be in word or 
symbol form unless color coding is used. If color coding is used to 
identify the extreme positions of a temperature control, the hot extreme 
shall be identified by the color red and the cold extreme by the color 
blue.

    Example 1. A slide lever controls the temperature of the air in the 
vehicle heating system over a continuous range, from no heat to maximum 
heat. Since the control regulates a single function over a quantitative 
range, only the extreme positions require identification.
    Example 2. A switch has three positions, for heat, defrost, and air 
conditioning. Since each position regulates a different function, each 
position must be identified.

    S5.2.3 Any display located within the passenger compartment and 
listed in column 1 of Table 2 that has a symbol designated in column 4 
of that table shall be identified by either the symbol designated in 
column 4 (or symbol substantially similar in form to that shown in 
column 4) or the word or abbreviation shown in column 3. Additional 
words or symbols may be used at the manufacturer's discretion for the 
purpose of clarity. Any telltales used in conjunction with a gauge need 
not be identified. The identification required or permitted by this 
section shall be placed on or adjacent to the display that it 
identifies. The identification of any display shall, under the 
conditions of S6, be visible to the driver and appear to the driver 
perceptually upright.
    S5.3 Illumination.
    S5.3.1 Except for foot-operated controls or hand-operated controls 
mounted upon the floor, floor console, or steering column, or in the 
windshield header area, the identification required by S5.2.1 or S5.2.2 
of any control listed in column 1 of Table 1 and accompanied by the word 
``yes'' in the corresponding space in column 4 shall be capable of being 
illuminated whenever the headlights are activated. However, control 
identification for a heating and air-conditioning system need not be 
illuminated if the system does not direct air directly upon windshield. 
If a gauge is listed in column 1 of Table 2 and accompanied by the word 
``yes'' in column 5, then the gauge and its identification required by 
S5.2.3 shall be illuminated whenever the ignition switch and/or the 
headlamps are activated. Controls, gauges, and their identifications 
need not be illuminated when the headlamps are being flashed. A telltale 
shall not emit light except when identifying the malfunction or vehicle 
condition for whose indication it is designed or during a bulb check 
upon vehicle starting.
    S5.3.2. Each telltale shall be of the color shown in column 2 of 
Table 2. The identification of each telltale shall be in a color that 
contrasts with the background.
    S5.3.3 (a) Means shall be provided for making controls, gauges, and 
the identification of those items visible to the driver under all 
driving conditions.
    (b) The means for providing the required visibility--
    (1) Shall be adjustable to provide at least two levels of 
brightness, one of which is barely discernible to a driver who has 
adapted to dark ambient roadway conditions.
    (2) May be operable manually or automatically, and
    (3) May have levels of brightness at which those items and 
identification are not visible.

[[Page 198]]

    (c) If the level of brightness is adjusted by automatic means to a 
point where those items or their identification are not visible to the 
driver, a means shall be provided to enable the driver to restore 
visibility.
    S5.3.4 (a) Means shall be provided that are capable of making 
telltales and their identification visible to the driver under all 
driving conditions.
    (b) The means for providing the required visibility may be 
adjustable manually or automatically, except that the telltales and 
identification for brakes, highbeams, turn signals, and safety belts may 
not be adjustable under any driving condition to a level that is 
invisible.
    S5.3.5 Any source of illumination within the passenger compartment 
which is forward of a transverse vertical plane 110 mm rearward of the 
manikin ``H'' point with the driver's seat in its rearmost driving 
position, which is not used for the controls and displays regulated by 
this standard, which is not a telltale, and which is capable of being 
illuminated while the vehicle is in motion, shall have either (1) light 
intensity which is manually or automatically adjustable to provide at 
least two levels of brightness, (2) a single intensity that is barely 
discernible to a driver who has adapted to dark ambient roadway 
conditions, or (3) a means of being turned off. This requirement does 
not apply to buses that are normally operated with the passenger 
compartment illuminated.
    S5.4 A common space may be used to display messages from any 
sources, subject to the following requirements:
    (a) The telltales for the brake, high beam, and turn signal, and the 
safety belt telltale required by S4.5.3.3 of Standard No. 208 may not be 
shown on the common space.
    (b) Except as provided in S5.4(e), the telltales listed in Table 2 
shall be displayed at the initiation of any underlying condition.
    (c) When the underlying condition exists for actuation of two or 
more messages, the messages shall be either--
    (1) Repeated automatically in sequence, or
    (2) Indicated by visible means and capable of being selected by the 
driver for viewing.
    (d) Messages may be cancellable automatically or by the driver.
    (e) The safety belt telltale must be displayed and visible during 
the time specified in S7.3 of Standard No. 208.
    S6. Conditions. The driver is restrained by the crash protection 
equipment installed in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 571.208 
of this part (Standard No. 208), adjusted in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions.

[[Page 199]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR24SE98.032


[[Page 200]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20NO03.000


[[Page 201]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20NO03.001


[43 FR 27542, June 26, 1978, as amended at 44 FR 55583, Sept. 27, 1979; 
45 FR 71804, Oct. 30, 1980; 47 FR 2998, Jan. 21, 1982; 49 FR 30196, July 
27, 1984; 50 FR 23431, June 4, 1985; 52 FR 3247, Feb. 3, 1987; 52 FR 
7157, Mar. 9, 1987; 52 FR 19874, May 28, 1987; 52 FR 33417, Sept. 3, 
1987; 56 FR 51848, Oct. 16, 1991; 60 FR 63977, Dec. 13, 1995; 62 FR 
32542, 32543, June 16, 1997; 63 FR 28926, May 27, 1998; 63 FR 50997, 
Sept. 24, 1998; 65 FR 30916, May 15, 2000; 65 FR 30916, May 15, 2000; 67 
FR 38743, June 5, 2002; 68 FR 65406, Nov. 20, 2003]

[[Page 202]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.102  Standard No. 102; Transmission shift lever sequence, starter 
interlock, and transmission braking effect.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard specifies the requirements for 
the transmission shift lever sequence, a starter interlock, and for a 
braking effect of automatic transmissions, to reduce the likelihood of 
shifting errors, starter engagement with vehicle in drive position, and 
to provide supplemental braking at speeds below 40 kilometers per hour.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses.
    S3. Requirements.
    S3.1 Automatic transmissions.
    S3.1.1 Location of transmission shift lever positions on passenger 
cars. A neutral position shall be located between forward drive and 
reverse drive positions. If a steering-column-mounted transmission shift 
lever is used, movement from neutral position to forward drive position 
shall be clockwise. If the transmission shift lever sequence includes a 
park position, it shall be located at the end, adjacent to the reverse 
drive position.
    S3.1.2 Transmission braking effect. In vehicles having more than one 
forward transmission gear ratio, one forward drive position shall 
provide a greater degree of engine braking than the highest speed 
transmission ratio at vehicle speeds below 40 kilometers per hour.
    S3.1.3 Starter interlock. The engine starter shall be inoperative 
when the transmission shift lever is in a forward or reverse drive 
position.
    S3.1.4 Identification of shift lever positions.
    S3.1.4.1 Except as specified in S3.1.4.3, if the transmission shift 
lever sequence includes a park position, identification of shift lever 
positions, including the positions in relation to each other and the 
position selected, shall be displayed in view of the driver whenever any 
of the following conditions exist:
    (a) The ignition is in a position where the transmission can be 
shifted.
    (b) The transmission is not in park.
    S3.1.4.2 Except as specified in S3.1.4.3, if the transmission shift 
lever sequence does not include a park position, identification of shift 
lever positions, including the positions in relation to each other and 
the position selected, shall be displayed in view of the driver whenever 
the ignition is in a position in which the engine is capable of 
operation.
    S3.1.4.3 Such information need not be displayed when the ignition is 
in a position that is used only to start the vehicle.
    S3.1.4.4 Effective September 23, 1991, all of the information 
required to be displayed by S3.1.4.1 or S3.1.4.2 shall be displayed in 
view of the driver in a single location. At the option of the 
manufacturer, redundant displays providing some or all of the 
information may be provided.
    S3.2 Manual transmissions. Identification of the shift lever pattern 
of manual transmissions, except three forward speed manual transmissions 
having the standard ``H'' pattern, shall be displayed in view of the 
driver at all times when a driver is present in the driver's seating 
position.

[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, as amended at 54 FR 29045, July 11, 1989; 56 
FR 12471, Mar. 26, 1991; 60 FR 13642, March 14, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 571.103  Standard No. 103; Windshield defrosting and defogging systems.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for windshield 
defrosting and defogging systems.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses.
    S3. Definitions. Road load means the power output required to move a 
given motor vehicle at curb weight plus 180 kilograms on level, clean, 
dry, smooth portland cement concrete pavement (or other surface with 
equivalent coefficient of surface friction) at a specified speed through 
still air at 20 degrees Celsius, and standard barometric pressure (101.3 
kilopascals) and includes driveline friction, rolling friction, and air 
resistance.
    S4. Requirements. (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this 
section, each passenger car shall meet the requirements specified in 
S4.1, S4.2, and S4.3, and each multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, 
and bus shall meet the requirements specified in Sec. 4.1.

[[Page 203]]

    (b) Each passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and 
bus manufactured for sale in the noncontinental United States may, at 
the option of the manufacturer, have a windshield defogging system which 
operates either by applying heat to the windshield or by dehumidifying 
the air inside the passenger compartment of the vehicle, in lieu of 
meeting the requirements specified by paragraph (a) of this section.
    S4.1 Each vehicle shall have a windshield defrosting and defogging 
system.
    S4.2 Each passenger car windshield defrosting and defogging system 
shall meet the requirements of section 3 of SAE Recommended Practice 
J902, ``Passenger Car Windshield Defrosting Systems,'' August 1964, when 
tested in accordance with S4.3, except that ``the critical area'' 
specified in paragraph 3.1 of SAE Recommended Practice J902 shall be 
that established as Area C in accordance with Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standard No. 104, ``Windshield Wiping and Washing Systems,'' and ``the 
entire windshield'' specified in paragraph 3.3 of SAE Recommended 
Practice J902 shall be that established as Area A in accordance with 
Sec. 571.104.
    S4.3 Demonstration procedure. The passenger car windshield 
defrosting and defogging system shall be tested in accordance with the 
portions of paragraphs 4.1 through 4.4.7 of SAE Recommended Practice 
J902, August 1964, or SAE Recommended Practice J902a, March 1967, 
applicable to that system, except that--
    (a) During the first 5 minutes of the test:
    (1) For a passenger car equipped with a heating system other than a 
heat exchanger type that uses the engine's coolant as a means to supply 
the heat to the heat exchanger, the warm-up procedure is that specified 
by the vehicle's manufacturer for cold weather starting, except that 
connection to a power or heat source external to the vehicle is not 
permitted.
    (2) For all other passenger cars, the warm-up procedure may be that 
recommended by the vehicle's manufacturer for cold weather starting.
    (b) During the last 35 minutes of the test period (or the entire 
test period if the 5-minute warm-up procedure specified in paragraph (a) 
of this section is not used),
    (1) For a passenger car equipped with a heating system other than a 
heat exchanger type that uses the engine's coolant as a means to supply 
the heat to the heat exchanger, the procedure shall be that specified by 
the vehicle's manufacturer for cold weather starting, except that 
connection to a power or heat source external to the vehicle is not 
permitted.
    (2) For all other passenger cars, either--
    (i) The engine speed shall not exceed 1,500 r.p.m. in neutral gear; 
or
    (ii) The engine speed and load shall not exceed the speed and load 
at 40 kilometers per hour in the manufacturer's recommended gear with 
road load;
    (c) A room air change of 90 times per hour is not required;
    (d) The windshield wipers may be used during the test if they are 
operated without manual assist;
    (e) One or two windows may be open a total of 25 millimeters;
    (f) The defroster blower may be turned on at any time; and
    (g) The wind velocity is at any level from 0 to 3 kilometers per 
hour.
    (h) The test chamber temperature and the wind velocity shall be 
measured, after the engine has been started, at the forwardmost point of 
the vehicle or a point 914 millimeters from the base of the windshield, 
whichever is farther forward, at a level halfway between the top and 
bottom of the windshield on the vehicle centerline.

[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, as amended at 40 FR 12992, Mar. 24, 1975; 40 
FR 32336, Aug. 1, 1975; 50 FR 48775, Nov. 27, 1985; 59 FR 11006, Mar. 9, 
1994; 60 FR 13642, Mar. 14, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 571.104  Standard No. 104; Windshield wiping and washing systems.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for windshield 
wiping and washing systems.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses.
    S3. Definitions. The term seating reference point is substituted for 
the terms manikin H point, manikin H point with seat in rearmost 
position and H point wherever any of these terms appear in

[[Page 204]]

any SAE Standard or SAE Recommended Practice referred to in this 
standard.
    Daylight opening means the maximum unobstructed opening through the 
glazing surface, as defined in paragraph 2.3.12 of section E, Ground 
Vehicle Practice, SAE Aerospace-Automotive Drawing Standards, September 
1963.
    Glazing surface reference line means the line resulting from the 
intersection of the glazing surface and a horizontal plane 635 
millimeters above the seating reference point, as shown in Figure 1 of 
SAE Recommended Practice J903a, ``Passenger Car Windshield Wiper 
Systems,'' May 1966.
    Overall width means the maximum overall body width dimension 
``W116'', as defined in section E, Ground Vehicle Practice, SAE 
Aerospace-Automotive Drawing Standards, September 1963.
    Plan view reference line means--
    (a) For vehicles with bench-type seats, a line parallel to the 
vehicle longitudinal centerline outboard of the steering wheel 
centerline 0.15 times the difference between one-half of the shoulder 
room dimension and the steering wheel centerline-to-car-centerline 
dimension as shown in Figure 2 of SAE Recommended Practice J903a, May 
1966; or
    (b) For vehicles with individual-type seats, either--
    (i) A line parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline which 
passes through the center of the driver's designated seating position; 
or
    (ii) A line parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline located 
so that the geometric center of the 95 percent eye range contour is 
positioned on the longitudinal centerline of the driver's designated 
seating position.
    Shoulder room dimension means the front shoulder room dimension 
``W3'' as defined in section E, Ground Vehicle Practice, SAE Aerospace-
Automotive Drawing Standards, September 1963.
    95 percent eye range contour means the 95th percentile tangential 
cutoff specified in SAE Recommended Practice J941, ``Passenger Car 
Driver's Eye Range,'' November 1965.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 Windshield wiping system. Each vehicle shall have a power-
driven windshield wiping system that meets the requirements of S4.1.1.
    S4.1.1 Frequency.
    S4.1.1.1 Each windshield wiping system shall have at least two 
frequencies or speeds.
    S4.1.1.2 One frequency or speed shall be at least 45 cycles per 
minute regardless of engine load and engine speed.
    S4.1.1.3 Regardless of engine speed and engine load, the highest and 
one lower frequency or speed shall differ by at least 15 cycles per 
minute. Such lower frequency or speed shall be at least 20 cycles per 
minute regardless of engine speed and engine load.
    S4.1.1.4 Compliance with subparagraphs S4.1.1.2 and S4.1.1.3 may be 
demonstrated by testing under the conditions specified in sections 4.1.1 
and 4.1.2 of SAE Recommended Practice J903a, May 1966.
    S4.1.2 Wiped area. When tested wet in accordance with SAE 
Recommended Practice J903a, May 1966, each passenger car windshield 
wiping system shall wipe the percentage of Areas A, B, and C of the 
windshield (established in accordance with S4.1.2.1) that (1) is 
specified in column 2 of the applicable table following subparagraph 
S4.1.2.1 and (2) is within the area bounded by a perimeter line on the 
glazing surface 25 millimeters from the edge of the daylight opening.
    S4.1.2.1 Areas A, B, and C shall be established as shown in Figures 
1 and 2 of SAE Recommended Practice J903a, May 1966, using the angles 
specified in Columns 3 through 6 of Table I, II, III, or IV, as 
applicable.

                     Table I--Passenger Cars of Less Than 1520 Millimeters in Overall Width
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Column 2--           Angles in degrees
                                                                   Minimum  ------------------------------------
                         Column 1--Area                          percent to   Column   Column    Column   Column
                                                                  be wiped   3--Left  4--Right   5--Up   6--Down
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A..............................................................         80        16        49        7        5
B..............................................................         94        13        46        4        3
C..............................................................         99         7        15        3        1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 205]]


            Table II--Passenger Cars of 1520 or More But Less Than 1630 Millimeters in Overall Width
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Column 2--           Angles in degrees
                                                                   Minimum  ------------------------------------
                         Column 1--Area                          percent to   Column   Column    Column   Column
                                                                  be wiped   3--Left  4--Right   5--Up   6--Down
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A..............................................................         80        17        51        8        5
B..............................................................         94        13        49        4        3
C..............................................................         99         7        15        3        1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


            Table III--Passenger Cars of 1630 or More But Less Than 1730 Millimeters in Overall Width
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Column 2--           Angles in degrees
                                                                   Minimum  ------------------------------------
                         Column 1--Area                          percent to   Column   Column    Column   Column
                                                                  be wiped   3--Left  4--Right   5--Up   6--Down
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A..............................................................         80        17        53        9        5
B..............................................................         94        14        51        5        3
C..............................................................         99         8        15        4        1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                      Table IV--Passenger Cars of 1730 or More Millimeters in Overall Width
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Column 2--           Angles in degrees
                                                                   Minimum  ------------------------------------
                         Column 1--Area                          percent to   Column   Column    Column   Column
                                                                  be wiped   3--Left  4--Right   5--Up   6--Down
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A..............................................................         80        18        56       10        5
B..............................................................         94        14        53        5        3
C..............................................................         99        10        15        5        1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S4.2 Windshield washing system.
    S4.2.1 Each passenger car shall have a windshield washing system 
that meets the requirements of SAE Recommended Practice J942, 
``Passenger Car Windshield Washer Systems,'' November 1965, except that 
the reference to ``the effective wipe pattern defined in SAE J903, 
paragraph 3.1.2'' in paragraph 3.1 of SAE Recommended Practice J942 
shall be deleted and ``the areas established in accordance with 
subparagraph S4.1.2.1 of Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 104'' shall 
be inserted in lieu thereof.
    S4.2.2 Each multipurpose passenger vehicle truck, and bus shall have 
a windshield washing system that meets the requirements of SAE 
Recommended Practice J942, November 1965, except that the reference to 
``the effective wipe pattern defined in SAE J903, paragraph 3.1.2'' in 
paragraph 3.1 of SAE Recommended Practice J942 shall be deleted and 
``the pattern designed by the manufacturer for the windshield wiping 
system on the exterior surface of the windshield glazing'' shall be 
inserted in lieu thereof.

[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, as amended at 58 FR 13023, Mar. 9, 1993; 60 
FR 13643, Mar. 14, 1995; 63 FR 51000, Sept. 24, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 571.105  Standard No. 105; Hydraulic and electric brake systems.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for hydraulic and 
electric service brake systems, and associated parking brake systems.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to insure safe braking 
performance under normal and emergency conditions.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to hydraulically-braked 
vehicles with a GVWR greater than 3,500 kilograms (7,716 pounds). This 
standard applies to hydraulically-braked passenger cars manufactured 
before September 1, 2000, and to hydraulically-braked multipurpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a GVWR of 3,500 kilograms or 
less that are manufactured before September 1, 2002. At the option of 
the manufacturer, hydraulically-braked passenger cars manufactured 
before September 1, 2000, and hydraulically-braked multipurpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a GVWR of 3,500 kilograms 
(7,716 pounds) or less manufactured before September 1, 2002, may meet 
the requirements of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 135, Light 
Vehicle Brake Systems instead of this standard.
    S4. Definitions.
    Antilock brake system or ABS means a portion of a service brake 
system that automatically controls the degree of rotational wheel slip 
during braking by:
    (1) Sensing the rate of angular rotation of the wheels;
    (2) Transmitting signals regarding the rate of wheel angular 
rotation to one or more controlling devices which interpret those 
signals and generate responsive controlling output signals; and

[[Page 206]]

    (3) Transmitting those controlling signals to one or more modulators 
which adjust brake actuating forces in response to those signals.
    Backup system means a portion of a service brake system, such as a 
pump, that automatically supplies energy, in the event of a primary 
brake power source failure.
    Brake power assist unit means a device installed in a hydraulic 
brake system that reduces the operator effort required to actuate the 
system, and that if inoperative does not prevent the operator from 
braking the vehicle by a continued application of muscular force on the 
service brake control.
    Brake power unit means a device installed in a brake system that 
provides the energy required to actuate the brakes, either directly or 
indirectly through an auxiliary device, with the operator action 
consisting only of modulating the energy application level.
    Directly Controlled Wheel means a wheel for which the degree of 
rotational wheel slip is sensed, either at that wheel or on the axle 
shaft for that wheel and corresponding signals are transmitted to one or 
more modulators that adjust the brake actuating forces at that wheel. 
Each modulator may also adjust the brake actuating forces at other 
wheels that are on the same axle or in the same axle set in response to 
the same signal or signals.
    Electric vehicle or EV means a motor vehicle that is powered by an 
electric motor drawing current from rechargeable storage batteries, fuel 
cells, or other portable sources of electrical current, and which may 
include a non-electrical source of power designed to charge batteries 
and components thereof.
    Electrically-actuated service brakes means service brakes that 
utilize electrical energy to actuate the foundation brakes.
    Full brake application means a brake application in which the force 
on the brake pedal reaches 150 pounds within 0.3 seconds from the point 
of application of force to the brake control.
    Hydraulic brake system means a system that uses hydraulic fluid as a 
medium for transmitting force from a service brake control to the 
service brake, and that may incorporate a brake power assist unit, or a 
brake power unit.
    Indirectly Controlled Wheel means a wheel at which the degree of 
rotational wheel slip is not sensed, but at which the modulator of an 
antilock braking system adjusts its brake actuating forces in response 
to signals from one or more sensed wheels.
    Initial brake temperature means the average temperature of the 
service brakes on the hottest axle of the vehicle 0.2 mi before any 
brake application.
    Lightly loaded vehicle weight means:
    (a) For vehicles with a GVWR of 10,000 lbs. or less, unloaded 
vehicle weight plus 400 lbs. (including driver and instrumentation);
    (b) For vehicles with a GVWR greater than 10,000 lbs., unloaded 
vehicle weight plus 500 lbs. (including driver and instrumentation).
    Maximum drive-through speed means the highest possible constant 
speed at which the vehicle can be driven through 200 feet of a 500-foot 
radius curve arc without leaving the 12-foot lane.
    Motor home means a motor vehicle with motive power that is designed 
to provide temporary residential accommodations, as evidenced by the 
presence of at least four of the following facilities: cooking; 
refrigeration or ice box; self-contained toilet; heating and/or air 
conditioning; a potable water supply system including a faucet and a 
sink; and a separate 110-125 volt electric power supply and/or an LP gas 
supply.
    Parking mechanism means a component or subsystem of the drive train 
that locks the drive train when the transmission control is placed in a 
parking or other gear position and the ignition key is removed.
    Peak friction coefficient or PFC means the ratio of the maximum 
value of braking test wheel longitudinal force to the simultaneous 
vertical force occurring prior to wheel lockup, as the braking torque is 
progressively increased.
    Pressure component means a brake system component that contains the 
brake system fluid and controls or senses the fluid pressure.
    Regenerative braking system or RBS means an electrical energy system 
that

[[Page 207]]

is installed in an EV for recovering or dissipating kinetic energy, and 
which uses the propulsion motor(s) as a retarder for partial braking of 
the EV while returning electrical energy to the propulsion batteries or 
dissipating electrical energy.
    Skid number means the frictional resistance of a pavement measured 
in accordance with American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) 
Method E-274-70 (as revised July, 1974) at 40 mph, omitting water 
delivery as specified in paragraphs 7.1 and 7.2 of that method.
    Snub means the braking deceleration of a vehicle from a higher 
reference speed to a lower reference speed that is greater than zero.
    Spike stop means a stop resulting from the application of 200 lbs of 
force on the service brake control in 0.08 s.
    Split service brake system means a brake system consisting of two or 
more subsystems actuated by a single control, designed so that a single 
failure in any subsystem (such as a leakage-type failure of a pressure 
component of a hydraulic subsystem except structural failure of a 
housing that is common to two or more subsystems, or an electrical 
failure in an electric subsystem) does not impair the operation of any 
other subsystem.
    Stopping distance means the distance traveled by a vehicle from the 
point of application of force to the brake control to the point at which 
the vehicle reaches a full stop.
    Tandem axle means a group of two or more axles placed in close 
arrangement one behind the other with the center lines of adjacent axles 
not more than 72 inches apart.
    Variable proportioning brake system means a system that 
automatically adjusts the braking force at the axles to compensate for 
vehicle static axle loading and/or dynamic weight transfer between axles 
during deceleration.
    Wheel lockup means 100 percent wheel slip.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 Service brake systems. Each vehicle must be equipped with a 
service brake system acting on all wheels. Wear of the service brake 
must be compensated for by means of a system of automatic adjustment. 
Each passenger car and each multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and 
bus with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less must be capable of meeting the 
requirements of S5.1.1 through S5.1.6 under the conditions prescribed in 
S6, when tested according to the procedures and in the sequence set 
forth in S7. Each school bus with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds must 
be capable of meeting the requirements of S5.1.1 through S5.1.5, and 
S5.1.7 under the conditions specified in S6, when tested according to 
the procedures and in the sequence set forth in S7. Each multipurpose 
passenger vehicle, truck and bus (other than a school bus) with a GVWR 
greater than 10,000 pounds must be capable of meeting the requirements 
of S5.1.1, S5.1.2, S5.1.3, and S5.1.7 under the conditions specified in 
S6, when tested according to the procedures and in the sequence set 
forth in S7. Except as noted in S5.1.1.2 and S5.1.1.4, if a vehicle is 
incapable of attaining a speed specified in S5.1.1, S5.1.2, S5.1.3, or 
S5.1.6, its service brakes must be capable of stopping the vehicle from 
the multiple of 5 mph that is 4 to 8 mph less than the speed attainable 
in 2 miles, within distances that do not exceed the corresponding 
distances specified in Table II. If a vehicle is incapable of attaining 
a speed specified in S5.1.4 in the time or distance interval set forth, 
it must be tested at the highest speed attainable in the time or 
distance interval specified.
    S5.1.1 Stopping distance. (a) The service brakes shall be capable of 
stopping each vehicle with a GVWR of less than 8,000 pounds, and each 
school bus with a GVWR between 8,000 pounds and 10,000 pounds in four 
effectiveness tests within the distances and from the speeds specified 
in S5.1.1.1, S5.1.1.2, S5.1.1.3, and S5.1.1.4.
    (b) The service brakes shall be capable of stopping each vehicle 
with a GVWR of between 8,000 pounds and 10,000 pounds, other than a 
school bus, in three effectiveness tests within the distances and from 
the speeds specified in S5.1.1.1, S5.1.1.2, and S5.1.1.4.
    (c) The service brakes shall be capable of stopping each vehicle 
with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds in two effectiveness tests within 
the distances and from the speeds specified in S5.1.1.2 and S5.1.1.3. 
Each school bus

[[Page 208]]

with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds manufactured after January 12, 
1996 and before March 1, 1999 and which is equipped with an antilock 
brake system may comply with paragraph S5.1.1.2 and S5.5.1 rather than 
the first effectiveness test, as specified in S5.1.1.1. Each school bus 
with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds manufactured on or after March 1, 
1999 shall be capable of meeting the requirements of S5.1.1 through 
S5.1.5, under the conditions prescribed in S6, when tested according to 
the procedures and in the sequence set forth in S7.
    S5.1.1.1 In the first (preburnished) effectiveness test, the vehicle 
shall be capable of stopping from 30 mph and 60 mph within the 
corresponding distances specified in column I of table II.
    S5.1.1.2 In the second effectiveness test, each vehicle with a GVWR 
of 10,000 pounds or less and each school bus with a GVWR greater than 
10,000 pounds shall be capable of stopping from 30 mph and 60 mph, and 
each vehicle with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds (other than a school 
bus) shall be capable of stopping from 60 mph, within the corresponding 
distances specified in Column II of Table II. If the speed attainable in 
2 miles is not less than 84 mph, a passenger car or other vehicle with a 
GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less shall also be capable of stopping from 80 
mph within the corresponding distances specified in Column II of Table 
II.
    S5.1.1.3 In the third effectiveness test the vehicle shall be 
capable of stopping at lightly loaded vehicle weight from 60 mph within 
the corresponding distance specified in column III of table II.
    S5.1.1.4 In the fourth effectiveness test, a vehicle with a GVWR of 
10,000 pounds or less shall be capable of stopping from 30 and 60 mph 
within the corresponding distances specified in column I of table II. If 
the speed attainable in 2 miles is not less than 84 mph, a passenger 
car, or other vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 lbs., or less, shall also be 
capable of stopping from 80 mph within the corresponding distance 
specified in column I of table II.
    If the speed attainable in 2 miles is not less than 99 mph, a 
passenger car shall, in addition, be capable of stopping from the 
applicable speed indicated below, within the corresponding distance 
specified in column I of table II.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Required
              Speed attainable in 2 miles (mph)                 to stop
                                                              from (mph)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Not less than 99 but less than 104..........................          95
104 or more.................................................         100
------------------------------------------------------------------------


For an EV, the speed attainable in 2 miles is determined with the 
propulsion batteries at a state of charge of not less than 95 percent at 
the beginning of the run.
    S5.1.2 Partial failure.
    S5.1.2.1 In vehicles manufactured with a split service brake system, 
in the event of a rupture or leakage type of failure in a single 
subsystem, other than a structural failure of a housing that is common 
to two or more subsystems, the remaining portion(s) of the service brake 
system shall continue to operate and shall be capable of stopping a 
vehicle from 60 mph within the corresponding distance specified in 
column IV of table II.
    S5.1.2.2 In vehicles not manufactured with a split service brake 
system, in the event of any one rupture or leakage type of failure in 
any component of the service brake system the vehicle shall, by 
operation of the service brake control, be capable of stopping 10 times 
consecutively from 60 mph within the corresponding distance specified in 
column IV of table II.
    S5.1.2.3 For a vehicle manufactured with a service brake system in 
which the brake signal is transmitted electrically between the brake 
pedal and some or all of the foundation brakes, regardless of the means 
of actuation of the foundation brakes, the vehicle shall be capable of 
stopping from 60 mph within the corresponding distance specified in 
Column IV of Table II with any single failure in any circuit that 
electrically transmits the brake signal, and with all other systems 
intact.
    S5.1.2.4 For an EV manufactured with a service brake system that 
incorporates RBS, the vehicle shall be capable of stopping from 60 mph 
within the corresponding distance specified in Column IV of Table II 
with any single failure in the RBS, and with all other systems intact.

[[Page 209]]

    S5.1.3 Inoperative brake power assist unit or brake power unit. A 
vehicle equipped with one or more brake power assist units shall meet 
the requirements of either S5.1.3.1, S5.1.3.2, or S5.1.3.4 (chosen at 
the option of the manufacturer), and a vehicle equipped with one or more 
brake power units shall meet the requirements of either S5.1.3.1, 
S5.1.3.3, or S5.1.3.4 (chosen at the option of the manufacturer).
    S5.1.3.1 The service brakes on a vehicle equipped with one or more 
brake power assist units or brake power units, with one such unit 
inoperative and depleted of all reserve capability, shall be capable of 
stopping a vehicle from 60 mph within the corresponding distance 
specified in column IV of table II.
    S5.1.3.2 Brake power assist units. The service brakes on a vehicle 
equipped with one or more brake power assist units, with one such unit 
inoperative, shall be capable of stopping a vehicle from 60 mph:
    (a) In six consecutive stops at an average deceleration for each 
stop that is not lower than that specified in column I of table III, 
when the inoperative unit is not initially depleted of all reserve 
capability; and
    (b) In a final stop, at an average deceleration that is not lower 
than 7 FPSPS for passenger cars (equivalent stopping distance 554 feet) 
or 6 FPSPS for vehicles other than passenger cars (equivalent stopping 
distance 646 feet), as applicable, when the inoperative unit is depleted 
of all reserve capacity.
    S5.1.3.3 Brake power units. The service brakes of a vehicle equipped 
with one or more brake power units with an accumulator-type reserve 
system, with any one failure in any one unit shall be capable of 
stopping the vehicle from 60 mph--
    (a) In 10 consecutive stops at an average deceleration for each stop 
that is not lower than that specified in column II of table III, when 
the unit is not initially depleted of all reserve capability; and
    (b) In a final stop, at an average deceleration that is not lower 
than 7 FPSPS for passenger cars (equivalent stopping distance 554 feet) 
or 6 FPSPS for vehicles other than passenger cars (equivalent stopping 
distance 646 feet), as applicable, when the inoperative unit is depleted 
of all reserve capacity.
    S5.1.3.4 Brake power assist and brake power units. The service 
brakes of a vehicle equipped with one or more brake power assist units 
or brake power units with a backup system, with one brake power assist 
unit or brake power unit inoperative and depleted of all reserve 
capability and with only the backup system operating in the failed 
subsystem, shall be capable of stopping the vehicle from 60 mph in 15 
consecutive stops at an average deceleration for each stop that is not 
lower than 12 fpsps (equivalent stopping distance 323 feet).
    S5.1.3.5 Electric brakes. Each vehicle with electrically-actuated 
service brakes (brake power unit) shall comply with the requirements of 
S5.1.3.1 with any single electrical failure in the electrically-actuated 
service brakes and all other systems intact.
    S5.1.4 Fade and recovery. The service brakes shall be capable of 
stopping each vehicle in two fade and recovery tests as specified below.
    S5.1.4.1 The control force used for the baseline check stops or 
snubs shall be not less than 10 pounds, nor more than 60 pounds, except 
that the control force for a vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or 
more may be between 10 pounds and 90 pounds.
    S5.1.4.2 (a) Each vehicle with GVWR of 10,000 lbs or less shall be 
capable of making 5 fade stops (10 fade stops on the second test) from 
60 mph at a deceleration not lower than 15 fpsps for each stop, followed 
by 5 fade stops at the maximum deceleration attainable from 5 to 15 
fpsps.
    (b) Each vehicle with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds shall be 
capable of making 10 fade snubs (20 fade snubs on the second test) from 
40 mph to 20 mph at 10 fpsps for each snub.
    S5.1.4.3 (a) Each vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less shall 
be capable of making five recovery stops from 30 mph at 10 fpsps for 
each stop, with a control force application that falls within the 
following maximum and minimum limits:
    (1) A maximum for the first four recovery stops of 150 pounds, and 
for the fifth stop, of 20 pounds more than the

[[Page 210]]

average control force for the baseline check; and
    (2) A minimum of--
    (A) The average control force for the baseline check minus 10 
pounds, or
    (B) The average control force for the baseline check times 0.60,

whichever is lower (but in no case lower than 5 pounds).
    (b) Each vehicle with a GVWR of more than 10,000 pounds shall be 
capable of making five recovery snubs from 40 mph to 20 mph at 10 fpsps 
for each snub, with a control force application that falls within the 
following maximum and minimum limits:
    (1) A maximum for the first four recovery snubs of 150 pounds, and 
for the fifth snub, of 20 pounds more than the average control force for 
the baseline check (but in no case more than 100 pounds); and
    (2) A minimum of--
    (A) The average control force for the baseline check minus 10 
pounds, or
    (B) The average control force for the baseline check times 0.60,

whichever is lower (but in no case lower than 5 pounds).
    S5.1.5 Water recovery. The service brakes shall be capable of 
stopping each vehicle in a water recovery test, as specified below.
    S5.1.5.1 The control force used for the baseline check stops or 
snubs shall be not less than 10 pounds, nor more than 60 pounds, except 
that the control force for a vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or 
more may be between 10 and 90 pounds.
    S5.1.5.2(a) After being driven for 2 minutes at a speed of 5 mph in 
any combination of forward and reverse directions through a trough 
having a water dept of 6 inches, each vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 
pounds or less shall be capable of making five recovery stops from 30 
mph at ten fpsps for each stop with a control force application that 
falls within the following maximum and minimum limits:
    (1) A maximum for the first four recovery stops of 150 pounds, and 
for the fifth stop, of 45 pounds more than the average control force for 
the baseline check (but in no case more than 90 pounds, except that the 
maximum control force for the fifth stop in the case of a vehicle 
manufactured before September 1, 1976, shall be not more than plus 60 
pounds of the average control force for the baseline check (but in no 
case more than 110 pounds).
    (2) A minimum of--
    (A) The average control force for the baseline check minus 10 
pounds, or
    (B) The average control force for the baseline check times 0.60,

whichever is lower (but in no case lower than 5 pounds).
    (b) After being driven for 2 minutes at a speed of 5 mph in any 
combination of forward and reverse directions through a trough having a 
water depth of 6 inches, each vehicle with a GVWR of more than 10,000 
pounds shall be capable of making five recovery stops from 30 mph at 10 
fpsps for each stop with a control force application that falls within 
the following maximum and minimum limits:
    (1) A maximum for the first four recovery stops of 150 pounds, and 
for the fifth stop, of 60 pounds more than the average control force for 
the baseline check (but in no case more than 110 pounds); and
    (2) A minimum of--
    (A) The average control force for the baseline check minus 10 
pounds, or
    (B) The average control force for the baseline check times 0.60,

whichever is lower (but in no case lower than 5 pounds).
    S5.1.6 Spike stops. Each vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 lbs. or less 
shall be capable of making 10 spike stops from 30 mph, followed by 6 
effectiveness (check) stops from 60 mph, at least one of which shall be 
within a corresponding stopping distance specified in column I of table 
II.
    S5.1.7 Stability and control during braking. When stopped four 
consecutive times under the conditions specified in S6, each vehicle 
with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds manufactured on or after July 1, 
2005 and each vehicle with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds 
manufactured in two or more stages on or after July 1, 2006 shall stop 
from 30 mph or 75 percent of the maximum drive-through speed, whichever 
is less, at least three times within the 12-foot lane, without any part 
of the vehicle leaving the roadway. Stop the vehicle with the vehicle at 
its lightly loaded vehicle weight, or

[[Page 211]]

at the manufacturer's option, at its lightly loaded vehicle weight plus 
not more than an additional 1000 pounds for a roll bar structure on the 
vehicle.
    S5.2 Parking brake system. Each vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 lbs. 
or less and each school bus with a GVWR greater than 10,000 lbs., shall 
be manufactured with a parking brake system of a friction type with a 
solely mechanical means to retain engagement, which shall under the 
conditions of S6., when tested according to the procedures specified in 
S7., meet the requirements specified in S5.2.1, S5.2.2, or S5.2.3 as 
appropriate, with the system engaged--
    (a) In the case of a vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 lbs. or less, 
with a force applied to the control not to exceed 125 pounds for a foot-
operated system and 90 pounds for a hand-operated system; and
    (b) In the case of a school bus with a GVWR greater than 10,000 lbs. 
with a force applied to the control not to exceed 150 pounds for a foot-
operated system and 125 pounds for a hand-operated system.
    S5.2.1. Except as provided in Sec. 5.2.2, the parking brake system 
on a passenger car and on a school bus with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or 
less shall be capable of holding the vehicle stationary (to the limit of 
traction on the braked wheels) for 5 minutes in both a forward and 
reverse direction on a 30 percent grade.
    S5.2.2 A vehicle of a type described in S5.2.1 at the option of the 
manufacturer may meet the requirements of S5.2.2.1, S5.2.2.2, and 
S5.2.2.3 instead of the requirements of S5.2.1 if:
    (a) The vehicle has a transmission or transmission control which 
incorporates a parking mechanism, and
    (b) The parking mechanism must be engaged before the ignition key 
can be removed.
    S5.2.2.1 The vehicle's parking brake and parking mechanism, when 
both are engaged, shall be capable of holding the vehicle stationary (to 
the limit of traction of the braked wheels) for 5 minutes, in both 
forward and reverse directions, on a 30 percent grade.
    S5.2.2.2 The vehicle's parking brake, with the parking mechanism not 
engaged, shall be capable of holding the vehicle stationary for 5 
minutes, in both forward and reverse directions, on a 20 percent grade.
    S5.2.2.3 With the parking mechanism engaged and the parking brake 
not engaged, the parking mechanism shall not disengage or fracture in a 
manner permitting vehicle movement, when the vehicle is impacted at each 
end, on a level surface, by a barrier moving at 2\1/2\ mph.
    S5.2.3. The parking brake system on a multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck and bus (other than a school bus) with a GVWR of 10,000 
pounds or less and a school bus with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds 
shall be capable of holding the vehicle stationary for 5 minutes, in 
both forward and reverse directions, on a 20 percent grade.
    S5.3 Brake system indicator lamp. Each vehicle shall have a brake 
system indicator lamp or lamps, mounted in front of and in clear view of 
the driver, which meet the requirements of S5.3.1 through S5.3.5. A 
vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less may have a single common 
indicator lamp. A vehicle with a GVWR of greater than 10,000 pounds may 
have an indicator lamp which is common for gross loss of pressure, drop 
in the level of brake fluid, or application of the parking brake, but 
shall have a separate indicator lamp for antilock brake system 
malfunction. However, the options provided in S5.3.1(a) shall not apply 
to a vehicle manufactured without a split service brake system; such a 
vehicle shall, to meet the requirements of S5.3.1(a), be equipped with a 
malfunction indicator that activates under the conditions specified in 
S5.3.1(a)(4). This warning indicator shall, instead of meeting the 
requirements of S5.3.2 through S5.3.5, activate (while the vehicle 
remains capable of meeting the requirements of S5.1.2.2 and the ignition 
switch is in the ``on'' position) a continuous or intermittent audible 
signal and a flashing warning light, displaying the words ``STOP-BRAKE 
FAILURE'' in block capital letters not less than one-quarter of an inch 
in height.
    S5.3.1 An indicator lamp shall be activated when the ignition 
(start) switch is in the ``on'' (``run'') position and whenever any of 
the conditions (a) or (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), and (g) occur:

[[Page 212]]

    (a) A gross loss of pressure (such as caused by rupture of a brake 
line but not by a structural failure of a housing that is common to two 
or more subsystems) due to one of the following conditions (chosen at 
the option of the manufacturer):
    (1) Before or upon application of a differential pressure of not 
more than 225 lb/in\2\ between the active and failed brake system 
measured at a master cylinder outlet or a slave cylinder outlet.
    (2) Before or upon application of 50 pounds of control force upon a 
fully manual service brake.
    (3) Before or upon application of 25 pounds of control force upon a 
service brake with a brake power assist unit.
    (4) When the supply pressure in a brake power unit drops to a level 
not less than one-half of the normal system pressure.
    (b) A drop in the level of brake fluid in any master cylinder 
reservoir compartment to less than the recommended safe level specified 
by the manufacturer or to one-fourth of the fluid capacity of that 
reservoir compartment, whichever is greater.
    (c) A malfunction that affects the generation or transmission of 
response or control signals in an antilock brake system, or a total 
functional electrical failure in a variable proportioning brake system.
    (d) Application of the parking brake.
    (e) For a vehicle with electrically-actuated service brakes, failure 
of the source of electric power to the brakes, or diminution of state of 
charge of the batteries to less than a level specified by the 
manufacturer for the purpose of warning a driver of degraded brake 
performance.
    (f) For a vehicle with electric transmission of the service brake 
control signal, failure of a brake control circuit.
    (g) For an EV with RBS that is part of the service brake system, 
failure of the RBS.
    S5.3.2 (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, all 
indicator lamps shall be activated as a check of lamp function either 
when the ignition (start) switch is turned to the ``on'' (run) position 
when the engine is not running, or when the ignition (start) switch is 
in a position between ``on'' (run) and ``start'' that is designated by 
the manufacturer as a check position.
    (b) The indicator lamps need not be activated when a starter 
interlock is in operation.
    S5.3.3 (a) Each indicator lamp activated due to a condition 
specified in S5.3.1 shall remain activated as long as the malfunction 
exists, whenever the ignition (start) switch is in the ``on'' (run) 
position, whether or not the engine is running.
    (b) For vehicles manufactured on and after September 1, 1999 with 
GVWRs greater than 10,000 lbs, each message about the existence of a 
malfunction, as described in S5.3.1(c), shall be stored in the antilock 
brake system after the ignition switch is turned to the ``off'' position 
and the indicator lamp shall be automatically reactivated when the 
ignition switch is again turned to the ``on'' position. The indicator 
lamp shall also be activated as a check of lamp function whenever the 
ignition is turned to the ``on'' (run) position. The indicator lamp 
shall be deactivated at the end of the check of lamp function unless 
there is a malfunction or a message about a malfunction that existed 
when the key switch was last turned to the ``off'' position.
    S5.3.4 When an indicator lamp is activated it may be steady burning 
or flashing.
    S5.3.5 (a) Each indicator lamp shall display word, words or 
abbreviation, in accordance with the requirements of Standard No. 101 
(49 CFR 571.101) and/or this section, which shall have letters not less 
than \1/8\-inch high and be legible to the driver in daylight when 
lighted. Words in addition to those required by Standard No. 101 and/or 
this section and symbols may be provided for purposes of clarity.
    (b) If a single common indicator is used, the lamp shall display the 
word ``Brake''. The letters and background of a single common indicator 
shall be of contrasting colors, one of which is red.
    (c)(1) If separate indicators are used for one or more of the 
conditions described in S5.3.1(a) through S5.3.1(g) of this standard, 
the indicator display shall include the word ``Brake'' and appropriate 
additional labeling, except as

[[Page 213]]

provided in (c)(1) (A) through (D) of this paragraph.
    (A) If a separate indicator lamp is provided for gross loss of 
pressure, the words ``Brake Pressure'' shall be used for S5.3.1(a).
    (B) If a separate indicator lamp is provided for low brake fluid, 
the words ``Brake Fluid'' shall be used for S5.3.1(b), except for 
vehicles using hydraulic system mineral oil.
    (C) If a separate indicator lamp is provided for an anti-lock 
system, the single word ``Antilock'' or ``Anti-lock'', or the 
abbreviation ``ABS'', may be used for S5.3.1(c).
    (D) If a separate indicator lamp is provided for application of the 
parking brake, the single word ``Park'' may be used for S5.3.1(d).
    (E) If a separate indicator is used for the regenerative brake 
system, the symbol ``RBS'' may be used. RBS failure may also be 
indicated by a lamp displaying the symbol ``ABS/RBS.''
    (2) Except for a separate indicator lamp for an anti-lock system, a 
regenerative system, or an indicator for both anti-lock and regenerative 
system, the letters and background of each separate indicator lamp shall 
be of contrasting colors, one of which is red. The letters and 
background of a separate lamp for an anti-lock system, a regenerative 
system, or a lamp displaying both an anti-lock and a regenerative system 
shall be of contrasting colors, one of which is yellow.
    S5.4 Reservoirs.
    S5.4.1 Master cylinder reservoirs. A master cylinder shall have a 
reservoir compartment for each service brake subsystem serviced by the 
master cylinder. Loss of fluid from one compartment shall not result in 
a complete loss of brake fluid from another compartment.
    S5.4.2 Reservoir capacity. Reservoirs, whether for master cylinders 
or other type systems, shall have a total minimum capacity equivalent to 
the fluid displacement resulting when all the wheel cylinders or caliper 
pistons serviced by the reservoirs move from a new lining, fully 
retracted position (as adjusted initially to the manufacturer's 
recommended setting) to a fully worn, fully applied position, as 
determined in accordance with S7.18(c) of this standard. Reservoirs 
shall have completely separate compartments for each subsystem except 
that in reservoir systems utilizing a portion of the reservoir for a 
common supply to two or more subsystems, individual partial compartments 
shall each have a minimum volume of fluid equal to at least the volume 
displaced by the master cylinder piston servicing the subsystem, during 
a full stroke of the piston. Each brake power unit reservoir servicing 
only the brake system shall have a minimum capacity equivalent to the 
fluid displacement required to charge the system piston(s) or 
accumulator(s) to normal operating pressure plus the displacement 
resulting when all the wheel cylinders or caliper pistons serviced by 
the reservoir or accumulator(s) move from a new lining fully retracted 
position (as adjusted initially to the manufacturer's recommended 
setting) to a fully worn, fully applied position.
    S5.4.3 Reservoir labeling--Each vehicle equipped with hydraulic 
brakes shall have a brake fluid warning statement that reads as follows, 
in letters at least one-eighth of an inch high: ``WARNING, Clean filler 
cap before removing. Use only ------ fluid from a sealed container.'' 
(Inserting the recommended type of brake fluid as specified in 49 CFR 
571.116, e.g., ``DOT 3''). The lettering shall be--
    (a) Permanently affixed, engraved, or embossed;
    (b) Located so as to be visible by direct view, either on or within 
4 inches of the brake fluid reservoir filler plug or cap; and
    (c) Of a color that contrasts with its background, if it is not 
engraved or embossed.
    S5.5 Antilock and variable proportioning brake systems.
    S5.5.1 Each vehicle with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds, except 
for any vehicle with a speed attainable in 2 miles of not more than 33 
mph, shall be equipped with an antilock brake system that directly 
controls the wheels of at least one front axle and the wheels of at 
least one rear axle of the vehicle. On each vehicle with a GVWR greater 
than 10,000 pounds but not greater than 19,500 pounds and motor homes 
with a GVWR greater

[[Page 214]]

than 10,000 pounds but not greater than 22,500 pounds manufactured 
before March 1, 2001, the antilock brake system may also directly 
control the wheels of the rear drive axle by means of a single sensor in 
the driveline. Wheels on other axles of the vehicle may be indirectly 
controlled by the antilock brake system.
    S5.5.2 In the event of any failure (structural or functional) in an 
antilock or variable proportioning brake system, the vehicle shall be 
capable of meeting the stopping distance requirements specified in 
S5.1.2 for service brake system partial failure. For an EV that is 
equipped with both ABS and RBS that is part of the service brake system, 
the ABS must control the RBS.
    S5.6 Brake system integrity. Each vehicle shall be capable of 
completing all performance requirements of S5 without--
    (a) Detachment or fracture of any component of the braking system, 
such as brake springs and brake shoe or disc pad facing, other than 
minor cracks that do not impair attachment of the friction facing. All 
mechanical components of the braking system shall be intact and 
functional. Friction facing tearout (complete detachment of lining) 
shall not exceed 10 percent of the lining on any single frictional 
element.
    (b) Any visible brake fluid or lubricant on the friction surface of 
the brake, or leakage at the master cylinder or brake power unit 
reservoir cover, seal and filler openings.
    S6 Test conditions. The performance requirements of S5 shall be met 
under the following conditions. Where a range of conditions is 
specified, the vehicle shall be capable of meeting the requirements at 
all points within the range. Compliance of vehicles manufactured in two 
or more stages may, at the option of the final-stage manufacturer, be 
demonstrated to comply with this standard by adherence to the 
instructions of the incomplete manufacturer provided with the vehicle in 
accordance with Sec. 568.4(a)(7)(ii) and Sec. 568.5 of title 49 of the 
Code of Federal Regulations.
    S6.1 Vehicle weight.
    S6.1.1 Other than tests specified at lightly loaded vehicle weight 
in S7.5(a), S7.7, S7.8, and S7.9, the vehicle is loaded to its GVWR such 
that the weight on each axle as measured at the tire-ground interface is 
in proportion to its GAWR, except that each fuel tank is filled to any 
level from 100 percent of capacity (corresponding to full GVWR) to 75 
percent. However, if the weight on any axle of a vehicle at lightly 
loaded vehicle weight exceeds the axle's proportional share of the gross 
vehicle weight rating, the load required to reach GVWR is placed so that 
the weight on that axle remains the same as a lightly loaded vehicle 
weight.
    S6.1.2 For the applicable tests specified in S7.5(a), S7.7, S7.8, 
and S7.9, vehicle weight is lightly loaded vehicle weight, with the 
added weight distributed in the front passenger seat area in passenger 
cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles, and trucks, and in the area 
adjacent to the driver's seat in buses.
    S6.2 Electric vehicles and electric brakes.
    S6.2.1 The state of charge of the propulsion batteries is determined 
in accordance with SAE Recommended Practice J227a, Electric Vehicle Test 
Procedure, February 1976. The applicable sections of J227a are 3.2.1 
through 3.2.4, 3.3.1 through 3.3.2.2, 3.4.1 and 3.4.2, 4.2.1, 5.2, 
5.2.1, and 5.3.
    S6.2.2 At the beginning of the first effectiveness test specified in 
S7.3, and at the beginning of each burnishing procedure, each EV's 
propulsion battery is at the maximum state of charge recommended by the 
manufacturer, as stated in the vehicle operator's manual or on a label 
that is permanently attached to the vehicle, or, if the manufacturer has 
made no recommendation, at a state of charge of not less than 95 
percent. If a battery is replaced rather than recharged, the replacement 
battery is to be charged and measured for state of charge in accordance 
with these procedures. During each burnish procedure, each propulsion 
battery is restored to the recommended state of charge or a state of 
charge of not less than 95 percent after each increment of 40 burnish 
stops until each burnish procedure is complete. The batteries may be 
charged at a more frequent interval if, during a particular 40-stop 
increment, the EV is incapable of achieving the initial burnish test 
speed. During

[[Page 215]]

each burnish procedure, the propulsion batteries may be charged by an 
external means or replaced by batteries that are charged to the state of 
charge recommended by the manufacturer or a state of charge of not less 
than 95 percent. For EVs having a manual control for setting the level 
of regenerative braking, the manual control, at the beginning of each 
burnish procedure, is set to provide maximum regenerative braking 
throughout the burnish.
    S6.2.3 At the beginning of each performance test in the test 
sequence (S7,3, S7.5, S7.7 through S7.11, and S7.13 through S7.19 of 
this standard), unless otherwise specified, each propulsion battery of 
an EV is at the maximum state of charge recommended by the manufacturer, 
as stated in the vehicle operator's manual or on a label that is 
permanently attached to the vehicle, or, if the manufacturer has made no 
recommendation, at a state of charge of not less than 95 percent. If 
batteries are replaced rather than recharged, each replacement battery 
shall be charged and measured for state of charge in accordance with 
these procedures. No further charging of any propulsion battery occurs 
during any of the performance tests in the test sequence of this 
standard. If the propulsion batteries are depleted during a test 
sequence such that the vehicle reaches automatic shut-down, will not 
accelerate, or the low state of charge warning lamp is illuminated, the 
vehicle is to be accelerated to brake test speed by auxiliary means.
    S6.2.4 (a) For an EV equipped with RBS, the RBS is considered to be 
part of the service brake system if it is automatically controlled by an 
application of the service brake control, if there is no means provided 
for the driver to disconnect or otherwise deactivate it, and if it is 
activated in all transmission positions, including neutral. The RBS is 
operational during all burnishes and all tests, except for the test of a 
failed RBS.
    (b) For an EV equipped with an RBS that is not part of the service 
brake system, the RBS is operational and set to produce the maximum 
regenerative braking effect during the burnishes, and is disabled during 
the test procedures. If the vehicle is equipped with a neutral gear that 
automatically disables the RBS, the test procedures which are designated 
to be conducted in gear may be conducted in neutral.
    S6.2.5 For tests conducted ``in neutral,'' the operator of an EV 
with no ``neutral'' position (or other means such as a clutch for 
disconnecting the drive train from the propulsion motor(s)) does not 
apply any electromotive force to the propulsion motor(s). Any 
electromotive force that is applied to the propulsion motor(s) 
automatically remains in effect unless otherwise specified by the test 
procedure.
    S6.2.6 A vehicle equipped with electrically-actuated service brakes 
also performs the following test series. Conduct 10 stopping tests from 
a speed of 100 kph or the maximum vehicle speed, whichever is less. At 
least two of the 10 stopping distances must be less than or equal to 70 
meters. The vehicle is loaded to GVWR for these tests and the 
transmission is in the neutral position when the service brake control 
is actuated and throughout the remainder of the test. The battery or 
batteries providing power to those electrically-actuated brakes, at the 
beginning of each test, shall be in a depleted state of charge for 
conditions (a), (b), or (c) of this paragraph as appropriate. An 
auxiliary means may be used to accelerate an EV to test speed.
    (a) For an EV equipped with electrically-actuated service brakes 
deriving power from the propulsion batteries, and with automatic shut-
down capability of the propulsion motor(s), the propulsion batteries are 
at not more than five percent above the EV actual automatic shut-down 
critical value. The critical value is determined by measuring the state-
of-charge of each propulsion battery at the instant that automatic shut-
down occurs and averaging the states-of-charge recorded.
    (b) For an EV equipped with electrically-actuated service brakes 
deriving power from the propulsion batteries, and with no automatic 
shut-down capability of the propulsion motor(s), the propulsion 
batteries are at an average of not more than five percent above the 
actual state of charge at which the brake failure

[[Page 216]]

warning signal, required by S5.3.1(e) of this standard, is illuminated.
    (c) For a vehicle which has an auxiliary battery (or batteries) that 
provides electrical energy to operate the electrically-actuated service 
brakes, the auxiliary battery(batteries) is (are) at (at an average of) 
not more than five percent above the actual state of charge at which the 
brake failure warning signal, required by S5.3.1(e) of this standard, is 
illuminated.
    S6.3 Tire inflation pressure. Tire inflation pressure is the 
pressure recommended by the vehicle manufacturer for the GVWR of the 
vehicle.
    S6.4 Transmission selector control. For S7.3, S7.5, S7.8, S7.15, 
S7.17, S7.11.1.2, S7.11.2.2, S7.11.3.2, and as required for S7.13, the 
transmission selector control is in neutral for all decelerations. For 
all other tests during all decelerations, the transmission selector is 
in the control position, other than overdrive, recommended by the 
manufacturer for driving on a level surface at the applicable test 
speed. To avoid engine stall during tests required to be run in gear a 
manual transmission may be shifted to neutral (or the clutch disengaged) 
when the vehicle speed decreases to 20 mph.
    S6.5 Engine. Engine idle speed and ignition timing settings are 
according to the manufacturer's recommendations. If the vehicle is 
equipped with an adjustable engine speed governor, it is adjusted 
according to the manufacturer's recommendation.
    S6.6 Vehicle openings. All vehicle openings (doors, windows, hood, 
trunk, convertible top, cargo doors, etc.) are closed except as required 
for instrumentation purposes.
    S6.7 Ambient temperature. The ambient temperature is any temperature 
between 32 [deg]F. and 100 [deg]F.
    S6.8 Wind velocity. The wind velocity is zero.
    S6.9 Road surface.
    S6.9.1 For vehicles with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less, road tests 
are conducted on a 12-foot-wide, level roadway, having a skid number of 
81. Burnish stops are conducted on any surface. The parking brake test 
surface is clean, dry, smooth, Portland cement concrete.
    S6.9.2(a) For vehicles with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds, road 
tests (excluding stability and control during braking tests) are 
conducted on a 12-foot-wide, level roadway, having a peak friction 
coefficient of 0.9 when measured using an American Society for Testing 
and Materials (ASTM) E 1136 standard reference test tire, in accordance 
with ASTM Method E 1337-90, at a speed of 40 mph, without water 
delivery. Burnish stops are conducted on any surface. The parking brake 
test surface is clean, dry, smooth, Portland cement concrete.
    S6.9.2(b) For vehicles with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds, 
stability and control during braking tests are conducted on a 500-foot-
radius curved roadway with a wet level surface having a peak friction 
coefficient of 0.5 when measured on a straight or curved section of the 
curved roadway using an American Society for Testing and Materials 
(ASTM) E1136 standard reference tire, in accordance with ASTM Method 
E1337-90, at a speed of 40 mph, with water delivery.
    S6.10 Vehicle position and wheel lockup restrictions. The vehicle is 
aligned in the center of the roadway at the start of each brake 
application. Stops, other than spike stops, are made without any part of 
the vehicle leaving the roadway.
    S6.10.1 For vehicles with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less, stops are 
made with wheel lockup permitted only as follows:
    (a) At vehicle speeds above 10 mph, there may be controlled wheel 
lockup on an antilock-equipped axle, and lockup of not more than one 
wheel per vehicle, uncontrolled by an antilock system. (Dual wheels on 
one side of an axle are considered a single wheel.)
    (b) At vehicle speeds of 10 mph or less, any wheel may lock up for 
any duration.
    (c) Unlimited wheel lockup is allowed during spike stops (but not 
spike check stops), partial failure stops, and inoperative brake power 
or power assist unit stops.
    S6.10.2 For vehicles with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds, stops 
are made with wheel lockup permitted only as follows:

[[Page 217]]

    (a) At vehicle speeds above 20 mph, any wheel on a nonsteerable axle 
other than the two rearmost nonliftable, nonsteerable axles may lock up 
for any duration. The wheels on the two rearmost nonliftable, 
nonsteerable axles may lock up according to (b).
    (b) At vehicle speeds above 20 mph, one wheel on any axle or two 
wheels on any tandem may lock up for any duration.
    (c) At vehicle speeds above 20 mph, any wheel not permitted to lock 
in (a) or (b) may lock up repeatedly, with each lockup occurring for a 
duration of one second or less.
    (d) At vehicle speeds of 20 mph or less, any wheel may lock up for 
any duration.
    (e) Unlimited wheel lockup is allowed during partial failure stops, 
and inoperative brake power or power assist stops.
    S6.11 Thermocouples. The brake temperature is measured by plug-type 
thermocouples installed in the approximate center of the facing length 
and width of the most heavily loaded shoe or disc pad, one per brake, as 
shown in figure 1. A second thermocouple may be installed at the 
beginning of the test sequence if the lining wear is expected to reach a 
point causing the first thermocouple to contact the metal rubbing 
surface of a drum or rotor. For centergrooved shoes or pads, 
thermocouples are installed within one-eighth of an inch to one-quarter 
inch of the groove and as close to the center as possible.
    S6.12 Initial brake temperature. Unless otherwise specified the 
brake temperature is 150 [deg]F. to 200 [deg]F.
    S6.13 Control forces. Unless otherwise specified, the force applied 
to a brake control is not less than 15 lb and not more than 150 lb.
    S6.14 Special drive conditions. A vehicle with a GVWR greater than 
10,000 pounds equipped with an interlocking axle system or a front wheel 
drive system that is engaged and disengaged by the driver is tested with 
the system disengaged.
    S6.15 Selection of compliance options. Where manufacturer options 
are specified, the manufacturer shall select the option by the time it 
certifies the vehicle and may not thereafter select a different option 
for the vehicle. Each manufacturer shall, upon request from the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, provide information regarding 
which of the compliance options it has selected for a particular vehicle 
or make/model.
    S7. Test procedure and sequence. Each vehicle shall be capable of 
meeting all the applicable requirements of S5 when tested according to 
the procedures and sequence set forth below, without replacing any brake 
system part or making any adjustments to the brake system other than as 
permitted in the burnish and reburnish procedures and in S7.9 and S7.10. 
(For vehicles only having to meet the requirements of S5.1.1, S5.1.2, 
S5.1.3, and S5.1.7 in section S5.1, the applicable test procedures and 
sequence are S7.1, S7.2, S7.4, S7.5(b), S7.5(a), S7.8, S7.9, S7.10, and 
S7.18. However, at the option of the manufacturer, the following test 
procedure and sequence may be conducted: S7.1, S7.2, S7.3, S7.4, 
S7.5(b), S7.6, S7.7, S7.5(a), S7.8, S7.9, S7.10, and S7.18. The choice 
of this option must not be construed as adding to the requirements 
specified in S5.1.2 and S5.1.3.) Automatic adjusters must remain 
activated at all times. A vehicle shall be deemed to comply with the 
stopping distance requirements of S5.1 if at least one of the stops at 
each speed and load specified in each of S7.3, S7.5(b), S7.8, S7.9, 
S7.10, S7.15 and S7.17 (check stops) is made within a stopping distance 
that does not exceed the corresponding distance specified in Table II. 
When the transmission selector control is required to be in neutral for 
a deceleration, a stop or snub must be obtained by the following 
procedures:
    (a) Exceed the test speed by 4 to 8 mph;
    (b) Close the throttle and coast in gear to approximately 2 mph 
above the test speed;
    (c) Shift to neutral; and
    (d) When the test speed is reached, apply the service brakes.
    S7.1 Brake warming. If the initial brake temperature for the first 
stop in a test procedure (other than S7.7 and S7.16) has not been 
reached, heat the brakes to the initial brake temperature by making not 
more than 10 snubs

[[Page 218]]

from not more than 40 to 10 mph, at a deceleration not greater than 10 
fpsps.
    S7.2 Pretest instrumentation check. Conduct a general check of 
instrumentation by making not more than 10 stops from a speed of not 
more than 30 mph, or 10 snubs from a speed of not more than 40 to 10 
mph, at a deceleration of not more than 10 fpsps. If instrument repair, 
replacement, or adjustment is necessary, make not more than 10 
additional stops or snubs after such repair, replacement, or adjustment.
    S7.3 Service brake system--first (preburnish) effectiveness test. 
Make six stops from 30 mph. Then make six stops from 60 mph.
    S7.4 Service brake system--burnish procedure.
    S7.4.1 Vehicles with GVWR of 10,000 lb or less.
    S7.4.1.1 Burnish. Burnish the brakes by making 200 stops from 40 mph 
at 12 fpsps (the 150 lb control force limit does not apply here). The 
interval from the start of one service brake application to the start of 
the next shall be either the time necessary to reduce the initial brake 
temperature to between 230 [deg]F. and 270 [deg]F., or the distance of 1 
mile, whichever occurs first. Accelerate to 40 mph after each stop and 
maintain that speed until making the next stop.
    S7.4.1.2 Brake adjustment--post burnish. After burnishing, adjust 
the brakes in accordance with the manufacturer's published 
recommendations.
    S7.4.2 Vehicles with GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds.
    S7.4.2.1 Burnish. Vehicles are burnished according to the following 
procedures. Make 500 snubs between 40 mph and 20 mph at a deceleration 
rate of 10 f.p.s.p.s. Except where an adjustment is specified, after 
each brake application accelerate to 40 mph and maintain that speed 
until making the next brake application at a point 1 mile from the 
initial point of the previous brake application. If the vehicle cannot 
attain a speed of 40 mph in 1 mph, continue to accelerate until the 
vehicle reaches 40 mph or until the vehicle has traveled 1.5 miles from 
the initial point of the previous brake application, whichever occurs 
first. The brakes shall be adjusted three times during the burnish 
procedure, in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations, after 
125, 250, and 375 snubs.
    S7.4.2.2 Brake adjustment--post burnish. After burnishing, adjust 
the brakes in accordance with the manufacturer's published 
recommendations.
    S7.5 (a) Stability and control during braking (vehicles with a GVWR 
greater than 10,000 pounds). Make four stops in the lightly-loaded 
weight condition specified in S5.1.7. Use a full brake application for 
the duration of the stop, with the clutch pedal depressed or the 
transmission selector control in the neutral position, for the duration 
of each stop.
    (b) Service brake system--second effectiveness test. For vehicles 
with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less, or any school bus, make six stops 
from 30 mph. Then, for any vehicle, make six stops from 60 mph. Then, 
for a vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less, make four stops from 
80 mph if the speed attainable in 2 miles is not less than 84 mph.
    S7.6 First reburnish. Repeat S7.4, except make 35 burnish stops or 
snubs. In the case of vehicles burnished in accordance with S7.4.2.1(a) 
of this section, reburnish the vehicle by making 35 snubs from 60 to 20 
mph, but if the hottest brake temperature reaches 500 [deg]F <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>50 [deg]F, make the remainder of the brake applications 
from the highest snub condition listed in Table IV that will maintain 
the hottest brake temperature at 500 [deg]F <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>50 
[deg]F. If at a snub condition of 40 to 20 mph, the temperature of the 
hottest brake exceeds 550 [deg]F, make the remainder of the 35 brake 
applications from the snub condition without regard to brake 
temperature.
    S7.7 Parking brake test. The parking brake tests for any vehicle on 
different grades, in different directions, and for different loads may 
be conducted in any order. The force required for actuation of a hand-
operated brake system shall be measured at the center of the hand grip 
area or at a distance of 1\1/2\ inches from the end of the actuation 
lever, as illustrated in Figure II.
    S7.7.1 Test procedure for requirements of S5.2.1.

[[Page 219]]

    S7.7.1.1 Condition the parking brake friction elements so that the 
temperature at the beginning of the test is at any level not more than 
150 [deg]F. (when the temperature of components on both ends of an axle 
are averaged).
    S7.7.1.2 Drive the vehicle, loaded to GVWR, onto the specified grade 
with the longitudinal axis of the vehicle in the direction of the slope 
of the grade, stop the vehicle and hold it stationary by application of 
the service brake control, and place the transmission in neutral.
    S7.7.1.3 With the vehicle held stationary by means of the service 
brake control, apply the parking brake by a single application of the 
force specified in (a), (b), or (c) of this paragraph, except that a 
series of applications to achieve the specified force may be made in the 
case of a parking brake system design that does not allow the 
application of the specified force in a single application:
    (a) In the case of a passenger car or other vehicle with a GVWR of 
10,000 lbs. or less, not more than 125 pounds for a foot-operated 
system, and not more than 90 pounds for a hand-operated system; and
    (b) In the case of a school bus with a GVWR greater than 10,000 lbs. 
not more than 150 pounds for a foot-operated system, and not more than 
125 pounds for a hand-operated system.
    (c) For a vehicle using an electrically-activated parking brake, 
apply the parking brake by activating the parking brake control.
    S7.7.1.4 Following the application of the parking brake in 
accordance with S7.7.1.3, release all force on the service brake control 
and commence the measurement of time if the vehicle remains stationary. 
If the vehicle does not remain stationary, reapplication of the service 
brake to hold the vehicle stationary, with reapplication of a force to 
the parking brake control at the level specified in S7.7.1.3 (a) or (b) 
as appropriate for the vehicle being tested (without release of the 
ratcheting or other holding mechanism of the parking brake) may be used 
twice to attain a stationary position.
    S7.7.1.5 Following observation of the vehicle in a stationary 
condition for the specified time in one direction, repeat the same test 
procedure with the vehicle orientation in the opposite direction on the 
specified grade.
    S7.7.1.6 Check the operation of the parking brake application 
indicator required by S5.3.1(d).
    S7.7.2 Test procedure for requirements of S5.2.2 (a) Check that 
transmission must be placed in park position to release key;
    (b) Test as in S7.7.1, except in addition place the transmission 
control to engage the parking mechanism; and
    (c) Test as in S7.7.1 except on a 20 percent grade, with the parking 
mechanism not engaged.
    S7.7.3 Lightly loaded vehicle. Repeat S7.7.1 or S7.7.2 as applicable 
except with the vehicle at lightly loaded vehicle weight.
    S7.7.4 Non-service brake type parking brake systems. For vehicles 
with parking brake systems not utilizing the service brake friction 
elements, burnish the friction elements of such systems prior to parking 
brake tests according to the manufacturer's published recommendations as 
furnished to the purchaser. If no recommendations are furnished, run the 
vehicle in an unburnished condition.
    S7.8 Service brake system--lightly loaded vehicle (third 
effectiveness) test. Make six stops from 60 mph with vehicle at lightly 
loaded vehicle weight. (This test is not applicable to a vehicle which 
both has a GVWR of not less than 8,000 pounds and not greater than 
10,000 pounds and is not a school bus.)
    S7.9 Service brake system test--partial failure.
    S7.9.1 With the vehicle at lightly loaded vehicle weight, alter the 
service brake system to produce any one rupture or leakage type of 
failure, other than a structural failure of a housing that is common to 
two or more subsystems. Determine the control force, pressure level, or 
fluid level (as appropriate for the indicator being tested) necessary to 
activate the brake system indicator lamp. Make four stops if the vehicle 
is equipped with a split service brake system, or 10 stops if the 
vehicle is not so equipped, each from 60 mph, by a continuous 
application of the service brake control. Restore the service brake 
system to normal at completion of this test.

[[Page 220]]

    S7.9.2 Repeat S7.9.1 for each of the other subsystems.
    S7.9.3 Repeat S7.9.1 and S7.9.2 with vehicle at GVWR. Restore the 
service brake system to normal at completion of this test.
    S7.9.4 (For vehicles with antilock and/or variable proportioning 
brake systems.) With vehicle at GVWR, disconnect functional power 
source, or otherwise render antilock system inoperative. Disconnect 
variable proportioning brake system. Make four stops, each from 60 mph. 
If more than one antilock or variable proportioning brake subsystem is 
provided, disconnect or render one subsystem inoperative and run as 
above. Restore system to normal at completion of this test. Repeat for 
each subsystem provided.
    Determine whether the brake system indicator lamp is activated when 
the electrical power source to the antilock or variable proportioning 
unit is disconnected.
    S7.9.5 For a vehicle in which the brake signal is transmitted 
electrically between the brake pedal and some or all of the foundation 
brakes, regardless of the means of actuation of the foundation brakes, 
the tests in S7.9.1 through S7.9.3 of this standard are conducted by 
inducing any single failure in any circuit that electrically transmits 
the brake signal, and all other systems intact. Determine whether the 
brake system indicator lamp is activated when the failure is induced.
    S7.9.6 For an EV with RBS that is part of the service brake system, 
the tests specified in S7.9.1 through S7.9.3 are conducted with the RBS 
disconnected and all other systems intact. Determine whether the brake 
system indicator lamp is activated when the RBS is disconnected.
    S7.10 Service brake system--inoperative brake power unit or brake 
power assist unit test. (For vehicles equipped with brake power unit or 
brake power assist unit.)
    S7.10.1 Regular procedure. (This test need not be run if the option 
in S7.10.2 is selected.) On vehicles with brake power assist units, 
render the brake power assist unit inoperative, or one of the brake 
power assist unit subsystems if two or more subsystems are provided, by 
disconnecting the relevant power supply. Exhaust any residual brake 
power reserve capability of the disconnected system. On vehicles with 
brake power units, disconnect the primary source of power. Make four 
stops, each from 60 mph by a continuous application of the service brake 
control. Restore the system to normal at completion of this test. For 
vehicles equipped with more than one brake power unit or brake power 
assist unit, conduct tests of each in turn.
    S7.10.2 Optional Procedures. On vehicles with brake power assist 
units, the unit is charged to maximum prior to start of test. (Engine 
may be run up in speed, then throttle closed quickly to attain maximum 
charge on vacuum assist units.) Brake power units shall also be charged 
to maximum accumulator pressure prior to start of test. No recharging is 
allowed after start of test.
    (a) (For vehicles with brake power assist units.) Disconnect the 
primary source of power. Make six stops each from 60 mph, to achieve the 
average deceleration for each stop as specified in table III. Apply the 
brake control as quickly as possible. Maintain control force until 
vehicle has stopped.

At the completion of the stops specified above, deplete the system of 
any residual brake power reserve capability. Make one stop from 60 mph 
at an average deceleration of not lower than 7 fpsps for passenger cars 
(equivalent stopping distance 554 feet), or 6 fpsps for vehicles other 
than passenger cars (equivalent stopping distance 646 feet) and 
determine whether the control force exceeds 150 pounds.
    (b) (For vehicles with brake power units with accumulator type 
systems.) Test as in S7.10.2(a), except make 10 stops instead of 6 and, 
at the completion of the 10 stops, deplete the failed element of the 
brake power unit of any residual brake power reserve capability before 
making the final stop.
    (c) (For vehicles with brake power assist or brake power units with 
backup systems.) If the brake power or brake power assist unit operates 
in conjunction with a backup system and the backup system is activated 
automatically in the event of a primary power failure, the backup system 
is operative

[[Page 221]]

during this test. Disconnect the primary source of power of one 
subsystem. Make 15 stops, each from 60 mph, with the backup system 
activated for the failed subsystem, to achieve an average deceleration 
of 12 fpsps for each stop.
    (d) Restore systems to normal at completion of these tests. For 
vehicles equipped with more than one brakepower assist or brakepower 
unit, conduct tests of each in turn.
    S7.10.3 Electric brakes.
    (a) For vehicles with electrically-actuated service brakes, the 
tests in S7.10.1 or S7.10.2 are conducted with any single electrical 
failure in the electric brake system instead of the brake power or brake 
power assist systems, and all other systems intact.
    (b) For EVs with RBS that is part of the service brake system, the 
tests in S7.10.1 or S7.10.2 are conducted with the RBS discontinued and 
all other systems intact.
    S7.11 Service brake system--first fade and recovery test.
    S7.11.1 Baseline check stops or snubs.
    S7.11.1.1 Vehicles with GVWR of 10,000 lb or less. Make three stops 
from 30 mph at 10 fpsps for each stop. Control force readings may be 
terminated when vehicle speed falls to 5 mph. Average the maximum brake 
control force required for the three stops.
    S7.11.1.2 Vehicles with GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds. With 
transmission in neutral (or declutched), make three snubs from 40 to 20 
mph at 10 fpsps for each snub. Average the maximum brake control force 
required for the three snubs.
    S7.11.2 Fade stops or snubs.
    S7.11.2.1 Vehicles with GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less. Make 5 stops 
from 60 mph at 15 fpsps followed by 5 stops at the maximum attainable 
deceleration between 5 and 15 fpsps for each stop. Establish an initial 
brake temperature before the first brake application of 130[deg] to 150 
[deg]F. Initial brake temperatures before brake applications for 
subsequent stops are those occurring at the distance intervals. Attain 
the required deceleration within 1 second and, as a minimum, maintain it 
for the remainder of the stopping time. Control force readings may be 
terminated when vehicle speed falls to 5 mph. Leave an interval of 0.4 
mi between the start of brake applications. Accelerate immediately to 
the initial test speed after each stop. Drive 1 mi at 30 mph after the 
last fade stop, and immediately follow the recovery procedure specified 
in S7.11.3.1.
    S7.11.2.2 Vehicles with GVWR greater than 10,000 lb. With 
transmission in neutral (or declutched) make 10 snubs from 40 to 20 mph 
at 10 fpsps for each snub. Establish an initial brake temperature before 
the first brake application of 130 [deg]F. to 150 [deg]F. Initial brake 
temperatures before brake application for subsequent snubs are those 
occurring in the time intervals specified below. Attain the required 
deceleration within 1 s and maintain it for the remainder of the 
snubbing time. Leave an interval of 30 s between snubs (start of brake 
application to start of brake application). Accelerate immediately to 
the initial test speed after each snub. Drive for 1.5 mi at 40 mph after 
the last snub and immediately follow the recovery procedure specified in 
S7.11.3.2.
    S7.11.3 Recovery stops or snubs.
    S7.11.3.1 Vehicles with GVWR of 10,000 lb or less. Make five stops 
from 30 mph at 10 fpsps for each stop. Control force readings may be 
terminated when vehicle speed falls to 5 mph. Allow a braking distance 
interval of 1 mi. Immediately after each stop accelerate at maximum rate 
to 30 mph and maintain that speed until making the next stop. Record the 
maximum control force for each stop.
    S7.11.3.2 Vehicles with GVWR greater than 10,000 lb. With 
transmission in neutral (or declutched) make five snubs from 40 to 20 
mph at 10 fpsps for each snub. After each snub, accelerate at maximum 
rate to 40 mph and maintain that speed until making the next brake 
application at a point 1.5 mi from the point of the previous brake 
application. Record the maximum control force for each snub.
    S7.12 Service brake system--second reburnish. Repeat S7.6.
    S7.13 Service brake system--second fade and recovery test. Repeat 
S7.11 except in S7.11.2 run 15 fade stops or 20 snubs instead of 10.
    S7.14 Third reburnish. Repeat S7.6.

[[Page 222]]

    S7.15 Service brake system--fourth effectiveness test. Repeat S7.5. 
Then (for passenger cars) make four stops from either 95 mph if the 
speed attainable in 2 mi is 99 to (but not including) 104 mph, or 100 
mph if the speed attainable in 2 mi is 104 mph or greater.
    S7.16 Service brake system--water recovery test.
    S7.16.1 Baseline check stop. Make three stops from 30 mph at 10 
fpsps for each stop. Control force readings may be terminated when 
vehicle speed falls to 5 mph. Average the maximum brake control force 
required for the three stops.
    S7.16.2 Wet brake recovery stops. With the brakes fully released at 
all times, drive the vehicle for 2 min at a speed of 5 mph in any 
combination of forward and reverse directions, through a trough having a 
water depth of 6 in. After leaving the trough, immediately accelerate at 
a maximum rate to 30 mph without a brake application. Immediately upon 
reaching that speed make five stops, each from 30 mph at 10 fpsps for 
each stop. After each stop (except the last), accelerate the vehicle 
immediately at a maximum rate to a speed of 30 mph and begin the next 
stop.
    S7.17 Spike stops. Make 10 successive spike stops from 30 mph with 
the transmission in neutral, with no reverse stops. Make spike stops by 
applying a control force of 200 lb while recording control force versus 
time. Maintain control force until vehicle has stopped. At completion of 
10 spike stops, make six effectiveness stops from 60 mph.
    S7.18 Final inspection. Inspect--
    (a) The service brake system for detachment or fracture of any 
components, such as brake springs and brake shoes or disc pad facing.
    (b) The friction surface of the brake, the master cylinder or brake 
power unit reservoir cover and seal and filler openings, for leakage of 
brake fluid or lubricant.
    (c) The master cylinder or brake power unit reservoir for compliance 
with the volume and labeling requirements of S5.4.2 and S5.4.3. In 
determining the fully applied worn condition assume that the lining is 
worn to: (1) Rivet or bolt heads on riveted or bolted linings, or (2) 
within one thirty-seconds of an inch of shoe or pad mounting surface on 
bonded linings, or (3) the limit recommended by the manufacturer, 
whichever is larger relative to the total possible shoe or pad movement. 
Drums or rotors are assumed to be at nominal design drum diameter or 
rotor thickness. Linings are assumed adjusted for normal operating 
clearance in the released position.
    (d) The brake system indicator light(s), for compliance with 
operation in various key positions, lens color, labeling, and location, 
in accordance with S5.3.
    S7.19 Moving barrier test. (Only for vehicles that have been tested 
according to S7.7.2.) Load the vehicle to GVWR, release parking brake, 
and place the transmission selector control to engage the parking 
mechanism. With a moving barrier as described in paragraph 3.3 of SAE 
recommended practice J972 ``Moving Barrier Collision Tests,'' November 
1966, impact the vehicle from the front at 2\1/2\ mph. Keep the 
longitudinal axis of the barrier parallel with the longitudinal axis of 
the vehicle. Repeat the test, impacting the vehicle from the rear.
    Note: The vehicle used for this test need not be the same vehicle 
that has been used for the braking tests.

[[Page 223]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.004

            Figure 1--Typical Plug Thermocouple Installations
    Note: The second thermocouple shall be installed at .080 inch depth 
within 1 inch circumferentially of the thermocouple installed at .040 
inch depth.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.005


                            Table I.--Brake Test Procedure Sequence and Requirements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Test load
             Sequence             ----------------------------------     Test procedure          Requirements
                                        Light             GVWR
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Instrumentation check.........  ...............  ...............  S7.2                    ...................
2. First (preburnish)              ...............               X   S7.3..................  S5.1.1.1
 effectiveness test.
3. Burnish procedure.............  ...............               X   S7.4                    ...................
4. Second effectiveness test.....  ...............               X   S7.5(b)...............  S5.1.1.2
5. First reburnish...............  ...............               X   S7.6..................  ...................

[[Page 224]]

 
6. Parking brake.................               X                X   S7.7..................  S5.2
7. Stability and control during                 X   ...............  S7.5(a)...............  S5.1.7
 braking (braking-in-a-curve
 test).
8. Third effectiveness (lightly                 X   ...............  S7.8..................  S5.1.1.3
 loaded vehicle).
9. Partial failure...............               X                X   S7.9..................  S5.1.2
10. Inoperative brake power and    ...............               X   S7.10.................  S5.1.3
 power assist units.
11. First fade and recovery......  ...............               X   S7.11.................  S5.1.4
12. Second reburnish.............  ...............               X   S7.12                   ...................
13. Second fade and recovery.....  ...............               X   S7.13.................  S5.1.4
14. Third reburnish..............  ...............               X   S7.14                   ...................
15. Fourth effectiveness.........  ...............               X   S7.15.................  S5.1.1.4
16. Water recovery...............  ...............               X   S7.16.................  S5.1.5
17. Spike stops..................  ...............               X   S7.17.................  S5.1.6
18. Final inspection.............  ...............  ...............  S7.18.................  S5.6
19. Moving barrier test..........  ...............               X   S7.19.................  S5.2.2.3
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                                                                             [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07SE99.007
                                                                                             

                         Table III--Inoperative Brake Power Assist and Brake Power Units
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Average deceleration, FPSPS           Equivalent stopping distance, feet
                             -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Column 1--brake      Column 2--brake      Column 3--brake      Column 4--brake
          Stop No.                power assist          power unit          power assist          power unit
                             -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         (b) and              (b) and              (b) and              (b) and
                                 (a)       (c)        (a)       (c)        (a)       (c)        (a)       (c)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1...........................      16.0       14.0      16.0       13.0       242        277       242        298
2...........................      12.0       12.0      13.0       11.0       323        323       298        352
3...........................      10.0       10.0      12.0       10.0       388        388       323        388
4...........................       9.0        8.5      11.0        9.5       431        456       352        409
5...........................       8.0        7.5      10.0        9.0       484        517       388        431
6...........................       7.5        6.7       9.5        8.5       517        580       409        456
7...........................   \1\ 7.0    \1\ 6.0       9.0        8.0       554        646       431        484
8...........................        NA         NA       8.5        7.5        NA         NA       456        517
9...........................        NA         NA       8.0        7.0        NA         NA       484        554
10..........................        NA         NA       7.5        6.5        NA         NA       517        596
11..........................        NA         NA   \1\ 7.0    \1\ 6.0        NA         NA       554        646
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Depleted. (a) Passenger cars; (b) vehicles other than passenger cars with GVWR of 10,000 lbs or less; (c)
  vehicles with GVWR greater than 10,000 lbs; NA=Not applicable.


[[Page 225]]


[41 FR 29696, July 19, 1976; 41 FR 32221, Aug. 2, 1976, as amended at 41 
FR 36026, 36027, Aug. 26, 1976; 43 FR 9606, Mar. 9, 1978; 46 FR 64, Jan. 
2, 1981; 46 FR 21180, Apr. 9, 1981; 47 FR 61893, Dec. 21, 1981; 48 FR 
39941, Sept. 2, 1983; 49 FR 30199, July 27, 1984; 52 FR 19874, May 28, 
1987; 53 FR 8200, Mar. 14, 1988; 54 FR 22905, May 30, 1989; 54 FR 40082, 
Sept. 29, 1989; 57 FR 47800, Oct. 20, 1992; 58 FR 45461, Aug. 30, 1993; 
60 FR 6434, Feb. 2, 1995; 60 FR 13256 and 13303, Mar. 10, 1995; 61 FR 
19562, May 2, 1996; 62 FR 46917, Sept. 5, 1997; 62 FR 51069, Sept. 30, 
1997; 64 FR 9449, Feb. 26, 1999; 64 FR 48564, Sept. 7, 1999; 65 FR 6331, 
Feb. 9, 2000; 68 FR 47495, Aug. 11, 2003]

    Effective Date Note: At 67 FR 79439, Dec. 27, 2002, Sec. 571.105 
was amended by removing the definition of motor home in S4, Definitions, 
effective Dec. 27, 2004.


<R05>
Sec. 571.106  Standard No. 106; Brake hoses.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies labeling and performance 
requirements for motor vehicle brake hose, brake hose assemblies, and 
brake hose end fittings.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries occurring as a result of brake system failure from pressure or 
vacuum loss due to hose or hose assembly rupture.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, buses, trailers, and 
motorcycles, and to hydraulic, air, and vacuum brake hose, brake hose 
assemblies, and brake hose end fittings for use in those vehicles.
    S4. Definitions.
    Armor means protective material installed on a brake hose to 
increase the resistance of the hose or hose assembly to abrasion or 
impact damage.
    Brake hose means a flexible conduit, other than a vacuum tubing 
connector, manufactured for use in a brake system to transmit or contain 
the fluid pressure or vacuum used to apply force to a vehicle's brakes. 
For hose, a dimensional description such as ``\1/4\-inch hose'' refers 
to the nominal inside diameter. For tubing, a dimensional description 
such as ``\1/4\-in tubing'' refers to the nominal outside diameter.
    Brake hose assembly means a brake hose, with or without armor, 
equipped with end fittings for use in a brake system, but does not 
include an air or vacuum assembly prepared by the owner or operator of a 
used vehicle, by his employee, or by a repair facility, for installation 
in that used vehicle.
    Brake hose end fitting means a coupler, other than a clamp, designed 
for attachment to the end of a brake hose.
    Free length means the linear measurement of hose exposed between the 
end fittings of a hose assembly in a straight position.
    Permanently attached end fitting means an end fitting that is 
attached by deformation of the fitting about the hose by crimping or 
swaging, or an end fitting that is attached by use of a sacrificial 
sleeve or ferrule that requires replacement each time a hose assembly is 
rebuilt.
    Rupture means any failure that results in separation of a brake hose 
from its end fitting or in leakage.
    Vacuum tubing connector means a flexible conduit of vacuum that (i) 
connects metal tubing to metal tubing in a brake system, (ii) is 
attached without end fittings, and (iii) when installed, has an 
unsupported length less than the total length of those portions that 
cover the metal tubing.
    S5. Requirements--hydraulic brake hose, brake hose assemblies, and 
brake hose end fittings.
    S5.1 Construction. (a) Each hydraulic brake hose assembly shall have 
permanently attached brake hose end fittings which are attached by 
deformation of the fitting about the hose by crimping or swaging.
    (b) Each hydraulic brake hose assembly that is equipped with a 
permanent supplemental support integrally attached to the assembly and 
is manufactured as a replacement for use on a vehicle not equipped, as 
an integral part of the vehicle's original design, with a means of 
attaching the support to the vehicle shall be equipped with a bracket 
that is integrally attached to the supplemental support and that adapts 
the vehicle to properly accept this type of brake hose assembly.
    S5.2 Labeling.
    S5.2.1 Each hydraulic brake hose, except hose sold as part of a 
motor vehicle, shall have at least two clearly

[[Page 226]]

identifiable stripes of at least one-sixteenth of an inch in width, 
placed on opposite sides of the brake hose parallel to its longitudinal 
axis. One stripe may be interrupted by the information required by 
S5.2.2, and the other stripe may be interrupted by additional 
information at the manufacturer's option. However, hydraulic brake hose 
manufactured for use only in an assembly whose end fittings prevent its 
installation in a twisted orientation in either side of the vehicle, 
need not meet the requirements of S5.2.1.
    S5.2.2 Each hydraulic brake hose shall be labeled, or cut from bulk 
hose that is labeled, at intervals of not more than 6 inches, measured 
from the end of one legend to the beginning of the next, in block 
capital letters and numerals at least one-eighth of an inch high, with 
the information listed in paragraphs (a) through (e) of this section. 
The information need not be present on hose that is sold as part of a 
brake hose assembly or a motor vehicle.
    (a) The symbol DOT, constituting a certification by the hose 
manufacturer that the hose conforms to all applicable motor vehicle 
safety standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the hose, 
which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Crash Avoidance 
Standards, Vehicle Dynamics Division, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. The 
marking may consist of a designation other than block capital letters 
required by S5.2.2.
    (c) The month, day, and year, or the month and year, of manufacture, 
expressed in numerals. For example, 10/1/96 means October 1, 1996.
    (d) The nominal inside diameter of the hose expressed in inches or 
fractions of inches, or in millimeters followed by the abbreviation 
``mm.''
    (e) Either ``HR'' to indicate that the hose is regular expansion 
hydraulic hose or ``HL'' to indicate that the hose is low expansion 
hydraulic hose.
    S5.2.3 Package labeling for brake hose assemblies designed to be 
used with a supplemental support. (a) Each hydraulic brake hose assembly 
that is equipped with a permanent supplemental support integrally 
attached to the assembly and is manufactured as a replacement assembly 
for a vehicle equipped, as an integral part of the vehicle's original 
design, with a means of attaching the support to the vehicle shall be 
sold in a package that is marked or labeled as follows: ``FOR USE ON 
[insert Manufacturer, Model Name] ONLY'';
    (b) Each hydraulic brake hose assembly that is equipped with a 
permanent supplemental support integrally attached to the assembly and 
is manufactured as a replacement for use on a vehicle not equipped, as 
an integral part of the vehicle's original design, with a means of 
attaching the support to the vehicle shall comply with paragraphs (a) 
(1) and (2) of this section:
    (1) Be sold in a package that is marked or labeled as follows: ``FOR 
USE ONLY WITH A SUPPLEMENTAL SUPPORT.''
    (2) Be accompanied by clear, detailed instructions explaining the 
proper installation of the brake hose and the supplemental support 
bracket to the vehicle and the consequences of not attaching the 
supplemental support bracket to the vehicle. The instructions shall be 
printed on or included in the package specified in paragraph (a)(1) of 
this section.
    S5.2.4 Each hydraulic brake hose assembly, except those sold as part 
of a motor vehicle, shall be labeled by means of a band around the brake 
hose assembly as specified in this paragraph or, at the option of the 
manufacturer, by means of labeling as specified in S5.2.4.1. The band 
may at the manufacturer's option be attached so as to move freely along 
the length of the assembly, as long as it is retained by the end 
fittings. The band shall be etched, embossed, or stamped in block 
capital letters, numerals or symbols at least one-eighth of an inch 
high, with the following information:
    (a) The symbol DOT constituting certification by the hose assembler 
that the hose assembly conforms to all applicable motor vehicle safety 
standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the hose 
assembly, which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Crash 
Avoidance Standards, Vehicle Dynamics Division, National

[[Page 227]]

Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., 
Washington, DC 20590. The designation may consist of block capital 
letters, numerals or a symbol.
    S5.2.4.1 At least one end fitting of a hydraulic brake hose assembly 
shall be etched, stamped or embossed with a designation at least one-
sixteenth of an inch high that identifies the manufacturer of the hose 
assembly and is filed in accordance with S5.2.4(b).
    S5.3 Test requirements. A hydraulic brake hose assembly or 
appropriate part thereof shall be capable of meeting any of the 
requirements set forth under this heading, when tested under the 
conditions of S11 and the applicable procedures of S6. However, a 
particular hose assembly or appropriate part thereof need not meet 
further requirements after having been subjected to and having met the 
constriction requirement (S5.3.1) and any one of the requirements 
specified in S5.3.2 through S5.3.11.
    S5.3.1 Constriction. Except for that part of an end fitting which 
does not contain hose, every inside diameter of any section of a 
hydraulic brake hose assembly shall be not less than 64 percent of the 
nominal inside diameter of the brake hose.
    S5.3.2 Expansion and burst strength. The maximum expansion of a 
hydraulic brake hose assembly at 1,000 psi and 1,500 psi shall not 
exceed the values specified in Table I (S6.1). The hydraulic brake hose 
assembly shall then withstand water pressure of 4,000 psi for 2 minutes 
without rupture, and shall not rupture at less than 5,000 psi (S6.2).

      Table 1--Maximum Expansion of Free Length Brake Hose, cc/ft.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Test Pressure
                             -------------------------------------------
                                    1,000 psi             1,500 psi
Hydraulic brake hose, inside -------------------------------------------
          diameter             Regular      Low      Regular      Low
                              expansion  expansion  expansion  expansion
                                 hose       hose       hose       hose
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/8\ inch or 3 mm or less..       0.66       0.33       0.79       0.42
\3/16\ inch or 4 to 5 mm....        .86        .55       1.02        .72
\1/4\ inch or 6 mm or more..       1.04        .82       1.30       1.17
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S5.3.3 Whip resistance. A hydraulic brake hose assembly shall not 
rupture when run continuously on a flexing machine for 35 hours (S6.3).
    S5.3.4 Tensile strength. A hydraulic brake hose assembly shall 
withstand a pull of 325 pounds without separation of the hose from its 
end fittings (S6.4).
    S5.3.5 Water absorption and burst strength. A hydraulic brake hose 
assembly, after immersion in water for 70 hours (S6.5), shall withstand 
water pressure of 4,000 psi for 2 minutes, and then shall not rupture at 
less than 5,000 psi (S6.2).
    S5.3.6 Water absorption and tensile strength. A hydraulic brake hose 
assembly, after immersion in water for 70 hours (S6.5), shall withstand 
a pull of 325 pounds without separation of the hose from its end 
fittings (S6.4).
    S5.3.7 Water absorption and whip resistance. A hydraulic brake hose 
assembly, after immersion in water for 70 hours (S6.5), shall not 
rupture when run continuously on a flexing machine for 35 hours (S6.3).
    S.5.3.8 Low-temperature resistance. A hydraulic brake hose 
conditioned at minus 40 [deg]F. for 70 hours shall not show cracks 
visible without magnification when bent around a cylinder as specified 
in S6.6. (S6.6)
    S5.3.9 Brake fluid compatibility, constriction, and burst strength. 
Except for brake hose assemblies designed for use with mineral or 
petroleum-based brake fluids, a hydraulic brake hose assembly shall meet 
the constriction requirement of S5.3.1 after having been subjected to a 
temperature of 200 [deg]F for 70 hours while filled with SAE RM-66-04 
Compatibility Fluid, as described in appendix B of SAE Standard J1703 
JAN 1995, ``Motor Vehicle Brake Fluid.'' It shall then withstand water 
pressure of 4,000 psi for 2 minutes and thereafter shall not rupture at 
less than 5,000 psi (S6.2). (SAE RM-66-03 Compatibility Fluid, as 
described in appendix A of SAE Standard J1703 NOV83, ``Motor Vehicle 
Brake Fluid,'' November 1983, may be used in place of SAE RM-66-04 until 
January 1, 1995.)
    S5.3.10 Ozone resistance. A hydraulic brake hose shall not show 
cracks visible under 7-power magnification after exposure to ozone for 
70 hours at 104 [deg]F. (S6.8).

[[Page 228]]

    S5.3.11 End fitting corrosion resistance. After 24 hours of exposure 
to salt spray, a hydraulic brake hose end fitting shall show no base 
metal corrosion on the end fitting surface except where crimping or the 
application of labeling information has caused displacement of the 
protective coating. (S6.9)
    S6. Test procedures--Hydraulic brake hose, brake hose assemblies, 
and brake hose end fittings.
    S6.1. Expansion test.
    S6.1.1 Apparatus. Utilize a test apparatus (as shown in Figure 1) 
which consists of:
    (a) Source for required fluid pressure;
    (b) Test fluid of water without any additives and free of gases;
    (c) Reservoir for test fluid;
    (d) Pressure gauges;
    (e) Brake hose end fittings in which to mount the hose vertically; 
and
    (f) Graduate burette with 0.05 cc increments.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.006
    
                    Fig. 1--Expansion Test Apparatus
    S6.1.2 Preparation. (a) Measure the free length of the hose 
assembly.
    (b) Mount the hose so that it is in a vertical straight position 
without tension when pressure is applied.
    (c) Fill the hose with test fluid and bleed all gases from the 
system.
    (d) Close the valve to the burette and apply 1,500 psi for 10 
seconds; then release pressure.
    S6.1.3 Calculation of expansion at 1,000 and 1,500 psi. (a) Adjust 
the fluid level in the burette to zero.
    (b) Close the valve to the burette, apply pressure at the rate of 
15,000 psi per minute, and seal 1,000 psi in the hose (1,500 psi in 
second series).
    (c) After 3 seconds open the valve to the burette for 10 seconds and 
allow the fluid in the expanded hose to rise into the burette.
    (d) Repeat the procedure in steps (b) and (c) twice. Measure the 
amount of test fluid which has accumulated in the burette as a result of 
the three applications of pressure.
    (e) Calculate the volumetric expansion per foot by dividing the 
total accumulated test fluid by 3 and further dividing by the free 
length of the hose in feet.
    S6.2 Burst strength test. (a) Connect the brake hose to a pressure 
system and fill it completely with water, allowing all gases to escape.
    (b) Apply water pressure of 4,000 psi at a rate of 15,000 psi per 
minute.
    (c) After 2 minutes at 4,000 psi, increase the pressure at the rate 
of 15,000 psi per minute until the pressure exceeds 5,000 psi.
    S6.3 Whip resistance test.
    S6.3.1 Apparatus. Utilize test apparatus that is dynamically 
balanced and includes:
    (a) A movable header consisting of a horizontal bar equipped with 
capped end fittings and mounted through bearings at each end to points 4 
inches from the center of two vertically rotating disks whose edges are 
in the same vertical plane;
    (b) An adjustable stationary header parallel to the movable header 
in the same horizontal plane as the centers of the disks, and fitted 
with open end fittings;
    (c) An elapsed time indicator; and
    (d) A source of water pressure connected to the open end fittings.
    S6.3.2 Preparation. (a) Except for the supplemental support 
specified in S6.3.2(d), remove all external appendages including, but 
not limited to, hose armor, chafing collars, mounting brackets, date 
band and spring guards.
    (b) Measure the hose free length.
    (c) Mount the hose in the whip test machine, introducing slack as 
specified

[[Page 229]]

in Table II for the size hose tested, measuring the projected length 
parallel to the axis of the rotating disks. The manufacturer may, at his 
option, adapt the fitting attachment points to permit mounting hose 
assemblies equipped with angled or other special fittings in the same 
orientation as hose assemblies equipped with straight fittings.
    (d) In the case of a brake hose assembly equipped with a permanent 
supplemental support integrally attached to the assembly, the assembly 
may be mounted using the supplemental support and associated means of 
simulating its attachment to the vehicle. Mount the supplemental support 
in the same vertical and horizontal planes as the stationary header end 
of the whip test fixture described in S6.3.1(b). Mount or attach the 
supplemental support so that it is positioned in accordance with the 
recommendation of the assembly manufacturer for attaching the 
supplemental support on a vehicle.

                         Table II--Hose Lengths
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       Slack, inches
                                                 -----------------------
                                                  \1/8\ inch   More than
    Free length between end fittings, inches        or 3 mm   \1/8\ inch
                                                    hose or     or 3 mm
                                                     less        hose
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8 to 15\1/2\, inclusive.........................       1.750  ..........
10 to 15\1/2\, inclusive........................  ..........       1,000
Over 15\1/2\ to 19 inclusive....................       1.250  ..........
Over 19 to 24, inclusive........................       0.750  ..........
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S6.3.3 Operation. (a) Apply 235 psi water pressure and bleed all 
gases from the system.
    (b) Drive the movable head at 800 rpm.
    S6.4 Tensile strength test. Utilize a tension testing machine 
conforming to the requirements of the methods of Verification of Testing 
Machines (1964 American Society for Testing and Materials, Designation 
E4), and provided with a recording device to give the total pull in 
pounds.
    S6.4.1 Preparation. Mount the hose assembly to ensure straight, 
evenly distributed machine pull.
    S6.4.2 Operation. Apply tension at a rate of 1 inch per minute 
travel of the moving head until separation occurs.
    S6.5 Water absorption sequence tests.
    S6.5.1 Preparation. Prepare three hose assemblies as follows:
    (a) Remove 1\1/8\ inches of hose cover, if any, from the center of 
the hose assemblies without injury to any reinforcing material or 
elongation of the hose assemblies.
    (b) Measure the free length of the hose assemblies.
    S.6.5.2 Immersion and sequence testing. (a) Immerse the hose 
assemblies in distilled water for 70 hours.
    (b) Thirty minutes after removal from water, conduct tests S6.2, 
S6.3, and S6.4, using a different hose for each sequence.
    S6.6 Low temperature resistance test.
    S6.6.1 Preparation. (a) Remove hose armor, if any, and condition a 
hose in a straight position in air at minus 40 [deg]F. for 70 hours.
    (b) Condition a cylinder in air at minus 40 [deg]F for 70 hours, 
using a cylinder of 2\1/2\ inches diameter for test of hose less than 
\1/8\ inch or 3 mm 3 inches for tests of \1/8\ inch or 3mm hose, 3\1/2\ 
inches for tests of \3/16\ and \1/4\ inch hose or of 4 to 6 mm hose, and 
4 inches for tests of hose greater than \1/4\ inch or 6 mm in diameter.
    S6.6.2 Flexibility testing. Bend the conditioned hose 180 degrees 
around the conditioned cylinder at a steady rate in a period of 3 to 5 
seconds. Examine without magnification for cracks.
    S6.7 Brake fluid compatibility test.
    S6.7.1 Preparation. (a) Attach a hose assembly below a 1-pint 
reservoir filled with 100 ml. of SAE RM-66-04 Compatibility Fluid as 
shown in Figure 2. (SAE RM-66-03 Compatibility Fluid, as described in 
appendix A of SAE Standard J1703 NOV83, ``Motor Vehicle Brake Fluid,'' 
November 1983, may be used in place of SAE RM-66-04 until January 1, 
1995.)
    (b) Fill the hose assembly with brake fluid, seal the lower end, and 
place the test assembly in an oven in a vertical position.

[[Page 230]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.007

    S6.7.2 Oven treatment. (a) Condition the hose assembly at 200 
[deg]F. for 70 hours.
    (b) Cool the hose assembly at room temperature for 30 minutes.
    (c) Drain the brake hose assembly, immediately determine that every 
inside diameter of any section of the hose assembly, except for that 
part of an end fitting which does not contain hose, is not less than 64 
percent of the nominal inside diameter of the hose, and conduct the test 
specified in S6.2.
    S6.8 Ozone resistance test. Utilize a cylinder with a diameter eight 
times the nominal outside diameter of the brake hose excluding armor.
    S6.8.1 Preparation. After removing any armor, bind a hydraulic brake 
hose 360[deg] around the cylinder. In the case of hose shorter than the 
circumference of the cylinder, bend the hose so that as much of its 
length as possible is in contact.
    S6.8.2 Exposure to ozone. (a) Condition the hose on the cylinder in 
air at room temperature for 24 hours.
    (b) Immediately thereafter, condition the hose on the cylinder for 
70 hours in an exposure chamber having an ambient air temperature of 104 
[deg]F. during the test and containing air mixed with ozone in the 
proportion of 50 parts of ozone per 100 million parts of air by volume.
    (c) Examine the hose for cracks under 7-power magnification, 
ignoring areas immediately adjacent to or within the area covered by 
binding.
    S6.9 End fitting corrosion resistance test. Utilize the apparatus 
described in ASTM B117-64, ``Salt Spray (Fog) Testing''.
    S6.9.1 Construction. Construct the salt spray chamber so that:
    (a) The construction material does not affect the corrosiveness of 
the fog.
    (b) The hose assembly is supported or suspended 30[deg] from the 
vertical and parallel to the principal direction of the horizontal flow 
of fog through the chamber.
    (c) The hose assembly does not contact any metallic material or any 
material capable of acting as a wick.
    (d) Condensation which falls from the assembly does not return to 
the solution reservoir for respraying.
    (e) Condensation from any source does not fall on the brake hose 
assemblies or the solution collectors.
    (f) Spray from the nozzles is not directed onto the hose assembly.
    S6.9.2 Preparation. (a) Plug each end of the hose assembly.
    (b) Mix a salt solution five parts by weight of sodium chloride to 
95 parts of distilled water, using sodium chloride substantially free of 
nickel and copper, and containing on a dry basis not more than 0.1 
percent of sodium iodide and not more than 0.3 percent total impurities. 
Ensure that the solution is free of suspended solids before the solution 
is atomized.
    (c) After atomization at 95 [deg]F. ensure that the collected 
solution is in the PH range of 6.5 to 7.2. Make the PH measurements at 
77 [deg]F.
    (d) Maintain a compressed air supply to the nozzle or nozzles free 
of oil and dirt and between 10 and 25 psi.
    S6.9.3 Operation. Subject the brake hose assembly to the salt spray 
continuously for 24 hours.
    (a) Regulate the mixture so that each collector will collect from 1 
to 2 ml. of solution per hour for each 80 square centimeters of 
horizontal collecting area.
    (b) Maintain exposure zone temperature at 95 [deg]F.

[[Page 231]]

    (c) Upon completion, remove the salt deposit from the surface of the 
hoses by washing gently or dipping in clean running water not warmer 
than 100 [deg]F. and then drying immediately.
    S7. Requirements--Air brake hose, brake hose assemblies, and brake 
hose end fittings.
    S7.1 Construction. Each air brake hose assembly shall be equipped 
with permanently attached brake hose end fittings or reusable brake hose 
end fittings. Each air brake hose constructed of synthetic or natural 
elastomeric rubber intended for use with reusable end fittings shall 
conform to the dimensional requirements specified in Table III.

                          Table III--Air Brake Hose Dimensions for Reusable Assemblies
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Type I outside diameter,       Type II outside
                                            Inside diameter            inches               diameter, inches
               Size, inches                tolerance, inches ---------------------------------------------------
                                                                Minimum      Maximum      Minimum      Maximum
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3/16\...................................             +0.026        0.472        0.510        0.500        0.539
                                                      -0.000
\1/4\....................................             +0.031        0.535        0.573        0.562        0.602
                                                      -0.000
\5/16\...................................             +0.031        0.598        0.636        0.656        0.695
                                                      -0.000
\3/8\....................................    <plus-minus<ls-        0.719        0.781        0.719        0.781
                                                thn-eq>0.023
\13/32\..................................             +0.031        0.714        0.760        0.742        0.789
                                                      -0.000
\1/2\....................................             +0.039        0.808        0.854        0.898        0.945
                                                      -0.000
\5/8\....................................             +0.042        0.933        0.979        1.054        1.101
                                                      -0.000
\1/2\ special............................    <plus-minus<ls-         .844         .906         .844         .906
                                                 thn-eq>.031
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S7.2 Labeling
    S7.2.1 Hose. Each air brake hose shall be labeled, or cut from bulk 
hose that is labeled, at intervals of not more than 6 inches, measured 
from the end of one legend to the beginning of the next, in block 
capital letters and numerals at least one-eighth of an inch high, with 
the information listed in paragraphs (a) through (e) of this section. 
The information need not be present on hose that is sold as part of a 
brake hose assembly or a motor vehicle.
    (a) The symbol DOT, constituting a certification by the hose 
manufacturer that the hose conforms to all applicable motor vehicle 
safety standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the hose, 
which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Crash Avoidance 
Standards, Vehicle Dynamics Division, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20590. The 
designation may consist of block capital letters, numerals, or a symbol.
    (c) The month, day, and year, or the month and year, of manufacture, 
expressed in numerals. For example, 10/1/96 means October 1, 1996.
    (d) The nominal inside diameter of the hose expressed in inches or 
fractions of inches or in millimeters, or the nominal outside diameter 
of plastic tubing expressed in inches or fractions of inches or in 
millimeters followed by the letters OD. The abbreviation ``mm'' shall 
follow hose sizes that are expressed in millimeters. (Examples of inside 
diameter: \1/8\, \1/2\ (\1/2\SP in the case of \1/2\ inch special air 
brake hose), 4 mm, 6 mm. Examples of outside diameter: \1/4\ OD, 12 mm 
OD.)
    (e) The letter ``A'' shall indicate intended use in air brake 
systems. In the case of a hose constructed of synthetic or natural 
elastomeric rubber intended for use in a reusable assembly, ``AI'' or 
``AII'' shall indicate Type I or Type II dimensional characteristics of 
the hose as described in Table III.
    S7.2.2 End fittings. Except for an end fitting that is attached by 
deformation of the fitting about a hose by crimping or swaging, at least 
one component of each air brake hose fitting shall be etched, embossed, 
or stamped in block capital letters and numerals at least

[[Page 232]]

one-sixteenth of an inch high with the following information:
    (a) The symbol DOT, constituting a certification by the manufacturer 
of that component that the component conforms to all applicable motor 
vehicle safety standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of that component 
of the fitting, which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Crash 
Avoidance Standards, Vehicle Dynamics Division, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20590. The 
designation may consist of block capital letters, numerals, or a symbol.
    (c) The letter ``A'' shall indicate intended use in air brake 
systems. In the case of an end fitting intended for use in a reusable 
assembly with brake hose subject to Table III, ``AI'' or ``AII'' shall 
indicate use with Type I or Type II hose, respectively.
    (d) The nominal inside diameter of the hose to which the fitting is 
properly attached expressed in inches or fractions of inches or in 
millimeters, or the outside diameter of the plastic tubing to which the 
fitting is properly attached expressed in inches or fractions of inches 
or in millimeters followed by the letters OD (See examples in 
S7.2.1(d)). The abbreviations ``mm'' shall follow hose sizes that are 
expressed in millimeters.
    S7.2.3 Assemblies. Each air brake hose assembly made with end 
fittings that are attached by crimping or swaging, except those sold as 
part of a motor vehicle, shall be labeled by means of a band around the 
brake hose assembly as specified in this paragraph or, at the option of 
the manufacturer, by means of labeling as specified in S7.2.3.1. The 
band may at the manufacturer's option be attached so as to move freely 
along the length of the assembly, as long as it is retained by the end 
fittings. The band shall be etched, embossed, or stamped in block 
capital letters, numerals or symbols at least one-eighth of an inch 
high, with the following information:
    (a) The symbol DOT, constituting certification by the hose assembler 
that the hose assembly conforms to all applicable motor vehicle safety 
standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the hose 
assembly, which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Crash 
Avoidance Standards, Vehicle Dynamics Division, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20590. The 
designation may consist of block capital letters, numerals or a symbol.
    S7.2.3.1 At least one end fitting of an air brake hose assembly made 
with end fittings that are attached by crimping or swaging shall be 
etched, stamped or embossed with a designation at least one-sixteenth of 
an inch high that identifies the manufacturer of the hose assembly and 
is filed in accordance with S7.2.3(b).
    S7.3 Test requirements. Each air brake hose assembly or appropriate 
part thereof shall be capable of meeting any of the requirements set 
forth under this heading, when tested under the conditions of S11 and 
the applicable procedures of S8. However, a particular hose assembly or 
appropriate part thereof need not meet further requirements after having 
met the constriction requirement (S7.3.1) and then having been subjected 
to any one of the requirements specified in S7.3.2 through S7.3.13.
    S7.3.1 Construction. Except for that part of an end fitting which 
does not contain hose, every inside diameter of any section of an air 
brake hose assembly shall be not less than 66 percent of the nominal 
inside diameter of the brake hose.
    S7.3.2 High temperature resistance. An air brake hose shall not show 
external or internal cracks, charring, or disintegration visible without 
magnification when straightened after being bent for 70 hours at 212 
[deg]F. over a cylinder having the radius specified in Table IV for the 
size of hose tested (S8.1).
    S7.3.3 Low temperature resistance. The outer cover of an air brake 
hose shall not show cracks visible without magnification as a result of 
conditioning at minus 40 [deg]F. for 70 hours when bent around a 
cylinder having the radius specified in Table IV for the size of hose 
tested (S8.2).

[[Page 233]]



                           Table IV--Air Brake Hose Diameters and Test Cylinder Radii
 
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nominal hose diameter, in.*....................   \1/8\  \3/16\   \1/4\  \5/16\  \3/8\, \13/  \7/16\, \1/  \5/8\
                                                                                         32\          2\
mm.*...........................................       3    4, 5       6       8           10          12      16
Radius of test cylinder in inches..............  1\1/2\       2  2\1/2\       3       3\1/2\           4  4\1/2\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*These sizes are listed to provide test values for brake hoses manufactured in these sizes. They do not
  represent conversions.

    S7.3.4 Oil resistance. After immersion in ASTM No. 3 oil for 70 
hours at 212 [deg]F. the volume of a specimen prepared from the inner 
tube and cover of an air brake hose shall not increase more than 100 
percent (S8.3).
    S7.3.5 Ozone resistance. The outer cover of an air brake hose shall 
not show cracks visible under 7-power magnification after exposure to 
ozone for 70 hours at 104 [deg]F. (S8.4).
    S7.3.6 Length change. An airbrake hose (other than a coiled nylon 
tube for use in an assembly that meets the requirements of Sec. 393.45 
of this title) shall not contract in length more than 7 percent nor 
elongate more than 5 percent when subjected to air pressure of 200 psi 
(S8.5).
    S7.3.7 Adhesion. Except for hose reinforced by wire, an airbrake 
hose shall withstand a tensile force of 8 pounds per inch of length 
before separation of adjacent layers (S8.6).
    S7.3.8 Air pressure. An air brake hose assembly shall contain air 
pressure of 200 psi for 5 minutes without loss of more than 5 psi 
(S8.7).
    S7.3.9 Burst strength. An air brake hose assembly shall not rupture 
when exposed to hydrostatic pressure of 800 psi (S8.8).
    S7.3.10 Tensile strength. An air brake hose assembly (other than a 
coiled nylon tube assembly which meets the requirements of Sec. 393.45 
of this title) designed for use between frame and axle or between a 
towed and a towing vehicle shall withstand, without separation of the 
hose from its end fittings, a pull of 250 pounds if it is \1/4\ inch or 
less or 6 mm or less in nominal internal diameter, or a pull of 325 
pounds if it is larger than \1/4\ inch or 6 mm in nominal internal 
diameter. An air brake hose assembly designed for use in any other 
application shall withstand, without separation of the hose from its end 
fitting, a pull of 50 pounds if it is \1/4\ inch or 6 mm or less in 
nominal internal diameter, 150 pounds if it is \3/8\ or \1/2\ inch or 10 
mm to 12 mm in nominal internal diameter, or 325 pounds if it is larger 
than \1/2\ inch or 12 mm in nominal internal diameter (S8.9).
    S7.3.11 Water absorption and tensile strength. After immersion in 
distilled water for 70 hours (S8.10), an air brake hose assembly (other 
than a coiled tube assembly which meets the requirements of Sec. 393.45 
of this title) designed for use between frame and axle or between a 
towed and a towing vehicle shall withstand without separation of the 
hose from its end fittings a pull of 250 pounds if it is \1/4\ inch or 6 
mm or less in nominal internal diameter, or a pull of 325 pounds if it 
is larger than \1/4\ inch or 6 mm in nominal internal diameter. After 
immersion in distilled water for 70 hours (S8.10), an air brake hose 
assembly designed for use in any other application shall withstand 
without separation of the hose from its end fitting a pull of 50 pounds 
if it is \1/4\ inch or 6 mm or less in nominal internal diameter, 150 
pounds if it is \3/8\ inch or \1/2\ inch or 10 to 12 mm in nominal 
internal diameter, or 325 pounds if it is larger than \1/2\ inch or 12 
mm in nominal internal diameter (S8.9).
    S7.3.12 Zinc chloride resistance. The outer cover of an air brake 
hose shall not show cracks visible under 7-power magnification after 
immersion in a 50 percent zinc chloride aqueous solution for 200 hours 
(S8.11).
    S7.3.13 End fitting corrosion resistance. After 24 hours of exposure 
to salt spray, air brake hose end fittings shall show no base metal 
corrosion on the end fitting surface except where crimping or the 
application of labeling information causes a displacement of the 
protective coating.
    S8. Test procedures--Air brake hose, brake hose assemblies, and 
brake hose end fittings.
    S8.1 High temperature resistance test. (a) Utilize a cylinder having 
the radius indicated in Table IV for the size of hose tested.

[[Page 234]]

    (b) Bind the hose around the cylinder and condition it in an air 
oven for 70 hours at 212 [deg]F.
    (c) Cool the hose to room temperature, remove it from the cylinder 
and straighten it.
    (d) Without magnification, examine the hose externally and cut the 
hose lengthwise and examine the inner tube.
    S8.2 Low temperature resistance test. (a) Utilize a cylinder having 
the radius indicated in Table IV for the size of hose tested.
    (b) Condition the cylinder and the brake hose, in a straight 
position, in a cold box at minus 40 [deg]F. for 70 hours.
    (c) With the hose and cylinder at minus 40 [deg]F., bend the hose 
180 degrees around the cylinder at a steady rate in a period of 3 to 5 
seconds.
    S8.3 Oil resistance test. Utilize three test specimens and average 
the results.
    S8.3.1 Preparation. Fashion a test specimen by cutting a rectangular 
block 2 inches long and not less than one-third of an inch in width, 
having a thickness of not more than one-sixteenth inch, from the brake 
hose and buff the specimen on both faces to ensure smooth surfaces.
    S8.3.2 Measurement. (a) Weigh each specimen to the nearest milligram 
in air (W1) and in distilled water (W2) at room temperature. If wetting 
is necessary to remove air bubbles, dip the specimen in acetone and 
thoroughly rinse it with distilled water.
    (b) Immerse each specimen in ASTM No. 3 oil for 70 hours at 212 
[deg]F. and then cool in ASTM No. 3 oil at room temperature for 30 to 60 
minutes.
    (c) Dip the specimen quickly in acetone and blot it lightly with 
filter paper.
    (d) Weigh each specimen in a tared weighing bottle (W3) and in 
distilled water (W4) within five minutes of removal from the cooling 
liquid.
    (e) Calculate the percentage increase in volume follows:


Percent of increase=

[(W<INF>3</INF>-W<INF>4</INF>)-(W<INF>1</INF>-W<INF>2</INF>)]/
    (W<INF>1</INF>-W<INF>2</INF>)x100

    S8.4 Ozone resistance test. Conduct the test specified in S6.8 using 
air brake hose.
    S8.5 Length change test. (a) Position a test hose in a straight, 
horizontal position, and apply air pressure of 10 psi thereto.
    (b) Measure the hose to determine original free length.
    (c) Without releasing the 10 psi, raise the air pressure to the test 
hose to 200 psi.
    (d) Measure the hose under 200 psi to determine final free length. 
An elongation or contraction is an increase or decrease, respectively, 
in the final free length from the original free length of the hose.
    S8.6 Adhesion test.
    S8.6.1 Apparatus. A tension testing machine that is power-driven and 
that applies a constant rate of extension is used for measuring the 
force required to separate the layers of the test specimen. The 
apparatus is constructed so that:
    (a) The recording head includes a freely rotating form with an 
outside diameter substantially the same as the inside diameter of the 
hose specimen to be placed on it.
    (b) The freely rotating form is mounted so that its axis of rotation 
is in the plane of the ply being separated from the specimen and so that 
the applied force is perpendicular to the tangent of the specimen 
circumference at the line of separation.
    (c) The rate of travel of the power-actuated grip is a uniform one 
inch per minute and the capacity of the machine is such that maximum 
applied tension during the test is not more than 85 percent nor less 
than 15 percent of the machine's rated capacity.
    (d) The machine produces a chart with separation as one coordinate 
and applied tension as the other.
    S8.6.2 Preparation. (a) Cut a test specimen of 1 inch or more in 
length from the hose to be tested and cut the layer to be tested of that 
test specimen longitudinally along its entire length to the level of 
contact with the adjacent layer.
    (b) Peel the layer to be tested from the adjacent layer to create a 
flap large enough to permit attachment of the power-actuated clamp of 
the apparatus.
    (c) Mount the test specimen on the freely rotating form with the 
separated layer attached to the power-actuated clamp.

[[Page 235]]

    S8.6.3 [Reserved]
    S8.6.4 Calculations. (a) The adhesion value shall be the minimum 
force recorded on the chart excluding that portion of the chart which 
corresponds to the initial and final 20 percent portion along the 
displacement axis.
    (b) Express the force in pounds per inch of length.
    S8.7 Air pressure test. (a) Connect the air brake hose assembly to a 
source of air pressure.
    (b) Apply 200 psi air pressure to the hose and seal the hose from 
the source of air pressure.
    (c) After 5 minutes, determine the air pressure remaining in the 
test specimen.
    S8.8 Burst strength test. (a) Utilize an air brake hose assembly.
    (b) Fill the hose assembly with water, allowing all gases to escape. 
Apply water pressure at a uniform rate of increase of approximately 
1,000 psi per minute until the hose ruptures.
    S8.9 Tensile strength test. Utilize a tension testing machine 
conforming to the requirements of the Methods of Verification of Testing 
Machines (1964 American Society for Testing and Materials, Designation 
E4), and provided with a recording device to register total pull in 
pounds.
    (a) Attach an air brake hose assembly to the testing machine to 
permit straight, even, machine-pull on the hose.
    (b) Apply tension at a rate of 1 inch per minute travel of the 
moving head until separation occurs.
    S8.10 Water Absorption and tensile strength test. Immerse an air 
brake hose assembly in distilled water at room temperature for 70 hours. 
Thirty minutes after removal from the water, conduct the test specified 
in S8.9.
    S8.11 Zinc chloride resistance test. Immerse an air brake hose in a 
50 percent zinc chloride aqueous solution at room temperature for 200 
hours. Remove it from the solution and examine it under 7-power 
magnification for cracks.
    S8.12 End fitting corrosion resistance test. Conduct the test 
specified in S6.9 using an air brake hose assembly.
    S9. Requirements--vacuum brake hose, brake hose assemblies, and 
brake hose end fittings.
    S9.1 Labeling.
    S9.1.1 Hose. Each vacuum brake hose shall be labeled, or cut from 
bulk hose that is labeled, at intervals of not more than 6 inches, 
measured from the end of one legend to the beginning of the next, in 
block capital letters and numerals at least one-eighth of an inch high, 
with the information listed in paragraphs (a) through (e) of this 
section. The information need not be present on hose that is sold as 
part of a brake hose assembly or a motor vehicle. (a) The symbol DOT, 
constituting a certification by the hose manufacturer that the hose 
conforms to all applicable motor vehicle safety standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the hose, 
which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Crash Avoidance 
Standards, Vehicle Dynamics Division, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. The 
designation may consist of block capital letters, numerals or a symbol.
    (c) The month, day, and year, or the month and year, of manufacture, 
expressed in numerals. For example, 10/1/96 means October 1, 1996.
    (d) The nominal inside diameter of the hose expressed in inches or 
fractions of inches or in millimeters, or the nominal outside diameter 
of plastic tubing expressed in inches or fractions of inches or in 
millimeters followed by the letters OD. The abbreviation ``mm'' shall 
follow hose sizes that are expressed in millimeters. (Example of inside 
diameter: \7/32\, \1/4\, 4 mm. Example of outside diameter: \1/4\ OD, 12 
mm OD.)
    (e) The letters ``VL'' or ``VH'' shall indicate that the component 
is a light-duty vacuum brake hose or heavy-duty vacuum brake hose, 
respectively.
    S9.1.2 End fittings. Except for an end fitting that is attached by 
heat striking or by interference fit with plastic vacuum hose or that is 
attached by deformation of the fitting about a hose by crimping or 
swaging, at least one component of each vacuum brake hose fitting shall 
be etched, embossed, or stamped in block capital letters and numerals at 
least one-sixteenth of an inch high with the following information:
    (a) The symbol DOT, constituting a certification by the manufacturer 
of that component that the component

[[Page 236]]

conforms to all applicable motor vehicle safety standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of that component 
of the fitting, which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Crash 
Avoidance Standards, Vehicle Dynamics Division, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. 
The designation may consist of block capital letters, numerals or a 
symbol.
    (c) The letters ``VL'' or ``VH'' shall indicate that the end fitting 
is intended for use in a light-duty or heavy-duty vacuum brake system, 
respectively.
    (d) The nominal inside diameter of the hose to which the fitting is 
properly attached expressed in inches or fractions of inches or in 
millimeters, or the outside diameter of the plastic tubing to which the 
fitting is properly attached expressed in inches or fraction of inches 
or in millimeters followed by the letter OD (See examples in S9.1.1(d)). 
The abbreviation ``mm'' shall follow hose sizes that are expressed in 
millimeters.
    S9.1.3 Assemblies. Each vacuum brake hose assembly made with end 
fittings that are attached by crimping or swaging and each plastic tube 
assembly made with end fittings that are attached by heat shrinking or 
dimensional interference fit, except those sold as part of a motor 
vehicle, shall be labeled by means of a band around the brake hose 
assembly as specified in this paragraph or, at the option of the 
manufacturer, by means of labeling as specified in S9.1.3.1. The band 
may at the manufacturer's option be attached so as to move freely along 
the length of the assembly, as long as it is retained by the end 
fittings. The band shall be etched, embossed, or stamped in block 
capital letters, numerals or symbols at least one-eighth of an inch 
high, with the following information:
    (a) The symbol DOT, constituting certification by the hose assembler 
that the hose assembly conforms to all applicable motor vehicle safety 
standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the hose 
assembly, which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Crash 
Avoidance Standards, Vehicle Dynamics Division, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20590. The 
designation may consist of block capital letters, numerals or a symbol.
    S9.1.3.1 At least one end fitting of a vacuum brake hose assembly 
made with end fittings that are attached by crimping or swaging, or of a 
plastic tubing assembly made with end fittings that are attached by heat 
shrinking or dimensional interference fit shall be etched, stamped or 
embossed with a designation at least one-sixteenth of an inch high that 
identifies the manufacturer of the hose assembly and is filed in 
accordance with S9.1.3(b).
    S9.2 Test requirements. Each vacuum brake hose assembly or 
appropriate part thereof shall be capable of meeting any of the 
requirements set forth under this heading, when tested under the 
conditions of S11. and the applicable procedures of S10. However, a 
particular hose assembly or appropriate part thereof need not meet 
further requirements after having met the construction requirement 
(S9.2.1) and then having been subjected to any one of the requirements 
specified in S9.2.2 through S9.2.11.
    S9.2.1 Constriction. Except for that part of an end fitting which 
does not contain hose, every inside diameter of any section of a vacuum 
brake hose assembly shall be not less than 75 percent of the nominal 
inside diameter of the hose if for heavy duty, or 70 percent of the 
nominal inside diameter of the hose if for light duty.
    S9.2.2 High temperature resistance. A vacuum brake hose shall not 
show external or internal cracks, charring, or disintegration visible 
without magnification when straightened after being bent for 70 hours at 
212 [deg]F. over a cylinder having the radius specified in Table V for 
the size of hose tested (S10.1).
    S9.2.3 Low temperature resistance. A vacuum brake hose shall not 
show cracks visible without magnification after conditioning at minus 40 
[deg]F. for 70 hours when bent around a cylinder having the radius 
specified in Table V for the size hose tested (S10.2).

[[Page 237]]

    S9.2.4 Ozone resistance. A vacuum brake hose shall not show cracks 
visible under 7-power magnification after exposure to ozone for 70 hours 
(S10.3).
    S9.2.5 Burst strength. A vacuum brake hose shall not rupture under 
hydrostatic pressure of 350 psi (S10.4).
    S9.2.6 Vacuum. The collapse of the outside diameter of a vacuum 
brake hose under internal vacuum of 26 inches of Hg. for five minutes 
shall not exceed one-sixteenth of an inch (S10.5).
    S9.2.7 Bend. The collapse of the outside diameter of a vacuum brake 
hose at the middle point of the test length when bent until the ends 
touch shall not exceed the values given in Table V for the size of hose 
tested (S10.6).

                                  Table V--Vacuum Brake Hose Test Requirements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hose inside diameter*    High temperature       Low temperature            Bend
----------------------      resistance            resistance      ----------------------
                      --------------------------------------------             Maximum    Deformation--collapsed
                                                                     Hose     collapse       inside diameter
 Inches   Millimeters    Hose     Radius of    Hose     Radius of   length,  of outside   (dimension D), inches
                        length,   cylinder,   length,   cylinder,   inches    diameter,
                        inches     inches     inches     inches                inches
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 \7/32\          5           8     1\1/2\    17\1/2\          3          7    \11/64\             \3/64\
  \1/4\          6           9     1\1/2\    17\1/2\          3          8     \3/32\             \1/16\
 \9/32\  ............        9     1\3/4\         19     3\1/2\          9    \12/64\             \4/64\
\11/32\          8           9     1\3/4\         19     3\1/2\         11    \13/64\             \5/64\
  \3/8\         10          10     1\3/4\         19     3\1/2\         12     \5/32\             \3/32\
 \7/16\  ............       11          2    20\1/2\          4         14    \17/64\             \5/64\
\15/32\  ............       11          2    20\1/2\          4         14    \17/64\             \5/64\
  \1/2\         12          11          2    20\1/2\          4         16     \7/32\              \1/8\
  \5/8\         16          12     2\1/4\         22     4\1/2\         22     \7/32\             \5/32\
  \3/4\  ............       14     2\1/2\         24          5         28     \7/32\             \3/16\
      1  ............       16     3\1/4\    28\1/2\     6\1/2\         36     \9/32\              \1/4\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*These sizes are listed to provide test values for brake hoses manufactured in these sizes. They do not
  represent conversions.

    S9.2.8 Swell. Following exposure to Reference Fuel A, every inside 
diameter of any section of a vacuum brake hose shall not be less than 75 
percent of the nominal inside of the hose if for heavy duty, or 70 
percent of the nominal inside diameter of the hose if for light duty. 
The vacuum brake hose shall show no leakage and there shall be no 
separation of the inner tube from the fabric reinforcement of the hose 
in a vacuum test of 26 inches of Hg for 10 minutes (S10.7).
    S9.2.9 Adhesion. Except for hose reinforced by wire, a vacuum brake 
hose shall withstand a force of 8 pounds per inch of length before 
separation of adjacent layers (S10.8).
    S9.2.10 Deformation. A vacuum brake hose shall return to 90 percent 
of its original outside diameter within 60 seconds after five 
applications of force as specified in S10.9, except that a wire-
reinforced hose need only return to 85 percent of its original outside 
diameter. In the case of heavy-duty hose the first application of force 
shall not exceed a peak value of 70 pounds, and the fifth application of 
force shall reach a peak value of at least 40 pounds. In the case of 
lightduty hose the first application of force shall not exceed a peak 
value of 50 pounds, and the fifth application of force shall reach a 
peak value of at least 20 pounds (S10.9).
    S9.2.11 End fitting corrosion resistance. After 24 hours of exposure 
to salt spray, vacuum brake hose end fittings shall show no base metal 
corrosion of the end fitting surface except where crimping or the 
application of labeling information has caused displacement of the 
protective coating.
    S10. Test procedures--Vacuum brake hose, brake hose assemblies, and 
brake hose end fittings.
    S10.1 High temperature resistance test. Conduct the test specified 
in S8.1 using vacuum brake hose with the cylinder radius specified in 
Table V for the size of hose tested.
    S10.2 Low temperature resistance test. Conduct the test specified in 
S8.2 using vacuum brake hose with the cylinder radius specified in Table 
V for the size of hose tested.
    S10.3 Ozone resistance test. Conduct the test specified in S6.8 
using vacuum brake hose.

[[Page 238]]

    S10.4 Burst strength test. Conduct the test specified in S8.8 using 
vacuum brake hose.
    S10.5 Vacuum test. Utilize a 12-inch vacuum brake hose assembly 
sealed at one end. (a) Measure the hose outside diameter.
    (b) Attach the hose to a source of vacuum and subject it to a vacuum 
of 26 inches of Hg for 5 minutes.
    (c) Measure the hose to determine the minimum outside diameter while 
the hose is still subject to vacuum.
    S10.6 Bend test. (a) Bend a vacuum brake hose, of the length 
prescribed in Table V, in the direction of its normal curvature until 
the ends just touch as shown in Figure 3.
    (b) Measure the outside diameter of the specimen at point A before 
and after bending.
    (c) The difference between the two measurements is the collapse of 
the hose outside diameter on bending.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.008

                 Fig. 3--Bend Test of Vacuum Brake Hose.
    S10.7 Swell test. (a) Fill a specimen of vacuum brake hose 12 inches 
long with Reference Fuel A as described in the Method of Test for Change 
in Properties of Elastomeric Vulcanizers Resulting From Immersion in 
Liquids (1964 American Society for Testing and Materials, designation 
D471).
    (b) Maintain reference fuel in the hose under atmospheric pressure 
at room temperature for 48 hours.
    (c) Remove fuel and determine that every inside diameter of any 
section of the brake hose is not less than 75 percent of the nominal 
inside diameter of the hose for heavy-duty hose and 70 percent of the 
nominal inside diameter of the hose for light-duty hose.
    (d) Subject the hose specimen to a vacuum of 26 inches of Hg for 10 
minutes.
    S10.8 Adhesion test. Conduct the test specified in S8.6 using vacuum 
brake hose.
    S10.9 Deformation test. Table VI specifies the test specimen 
dimensions.
    S10.9.1 Apparatus. Utilize a compression device, equipped to measure 
force of at least 100 pounds, and feeler gages of sufficient length to 
be passed completely through the test specimen.
    S10.9.2 Operation. (a) Position the test specimen longitudinally in 
the compression device with the fabric laps not in the line of the 
applied pressure.

  Table VI--Dimensions of Test Specimen and Feeler Gage for Deformation
                                  Test
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hose inside diameter*    Specimen dimensions     Feeler gage dimensions
----------------------      (see fig. 4)      --------------------------
                      ------------------------
    In.        Mm.        Depth      Length       Width      Thickness
                         (inch)      (inch)      (inch)        (inch)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  \7/32\          5      \3/64\           1       \1/8\       \3/64\
   \1/4\          6      \1/16\           1       \1/8\       \1/16\
  \9/32\    .........    \1/16\           1       \1/8\       \1/16\
 \11/32\          8      \5/64\           1      \3/16\       \5/64\
   \3/8\         10      \3/32\           1      \3/16\       \3/32\
  \7/16\    .........    \5/64\           1       \1/4\       \5/64\
 \15/32\    .........    \5/64\           1       \1/4\       \5/64\
   \1/2\         12       \1/8\           1       \1/4\        \1/8\
   \5/8\         16      \5/32\           1       \1/4\       \5/32\
   \3/4\    .........    \3/16\           1       \1/4\       \3/16\
       1    .........     \1/4\           1       \1/4\        \1/4\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
*These sizes are listed to provide test values for brake hoses
  manufactured in these sizes. They do not represent conversions.

    (b) Apply gradually increasing force to the test specimen to 
compress its inside diameter to that specified in Table VI (dimension D 
of figure 4) for the size of hose tested.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.009

             Fig. 4--Deformed Specimen of Vacuum Brake Hose
    (c) After 5 seconds release the force and record the peak load 
applied.
    (d) Repeat the procedure four times permitting a 10-second recovery 
period between load applications.

[[Page 239]]

    S10.10 End fitting corrosion resistance test. Conduct the test 
specified in S6.9 using a vacuum brake hose assembly.
    S11. Test conditions. Each hose assembly or appropriate part thereof 
shall be able to meet the requirements of S5., S7., and S9. under the 
following conditions.
    S11.1 The temperature of the testing room is 75 [deg]F.
    S11.2 Except for S6.6, S8.2, and S10.2, the test samples are 
stabilized at test room temperature prior to testing.
    S11.3 The brake hoses and brake hose assemblies are at least 24 
hours old, and unused.

[38 FR 31303, Nov. 13, 1973]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.106, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 571.107  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 571.108  Standard No. 108; Lamps, reflective devices, and associated 
equipment.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for original and 
replacement lamps, reflective devices, and associated equipment.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce traffic 
accidents and deaths and injuries resulting from traffic accidents, by 
providing adequate illumination of the roadway, and by enhancing the 
conspicuity of motor vehicles on the public roads so that their presence 
is perceived and their signals understood, both in daylight and in 
darkness or other conditions of reduced visibility.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to:
    (a) Passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, buses, 
trailers (except pole trailers and trailer converter dollies), and 
motorcycles;
    (b) Retroreflective sheeting and reflex reflectors manufactured to 
conform to S5.7 of this standard; and
    (c) Lamps, reflective devices, and associated equipment for 
replacement of like equipment on vehicles to which this standard 
applies.
    S4. Definitions.
    Aiming Reference Plane means a plane which is perpendicular to the 
longitudinal axis of the vehicle and tangent to the forwardmost aiming 
pad on the headlamp.
    Axis of reference means the characteristic axis of the lamp for use 
as the direction of reference (H = 0[deg], V = 0[deg]) for angles of 
field for photometric measurements and for installing the lamp on the 
vehicle.
    Beam contributor means an indivisible optical assembly including a 
lens, reflector, and light source, that is part of an integral beam 
headlighting system and contributes only a portion of a headlamp beam.
    Cargo lamp is a lamp that is mounted on a multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck, or bus for the purpose of providing illumination to load 
or unload cargo.
    Cutoff means a generally horizontal, visual/optical aiming cue in 
the lower beam that marks a separation between areas of higher and lower 
luminance.
    Direct reading indicator means a device that is mounted in its 
entirety on a headlamp or headlamp aiming or headlamp mounting 
equipment, is part of a VHAD, and provides information about headlamp 
aim in an analog or digital format.
    Effective light-emitting surface means that portion of a lamp that 
directs light to the photometric test pattern, and does not include 
transparent lenses, mounting hole bosses, reflex reflector area, beads 
or rims that may glow or produce small areas of increased intensity as a 
result of uncontrolled light from an area of 1/2 degree radius around a 
test point.
    Effective projected luminous lens area means the area of the 
orthogonal projection of the effective light-emitting surface of a lamp 
on a plane perpendicular to a defined direction relative to the axis of 
reference. Unless otherwise specified, the direction is coincident with 
the axis of reference.
    Filament means that part of the light source or light emitting 
element(s), such as a resistive element, the excited portion of a 
specific mixture of gases under pressure, or any part of other energy 
conversion sources, that generates radiant energy which can be seen.
    Flash means a cycle of activation and deactivation of a lamp by 
automatic

[[Page 240]]

means continuing until stopped either automatically or manually.
    Fully opened means the position of the headlamp concealment device 
in which the headlamp is in the design open operating position.
    Headlamp concealment device means a device, with its operating 
system and components, that provides concealment of the headlamp when it 
is not in use, including a movable headlamp cover and a headlamp that 
displaces for concealment purposes.
    Headlamp test fixture means a device designed to support a headlamp 
or headlamp assembly in the test position specified in the laboratory 
tests and whose mounting hardware and components are those necessary to 
operate the headlamp as installed in a motor vehicle.
    Integral beam headlamp means a headlamp (other than a standardized 
sealed beam headlamp designed to conform to paragraph S7.3 or a 
replaceable bulb headlamp designed to conform to paragraph S7.5) 
comprising an integral and indivisible optical assembly including lens, 
reflector, and light source, except that a headlamp conforming to 
paragraph S7.8.5.2 or paragraph S7.8.5.3 may have a lens designed to be 
replaceable.
    Multiple compartment lamp means a device which gives its indication 
by two or more separately lighted areas which are joined by one or more 
common parts, such as a housing or lens.
    Multiple lamp arrangement means an array of two or more separate 
lamps on each side of the vehicle which operate together to give a 
signal.
    Remote reading indicator means a device that is not mounted in its 
entirety on a headlamp or headlamp aiming or headlamp mounting 
equipment, but otherwise meets the definition of a direct reading 
indicator.
    Replaceable bulb headlamp means a headlamp comprising a bonded lens 
and reflector assembly and one or two replaceable headlamp light 
sources, except that a headlamp conforming to paragraph S7.8.5.2 or 
paragraph S7.8.5.3 may have a lens designed to be replaceable.
    Replaceable light source means an assembly of a capsule, base, and 
terminals that is designed to conform to the requirements of Appendix A 
or Appendix B of part 564 Replaceable Light Source Information of this 
Chapter.
    Vehicle headlamp aiming device or VHAD means motor vehicle 
equipment, installed either on a vehicle or headlamp, which is used for 
determining the horizontal or vertical aim, or both the vertical and 
horizontal aim of the headlamp.
    Visually/optically aimable headlamp means a headlamp which is 
designed to be visually/optically aimable in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph S7.8.5.3 of this standard.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 Required motor vehicle lighting equipment.
    S5.1.1 Except as provided in succeeding paragraphs of this S5.1.1, 
each vehicle shall be equipped with at least the number of lamps, 
reflective devices, and associated equipment specified in Tables I and 
III and S7, as applicable. Required equipment shall be designed to 
conform to the SAE Standards or Recommended Practices referenced in 
those tables. Table I applies to multipurpose passenger vehicles, 
trucks, trailers, and buses, 80 or more inches in overall width. Table 
III applies to passenger cars and motorcycles and to multipurpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks, trailers, and buses, less than 80 inches in 
overall width.
    S5.1.1.1 A truck tractor need not be equipped with turn signal lamps 
mounted on the rear if the turn signal lamps at or near the front are so 
constructed (double-faced) and so located that they meet the 
requirements for double-faced turn signals specified in SAE Standard 
J588e, Turn Signal Lamps, September 1970.
    S5.1.1.2 A truck tractor need not be equipped with any rear side 
marker devices, rear clearance lamps, and rear identification lamps.
    S5.1.1.3 Intermediate side marker devices are not required on 
vehicles less than 30 feet in overall length.
    S5.1.1.4 Reflective material conforming to Federal Specification L-
S-300, Sheeting and Tape, Reflective; Non-exposed Lens, Adhesive 
Backing, September 7, 1965, may be used for side reflex reflectors if 
this material as used on the vehicle, meets the performance standards in 
either Table I or Table IA

[[Page 241]]

of SAE Standard J594f, Reflex Reflectors, January 1977.
    S5.1.1.5 The turn signal operating unit on each passenger car, and 
multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and bus less than 80 inches in 
overall width shall be self-canceling by steering wheel rotation and 
capable of cancellation by a manually operated control.
    S5.1.1.6 Instead of the photometric values specified in Table 1 of 
SAE Standards J222 December 1970, or J585e September 1977, a parking 
lamp or tail lamp, respectively, shall meet the minimum percentage 
specified in Figure 1a of the corresponding minimum allowable value 
specified in Figure 1b. The maximum candlepower output of a parking lamp 
shall not exceed that prescribed in Figure 1b, or of a taillamp, that 
prescribed in Figure 1b at H or above. If the sum of the percentages of 
the minimum candlepower measured at the test points is not less than 
that specified for each group listed in Figure 1c, a parking lamp or 
taillamp is not required to meet the minimum photometric value at each 
test point specified in SAE Standards J222 or J585e respectively.
    S5.1.1.7 A motorcycle turn signal lamp need meet only one-half of 
the minimum photometric values specified in Table 1 and Table 3 of SAE 
J588 NOV84 Turn Signal Lamps.
    S5.1.1.8 For each motor vehicle less than 30 feet in overall length, 
the photometric minimum candlepower requirements for side marker lamps 
specified in SAE Standard J592e Clearance, Side Marker, and 
Identification Lamps, July 1972, may be met for all inboard test points 
at a distance of 15 feet from the vehicle and on a vertical plane that 
is perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the vehicle and located 
midway between the front and rear side marker lamps.
    S5.1.1.9 A boat trailer whose overall width is 80 inches or more 
need not be equipped with both front and rear clearance lamps provided 
an amber (to front) and red (to rear) clearance lamp is located at or 
near the midpoint on each side so as to indicate its extreme width.
    S5.1.1.10 Multiple license plate lamps and backup lamps may be used 
to fufill the requirements of the SAE Standards applicable to such lamps 
referenced in Tables I and III.
    S5.1.1.11 A stop lamp that is not optically combined, as defined by 
SAE Information Report J387 Terminology--Motor Vehicle Lighting NOV87, 
with a turn signal lamp, shall remain activated when the turn signal 
lamp is flashing.
    S5.1.1.12 On a motor vehicle, except a passenger car, whose overall 
width is 2032 mm. (80 inches) or more, measurements of the effective 
projected luminous lens area, and of the photometrics of a multiple 
compartment stop lamp and a multiple compartment turn signal lamp, shall 
be made for the entire lamp and not for the individual compartments.
    S5.1.1.13 Each passenger car, and each multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck, and bus of less than 80 inches overall width, shall be 
equipped with a turn signal operating unit designed to complete a 
durability test of 100,000 cycles.
    S5.1.1.14 A trailer that is less than 30 inches in overall width may 
be equipped with only one taillamp, stop lamp, and rear reflex 
reflector, which shall be located at or near its vertical centerline.
    S5.1.1.15 A trailer that is less than 6 feet in overall length, 
including the trailer tongue, need not be equipped with front side 
marker lamps and front side reflex reflectors.
    S5.1.1.16 A lamp designed to use a type of bulb that has not been 
assigned a mean spherical candlepower rating by its manufacturer and is 
not listed in SAE Standard J573d, Lamp Bulbs and Sealed Units, December 
1968, shall meet the applicable requirements of this standard when used 
with any bulb of the type specified by the lamp manufacturer, operated 
at the bulb's design voltage. A lamp that contains a sealed-in bulb 
shall meet these requirements with the bulb operated at the bulb's 
design voltage.
    S5.1.1.17 Except for a lamp having a sealed-in bulb, a lamp shall 
meet the applicable requirements of this standard when tested with a 
bulb whose filament is positioned within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>.010 inch 
of the nominal design position specified in SAE Standard J573d, Lamp 
Bulbs and

[[Page 242]]

Sealed Units, December 1968, or specified by the bulb manufacturer.
    S5.1.1.18 A backup lamp is not required to meet the minimum 
photometric values at each test point specified in Table I of SAE 
Standard J593c, Backup Lamps, February 1968, if the sum of the 
candlepower measured at the test points within each group listed in 
Figure 2 is not less than the group totals specified in that figure.
    S5.1.1.19 Each variable load turn signal flasher shall comply with 
voltage drop and durability requirements of SAE Standard J590b, Turn 
Signal Flashers, October 1965 with the maximum design load connected, 
and shall comply with starting time, flash rate, and percent current 
``on'' time requirements of J590b both with the minimum and with the 
maximum design load connected.
    S5.1.1.20 The lowest voltage drop for turn signal flashers and 
hazard warning signal flashers measured between the input and load 
terminals shall not exceed 0.8 volt.
    S5.1.1.21 A motor-driven cycle whose speed attainable in 1 mile is 
30 mph or less need not be equipped with turn signal lamps.
    S5.1.1.22 A motor-driven cycle whose speed attainable in 1 mile is 
30 mph or less may be equipped with a stop lamp whose effective 
projected luminous lens area is not less than 3\1/2\ square inches and 
whose photometric output for the groups of test points specified in 
Figure 1 is at least one-half of the minimum values set forth in that 
figure.
    S5.1.1.23-24 [Reserved]
    S5.1.1.25 Each turn signal lamp on a motorcycle shall have an 
effective projected luminous lens area of not less than 2258 square mm. 
(3\1/2\ square inches).
    S5.1.1.26 On a motor vehicle whose overall width is less than 80 
inches:
    (a) The effective projected luminous lens area of a single 
compartment stop lamp, and a single compartment rear turn signal lamp, 
shall be not less than 50 square centimeters (7\3/4\ square inches).
    (b) If a multiple compartment lamp or multiple lamps are used to 
meet the photometric requirements for stop lamps and rear turn signal 
lamps, the effective projected luminous lens area of each compartment or 
lamp shall be at least 22 square centimeters, provided the combined area 
is at least 50 square centimeters (7\3/4\ square inches).
    S5.1.1.27 (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, 
each passenger car manufactured on or after September 1, 1985, and each 
multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and bus, whose overall width is 
less than 80 inches, whose GVWR is 10,000 pounds or less, manufactured 
on or after September 1, 1993, shall be equipped with a high-mounted 
stop lamp which:
    (1) Shall have an effective projected luminous lens area not less 
than 2903 square mm. (4\1/2\ square inches).
    (2) Shall meet the visibility requirements specified in S5.3.2(c).
    (3) Shall have the minimum photometric values in the amount and 
location listed in Figure 10.
    (4) Need not meet the requirements of paragraphs 3.1.6 Moisture 
Test, 3.1.7 Dust Test, and 3.1.8 Corrosion Test of SAE Recommended 
Practice J186a, Supplemental High-Mounted Stop and Rear Turn Signal 
Lamps, September 1977, if it is mounted inside the vehicle.
    (5) Shall provide access for convenient replacement of the bulb 
without the use of special tools.
    (b) Each multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck and bus whose overall 
width is less than 80 inches, whose GVWR is 10,000 pounds or less, whose 
vertical centerline, when the vehicle is viewed from the rear, is not 
located on a fixed body panel but separates one or two movable body 
sections, such as doors, which lacks sufficient space to install a 
single high-mounted stop lamp on the centerline above such body 
sections, and which is manufactured on or after September 1, 1993, shall 
have two high-mounted stop lamps which:
    (1) Are identical in size and shape and have an effective projected 
luminous lens area not less than 1452 square mm. (2\1/4\ square inches) 
each.
    (2) Shall meet the visibility requirements specified in S5.3.2(d).
    (3) Together have the minimum photometric values specified in 
paragraph (a)(3) of this S5.1.1.27.
    (4) Shall provide access for convenient replacement of the bulbs 
without special tools.
    S5.1.1.28 [Reserved]

[[Page 243]]

    S5.1.1.29 A trailer equipped with a conspicuity treatment in 
conformance with paragraph S5.7 of this standard need not be equipped 
with the reflex reflectors required by Table I of this standard if the 
conspicuity material is placed at the locations of the reflex reflectors 
required by Table I.
    S5.1.2 Plastic materials used for optical parts such as lenses and 
reflectors shall conform to SAE Recommended Practice J576 JUL91, except 
that:
    (a) Plastic lenses (other than those incorporating reflex 
reflectors) used for inner lenses or those covered by another material 
and not exposed directly to sunlight shall meet the requirements of 
paragraphs 3.3 and 4.2 of SAE J576 JUL91 when covered by the outer lens 
or other material;
    (b) After the outdoor exposure test, the haze and loss of surface 
luster of plastic materials (other than those incorporating reflex 
reflectors) used for outer lenses shall not be greater than 30 percent 
haze as measured by ASTM D 1003-92, Haze and Luminous Transmittance of 
Transparent Plastic;
    (c) After the outdoor exposure test, plastic materials used for 
reflex reflectors and for lenses used in front of reflex reflectors 
shall not show surface deterioration, crazing, dimensional changes, 
color bleeding, delamination, loss of surface luster, or haze that 
exceeds 7 percent as measured under ASTM D 1003-92.
    (d) The thickness of the test specimens specified in paragraph 3.2.2 
of SAE J576 JUL91 may vary by as much as <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.25 mm.
    (e) After exposure to the heat test as specified in subparagraph (f) 
of this paragraph, and after cooling to room ambient temperature, a test 
specimen shall show no change in shape and general appearance 
discernable to the naked eye when compared with an unexposed specimen. 
The trichromatic coefficients of the samples shall conform to the 
requirements of SAE J578c, Color Specification for Electric Signal 
Lighting Devices, February 1977.
    (f) Two samples of each thickness of each plastic material are used 
in the heat test. Each sample is supported at the bottom, with at least 
51 mm. of the sample above the support, in the vertical position in such 
a manner that, on each side, the minimum uninterrupted area of exposed 
surface is not less than 3225 sq. mm. The samples are placed for two 
hours in a circulating air oven at 79 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 degrees C.
    (g) All outdoor exposure tests shall be 3 years in duration, whether 
the material is exposed or protected. Accelerated weathering procedures 
are not permitted.
    S5.1.3 No additional lamp, reflective device or other motor vehicle 
equipment shall be installed that impairs the effectiveness of lighting 
equipment required by this standard.
    5.1.4 Except for multifunction school activity buses, each school 
bus shall be equipped with a system of either:
    (a) Four red signal lamps designed to conform to SAE Standard J887, 
School Bus Red Signal Lamps, July 1964, and installed in accordance with 
that standard; or
    (b) Four red signal lamps designed to conform to SAE Standard J887, 
School Bus Red Signal Lamps, July 1964, and four amber signal lamps 
designed to conform to that standard, except for their color, and except 
that their candlepower shall be at least 2\1/2\ times that specified for 
red signal lamps. Both red and amber lamps shall be installed in 
accordance with SAE Standard J887, except that:
    (i) Each amber signal lamp shall be located near each red signal 
lamp, at the same level, but closer to the vertical centerline of the 
bus; and
    (ii) The system shall be wired so that the amber signal lamps are 
activated only by manual or foot operation, and if activated, are 
automatically deactivated and the red signal lamps automatically 
activated when the bus entrance door is opened.
    S5.1.5 The color in all lamps, reflective devices, and associated 
equipment to which this standard applies shall comply with SAE Standard 
J578c, Color Specification for Electric Signal Lighting Devices, 
February 1977.
    S5.2 Other requirements.
    S5.2.1 The words ``it is recommended that,'' ``recommendations,'' or 
``should be'' appearing in any SAE Standard or Recommended Practice 
referenced or subreferenced in this standard shall be

[[Page 244]]

read as setting forth mandatory requirements, except that the aiming 
pads on the lens face and the black area surrounding the signal lamp 
recommended in SAE Standard J887, School Bus Red Signal Lamps, July 
1964, are not required.
    S5.2.2 The words ``Type 1 (5\3/4\<gr-thn-eq>),'' ``Type 2 (5\3/
4\<gr-thn-eq>),'' ``Type 2 (7<gr-thn-eq>),'' ``Type 1A,'' ``Type 2A,'' 
and ``Type 2B'' appearing in any SAE Standard or Recommended Practice 
referenced or subreferenced in this standard shall also be read as 
setting forth requirements respectively for the following types of 
headlamps: 1C1, 2C1, 2D1, 1A1, 2A1, and 2B1.
    S5.3 Location of required equipment. Except as provided in 
paragraphs S5.3.2, S5.7, and S7, each lamp, reflective device, and item 
of associated equipment shall be securely mounted on a rigid part of the 
vehicle other than glazing that is not designed to be removed except for 
repair, in accordance with the requirements of Table I and Table III, as 
applicable, and in the location specified in Table II (multipurpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks, trailers, and buses 80 or more inches in 
overall width) or Table IV (all passenger cars, and motorcycles, and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, truck, trailers and buses less than 80 
inches in overall width), as applicable.
    S5.3.1 [Reserved]
    S5.3.1.1 [Reserved]
    S5.3.1.1.1 [Reserved]
    S5.3.1.2 On a truck tractor, the red rear reflex reflectors may be 
mounted on the back of the cab, at a minimum height not less than 4 
inches above the height of the rear tires.
    S5.3.1.3 On a trailer, the amber front side reflex reflectors and 
amber front side marker lamps may be located as far forward as 
practicable exclusive of the trailer tongue.
    S5.3.1.4 When the rear identification lamps are mounted at the 
extreme height of a vehicle, rear clearance lamps need not meet the 
requirement of Table II that they be located as close as practicable to 
the top of the vehicle.
    S5.3.1.5 [Reserved]
    S5.3.1.6 On a truck tractor, clearance lamps mounted on the cab may 
be located to indicate the width of the cab, rather than the overall 
width of the vehicle.
    S5.3.1.7 On a motor vehicle on which the front turn signal lamp is 
less than 100 mm from the lighted edge of a lower beam headlamp, as 
measured from the optical center of the turn signal lamp, the multiplier 
applied to obtain the required minimum luminous intensities shall be 
2.5.
    S5.3.1.8 (a) Each high-mounted stop lamp installed in or on a 
vehicle subject to S5.1.1.27(a) shall be located as follows:
    (1) With its center at any place on the vertical centerline of the 
vehicle, including the glazing, as the vehicle is viewed from the rear.
    (2) If the lamp is mounted below the rear window, no portion of the 
lens shall be lower than 6 inches below the rear window on convertibles, 
or 3 inches on other passenger cars.
    (3) If the lamp is mounted inside the vehicle, means shall be 
provided to minimize reflections from the light of the lamp upon the 
rear window glazing that might be visible to the driver when viewed 
directly, or indirectly in the rearview mirror.
    (b) The high-mounted stop lamps installed in or on a vehicle subject 
to S5.1.1.27(b) shall be located at the same height, with one vertical 
edge of each lamp on the vertical edge of the body section nearest the 
vertical centerline.
    S5.3.2 Except as provided in S5.3.2.1 through S5.3.2.4 and in 
paragraphs S5.7 and S7, each vehicle must conform to the following 
requirements:
    (a) Each lamp and reflective device must be installed in a location 
where it complies with all applicable photometric requirements and 
visibility requirements, with all obstructions (e.g., mirrors, snow 
plows, wrecker booms, backhoes, and winches) installed on the vehicle.
    (b) A manufacturer must certify compliance of each lamp to one of 
the following visibility requirement options, and it may not thereafter 
choose a different option for that vehicle:
    (1) When a vehicle is equipped with any lamp listed in Figure 19 of 
this standard, each such lamp must provide not less than 12.5 square 
centimeters of unobstructed effective projected luminous lens area in 
any direction throughout the pattern defined by the

[[Page 245]]

corner points specified in Figure 19 for each such lamp; or
    (2) When a vehicle is equipped with any lamp listed in Figure 20 of 
this standard, each such lamp must provide a luminous intensity not less 
than that specified in Figure 20 in any direction throughout the pattern 
defined by the corner points specified in Figure 20 for each such lamp. 
The luminous intensity must be measured in accordance with the 
photometry test requirements of the applicable SAE Standards and 
Recommended Practices incorporated by reference or subreference in this 
standard.
    (c) A high mounted stop lamp must have a signal visible to the rear 
through a horizontal angle from 45 degrees to the left to 45 degrees to 
the right of the longitudinal axis of the vehicle.
    (d) High mounted stop lamps required to comply with S5.1.1.27(b) 
must together have a signal to the rear as specified in S5.3.2(c).
    (e) Backup lamps must be mounted on the rear so that the optical 
center of at least one lamp is visible from any eye point elevation from 
at least 1828 mm (6 ft) to 610 mm (2 ft) above the horizontal plane on 
which the vehicle is standing; and from any position in the area, 
rearward of a vertical plane perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of 
the vehicle, 914 mm (3 ft) to the rear of the vehicle and extending 914 
mm (3 ft) beyond each side of the vehicle.
    S5.3.2.1 Clearance lamps may be located at a location other than on 
the front and rear if necessary to indicate the overall width of a 
vehicle, or for protection from damage during normal operation of the 
vehicle, and at such a location they need not meet the photometric 
output at any test point that is 45 degrees inboard.
    S5.3.2.2 If any required lamp or reflective device is obstructed by 
motor vehicle equipment (e.g., mirrors, snow plows, wrecker booms, 
backhoes, winches, etc.), and cannot meet requirements of S5.3.2, the 
vehicle must be equipped with an additional lamp or device of the same 
type which meet all applicable requirements of this standard, including 
S5.3.2.
    S5.3.2.3 For signal lamps and reflective devices mounted less than 
750 mm above the road surface as measured to the lamp axis of reference, 
the vertical test point angles located below the horizontal plane 
subject to photometric and visibility requirements of this standard may 
be reduced to 5 degrees.
    S5.3.2.4 As an alternative to S5.3.2(b), each passenger car and 
motorcycle, and each multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, trailer and 
bus that is of less than 2032 mm overall width, that are manufactured on 
or before September 1, 2011, and each multipurpose passenger vehicle, 
truck, trailer and bus of 2032 mm or more overall width that is 
manufactured on or before September 1, 2014, must have each lamp located 
so that it meets the visibility requirements specified in any applicable 
SAE Standard or Recommended Practice.
    S5.4 Equipment combinations. Two or more lamps, reflective devices, 
or items of associated equipment may be combined if the requirements for 
each lamp, reflective device, and item of associated equipment are met, 
with the following exceptions:
    (a) No high-mounted stop lamp shall be combined with any other lamp 
or reflective device, other than with a cargo lamp.
    (b) No high-mounted stop lamp shall be combined optically, as 
defined by SAE Information Report J387 Terminology--Motor Vehicle 
Lighting NOV87, with any cargo lamp.
    (c) No clearance lamp shall be combined optically, as defined by SAE 
Information Report J387 Terminology--Motor Vehicle Lighting NOV87, with 
any taillamp.
    S5.5 Special wiring requirements.
    S.5.5.1 Each vehicle shall have a means of switching between lower 
and upper beams that conforms to SAE Recommended Practice J564a Headlamp 
Beam Switching, April 1964 or to SAE Recommended Practice J565b, Semi-
Automatic Headlamp Beam Switching Devices, February 1969. Except as 
provided in S5.5.8, the lower and upper beams shall not be energized 
simultaneously except momentarily for temporary signalling purposes or 
during switching between beams.
    S5.5.2 Each vehicle shall have a means for indicating to the driver 
when the upper beams of the

[[Page 246]]

headlamps are on that conforms to SAE Recommended Practice J564a, April 
1964, except that the signal color need not be red.
    S5.5.3 The taillamps on each vehicle shall be activated when the 
headlamps are activated in a steady-burning state, but need not be 
activated if the headlamps are activated at less than full intensity as 
permitted by paragraph S5.5.11(a).
    S5.5.4 The stop lamps on each vehicle shall be activated upon 
application of the service brakes. The high-mounted stop lamp on each 
vehicle shall be activated only upon application of the service brakes.
    S5.5.5 The vehicular hazard warning signal operating unit on each 
vehicle shall operate independently of the ignition or equivalent 
switch, and when activated, shall cause to flash simultaneously 
sufficient turn signal lamps to meet, as a minimum, the turn signal lamp 
photometric requirements of this standard.
    S5.5.6 Each vehicle equipped with a turn signal operating unit shall 
also have an illuminated pilot indicator. Failure of one or more turn 
signal lamps to operate shall be indicated in accordance with SAE 
Standard J588e, Turn Signal Lamps, September 1970, except when a 
variable-load turn signal flasher is used on a truck, bus, or 
multipurpose passenger vehicle 80 or more inches in overall width, on a 
truck that is capable of accommodating a slide-in camper, or on any 
vehicle equipped to tow trailers.
    S5.5.7 On each passenger car and motorcycle, and on each 
multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and bus of less than 80 inches 
overall width:
    (a) When the parking lamps are activated, the taillamps, license 
plate lamps, and side marker lamps shall also be activated; and
    (b) When the headlamps are activated in a steady-burning state, the 
tail lamps, parking lamps, license plate lamps and side marker lamps 
shall also be activated.
    S5.5.8 On a motor vehicle equipped with a headlighting system 
designed to conform to the photometric requirements of Figure 15-1 or 
Figure 15-2, the lamps marked ``L'' or ``LF'' may be wired to remain 
permanently activated when the lamps marked ``U'' or ``UF'' are 
activated. On a motor vehicle equipped with an Integral Beam 
headlighting system meeting the photometric requirements of paragraph 
S7.4(a)(1)(ii), the lower beam headlamps shall be wired to remain 
permanently activated when the upper beam headlamps are activated. On a 
motor vehicle equipped with a headlighting system designed to conform to 
the requirements of Figure 17-1 or Figure 17-2, a lower beam light 
source may be wired to remain activated when an upper beam light source 
is activated if the lower beam light source contributes to compliance of 
the headlighting system with the upper beam requirements of Figure 17-1 
or Figure 17-2.
    S5.5.9 Except as provided in section S5.5.8, the wiring harness or 
connector assembly of each headlamp system shall be designed so that 
only those light sources intended for meeting lower beam photometrics 
are energized when the beam selector switch is in the lower beam 
position, and that only those light sources intended for meeting upper 
beam photometrics are energized when the beam selector switch is in the 
upper beam position.
    S5.5.10 The wiring requirements for lighting equipment in use are:
    (a) Turn signal lamps, hazard warning signal lamps, and school bus 
warning lamps shall be wired to flash;
    (b) Headlamps and side marker lamps may be wired to flash for 
signaling purposes;
    (c) A motorcycle headlamp may be wired to allow either its upper 
beam or its lower beam, but not both, to modulate from a higher 
intensity to a lower intensity in accordance with section S5.6;
    (d) All other lamps shall be wired to be steady-burning.
    S5.5.11(a) Any pair of lamps on the front of a passenger car, 
multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, or bus, whether or not required 
by this standard, other than parking lamps or fog lamps, may be wired to 
be automatically activated, as determined by the manufacturer of the 
vehicle, in a steady burning state as daytime running lamps (DRLs) and 
to be automatically deactivated when the headlamp control is in any 
``on'' position, and as

[[Page 247]]

otherwise determined by the manufacturer of the vehicle, provided that 
each such lamp:
    (1) Has a luminous intensity not less than 500 candela at test point 
H-V, nor more than 3,000 candela at any location in the beam, when 
tested in accordance with Section S11 of this standard, unless it is:
    (i) A lower beam headlamp intended to operate as a DRL at full 
voltage, or at a voltage lower than used to operate it as a lower beam 
headlamp; or
    (ii) An upper beam headlamp intended to operate as a DRL, whose 
luminous intensity at test point H-V is not more than 7,000 candela, and 
which is mounted not higher than 864 mm above the road surface as 
measured from the center of the lamp with the vehicle at curb weight;
    (2) Is permanently marked ``DRL'' on its lens in letters not less 
than 3 mm high, unless it is optically combined with a headlamp;
    (3) Is designed to provide the same color as the other lamp in the 
pair, and that is one of the following colors as defined in SAE Standard 
J578 MAY88: White, white to yellow, white to selective yellow, selective 
yellow, or yellow;
    (4) If not optically combined with a turn signal lamp, is located so 
that the distance from its lighted edge to the optical center of the 
nearest turn signal lamp is not less than 100 mm, unless:
    (i) The luminous intensity of the DRL is not more than 2,600 candela 
at any location in the beam and the turn signal meets the requirements 
of S5.3.1.7; or
    (ii) (For a passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, or 
bus that is manufactured before October 1, 1995, and which uses an upper 
beam headlamp as a DRL as specified in paragraph S5.5.11(a)(1)(ii)) the 
luminous intensity of the DRL is greater than 2,600 candela at any 
location in the beam and the turn signal lamp meets the requirements of 
S5.3.1.7; or
    (iii) The DRL is optically combined with a lower beam headlamp and 
the turn signal lamp meets the requirements of S5.3.1.7; or
    (iv) The DRL is deactivated when the turn signal or hazard warning 
signal lamp is activated.
    (5) If optically combined with a turn signal lamp, is automatically 
deactivated as a DRL when the turn signal lamp or hazard warning lamp is 
activated, and automatically reactivated as a DRL when the turn signal 
lamp or hazard warning lamp is deactivated.
    (b) Any pair of lamps that are not required by this standard and are 
not optically combined with any lamps that are required by this 
standard, and which are used as DRLs to fulfill the specifications of 
S5.5.11(a), shall be mounted at the same height, which shall be not more 
than 1.067 m above the road surface measured from the center of the lamp 
on the vehicle at curb weight, and shall be symmetrically disposed about 
the vertical centerline of the vehicle.
    S5.6 [Reserved]
    S5.7 Conspicuity Systems. Each trailer of 80 or more inches overall 
width, and with a GVWR over 10,000 lbs., manufactured on or after 
December 1, 1993, except a trailer designed exclusively for living or 
office use, and each truck tractor manufactured on or after July 1, 
1997, shall be equipped with either retroreflective sheeting that meets 
the requirements of S5.7.1, reflex reflectors that meet the requirements 
of S5.7.2, or a combination of retroreflective sheeting and reflex 
reflectors that meet the requirement of S5.7.3.
    S5.7.1 Retroreflective sheeting. Each trailer or truck tractor to 
which S5.7 applies that does not conform to S5.7.2 or S5.7.3 shall be 
equipped with retroreflective sheeting that conforms to the requirements 
specified in S5.7.1.1 through S5.7.1.5.
    S5.7.1.1 Construction. Retroreflective sheeting shall consist of a 
smooth, flat, transparent exterior film with retroreflective elements 
embedded or suspended beneath the film so as to form a non-exposed 
retroreflective optical system.
    S5.7.1.2 Performance requirements. Retroreflective sheeting shall 
meet the requirements of ASTM D 4956-90, Standard Specification for 
Retroreflective Sheeting for Traffic Control, for Type V Sheeting, 
except for the photometric requirements, and shall meet the minimum 
photometric performance requirements specified in Figure 29.

[[Page 248]]

    S5.7.1.3 Sheeting pattern, dimensions, and relative coefficients of 
retroreflection.
    (a) Retroreflective sheeting shall be applied in a pattern of 
alternating white and red color segments to the sides and rear of each 
trailer, and to the rear of each truck tractor, and in white to the 
upper rear corners of each trailer and truck tractor, in the locations 
specified in S5.7.1.4, and Figures 30-1 through 30-4, or Figure 31, as 
appropriate.
    (b) Except for a segment that is trimmed to clear obstructions, or 
lengthened to provide red sheeting near red lamps, each white or red 
segment shall have a length of 300 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>150 mm.
    (c) Neither white nor red sheeting shall represent more than two 
thirds of the aggregate of any continuous strip marking the width of a 
trailer, or any continuous or broken strip marking its length.
    (d) Retroreflective sheeting shall have a width of not less than 50 
mm (Grade DOT-C2), 75 mm (Grade DOT-C3), or 100 mm (Grade DOT-C4).
    (e) The coefficients for retroreflection of each segment of red or 
white sheeting shall be not less than the minimum values specified in 
Figure 29 of this standard for grades DOT-C2, DOT-C3, and DOT-C4.
    S5.7.1.4 Location. (a) Retroreflective sheeting shall be applied to 
each trailer and truck tractor as specified below, but need not be 
applied to discontinuous surfaces such as outside ribs, stake post 
pickets on platform trailers, and external protruding beams, or to items 
of equipment such as door hinges and lamp bodies on trailers and body 
joints, stiffening beads, drip rails and rolled surfaces on truck 
tractors.
    (b) The edge of white sheeting shall not be located closer than 75 
mm to the edge of the luminous lens area of any red or amber lamp that 
is required by this standard.
    (c) The edge of red sheeting shall not be located closer than 75 mm 
to the edge of the luminous lens area of any amber lamp that is required 
by this standard.
    S5.7.1.4.1 Rear of trailers. Retroreflective sheeting shall be 
applied to the rear of each trailer as follows, except that Element 2 is 
not required for container chassis or for platform trailers without 
bulkheads, and Element 3 is not required for trailers without underride 
protection devices:
    (a) Element 1: A strip of sheeting, as horizontal as practicable, in 
alternating colors across the full width of the trailer, as close to the 
extreme edges as practicable, and as close as practicable to not less 
than 375 mm and not more than 1525 mm above the road surface at the 
stripe centerline with the trailer at curb weight.
    (b) Element 2: Two pairs of white strips of sheeting, each pair 
consisting of strips 300 mm long of grade DOT-C2, DOT-C3, or DOT-C4, 
applied horizontally and vertically to the right and left upper contours 
of the body, as viewed from the rear, as close to the top of the trailer 
and as far apart as practicable. If the perimeter of the body, as viewed 
from the rear, is other than rectangular, the strips may be applied 
along the perimeter, as close as practicable to the uppermost and 
outermost areas of the rear of the body on the left and right sides.
    (c) Element 3: A strip of sheeting in alternating colors across the 
full width of the horizontal member of the rear underride protection 
device. Grade DOT-C2 material not less than 38 mm wide may be used.
    S5.7.1.4.2 Side of trailers. Retroreflective sheeting shall be 
applied to each side of a trailer as follows:
    (a) A strip of sheeting, as horizontal as practicable, in 
alternating colors, originating and terminating as close to the front 
and rear as practicable, as close as practicable to not less than 375 mm 
and not more than 1525 mm above the road surface at the stripe 
centerline with the trailer at curb weight, except that at the location 
chosen the strip shall not be obscured in whole or in part by other 
motor vehicle equipment or trailer cargo. The strip need not be 
continuous as long as not less than half of the length of the trailer is 
covered and the spaces are distributed as evenly as practicable.
    (b) If necessary to clear rivet heads or other similar obstructions, 
grade DOT-C2 retroreflective sheeting may be separated into two 25 mm 
wide strips of the same length and color, separated by a space of not 
more than

[[Page 249]]

25 mm, and used in place of the retroreflective sheeting that would 
otherwise be applied.
    S5.7.1.4.3 Rear of truck tractors. Retroreflective sheeting shall be 
applied to the rear of each truck tractor as follows:
    (a) Element 1: Two strips of sheeting in alternating colors, each 
not less than 600 mm long, located as close as practicable to the edges 
of the rear fenders, mudflaps, or the mudflap support brackets, to mark 
the width of the truck tractor. The strips shall be mounted as 
horizontal as practicable, in a vertical plane facing the rear, on the 
rear fenders, on the mudflap support brackets, on plates attached to the 
mudflap support brackets, or on the mudflaps. Strips on mudflaps shall 
be mounted not lower than 300 mm below the upper horizontal edge of the 
mudflap. If the vehicle is certified with temporary mudflap support 
brackets, the strips shall be mounted on the mudflaps or on plates 
transferable to permanent mudflap support brackets. For a truck tractor 
without mudflaps, the strips may be mounted outboard of the frame on 
brackets behind the rear axle or on brackets ahead of the rear axle and 
above the top of the tires at unladen vehicle height, or they may be 
mounted directly or indirectly to the back of the cab as close to the 
outer edges as practicable, above the top of the tires, and not more 
than 1525 mm above the road surface at unladen vehicle height. If the 
strips are mounted on the back of the cab, no more than 25 percent of 
their cumulative area may be obscured by vehicle equipment as determined 
in a rear orthogonal view.
    (b) Element 2: Two pairs of white strips of sheeting, each pair 
consisting of strips 300 mm long, applied as horizontally and vertically 
as practicable, to the right and left upper contours of the cab, as 
close to the top of the cab and as far apart as practicable. No more 
than 25 percent of their cumulative area may be obscured by vehicle 
equipment as determined in a rear orthogonal view. If one pair must be 
relocated to avoid obscuration by vehicle equipment, the other pair may 
be relocated in order to be mounted symmetrically. If the rear window is 
so large as to occupy all the practicable space, the material may be 
attached to the edge of the window itself.
    S5.7.1.5 Certification. The letters DOT-C2, DOT-C3, or DOT-C4, as 
appropriate, constituting a certification that the retroreflective 
sheeting conforms to the requirements of S5.7.1.2, shall appear at least 
once on the exposed surface of each white or red segment of 
retroreflective sheeting, and at least once every 300 mm on 
retroreflective sheeting that is white only. The characters shall be not 
less than 3 mm high, and shall be permanently stamped, etched, molded, 
or printed in indelible ink.
    S5.7.2 Reflex Reflectors. Each trailer or truck tractor to which 
S5.7 applies that does not conform to S5.7.1 or S5.7.3 shall be equipped 
with reflex reflectors in accordance with this section.
    S5.7.2.1 (a) Each reflex reflector shall conform to SAE Standard 
J594f, Reflex Reflectors, January 1977.
    (b) Each red reflex reflector shall also provide, at an observation 
angle of 0.2 degree, not less than 300 millicandelas/lux at any light 
entrance angle between 30 degrees left and 30 degrees right, including 
an entrance angle of 0 degree, and not less than 75 millicandelas/lux at 
any light entrance angle between 45 degrees left and 45 degrees right.
    (c) Each white reflex reflector shall also provide at an observation 
angle of 0.2 degree, not less than 1250 millicandelas/lux at any light 
entrance angle between 30 degrees left and 30 degrees right, including 
an entrance angle of 0 degree, and not less than 300 millicandelas/lux 
at any light entrance angle between 45 degrees left and 45 degrees 
right.
    (d) A white reflex reflector complying with S5.7.2.1(a) and (c) when 
tested in a horizontal orientation may be installed in all orientations 
specified for rear upper locations in S5.7.1.4.1(b) or S5.7.1.4.3(b) if, 
when tested in a vertical orientation, it provides an observation angle 
of 0.2 degree not less than 1680 millicandelas/lux at a light entrance 
angle of 0 degree, not less than 1120 millicandelas/lux at any light 
entrance angle from 10 degrees down to 10 degrees up, and not less than 
560 millicandelas/lux at any light

[[Page 250]]

entrance angle from 20 degrees right to 20 degrees left.
    S5.7.2.2 Reflex reflectors shall be installed and located as 
specified below:
    (a) In the same locations and in the same length in which 
retroreflective sheeting is required by S5.7.1.4 to be applied in 
alternating colors, reflex reflectors shall be installed in a repetitive 
pattern of two or three white reflex reflectors alternating with two or 
three red reflex reflectors, with the center of each reflector not more 
than 100 mm from the center of each adjacent reflector.
    (b) In the same locations and in the same length in which white 
retroreflective sheeting is required by S5.7.1.4 to be installed, white 
reflex reflectors shall be installed, with the center of each white 
reflex reflector not more than 100 mm from the center of each adjacent 
reflector.
    S5.7.2.3 Certification. The exposed surface of each reflex reflector 
shall be marked with the letters DOT-C which constitutes a certification 
that the reflector conforms to all applicable requirements of Sec. 
571.108 of this part. The certification shall be not less than 3 mm 
high, and permanently stamped, etched, molded or printed in indelible 
ink.
    S5.7.3 Combination of sheeting and reflectors. Each trailer or truck 
tractor to which S5.7 applies that does not conform to S5.7.1 or S5.7.2, 
shall be equipped with retroreflective materials that meet the 
requirements of S5.7.1 except that reflex reflectors that meet the 
requirements of S5.7.2.1, and that are installed in accordance with 
S5.7.2.2, may be used instead of any corresponding element of 
retroreflective sheeting located as required by S5.7.1.4.
    S5.8 Replacement Equipment.
    S5.8.1 Except as provided below, each lamp, reflective device, or 
item of associated equipment manufactured to replace any lamp, 
reflective device, or item of associated equipment on any vehicle to 
which this standard applies, shall be designed to conform to this 
standard.
    S5.8.2 A Type C replacement headlamp designed to conform to the 
requirements of paragraph S7.3.2(a) through (d) of this standard may be 
marked ``1'' and ``2'' rather than ``1C1'' and ``2C1'' respectively. A 
Type D replacement headlamp designed to conform to S7.3.2(a) through (c) 
and S7.3.5(b) of this standard may be marked ``TOP'' or ``2'' rather 
than ``2D1''.
    S5.8.3 (a) Each stop lamp manufactured to replace a stop lamp that 
was designed to conform to SAE Standard J586b, Stop Lamps, June 1966, 
may also be designed to conform to J586b. It shall meet the photometric 
minimum candlepower requirements for Class A red turn signal lamps 
specified in SAE Standard J575d, Test for Motor Vehicle Lighting Devices 
and Components, August 1967. Each such lamp manufactured for use on a 
passenger car and on a multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, trailer or 
bus less than 2032 mm. (80 inches) in overall width shall have an 
effective projected luminous lens area not less than 2258 square mm. 
(3\1/2\ square inches). If multiple compartment lamps or multiple lamps 
are used, the effective projected luminous lens area of each compartment 
or lamp shall be not less than 2258 square mm. (3\1/2\ square inches); 
however, the photometric requirements may be met by a combination of 
compartments or lamps.
    (b) Each stop lamp manufactured to replace a stop lamp that was 
designed to conform to SAE Standard J586c, Stop Lamps, August 1970, may 
also be designed to conform to J586c.
    S5.8.4 (a) Each turn signal lamp manufactured to replace a turn 
signal lamp that was designed to conform to SAE Standard J588d, Turn 
Signal Lamps, June 1966, may also be designed to conform to J588d, and 
shall meet the photometric minimum candlepower requirements for Class A 
turn signal lamps specified in SAE Standard J575d, Tests for Motor 
Vehicle Lighting Devices and Components, August 1967. Each such lamp 
manufactured for use on a passenger car and on a multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck, trailer or bus less than 80 inches in overall width 
shall have an effective projected luminous area not less than 3\1/2\ 
square inches. If multiple compartment lamps or multiple lamps are used, 
the effective projected luminous area of each compartment or lamp shall 
be not less than 3\1/2\ square inches; however, the

[[Page 251]]

photometric requirements may be met by a combination of compartments or 
lamps. Each such lamp manufactured for use on a multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck, trailer or bus 80 inches or more in overall width shall 
have an effective projected luminous area not less than 12 square 
inches.
    (b) Each turn signal lamp manufactured to replace a turn signal lamp 
that was designed to conform to SAE Standard J588e, Turn Signal Lamps, 
September 1970, may also be designed to conform to SAE Standard J588e.
    S5.8.5 Note 6 of Table 1 of SAE Standard J588e does not apply.
    S5.8.6. Instead of the photometric values specified in SAE Standards 
J586c and J588e, a stop lamp manufactured to replace a stop lamp 
designed to conform to SAE Standard J586c, or a turn signal lamp 
manufactured to replace a turn signal lamp designed to conform to SAE 
Standard J588e, shall meet the minimum percentage specified in Figure 1a 
of the corresponding minimum allowable value specified in Figure 1b. The 
maximum candlepower output of each such stop lamp or turn signal lamp 
shall not exceed that prescribed in Figure 1b. If the sum of the 
percentages of the minimum candlepower measured at the test points is 
not less than that specified for each group listed in Figure 1c, a stop 
lamp or turn signal lamp is not required to meet the minimum photometric 
value at each test point specified in SAE Standards J586c and J588e, 
respectively.
    S5.8.7 Note 6 of Table 1 in SAE Standard J588e, Turn Signal Lamps, 
September 1970, does not apply.
    S5.8.8 Each taillamp manufactured to replace a taillamp designed to 
conform to SAE Standard J585d, Tail Lamps, August 1970, may also be 
designed to conform to J585d.
    S5.8.9 Each turn signal lamp manufactured to replace a turn signal 
lamp (on a motorcycle) that was designed to conform to SAE Standard 
J588d, Turn Signal Lamps, June 1966, may also be designed to conform to 
J588d.
    S5.8.10 Unless otherwise specified in this standard, each lamp, 
reflective device, or item of associated equipment to which paragraph 
S5.8.1 applies may be labeled with the symbol DOT, which shall 
constitute a certification that it conforms to applicable Federal motor 
vehicle safety standards.
    S5.8.11 A replacement lens for a replaceable bulb headlamp or an 
integral beam headlamp that is not required to have a bonded lens shall 
be provided with a replacement seal in a package that includes 
instructions for the removal and replacement of the lens, the cleaning 
of the reflector, and the sealing of the replacement lens to the 
reflector assembly.
    S6. Subreferenced SAE Standards and Recommended Practices
    S6.1 SAE Standards and Recommended Practices subreferenced by the 
SAE Standards and Recommended Practices included in Tables I and III and 
paragraphs S5.1.4 and S5.5.1 are those published in the 1970 edition of 
the SAE Handbook, except that the SAE standard referred to as ``J575'' 
is J575e, Tests for Motor Vehicle Lighting Devices and Components, 
August 1970, for stoplamps designed to conform to SAE Standards J586c, 
J586 FEB84, and J1398 MAY85; for taillamps designed to conform to SAE 
Standards J585d and J585e; for turn signal lamps designed to conform to 
SAE Standards J588e, J588 NOV84, and J1395 APR85; and for high-mounted 
stoplamps designed to conform to SAE Recommended Practice J186a. The 
reference in J585e to J256 does not apply. For headlamps other than 
motorcycle headlamps, unless otherwise specified in this standard, the 
version of SAE Standard J575 is DEC88, and the version of SAE Standard 
J602 is OCT80.The definition of ``optically combined'' in SAE 
Information Report J387 Terminology--Motor Vehicle Lighting NOV87, 
applies to that term as used in J586c and J588e.
    S6.2 Requirements of SAE Standards incorporated by reference in this 
standard, other than J576b and J576c, do not include test for warpage of 
devices with plastic lenses.
    S6.3 The term ``functional lighted lens area'' in any SAE Standard 
or Recommended Practice incorporated by reference or by subreference in 
this standard, has the same meaning as the term ``effective projected 
luminous lens area.''
    S7. Headlighting requirements.

[[Page 252]]

    S7.1 Each passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and 
bus manufactured on or after September 1, 1994, shall be equipped with a 
headlighting system designed to conform to the requirements of S7.3, 
S7.4, S7.5, or S7.6.
    S7.2(a) The lens of each original and replacement equipment 
headlamp, and of each original equipment and replacement equipment beam 
contributor shall be marked with the symbol ``DOT'' either horizontally 
or vertically which shall constitute the certification required by 49 
U.S.C. 30115.
    (b) The lens of each headlamp and of each beam contributor 
manufactured on or after December 1, 1989, to which paragraph (a) of 
this section applies shall be marked with the name and/or trademark 
registered with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office of the manufacturer 
of such headlamp or beam contributor, or its importer, or any 
manufacturer of a vehicle equipped with such headlamp or beam 
contributor. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to authorize 
the marking of any such name and/or trademark by one who is not the 
owner, unless the owner has consented to it.
    (c) Each headlamp and beam contributor to which paragraph (a) of 
this section applies shall be marked with its voltage and with its part 
or trade number.
    (d) Unless stated otherwise, a tolerance of <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/4\ degree is permitted during photometric performance 
tests for any headlamp or beam contributor, and the test points 10U-90U 
shall be measured from the normally exposed surface of the lens face. 
The term `aiming plane' means `aiming reference plane' or an appropriate 
vertical plane defined by the manufacturer as required in S7.7.1.
    (e) Each replacement headlamp lens with seal, provided in accordance 
with S5.8.11, when installed according to the lens manufacturer's 
instructions on an integral beam or replaceable bulb headlamp, shall not 
cause the headlamp to fail to comply with any of the requirements of 
this standard. Each replacement headlamp lens shall be marked with the 
symbol ``DOT'', either horizontally or vertically, to constitute 
certification. Each replacement headlamp lens shall also be marked with 
the manufacturer and the part or trade number of the headlamp for which 
it is intended, and with the name and/or trademark of the lens 
manufacturer or importer that is registered with the U.S. Patent and 
Trademark Office. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to 
authorize the marking of any such name and/or trademark by one who is 
not the owner, unless the owner has consented to it.
    S7.3 Sealed beam headlighting system. A sealed beam headlighting 
system shall be designed to meet the requirements of one of the 
following subparagraphs of S7.3.2 through S7.3.9. In references to 
Figures in SAE J1383 APR85 for headlamp dimensional requirements, only 
those dimensions marked ``I'' for interchangeability are applicable.
    S7.3.1 The lens of each sealed beam headlamp designed to conform to 
S7.3.2 through S7.3.6 shall be marked according to paragraph 5.4.3 
through 5.4.5 of SAE Standard J1383 APR85 Performance Requirements for 
Motor Vehicle Headlamps.
    S7.3.2 Type A headlighting system. A Type A headlighting system 
consists of two Type 1A1 and two Type 2A1 headlamps and associated 
hardware, which are designed to conform to the following requirements:
    (a) SAE Standard J1383 APR85 Performance Requirements for Motor 
Vehicle Headlamps, with the following exceptions:
    (1) Paragraphs 1, 2.1.2, 2.8.2, 3, 4.1.1, 4.1.2, 4.1.3, 4.4, 4.6, 
4.8 through 4.18, 5.1.1, 5.1.3, 5.1.5, 5.1.7 through 5.1.16, 5.2.2, 
5.3.5, 5.4.1, 5.4.2, and 6 through 6.4 do not apply.
    (2) In paragraph 5.3.2, the words ``and retaining rings'' are 
omitted.
    (3) In paragraphs 4.5.2 and 5.1.6, the words ``Figure 28-1 or 28-2 
of Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 108'' are substituted for ``Table 
3.''
    (b) SAE Standard J580 DEC86 Sealed Beam Headlamp Assembly (except 
paragraphs 3, 4.1.1, 5.1.1.1, 5.1.2.3, and the second sentence of 
5.1.6); in 5.2.1, delete the words ``and retaining rings;'' the correct 
reference is SAE J1383 Figures 6, 9, 12 and 14.
    (c) After a vibration test conducted in accordance with paragraph 
S8.8,

[[Page 253]]

there shall be no evidence of loose or broken parts, other than 
filaments, visible without magnification.
    (d) The maximum wattage at 12.8 volts (design voltage): Single 
filament headlamp, 55 watts on the upper beam; dual filament headlamp, 
43 watts on the upper beam and 65 watts on the lower beam.
    S7.3.3 Type B headlighting system. A Type B headlighting system 
consists of two Type 2B1 headlamps and associated hardware, which are 
designed to conform to the following requirements:
    (a) The requirements of paragraph S7.3.2 (a) through (c), except 
that the words ``Figure 27-1 or Figure 27-2'' are substituted for 
``Table 3'' in paragraph S7.3.2(a)(3).
    (b) The maximum wattage at 12.8 volts (design voltage): 70 watts on 
the upper beam and 60 watts on the lower beam.
    S7.3.4 Type C headlighting system. A Type C headlighting system 
consists of two Type 1C1 and two Type 2C1 headlamps and associated 
hardware, which are designed to conform to the requirements of paragraph 
S7.3.2 (a) through (d), except that the words ``Figure 28-1 or Figure 
28-2'' are substituted for ``Table 3'' in paragraph S7.3.2(a)(3).
    S7.3.5 Type D headlighting system. (a) A Type D headlighting system 
consists of two Type 2D1 headlamps and associated hardware, which are 
designed to conform to the requirements of paragraph S7.3.2 (a) through 
(c), except that the words ``Figure 27-1 or Figure 27-1'' are 
substituted for ``Table 3'' in paragraph S7.3.2(a)(3).
    (b) The maximum wattage at 12.8 volts (design voltage): 65 watts on 
upper beam, and 55 watts on lower beam.
    S7.3.6 Type E headlighting system. (a) A Type E headlighting system 
consists of two Type 2E1 headlamps and associated hardware, which are 
designed to conform to the requirements of paragraph S7.3.2 (a) through 
(c), except that the words ``Figure 27-1 or Figure 27-1'' are 
substituted for ``Table 3'' in paragraph S7.3.2(a)(3).
    (b) The maximum wattage at 12.8 volts (design voltage): 70 watts on 
upper beam, and 60 watts on lower beam.
    S7.3.7 Type F headlighting system. A Type F headlighting system 
consists of two Type UF and two Type LF headlamps and associated 
hardware, which are designed to conform to the following requirements:
    (a) Figures 11, 12, 13, and 14 as appropriate.
    (b) The photometric requirements of Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2 of 
this standard. A reaim tolerance of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/4\ degree 
is allowed for any test point on the Type LF lamp when tested alone, but 
is not allowed on the Type UF lamp when tested alone. For the test point 
10U-90U, measurement shall be from the normally exposed surface of the 
lens face.
    (c) SAE Standard J1383 APR85 Performance Requirements for Motor 
Vehicle Headlamps, Sections 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 4.1, 4.1.4, and 5.1.4.
    (d) When tested in accordance with section (c), the mounted assembly 
(either Type UF or Type LF headlamps, respective mounting ring, aiming 
ring, and aim adjustment mechanism) shall be designed to conform to the 
requirements of Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2 for upper or lower beams 
respectively without reaim when any conforming Type UF or LF headlamp is 
tested and replaced by another conforming headlamp of the same Type.
    (e) SAE J580 DEC86 Sealed Beam Headlamp Assembly with the following 
exceptions:
    (1) Section 2.2 Mounting Ring reads: ``the adjustable ring upon 
which the sealed beam unit is mounted and which forces the sealed beam 
unit to seat against the aiming ring when assembled into a sealed beam 
assembly.''
    (2) The definition ``2.3 Aiming Ring'' reads: ``The clamping ring 
that retains the sealed beam unit against the mounting ring, and that 
provides an interface between the unit's aiming/seating pads and the 
headlamp aimer adapter (locating plate).''
    (3) Section 4.1.1 Vibration Test does not apply.
    (4) Sections 5.1.1.1 and 5.1.2.3 do not apply.
    (5) Section 5.1.2.1 reads: ``When the headlamp assembly is tested in 
the laboratory, a minimum aiming adjustment of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 
degrees shall be provided

[[Page 254]]

in the horizontal plane and <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>4 degrees in the 
vertical plane.''
    (6) Section 5.1.2.2 concludes: ``* * * through an angle of <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 degrees and <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>4 degrees 
respectively.''
    (7) Section 5.1.6 is retitled ``Retaining Ring/Aiming Ring Tests''. 
The phrase ``92x150 mm * * * 0.340 in (8.6 mm)'' is added at the end of 
the table for flange thickness. The sentence beginning ``The fastening 
means'' is deleted.
    (8) Figures 2, 3, and 4 do not apply, and the reference to them in 
section 4.5 is replaced by ``Figure 16, Deflectometer, of Federal Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standard No. 108.''
    (f) A lens for a Type F headlamp incorporating an upper beam shall 
be labeled ``UF.'' A lens for a Type F headlamp incorporating a lower 
beam shall be labeled ``LF''. The face of letters, numbers, or other 
symbols molded on the surface of the lens shall not be raised more than 
0.020 in (0.5 mm), and shall be placed no closer to the geometric center 
of the lens than 1.375 in. (35 mm). The marking shall be molded in the 
lens and shall be not less than \1/4\ in. (6.35 mm) in size.
    (g) The maximum wattage at 12.8 volts (design voltage): 70 watts on 
the upper beam and 60 watts on the lower beam.
    (h) Type F headlamps may be mounted on common or parallel seating 
and aiming planes to permit simultaneous aiming of both headlamps 
provided that when tested with any conforming Type UF and LF headlamps 
according to Section S10:
    (1) The assembly (consisting of the Type UF and LF headlamps, 
mounting rings, the aiming/seating rings, and aim adjustment mechanism) 
shall be designed to conform to the test points of Figure 15-1 or Figure 
15-2.
    (2) There shall be no provision for adjustment between the common or 
parallel aiming and seating planes of the two lamps.
    (i) After a vibration test conducted in accordance with paragraph 
S8.8, the Type F system shall show no evidence of loose or broken parts, 
other than filaments, visible without magnification.
    S7.3.8 Type G headlighting system. A Type G headlamp system consists 
of two Type 1G1 headlamps and two Type 2G1 headlamps each of which is 
designed to conform to the following requirements:
    (a) Figures 18 and 21.
    (b) SAE Standard J1383 APR85 Performance Requirements for Motor 
Vehicle Headlamps (except paragraphs 1, 2.1.2, 2.8.2,3, 4.1.1, 4.1.2, 
4.1.3, 4.4, 4.6, 4.8 through 4.18, 5.1.1, 5.1.3, 5.1.5 through 5.1.16, 
5.2.2, 5.3.5 through 6.4). In paragraph 5.3.2 the words ``and retaining 
rings'' are omitted. In paragraph 4.5.2, the words ``either Figure 28-1, 
or Figure 28-2'' are substituted for ``Table 3''.
    (c) SAE Standard J580 DEC86 Sealed Beam Headlamp Assembly, with the 
following exceptions:
    (1) Sections 2.2, 2.3, 4.1.1, 5.1.1.1, 5.1.2.3, 5.1.6, and 5.2.1.
    (2) Section 4.5 reads: ``Torque Deflection Test. The headlamp 
assembly to be tested shall be mounted in the designed vehicle position 
and set at nominal aim (0.0). A special adapter (Figure 22) for the 
deflectometer (Figure 16) shall be clamped onto the headlamp assembly. A 
torque of 20 in.-lbs (2.25 N-m) shall be applied to the headlamp 
assembly through the deflectometer, and a reading on the thumb wheel 
shall be taken. The torque shall be removed and a second reading on the 
thumb wheel shall be taken.''
    (d) After a vibration test conducted in accordance with paragraph 
S8.8, there shall be no evidence of loose or broken parts, other than 
filaments, visible without magnification.
    (e) The maximum wattage at 12.8 volts (design voltage) for the 1G1 
and 2G1 upper beam is 55 watts and 43 watts respectively; for the 2G1 
lower beam, 65 watts.
    (f) A lens for a Type G headlamp incorporating only part of an upper 
beam shall be labeled ``1G1.'' A lens for a Type G headlamp 
incorporating both part of an upper beam and a lower beam shall be 
labeled ``2G1.'' The face of letters, numbers, or other symbols molded 
on the surface of the lens shall not be raised more than 0.020 in. (0.5 
mm.), and shall be placed no closer to the geometric center of the lens 
than 1.375 in. (35 mm). The marking shall be molded in the lens and 
shall be not less than \1/4\ in. (6.35 mm) in size.
    S7.3.9 Type H headlighting system. A Type H headlamp system 
consisting of

[[Page 255]]

two Type 2H1 headlamps and associated hardware, which are designed to 
conform to the following requirements:
    (a) Paragraphs S7.3.8 (a) through (d) except that in paragraph 
S7.3.8(b), the words ``Figure 27-1 or Figure 27-2'' are substituted for 
``Table 3.''
    (b) The maximum wattage at 12.8 volts (design voltage): 70 watts on 
the upper beam and 60 watts on the lower beam.
    (c) A lens for a Type H headlamp incorporating both an upper beam 
and a lower beam shall be labeled ``2H1.'' The face of letters, numbers, 
or other symbols molded on the surface of the lens shall not be raised 
more than 0.020 in. (0.5 mm), and shall be placed no closer to the 
geometric center of the lens than 1.375 in. (35 mm). The marking shall 
be molded in the lens and shall be not less than \1/4\ in. (6.35 mm) in 
size.
    S7.4 Integral Beam Headlighting System. An integral beam 
headlighting system shall be designed to conform to the following 
requirements:
    (a) The system shall provide in total not more than two upper beams 
and two lower beams of the performance described in one of the 
following:
    (1) In a four-headlamp system, each upper beam headlamp and each 
lower beam headlamp shall be designed to conform to the photometrics of 
one of the following:
    (i) Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2; or
    (ii) Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2, except that the upper beam test 
value at 2.5 D-V and 2.5D-12R and 12L, shall apply to the lower beam 
headlamp and not to the upper beam headlamp, and the upper beam test 
point value at 1.5D-9R and 9L shall be 1000; or
    (iii) Figure 28-1 or Figure 28-2.
    (2) In a two-headlamp system, each headlamp shall be designed to 
conform to the photometrics of one of the following:
    (i) Figure 17-1 or Figure 17-2; or
    (ii) Figure 27-1 or Figure 27-2.
    (3) In a system in which there is more than one beam contributor 
providing a lower beam, and/or more than one beam contributor providing 
an upper beam, each beam contributor in the system shall be designed to 
meet only the photometric performance requirements of Figure 15-1 or 
Figure 15-2 based upon the following mathematical expression: conforming 
test point value = 2 (Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2 test point value)/total 
number of lower or upper beam contributors for the vehicle, as 
appropriate. The system shall be designed to use the Vehicle Headlamp 
Aiming Device (VHAD) as specified in paragraph S7.8.5.2.
    (b) The lower and upper beams shall be provided only as follows 
where each headlamp contains two light sources:
    (1) The lower beam shall be provided either by the most outboard 
light source (or the uppermost if arranged vertically), or by all light 
sources.
    (2) The upper beam shall be provided either by the most inboard 
light source (or the lowermost if arranged vertically), or by all light 
sources.
    (c) The lower and upper beams shall be provided only as follows 
where each headlamp contains a single light source:
    (1) The lower beam shall be provided by the most outboard headlamps 
(or the uppermost if arranged vertically), and the lens of each such 
headlamp shall be permanently marked with the letter ``L.''
    (2) The upper beam shall be provided by the most inboard headlamps 
(or lowermost if arranged vertically), and the lens of each such 
headlamp shall be permanently marked with the letter ``U.''
    (d) A headlamp or beam contributor designed to meet paragraphs 
(a)(1) or (a)(3) of this section and S7.8.5.1 may be mounted in an 
assembly to permit simultaneous aiming of the beam(s) contributors, 
provided that with any complying contributor the assembly complete with 
all lamps meets the appropriate photometric requirements when tested in 
accordance with S10.
    (e) Each integral beam headlamp system shall be designed to conform 
to the applicable photometric performance requirements in paragraph (a) 
of this section when tested in accordance with sections 4.1 and 4.1.4 of 
SAE Standard J1383 APR85 with any headlamps intended for use in such 
system. The term ``aiming plane'' means ``aiming reference plane,'' or 
an appropriate vertical plane defined by the manufacturer as required in 
paragraph S7.8.1.
    (f) The system shall be aimable in accordance with the requirements 
of

[[Page 256]]

paragraph S7.8. A system that incorporates any headlamp or beam 
contributor that does not have a VHAD as an integral and indivisible 
part of the headlamp or beam contributor shall be designed so that the 
appropriate photometrics are met when any correctly aimed and 
photometrically conforming headlamp or beam contributor is removed from 
its mounting and aiming mechanism, and is replaced without reaim by any 
conforming headlamp or beam contributor of the same type.
    (g) A headlamp with a glass lens need not meet the abrasion 
resistance test (S8.2). A headlamp with a nonreplaceable glass lens need 
not meet the chemical resistance test (S8.3). A headlamp with a glass 
lens and a non-plastic reflector need not meet the internal heat test of 
paragraph S8.6.2. A headlamp of sealed design as verified in paragraph 
S8.9 (sealing) need not meet the corrosion (S8.4), dust (S8.5), or 
humidity (S8.7) tests; however, the headlamp shall meet the requirements 
of paragraphs 4.1, 4.1.2, 4.4 and 5.1.4 for corrosion and connector of 
SAE Standard J580 DEC86 Sealed Beam Headlamp Assembly. An integral beam 
headlamp may incorporate light sources that are replaceable and are used 
for purposes other than headlighting.
    (h) When tested according to any of the procedures indicated in 
subparagraphs (1) through (7) each headlamp or beam contributor shall 
meet the appropriate requirement:
    (1) After an abrasion test conducted in accordance with paragraph 
S8.2, the headlamp shall meet the photometric requirements applicable to 
the headlamp system under test.
    (2) After the chemical resistance tests of paragraphs S8.3 and 
S8.10.1, the headlamp shall have no surface deterioration, coating 
delamination, fractures, deterioration of bonding or sealing materials, 
color bleeding or color pickup visible without magnification, and the 
headlamp shall meet the photometric requirements applicable to the 
headlamp system under test.
    (3) After a corrosion test conducted in accordance with paragraph 
S8.4, there shall be no evidence of external or internal corrosion or 
rust visible without magnification. After a corrosion test conducted in 
accordance with paragraph S8.10.2, there shall be no evidence of 
corrosion or rust visible without magnification on any part of the 
headlamp reflector that receives light from a headlamp light source, on 
any metal light or heat shield assembly, or on a metal reflector of any 
other lamp not sealed from the headlamp reflector. Loss of adhesion of 
any applied coating shall not occur more than 0.l25 in. (3.2 mm) from 
any sharp edge on the inside or outside. Corrosion may occur on 
terminals only if the current produced during the test of paragraph 
S8.4(c) is not less than 9.7 amperes.
    (4) After a dust test conducted in accordance with paragraph S8.5, 
the headlamp shall meet the photometric requirements applicable to the 
headlamp system under test.
    (5) The headlamp shall first meet the requirements of subparagraph 
(i) and then those of subparagraph (ii).
    (i) After a temperature cycle test conducted in accordance with 
paragraph S8.6.1, the headlamp shall show no evidence of delamination, 
fractures, entry of moisture or deterioration of bonding material, color 
bleeding, warpage or deformation visible without magnification or lens 
warpage greater than .118 in. (3 mm) when measured parallel to the 
optical axis at the point of intersection of the axis of each light 
source with the exterior surface of the lens, and it shall meet the 
photometric requirements applicable to the headlamp system under test.
    (ii) After an internal heat test conducted in accordance with 
paragraph S8.6.2, there shall be no lens warpage greater than .118 in. 
(3 mm) when measured parallel to the optical axis at the point of 
intersection of the axis of each light source with the exterior surface 
of the lens, and it shall meet the photometric requirements applicable 
to the headlamp system under test.
    (6) After a humidity test conducted in accordance with paragraph 
S8.7, the inside of the headlamp shall show no evidence of delamination 
or moisture, fogging or condensation visible without magnification.
    (7) After a vibration test conducted in accordance with paragraph 
S8.8, there shall be no evidence of loose or broken parts, other than 
filaments, visible without magnification.

[[Page 257]]

    (i) An integral beam headlamp may incorporate replaceable light 
sources that are used for purposes other than headlighting.
    S7.5 Replaceable bulb headlamp system. Each replaceable bulb 
headlamp system shall be designed to conform to the following 
requirements:
    (a) The system shall provide only two lower beams and two upper 
beams and shall incorporate not more than two replaceable light sources 
in each headlamp.
    (b) The photometrics as specified in subparagraphs (c) through (e) 
of this paragraph (depicted in Figure 26), using any light source of the 
Type intended for use in such system.
    (c) The test requirements of sections 4.1, 4.1.4, and performance 
requirements of section 5.1.4 of SAE J1383 APR85, using the photometric 
requirements specified in subparagraphs (d) and (e) of this paragraph.
    (d) For a headlamp equipped with dual filament replaceable light 
sources, the following requirements apply:
    (1) Headlamps designed to conform to the external aiming 
requirements of S7.8.5.1 shall have no mechanism that allows adjustment 
of an individual light source, or, if there are two light sources, 
independent adjustments of each reflector.
    (2) The lower and upper beams of a headlamp system consisting of two 
lamps, each containing either one or two replaceable light sources, 
shall be provided as follows:
    (i) The lower beam shall be provided in one of the following ways:
    (A) By the outboard light source (or upper one if arranged 
vertically) designed to conform to:
    (1) The lower beam requirements of Figure 27-1 or Figure 27-2, or 
Figure 17-1 or Figure 17-2, if the light sources in the headlamp system 
are any combination of dual filament replaceable light sources other 
than Type HB2; or
    (2) The lower beam requirements of Figure 17-1 or Figure17-2 if the 
light sources are Type HB2, or any dual filament replaceable light 
sources that include Type HB2; or
    (B) By both light sources in the headlamp, designed to conform to 
the lower beam requirements specified above.
    (ii) The upper beam shall be provided in one of the following ways:
    (A) By the inboard light source (or the lower one if arranged 
vertically) designed to conform to:
    (1) The upper beam requirements of Figure 27-1 or Figure 27-2, or 
Figure 17-1 or Figure 17-2 if the light sources in the headlamp system 
are any combination of dual filament replaceable light sources that 
include Type HB2, or
    (2) The upper beam requirements of figure 17-1 or Figure 17-2 if the 
light sources are type HB2, or any combination of replaceable light 
sources that include Type HB2; or
    (B) By both light sources in the headlamp, designed to conform to 
the upper beam requirements specified above.
    (3) The lower and upper beams of a headlamp system consisting of 
four lamps, each containing a single replaceable light source, shall be 
provided as follows:
    (i) The lower beam shall be provided by the outboard lamp (or the 
upper one if arranged vertically), designed to conform to:
    (A) The lower beam requirements of Figure 27-1 or Figure 27-2, or 
Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2 if the light sources in the headlamp system 
are any combination of dual filament light sources other than Type HB2; 
or
    (B) The lower beam requirements of Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2 if the 
light sources are Type HB2, or dual filament light sources other than 
Type HB1 and HB5. The lens of each such headlamp shall be marked with 
the letter ``L''.
    (ii) The upper beam shall be provided by the inboard lamp (or the 
lower one if arranged vertically), designed to conform to:
    (A) The upper beam requirements of Figure 27-1 or Figure 27-2, of 
Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2 if the light sources in the headlamp system 
are any combination of dual filament light sources other than Type HB2; 
or
    (B) The upper beam requirements of Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2 if the 
light sources are Type HB2, or dual filament light sources other tha 
Type HB1 and Type HB5. The lens of each such headlamp shall be marked 
with the letter ``u''.

[[Page 258]]

    (e) The following requirements apply to a headlamp system equipped 
with any combination of replaceable light sources except those specified 
in paragraph (d) of this section:
    (1) Headlamps designed to conform to the external aim requirements 
of S7.8.5.1 shall have no mechanism that allows adjustment of an 
individual light source, or, if there are two replaceable light sources, 
independent adjustment of each reflector.
    (2) The lower and upper beams of a headlamp system consisting of two 
lamps, each containing a combination of two replaceable light sources 
(other than those combinations specified in subparagraph (d) of this 
paragraph) shall be provided only as follows:
    (i) The lower beam shall be provided in one of the following ways:
    (A) By the outboard light source (or the uppermost if arranged 
vertically) designed to conform to the lower beam requirements of Figure 
17-1 or Figure 17-2; or
    (B) By both light sources, designed to conform to the lower beam 
requirements of Figure 17-1 or Figure 17-2.
    (ii) The upper beam shall be provided in one of the following ways:
    (A) By the inboard light source (or the lower one if arranged 
vertically) designed to conform to the upper beam requirements of Figure 
17-1 or Figure 17-2; or
    (B) By both light sources, designed to conform to the upper beam 
requirements of Figure 17-1 or Figure 17-2.
    (3) The lower and upper beams of a headlamp system consisting of 
four lamps, using any combination of replaceable light sources except 
those specified in subparagraph (d) of this paragraph, each lamp 
containing only a single replaceable light source, shall be provided 
only as follows:
    (i) The lower beam shall be produced by the outboard lamp (or upper 
one if arranged vertically), designed to conform to the lower beam 
requirements of Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2. The lens of each headlamp 
shall be permanently marked with the letter ``L''.
    (ii) The upper beam shall be produced by the inboard lamp (or lower 
one of arranged vertically), designed to conform to the upper beam 
requirements of Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2. The lens of each headlamp 
shall be permanently marked with the letter ``U''.
    (f) Each lens reflector unit manufactured as replacement equipment 
shall be designed to conform to the requirements of subparagraphs (d) 
and (e) of this paragraph when any replaceable light source appropriate 
for such unit is inserted in it.
    (g) The lens of each replaceable bulb headlamp shall bear permanent 
marking in front of each replaceable light source with which it is 
equipped that states the HB Type, if the light source is designed to 
conform to subparagraphs (a) through (e) of paragraph S7.7, or the bulb 
marking/ designation provided in compliance with Section VIII of 
appendix A of part 564, if the light source is designed to conform to 
subparagraph (g) of paragraph S.7.7 No marking need be provided if the 
only replaceable light source in the headlamp is Type HB1.
    (h) The system shall be aimable in accordance with paragraph S7.8.
    (i) Each headlamp shall meet the requirements of paragraphs S7.4(g) 
and (h), except that the sentence in paragraph (g) to verify sealing 
according to section S8.9 Sealing does not apply.
    (j) A replaceable bulb headlighting system may incorporate 
replaceable light sources that are used for purposes other than 
headlighting.
    S7.6 Combination Headlighting System. A combination headlighting 
system shall be comprised of either two headlamps designed to conform to 
the requirements of S7.6.2, or any combination of four headlamps 
designed to conform to the requirements of S7.3.7, S7.4, or S7.5 of this 
standard.
    S7.6.1 A combination headlighting system shall provide in total not 
more than two upper beams and two lower beams. When installed on a motor 
vehicle, the headlamps (or parts thereof) that provide the lower beam 
shall be of the same type, and provide a symmetrical effective projected 
luminous lens area when illuminated.
    S7.6.2 In a combination headlighting system consisting of two 
headlamps, each headlamp shall be designed to conform to Figure 17-1 or 
Figure 17-2 and shall be a combination of two different headlamps chosen 
from the following types: a Type F headlamp, an

[[Page 259]]

integral beam headlamp, and a replaceable bulb headlamp.
    S7.6.2.1 That part of the headlamp which contains an integral beam 
headlamp, or beam contributors used in place of a single headlamp, shall 
be designed to conform to the requirements of S7.4 (c) through (h) of 
this standard.
    S7.6.2.2 That part of the headlamp which contains a replaceable bulb 
headlamp shall be designed to conform to the requirements of S7.5 of 
this standard.
    S7.6.3 In a combination headlighting system consisting of four 
headlamps, each headlamp shall be designed to conform to Figure 15-1 or 
Figure 15-2, or if an integral beam headlamp in which there is more than 
one beam contributor, designed to conform to Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2 
in the manner required by S7.4(a)(3) of this standard.
    S7.7 Replaceable light sources. Each replaceable light source shall 
be designed to conform to the dimensions and electrical specifications 
furnished with respect to it pursuant to part 564 of this chapter, and 
shall conform to the following requirements:
    (a) If other than an HB Type, the light source shall be marked with 
the bulb marking designation specified for it in compliance with 
Appendix A or Appendix B of part 564 of this chapter. The base of each 
HB Type shall be marked with its HB Type designation. Each replaceable 
light source shall also be marked with the symbol DOT and with a name or 
trademark in accordance with paragraph S7.2.
    (b) The measurement of maximum power and luminous flux that is 
submitted in compliance with Appendix A or Appendix B of part 564 of 
this chapter shall be made in accordance with this paragraph. The 
filament or discharge arc shall be seasoned before measurement of 
either. Measurement shall be made with the direct current test voltage 
regulated within one quarter of one percent. The test voltage shall be 
12.8v. The measurement of luminous flux shall be in accordance with the 
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, LM-45, IES Approved 
Method for Electrical and Photometric Measurements of General Service 
Incandescent Filament Lamps (April 1980); shall be made with the black 
cap installed on Type HB1, Type HB2, Type HB4, and Type HB5, and on any 
other replaceable light source so designed; and shall be made with the 
electrical conductor and light source base shrouded with an opaque white 
cover, except for the portion normally located within the interior of 
the lamp housing. The measurement of luminous flux for the Types HB3 and 
HB4 shall be made with the base covered with a white cover as shown in 
the drawings for Types HB3 and HB4 filed in Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397. 
(The white cover is used to eliminate the likelihood of incorrect lumen 
measurement that will occur should the reflectance of the light source 
base and electrical connector be low).
    (c) The capsule, lead wires and/or terminals, and seal on each Type 
HB1, Type HB3, Type HB4, and Type HB5 light source, and on any other 
replaceable light source which uses a seal, shall be installed in a 
pressure chamber as shown in Figure 25 so as to provide an airtight 
seal. The diameter of the aperture in Figure 25 on a replaceable light 
source (other than an HB Type) shall be that dimension furnished for 
such light source in compliance with Appendix A or Appendix B of part 
564 of this chapter. An airtight seal exists when no air bubbles appear 
on the low pressure (connector) side after the light source has been 
immersed in water for one minute while inserted in a cylindrical 
aperture specified for the light source, and subjected to an air 
pressure of 70kPa (10 P.S.I.G.) on the glass capsule side.
    (d) The measurement of maximum power and luminous flux that is 
submitted in compliance with section VII of Appendix A of part 564 of 
this chapter, or section IV of Appendix B of part 564 of this chapter, 
shall be made with the direct current test voltage regulated within one 
quarter of one percent. The test voltage shall be 12.8v. The measurement 
of luminous flux shall be in accordance with the Illuminating 
Engineering Society of North America, LM 45; IES Approved Method for 
Electrical and Photometric Measurements of General Service Incandescent

[[Page 260]]

Filament Lamps (April 1980). The filament of a replaceable light source 
shall be seasoned before such measurement. The white covers are used to 
eliminate the likelihood of incorrect lumens measurement that will occur 
should the reflectance of the light source base and electrical connector 
be low.
    (1) For a light source with a resistive element type filament, 
seasoning of the light source shall be made in accordance with section 
2.9 of SAE Standard J1383 APR85 Performance Requirements for Motor 
Vehicle Headlamps. The measurement of luminous flux shall be made with 
the black cap installed on Type HB1, Type HB2, Type HB4, and Type HB5 
light sources, and on any other replaceable light source so designed, 
and shall be made with the electrical conductor and light source base 
shrouded with an opaque white colored cover, except for the portion 
normally located within the interior of the lamp housing. The 
measurement of luminous flux for Type HB3 and Type HB4 shall be made 
with the base covered with the white cover shown in the drawings for 
Types HB3 and HB4 filed in Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397.
    (2) For a light source using excited gas mixtures as a filament or 
discharge arc, seasoning of the light source system, including any 
ballast required for its operation, shall be made in accordance with 
section 4.0 of SAE Recommended Practice J2009 FEB93 Discharge Forward 
Lighting Systems. With the test voltage applied to the ballast input 
terminals, the measurement of luminous flux shall be made with the black 
cap installed, if so designed, and shall be made with an opaque white 
colored cover, except for the portion normally located within the 
interior of the lamp housing.
    (e) If a ballast is required for operation, each ballast shall bear 
the following permanent markings:
    (1) Name or logo of ballast manufacturer;
    (2) Ballast part number or unique identification;
    (3) Part number or other unique identification of the light source 
for which the ballast is designed;
    (4) Rated laboratory life of the light source/ballast combination, 
if the information for the light source has been filed in Appendix B of 
part 564 of this chapter;
    (5) A warning that ballast output voltage presents the potential for 
severe electrical shock that could lead to permanent injury or death;
    (6) Ballast output power in watts and output voltage in rms volts AC 
or DC; and
    (7) The symbol `DOT'.''
    (f) For light sources that use excited gas mixtures as a filament or 
discharge arc, the ``rated laboratory life'' shall be determined in 
accordance with sections 4.3 and 4.9 of SAE Recommended Practice J2009 
FEB93 Forward Discharge Lighting Systems.
    (g) After the force deflection test conducted in accordance with S9, 
the permanent deflection of the glass envelope shall not exceed 0.13 mm 
in the direction of the applied force.
    S7.8 Aimability Performance Requirements.
    S7.8.1 (a) Each headlamp or beam contributor that is not visually/
optically aimable in accordance with S7.8.5.3 of this standard shall be 
equipped with fiducial marks, aiming pads, or similar references of 
sufficient detail and accuracy, for determination of an appropriate 
vehicle plane to be used with the photometric procedures of SAE J1383 
APR85 for correct alignment with the photometer axis when being tested 
for photometric compliance, and to serve for the aiming reference when 
the headlamp or beam contributor is installed on a motor vehicle. The 
fiducial marks, aiming pads, or similar references are protrusions, 
bubble vials, holes, indentations, ridges, scribed lines, or other 
readily identifiable marks established and described by the vehicle or 
headlamp manufacturer.
    (b) Each motor vehicle manufactured on and after September 1, 1998, 
shall be equipped with headlamps or beam contributors which have a mark 
or markings that are visible from the front of the headlamp when 
installed on the vehicle to identify the optical axis of the headlamp to 
assure proper horizontal and vertical alignment of the aiming screen or 
optical aiming equipment. The manufacturer is free to choose the design 
of the mark or markings. The

[[Page 261]]

mark or markings may be on the interior or exterior of the lens or 
indicated by a mark or central structure on the interior or exterior of 
the headlamp.
    (c) Each headlamp that is visually/optically aimable in accordance 
with S7.8.5.3 of this standard shall be marked in accordance with 
S7.8.5.3(f).
    S7.8.2 Except as provided in this paragraph, each headlamp shall be 
installed on a motor vehicle with a mounting and aiming mechanism that 
allows aim inspection and adjustment of both vertical and horizontal 
aim, and is accessible for those purposes without removal of any vehicle 
parts, except for protective covers removable without the use of tools.
    S7.8.2.1 (a) When installed on the vehicle, adjustment of one aim 
axis through its full on-vehicle range shall not cause the aim of the 
other axis to deviate more than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.76 degree.
    (b) If the performance specified in paragraph (a) of this section is 
not achievable, the requirements of S7.8.5.2(b)(3) apply, except that if 
the aiming mechanism is not a VHAD, the requirements specific to VHADs 
are not applicable, and the instruction shall be specific to the aiming 
mechanism installed.
    (c) A visually/optically aimable headlamp that has a lower beam 
shall not have a horizontal adjustment mechanism unless such mechanism 
meets the requirements of paragraph S7.8.5.2 of this standard.
    S7.8.2.2 If the headlamp is aimed by moving the reflector relative 
to the lens and headlamp housing, or vice versa, it shall:
    (a) Allow movement of the headlamp system, when tested in the 
laboratory, to be not less than the full range of pitch on the vehicle 
on which the headlamp system is installed and for the horizontal aim 
range limits of S7.8.4,
    (b) Conform with the photometrics applicable to it with the lens at 
any position relative to the reflector within the range limits as 
specified in S7.8.2.2(a),
    (c) Be exempted from the aim range limits for testing in a 
laboratory in S7.8.3, and
    (d) Be exempted from S7.8.4 if it is visually/optically aimable and 
has fixed horizontal aim.
    S7.8.3 When a headlamp system is tested in a laboratory, the range 
of its vertical aim shall not be less than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>4 
degrees from the nominal correct aim position for the intended vehicle 
application. When installed on a motor vehicle, the range of vertical 
aim shall be not less than the full range of pitch of the vehicle on 
which the headlamp system is installed. The installed range of static 
pitch angle shall as a minimum be determined from unloaded vehicle 
weight to gross vehicle weight rating, and incorporate pitch angle 
effects from maximum trailer or trunk loadings, the full range of tire 
intermix sizes and suspensions recommended and/or installed by the 
vehicle manufacturer, and the anticipated effects of variable passenger 
loading. The vertical aim adjustment mechanism shall be continuously 
adjustable over the full range.
    S7.8.4 When a headlamp system is tested in a laboratory, the range 
of its horizontal aim shall be not less that +/-2.5 degrees from the 
nominal correct aim position for the intended vehicle application.
    S7.8.5 When activated in a steady-burning state, headlamps shall not 
have any styling ornament or other feature, such as a translucent cover 
or grill, in front of the lens. Headlamp wipers may be used in front of 
the lens provided that the headlamp system is designed to conform with 
all applicable photometric requirements with the wiper stopped in any 
position in front of the lens. When a headlamp system is installed on a 
motor vehicle, it shall be aimable with at least one of the following: 
An externally applied aiming device, as specified in S7.8.5.1; an on-
vehicle headlamp aiming device installed by the vehicle or lamp 
manufacturer, as specified in S7.8.5.2; or by visual/optical means, as 
specified in S7.8.5.3.
    S7.8.5.1 External aiming. Each headlamp system that is capable of 
being mechanically aimed by externally applied headlamp aiming devices 
shall be mechanically aimable using the equipment specified in SAE 
Standard J602 OCT80 Headlamp Aiming Device for Mechanically Aimable 
Sealed Beam

[[Page 262]]

Headlamp Units without the removal of any ornamental trim rings, covers, 
wipers or other vehicle parts.
    (a) The aim of the headlamps in each headlamp system, other than a 
headlamp system designed to conform to section S7.3, that is designed to 
use such external aiming devices, shall not deviate more than 0.30 
degree when a downward torque of 20 lb.-in. (2.25 N-m) is removed from 
the headlamp in its design operating position. The downward force used 
to create the torque shall be applied parallel to the aiming reference 
plane, through the aiming pads, and displaced forward using a lever arm 
such that the force is applied on an axis that is perpendicular to the 
aiming reference plane and originates at the center of the aiming pad 
pattern (see Figures 4-1 and 4-3). For headlamps using the aiming pad 
locations of Group 1, the distance between the point of application of 
force and the aiming reference plane shall be not less than 6.625 in. 
(168.3 mm) plus the distance from the aiming reference plane to the 
secondary plane, if used (see section S7.8.5.1(d)(1)). For headlamps 
using the aiming pad locations of Group II, the distance between the 
point of application of force and the aiming reference plane shall be 
not less than 6.609 in. (167.9 mm) plus the distance from the aiming 
reference plane to the secondary plane, if used. For headlamps using the 
nonadjustable Headlamp Aiming Device Locating Plates for the 146 mm 
diameter, the 176 mm diameter, and the 92x150 mm sealed beam units, the 
distance between the point of application of force and the aiming plane 
shall, respectively, be not less than 6.984 in. (177.4 mm), 6.937 in. 
(176.2 mm), and 7.625 in (193.7 mm). Each headlamp system that is 
designed to conform to paragraph S7.5 and that is designed to use such 
external aiming devices, and which is manufactured on or after September 
1, 1990, shall comply with this paragraph.
    (b) When a headlamp is installed on a motor vehicle, its aim in any 
direction shall not change by more than 0.30 degree nor shall the lamp 
recede more than 0.1 in. (2.5 mm.) after being subjected to an inward 
force of 50 pounds (222 newtons) applied evenly to the lens parallel to 
the mechanical axis.
    (c) Each headlamp system mounting and aiming mechanism shall be 
subjected to a salt spray (fog) test in accordance with ASTM B117-73 
Method of Salt Spray (Fog) Testing for a period of 50 hours, consisting 
of two successive 25-hour periods of 24 hours exposure followed by 1 
hour of drying. At the end of 50 hours, the headlamp system shall be 
capable of meeting any of the applicable requirements of paragraph S7.8.
    (d) Each headlamp system which is designed to use the Headlamp 
Aiming Device Locating Plates with adjustable legs for the 100 x 165 mm 
unit and the 142 x 200 mm unit, and which has adjustable length legs, 
shall meet the requirements of subparagraphs (1) and (2) below.
    (1) The lens shall have three aiming pads which meet the 
requirements of Figure 4, Dimensional Specifications for Location of 
Aiming Pads on Replaceable Bulb Headlamp Units. The aiming pads need not 
be centered at the geometric center of the lens, or on the optical axis. 
Except as provided in subparagraph (2), a whole number, which represents 
the distance in tenths of an inch (i.e. 0.3 inch=3) from the aiming 
reference plane to the respective aiming pads which are not in contact 
with that plane, shall be inscribed adjacent to each respective aiming 
pad on the lens. The height of these numbers shall be not less than .157 
inch (4 mm). If there is interference between the plane and the area of 
the lens between the aiming pads, the whole number represents the 
distance to a secondary plane. The secondary plane shall be located 
parallel to the aiming reference plane and as close to the lens as 
possible without causing interference.
    (2) If the most forward aiming pad is the lower inboard aiming pad, 
then the dimensions may be placed anywhere on the lens. The dimension 
for the outboard aiming pad (Dimension F in Figure 4) shall be followed 
by the letter ``H'' and the dimension for the center aiming pad shall be 
followed by the letter ``V.'' The dimensions shall be expressed in 
tenths of an inch.
    (e) Each headlamp may be designed to use the nonadjustable Headlamp 
Aiming Device Locating Plate for the 100x165 mm unit, the 142x200 mm 
unit,

[[Page 263]]

the 146 mm diameter unit, or the 178 mm diameter unit of SAE J602, or 
the 92x150 mm Type F unit, and incorporate lens-mounted aiming pads as 
specified for those units in Figures 10, 13, 5, or 7 respectively in SAE 
J1383 APR85, or Figure 11 of this standard for the Type F unit. If so 
designed, no additional lens marking is necessary to designate the type 
of plate or dimensions.
    S7.8.5.2 On-vehicle aiming. Each headlamp system that is capable of 
being aimed by equipment installed on the vehicle shall include a 
Vehicle Headlamp Aiming Device (VHAD) that conforms to the following 
requirements:
    (a) Aim. The VHAD shall provide for headlamp aim inspection and 
adjustment in both the vertical and horizontal axes.
    (1) Vertical aim. The VHAD shall include the necessary references 
and scales relative to the horizontal plane to assure correct vertical 
aim for photometry and aiming purposes. An off-vehicle measurement of 
the angle of the plane of the ground is permitted. In addition, an equal 
number of graduations from the ``O'' position representing angular 
changes in the axis in the upward and downward directions shall be 
provided.
    (i) Each graduation shall represent a change in the vertical 
position of the mechanical axis not larger than 0.19 degree (1 in. at 25 
ft.) to provide for variations in aim at least 1.2 degrees above and 
below the horizontal, and have an accuracy relative to the zero mark of 
less than 0.1 degree.
    (ii) The VHAD shall be marked to indicate headlamp aim movement in 
the upward and downward directions.
    (iii) Each graduation shall indicate a linear movement of the scale 
indicator of not less than 0.05 in. (1.27 mm) if a direct reading analog 
indicator is used. If a remote reading indicator is provided, it shall 
represent the actual aim movement in a clear, understandable format.
    (iv) The vertical indicator shall perform through a minimum range of 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.2 degrees.
    (v) Means shall be provided in the VHAD for compensating for 
deviations in floor slope less than 1.2 degrees from the horizontal that 
would affect the correct positioning of the headlamp for vertical aim.
    (vi) The graduations shall be legible under an illumination level 
not greater than 30 foot candles, measured at the top of the graduation, 
by an observer having 20/20 vision (Snellen), and shall permit aim 
adjustment to within 0.19 degree (1 in. at 25 ft.).
    (2) Horizontal aim. The VHAD shall include references and scales 
relative to the longitudinal axis of the vehicle necessary to assure 
correct horizontal aim for photometry and aiming purposes. An ``O'' mark 
shall be used to indicate alignment of the headlamps relative to the 
longitudinal axis of the vehicle. In addition, an equal number of 
graduations from the ``O'' position representing equal angular changes 
in the axis relative to the vehicle axis shall be provided.
    (i) Each graduation shall represent a change in the horizontal 
position of the mechanical axis not greater than 0.38 degree (2 in. at 
25 ft.) to provide for variations in aim at least 0.76 degree (4 in. at 
25 ft.) to the left and right of the longitudinal axis of the vehicle, 
and shall have an accuracy relative to the zero mark of less than 0.1 
degree.
    (ii) The VHAD shall be marked to indicate headlamp aim movement in 
the left and right directions.
    (iii) The graduations shall be legible under an illumination level 
not greater than 30 foot candles, measured at the top of the graduation, 
by an observer having 20/20 vision (Snellen), and shall permit aim 
adjustment to within 0.38 degree (2 in. at 25 ft.).
    (iv) The horizontal indicator shall perform through a minimum range 
of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.76 degree (4 in. at 25 ft.); however, the 
indicator itself shall be capable of recalibration over a movement of 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 degrees relative to the longitudinal axis of 
the vehicle to accommodate any adjustment necessary for recalibrating 
the indicator after vehicle repair from accident damage.
    (b) Aiming instructions. (1) The instructions for properly aiming 
the headlighting system using the VHAD shall be provided on a label 
permanently affixed to the vehicle adjacent to the VHAD, or in the 
vehicle operator's manual. The instructions shall

[[Page 264]]

advise that the headlighting system is properly aimed if the appropriate 
vertical plane (as defined by the vehicle manufacturer) is perpendicular 
to both the longitudinal axis of the vehicle, and a horizontal plane 
when the vehicle is on a horizontal surface, and the VHAD is set at 
``O'' vertical and ``O'' horizontal.
    (2) Should a remote indicator or a remote indicator and adjuster be 
provided, the instructions shall be placed in the operator's manual, and 
may also be placed on a label adjacent to the VHAD.
    (3) Should the mechanism not meet the requirements of S7.8.2.1, on 
each motor vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 1990, a 
cautionary label shall be placed adjacent to the mechanism stating the 
caution and including either the reason for the caution or the 
corrective action necessary. Each such label shall also refer the reader 
to the vehicle operator's manual for complete instructions. Each such 
vehicle shall be equipped with an operator's manual containing the 
complete instructions appropriate for the mechanism installed.
    (c) Each headlamp equipped with a VHAD that is manufactured for use 
on motor vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1998, shall be 
manufactured with its calibration permanently fixed by its manufacturer. 
Calibration in this case means the process of accurately aligning the 
geometry of the VHAD devices with the beam pattern for the purposes of 
compliance with the standard.
    (d) Testing the VHAD.
    (1) The headlamp assembly (the headlamp(s), and the VHAD(s)) shall 
be mounted on a level goniometer, aligned to a photometer located not 
less than 60 ft. (18.3 m) from the VHAD assembly. The assembly shall be 
mechanically aimed using the VHAD in accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions as provided with the vehicle on which the VHAD is intended 
to be used. A \1/4\ degree reaim is permitted in any direction at any 
test point to allow for variations in readings between laboratories. The 
test shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures of paragraphs 
4.1 and 4.1.4 of SAE J1383 APR85. Under these conditions the mounted 
headlamp assembly shall be designed to conform to the photometric 
requirements appropriate for the headlamp system under test.
    (2) When tested in accordance with subsection (1) of this section, 
with any replacement headlamp unit(s) or light sources intended for use 
in the system under test, the VHAD and headlamp system shall be designed 
to conform to the photometric performance requirements appropriate for 
the system under test.
    (3) The same VHAD and associated headlamp(s) (or headlamp assembly) 
shall be rigidly mounted in a headlamp test fixture and comply with the 
following laboratory test procedures:
    (i) Each graduation on the horizontal and vertical aim scales shall 
be checked and any variation from the correct aim shall not exceed 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 degree, and <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 degree 
respectively.
    (ii) With the aiming plane horizontal and vertical and with the 
scale on the device set at 0, the aimer shall be adjusted before each of 
the following tests to assure that the indicators are centered at 0.
    (A) The VHAD and an unlighted headlamp assembly shall be stabilized 
at 20 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees F (-7 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 
degrees C) in a circulating air environmental test chamber. After a 
period of 30 minutes, when measured at that soak temperature, the 
variation from correct horizontal of vertical aim shall not exceed 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 degree, and <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 degree, 
respectively.
    (B) The VHAD, and the headlamp assembly with its highest wattage 
filament (or combination of filaments intended to be used 
simultaneously) energized at its design voltage, shall then be 
stabilized at 100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees F (38 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 degrees C) in a circulating air environmental test 
chamber. After a period of 30 minutes, when measured at that soak 
temperature, the variation from correct horizontal and vertical aim 
shall not exceed <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 degree, and <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 degree, respectively.
    (C) The VHAD and an unlighted headlamp assembly shall then be placed 
in a circulating air environmental test chamber and exposed to a 
temperature of 140 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees F (60 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 degrees C) for 24 hours, followed by a temperature of 
-40 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees F (-40

[[Page 265]]

<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 degrees C) for 24 hours and then permitted to 
return to room temperature, after which the VHAD and headlamp assembly 
shall show no damage which would impair its ability to perform as 
specified herein. The variation from correct horizontal or vertical aim 
shall not exceed <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 degree, and <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 degree, respectively.
    (D) The VHAD and headlamp assembly shall then be tested according to 
the corrosion test procedure of paragraph S7.8.5.1(c).
    (E) The VHAD and headlamp assembly shall then be tested for 
photometric compliance as specified in paragraphs S7.8.5.2(c)(1) and 
(2).
    S7.8.5.3 Visual/optical aiming. Each visually/optically aimable 
headlamp shall be designed to conform to the following requirements:
    (a) Vertical aim, lower beam. Each lower beam headlamp shall have a 
cutoff in the beam pattern. It may be either on the left side or the 
right side of the optical axis, but once chosen for a particular 
headlamp system's design, the side chosen for the cutoff shall not be 
changed for any headlamps intended to be used as replacements for those 
system's headlamps.
    (1) Vertical position of cutoff. The headlamp shall be aimed 
vertically so that the cutoff is on the left side, at 0.4 degree down 
from the H-H line, or on the right side, at the H-H line.
    (2) Vertical gradient. The gradient of the cutoff measured at either 
2.5 degrees L or 2.0 degrees R shall be not less than 0.13 based on the 
procedure of S7.8.5.3, paragraph (a)(5).
    (3) Horizontal position of the cutoff. The width shall be not less 
than two degrees, with not less than two degrees of its actual width 
centered at either 2.5 degrees L, or 2.0 degrees R.
    (4) Maximum inclination of cutoff. The vertical location of the 
highest gradient at the ends of the minimum width shall be within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 degree of the vertical location of the maximum 
gradient measured at the appropriate vertical line (at either 2.5 
degrees L for a left side cutoff, or 2.0 degrees R for a right side 
cutoff.)
    (5) Measuring the cutoff parameter. (i) The headlamp shall be 
mounted on a fixture which simulates its actual design location on any 
vehicle for which the headlamp is intended. The fixture, with the 
headlamp installed shall be attached to the goniometer table in such a 
way that the fixture alignment axes are coincident with the goniometer 
axes. The headlamp shall be energized at the specified test voltage.
    (ii) The headlamp beam pattern shall be aimed with the cutoff at the 
H-H axis. There shall be no adjustment, shimming, or modification of the 
horizontal axis of the headlamp or test fixture, unless the headlamp is 
equipped with a VHAD. In this case the VHAD shall be adjusted to zero.
    (iii) A vertical scan of the beam pattern shall be conducted for a 
headlamp with a left side gradient by aligning the goniometer on a 
vertical line at 2.5 degrees L and scanning from 1.5 degrees U to 1.5 
degrees D. For a headlamp with a right side gradient, a vertical scan of 
the beam pattern shall be conducted by aligning the goniometer on a 
vertical line at 2.0 degrees R and scanning from 1.5 degrees U to 1.5 
degrees D.
    (iv) Determine the maximum gradient within the range of the scan by 
using the formula: G = log E(a)-log E(a+0.1), where ``G'' is the 
gradient, ``E'' is illumination and ``a'' is vertical angular position. 
The maximum value of the gradient ``G'' determines the vertical angular 
location of the cutoff. Perform vertical scans at 1.0 degree L and R of 
the measurement point of the maximum gradient to determine the 
inclination.
    (b) Horizontal aim, lower beam. There shall be no adjustment of 
horizontal aim unless the headlamp is equipped with a horizontal VHAD. 
If the headlamp has a VHAD, it shall be set to zero.
    (c) Vertical aim, upper beam. (1) If the upper beam is combined in a 
headlamp with a lower beam, the vertical aim of the upper beam shall not 
be changed from the aim set using the procedures of paragraphs 
S7.8.5.3(a) and (b) used for the lower beam.
    (2) If the upper beam is not combined in a headlamp with a lower 
beam, the vertical aim of the upper beam shall be adjusted so that the 
maximum beam intensity is located on the H-H axis.
    (d) Horizontal aim, upper beam. (1) If the upper beam is combined in 
a

[[Page 266]]

headlamp with a lower beam, the horizontal aim of the upper beam shall 
not be changed from the aim set using the procedures of paragraphs 
S7.8.5.3 (a) and (b) used for the lower beam.
    (2) If the upper beam is not combined in a headlamp with the lower 
beam and has fixed horizontal aim or has a horizontal VHAD, then the 
headlamp shall be mounted on a fixture which simulates its actual design 
location on any vehicle for which the headlamp is intended. The fixture, 
with the headlamp installed shall be attached to the goniometer table in 
such a way that the fixture alignment axes are coincident with the 
goniometer axes. The headlamp shall be energized at 12.8 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.20 mV. There shall be no adjustment, shimming, or 
modification of the horizontal axis of the headlamp or test fixture, 
unless the headlamp is equipped with a VHAD. In this case the VHAD shall 
be adjusted to zero.
    (3) If the upper beam is not combined in a headlamp with a lower 
beam, and it does not have a VHAD, the horizontal aim of the upper beam 
shall be adjusted so that the maximium beam intensity is located on the 
V-V axis.
    (e) Photometric Requirements and Measurement. (1) Instead of being 
designed to conform to the photometric requirements of Figures 15-1, 17-
1, 27-1 or 28-1, a visually/optically aimable headlamp shall be designed 
to conform to the requirements of Figures 15-2, 17-2, 27-2 or 28-2 when 
tested in accordance with paragraph (2) and SAE J575 DEC88, with the 
distance from the photometer to the headlamp no less than 18.3 m.
    (2) If the lower beam has a left side cutoff, reaim the headlamp 
vertically to place the maximum gradient found in paragraph S7.8.5.3 at 
0.4 degree below the H-H line. For a headlamp with a lower beam right 
side cutoff, place the maximum gradient found in paragraph S7.8.5.3 at 
the H-H line. For an upper beam, the headlamp would already be aimed at 
the end of the procedure found in paragraph S7.8.5.3. A 0.25 degree 
reaim is permitted in any direction at any test point.
    (f) Marking--(1) Headlamp optical axis mark. There shall be a mark 
or markings identifying the optical axis of the headlamp visible from 
the front of the headlamp when installed on the vehicle, to assure 
proper horizontal and vertical alignment of the aiming screen or optical 
aiming equipment with the headlamp being aimed. The manufacturer is free 
to choose the design of the mark or markings. The mark or markings may 
be on the interior or exterior of the lens or indicated by a mark or 
central structure on the interior or exterior of the headlamp.
    (2) Visual/optical aimability identification marks. (i) The lens of 
a lower beam headlamp shall be marked ``VOL'' if the headlamp is 
intended to be visually/optically aimed using the left side of the lower 
beam pattern.
    (ii) The lens of a lower beam headlamp shall be marked ``VOR'' if 
the headlamp is intended to be visually/optically aimed using the right 
side of the lower beam pattern.
    (iii) The lens of each sealed beam or integral beam headlamp shall 
be marked ``VOR'' if the headlamp is of a type that was manufactured 
before May 1, 1997, and if such headlamp type has been redesigned since 
then to be visually/optically aimable.
    (iv) The lens of a headlamp that is solely an upper beam headlamp 
and intended to be visually/optically aimed using the upper beam shall 
be marked ``VO''.
    (v) Each letter used in marking according to this paragraph shall be 
not less than 3 mm. high.
    S7.9 Motorcycles. Each motorcycle shall be equipped with a 
headlighting system designed to conform to the following requirements.
    S7.9.1 A motorcycle manufactured before September 1, 2000, may be 
equipped with--
    (a) A headlighting system designed to conform to SAE Standard J584 
Motorcycle Headlamps April 1964, or to SAE Standard J584 April 1964 with 
the photometric specifications of Figure 32 and the upper beam 
aimability specifications of paragraph S7.9.3; or
    (b) One half of any headlighting system specified in S7.1 through 
S7.6 which provides both a full upper beam and full lower beam. Where 
more than one lamp must be used, the lamps shall be mounted vertically, 
with the lower beam as high as practicable.

[[Page 267]]

    S7.9.2 A motorcycle manufactured on or after September 1, 2000, 
shall be equipped with--
    (a) A headlighting system designed to conform to SAE Standard J584 
Motorcycle Headlamps April 1964 with the photometric specifications of 
Figure 32 and the upper beam aimability specifications of paragraph 
S7.9.3; or
    (b) A headlighting system that conforms to S7.9.1(b).
    S7.9.3 The upper beam of a multiple beam headlamp designed to 
conform to the photometric requirements of Figure 32 shall be aimed 
photoelectrically during the photometric test in the manner prescribed 
in SAE Standard J584 OCT93 Motorcycle Headlamps.
    S7.9.4 Motorcycle headlamp modulation system.
    S7.9.4.1 A headlamp on a motorcycle may be wired to modulate either 
the upper beam or the lower beam from its maximum intensity to a lesser 
intensity, provided that:
    (a) The rate of modulation shall be 240 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>40 
cycles per minute.
    (b) The headlamp shall be operated at maximum power for 50 to 70 
percent of each cycle.
    (c) The lowest intensity at any test point shall be not less than 17 
percent of the maximum intensity measured at the same point.
    (d) The modulator switch shall be wired in the power lead of the 
beam filament being modulated and not in the ground side of the circuit.
    (e) Means shall be provided so that both the lower beam and upper 
beam remain operable in the event of a modulator failure.
    (f) The system shall include a sensor mounted with the axis of its 
sensing element perpendicular to a horizontal plane. Headlamp modulation 
shall cease whenever the level of light emitted by a tungsten filament 
light operating at 3000[deg] Kelvin is either less than 270 lux (25 
foot-candles) of direct light for upward pointing sensors or less than 
60 lux (5.6 foot-candles) of reflected light for downward pointing 
sensors. The light is measured by a silicon cell type light meter that 
is located at the sensor and pointing in the same direction as the 
sensor. A Kodak Gray Card (Kodak R-27) is placed at ground level to 
simulate the road surface in testing downward pointing sensors.
    (g) When tested in accordance with the test profile shown in Figure 
9, the voltage drop across the modulator when the lamp is on at all test 
conditions for 12 volt systems and 6 volt systems shall not be greater 
than .45 volt. The modulator shall meet all the provisions of the 
standard after completion of the test profile shown in Figure 9.
    (h) Means shall be provided so that both the lower and upper beam 
function at design voltage when the headlamp control switch is in either 
the lower or upper beam position when the modulator is off.
    S7.9.4.2(a) Each motorcycle headlamp modulator not intended as 
original equipment, or its container, shall be labeled with the maximum 
wattage, and the minimum wattage appropriate for its use. Additionally, 
each such modulator shall comply with S7.9.4.1 (a) through (g) when 
connected to a headlamp of the maximum rated power and a headlamp of the 
minimum rated power, and shall provide means so that the modulated beam 
functions at design voltage when the modulator is off.
    (b) Instructions, with a diagram, shall be provided for mounting the 
light sensor including location on the motorcycle, distance above the 
road surface, and orientation with respect to the light.
    S7.9.5 Each replaceable bulb headlamp that is designed to meet the 
photometric requirements of paragraph S7.9.1(a) or paragraph S7.9.2(a) 
and that is equipped with a light source other than a replaceable light 
source meeting the requirements of paragraph S7.7, shall have the word 
``motorcycle'' permanently marked on the lens in characters not less 
than 0.114 in. (3 mm) in height.
    S7.9.6 A headlamp system shall be installed on a motorcycle in 
accordance with the requirements of this paragraph.
    S7.9.6.1 The headlamp system shall be located on the front of the 
motorcycle.
    S7.9.6.2 (a) If the system consists of a single headlamp, it shall 
be mounted on the vertical centerline of the motorcycle. If the headlamp 
contains more

[[Page 268]]

than one light source, each light source shall be mounted on the 
vertical centerline with the upper beam no higher than the lower beam, 
or horizontally disposed about the vertical centerline and mounted at 
the same height. If the light sources are horizontally disposed about 
the vertical centerline, the distance between the closest edges of the 
effective projected luminous lens area in front of the light sources 
shall not be greater than 200 mm (8 in.).
    (b) If the system consists of two headlamps, each of which provides 
both an upper and lower beam, the headlamps shall be mounted either at 
the same height and symmetrically disposed about the vertical centerline 
or mounted on the vertical centerline. If the headlamps are horizontally 
disposed about the vertical centerline, the distance between the closest 
edges of their effective projected luminous lens areas shall not be 
greater than 200 mm (8 in.).
    (c) If the system consists of two headlamps, one of which provides 
an upper beam and one of which provides the lower beam, the headlamps 
shall be located on the vertical centerline with the upper beam no 
higher than the lower beam, or horizontally disposed about the vertical 
centerline and mounted at the same height. If the headlamps are 
horizontally disposed about the vertical centerline, the distance 
between the closest edges of their effective projected luminous lens 
areas shall not be greater than 200 mm (8 in.).
    S8 Tests and Procedures for Integral Beam and Replaceable Bulb 
Headlighting Systems. When tested in accordance with the following 
procedures, each integral beam headlamp shall meet the requirements of 
paragraph S7.4, and each replaceable bulb headlamp shall meet the 
requirements of paragraph S7.5. Ballasts required to operate specific 
gas mixture light sources shall be included in the tests specified in 
paragraphs S8.1 and S8.4 though S8.7.
    S8.1 Photometry. Each headlamp to which paragraph S8 applies shall 
be tested according to paragraphs 4.1 and 4.1.4 of SAE Standard J1383 
APR85 for meeting the applicable photometric requirements, after each 
test specified in paragraphs S8.2, S8.3, S8.5, S8.6.1, S8.6.2, S8.7, and 
S8.10.1 and S8.10.2, if applicable. A \1/4\ degree reaim is permitted in 
any direction at any test point.
    S8.2 Abrasion. (a) A headlamp shall be mounted in the abrasion test 
fixture in the manner indicated in Figure 5 with the lens facing upward.
    (b) An abrading pad meeting the requirements in paragraphs (c)(1) 
through (c)(4) of this section shall be cycled back and forth (1 cycle) 
for 11 cycles at 4 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.8 in. (10 cm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 cm) per second over at least 80 percent of the lens 
surface, including all the area between the upper and lower aiming pads, 
but not including lens trim rings and edges.
    (c)(1) The abrading pad shall be not less than 1.0 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>.04 in. (2.5 cm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>.1 cm) wide, 
constructed of 0000 steel wool, and rubber cemented to a rigid base 
shaped to the same vertical contour of the lens. The ``grain'' of the 
pad shall be perpendicular to the direction of motion.
    (2) The abrading pad support shall be equal in size to the pad and 
the center of the support surface shall be within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>.08 in. ( <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 mm) of parallel to the 
lens surface.
    (3) The density of the abrading pad shall be such that when the pad 
is mounted to its support and is resting unweighted on the lens, the 
base of the pad shall be no closer than .125 in. (3.2 mm) to the lens at 
its closest point.
    (4) When mounted on its support and resting on the lens of the test 
headlamp, the abrading pad shall then be weighted such that a pad 
pressure of 2.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>.15 psi (14 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1 KPa) exists at the center and perpendicular to the 
face of the lens.
    (d) A pivot shall be used if it is required to follow the contour of 
the lens.
    (e) Unused steel wool shall be used for each test.
    S8.3 Chemical resistance. (a) The entire exterior lens surface of 
the headlamp in the headlamp test fixture and top surface of the lens-
reflector joint shall be wiped once to the left and once to the right 
with a 6-inch square soft cotton cloth (with pressure equally applied) 
which has been saturated once in a container with 2 ounces of a test 
fluid as listed in paragraph (b). The

[[Page 269]]

lamp shall be wiped within 5 seconds after removal of the cloth from the 
test fluid.
    (b) The test fluids are:
    (1) ASTM Reference Fuel C, which is composed of Isooctane 50% volume 
and Toluene 50% volume. Isooctane must conform to A2.7 in Annex 2 of the 
Motor Fuels Section of the 1985 Annual Book of ASTM Standards, Vol. 
05.04, and Toluene must conform to ASTM specification D362-84, Standard 
Specification for Industrial Grade Toluene. ASTM Reference Fuel C must 
be used as specified in:
    (i) Paragraph A2.3.2 and A2.3.3 of Annex 2 to Motor Fuels, Section 1 
in the 1985 Annual Book of ASTM Standards; and
    (ii) OSHA Standard 29 CFR 1910.106--Handling Storage and Use of 
Flammable Combustible Liquids.
    (2) Tar remover (consisting by volume of 45% xylene and 55% 
petroleum base mineral spirits).
    (3) Power steering fluid (as specified by the vehicle manufacturer 
for use in the motor vehicle on which the headlamp is intended to be 
installed).
    (4) Windshield washer fluid consisting of 0.5% monoethanolamine with 
the remainder 50% concentration of methanol/distilled water by volume.
    (5) Antifreeze (50% concentration of ethylene glycol/distilled water 
by volume).
    (c) After the headlamp has been wiped with the test fluid, it shall 
be stored in its designed operating attitude for 48 hours at a 
temperature of 73 [deg]F <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>7[deg] (23 [deg]C <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>4[deg]) and a relative humidity of 30 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent. At the end of the 48-hour period, the 
headlamp shall be wiped clean with a soft dry cotton cloth and visually 
inspected.
    S8.4 Corrosion. (a) A connector test shall be performed on each 
filament circuit prior to the test in subparagraph (b) according to 
Figure 1 and SAE Standard J580 DEC86. The power source shall be set to 
provide 12. 8 volts and the resistance shall be set to produce 10 
amperes.
    (b) The headlamp with connector attached to the terminals, 
unfixtured and in its designed operating attitude with all drain holes, 
breathing devices or other designed openings in their normal operating 
positions, shall be subjected to a salt spray (fog) test in accordance 
with ASTM B117-73, Method of Salt Spray (Fog) Testing, for 240 hours, 
consisting of ten successive 24-hour periods. During each period, the 
headlamp shall be mounted in the middle of the chamber and exposed for 
23 hours to the salt spray. The spray shall not be activated during the 
24th hour. The bulb shall be removed from the headlamp and from the test 
chamber during the one hour of salt spray deactivation and reinserted 
for the start of the next test period, at the end of the first and last 
three 23-hour periods of salt spray exposure, and at the end of any two 
of the fourth through seventh 23-hour periods of salt-spray exposure. 
The test chamber shall be closed at all times except for a maximum of 2 
minutes which is allowed for removal or replacement of a bulb during 
each period. After the ten periods, the lens reflector unit without the 
bulb shall be immersed in deionized water for 5 minutes, then secured 
and allowed to dry by natural convection only.
    (c) Using the voltage, resistance and pretest set up of paragraph 
(a) the current in each filament circuit shall be measured after the 
test conducted in paragraph (b).
    S8.5 Dust. The headlamp, mounted on a headlamp test fixture, with 
all drain holes, breathing devices or other designed openings in their 
normal operating positions, shall be positioned within a cubical box, 
with inside measurements of 35.4 in. (900 mm) on each side or larger if 
required for adequate wall clearance, i.e., a distance of at least 5.9 
in. (150 mm) between the headlamp and any wall of the box. The box shall 
contain 9.9 lb. (4.5 kg) of fine powdered cement which conforms to the 
ASTM C150-77 specification for Portland Cement. Every 15 minutes, the 
cement shall be agitated by compressed air or fan blower(s) by 
projecting blasts of air for a two-second period in a downward direction 
so that the cement is diffused as uniformly as possible throughout the 
entire box. This test shall be continued for five hours after which the 
exterior surfaces of the headlamp shall be wiped clean.
    S8.6 Temperature and internal heat test. A headlamp with one or more 
replaceable light sources shall be tested

[[Page 270]]

according to paragraphs S8.6.1 and S8.6.2. Tests shall be made with all 
filaments lighted at design voltage that are intended to be used 
simultaneously in the headlamp and which in combination draw the highest 
total wattage. These include but are not limited to filaments used for 
turn signal lamps, fog lamps, parking lamps, and headlamp lower beams 
lighted with upper beams when the wiring harness is so connected on the 
vehicle. If a turn signal is included in the headlamp assembly, it shall 
be operated at 90 flashes a minute with a 75 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2% 
current ``on time.'' If the lamp produces both the upper and lower beam, 
it shall be tested in both the upper beam mode and the lower beam mode 
under the conditions above described, except for a headlamp with a 
single Types HB1 or HB2 light source.
    S8.6.1 Temperature cycle. A headlamp, mounted on a headlamp test 
fixture, shall be subjected to 10 complete consecutive cycles having the 
thermal cycle profile shown in Figure 6. During the hot cycle, the lamp, 
shall be energized commencing at point ``A'' of Figure 6 and de-
energized at point ``B.'' Separate or single test chambers may be used 
to generate the environment of Figure 6. All drain holes, breathing 
devices or other openings or vents of the headlamps shall be in their 
normal operating positions.
    S8.6.2 Internal Heat Test. (a) The headlamp lens surface that would 
normally be exposed to road dirt shall be uniformly sprayed with any 
appropriate mixture of dust and water or other materials to reduce the 
photometric output at the H-V test point of the upper beam (or the \1/
2\D-1\1/2\R test point of the lower beam as appropriate) to 25 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2% of the output originally measured in the photometric 
test conducted pursuant to paragraphs S7.4(i), or S7.5 (a) through (e), 
as applicable. A headlamp with a single Types HB1 or HB2 light source 
shall be tested on the upper beam only. Such reduction shall be 
determined under the same conditions as that of the original photometric 
measurement.
    (b) After the photometric output of the lamp has been reduced as 
specified in paragraph (a), the lamp and its mounting hardware shall be 
mounted in an environmental chamber in a manner similar to that 
indicated in Figure 7 ``Dirt/Ambient Test Setup.'' The headlamp shall be 
soaked for one hour at a temperature of 95 + 7 -0 degrees F (35 + 4 -0 
degrees C) and then the lamp shall be energized according to paragraph 
S8.6 for one hour in a still air condition, allowing the temperature to 
rise from the soak temperature.
    (c) The lamp shall be returned to a room ambient temperature of 73 + 
7 -0 degrees F (23 + 4 -0 degrees C) and a relative humidity of 30 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10% and allowed to stabilize to the room ambient 
temperature. The lens shall then be cleaned.
    S8.7 Humidity. (a) The test fixture consists of a horizontal steel 
plate to which three threaded steel or aluminum rods of \1/2\ inch 
diameter are screwed vertically behind the headlamp. The headlamp 
assembly is clamped to the vertical rods, which are behind the headlamp. 
All attachments to the headlamp assembly are made behind the lens and 
vents or openings, and are not within 2 inches laterally of a vent inlet 
or outlet.
    (b) The mounted headlamp assembly is oriented in its design 
operating position, and is placed in a controlled environment at a 
temperature of 100+7-0 degrees F (38+4-0 degrees C) with a relative 
humidity of not less than 90 percent. All drain holes, breathing 
devices, and other openings are in their normal operation positions for 
all phases of the humidity test. The headlamp shall be subjected to 24 
consecutive 3-hour test cycles. In each cycle, it shall be energized for 
1 hour at design voltage with the highest combination of filament 
wattages that are intended to be used, and then de-energized for 2 
hours. If the headlamp incorporates a turn signal, it shall flash at 90 
flashes per minute with a 75<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent current 
``on-time.''
    (c) Within 3 minutes after the completion of the 24th cycle, the air 
flow test will begin. The following shall occur: the mounted assembly 
shall be removed, placed in an insulating box and covered with foam 
material so that there is no visible air space around the assembly; the 
box shall be closed, taken to the air flow test chamber, and placed 
within it. Inside the chamber,

[[Page 271]]

the assembly with respect to the air flow, shall be oriented in its 
design operating position. The assembly is positioned in the chamber so 
that the center of the lens is in the center of the opening of the air 
flow entry duct during the test. The headlamp has at least 3 inches 
clearance on all sides, and at least 4 inches to the entry and exit 
ducts at the closest points. If vent tubes are used which extend below 
the lamp body, the 3 inches are measured from the bottom of the vent 
tube or its protection. The temperature of the chamber is 73+7-0 degrees 
F (23+4-0 degrees C) with a relative humidity of 30+10-0 percent. The 
headlamp is not energized.
    (d) Before the test specified in paragraph (e) of this section, the 
uniformity of the air flow in the empty test chamber at a plane 4 inches 
downstream of the air entry duct shall have been measured over a 4-inch 
square grid. The uniformity of air flow at each grid point is <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent of the average air flow specified in 
paragraph (e) of this section.
    (e) The mounted assembly in the chamber shall be exposed, for one 
hour, to an average air flow of 330+0-30 ft/min. as measured with an air 
velocity measuring probe having an accuracy of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 
percent in the 330 ft/min range. The average air flow is the average of 
the velocity recorded at six points around the perimeter of the lens. 
The six points are determined as follows: At the center of the lens, 
construct a horizontal plane. The first two points are located in the 
plane, 1 inch outward from the intersection of the plane and each edge 
of the lens. Then, trisect the distance between these two points and 
construct longitudinal vertical planes at the two intermediate locations 
formed by the trisection. The four remaining points are located in the 
vertical planes, one inch above the top edge of the lens, and one inch 
below the bottom edge of the lens.
    (f) After one hour, the headlamp is removed and inspected for 
moisture.
    S8.8 Vibration. A vibration test shall be conducted in accordance 
with the procedures of SAE Standard J575e Tests for Motor Vehicle 
Lighting Devices and Components August 1970, and the following: the 
table on the adapter plate shall be of sufficient size to completely 
contain the test fixture base with no overhang. The vibration shall be 
applied in the vertical axis of the headlamp system as mounted on the 
vehicle. The filament shall not be energized.
    S8.9 Sealing. An unfixtured headlamp in its design mounting position 
shall be placed in water at a temperature of 176 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 
degrees F (60 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 degrees C) for one hour. The 
headlamp shall be energized in its highest wattage mode, with the test 
voltage at 12.8 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 V. during immersion. The lamp 
shall then be de-energized and immediately submerged in its design 
mounting position into water at 32 +5 -0 degrees F (0 +3 -0 degrees C). 
The water shall be in a pressurized vessel, and the pressure shall be 
increased to 10 psi (70 kPa), upon placing the lamp in the water. The 
lamp shall remain in the pressurized vessel for a period of thirty 
minutes. This entire procedure shall be repeated for four cycles. Then 
the lamp shall be inspected for any signs of water on its interior. 
During the high temperature portion of the cycles, the lamp shall be 
observed for signs of air escaping from its interior. If any water 
occurs on the interior or air escapes, the lamp is not a sealed lamp.
    S8.10 Chemical and corrosion resistance of reflectors of replaceable 
lens headlamps.
    S8.10.1 Chemical resistance. (a) With the headlamp in the headlamp 
test fixture and the lens removed, the entire surface of the reflector 
that receives light from a headlamp light source shall be wiped once to 
the left and once to the right with a 6-inch square soft cotton cloth 
(with pressure equally applied) which has been saturated once in a 
container with 2 ounces of one of the test fluids listed in paragraph 
(b). The lamp shall be wiped within 5 seconds after removal of the cloth 
from the test fluid.
    (b) The test fluids are:
    (1) Tar remover (consisting by volume of 45% xylene and 55% 
petroleum base mineral spirits);
    (2) Mineral spirits; or
    (3) Fluids other than water contained in the manufacturer's 
instructions for cleaning the reflector.

[[Page 272]]

    (c) After the headlamp has been wiped with the test fluid, it shall 
be stored in its designed operating attitude for 48 hours at a 
temperature of 73 [deg]F <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>7[deg] (23 [deg]C <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>4[deg]) and a relative humidity of 30 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent. At the end of the 48-hour period, the 
headlamp shall be wiped clean with a soft dry cotton cloth and visually 
inspected.
    S8.10.2 Corrosion. (a) The headlamp with the lens removed, 
unfixtured and in its designed operating attitude with all drain holes, 
breathing devices or other designed openings in their normal operating 
positions, shall be subjected to a salt spray (fog) test in accordance 
with ASTM B117-73, Method of Salt Spray (Fog) Testing, for 24 hours, 
while mounted in the middle of the chamber.
    (b) Afterwards, the headlamp shall be stored in its designed 
operating attitude for 48 hours at a temperature of 73 [deg]F <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>7[deg] (23 [deg]C <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>4[deg]) and a 
relative humidity of 30 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent and allowed to 
dry by natural convection only. At the end of the 48-hour period, the 
reflector shall be cleaned according to the instructions supplied with 
the headlamp manufacturer's replacement lens, and inspected. The lens 
and seal shall then be attached according to these instructions and the 
headlamp tested for photometric performance.
    S9. Deflection test for replaceable light sources. With the light 
source rigidly mounted in a fixture in a manner indicated in Figure 8, a 
force 4.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 pounds (17.8 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4N) is applied at a distance ``A'' from the reference 
plane perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the glass capsule and 
parallel to the smallest dimension of the pressed glass capsule seal. 
The force shall be applied (using a rod with a hard rubber tip with a 
minimum spherical radius of .039 in (1 mm)) radially to the surface of 
the glass capsule in four locations in a plane parallel to the reference 
plane and spaced at a distance ``A'' from that plane. These force 
applications shall be spaced 90 degrees apart starting at the point 
perpendicular to the smallest dimension of the pressed seal of the glass 
capsule. The bulb deflection shall be measured at the glass capsule 
surface at 180 degrees opposite to the force application. Distance ``A'' 
for a replaceable light source other than an HB Type shall be the 
dimension provided in accordance with Appendix A of part 564 of this 
chapter, section I.A.1 if the light source has a lower beam filament, or 
as specified in section I.B.1 if the light source has only an upper beam 
filament.
    S10 Simultaneous Aim Photometry Tests--(a) Type F Headlamp Systems. 
The assembly shall be located on a goniometer placed not less than 60 
feet (18.3m) from the photometer. The LF unit shall be aimed 
mechanically by centering the unit on the photometer axis and by 
aligning the aiming plane of the lens perpendicular to the photometer 
axis. Then the assembly shall be moved in a plane parallel to the 
established aiming plane of the LF headlamp until the UF headlamp is 
centered on the photometer axis. Photometry measurements of the UF 
photometry unit shall be completed using the aiming plane so 
established, and the procedures of section 4.1 and 4.1.4 Standard J1383 
APR85, and Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2. A reaim tolerance of <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/4\ degree is permitted in any direction at any test 
point.
    (b) Integral Beam Headlamp Systems. The assembly used for 
simultaneously aiming more than one integral beam headlamp shall be 
placed on a test fixture on a goniometer located not less than 60 feet 
(18.3 m.) from the photometer. The assembly shall be aimed by centering 
the geometric center of the lower beam lens(es) on the photometer axis 
and by aligning the photometer axis to be perpendicular to the aiming 
reference plane or appropriate vertical plane defined by the 
manufacturer of any lower beam contributor. Photometric compliance of 
the lower beam shall be determined with all lower beam contributors 
illuminated and in accordance with sections 4.1 and 4.1.6 of SAE 
Standard J1383 APR85, and Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2. The assembly shall 
then be moved in a plane parallel to the established aiming plane of the 
lower beam until the assembly is located with the geometric center of 
the upper lens(es) on the photometer axis. Photometric compliance for 
upper beam shall now be determined using the figure and procedure 
specified for the lower beam. During photometric testing, a \1/4\ degree 
reaim is permitted in any direction at any test point.

[[Page 273]]

    S11. Photometric Test. A lamp that is wired in accordance with 
paragraph S5.5.11 of this standard, shall be tested for compliance with 
S5.5.11(a)(1) in accordance with the test method specified for 
photometric testing in SAE Standard J575 DEC88 when a test voltage of 
12.8V <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>20 mV is applied to the input terminals of 
the lamp switch module or voltage-reducing equipment, whichever is 
closer to the electrical source on the vehicle. The test distance from 
the lamp to the photometer shall be not less than 18.3 m, if the lamp is 
optically combined with a headlamp, or is a separate lamp, and not less 
than 3 m, if the lamp is optically combined with a lamp, other than a 
headlamp, that is required by this standard.
    S12. Headlamp Concealment Devices.
    S12.1 While the headlamp is illuminated, its fully opened headlamp 
concealment device shall remain fully opened should any loss of power to 
or within the headlamp concealment device occur.
    S12.2 Whenever any malfunction occurs in a component that controls 
or conducts power for the actuation of the concealment device, each 
closed headlamp concealment device shall be capable of being fully 
opened by a means not requiring the use of any tools. Thereafter, the 
headlamp concealment device must remain fully opened until intentionally 
closed.
    S12.3 Except for malfunctions covered by S12.2, each headlamp 
concealment device shall be capable of being fully opened and the 
headlamps illuminated by actuation of a single switch, lever, or similar 
mechanism, including a mechanism that is automatically actuated by a 
change in ambient light conditions.
    S12.4 Each headlamp concealment device shall be installed so that 
the headlamp may be mounted, aimed, and adjusted without removing any 
component of the device, other than components of the headlamp assembly.
    S12.5 Except for cases of malfunction covered by S12.2, each 
headlamp concealment device shall, within an ambient temperature range 
of -20 [deg]F. to +120 [deg]F., be capable of being fully opened in not 
more than 3 seconds after the actuation of a driver-operated control.
    S12.6 As an alternative to complying with the requirements of S12.1 
through S12.5, a vehicle with headlamps incorporating VHAD or visual/
optical aiming in accordance with paragraph S7 may meet the requirements 
for Concealable lamps in paragraph 5.14 of the following version of the 
Economic Commission for Europe Regulation 48 ``Uniform Provisions 
Concerning the Approval of Vehicles With Regard to the Installation of 
Lighting and Light-Signalling Devices'': E/ECE/324-E/ECE/TRANS/505, 
Rev.1/Add.47/Rev.1/Corr.2, 26 February 1996 (page 17), in the English 
language version. A copy of paragraph 5.14 may be reviewed at the DOT 
Docket Management Facility, U.S. Department of Transportation, Room PL-
01, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, D.C. 20590-0001. Copies of E/
ECE/324-E/ECE/TRANS/505, Rev.1/Add.47/Rev.1/Corr.2, 26 February 1996 may 
be obtained from the ECE internet site:

www.unece.org/trans/main/wp29/wp29regs.html or by writing to:

    United Nations, Conference Services Division, Distribution and Sales 
Section, Office C.115-1, Palais des Nations, CH-1211, Geneva 10, 
Switzerland.
    S12.7 Manufacturers of vehicles with headlamps incorporating VHAD or 
visual/optical aiming shall elect to certify to S12.1 through S12.5 or 
to S12.6 prior to, or at the time of certification of the vehicle, 
pursuant to 49 CFR part 567. The selection is irrevocable.

                   Figures and Tables to Sec. 571.108

                       Figure 1a--Required Percentages of Minimum Candlepower of Figure 1b
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Turn
            Test points (deg)                                              signal     Stop     Parking    Tail
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10U, 10D.................................  5L, 5R.......................        20        20        20        20
5U, 5D...................................  20L, 20R.....................      12.5      12.5        10        15
                                           10L, 10R.....................      37.5      37.5        20        40
                                           V............................      87.5      87.5        70        90
H........................................  10L, 10R.....................        50        50        35        40

[[Page 274]]

 
                                           5L, 5R.......................       100       100        90       100
                                           V............................       100       100       100       100
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note--Minimum design candlepower requirements are determined by multiplying the percentages given in this Figure
  by the minimum allowable candlepower values in Figure 1b. The resulting values shall be truncated after one
  digit to the right of the decimal point.


       Figure 1b--Minimum and Maximum Allowable Candlepower Values
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Lighted sections
                 Lamp                 ----------------------------------
                                            1          2           3
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Stop.................................     80/300      95/360    110/420
Tail \1\.............................      2/18       3.5/20    5.0/25
Parking \2\..........................    4.0/125
Red turn signal......................     80/300      95/360    110/420
Yellow turn signal rear..............    130/750     150/900    175/1050
Yellow turn signal front.............    200/-          240-    275/-
Yellow turn signal front \3\.........    500/-         600/-    685/-
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Maximum at H or above.
\2\ The maximum candlepower value of 125 applies to all test points at H
  or above. The maximum allowable candlepower value below H is 250.
\3\ Values apply when the optical axis (filament center) of the front
  turn signal is at a spacing less than 4 in. (10 cm.) from the lighted
  edge of the headlamp unit providing the lower beam, or from the
  lighted edge of any additional lamp installed as original equipment
  and which supplements the lower beam.


    Figure 1c--Sum of the Percentages of Grouped Minimum Candlepower
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Turn
    Group and test points       signal      Stop     Parking      Tail
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1 10U-5L, 5U-20L, 5D-20L,            65         65         60         70
 10D-5L.....................
2 5U-10L, H-10L, 5D-10L.....        125        125         75        120
3 H-5L, 5U-V, H-V, 5D-V, H-         475        475        420        480
 5R.........................
4 5U-10R, H-10R, 5D-10R.....        125        125         75        120
5 10U-5R, 5U-20R, 5D-20R,            65         65         60         70
 10D-5R.....................
------------------------------------------------------------------------


   Figure 2--Minimum Luminous Intensity Requirements for Backup Lamps
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Total for
                                                                group,
 Group                   Test point, degrees                    candela
                                                               (see note
                                                                  1)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1 \1\  45L-5U, 45L-H, 45L-5D...............................          45
 2 \1\  30L-H, 30L-5D.......................................          50
     3  10L-10U, 10L-5U, V-10U, V-5U, 10R-10U, 10R-5U.......         100
     4  10L-H, 10L-5D, V-H, V-5D, 10R-H, 10R-5D.............         360
 5 \1\  30R-H, 30R-5D.......................................          50
 6 \1\  45R-5U, 45R-H, 45R-5D...............................          45
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ When 2 lamps of the same or symmetrically opposite design are used,
  the reading along the vertical axis and the averages of the readings
  for the same angles left and right of vertical for 1 lamp shall be
  used to determine compliance with the requirements. If 2 lamps of
  differing designs are used, they shall be tested individually and the
  values added to determine that the combined units meet twice the
  candela requirements.
When only 1 backup lamp is used on the vehicle, it shall be tested to
  twice the candela requirements.


[[Page 275]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.010


[[Page 276]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.011


[[Page 277]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.012


[[Page 278]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.013


[[Page 279]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.014


[[Page 280]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.015


[[Page 281]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.016


[[Page 282]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.017


[[Page 283]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.018


                     Figure 10--Photometric Requirements for Center High-Mounted Stop Lamps
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                       Minimum
                                                  Minimum     Zones (test points within zones, see    total for
            Individual test points               intensity                   note 2)                     zone
                                                 (candela)                                            (canadela)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10U-10L.......................................            8  Zone I (5U-V, H-5L, H-V, H-5R, 5D-V)..          125
-V............................................           16                                          ...........
-10R..........................................            8                                          ...........
5U-10L........................................           16  Zone II (5U-5R, 5U-10R, H-10R, 5D-10R,           98
                                                              5D-5R).
-5L...........................................           25                                          ...........
-V............................................           25                                          ...........
-5R...........................................           25                                          ...........

[[Page 284]]

 
-10R..........................................           16                                          ...........
5D-10L........................................           16  Zone III (5U-5L, 5U-10L, H-10L, 5D-              98
                                                              10L, 5D-5L).
-5L...........................................           25                                          ...........
-V............................................           25                                          ...........
-5R...........................................           25                                          ...........
-10R..........................................           16                                          ...........
H-10L.........................................           16  Zone IV (10U-10L, 10U-V, 10U-10R).....           32
-5L...........................................           25                                          ...........
-V............................................           25                                          ...........
-5R...........................................           25                                          ...........
-10R..........................................           16                                          ...........
See Note 1....................................      \1\ 160
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note 1: The listed maximum shall not occur over any area larger than that generated by a \1/4\ degree radius
  within an solid cone angle within the rectangle bounded by test points 10U-10L, 10U-10R, 5D-10L, and 5D-10R.
Note 2: The measured values at each test point shall not be less than 60% of the value listed.
\1\ Maximum intensity (Candela).

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.019


[[Page 285]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.020


[[Page 286]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.021


[[Page 287]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.022


[[Page 288]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.024


[[Page 289]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.025


[[Page 290]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.024


[[Page 291]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.026


[[Page 292]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.027


[[Page 293]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.025


[[Page 294]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11AU04.554


[[Page 295]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11AU04.555


[[Page 296]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.026


[[Page 297]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.027


[[Page 298]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.028


[[Page 299]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFTED] TR10MR97.028


[[Page 300]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.029


[[Page 301]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.030


[[Page 302]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.031


[[Page 303]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.032


[[Page 304]]


        Figure 29--Minimum Photometric Performance of Retroflective Sheeting in Candela/Lux/Square Meter
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                        Observation angle
                                                          --------------------------------------------
                      Entrance angle                            0.2 Degree            0.5 Degree         Grade
                                                          --------------------------------------------
                                                             White       Red       White       Red
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-4 degree................................................        250         60         65         15     DOT-C2
30 degree................................................        250         60         65         15     DOT-C2
45 degree................................................         60         15         15          4     DOT-C2
-4 degree................................................        165         40         43         10     DOT-C3
30 degree................................................        165         40         43         10     DOT-C3
45 degree................................................         40         10         10          3     DOT-C3
-4 degree................................................        125         30         33          8     DOT-C4
30 degree................................................        125         30         33          8     DOT-C4
45 degree................................................         30          8          8          2     DOT-C4
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 305]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.031


[[Page 306]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.032


[[Page 307]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.033


[[Page 308]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.034


[[Page 309]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP97.019


[[Page 310]]


                 Figure 32--Motorcycle and Motor-Driven Cycle Headlamp Photometric Requirements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Test Points (deg.)                                                           Motor-Driven Cycle
----------------------------------------------------     Motorcycle      Motor-Driven Cycle    with Single Lamp
           Up or Down               Left or Right         (candela)           (candela)       System  (candela)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   Lower Beam
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.5U...........................  1R to R...........  1400-MAX..........  1400-MAX
1.5U...........................  1R to 3R..........  ..................  ..................  1400-MAX.
1U.............................  1.5L to L.........  700-MAX...........  700-MAX...........  700-MAX.
0.5U...........................  1.5L to L.........  1000-MAX..........  1000-MAX..........  1000-MAX.
0.5U...........................  1R to 3R..........  2700-MAX..........  2700-MAX..........  2700-MAX.
1.5D...........................  9L and 9R.........  700-MIN
2D.............................  0.0R..............  7000-MIN..........  5000-MIN..........  4000-MIN.
2D.............................  3L and 3R.........  4000-MIN..........  3000-MIN..........  3000-MIN.
2D.............................  6L and 6R.........  1500-MIN..........  1500-MIN..........  1500-MIN.
2D.............................  12L and 12R.......  700-MIN
3D.............................  6L and 6R.........  800-MIN...........  800-MIN
4D.............................  0.0R..............  2000-MIN..........  2000-MIN..........  1000-MIN.
4D.............................  4R................  12500-MAX.........  12500-MAX.........  12500-MAX.
--------------------------------
                                                   Upper Beam
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2U.............................  0.0R..............  1000-MIN
1U.............................  3L and 3R.........  2000-MIN..........  2000-MIN.
0.0U...........................  0.0R..............  12500-MIN.........  10000-MIN.
0.5D...........................  0.0R..............  20000-MIN.........  20000-MIN.
0.5D...........................  3L and 3R.........  10000-MIN.........  5000-MIN.
0.5D...........................  6L and 6R.........  3300-MIN..........  2000-MIN.
0.5D...........................  9L and 9R.........  1500-MIN
0.5D...........................  12L and 12R.......  800-MIN
1D.............................  0.0R..............  17500-MIN.........  15000-MIN.
2D.............................  0.0R..............  5000-MIN..........  5000-MIN.
3D.............................  0.0R..............  2500-MIN..........  2500-MIN.
3D.............................  6L and 6R.........  ..................  800-MIN.
3D.............................  9L and 9R.........  1500-MIN
3D.............................  12L and 12R.......  300-MIN
4D.............................  0.0R..............  1500-MIN
4D.............................  0.0R..............  7500-MAX..........  7500-MAX.
ANYWHERE.......................  ANYWHERE..........  75000-MAX.........  75000-MAX.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                     Table I--Required Motor Vehicle Lighting Equipment Other Than Headlamps
        Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles, Trucks, Trailers, and Buses, of 80 or More Inches Overall Width
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                              Applicable SAE
                                                                                                standard or
                                        Multipurpose passenger                             recommended practice
                Item                 vehicles, trucks, and buses         Trailers               (See S5 for
                                                                                             subreferenced SAE
                                                                                                materials)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Taillamps..........................  2 red......................  2 red.................  J585e, September 1977.
Stoplamps..........................  2 red......................  2 red.................  SAE J1398, May 1985.
License plate lamp.................  1 white....................  1 white...............  J587 October 1981.
Reflex reflectors..................  4 red; 2 amber.............  4 red; 2 amber........  J594f, January 1977.
Side marker lamps..................  2 red; 2 amber.............  2 red; 2 amber........  J592e, July 1972.
Backup lamp........................  1 white....................  None..................  J593c, February 1968.
Turn signal lamps..................  2 red or amber; 2 amber....  2 red or amber........  SAE J1395, April 1985.
Turn signal operating unit.........  1..........................  None..................  J589, April 1964.
Turn signal flasher................  1..........................  None..................  J590b, October 1965.
Vehicular hazard warning signal      1..........................  None..................  J910, January 1966.
 operating unit.
Vehicular hazard warning signal      1..........................  None..................  J945, February 1966.
 flasher..
Identification lamps...............  3 amber; 3 red.............  3 red.................  J592e, July 1972.
Clearance lamps....................  2 amber; 2 red.............  2 amber, 2 red........  J592e, July 1972.
Intermediate side marker lamps.      2 amber....................  2 amber...............  J592e, July 1972.
Intermediate side reflex             2 amber....................  2 amber...............  J594f, January 1977.
 reflectors.
Conspicuity........................  See S5.7...................  See S5.7..............  See S5.7
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 311]]


                                    Table II--Location of Required Equipment
        Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles, Trucks, Trailers, and Buses, of 80 or More Inches Overall Width
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Location on--                        Height above road
                                   --------------------------------------------------------   surface measured
               Item                   Multipurpose passenger                                 from center of item
                                       vehicles, trucks, and             Trailers            on vehicle at curb
                                               buses                                               weight
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Headlamps.........................  On the front, each          Not required..............  Not less than 22
                                     headlamp providing the                                  inches (55.9 cm)
                                     upper beam, at the same                                 nor more than 54
                                     height, 1 on each side of                               inches (137.2 cm).
                                     the vertical centerline,
                                     each headlamp providing
                                     the lower beam, at the
                                     same height, 1 on each
                                     side of the vertical
                                     centerline, as far apart
                                     as practicable. See also
                                     S7.
Taillamps.........................  On the rear, 1 on each      On the rear, 1 on each      Not less than 15
                                     side of the vertical        side of the vertical        inches, nor more
                                     centerline, at the same     centerline, at the same     than 72 inches.
                                     height, and as far apart    height, and as far apart
                                     as practicable.             as practicable.
Stop lamps........................  ......do..................  ......do..................   Do.
License plate lamp................  At rear license plate, to   At rear license plate, to   No requirement.
                                     illuminate the plate from   illuminate the plate from
                                     the top or sides.           the top or sides.
Backup lamp.......................  On the rear...............  Not required..............   Do.
Turn signal lamps.................  At or near the front--1     On the rear--1 red or       Not less than 15
                                     amber on each side of the   amber on each side of the   inches, nor more
                                     vertical centerline, at     vertical centerline, at     than 83 inches.
                                     the same height, and as     the same height, and as
                                     far apart as practicable.   far apart as practicable.
                                    On the rear--1 red or
                                     amber on each side of the
                                     vertical centerline, at
                                     the same height, and as
                                     far apart as practicable.
Identification lamps..............  On the front and rear--3    On the rear--3 lamps as     No requirement.
                                     lamps, amber in front,      close as practicable to
                                     red in rear, as close as    the top of the vehicle at
                                     practicable to the top of   the same height, as close
                                     the vehicle, at the same    as practicable to the
                                     height, as close as         vertical centerline, with
                                     practicable to the          lamp centers spaced not
                                     vertical centerline, with   less than 6 inches or
                                     lamp centers spaced not     more than 12 inches apart.
                                     less than 6 inches or
                                     more than 12 inches
                                     apart. Alternatively, the
                                     front lamps may be
                                     located as close as
                                     practicable to the top of
                                     the cab.
Clearance lamps...................  On the front and rear--2    On the front and rear--2     Do.
                                     amber lamps on front, 2     amber lamps on front, 2
                                     red lamps on rear, to       red lamps on rear, to
                                     indicate the overall        indicate the overall
                                     width of the vehicle, one   width of the vehicle, one
                                     on each side of the         on each side of the
                                     vertical centerline, at     vertical centerline, at
                                     the same height, and as     the same height, and as
                                     near the top as             near the top thereof as
                                     practicable.                practicable 2, 3 4.
Intermediate side marker lamps....  On each side--1 amber lamp  On each side--1 amber lamp  Not less than 15
                                     located at or near the      located at or near the      inches.
                                     midpoint between the        midpoint between the
                                     front and rear side         front and rear side
                                     marker lamps.               marker lamps.
Intermediate side reflex            On each side--1 amber       On each side--1 amber       Not less than 15
 reflectors.                         located at or near the      located at or near the      inches nor more
                                     midpoint between the        midpoint between the        than 60 inches.
                                     front and rear side         front and rear side
                                     reflex reflectors.          reflex reflectors.
Conspicuity.......................  See S5.7..................  See S5.7..................  See S5.7
Reflex reflectors.................  On the rear--1 red on each  On the rear--1 red on each   Do.
                                     side of the vertical        side of the vertical
                                     centerline, as far apart    centerline, as far apart
                                     as practicable, and at      as practicable, and at
                                     the same height.            the same height.
                                    On each side--1 red as far  On each side--1 red as far
                                     to the rear as              to the rear as
                                     practicable, and 1 amber    practicable, and 1 amber
                                     as far to the front as      as far to the front as
                                     practicable.                practicable.
Side marker lamps.................  ......do..................  ......do..................  Not less than 15
                                                                                             inches, and on the
                                                                                             rear of trailers
                                                                                             not more than 60
                                                                                             inches.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 312]]


                              Table III--Required Motor Vehicle Lighting Equipment
  [All Passenger Cars and Motorcycles, and Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles, Trucks, Buses and Trailers of Less
                                    Than 80 (2032) Inches (mm) Overall Width]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                               Applicable SAE
                                   Passenger cars,                                              standard or
                                    multipurpose                                            recommended practice
             Item                passenger vehicles,       Trailers         Motorcycles         (See S5 for
                                  trucks, and buses                                          subreferenced SAE
                                                                                                 materials)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Headlamps.....................  See S7..............  None.............  See S7.9........  J566 January 1960.
Taillamps.....................  2 red...............  2 red............  1 red...........  J585e, September
                                                                                            1977.
Stoplamps.....................  2 red...............  2 red............  1 red...........  SAE J586, February
                                                                                            1984.
High-mounted stoplamp.........  1 red...............  Not required.....  Not required....  J186a, September
                                                                                            1977.
License plate lamp............  1 white.............  1 white..........  1 white.........  J587, October 1981.
Parking lamps.................  2 amber or white....  None.............  None............  J222, December 1970.
Reflex reflectors.............  4 red; 2 amber......  4 red; 2 amber...  3 red; 2 amber..  J594f, January 1977.
Intermediate side reflex        2 amber.............  2 amber..........  None............  J594f, January 1977.
 reflectors.
Intermediate side marker lamps  2 amber.............  2 amber..........  None............  J592e, July 1972.
Side marker lamps.............  2 red; 2 amber......  2 red; 2 amber...  None............  J592e, July 1972.
Backup lamp...................  1 white.............  None.............  None............  J593c, February 1968.
Turn signal lamps.............  2 red or amber; 2     2 red or amber...  2 amber; 2 red    SAE J588, November
                                 amber.                                   or amber.         1984.
Turn signal operating unit.3,   1...................  None.............  1...............  J589, April 1964.
 4.
Turn signal flasher...........  1...................  None.............  1...............  J590b, October 1965.
Vehicular hazard warning        1...................  None.............  None............  J910, January 1966.
 signal operating unit.
Vehicular hazard warning        1...................  None.............  None............  J945, February 1966.
 signal flasher.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                    Table IV--Location of Required Equipment
  [All Passenger Cars and Motorcycles, and Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles, Trucks, Trailers, and Buses of Less
                                    than 80 (2032) Inches (MM) Overall Width]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Location on--
                                    ------------------------------------------------------   Height above road
                                         Passenger cars,                                   surface measured from
                Item                  multipurpose passenger                                 center of item on
                                        vehicles, trucks,             Motorcycles             vehicle at curb
                                       trailers, and buses                                         weight
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Headlamps..........................  On the front, each       See S7.9...................  Not less than 22
                                      headlamp providing the                                inches (55.9 cm) nor
                                      lower beam, at the                                    more than 54 inches
                                      same height, 1 on each                                (137.2 cm).
                                      side of the vertical
                                      centerline, each
                                      headlamp providing the
                                      upper beam, at the
                                      same height, 1 on each
                                      side of the vertical
                                      center-line, as far
                                      apart as practicable.
                                      See also S7.
Taillamps..........................  On the rear--1 on each   On the rear--on the          Not less than 15
                                      side of the vertical     vertical centerline except   inches, nor more
                                      centerline, at the       that if two are used, they   than 72 inches.
                                      same height, and as      shall be symmetrically
                                      far apart as             disposed about the
                                      practicable.             vertical centerline.
Stoplamps..........................  On the rear--1 on each   On the rear--on the          Not less than 15
                                      side of the vertical     vertical centerline except   inches, nor more
                                      centerline, at the       that if two are used, they   than 72 inches.
                                      same height, and as      shall be symmetrically
                                      far apart as             disposed about the
                                      practicable.             vertical centerline.
High-mounted stoplamp..............  On the rear, on the      Not required...............  See S5.3.1.8 for
                                      vertical centerline                                   passenger cars. Not
                                      [See S5.1.1.27,                                       less than 34 inches
                                      S5.3.1.8, and Table                                   for multipurpose
                                      III], effective                                       passenger vehicles,
                                      September 1, 1985, for                                trucks, and buses.
                                      passenger cars only.

[[Page 313]]

 
License plate lamp.................  At rear license plate,   At rear license plate......  No requirement.
                                      to illuminate the
                                      plate from the top or
                                      sides.
Parking lamps......................  On the front--1 on each  Not required...............  Not less than 15
                                      side of the vertical                                  inches, nor more
                                      centerline, at the                                    than 72 inches.
                                      same height, and as
                                      far apart as
                                      practicable.
Reflex reflectors..................  On the rear--1 red on    On the rear--1 red on the    Not less than 15
                                      each side of the         vertical centerline except   inches, nor more
                                      vertical centerline,     that, if two are used on     than 60 inches.
                                      at the same height,      the rear, they shall be
                                      and as far apart as      symmetrically disposed
                                      practicable.             about the vertical
                                                               centerline.
                                     On each side--1 red as   On each side--1 red as far
                                      far to the rear as       to the rear as
                                      practicable, and 1       practicable, and 1 amber
                                      amber as far to the      as far to the front as
                                      front as practicable.    practicable.
Backup lamp........................  On the rear............  Not required...............  No requirement.
Turn signal lamps..................  At or near the front--1  At or near the front--1      Not less than 15
                                      amber on each side of    amber on each side of the    inches, nor more
                                      the vertical             vertical centerline at the   than 83 inches.
                                      centerline, at the       same height, and having a
                                      same height, and as      minimum horizontal
                                      far apart as             separation distance
                                      practicable.             (centerline of lamps) of
                                     On the rear--1 red or     16 inches. Minimum edge to
                                      amber on each side of    edge separation distance
                                      the vertical             between lamp and headlamp
                                      centerline, at the       is 4 inches.
                                      same height, and as     At or near the rear--1 red
                                      far apart as             or amber on each side of
                                      practicable.             the vertical centerline,
                                                               at the same height and
                                                               having a minimum
                                                               horizontal separation
                                                               distance (centerline to
                                                               centerline of lamps) of 9
                                                               inches. Minimum edge to
                                                               edge separation distance
                                                               between lamp and tail or
                                                               stop lamp is 4-inches,
                                                               when a single stop and
                                                               taillamp is installed on
                                                               the vertical centerline
                                                               and the turn signal lamps
                                                               are red..
Side marker lamps..................  On each side--1 red as   Not required...............  Not less than 15
                                      far to the rear as                                    inches.
                                      practicable, and 1
                                      amber as far to the
                                      front as practicable.
Intermediate side marker lamps.....  On each side--1 amber    Not required...............  Not less than 15
                                      located at or near the                                inches.
                                      midpoint between the
                                      front and rear side
                                      marker lamps.
Intermediate side marker reflectors  On each side--1 amber    Not required...............  Not less than 15
                                      located at or near the                                inches, nor more
                                      midpoint between the                                  than 60 inches.
                                      front and rear side
                                      marker reflectors.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: (1) The term overall width refers to the nominal design dimension of the widest part of the vehicle,
  exclusive of signal lamps, marker lamps, outside rearview mirrors, flexible fender extensions, and mud flaps,
  determine with doors and windows closed, and the wheels in the straight-ahead position.
This supersedes the interpretation of the term ``overall width'' appearing in the Federal Register of March 1,
  1967 (32 FR 3390).
(2) Paragraph S3.1 and Tables I and III of Sec. 571.108 as amended (32 FR 18033, Dec. 16, 1967), specify that
  certain lamp assemblies shall conform to applicable SAE Standards. Each of these basically referenced
  standards subreferences both SAE Standard J575 (tests for motor vehicle lighting devices and components) which
  in turn references SAE Standard J573 on bulbs, and SAE Standard J567 on bulb sockets.
(3) Paragraph C of SAE Standard J575 states in part: ``Where special bulbs are specified, they should be
  submitted with the devices and the same or similar bulbs used in the tests and operated at their rated mean
  spherical candlepower.'' The Administrator has determined that this provision of SAE Standard J575 permits the
  use of special bulbs, including tubular-type bulbs, which do not conform to the detailed requirements of Table
  I of SAE Standard J573. It follows that the sockets for special bulbs need not conform to the detailed
  requirements of SAE Standard J567. These provisions for special bulbs in no way except the lamp assemblies
  from meeting all performance requirements specified in Federal Standard No. 108, including those specified in
  the basically referenced SAE Standards, and in the subreferenced SAE Standard J575.


[41 FR 35522, Aug. 23, 1976]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.108, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.

[[Page 314]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.109  Standard No. 109; New pneumatic tires.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies tire dimensions and laboratory 
test requirements for bead unseating resistance, strength, endurance, 
and high speed performance; defines tire load ratings; and specifies 
labeling requirements for passenger car tires.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to new pneumatic tires for 
use on passenger cars manufactured after 1948. However, it does not 
apply to any tire that has been altered so as render impossible its use, 
or its repair for use, as motor vehicle equipment.
    S3. Definitions.
    Bead means that part of the tire made of steel wires, wrapped or 
reinforced by ply cords, that is shaped to fit the rim.
    Bead separation means a breakdown of bond between components in the 
bead area.
    Bias ply tire means a pneumatic tire in which the ply cords that 
extend to the beads are laid at alternate angles substantially less than 
90[deg] to the centerline of the tread.
    Carcass means the tire structure, except tread and sidewall rubber.
    Chunking means the breaking away of pieces of the tread or sidewall.
    Cord means the strands forming the plies in the tire.
    Cord separation means cords parting away from adjacent rubber 
compounds.
    Cracking means any parting within the tread, sidewall, or innerliner 
of the tire extending to cord material.
    CT means a pneumatic tire with an inverted flange tire and rim 
system in which the rim is designed with rim flanges pointed radially 
inward and the tire is designed to fit on the underside of the rim in a 
manner that encloses the rim flanges inside the air cavity of the tire.
    Groove means the space between two adjacent tread ribs.
    Innerliner means the layer(s) forming the inside surface of a 
tubeless tire that contains the inflating medium within the tire.
    Innerliner separation means the parting of the innerliner from cord 
material in the carcass.
    Load rating means the maximum load a tire is rated to carry for a 
given inflation pressure.
    Maximum permissible inflation pressure means the maximum cold 
inflation pressure to which a tire may be inflated.
    Maximum load rating means the load rating at the maximum permissible 
inflation pressure for that tire.
    Open splice means any parting at any junction of tread, sidewall, or 
innerliner that extends to cord material.
    Overall width means the linear distance between the exteriors of the 
sidewalls of an inflated tire, including elevations due to labeling, 
decorations, or protective bands or ribs.
    Ply means a layer of rubber-coated parallel cords.
    Ply separation means a parting of rubber compound between adjacent 
plies.
    Pneumatic tire means a mechanical device made of rubber, chemicals, 
fabric and steel or other materials, which, when mounted on an 
automotive wheel, provides the traction and contains the gas or fluid 
that sustains the load.
    Radial ply tire means a pneumatic tire in which the ply cords which 
extend to the beads are laid at substantially 90[deg] to the centerline 
of the tread.
    Rim means a metal support for a tire or a tire and tube assembly 
upon which the tire beads are seated.
    Section width means the linear distance between the exteriors of the 
sidewalls of an inflated tire, excluding elevations due to labeling, 
decoration, or protective bands.
    Sidewall means that portion of a tire between the tread and the 
bead.
    Sidewall separation means the parting of the rubber compound from 
the cord material in the sidewall.
    Test rim means, with reference to a tire to be tested, any rim that 
is listed as appropriate for use with that tire in accordance with S4.4. 
For purposes of this section and Sec. 571.110, each rim listing shall 
include dimensional specifications and a diagram of the rim.
    Tread means that portion of a tire that comes into contact with the 
road.
    Tread rib means a tread section running circumferentially around a 
tire.

[[Page 315]]

    Tread separation means pulling away of the tread from the tire 
carcass.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 Size and construction. Each tire shall be designed to fit each 
rim specified for its size designation in each reference cited in the 
definition of test rim in S3.
    S4.2 Performance requirements.
    S4.2.1 General. Each tire shall conform to each of the following:
    (a) It shall meet the requirements specified in S4.2.2 for its tire 
size designation, type, and maximum permissible inflation pressure.
    (b) Its maximum permissible inflation pressure shall be either 32, 
36, 40, or 60 psi, or 240, 280, 300, 340, or 350 kPa. For a CT tire, the 
maximum permissible inflation pressure shall be either 290, 330, 350, or 
390 kPa.
    (c) Its load rating shall be that specified in a submission made by 
an individual manufacturer, pursuant to S4.4.1(a), or in one of the 
publications described in S4.4.1(b) for its size designation, type and 
each appropriate inflation pressure. If the maximum load rating for a 
particular tire size is shown in more than one of the publications 
described in S4.4.1(b), each tire of that size designation shall have a 
maximum load rating that is not less than the published maximum load 
rating, or if there are differing maximum load ratings for the same tire 
size designation, not less than the lowest published maximum load 
rating.
    (d) It shall incorporate a tread wear indicator that will provide a 
visual indication that the tire has worn to a tread depth of 1.6 mm (\1/
16\ inch).
    (e) It shall, before being subjected to either the endurance test 
procedure specified in S5.4 or the high speed performance procedure 
specified in S5.5, exhibit no visual evidence of tread, sidewall, ply, 
cord, innerliner, or bead separation, chunking, broken cords, cracking, 
or open splices.
    (f) It shall meet the requirements of S4.2.2.5 and S4.2.2.6 when 
tested on a test wheel described in S5.4.2.1 either alone or 
simultaneously with up to 5 other tires.
    S4.2.2 Test requirements.
    S4.2.2.1 Test sample. For each test sample use:
    (a) One tire for physical dimensions, resistance to bead unseating, 
and strength, in sequence;
    (b) Another tire for tire endurance; and
    (c) A third tire for high speed performance.
    S4.2.2.2 Physical dimensions. The actual section width and overall 
width for each tire measured in accordance with S5.1, shall not exceed 
the section width specified in a submission made by an individual 
manufacturer, pursuant to S4.4.1(a) or in one of the publications 
described in S4.4.1(b) for its size designation and type by more than:
    (a) (For tires with a maximum permissible inflation pressure of 32, 
36, or 40 psi) 7 percent, or
    (b) (For tires with a maximum permissible inflation pressure of 240, 
280, 290, 300, 330, 350 or 390 kPa, or 60 psi) 7 percent or 10 mm (0.4 
inches), whichever is larger.
    S4.2.2.3 Tubeless tire resistance to bead unseating.
    S4.2.2.3.1 When a tubeless tire that has a maximum inflation 
pressure other than 420 kPa (60 psi) is tested in accordance with S5.2, 
the applied force required to unseat the tire bead at the point of 
contact shall be not less than:
    (a) 6,670 N (1,500 pounds) for tires with a designated section width 
of less than 160 mm (6 inches);
    (b) 8,890 N (2,000 pounds) for tires with a designated section width 
of 160 mm (6 inches) or more but less than 205 mm (8 inches);
    (c) 11,120 N (2,500 pounds) for tires with a designated section 
width of 205 mm (8 inches) or more, using the section width specified in 
a submission made by an individual manufacturer, pursuant to S4.4.1(a), 
or in one of the publications described in S4.4.1(b) for the applicable 
tire size designation and type.
    S4.2.2.3.2 When a tire that has a maximum inflation pressure of 420 
kPa (60 psi) is tested in accordance with S5.2, the applied force 
required to unseat the bead at the point of contact shall be not less 
than:
    (a) 6,670 N (1,500 pounds) for tires with a maximum load rating of 
less than 399 kg (880 pounds);
    (b) 8,890 N (2,000 pounds) for tires with a maximum load rating of 
399 kg

[[Page 316]]

(880 pounds) or more but less than 635 kg (1,400 pounds);
    (c) 11,120 N (2,500 pounds) for tires with a maximum load rating of 
635 kg (1,400 pounds) or more, using the maximum load rating marked on 
the sidewall of the tire.
    S4.2.2.4 Tire strength. Each tire shall meet the requirements for 
minimum breaking energy specified in Table 1 when tested in accordance 
with S5.3.
    S4.2.2.5 Tire endurance. When the tire has been subjected to the 
laboratory endurance test specified in S5.4, using a test rim that 
undergoes no permanent deformation and allows no loss of air through the 
portion that it comprises of the tire-rim pressure chamber:
    (a) There shall be no visual evidence of tread, sidewall, ply, cord, 
innerliner, or bead separation, chunking, broken cords, cracking, or 
open splices.
    (b) The tire pressure at the end of the test shall be not less than 
the initial pressures specified in S5.4.1.1.
    S4.2.2.6 High speed performance. When the tire has been subjected to 
the laboratory high speed performance test specified in S5.5, using a 
test rim that undergoes no permanent deformation and allows no loss of 
air through the portion that it comprises of the tire-rim pressure 
chamber, the tire shall meet the requirements set forth in S4.2.2.5 (a) 
and (b).
    S4.3 Labeling Requirements. Except as provided in S4.3.1 and S4.3.2 
of this standard, each tire, except for those certified to comply with 
S5.5 of Sec. 571.139, shall have permanently molded into or onto both 
sidewalls, in letters and numerals not less than 0.078 inches high, the 
information shown in paragraphs S4.3 (a) through (g) of this standard. 
On at least one sidewall, the information shall be positioned in an area 
between the maximum section width and bead of the tire, unless the 
maximum section width of the tire falls between the bead and one-fourth 
of the distance from the bead to the shoulder of the tire. For tires 
where the maximum section width falls in that area, locate all required 
labeling between the bead and a point one-half the distance from the 
bead to the shoulder of the tire. However, in no case shall the 
information be positioned on the tire so that it is obstructed by the 
flange or any rim designated for use with that tire in Standards Nos. 
109 and 110 (Sec. 571.109 and Sec. 571.110 of this part).
    (a) One size designation, except that equivalent inch and metric 
size designations may be used;
    (b) Maximum permissible inflation pressure;
    (c) Maximum load rating;
    (d) The generic name of each cord material used in the plies (both 
sidewall and tread area) of the tire;
    (e) Actual number of plies in the sidewall, and the actual number of 
plies in the tread area if different;
    (f) The words ``tubeless'' or ``tube type'' as applicable; and
    (g) The word ``radial'' if the tire is a radial ply tire.
    S4.3.1 Each tire shall be labeled with the symbol DOT in the manner 
specified in part 574 of this chapter, which shall constitute a 
certification that the tire conforms to applicable Federal motor vehicle 
safety standards.
    S4.3.2 Each tire shall be labeled with the name of the manufacturer, 
or brand name and number assigned to the manufacturer in the manner 
specified in part 574.
    S4.3.3 [Reserved]
    S4.3.4 If the maximum inflation pressure of a tire is 240, 280, 290, 
300, 330, 340, 350, or 390 kPa, then:
    (a) Each marking of that inflation pressure pursuant to S4.3(b) 
shall be followed in parenthesis by the equivalent inflation pressure in 
psi, rounded to the next higher whole number; and
    (b) Each marking of the tire's maximum load rating pursuant to 
S4.3(c) in kilograms shall be followed in parenthesis by the equivalent 
load rating in pounds, rounded to the nearest whole number.
    S4.3.5 If the maximum inflation pressure of a tire is 420 kPa (60 
psi), the tire shall have permanently molded into or onto both 
sidewalls, in letters and numerals not less than 12.7 mm (\1/2\ inch), 
the words ``Inflate to 420 kPa (60 psi)''. On both sidewalls, the words 
shall be positioned in an area between the tire shoulder and the bead of 
the tire. However, in no case shall the words be positioned on the tire 
so that they are obstructed by the flange of any rim

[[Page 317]]

designated for use with that tire in this standard or in Standard No. 
110 (Sec. 571.110 of this part).
    S4.4 Tire and rim matching information.
    S4.4.1 Each manufacturer of tires not certified to comply with S4 of 
Sec. 571.139 shall ensure that a listing of the rims that may be used 
with each tire that he produces is provided to the public. A listing 
compiled in accordance with paragraph (a) of S4.4.1 of this standard 
need not include dimensional specifications or diagram of a rim if the 
rim's dimensional specifications and diagram are contained in each 
listing published in accordance with paragraph (b) of S4.4.1 of this 
standard. The listing shall be in one of the following forms:
    (a) Listed by manufacturer name or brand name in a document 
furnished to dealers of the manufacturer's tires, to any person upon 
request, and in duplicate to the Docket Section, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 
20590; or
    (b) Contained in publications, current at the date of manufacture of 
the tire or any later date, of at least one of the following 
organizations:

The Tire and Rim Association
The European Tyre and Rim Technical Organisation
Japan Automobile Tire Manufacturers' Association, Inc.
Deutsche Industrie Norm
British Standards Institution
Scandinavian Tire and Rim Organization
The Tyre and Rim Association of Australia

    S4.4.2 Information contained in any publication specified in 
S4.4.1(b) of this standard which lists general categories of tires and 
rims by size designation, type of construction and/or intended use, 
shall be considered to be manufacturer's information pursuant to S4.4.1 
of this standard for the listed tires and rims, unless the publication 
itself or specific information provided according to S4.4.1(a) of this 
standard indicates otherwise.
    S5. Test procedures.
    S5.1 Physical Dimensions. Determine tire physical dimensions under 
uniform ambient conditions as follows:
    (a) Mount the tire on a test rim having the test rim width specified 
in a submission made by an individual manufacturer, pursuant to 
S4.4.1(a), or in one of the publications described in S4.4.1(b) for that 
tire size designation and inflate it to the applicable pressure 
specified in Table II.
    (b) Condition it at ambient room temperature for at least 24 hours.
    (c) Readjust pressure to that specified in (a).
    (d) Caliper the section width and overall width at six points 
approximately equally spaced around the tire circumference.
    (e) Record the average of these measurements as the section width 
and overall width, respectively.
    (f) Determine tire outer diameter by measuring the maximum 
circumference of the tire and dividing this dimension by pi (3.14).
    S5.2 Tubeless tire bead unseating resistance.
    S5.2.1 Preparation of tire-wheel assembly.
    S5.2.1.1 Wash the tire, dry it at the beads, and mount it without 
lubrication or adhesives on a clean, painted test rim.
    S5.2.1.2 Inflate it to the applicable pressure specified in Table II 
at ambient room temperature.
    S5.2.1.3 Mount the wheel and tire in a fixture shown in Figure 1, 
and force the bead unseating block shown in Figure 2 or Figure 2A 
against the tire sidewall as required by the geometry of the fixture. 
However, in testing a tire that has an inflation pressure of 60 psi, 
only use the bead unseating block described in Figure 2A.
    S5.2.2 Test procedure.
    S5.2.2.1 Apply a load through the block to the tire's outer sidewall 
at the distance specified in Figure 1 for the applicable wheel size at a 
rate of 50 mm (2 inches) per minute, with the load arm substantially 
parallel to the tire and rim assembly at the time of engagement.
    S5.2.2.2 Increase the load until the bead unseats or the applicable 
value specified in S4.2.2.3 is reached.
    S5.2.2.3 Repeat the test at least four places equally spaced around 
the tire circumference.
    S5.3 Tire strength.
    S5.3.1 Preparation of tire.

[[Page 318]]

    S5.3.1.1 Mount the tire on a test rim and inflate it to the 
applicable pressure specified in Table II.
    S5.3.1.2 Condition it at room temperature for at least 3 hours; and
    S5.3.1.3 Readjust its pressure to that specified in S5.3.1.1.
    S5.3.2 Test procedure.
    S5.3.2.1 Force a 19 mm (\3/4\ inch) diameter cylindrical steel 
plunger with a hemispherical end perpendicularly into the tread rib as 
near to the centerline as possible, avoiding penetration into the tread 
groove, at the rate of 50 mm (2 inches) per minute.
    S5.3.2.2 Record the force and penetration at five test points 
equally spaced around the circumference of the tire. If the tire fails 
to break before the plunger is stopped by reaching the rim, record the 
force and penetration as the rim is reached and use these values in 
S5.3.2.3.
    S5.3.2.3 Compute the breaking energy for each test point by means of 
one of the two following formulas:

W=[(FxP)/2]x10<SUP>x3</SUP> (joules)


Where

W=Energy, in joules;
F=Force, Newtons; and
P=Penetration, mm; or

W=[(FxP)/2]


Where

W=Energy, inch-pounds;
F=Force, pounds; and
P=Penetration, inches.

    S5.3.2.4 Determine the breaking energy value for the tire by 
computing the average of the five values obtained in accordance with 
S5.3.2.3.
    S5.4 Tire endurance.
    S5.4.1 Preparation of tire.
    S5.4.1.1 Mount a new tire on a test rim and inflate it to the 
applicable pressure specified in Table II.
    S5.4.1.2 Condition the tire assembly to 38[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 [deg]C (100[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]F) for 
at least three hours.
    S5.4.1.3 Readjust tire pressure to that specified in S5.4.1.1 
immediately before testing.
    S5.4.2 Test procedure.
    S5.4.2.1 Mount the tire and wheel assembly on a test axle and press 
it against a flat-faced steel test wheel 1708 mm (67.23 inches) in 
diameter and at least as wide as the section width of the tire to be 
tested or an approved equivalent test wheel, with the applicable test 
load specified in the table in S5.4.2.3 for the tire's size designation, 
type and maximum permissible inflation pressure.
    S5.4.2.2 During the test, the air surrounding the test area shall be 
38[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 [deg]C (100[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 
[deg]F).
    S5.4.2.3 Conduct the test at 80 kilometers per hour (km/h)(50 miles 
per hour) in accordance with the following schedule without pressure 
adjustment or other interruptions:
    The loads for the following periods are the specified percentage of 
the maximum load rating marked on the tire sidewall:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Percent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4 hours.......................................................        85
6 hours.......................................................        90
24 hours......................................................       100
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S5.5.2 Break in the tire by running it for 2 hours at 80 km/h (50 
mph).
    S5.5.3 Allow to cool to 38[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 [deg]C 
(100[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]F) and readjust the inflation 
pressure to the applicable pressure specified in Table II.
    S5.5.4 Without readjusting inflation pressure, test at 121 km/h (75 
mph) for 30 minutes, 129 km/h (80 mph) for 30 minutes, and 137 km/h (85 
mph) for 30 minutes.
    S5.5.5 Immediately after running the tire the required time, measure 
its inflation pressure. Allow the tire to cool for one hour. Then 
deflate the tire, remove it from the test rim, and inspect it for the 
conditions specified in S4.2.2.5(a).
    S6. Nonconforming tires. No tire that is designed for use on 
passenger cars and manufactured on or after October 1, 1972, but does 
not conform to all the requirements of this standard, shall be sold, 
offered for sale, introduced or delivered for introduction into 
interstate commerce, or imported into the United States, for any 
purpose.

[[Page 319]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.013


                                            Figures for Standard 109
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Dimension ``A'' for tires with maximum inflation pressure
                                     ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Wheel sizes                                        Other than
                                         Other than 60 psi       420 kPa             60 psi            420 kPa
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
19..................................  13.00 in...............          330  12.00 in...............          305
18..................................  12.50 in...............          318  11.40 in...............          290
17..................................  12.00 in...............          305  10.60 in...............          269
16..................................  11.50 in...............          292  9.90 in................          251
15..................................  11.00 in...............          279  9.40 in................          239
14..................................  10.50 in...............          267  8.90 in................          226
13..................................  10.00 in...............          254  8.40 in................          213
12..................................  9.50 in................          241  .......................  ...........
11..................................  9.00 in................          229  .......................  ...........
10..................................  8.50 in................          216  .......................  ...........
320.................................  8.50 in................          216  .......................  ...........
340.................................  9.00 in................          229  .......................  ...........
345.................................  9.25 in................          235  .......................  ...........
365.................................  9.75 in................          248  .......................  ...........
370.................................  10.00 in...............          254  .......................  ...........
390.................................  11.00 in...............          279  .......................  ...........
415.................................  11.50 in...............          292  .......................  ...........
4001................................  10.25 in...............          260  .......................  ...........
4251................................  10.75 in...............          273  .......................  ...........
4501................................  11.25 in...............          286  .......................  ...........
4751................................  11.75 in...............          298  .......................  ...........
5001................................  12.25 in...............          311
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1 For CT Tires only.


[[Page 320]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.014


[[Page 321]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.015

        Appendix A--Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 109

    The following tables list tire sizes and tire constructions with 
proper load and inflation values. The tables group tires of related 
constructions and load/inflation values. Persons requesting the addition 
of new tire sizes to the tables or the addition of tables for new tire 
constructions may, when the additions requested are compatible with 
existent groupings, or when adequate justification for new tables 
exists, submit five (5) copies of information and data supporting the 
request to

[[Page 322]]

the Vehicle Dynamics Division, Office of Crash Avoidance Standards, 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., 
Washington, DC 20590.
    The information should contain the following:
    1. The tire size designation, and a statement either that the tire 
is an addition to a category of tires listed in the tables or that it is 
in a new category for which a table has not been deloped.
    2. The tire dimensions, including aspect ratio, size factor, section 
width, overall width, and test rim size.
    3. The load-inflation schedule of the tire.
    4. A statement as to whether the tire size designation and load 
inflation schedule has been coordinated with the Tire and Rim 
Association, the European Tyre and Rim Technical Organisation, the Japan 
Automobile Tire Manufacturers' Association, Inc., the Deutsche Industrie 
Norm, the British Standards Institution, the Scandinavian Tire and Rim 
Organization, and the Tyre and Rim Association of Australia.
    5. Copies of test data sheets showing test conditions, results and 
conclusions obtained for individual tests specified in Sec. 571.109.
    6. Justification for the additional tire sizes.

                               Table I-A--For Bias Ply Tires With Designated Section Width of 152 mm (6 Inches) and Above
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Cord material                             32 psi       36 psi       40 psi      240 kPa      280 kPa      300 kPa      340 kPa
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rayon:
    (in-lbs).................................................        1,650        2,574        3,300        1,650        3,300        1,650        3,300
    (joules).................................................          186          291          373          186          373          186          373
Nylon or polyester:
    (in-lbs).................................................        2,600        3,900        5,200        2,600        5,200        2,600        5,200
    (joules).................................................          294          441          588          294          588          294          588
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                   Table I-B--For Bias Ply Tires With Designated Section Width Below 152 mm (6 Inches)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Cord material                             32 psi       36 psi       40 psi      240 kPa      280 kPa      300 kPa      340 kPA
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rayon:
    (in-lbs).................................................        1,000        1,875        2,500        1,000        2,500        1,000        2,500
    (joules).................................................          113          212          282          113          282          113          282
Nylon or polyester:
    (in-lbs).................................................        1,950        2,925        3,900        1,950        3,900        1,950        3,900
    (joules).................................................          220          330          441          220          441          220          441
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                                             Table I-C--For Radial Ply Tires
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                           Maximum permissible inflation
                                                         -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                             Tires other than CT tires                               CT tires
                    Size designation                     -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    psi                             kPa                                 kPa
                                                         -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                            32      36      40      240     280     300     340     350     290     330     350     390
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Below 160 mm:
    (in-lbs)............................................   1,950   2,925   3,900   1,950   3,900   1,950   3,900   1,950   1,950   3,900   1,950   3,900
    (joules)............................................     220     330     441     220     441     220     441     220     220     441     220     441
160 mm or above:
    (in-lbs)............................................   2,600   3,900   5,200   2,600   5,200   2,600   5,200   2,600   2,600   5,200   2,600   5,200
    (joules)............................................     294     441     588     294     588     294     588     294     294     588     294     588
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Table I-D--For Tires With 420 kPa (60 psi) Maximum Permissible Inflation Pressure and Maximum Load Rating 399 kg
                                               (880 lb) and Above
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Cord material                                       Inch-pounds joules (J)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rayon.................................................  1,650 inch pounds 186 joules (J).
Nylon or Polyester....................................  2,600 inch pounds 294 joules (J).
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


 Table I-E--For Tires With 420 kPa (60 psi) Maximum Permissible Inflation Pressure and Maximum Load Rating Below
                                                 399 kg (880 lb)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Cord material                                       Inch-pounds joules (J)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rayon.................................................  1,000 inch pounds 113 joules (J).

[[Page 323]]

 
Nylon or Polyester....................................  1,950 inch pounds 220 joules (J).
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                                           Table II--Test Inflation Pressures
                                       [Maximum permissible inflation pressure to be used for the following test]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                 Tires other than CT tires                             CT tires
                                                              ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Test type                                        psi                            kPa                             kPa
                                                              ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 32     36     40     60    240    280    300    340    350    290    300    350    390
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Physical dimensions, bead unseating, tire strength, and tire      24     28     32     52    180    220    180    220    180    230    270    230    270
 endurance...................................................
High speed performance.......................................     30     34     38     58    220    260    220    260    220    270    310    270    310
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[38 FR 30235, Nov. 1, 1973]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.109, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.

    Effective Date Notes: 1. At 67 FR 69623, Nov. 18, 2002, Sec. 
571.109 was amended by revising S2, effective Sept. 1, 2003. At 68 FR 
33655, June 5, 2003, the effective date was delayed until Sept. 1, 2004. 
At 69 FR 31306, June 3, 2004, the effective date was further delayed 
until Sept. 1, 2005. For the convenience of the user the revised text is 
set forth as follows:

Sec. 571.109  Standard No. 109; New pneumatic tires.

                                * * * * *

    S2. Application. This standard applies to new pneumatic tires for 
use on passenger cars manufactured after 1948. However, it does not 
apply to any tire that has been altered so as to render impossible its 
use, or its repair for use, as motor vehicle equipment. In addition, 
S4.3 does not apply to tires certified to comply with S5.5 of Sec. 
571.139 and S4.4. does not apply to tires certified to comply with S4 of 
Sec. 571.139.

                                * * * * *

    2. At 68 FR 38147, June 26, 2003, Sec. 571.109 was amended by 
revising the heading and S2, effective June 1, 2007. For the convenience 
of the user, the revised and added text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 571.109  Standard No. 109--New Pneumatic Bias Ply and Certain 
          Specialty Tires.

                                * * * * *

    S2. Application. This standard applies to new pneumatic radial tires 
for use on passenger cars manufactured before 1975, new pneumatic bias 
ply tires, and ST, FI, and 8-12 rim diameter and below tires for use on 
passenger cars manufactured after 1948. However, it does not apply to 
any tire that has been so altered so as to render impossible its use, or 
its repair for use, as motor vehicle equipment.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 571.110  Standard No. 110; Tire selection and rims.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard specifies requirements for tire 
selection to prevent tire overloading.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars and to non-
pneumatic spare tire assemblies for use on passenger cars.
    S3. Definitions.
    Accessory weight means the combined weight (in excess of those 
standard items which may be replaced) of automatic transmission, power 
steering, power brakes, power windows, power seats, radio, and heater, 
to the extent that these items are available as factory-installed 
equipment (whether installed or not).
    Curb weight means the weight of a motor vehicle with standard 
equipment including the maximum capacity of fuel, oil, and coolant, and, 
if so equipped, air conditioning and additional weight optional engine.

[[Page 324]]

    Maximum loaded vehicle weight means the sum of--
    (a) Curb weight;
    (b) Accessory weight;
    (c) Vehicle capacity weight; and
    (d) Production options weight.
    Non-pneumatic rim is used as defined in Sec. 571.129.
    Non-pneumatic spare tire assembly means a non-pneumatic tire 
assembly intended for temporary use in place of one of the pneumatic 
tires and rims that are fitted to a passenger car in compliance with the 
requirements of this standard.
    Non-pneumatic tire and non-pneumatic tire assembly are used as 
defined in Sec. 571.129.
    Normal occupant weight means 68 kilograms times the number of 
occupants specified in the second column of Table I.
    Occupant distribution means distribution of occupants in a vehicle 
as specified in the third column of Table I.
    Production options weight means the combined weight of those 
installed regular production options weighing over 2.3 kilograms in 
excess of those standard items which they replace, not previously 
considered in curb weight or accessory weight, including heavy duty 
brakes, ride levelers, roof rack, heavy duty battery, and special trim.
    Rim is used as defined in Sec. 571.109.
    Vehicle capacity weight means the rated cargo and luggage load plus 
68 kilograms times the vehicle's designated seating capacity.
    Vehicle maximum load on the tire means that load on an individual 
tire that is determined by distributing to each axle its share of the 
maximum loaded vehicle weight and dividing by two.
    Vehicle normal load on the tire means that load on an individual 
tire that is determined by distributing to each axle its share of the 
curb weight, accessory weight, and normal occupant weight (distributed 
in accordance with Table I) and dividing by 2.
    Wheel center member is used as defined in Sec. 571.129.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 General. (a) Passenger cars shall be equipped with tires that 
meet the requirements of Sec. 571.109, New Pneumatic Tires, except that 
passenger cars may be equipped with a non-pneumatic spare tire assembly 
that complies with Sec. 571.129, New Non-Pneumatic Tires for Passenger 
Cars and S6 and S8 of this standard.
    (b) Passenger cars and non-pneumatic spare tires assemblies for use 
on passenger cars shall comply with S4 through S8 of this standard.
    (c) Motor vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) or 
10,000 pounds or less, except for passenger cars, and the non-pneumatic 
spare tire assemblies for use on those vehicles shall comply with S4.3, 
S4.3.1, S4.3.2, S4.3.3, S4.3.4, and S7.2(a) of this standard.
    S4.2 Tire load limits.
    S4.2.1 The vehicle maximum load on the tire shall not be greater 
than the applicable maximum load rating as marked on the sidewall of the 
tire.
    S4.2.2 The vehicle normal load on the tire shall not be greater than 
the test load used in the high speed performance test specified in S5.5 
of Sec. 571.109 for that tire.
    S4.3 Placard. A placard, permanently affixed to the glove 
compartment door or an equally accessible location, shall display the--
    (a) Vehicle capacity weight;
    (b) Designated seating capacity (expressed in terms of total number 
of occupants and in terms of occupants for each seat location);
    (c) Vehicle manufacturer's recommended cold tire inflation pressure 
for maximum loaded vehicle weight and, subject to the limitations of 
S4.3.1, for any other manufacturer-specified vehicle loading condition;
    (d) Vehicle manufacturer's recommended tire size designation; and
    (e) For a vehicle equipped with a non-pneumatic spare tire assembly, 
the non-penumatic tire identification code with which that assembly is 
labeled pursuant to the requirements of S4.3(a) of Sec. 571.129, New 
Non-Pneumatic Tires for Passenger Cars.
    S4.3.1 No inflation pressure other than the maximum permissible 
inflation pressure may be specified unless--
    (a) It is less than the maximum permissible inflation pressure;
    (b) The vehicle loading condition for that pressure is specified; 
and

[[Page 325]]

    (c) The tire load rating specified in a submission by an individual 
manfacturer, pursuant to S4.4.1(a) of Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 
109, or contained in one of the publications described in S4.4.1(b) of 
Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 109 for the tire size at that 
inflation pressure is not less than the vehicle load on the tire for 
that vehicle loading condition.
    S4.4 Rims.
    S4.4.1 Requirements. Each rim shall:
    (a) Be constructed to the dimensions of a rim that is listed 
pursuant to the definition of test rim in paragraph S3. of Sec. 571.109 
(Standard No. 109) for use with the tire size designation with which the 
vehicle is equipped.
    (b) In the event of rapid loss of inflation pressure with the 
vehicle traveling in a straight line at a speed of 97 kilometers per 
hour, retain the deflated tire until the vehicle can be stopped with a 
controlled braking application.

 Table I--Occupant Loading and Distribution for Vehicle Normal Load for
                  Various Designated Seating Capacities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Vehicle
                                  normal
 Designated seating capacity,     load,      Occupant distribution in a
      number of occupants       number of     normally loaded vehicle
                                occupants
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2 through 4                             2  2 in front.
5 through 10                            3  2 in front, 1 in second seat.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S5. Load Limits for Non-Pneumatic Spare Tires. The highest vehicle 
maximum load on the tire for the vehicle shall not be greater than the 
load rating for the non-pneumatic spare tire.
    S6 Labeling Requirements for Non-Pneumatic Spare Tires or Tire 
Assemblies. Each non-pneumatic tire or, in the case of a non-pneumatic 
tire assembly in which the non-pneumatic tire is an integral part of the 
assembly, each non-pneumatic tire assembly shall include, in letters or 
numerals not less than 4 millimeters high, the information specified in 
paragraphs S6 (a) and (b). The information shall be permanently molded, 
stamped, or otherwise permanently marked into or onto the non-pneumatic 
tire or non-pneumatic tire assembly, or shall appear on a label that is 
permanently attached to the tire or tire assembly. If a label is used, 
it shall be subsurface printed, made of material that is resistant to 
fade, heat, moisture and abrasion, and attached in such a manner that it 
cannot be removed without destroying or defacing the label on the non-
pneumatic tire or tire assembly. The information specified in paragraphs 
S6 (a) and (b) shall appear on both sides of the non-pneumatic tire or 
tire assembly, except, in the case of a non-pneumatic tire assembly 
which has a particular side that must always face outward when mounted 
on a vehicle, in which case the information specified in paragraphs S6 
(a) and (b) shall only be required on the outward facing side. The 
information shall be positioned on the tire or tire assembly such that 
it is not placed on the tread or the outermost edge of the tire and is 
not obstructed by any portion of any non-pneumatic rim or wheel center 
member designated for use with that tire in this standard or in Standard 
No. 129.
    (a) FOR TEMPORARY USE ONLY; and
    (b) MAXIMUM 80 KM/H (50 M.P.H.).
    S7. Requirements for Passenger Cars Equipped with Non-Pneumatic 
Spare Tire Assemblies
    S7.1 Vehicle Placarding Requirements. A placard, permanently affixed 
to the inside of the vehicle trunk or an equally accessible location 
adjacent to the non-pneumatic spare tire assembly, shall display the 
information set forth in S6 in block capitals and numerals not less than 
6 millimeters high preceded by the words ``IMPORTANT--USE OF SPARE 
TIRE'' in letters not less than 9 millimeters high.
    S7.2 Supplementary Information. The owner's manual of the passenger 
car shall contain, in writing in the English language and in not less 
than 10 point type, the following information under the heading 
``IMPORTANT--USE OF SPARE TIRE'':
    (a) A statement indicating the information related to appropriate 
use for the non-pneumatic spare tire including at a minimum the 
information set forth in S6 (a) and (b) and either the information set 
forth in S4.3(e) or a statement that the information set forth in 
S4.3(e) is located on the vehicle placard and on the non-pneumatic tire;
    (b) An instruction to drive carefully when the non-pneumatic spare 
tire is

[[Page 326]]

in use, and to install the proper pneumatic tire and rim at the first 
reasonable opportunity; and
    (c) A statement that operation of the passenger car is not 
recommended with more than one non-pneumatic spare tire in use at the 
same time.
    S8. Non-Pneumatic Rims and Wheel Center Members
    S8.1 Non-Pneumatic Rim Requirements. Each non-pneumatic rim that is 
part of a separable non-pneumatic spare tire assembly shall be 
constructed to the dimensions of a non-pneumatic rim that is listed 
pursuant to S4.4 of Sec. 571.129 for use with the non-pneumatic tire, 
designated by its non-pneumatic tire identification code, with which the 
vehicle is equipped.
    S8.2 Wheel Center Member Requirements. Each wheel center member that 
is part of a separable non-pneumatic spare tire assembly shall be 
constructed to the dimensions of a wheel center member that is listed 
pursuant to S4.4 of Sec. 571.129 for use with the non-pneumatic tire, 
designated by its non-pneumatic tire identification code, with which the 
vehicle is equipped.

[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, as amended at 37 FR 23727, Nov. 8, 1972; 40 
FR 5530, Feb. 6, 1975; 47 FR 36183, Aug. 19, 1982; 49 FR 38612, Oct. 1, 
1984; 55 FR 29589, July 20, 1990; 56 FR 19311, Apr. 26, 1991; 60 FR 
13643, Mar. 14, 1995; 68 FR 37982, June 26, 2003]

    Effective Date Notes: 1. At 67 FR 69623, Nov. 18, 2002, Sec. 
571.110 was amended by revising the heading and S2, S4.3, S4.3.1, and 
S7.2(a), by adding S4.3.2, S4.3.3, and S4.3.4, and by adding Figure 1 
and Figure 2 at the end of Sec. 571.110, effective Sept. 1, 2003. At 68 
FR 33655, June 5, 2003, the effective date was delayed until Sept. 1, 
2004. At 69 FR 31306, June 3, 2004, the effective date was further 
delayed until Sept. 1, 2005. For the convenience of the user, the added 
and revised text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 571.110  Standard No. 110; Tire selection and rims for motor 
          vehicles with a GVWR of 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) or 
          less.

                                * * * * *

    S2 Application. This standard applies to motor vehicles with a gross 
vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 10,000 pounds or less, except for 
motorcycles, and to non-pneumatic spare tire assemblies for use on those 
vehicles.

                                * * * * *

    S4.3 Placard. Each vehicle, except for an incomplete vehicle, shall 
show the information specified in S4.3 (a) through (g) on a placard 
permanently affixed to the driver's side B-pillar. If the vehicle lacks 
a B-pillar on the driver's side, the placard shall be permanently 
affixed to the edge of the driver's side door. If the vehicle lacks a 
driver's side B-pillar and either has a driver's side door whose edge is 
too narrow to permit the affixing of the placard or lacks a driver's 
side door, the placard shall be affixed to the inward facing surface of 
the vehicle next to the driver's seating position. This information 
shall be in the English language and conform in color and format, not 
including the border surrounding the entire placard, as specified in the 
example set forth in Figure 1 in this standard. At the manufacturer's 
option, the information specified in S4.3 (c) and (d) may be shown, 
alternatively, on a tire inflation pressure label, and conform in color 
and format, not including the border surrounding the entire label, as 
specified in the example set forth in Figure 2 in this standard. The 
label shall be permanently affixed and proximate to the placard required 
by this paragraph. The information specified in S4.3 (e) shall be shown 
on both the vehicle placard and on the tire inflation pressure label (if 
such a label is affixed to provide the information specified in S4.3 (c) 
and (d)) in the format and color scheme set forth in Figures 1 and 2.
    (a) Vehicle capacity weight expressed as ``The combined weight of 
occupants and cargo should never exceed XXX kilograms or XXX pounds'';
    (b) Designated seated capacity (expressed in terms of total number 
of occupants and number of occupants for each seat location);
    (c) Vehicle manufacturer's recommended cold tire inflation pressure, 
subject to the limitations of 4.3.4;
    (d) Tire size designation, indicated by the headings ``original tire 
size'' or ``original size,'' for the tire installed as original 
equipment on the vehicle by the vehicle manufacturer;
    (e) On the vehicle placard, ``Tire and Loading Information'' and, on 
the tire inflation pressure label, ``Tire Information'';
    (f) ``See Owner's Manual for Additional Information''; and
    (g) For a vehicle equipped with a non-pneumatic assembly, the tire 
identification code with which that assembly is labeled pursuant to the 
requirements of S4.3(a) of 571.129, New Non-Pneumatic Tires for 
Passenger Cars.
    S4.3.1 Requirements for vehicles manufactured in two or more stages. 
A placard or placard and label shall be affixed to the completed vehicle 
by the final-stage manufacturer in accordance with S4.3 and with the 
vehicle capacity weight and seating designations as finally 
manufactured.

[[Page 327]]

    S4.3.2 Requirements for altered vehicles. A new placard or placard 
and label shall be affixed, so as to obscure the original placard, to an 
altered vehicle that has previously been certified in accordance with 
Sec. 567.4 or Sec. 567.5, other than by the addition, substitution, or 
removal of readily attachable components such as mirrors or tire and rim 
assemblies, or minor finishing operations such as painting, or who 
alters the vehicle in such a manner that its stated weight ratings are 
not longer valid, before the first purchase of the vehicle in good faith 
for purposes other than resale, containing accurate information for the 
altered vehicle, in accordance with S4.3.
    S4.3.3 Additional labeling information for vehicles other than 
passenger cars. Each vehicle shall show the size designation and, if 
applicable, the type designation of rims (not necessarily those on the 
vehicle) appropriate for the tire appropriate for use on that vehicle, 
including the tire installed as original equipment on the vehicle by the 
vehicle manufacturer, after each GAWR listed on the certification label 
required by Sec. 567.4 or Sec. 567.5 of this chapter. This information 
shall be in the English language, lettered in block capitals and 
numerals not less than 2.4 millimeters high and in the following format:

                 Truck Example--Suitable Tire-Rim Choice

    GVWR: 2,441 kilograms (5381 pounds).
    GAWR: Front--1,299 kilograms (2,864 pounds) with P265/70R16 tires, 
16 x 8.0 rims at 240 kPa (36 psi) cold single.
    GAWR: Rear--1,142 kilograms (2,864 pounds) with P265/70R16 tires, 16 
x 8.00 rims, at 245 kPa (36 psi) cold single.

    S4.3.4 No inflation pressure other than the maximum permissible 
inflation pressure may be shown on the placard and, if any, tire 
inflation pressure label unless--
    (a) It is less than the maximum permissible inflation pressure;
    (b) It is appropriate for the load limits as calculated in 
accordance with S4.2; and
    (c) The tire load rating specified in a submission by an individual 
manufacturer, pursuant to S4.1.1(a) of Sec. 571.139 or contained in one 
of the publications described in S4.1.1.(b) of Sec. 571.139, for the 
tire size at that inflation pressure is not less than the vehicle 
maximum load and the vehicle normal load.

                                * * * * *

    S7.2 * * *
    (a) A statement indicating the information related to appropriate 
use for the non-pneumatic spare tire including at a minimum the 
information set forth in S6 (a) and (b) and either the information set 
forth in S4.3(g) or a statement that the information set forth in 
S4.3(g) is located on the vehicle placard and on the non-pneumatic tire;

                                * * * * *

[[Page 328]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18NO02.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18NO02.003


[[Page 329]]


    2. At 68 FR 38147, June 26, 2003, Sec. 571.110 was amended by 
revising S2, S4.1, S4.2.1, S4.2.2, S4.4.1(a), and table 1 following 
S4.4.1(b), by adding S4.2.1.1, S4.2.1.2, S4.2.2.1, S4.2.2.2, S4.2.2.3, 
and S4.4.2 and by adding to S3 in alphabetical order, definitions for 
``Rim diameter,'' ``Rim size designation,'' ``Rim type designation,'' 
``Rim width,'' and ``Weather side,'', effective June 1, 2007. For the 
convenience of the user, the revised and added text is set forth as 
follows:

Sec. 571.110  Standard No. 110; Tire selection and rims for motor 
          vehicles with a GVWR of 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) or 
          less.

                                * * * * *

    S2. Application. This standard applies to motor vehicles with a 
gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR or 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) or 
less, except for motorcycles, and to non-pneumatic spare tire assemblies 
for those vehicles.

                             S3. Definitions

                                * * * * *

    Rim diameter means nominal diameter of the bead seat.
    Rim size designation means rim diameter and width.
    Rim type designation means the industry of manufacturer's 
designation for a rim by style or code.
    Rim width means nominal distance between rim flanges.

                                * * * * *

    Weather side means the surface area of the rim not covered by the 
inflated tire.

                                * * * * *

    S4.1. General. Vehicles shall be equipped with tires that meet the 
requirements of Sec. 571.139, New pneumatic tires for light vehicles, 
except that passenger cars may be equipped with a non-pneumatic spare 
tire assembly that meets the requirements of Sec. 571.129, New non-
pneumatic tires for passenger cars and S6 and S8 of this standard. 
Passenger cars equipped with such an assembly shall meet the 
requirements of S4.3(e), and S5, and S7 of this standard.

                                * * * * *

    S4.2.1 Tire load limits for passenger cars.
    S4.2.1.1 The vehicle maximum load on the tire shall not be greater 
than the applicable maximum load rating as marked on the sidewall of the 
tire.
    S4.2.1.2 The vehicle normal load on the tire shall not be greater 
than 94 percent of the load rating at the vehicle manufacturer's 
recommended cold inflation pressure for that tire.
    S4.2.2 Tire load limits for multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, 
buses, and trailers.
    S4.2.2.1 Except as provided in S4.2.2.2, the sum of the maximum load 
ratings of the tires fitted to an axle shall not be less than the GAWR 
of the axle system as specified on the vehicle's certification label 
required by 49 CFR part 567. If the certification label shows more than 
one GAWR for the axle system, the sum shall be not less than the GAWR 
corresponding to the size designation of the tires fitted to the axle.
    S4.2.2.2 When passenger car (P-metric) tires are installed on an 
MPV, truck, bus, or trailer, each tire's load rating is reduced by 
dividing it by 1.10 before determining, under S4.2.2.1, the sum of the 
maximum load ratings of the tires fitted to an axle.
    S4.2.2.3 (a) For vehicles equipped with P-metric tires, the vehicle 
normal load on the tire shall be no greater than the value of 94 percent 
of the derated load rating at the vehicle manufacturer's recommended 
cold inflation pressure for that tire.
    (b) For vehicles equipped with LT tires, the vehicle normal load on 
the tire shall be no greater than 94 percent of the load rating at the 
vehicle manufacturer's recommended cold inflation pressure for that 
tire.

                                * * * * *

    S4.4.1 * * *
    (a) Be constructed to the dimensions of a rim that is listed by the 
manufacturer of the tires as suitable for use with those tires, in 
accordance with S4 of Sec. 571.139.
    (b) * * *

  Table I.--Occupant Loading and Distribution for Vehicle Normal Load for Various Designated Seating Capacities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Designated seating capacity, number of       Vehicle normal load, number of        Occupant distribution in a
                occupants                               occupants                    normally loaded vehicle
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2 through 4.............................  2....................................  2 in front.
5 through 10............................  3....................................  2 in front, 1 in second seat.
11 through 15...........................  5....................................  2 in front, 1 in second seat, 1
                                                                                  in third seat, 1 in fourth
                                                                                  seat.
16 through 22...........................  7....................................  2 in front, 2 in second seat, 2
                                                                                  in third seat, 1 in fourth
                                                                                  seat.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 330]]

    S4.4.2. Rim markings for vehicles other than passenger cars. Each 
rim or, at the option of the manufacturer in the case of a single-piece 
wheel, each wheel disc shall be marked with the information listed in 
paragraphs (a) through (e) of this S4.4.2, in lettering not less than 3 
millimeters in height, impressed to a depth or, at the option of the 
manufacturer, embossed to a height of not less than 0.125 millimeters. 
The information listed in paragraphs (a) through (c) of this S4.2.2 
shall appear on the outward side. In the case of rims of multi piece 
construction, the information listed in paragraphs (a) through (e) of 
this S4.2.2 shall appear on the rim base and the information listed in 
paragraphs (b) and (d) of this S4.2.2 shall also appear on each other 
part of the rim.
    (a) A designation that indicates the source of the rim's published 
nominal dimensions, as follows:
    (1) ``T'' indicates The Tire and Rim Association.
    (2) ``E'' indicates The European Tyre and Rim Technical 
Organization.
    (3) ``J'' indicates Japan Automobile Tire Manufacturers'' 
Association, Inc.
    (4) ``L'' indicates ABPA (Brazil), a.k.a. Associacao Latino 
Americana De Pneus E Aros.
    (5) ``F'' indicates Tire and Rim Engineering Data Committee of South 
Africa (Tredco).
    (6) ``S'' indicates Scandinavian Tire and Rim Organization (STRO).
    (7) ``A'' indicates The Tyre and Rim Association of Australia.
    (8) ``I'' indicates Indian Tyre Technical Advisory Committee 
(ITTAC).
    (9) ``R'' indicates Argentine Institute of Rationalization of 
Materials, a.k.a. Instituto Argentino de Racionalizacion de Materiales, 
(ARAM).
    (10) ``N'' indicates an independent listing pursuant to S4.1 of 
Sec. 571.139 or S5.1(a) of Sec. 571.119.
    (b) The rim size designation, and in case of multipiece rims, the 
rim type designation. For example: 20 x 5.50, or 20 x 5.5.
    (c) The symbol DOT, constituting a certification by the manufacturer 
of the rim that the rim complies with all applicable Federal motor 
vehicle safety standards.
    (d) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the rim by 
name, trademark, or symbol.
    (e) The month, day and year or the month and year of manufacture, 
expressed either numerically or by use of a symbol, at the option of the 
manufacturer. For example: ``September 4, 2001'' may be expressed 
numerically as: ``90401'', ``904, 01'' or ``01, 904''; ``September 
2001'' may be expressed as: ``901'', ``9, 01'' or ``01, 9''.
    (1) Any manufacturer that elects to express the date of manufacture 
by means of a symbol shall notify NHTSA in writing of the full names and 
addresses of all manufacturers and brand name owners utilizing that 
symbol and the name and address of the trademark owner of that symbol, 
if any. The notification shall describe in narrative form and in detail 
how the month, day, and year or the month and year are depicted by the 
symbol. Such description shall include an actual size graphic depiction 
of the symbol, showing and/or explaining the interrelationship of the 
component parts of the symbol as they will appear on the rim or single 
piece wheel disc, including dimensional specifications, and where the 
symbol will be located on the rim or single piece wheel disc. The 
notification shall be received by NHTSA not less than 60 calendar days 
before the first use of the symbol. The notification shall be mailed to 
the Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance (NVS-222), National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 
20590. All information provided to NHTSA under this paragraph will be 
placed in the public docket.
    (2) Each manufacturer of wheels shall provide an explanation of its 
date of manufacture symbol to any person upon request.

                                * * * * *

    3. At 69 FR 31317, June 3, 2004, Sec. 571.110 was amended by 
revising paragraph S4.3, adding paragraph S4.3.5, and revising Figures 1 
and 2 at the end of Sec. 571.110, effective Sept. 1, 2005. At 69 FR 
51399, Aug. 19, 2004, the amendatory instruction to paragraph 2 was 
corrected to read ``2. Section 571.110 is amended by revising paragraph 
S4.2.2, S4.3, S4.3.4(c), adding paragraph S4.3.5, and revising Figures 1 
and 2 at the end of Sec. 571.110, to read as follows:''. For the 
convenience of the user, the correctly revised and added text is set 
forth follows:

Sec. 571.110  Standard No. 110--Tire selection and rims for motor 
          vehicles with a GVWR of 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) or 
          less.

                                * * * * *

    S4.2.2 The vehicle normal load on the tire shall not be greater than 
the test load used in the high speed performance test specified in S5.5 
of Sec. 571.109, or S7.4 of Sec. 571.119, as appropriate, for that 
tire.

                                * * * * *

    S4.3 Placard. Each vehicle, except for a trailer or incomplete 
vehicle, shall show the information specified in S4.3 (a) through (g), 
and may show, at the manufacturer's option, the information specified in 
S4.3 (h) and (i), on a placard permanently affixed to the driver's side 
B-pillar. In each vehicle without a driver's side B-pillar and with two 
doors on the driver's side of the vehicle opening in opposite 
directions, the placard shall be affixed

[[Page 331]]

on the forward edge of the rear side door. If the above locations do not 
permit the affixing of a placard that is legible, visible and prominent, 
the placard shall be permanently affixed to the rear edge of the 
driver's side door. If this location does not permit the affixing of a 
placard that is legible, visible and prominent, the placard shall be 
affixed to the inward facing surface of the vehicle next to the driver's 
seating position. This information shall be in the English language and 
conform in color and format, not including the border surrounding the 
entire placard, as shown in the example set forth in Figure 1 in this 
standard. At the manufacturer's option, the information specified in 
S4.3 (c), (d), and, as appropriate, (h) and (i) may be shown, 
alternatively to being shown on the placard, on a tire inflation 
pressure label which must conform in color and format, not including the 
border surrounding the entire label, as shown in the example set forth 
in Figure 2 in this standard. The label shall be permanently affixed and 
proximate to the placard required by this paragraph. The information 
specified in S4.3 (e) shall be shown on both the vehicle placard and on 
the tire inflation pressure label (if such a label is affixed to provide 
the information specified in S4.3 (c), (d), and, as appropriate, (h) and 
(i)) may be shown in the format and color scheme set forth in Figures 1 
and 2.
    (a) Vehicle capacity weight expressed as ``The combined weight of 
occupants and cargo should never exceed XXX kilograms or XXX pounds'';
    (b) Designated seated capacity (expressed in terms of total number 
of occupants and number of occupants for each front and rear seat 
location);
    (c) Vehicle manufacturer's recommended cold tire inflation pressure 
for front, rear and spare tires, subject to the limitations of S4.3.4;
    (d) Tire size designation, indicated by the headings ``size'' or 
``original tire size'' or ``original size,'' and ``spare tire'' or 
``spare,'' for the tires installed at the time of the first purchase for 
purposes other than resale;
    (e) On the vehicle placard, ``Tire and Loading Information and, on 
the tire inflation pressure label, ``Tire Information'';
    (f) ``See Owner's Manual for Additional Information'';
    (g) For a vehicle equipped with a non-pneumatic spare tire assembly, 
the tire identification code with which that assembly is labeled 
pursuant to the requirements of S4.3(a) of 571.129, New Non-Pneumatic 
Tires for Passenger Cars;
    (h) At the manufacturer's option, a bar code or VIN located 
vertically on the right-hand edge of the placard and label; and
    (i) As appropriate, the tire load identification ``XL'' or 
``reinforced.''

                                * * * * *

    S4.3.4 (c) The tire load rating specified in a submission by an 
individual manufacturer, pursuant to S4.1.1(a) of Sec. 571.139 or 
contained in one of the publications described in S4.1.1(b) of Sec. 
571.139, for the tire size at that inflation pressure is not less than 
the vehicle maximum load and the vehicle normal load on the tire for 
those vehicle loading conditions.

                                * * * * *

    S4.3.5 Requirements for trailers. Each trailer, except for an 
incomplete vehicle, must show the information specified in S4.3 (c) 
through (g), and may show the information specified in S4.3 (h) and (i), 
on a placard permanently affixed proximate to the certification label 
specified in 49 CFR part 567. Additionally, each trailer must on its 
placard contain a cargo capacity statement expressed as ``The weight of 
cargo should never exceed XXX kilograms or XXX pounds'' in the same 
location on the placard specified for the ``vehicle capacity weight'' 
statement required by this standard. At the manufacturer's option, the 
information specified in S4.3 (c), (d), (h) and (i) may be shown, 
alternatively, on a tire inflation pressure label, and conform in color 
and format, not including the border surrounding the entire label, as 
specified in the example set forth in Figure 2 in this standard. The 
label shall be permanently affixed and proximate to the placard required 
by this paragraph. The information specified in S4.3 (e) shall be shown 
on both the vehicle placard and on the tire inflation pressure label (if 
such a label is affixed to provide the information specified in S4.3 
(c), (d), (h) and (i)) in the format and color scheme set forth in 
Figures 1 and 2.

                                * * * * *

[[Page 332]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR03JN04.004


[[Page 333]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR03JN04.005


<R05>
Sec. 571.111  Standard No. 111; Rearview mirrors.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for the performance 
and location of rearview mirrors.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the number of 
deaths and injuries that occur when the driver of a motor vehicle does 
not have a clear and reasonably unobstructed view to the rear.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, buses, schoolbuses and 
motorcycles.
    S4. Definitions.
    Convex mirror means a mirror having a curved reflective surface 
whose shape is the same as that of the exterior surface of a section of 
a sphere.
    Effective mirror surface means the portions of a mirror that reflect 
images, excluding the mirror rim or mounting brackets.
    Unit magnification mirror means a plane or flat mirror with a 
reflective surface through which the angular height and width of the 
image of an object is equal to the angular height and width of the 
object when viewed directly at the same distance except for flaws that 
do not exceed normal manufacturing tolerances. For the purposes of this 
regulation a prismatic day-night adjustment rearview mirror one of whose 
positions provides unit magnification is considered a unit magnification 
mirror.
    S5. Requirements for passenger cars.
    S5.1 Inside rearview mirror. Each passenger car shall have an inside 
rearview mirror of unit magnification.
    S5.1.1 Field of view. Except as provided in S5.3, the mirror shall 
provide a field of view with an included horizontal angle measured from 
the projected eye point of at least 20 degrees, and a sufficient 
vertical angle to provide a view of a level road surface extending to 
the horizon beginning at a point not greater than 61 m to the rear

[[Page 334]]

of the vehicle when the vehicle is occupied by the driver and four 
passengers or the designated occupant capacity, if less, based on an 
average occupant weight of 68 kg. The line of sight may be partially 
obscured by seated occupants or by head restraints. The location of the 
driver's eye reference points shall be those established in Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standard No. 104 (Sec. 571.104) or a nominal location 
appropriate for any 95th percentile male driver.
    S5.1.2 Mounting. The mirror mounting shall provide a stable support 
for the mirror, and shall provide for mirror adjustment by tilting in 
both the horizontal and vertical directions. If the mirror is in the 
head impact area, the mounting shall deflect, collapse or break away 
without leaving sharp edges when the reflective surface of the mirror is 
subjected to a force of 400 N in any forward direction that is not more 
than 45[deg] from the forward longitudinal direction.
    S5.2 Outside rearview mirror--driver's side.
    S5.2.1 Field of view. Each passenger car shall have an outside 
mirror of unit magnification. The mirror shall provide the driver a view 
of a level road surface extending to the horizon from a line, 
perpendicular to a longitudinal plane tangent to the driver's side of 
the vehicle at the widest point, extending 2.4 m out from the tangent 
plane 10.7 m behind the driver's eyes, with the seat in the rearmost 
position. The line of sight may be partially obscured by rear body or 
fender contours. The location of the driver's eye reference points shall 
be those established in Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 104 (Sec. 
571.104) or a nominal location appropriate for any 95th percentile male 
driver.
    S5.2.2 Mounting. The mirror mounting shall provide a stable support 
for the mirror, and neither the mirror nor the mounting shall protrude 
farther than the widest part of the vehicle body except to the extent 
necessary to produce a field of view meeting or exceeding the 
requirements of S5.2.1. The mirror shall not be obscured by the unwiped 
portion of the windshield, and shall be adjustable by tilting in both 
horizontal and vertical directions from the driver's seated position. 
The mirror and mounting shall be free of sharp points or edges that 
could contribute to pedestrian injury.
    S5.3 Outside rearview mirror passenger's side. Each passenger car 
whose inside rearview mirror does not meet the field of view 
requirements of S5.1.1 shall have an outside mirror of unit 
magnification or a convex mirror installed on the passenger's side. The 
mirror mounting shall provide a stable support and be free of sharp 
points or edges that could contribute to pedestrian injury. The mirror 
need not be adjustable from the driver's seat but shall be capable of 
adjustment by tilting in both horizontal and vertical directions.
    S5.4 Convex mirror requirements. Each motor vehicle using a convex 
mirror to meet the requirements of S5.3 shall comply with the following 
requirements:
    S5.4.1 When each convex mirror is tested in accordance with the 
procedures specified in S12. of this standard, none of the radii of 
curvature readings shall deviate from the average radius of curvature by 
more than plus or minus 12.5 percent.
    S5.4.2 Each convex mirror shall have permanently and indelibly 
marked at the lower edge of the mirror's reflective surface, in letters 
not less than 4.8 mm nor more than 6.4 mm high the words ``Objects in 
Mirror Are Closer Than They Appear.''
    S5.4.3 The average radius of curvature of each such mirror, as 
determined by using the procedure in S12., shall be not less than 889 mm 
and not more than 1,651 mm.
    S6. Requirements for multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and 
buses, other than school buses, with GVWR of 4,536 kg or less.
    S6.1 Each multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck and bus, other than 
a school bus, with a GVWR of 4,536 kg or less shall have either--
    (a) Mirrors that conform to the requirements of S5.; or
    (b) Outside mirrors of unit magnification, each with not less than 
126 cm<SUP>2</SUP> of reflective surface, installed with stable supports 
on both sides of the vehicle, located so as to provide the driver a view 
to the rear along both sides of the vehicle, and adjustable in both the

[[Page 335]]

horizontal and vertical directions to view the rearward scene.
    S7. Requirements for multipurpose passenger vehicles and trucks with 
a GVWR of more than 4,536 kg and less than 11,340 kg and buses, other 
than school buses, with a GVWR of more than 4,536 kg.
    S7.1 Each multipurpose passenger vehicle and truck with a GVWR of 
more than 4,536 kg and less than 11,340 kg and each bus, other than a 
school bus, with a GVWR of more than 4,536 kg shall have outside mirrors 
of unit magnification, each with not less than 323 cm<SUP>2</SUP> of 
reflective surface, installed with stable supports on both sides of the 
vehicle. The mirrors shall be located so as to provide the driver a view 
to the rear along both sides of the vehicle and shall be adjustable both 
in the horizontal and vertical directions to view the rearward scene.
    S8. Requirements for multipurpose passenger vehicles and trucks with 
a GVWR of 11,340 kg or more.
    S8.1 Each multipurpose passenger vehicle and truck with a GVWR of 
11,340 kg or more shall have outside mirrors of unit magnification, each 
with not less than 323 cm<SUP>2</SUP> of reflective surface, installed 
with stable supports on both sides of the vehicle. The mirrors shall be 
located so as to provide the driver a view to the rear along both sides 
of the vehicle and shall be adjustable both in the horizontal and 
vertical directions to view the rearward scene.
    S9. Requirements for School Buses. When a school bus is tested in 
accordance with the procedures of S13, it shall meet the requirements of 
S9.1 through S9.4.
    S9.1 Outside Rearview Mirrors. Each school bus shall have two 
outside rearview mirror systems: System A and System B.
    S9.2. System A shall be located with stable supports so that the 
portion of the system on the bus's left side, and the portion on its 
right side, each:
    (a) Includes at least one mirror of unit magnification with not less 
than 323 cm\2\ of reflective surface; and
    (b) Includes one or more mirrors which together provide, at the 
driver's eye location, a view of:
    (1) For the mirror system on the right side of the bus, the entire 
top surface of cylinder N in Figure 2, and that area of the ground which 
extends rearward from cylinder N to a point not less than 61 meters from 
the mirror surface.
    (2) For the mirror system on the left side of the bus, the entire 
top surface of cylinder M in Figure 2, and that area of the ground which 
extends rearward from cylinder M to a point not less than 61 meters from 
the mirror surface.
    S9.3(a) For each of the cylinders A through P whose entire top 
surface is not directly visible from the driver's eye location, System B 
shall provide, at that location:

    (1) A view of the entire top surface of that cylinder.
    (2) A view of the ground that overlaps with the view of the ground 
provided by System A.
    (b) Each mirror installed in compliance with S9.3(a) shall meet the 
following requirements:
    (1) Each mirror shall have a projected area of at least 258 
cm<SUP>2</SUP>, as measured on a plane at a right angle to the mirror's 
axis.
    (2) Each mirror shall be located such that the distance from the 
center point of the eye location of a 25th percentile adult female 
seated in the driver's seat to the center of the mirror shall be at 
least 95 cm.
    (3) Each mirror shall have no discontinuities in the slope of the 
surface of the mirror.
    (4) Each mirror shall be installed with a stable support.
    (c) Each school bus which has a mirror installed in compliance with 
S9.3(a) that has an average radius of curvature of less than 889 mm, as 
determined under S12, shall have a label visible to the seated driver. 
The label shall be printed in a type face and color that are clear and 
conspicuous. The label shall state the following:


``USE CROSS VIEW MIRRORS TO VIEW PEDESTRIANS WHILE BUS IS STOPPED. DO 
NOT USE THESE MIRRORS TO VIEW TRAFFIC WHILE BUS IS MOVING. IMAGES IN 
SUCH MIRRORS DO NOT ACCURATELY SHOW ANOTHER VEHICLE'S LOCATION.''
    S10. Requirements for motorcycles.
    S10.1 Each motorcycle shall have either a mirror of unit 
magnification with not less than 8065 mm<SUP>2</SUP> of reflective 
surface, or a convex mirror with

[[Page 336]]

not less than 6450 mm<SUP>2</SUP> of reflective surface and an average 
radius of curvature not less than 508 mm and not greater than 1524 mm, 
installed with a stable support, and mounted so that the horizontal 
center of the reflective surface is at least 279 mm outward of the 
longitudinal centerline of the motorcycle. The mirror shall be 
adjustable by tilting in both the horizontal and vertical directions.
    S11. Mirror Construction. The average reflectance of any mirror 
required by this standard shall be determined in accordance with SAE 
Recommended Practice J964, OCT84. All single reflectance mirrors shall 
have an average reflectance of at least 35 percent. If a mirror is 
capable of multiple reflectance levels, the minimum reflectance level in 
the day mode shall be at least 35 percent and the minimum reflectance 
level in the night mode shall be at least 4 percent. A multiple 
reflectance mirror shall either be equipped with a means for the driver 
to adjust the mirror to a reflectance level of at least 35 percent in 
the event of electrical failure, or achieve such reflectance level 
automatically in the event of electrical failure.
    S12. Determination of radius of curvature.
    S12.1 To determine the average radius of curvature of a convex 
mirror, use a 3-point linear spherometer, which meets the requirements 
of S12.2, at the 10 test positions shown in Figure 1 and record the 
readings for each position.
    S12.2 The 3-point linear spherometer has two outer fixed legs 38 mm 
apart and one inner movable leg at the midpoint. The spherometer has a 
dial indicator with a scale that can be read accurately to .0025 mm, 
with the zero reading being a flat surface.
    S12.3 The 10 test positions on the image display consist of two 
positions at right angles to each other at each of five locations as 
shown in Figure 1. The locations are at the center of the mirror, at the 
left and right ends of a horizontal line that bisects the mirror and at 
the top and bottom ends of a vertical line that bisects the mirror. None 
of the readings are within a 6.4 mm border on the edge of the image 
display.
    S12.4 At each position, the spherometer is held perpendicular to the 
convex mirror-surface and a record is made of the reading on the dial 
indicator to the nearest .0025 mm.
    S12.5 Convert the dial reading data for each of the 10 test 
positions to radius of curvature calculations using Table I. Consider 
the change as linear for dial readings that fall between two numbers in 
Table I.
    S12.6 Calculate the average radius of curvature by adding all 10 
radius of curvature calculations and dividing by ten.
    S12.7 Determine the numerical difference between the average radius 
of curvature and each of the 10 individual radius of curvature 
calculations determined in S12.5.
    S12.8 Calculate the greatest percentage deviation by dividing the 
greatest numerical difference determined in S12.7 by the average radius 
of curvature and multiply by 100.

[[Page 337]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR24SE98.034


  Table I--Conversion Table From Spherometer Dial Reading to Radius of
                                Curvature
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                 Radius of    Radius of
                 Dial reading                    curvature    curvature
                                                  (Inches)       (mm)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
.00330........................................         85.2       2164.1
.00350........................................         80.4      2042.92
.00374........................................         75.2       1910.1
.00402........................................         70.0       1778.0
.00416........................................         67.6       1717.0
.00432........................................         65.1       1653.5
.00450........................................         62.5       1587.5
.00468........................................         60.1       1526.5
.00476........................................         59.1       1501.1
.00484........................................         58.1       1475.7
.00492........................................         57.2       1452.9
.00502........................................         56.0       1422.4
.00512........................................         54.9       1394.5
.00522........................................         53.9       1369.1
.00536........................................         52.5       1333.5
.00544........................................         51.7       1313.2
.00554........................................         50.8       1290.3
.00566........................................         49.7       1262.4
.00580........................................         48.5       1231.9
.00592........................................         47.5       1206.5
.00606........................................         46.4       1178.6
.00622........................................         45.2       1148.1
.00636........................................         44.2       1122.7
.00654........................................         43.0       1092.2
.00668........................................         42.1       1069.3
.00686........................................         41.0       1041.4
.00694........................................         40.5       1028.7
.00720........................................         39.1        993.1
.00740........................................         38.0        965.2
.00760........................................         37.0        939.8
.00780........................................         36.1        916.9
.00802........................................         35.1        891.5
.00822........................................         34.2        868.7
.00850........................................         33.1        840.7
.00878........................................         32.0        812.8
.00906........................................         31.0        787.4
.00922........................................         30.5        774.7
.00938........................................         30.0        762.0
.00960........................................         29.3        744.2
.00980........................................         28.7        729.0
.01004........................................         28.0        711.2
.01022........................................         27.5        698.5
.01042........................................         27.0        685.8
.01060........................................         26.5        673.1
.01080........................................         26.0        660.4
.01110........................................         25.3        642.6
.01130........................................         24.9        632.5
.01170........................................         24.0        609.6
.01200........................................         23.4        594.4
.01240........................................         22.7        576.6
.01280........................................         22.0        558.8
.01310........................................         21.5        546.1
.01360........................................         20.7        525.8
.01400........................................         20.1        510.5
.01430........................................         19.7        500.4
.01480........................................         19.0        482.6
.01540........................................         18.3        464.8
.01570........................................         17.9        454.7
.01610........................................         17.5        444.5
.01650........................................         17.1        434.3
.01700........................................         16.6        421.6
.01750........................................         16.1        408.9
.01800........................................         15.6        396.2
.01860........................................         15.1        383.5
.01910........................................         14.7        373.4
.01980........................................         14.2        360.7
.02040........................................         13.8        350.5
.02100........................................         13.4        340.4

[[Page 338]]

 
.02160........................................         13.0        330.2
.02250........................................         12.5        317.5
.02340........................................         12.0        304.8
.02450........................................         11.5        292.1
.02560........................................         11.0        279.4
.02680........................................         10.5        266.7
.02810........................................         10.0        254.0
.02960........................................          9.5        241.3
.03130........................................          9.0        228.6
.03310........................................          8.5        215.9
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S13. School bus mirror test procedures. The requirements of S9.1 
through S9.4 shall be met when the vehicle is tested in accordance with 
the following conditions.
    S13.1 The cylinders shall be a color which provides a high contrast 
with the surface on which the bus is parked.
    S13.2 The cylinders are 0.3048 m high and 0.3048 m in diameter, 
except for cylinder P which is 0.9144 m high and 0.3048 m in diameter.
    S13.3 Place cylinders at locations as specified in S13.3(a) through 
S13.3(g) and illustrated in Figure 2. Measure the distances shown in 
Figure 2 from a cylinder to another object from the center of the 
cylinder as viewed from above.
    (a) Place cylinders G, H, and I so that they are tangent to a 
transverse vertical plane tangent to the forward-most surface of the 
bus's front bumper. Place cylinders D, E, F so that their centers are 
located in a transverse vertical plane that is 1.8288 meters (6 feet) 
forward of a transverse vertical plane passing through the centers of 
cylinders G, H, and I. Place cylinders A, B, and C so that their centers 
are located in a transverse vertical plane that is 3.6576 meters (12 
feet) forward of the transverse vertical plane passing through the 
centers of cylinders G, H, and I.
    (b) Place cylinders B, E, and H so that their centers are in a 
longitudinal vertical plane that passes through the bus's longitudinal 
centerline.
    (c) Place cylinders A, D, and G so that their centers are in a 
longitudinal vertical plane that is tangent to the most outboard edge of 
the left side of the bus's front bumper.
    (d) Place cylinders C, F, and I so that their centers are in a 
longitudinal vertical plane that is tangent to the most outboard edge of 
the right side of the bus's front bumper.
    (e) Place cylinder J so that its center is in a longitudinal 
vertical plane 0.3048 meters (1 foot) to the left of the longitudinal 
vertical plane passing through the centers of cylinders A, D, and G, and 
is in the transverse vertical plane that passes through the centerline 
of the bus's front axle.
    (f) Place cylinder K so that its center is in a longitudinal 
vertical plane 0.3048 meters (1 foot) to the right of the longitudinal 
vertical plane passing through the centers of cylinders C, F, and I, and 
is in the transverse vertical plane that passes through the centerline 
of the bus's front axle.
    (g) Place cylinders L, M, N, O, and P so that their centers are in 
the transverse vertical plane that passes through the centerline of the 
bus's rear axle. Place cylinder L so that its center is in a 
longitudinal vertical plane that is 1.8288 meters (6 feet) to the left 
of the longitudinal vertical plane tangent to the bus's most outboard 
left surface (excluding the mirror system). Place cylinder M so that its 
center is in a longitudinal vertical plane that is 0.3048 meters (1 
foot) to the left of the longitudinal vertical plane tangent to the left 
side of the bus. Place cylinder N so that its center is in a 
longitudinal vertical plane that is 0.3048 meters (1 foot) to the right 
of the longitudinal vertical plane tangent to the right side of the bus. 
Place cylinder O so that its center is in a longitudinal vertical plane 
that is 1.8288 meters (6 feet) to the right of the longitudinal vertical 
plane tangent to the right side of the bus. Place cylinder P so that its 
center is in a longitudinal vertical plane that is 3.6576 meters (12 
feet) to the right of the longitudinal vertical plane tangent to the 
right side of the bus.

[[Page 339]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.002


[[Page 340]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.041

    S13.4 The driver's eye location is the eye location of a 25th 
percentile adult female, when seated in the driver's seat as follows:
    (a) The center point of the driver's eye location is the point 
located 68.58 centimeters (27 inches) vertically above the intersection 
of the seat cushion and the seat back at the longitudinal centerline of 
the seat.
    (b) Adjust the driver's seat to the midway point between the 
forward-most and rear-most positions, and if separately adjustable in 
the vertical direction, adjust to the lowest position. If an adjustment 
position does not

[[Page 341]]

exist at the midway point, use the closest adjustment position to the 
rear of the midpoint. If a seat back is adjustable, adjust the seat back 
angle to the manufacturer's nominal design riding position in accordance 
with the manufacturer's recommendations.
    S13.5 Adjustable mirrors are adjusted before the test in accordance 
with the manufacturer's recommendations. Such mirrors are not moved or 
readjusted at any time during the test.
    13.6 Place a 35 mm or larger format camera, or video camera, so that 
its image plane is located at the center point of the driver's eye 
location or at any single point within a semicircular area established 
by a 15.24 centimeter (6 inch) radius parallel to and forward of the 
center point (see figure 3). With the camera at any single location on 
or within that semicircle look through the camera and the windows of the 
bus and determine whether the entire top surface of each cylinder is 
directly visible.
    S13.7 For each cylinder whose entire top surface is determined under 
paragraph 13.4 of this section not to be directly visible at the 
driver's eye location,
    (a) Place a comparison chart (see figure 4) above the mirror that 
provides the fullest view of the cylinder in situations where a cylinder 
is partially visible through more than one mirror.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.042

    The width of the bars in Figure 4 indicating three minutes of arc 
and nine minutes of arc are derived from the following formula:

    For 3 minutes of arc:


[[Page 342]]


X=Dx0.000873,

    Where:

X=the width of a line, in the unit of measurement D, representing 3 
minutes of arc;
D=distance from center point of driver's eye location to the center of 
the mirror's surface; and

0.000873=tangent of 3 minutes of arc.

    For 9 minutes of arc:

X=Dx0.002618,

Where:

X=the width of a line, in the unit of measurement D, representing 9 
minutes of arc;
D=distance from center point of driver's eye location to the center of 
the mirror's surface; and

0.002618=tangent of 9 minutes of arc.

    (b) Photograph each cylinder through the mirror(s) that provides a 
view of the cylinder. Photograph each cylinder with the camera located 
so that the view through its film or image plane is located at any 
single location within the semicircle established under 13.4, [POINT 
A,B,C, OR D] ensuring that the image of the mirror and comparison chart 
fill the camera's view finder to the extent possible.
    13.8 Make all observations and take all photographs with the 
service/entry door in the closed position and the stop signal arm(s) in 
the fully retracted position.

[41 FR 36025, Aug. 26, 1976, as amended at 41 FR 56813, Dec. 30, 1976; 
47 FR 38700, Sept. 2, 1982; 48 FR 38844, Aug. 26, 1983; 48 FR 40262, 
Sept. 6, 1983; 56 FR 58516, Nov. 20, 1991; 57 FR 57015, Dec. 2, 1992; 58 
FR 60402, Nov. 16, 1993; 60 FR 15692, Mar. 27, 1995; 63 FR 28929-28931, 
May 27, 1998; 63 FR 51000, Sept. 24, 1998; 69 FR 18497, Apr. 8, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 571.112  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 571.113  Standard No. 113; Hood latch system.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard establishes the requirement for 
providing a hood latch system or hood latch systems.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses.
    S3. Definitions. Hood means any exterior movable body panel forward 
of the windshield that is used to cover an engine, luggage, storage, or 
battery compartment.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 Each hood must be provided with a hood latch system.
    S4.2 A front opening hood which, in any open position, partially or 
completely obstructs a driver's forward view through the windshield must 
be provided with a second latch position on the hood latch system or 
with a second hood latch system.


<R05>
Sec. 571.114  Standard No. 114; Theft protection.

    S1. Purpose and Scope. This standard specifies requirements 
primarily for theft protection to reduce the incidence of crashes 
resulting from unauthorized operation of a motor vehicle. It also 
specifies requirements to reduce the incidence of crashes resulting from 
the rollaway of parked vehicles with automatic transmissions as a result 
of children moving the shift mechanism out of the ``park'' position.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, and to 
trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles having a GVWR of 4536 
kilograms or less. However, it does not apply to walk-in van-type 
vehicles.
    S3. Definitions.
    Combination means one of the specifically planned and constructed 
variations of a locking system which, when properly actuated, permits 
operation of the locking system.
    Key includes any other device designed and constructed to provide a 
method for operating a locking system which is designed and constructed 
to be operated by that device.
    Vehicle type refers to passenger car, truck, or multipurpose 
passenger vehicle, as those terms are defined in 49 CFR 571.3.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 Each truck and multipurpose passenger vehicle having a GVWR of 
4536 kilograms or less and each passenger car shall meet the 
requirements of S4.2, S4.3, S4.4, and S4.5. However, open-body type 
vehicles that are manufactured for operation without doors and that 
either have no doors or have doors that are designed to be easily 
attached to and removed from the vehicle by the vehicle owner are not 
required to comply with S4.5.

[[Page 343]]

    S4.2 Each vehicle shall have a key-locking system which, whenever 
the key is removed, prevents:
    (a) The normal activation of the vehicle's engine or motor; and
    (b) Either steering or forward self-mobility of the vehicle or both.
    S4.2.1 (a) Except as provided in S4.2.2 (a) and (b), the key-locking 
system required by S4.2 in each vehicle which has an automatic 
transmission with a ``park'' position shall, when tested under the 
procedures in S5.2, prevent removal of the key unless the transmission 
or transmission shift lever is locked in ``park'' or becomes locked in 
``park'' as the direct result of removing the key.
    (b) Each vehicle shall not move more than 150 mm on a 10 percent 
grade when the transmission or transmission shift lever is locked in 
``park.''
    S4.2.2 (a) Notwithstanding S4.2.1, provided that steering is 
prevented upon the key's removal, each vehicle specified therein may 
permit key removal when electrical failure of this system (including 
battery discharge) occurs or may have a device which, when activated, 
permits key removal. The means for activating any such device shall be 
covered by a non-transparent surface which, when installed, prevents 
sight of and activation of the device. The covering surface shall be 
removable only by use of a screwdriver or other tool.
    (b) Notwithstanding S4.2.1, each vehicle specified therein may have 
a device which, when activated, permits moving the transmission shift 
lever from ``park'' after the removal of the key. The device shall 
either be operable:
    (1) By the key, as defined in S3; or
    (2) By another means, provided that steering is prevented when the 
key is removed from the ignition, and provided that the means for 
activating the device is covered by a non-transparent surface which, 
when installed, prevents sight of and activation of the device. The 
covering surface shall be removable only by use of a screwdriver or 
other tool.
    S4.3 Except when an automatic transmission vehicle is in ``park,'' 
the means for deactivating the vehicle's engine or motor shall not 
activate any device installed pursuant to S4.2(b) to prevent the 
vehicle's steering or forward self-mobility or both.
    S4.4. For each vehicle type manufactured by a manufacturer, the 
number of different combinations of the key-locking systems required by 
S4.2 shall be at least 1,000, or a number equal to the number of 
vehicles of that type manufactured by such manufacturer, whichever is 
less. The same combinations may be used for more than one vehicle type.
    S4.5. A warning to the driver shall be activated whenever the key 
required by S4.2 has been left in the locking system and the driver's 
door is opened. The warning to the driver need not operate--
    (a) After the key has been manually withdrawn to a position from 
which it may not be turned;
    (b) When the key-locking system is in the ``on'' or ``start'' 
position; or
    (c) After the key has been inserted in the locking system and before 
it has been turned.
    S5. Compliance Test Procedure for vehicles with automatic 
transmissions.
    S5.1 Test Conditions. (a) The vehicle shall be tested at curb weight 
plus 91 kg (including the driver).
    (b) Except where specified otherwise, the test surface shall be 
level.
    S5.2 Test procedure. (a) Move the transmission shift lever to any 
position where it will remain without assistance, including a position 
between the detent positions, except for the ``park'' position. Try to 
remove the key from each possible key position in each such shift 
position.
    (b) Drive the vehicle forward up a 10 percent grade and stop it with 
the service brakes. Apply the parking brake (if present). Move the shift 
mechanism to the ``park'' position. Note the vehicle position. Release 
the parking brake. Release the service brakes. Remove the key. Verify 
that the transmission shift lever or transmission is locked in ``park.'' 
Verify that the vehicle, at rest, has moved no more than 150 mm from the 
position noted prior to release of the brakes.

[46 FR 32253, June 22, 1981, as amended at 56 FR 12468, Mar. 26, 1991; 
57 FR 2043, Jan. 17, 1992; 60 FR 13644, Mar. 14, 1995; 60 FR 30011, June 
7, 1995; 60 FR 41028, Aug. 11, 1995; 62 FR 2978, Jan. 21, 1997]

[[Page 344]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.115  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 571.116  Standard No. 116; Motor vehicle brake fluids.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for fluids for use 
in hydraulic brake systems of motor vehicles, containers for these 
fluids, and labeling of the containers.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce failures in 
the hydraulic braking systems of motor vehicles which may occur because 
of the manufacture or use of improper or contaminated fluid.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to all fluid for use in 
hydraulic brake systems of motor vehicles. In addition, S5.3 applies to 
passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, buses, 
trailers, and motorcycles.
    S4. Definitions.
    Blister means a cavity or sac on the surface of a brake cup.
    Brake fluid means a liquid designed for use in a motor vehicle 
hydraulic brake system in which it will contact elastomeric components 
made of styrene and butadiene rubber (SBR), ethylene and propylene 
rubber (EPR), polychloroprene (CR) brake hose inner tube stock or 
natural rubber (NR).
    Chipping means a condition in which small pieces are missing from 
the outer surface of a brake cup.
    Duplicate samples means two samples of brake fluid taken from a 
single packaged lot and tested simultaneously.
    Hydraulic system mineral oil means a mineral-oil-based fluid 
designed for use in motor vehicle hydraulic brake systems in which the 
fluid is not in contact with components made of SBR, EPR or NR.
    Packager means any person who fills containers with brake fluid that 
are subsequently distributed for retail sale.
    Packaged lot is that quantity of brake fluid shipped by the 
manufacturer to the packager in a single container, or that quantity of 
brake fluid manufactured by a single plant run of 24 hours or less, 
through the same processing equipment and with no change in ingredients.
    Scuffing means a visible erosion of a portion of the outer surface 
of a brake cup.
    A silicone base brake fluid (SBBF) is a brake fluid which consists 
of not less than 70 percent by weight of a diorgano polysiloxane.
    Sloughing means degradation of a brake cup as evidenced by the 
presence of carbon black loosely held on the brake cup surface, such 
that a visible black streak is produced when the cup, with a 500 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 gram deadweight on it, is drawn base down over a 
sheet of white bond paper placed on a firm flat surface.
    Stickiness means a condition on the surface of a brake cup such that 
fibers will be pulled from a wad of U.S.P. absorbent cotton when it is 
drawn across the surface.
    S5. Requirements. This section specifies performance requirements 
for DOT 3, DOT 4 and DOT 5 brake fluids; requirements for brake fluid 
certification; and requirements for container sealing, labeling and 
color coding for brake fluids and hydraulic system mineral oils. Where a 
range of tolerances is specified, the brake fluid shall meet the 
requirements at all points within the range.
    S5.1 Brake fluid. When tested in accordance with S6, brake fluids 
shall meet the following requirements:
    S5.1.1 Equilibrium reflux boiling point (ERBP). When brake fluid is 
tested according to S6.1, the ERBP shall not be less than the following 
value for the grade indicated:
    (a) DOT 3: 205 [deg]C. (401 [deg]F.).
    (b) DOT 4: 230 [deg]C. (446 [deg]F.).
    (c) DOT 5: 260 [deg]C. (500 [deg]F.).
    S5.1.2 Wet ERBP. When brake fluid is tested according to S6.2, the 
wet ERBP shall not be less than the following value for the grade 
indicated:
    (a) DOT 3: 140 [deg]C. (284 [deg]F.).
    (b) DOT 4: 155 [deg]C. (311 [deg]F.).
    (c) DOT 5: 1 180 [deg]C. (356 [deg]F.).
    S5.1.3. Kinematic viscosities. When brake fluid is tested according 
to S6.3, the kinematic viscosities in square millimeters per second at 
stated temperatures shall be neither less than 1.5 mm\2\/s at 100 
[deg]C. (212 [deg]F.) nor more than the following maximum value for the 
grade indicated:
    (a) DOT 3: 1,500 mm\2\/s at minus 40 [deg]C. (minus 40 [deg]F.).
    (b) DOT 4: 1,800 mm\2\/s at minus 40 [deg]C. (minus 40 [deg]F.).

[[Page 345]]

    (c) DOT 5: 900 mm\2\/s at minus 40 [deg]C. (minus 40 [deg]F.).
    S5.1.4 pH value. When brake fluid, except DOT 5 SBBF, is tested 
according to S6.4, the pH value shall not be less than 7.0 nor more than 
11.5.
    S5.1.5 Brake fluid stability.
    S5.1.5.1 High-temperature stability. When brake fluid is tested 
according to S6.5.3 the ERBP shall not change by more than 3 [deg]C. 
(5.4 [deg]F.) plus 0.05[deg] for each degree that the ERBP of the fluid 
exceeds 225 [deg]C. (437 [deg]F.).
    S5.1.5.2 Chemical stability. When brake fluid, except DOT 5 SBBF, is 
tested according to S6.5.4, the change in temperature of the refluxing 
fluid mixture shall not exceed 3.0 [deg]C (5.4 [deg]F.) plus 0.05[deg] 
for each degree that the ERBP of the fluid exceeds 225 [deg]C (437 
[deg]F.).
    S5.1.6 Corrosion. When brake fluid is tested according to S6.6--
    (a) The metal test strips shall not show weight changes exceeding 
the limits stated in Table I.

                                 Table I
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Maximum
                                                             permissible
                                                                weight
                    Test strip material                      change, mg./
                                                              sq. cm. of
                                                               surface
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Steel, tinned iron, cast iron..............................          0.2
Aluminum...................................................           .1
Brass, copper..............................................           .4
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Excluding the area of contact (13 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 mm. 
(\1/2\ <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/32\ inch) measured from the bolt hole 
end of the test strip), the metal test strips shall not show pitting or 
etching to an extent discernible without magnification;
    (c) The water-wet brake fluid at the end of the test shall show no 
jelling at 23 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C (73.4 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.);
    (d) No crystalline deposit shall form and adhere to either the glass 
jar walls or the surface of the metal strips;
    (e) At the end of the test, sedimentation of the water-wet brake 
fluid shall not exceed 0.10 percent by volume;
    (f) The pH value of water-wet brake fluid, except DOT 5 SBBF, at the 
end of the test shall not be less than 7.0 nor more than 11.5;
    (g) The cups at the end of the test shall show no disintegration, as 
evidenced by blisters or sloughing;
    (h) The hardness of the cup shall not decrease by more than 15 
International Rubber Hardness Degrees (IRHD); and
    (i) The base diameter of the cups shall not increase by more than 
1.4 mm. (0.055 inch).
    S5.1.7 Fluidity and appearance at low temperature. When brake fluid 
is tested according to S6.7, at the storage temperature and for the 
storage times given in Table II--
    (a) The fluid shall show no sludging, sedimentation, 
crystallization, or stratification;
    (b) Upon inversion of the sample bottle, the time required for the 
air bubble to travel to the top of the fluid shall not exceed the bubble 
flow times shown in Table II; and
    (c) On warming to room temperature, the fluid shall resume the 
appearance and fluidity that it had before chilling.

          Table II--Fluidity and Appearance at Low Temperatures
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Maximum
                                                    Storage     bubble
               Storage temperature                   time      flow time
                                                    (hours)    (seconds)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Minus 40 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (minus   144 <plus-          10
 40 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.)..........  minus<ls-t
                                                        h4.0
Minus 50 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (minus     6 <plus-          35
 58 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.)..........  minus<ls-t
                                                        h0.2
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S5.1.8 Evaporation. When brake fluid is tested according to S6.8--
    (a) The loss by evaporation shall not exceed 80 percent by weight;
    (b) The residue from the brake fluid after evaporation shall contain 
no precipitate that remains gritty or abrasive when rubbed with the 
fingertip; and
    (c) The residue shall have a pour point below minus 5 [deg]C. (+23 
[deg]F.).
    S5.1.9 Water tolerance. (a) At low temperature. When brake fluid is 
tested according to S6.9.3(a)--
    (1) The fluid shall show no sludging, sedimentation, 
crystallization, or stratification;
    (2) Upon inversion of the centrifuge tube, the air bubble shall 
travel to the top of the fluid in not more than 10 seconds;
    (3) If cloudiness has developed, the wet fluid shall regain its 
original clarity and fluidity when warmed to room temperature; and

[[Page 346]]

    (b) At 60 [deg]C. (140 [deg]F.). When brake fluid is tested 
according to S6.9.3(b)--
    (1) The fluid shall show no stratification; and
    (2) Sedimentation shall not exceed 0.15 percent by volume after 
centrifuging.
    S5.1.10 Compatibility.
    (a) At low temperature. When brake fluid is tested according to 
S6.10.3(a), the test specimen shall show no sludging, sedimentation, or 
crystallization. In addition, fluids, except DOT 5 SBBF, shall show no 
stratification.
    (b) At 60 [deg]C. (140 [deg]F.). When brake fluid is tested 
according to S6.10.3(b)--
    (1) Sedimentation shall not exceed 0.05 percent by volume after 
centrifuging; and
    (2) Fluids, except DOT 5 SBBF, shall show no stratification.
    S5.1.11 Resistance to oxidation. When brake fluid is tested 
according to S6.11--
    (a) The metal test strips outside the areas in contact with the 
tinfoil shall not show pitting or etching to an extent discernible 
without magnification;
    (b) No more than a trace of gum shall be deposited on the test 
strips outside the areas in contact with the tinfoil;
    (c) The aluminum strips shall not change in weight by more than 0.05 
mg./sq. cm.; and
    (d) The cast iron strips shall not change in weight by more than 0.3 
mg./sq. cm.
    S5.1.12 Effects on cups. When brake cups are subjected to brake 
fluid in accordance with S6.12--
    (a) The increase in the diameter of the base of the cups shall be 
not less than 0.15 mm. (0.006 inch) or more than 1.40 mm. (0.055 inch);
    (b) The decrease in hardness of the cups shall be not more than 10 
IRHD at 70 [deg]C. (158 [deg]F.) or more than 15 IRHD at 120 [deg]C. 
(248 [deg]F.), and there shall be no increase in hardness of the cups; 
and
    (c) The cups shall show no disintegration as evidenced by 
stickiness, blisters, or sloughing.
    S5.1.13 Stroking properties. When brake fluid is tested according to 
S6.13--
    (a) Metal parts of the test system shall show no pitting or etching 
to an extent discernible without magnification;
    (b) The change in diameter of any cylinder or piston shall not 
exceed 0.13 mm. (0.005 inch);
    (c) The average decrease in hardness of seven of the eight cups 
tested (six wheel cylinder and one master cylinder primary) shall not 
exceed 15 IRHD. Not more than one of the seven cups shall have a 
decrease in hardness greater than 17 IRHD;
    (d) None of the eight cups shall be in an unsatisfactory operating 
condition as evidenced by stickiness, scuffing, blisters, cracking, 
chipping, or other change in shape from its original appearance;
    (e) None of the eight cups shall show an increase in base diameter 
greater than 0.90 mm (0.035 inch);
    (f) The average lip diameter set of the eight cups shall not be 
greater than 65 percent.
    (g) During any period of 24,000 strokes, the volume loss of fluid 
shall not exceed 36 milliliters;
    (h) The cylinder pistons shall not freeze or function improperly 
throughout the test;
    (i) The total loss of fluid during the 100 strokes at the end of the 
test shall not exceed 36 milliliters;
    (j) The fluid at the end of the test shall show no formation of 
gels;
    (k) At the end of the test the amount of sediment shall not exceed 
1.5 percent by volume; and
    (l) Brake cylinders shall be free of deposits that are abrasive or 
that cannot be removed when rubbed moderately with a nonabrasive cloth 
wetted with ethanol.
    S5.1.14 Fluid color. Brake fluid and hydraulic system mineral oil 
shall be of the color indicated:

DOT 3, DOT 4, and DOT 5.1 non-SBBF--colorless to amber.
DOT 5 SBBF--purple.
Hydraulic system mineral oil--green.

    S5.2 Packaging and labeling requirements for motor vehicle brake 
fluids.
    S5.2.1 Container sealing. Each brake fluid or hydraulic system 
mineral oil container with a capacity of 177 mL or more shall be 
provided with a resealable closure that has an inner seal impervious to 
the packaged brake fluid. The container closure shall include a tamper-
proof feature that will either be destroyed or substantially altered

[[Page 347]]

when the container closure is initially opened.
    S5.2.2 Certification, marking, and labeling.
    S5.2.2.1 Each manufacturer of a DOT grade brake fluid shall furnish 
to each packager, distributor, or dealer to whom he delivers brake 
fluid, the following information:
    (a) A serial number identifying the production lot and the date of 
manufacture of the brake fluid.
    (b) The grade (DOT 3, DOT 4, DOT 5) of the brake fluid. If DOT 5 
grade brake fluid , it shall be further distinguished as ``DOT 5 
SILICONE BASE'' or ``DOT 5.1 NON-SILICONE BASE.''
    (c) The minimum wet boiling point in Fahrenheit of the brake fluid.
    (d) Certification that the brake fluid conforms to Sec. 571.116.
    S5.2.2.2 Each packager of brake fluid shall furnish the information 
specified in paragraphs (a) through (g) of this S5.2.2.2 by clearly 
marking it on each brake fluid container or on a label (labels) 
permanently affixed to the container, in any location except a removable 
part such as a lid. After being subjected to the operations and 
conditions specified in S6.14, the information required by this section 
shall be legible to an observer having corrected visual acuity of 20/40 
(Snellen ratio) at a distance of 305 mm, and any label affixed to the 
container in compliance with this section shall not be removable without 
its being destroyed or defaced.
    (a) Certification that the brake fluid conforms to Sec. 571.116.
    (b) The name of the packager of the brake fluid, which may be in 
code form.
    (c) The name and complete mailing address of the distributor.
    (d) A serial number identifying the packaged lot and date of 
packaging.
    (e) Designation of the contents as ``DOT--MOTOR VEHICLE BRAKE 
FLUID'' (Fill in DOT 3, DOT 4, DOT 5 SILICONE BASE, or DOT 5.1 NON-
SILICONE BASE as applicable).
    (f) The minimum wet boiling point in Fahrenheit of the DOT brake 
fluid in the container.
    (g) The following safety warnings in capital and lower case letters 
as indicated:
    (1) FOLLOW VEHICLE MANUFACTURER'S RECOMMENDATIONS WHEN ADDING BRAKE 
FLUID.
    (2) KEEP BRAKE FLUID CLEAN AND DRY. Contamination with dirt, water, 
petroleum products or other materials may result in brake failure or 
costly repairs.
    (3) STORE BRAKE FLUID ONLY IN ITS ORIGINAL CONTAINER. KEEP CONTAINER 
CLEAN AND TIGHTLY CLOSED TO PREVENT ABSORPTION OF MOISTURE.
    (4) CAUTION: DO NOT REFILL CONTAINER, AND DO NOT USE FOR OTHER 
LIQUIDS. (Not required for containers with a capacity in excess of 19 
L.)
    S5.2.2.3 Each packager of hydraulic system mineral oil shall furnish 
the information specified in paragraphs (a) through (e) of this S5.2.2.3 
by clearly marking it on each brake fluid container or on a label 
(labels) permanently affixed to the container, in any location except a 
removable part such as a lid. After being subjected to the operations 
and conditions specified in S6.14, the information required by this 
section shall be legible to an observer having corrected visual acuity 
of 20/40 (Snellen ratio) at a distance of 305 mm and any label affixed 
to the container in compliance with this section shall not be removable 
without its being destroyed or defaced.
    (a) The name of the packager of the hydraulic system mineral oil, 
which may be in code form.
    (b) The name and complete mailing address of the distributor.
    (c) A serial number identifying the packaged lot and date of 
packaging.
    (d) Designation of the contents as ``HYDRAULIC SYSTEM MINERAL OIL'' 
in capital letters at least 3 mm high.
    (e) The following safety warnings in capital and lower case letters 
as indicated:
    (1) FOLLOW VEHICLE MANUFACTURER'S RECOMMENDATIONS WHEN ADDING 
HYDRAULIC SYSTEM MINERAL OIL.
    (2) Hydraulic System Mineral Oil is NOT COMPATIBLE with the rubber 
components of brake systems designed for use with DOT brake fluids.

[[Page 348]]

    (3) KEEP HYDRAULIC SYSTEM MINERAL OIL CLEAN. Contamination with dust 
or other materials may result in brake failure or costly repair.
    (4) CAUTION: STORE HYDRAULIC SYSTEM MINERAL OIL ONLY IN ITS ORIGINAL 
CONTAINER. KEEP CONTAINER CLEAN AND TIGHTLY CLOSED. DO NOT REFILL 
CONTAINER OR USE OTHER LIQUIDS. (The last sentence is not required for 
containers with a capacity in excess of 19 L.)
    S5.2.2.4 If a container for brake fluid or hydraulic system mineral 
oil is not normally visible but designed to be protected by an outer 
container or carton during use, the outer container or carton rather 
than the inner container shall meet the labeling requirements of 
S5.2.2.2 or S5.2.2.3, as appropriate.
    S5.3 Motor vehicle requirement. Each passenger car, multipurpose 
passenger vehicle, truck, bus, trailer, and motorcycle that has a 
hydraulic brake system shall be equipped with fluid that has been 
manufactured and packaged in conformity with the requirements of this 
standard.
    S6. Test procedures.
    S6.1 Equilibrium reflux boiling point. Determine the ERBP of a brake 
fluid by running duplicate samples according to the following procedure 
and averaging the results.
    S6.1.1 Summary of procedure. Sixty milliliters (ml.) of brake fluid 
are boiled under specified equilibrium conditions (reflux) at 
atmospheric pressure in a 100-ml. flask. The average temperature of the 
boiling fluid at the end of the reflux period, corrected for variations 
in barometric pressure if necessary, is the ERBP.
    S6.1.2 Apparatus. (See Figure 1) The test apparatus shall consist 
of--
    (a) Flask. (See Figure 2) A 100-ml. round-bottom, short-neck heat-
resistant glass flask having a neck with a \19/38\ standard taper, 
female ground-glass joint and a side-entering tube, with an outside 
diameter of 10 millimeters (mm.), which centers the thermometer bulb in 
the flask 6.5 mm. from the bottom;
    (b) Condenser. A water-cooled, reflux, glass-tube type, condenser 
having a jacket 200 mm. in length, the bottom end of which has a \19/38\ 
standard-taper, drip-tip, male ground-glass joint;
    (c) Boiling stones. Three clean, unused silicon carbide grains 
(approximately 2 mm. (0.08 inch) in diameter, grit No. 8);
    (d) Thermometer. Standardized calibrated partial immersion (76 mm.), 
solid stem, thermometers conforming to the requirements for an ASTM 2C 
or 2F, and an ASTM 3C or 3F thermometer; and
    (e) Heat source. Variable autotransformer-controlled heating mantle 
designed to fit the flask, or an electric heater with rheostat heat 
control.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.043

                  Fig. 1--Boiling Point Test Apparatus

[[Page 349]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.044

                Fig. 2--Detail of 100 ml Short-Neck Flask
    S6.1.3 Preparation of apparatus. (a) Thoroughly clean and dry all 
glassware.
    (b) Insert thermometer through the side tube until the tip of the 
bulb is 6.5 mm. (\1/4\ inch) from the bottom center of the flask. Seal 
with a short piece of natural rubber, EPDM, SBR, or butyl tubing.
    (c) Place 60 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. of brake fluid and the 
silicon carbide grains into the flask.
    (d) Attach the flask to the condenser. When using a heating mantle, 
place the mantle under the flask and support it with a ring-clamp and 
laboratory-type stand, holding the entire assembly in place by a clamp. 
When using a rheostat-controlled heater, center a standard porcelain or 
hard asbestos refractory, having a diameter opening 32 to 38 mm., over 
the heating element and mount the flask so that direct heat is applied 
only through the opening in the refractory. Place the assembly in an 
area free from drafts or other types of sudden temperature changes. 
Connect the cooling water inlet and outlet tubes to the condenser. Turn 
on the cooling water. The water supply temperature shall not exceed 28 
[deg]C. (82.4 [deg]F.) and the temperature rise through the condenser 
shall not exceed 2 [deg]C. (3.6 [deg]F.).
    S6.1.4 Procedure. Apply heat to the flask so that within 10 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 minutes the fluid is refluxing in excess of 1 drop per 
second. The reflux rate shall not exceed 5 drops per second at any time. 
Immediately adjust the heating rate to obtain an equilibrium reflux rate 
of 1 to 2 drops per second over the next 5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 
minutes. Maintain this rate for an additional 2 minutes, taking four 
temperature readings at 30-second intervals. Record the average of these 
as the observed ERBP. If no reflux is evident when the fluid temperature 
reaches 260 [deg]C (500 [deg]F), discontinue heating and report ERBP as 
in excess of 260 [deg]C (500 [deg]F).
    S6.1.5 Calculation. (a) Thermometer inaccuracy. Correct the observed 
ERBP by applying any correction factor obtained in standardizing the 
thermometer.
    (b) Variation from standard barometric pressure. Apply the factor 
shown in Table III to calculate the barometric pressure correction to 
the ERBP.

              Table III--Correction for Barometric Pressure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Correction per 1 mm
                                                  difference in pressure
     Observed ERBP corrected for thermometer                \a\
                   inaccuracy                    -----------------------
                                                    [deg]C.   ( [deg]F.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
100 [deg]C. (212 [deg]F.) to 190 [deg]C. (374          0.039      (0.07)
 [deg]F.).......................................
Over 190 [deg]C. (374 [deg]F.)..................        0.04      (0.08)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\a\ To be added in case barometric pressure is below 760 mm.; to be
  subtracted in case barometric pressure is above 670 mm.

    (c) If the two corrected observed ERBP's agree within 2 [deg]C. (4 
[deg]C. for brake fluids having an ERBP over 230 [deg]C./446 [deg]F.) 
average the duplicate runs as the ERBP; otherwise, repeat the entire 
test, averaging the four corrected observed values to determine the 
original ERBP.
    S6.2 Wet ERBP. Determine the wet ERBP of a brake fluid by running 
duplicate samples according to the following procedure.
    S6.2.1. Summary of procedure. A 350 ml. sample of the brake fluid is 
humidified under controlled conditions; 350 ml. of SAE triethylene 
glycol monomethyl ether, brake fluid grade, referee material (TEGME) as 
described in appendix E of SAE Standard J1703 Nov. 83, ``Motor Vehicle 
Brake Fluid,'' November 1983, is used to establish the end point for 
humidification. After humidification, the water content and

[[Page 350]]

ERBP of the brake fluid are determined.
    S6.2.2 Apparatus for humidification. (See Figure 3).
    Test apparatus shall consist of--
    (a) Glass jars. Four SAE RM-49 corrosion test jars or equivalent 
screwtop, straight-sided, round glass jars each having a capacity of 
about 475 ml. and approximate inner dimensions of 100 mm. in height by 
75 mm. in diameter, with matching lids having new, clean inserts 
providing water-vapor-proof seals;
    (b) Desiccator and cover. Two bowl-form glass desiccators, 250-mm. 
inside diameter, having matching tubulated covers fitted with No. 8 
rubber stoppers; and
    (c) Desiccator plate. Two 230-mm. diameter, perforated porcelain 
desiccator plates, without feet, glazed on one side.
    S6.2.3 Reagents and materials. (a) Distilled water, see S7.1.
    (b) SAE TEGME referee material.
    S6.2.4 Preparation of apparatus. Lubricate the ground-glass joint of 
the desiccator. Pour 450 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 ml. of distilled water 
into each desiccator and insert perforated porcelain desiccator plates. 
Place the desiccators in an oven with temperature controlled at 50 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 [deg]C. (122 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.8 [deg]F.) 
throughout the humidification procedure.
    S6.2.5 Procedure. Pour 350 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 ml. of brake 
fluid into an open corrosion test jar. Prepare in the same manner a 
duplicate test fluid sample and two duplicate specimens of the SAE TEGME 
referee material (350 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 ml. of TEGME in each jar). 
The water content of the SAE TEGME fluid is adjusted to 0.50 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 percent by weight at the start of the test in 
accordance with S7.2. Place one sample each of the test brake fluid and 
the prepared TEGME sample into the same desiccator. Repeat for the 
second sample of test brake fluid and TEGME in a second desiccator. 
Place the desiccators in the 50 [deg]C. (122 [deg]F.) controlled oven 
and replace desiccator covers. At intervals, during oven humidification, 
remove the rubber stoppers in the tops of desiccators. Using a long 
needled hypodermic syringe, take a sample of not more than 2 ml. from 
each TEGME sample and determine its water content. Remove no more than 
10 ml. of fluid from each SAE TEGME sample during the humidification 
procedure. When the water content of the SAE fluid reaches 3.70 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 percent by weight (average of the duplicates). 
remove the two test fluid specimens from their desiccators and promptly 
cap each jar tightly. Allow the sealed jars to cool for 60 to 90 minutes 
at 23[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.). Measure the water contents of the test fluid 
specimens in accordance with S7.2 and determine their ERBP's in 
accordance with S6.1. If the two ERBPs agree within 4 [deg]C. (8 
[deg]F.), average them to determine the wet ERBP; otherwise repeat and 
average the four individual ERBPs as the wet ERBP of the brake fluid.

[[Page 351]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.045

    S6.3 Kinematic viscosities. Determine the kinematic viscosity of a 
brake fluid in mm<SUP>2</SUP>/s by the following procedure. Run 
duplicate samples at each of the specified temperatures, making two 
timed runs on each sample.
    S6.3.1 Summary of the procedure. The time is measured for a fixed 
volume of the brake fluid to flow through a calibrated glass capillary 
viscometer under an accurately reproducible head and at a closely 
controlled temperature. The kinematic viscosity is then calculated from 
the measured flow time and the calibration constant of the viscometer.
    S6.3.2 Apparatus.
    (a) Viscometers. Calibrated glass cap illary-type viscometers, ASTM 
D2515-66, ``Standard Specification for Kinematic Glass Viscometers,'' 
measuring viscosity within the precision limits of S6.4.7. Use suspended 
level viscometers for viscosity measurements at low temperatures. Use 
Cannon-Fenske Routine or other modified Ostwald viscometers at ambient 
temperatures and above.
    (b) Viscometer holders and frames. Mount a viscometer in the 
constant-temperature bath so that the mounting tube is held within 
1[deg] of the vertical.
    (c) Viscometer bath. A transparent liquid bath of sufficient depth 
such that

[[Page 352]]

at no time during the measurement will any portion of the sample in the 
viscometer be less than 2 cm. below the surface or less than 2 cm. above 
the bottom. The bath shall be cylindrical in shape, with turbulent 
agitation sufficient to meet the temperature control requirements. For 
measurements within 15[deg] to 100 [deg]C. (60[deg] to 212 [deg]F.) the 
temperature of the bath medium shall not vary by more than 0.01 [deg]C. 
(0.02 [deg]F.) over the length of the viscometers, or between the 
positions of the viscometers, or at the locations of the thermometers. 
Outside this range, the variation shall not exceed 0.03 [deg]C. (0.05 
[deg]F.).
    (d) Thermometers. Liquid-in-Glass Kinematic Viscosity Test 
Thermometers, covering the range of test temperatures indicated in Table 
IV and conforming to ASTM E1-68, ``Specifications for ASTM 
Thermometers,'' and in the IP requirements for IP Standard Thermometers. 
Standardize before use (see S6.3.3(b)). Use two standardized 
thermometers in the bath.

                                                       Table IV--Kinematic Viscosity Thermometers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Temperature range                                      For tests at                    Subdivisions         Thermometer number
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
               [deg]C.                       [deg]F.                [deg]C.                [deg]F.        [deg]C.  [deg]F.   ASTM            IP
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Minus 55.3 to minus 52.5...........  Minus 67.5 to minus    Minus 55.............  Minus 67.............    0.05      0.1    74 F  69 F. or C.
                                      62.5.
Minus 41.4 to minus 38.6...........  Minus 42.5 to minus    Minus 40.............  Minus 40.............    0.05      0.1    73 F  68 F. or C.
                                      37.5.
98.6 to 101.4......................  207.5 to 212.5.......  100..................  212..................    0.05      0.1    30 F  32 F. or C.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (e) Timing device. Stop watch or other timing device graduated in 
divisions representing not more than 0.2 second, with an accuracy of at 
least <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 percent when tested over intervals of 
15 minutes. Electrical timing devices may be used when the current 
frequency is controlled to an accuracy of 0.01 percent or better.
    S6.3.3 Standardization.
    (a) Viscometers. Use viscometers calibrated in accordance with 
appendix 1 of ASTM D445-65, ``Viscosity of Transparent and Opaque 
Liquids (Kinematic and Dynamic Viscosities).'' The calibration constant, 
C, is dependent upon the gravitational acceleration at the place of 
calibration. This must, therefore, be supplied by the standardization 
laboratory together with the instrument constant. Where the acceleration 
of gravity, g, in the two locations differs by more than 0.1 percent, 
correct the calibration constant as follows:

C<INF>2</INF>=(g<INF>2</INF>/g<INF>1</INF>)xC<INF>1</INF>


where the subscripts 1 and 2 indicate respectively the standardization 
laboratory and the testing laboratory.

    (b) Thermometers. Check liquid-in-glass thermometers to the nearest 
0.01 [deg]C. (0.02 [deg]F.) by direct comparison with a standardized 
thermometer. Kinematic Viscosity Test Thermometers shall be standardized 
at ``total immersion.'' The ice point of standardized thermometers shall 
be determined before use and the official corrections shall be adjusted 
to conform to the changes in ice points. (See ASTM E77-66, 
``Verification and Calibration of Liquid-in-Glass Thermometers.'')
    (c) Timers. Time signals are broadcast by the National Bureau of 
Standards, Station WWV, Washington, DC at 2.5, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 
and 35 Mc/sec (MHz). Time signals are also broadcast by Station CHU from 
Ottawa, Canada, at 3.330, 7.335, and 14.670 Mc/sec, and Station MSF at 
Rugby, United Kingdom, at 2.5, 5, and 10 Mc/sec.
    S6.3.4 Procedure. (a) Set and maintain the bath at the appropriate 
test temperature (see S5.1.3) within the limits specified in S6.3.2(c). 
Apply the necessary corrections, if any, to all thermometer readings.
    (b) Select a clean, dry, calibrated viscometer giving a flow time 
not less than its specified minimum, or 200 seconds, whichever is the 
greater.
    (c) Charge the viscometer in the manner used when the instrument was 
calibrated. Do not filter or dry the brake fluid, but protect it from 
contamination by dirt and moisture during filling and measurements.
    (1) Charge the suspended level viscom eters by tilting about 30[deg] 
from the vertical and pouring sufficient

[[Page 353]]

brake fluid through the fill tube into the lower reservoir so that when 
the viscometer is returned to vertical position the meniscus is between 
the fill marks. For measurements below 0 [deg]C. (32 [deg]F.), before 
placing the filled viscometer into the constant temperature bath, draw 
the sample into the working cap illary and timing bulb and insert small 
rubber stoppers to suspend the fluid in this position, to prevent 
accumulation of water condensate on the walls of the critical portions 
of the viscometer. Alternatively, fit loosely packed drying tubes into 
the open ends of the viscometer to prevent water condensation, but do 
not restrict the flow of the sample under test by the pressures created 
in the instrument.
    (2) If a Cannon-Fenske Routine viscometer is used, charge by 
inverting and immersing the smaller arm into the brake fluid and 
applying vacuum to the larger arm. Fill the tube to the upper timing 
mark, and return the viscometer to an upright position.
    (d) Mount the viscometer in the bath in a true vertical position 
(see S6.3.2(b)).
    (e) The viscometer shall remain in the bath until it reaches the 
test temperature.
    (f) At temperatures below 0 [deg]C. (32 [deg]F.) conduct an untimed 
preliminary run by allowing the brake fluid to drain through the 
capillary into the lower reservoir after the test temperature has been 
established.
    (g) Adjust the head level of the brake fluid to a position in the 
capillary arm about 5 mm. above the first timing mark.
    (h) With brake fluid flowing freely measure to within 0.2 second the 
time required for the meniscus to pass from the first timing mark to the 
second. If this flow time is less than the minimum specified for the 
viscometer, or 200 seconds, whichever is greater, repeat using a 
viscometer with a capillary of smaller diameter.
    (i) Repeat S6.3.4 (g) and (h). If the two timed runs do not agree 
within 0.2 percent, reject and repeat using a fresh sample of brake 
fluid.
    S6.3.5 Cleaning the viscometers. (a) Periodically clean the 
instrument with chromic acid to remove organic deposits. Rinse 
thoroughly with distilled water and acetone, and dry with clean dry air.
    (b) Between successive samples rinse the viscometer with ethanol 
(isopropanol when testing DOT 5 fluids) followed by an acetone or ether 
rinse. Pass a slow stream of filtered dry air through the viscometer 
until the last trace of solvent is removed.
    S6.3.6 Calculation. (a) The following viscometers have a fixed 
volume charged at ambient temperature, and as a consequence C varies 
with test temperature: Cannon-Fenske Routine, Pinkevitch, Cannon-Manning 
Semi-Micro, and Cannon Fenske Opaque. To calculate C at test 
temperatures other than the calibration temperature for these 
viscometers, see ASTM D2515-66, ``Kinematic Glass Viscometers'' or 
follow instructions given on the manufacturer's certificate of 
calibration.
    (b) Average the four timed runs on the duplicate samples to 
determine the kinematic viscosities.
    S6.3.7 Precision (at 95 percent confidence level).
    (a) Repeatability. If results on duplicate samples by the same 
operator differ by more than 1 percent of their mean, repeat the tests.
    S6.4 pH value. Determine the pH value of a brake fluid by running 
one sample according to the following procedure.
    S6.4.1 Summary of the procedure. Brake fluid is diluted with an 
equal volume of an ethanol-water solution. The pH of the resultant 
mixture is measured with a prescribed pH meter assembly at 23 [deg]C. 
(73.4 [deg]F.).
    S6.4.2 Apparatus. The pH assembly consists of the pH meter, glass 
electrode, and calomel electrode, as specified in Appendices A1.1, A1.2, 
and A1.3 of ASTM D 1121-67, ``Standard Method of Test for Reserve 
Alkalinity of Engine Antifreezes and Antirusts.'' The glass electrode is 
a full range type (pH 0-14), with low sodium error.
    S6.4.3 Reagents. Reagent grade chemicals conforming to the 
specifications of the Committee on Analytical Reagents of the American 
Chemical Society.
    (a) Distilled water. Distilled water (S7.1) shall be boiled for 
about 15 minutes to remove carbon dioxide, and protected with a soda-
lime tube or its

[[Page 354]]

equivalent while cooling and in storage. (Take precautions to prevent 
contamination by the materials used for protection against carbon 
dioxide.) The pH of the boiled distilled water shall be between 6.2 and 
7.2 at 25 [deg]C. (77 [deg]F.).
    (b) Standard buffer solutions. Prepare buffer solutions for 
calibrating the pH meter and electrode pair from salts sold specifically 
for use, either singly or in combination, as pH standards. Dry salts for 
1 hour at 110 [deg]C. (230 [deg]F.) before use except for borax which 
shall be used as the decahydrate. Store solutions with pH less than 9.5 
in bottles of chemically resistant glass or polyethylene. Store the 
alkaline phosphate solution in a glass bottle coated inside with 
paraffin. Do not use a standard with an age exceeding three months.
    (1) Potassium hydrogen phthalate buffer solution (0.05 M, pH=4.01 at 
25 [deg]C. (77 [deg]F.)). Dissolve 10.21 g. of potassium hydrogen 
phthalate (KHC<INF>8</INF> H<INF>4</INF> O<INF>4</INF>) in distilled 
water. Dilute to 1 liter.
    (2) Neutral phosphate buffer solution (0.025 M with respect to each 
phosphate salt, pH=6.86 at 25 [deg]C. (77 [deg]F.)). Dissolve 3.40 g. of 
potassium dihydrogen phosphate (KH<INF>2</INF> PO<INF>4</INF>) and 3.55 
g. of anhydrous disodium hydrogen phosphate (Na<INF>2</INF> 
HPO<INF>4</INF>) in distilled water.
    (3) Borax buffer solution (0.01 M, pH=9.18 at 25 [deg]C. (77 
[deg]F.)). Dissolve 3.81 g. of disodium tetraborate decahydrate 
(Na<INF>2</INF> B<INF>4</INF> O<INF>7</INF>[deg]10H2 O) in distilled 
water, and dilute to 1 liter. Stopper the bottle except when actually in 
use.
    (4) Alkaline phosphate buffer solution (0.01 M trisodium phosphate, 
pH=11.72 at 25 [deg]C. (77 [deg]F.)). Dissolve 1.42 g. of anhydrous 
disodium hydrogen phosphate (Na<INF>2</INF> HPO<INF>4</INF>) in 100 ml. 
of a 0.1 M carbonate-free solution of sodium hydroxide. Dilute to 1 
liter with distilled water.
    (5) Potassium chloride electrolyte. Prepare a saturated solution of 
potassium chloride (KCl) in distilled water.
    (c) Ethanol-water mixture. To 80 parts by volume of ethanol (S7.3) 
add 20 parts by volume of distilled water. Adjust the pH of the mixture 
to 7 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 using 0.1 N sodium hydroxide (NaOH) 
solution. If more than 4 ml. of NaOH solution per liter of mixture is 
required for neutralization, discard the mixture.
    S6.4.4 Preparation of electrode system.
    (a) Maintenance of electrodes. Clean the glass electrode before 
using by immersing in cold chromic-acid cleaning solution. Drain the 
calomel electrode and fill with KCl electrolyte, keeping level above 
that of the mixture at all times. When not in use, immerse the lower 
halves of the electrodes in distilled water, and do not immerse in the 
mixture for any appreciable period of time between determinations.
    (b) Preparation of electrodes. Condition new glass electrodes and 
those that have been stored dry as recommended by the manufacturer. 
Before and after using, wipe the glass electrode thoroughly with a clean 
cloth, or a soft absorbent tissue, and rinse with distilled water. 
Before each pH determination, soak the prepared electrode in distilled 
water for at least 2 minutes. Immediately before use, remove any excess 
water from the tips of the electrode.
    S6.4.5 Standardization of the pH assembly and testing of the 
electrodes. (a) Immediately before use, standardize the pH assembly with 
a standard buffer solution. Then use a second standard buffer solution 
to check the linearity of the response of the electrodes at different pH 
values, and to detect a faulty glass electrode or incorrect temperature 
compensation. The two buffer solutions bracket the anticipated pH value 
of the test brake fluid.
    (b) Allow instrument to warm up, and adjust according to the 
manufacturer's instructions. Immerse the tips of the electrodes in a 
standard buffer solution and allow the temperature of the buffer 
solution and the electrodes to equalize. Set the temperature knob at the 
temperature of the buffer solution. Adjust the standardization or 
asymmetry potential control until the meter registers a scale reading, 
in pH units, equal to the known pH of the standardizing buffer solution.
    (c) Rinse the electrodes with distilled water and remove excess 
water from the tips. Immerse the electrodes in a second standard buffer 
solution. The reading of the meter shall agree with the known pH of the 
second standard buffer solution within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 unit 
without changing the setting of the standardization of asymmetry 
potential control.

[[Page 355]]

    (d) A faulty electrode is indicated by failure to obtain a correct 
value for the pH of the second standard buffer solution after the meter 
has been standardized with the first.
    S6.4.6 Procedure. To 50 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. of the test 
brake fluid add 50 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. of the ethanol-water 
(S6.4.3(c)) and mix thoroughly. Immerse the electrodes in the mixture. 
Allow the system to come to equilibrium, readjust the temperature 
compensation if necessary, and take the pH reading.
    S6.5 Fluid stability. Evaluate the heat and chemical stability of a 
brake fluid by the following procedure, running duplicate samples for 
each test and averaging the results.
    S6.5.1 Summary of the procedure. The degradation of the brake fluid 
at elevated temperature, alone or in a mixture with a reference fluid, 
is evaluated by determining the change in boiling point after a period 
of heating under reflux conditions.
    S6.5.2 Apparatus. Use the apparatus and preparation specified in 
S6.1.2 and S6.1.3.
    S6.5.3 High temperature stability.
    S6.5.3.1 Procedure. (a) Heat a new 60 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. 
sample of the brake fluid to 185[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. 
(365[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.). Hold at this temperature 
for 120 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 minutes. Bring to a reflux rate in 
excess of 1 drop per second within 5 minutes. The reflux rate should not 
exceed 5 drops per second at any time. Over the next 5 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 minutes adjust the heating rate to obtain an 
equilibrium reflux rate of 1 to 2 drops per second. Maintain this rate 
for an additional 2 minutes, taking four temperature readings at 30-
second intervals. Average these as the observed ERBP. If no reflux is 
evident when the fluid temperature reaches 260 [deg]C. (500 [deg]F), 
discontinue heating and report ERBP as in excess of 260 [deg]C. (500 
[deg]F.).
    S6.5.3.2 Calculation. Correct the observed ERBP for thermometer and 
barometric pressure factors according to S6.1.5 (a) and (b). Average the 
corrected ERBP's of the duplicate samples. The difference between this 
average and the original ERBP obtained in S6.1 is the change in ERBP of 
the fluid.
    S6.5.4 Chemical stability.
    S6.5.4.1 Materials. SAE RM-66-04 Compatibility Fluid as described in 
appendix B of SAE Standard J1703 JAN 1995, ``Motor Vehicle Brake 
Fluid.'' (SAE RM-66-03 Compatibility Fluid as described in appendix A of 
SAE Standard J1703 Nov83, ``Motor Vehicle Brake Fluid,'' November 1983, 
may be used in place of SAE RM-66-04 until January 1, 1995.)
    S6.5.4.2 Procedure. (a) Mix 30 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. of the 
brake fluid with 30 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. of SAE RM-66-04 
Compatibility Fluid in a boiling point flask (S6.1.2(a)). Determine the 
initial ERBP of the mixture by applying heat to the flask so that the 
fluid is refluxing in 10 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 minutes at a rate in 
excess of 1 drop per second, but not more than 5 drops per second. Note 
the maximum fluid temperature observed during the first minute after the 
fluid begins refluxing at a rate in excess of 1 drop per second. Over 
the next 15 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 minutes, adjust and maintain the 
reflux rate at 1 to 2 drops per second. Maintain this rate for an 
additional 2 minutes, recording the average value of four temperature 
readings taken at 30 second intervals as the final ERBP.
    (b) Thermometer and barometric corrections are not required.
    S6.5.4.3 Calculation. The difference between the initial ERBP and 
the final average temperature is the change in temperature of the 
refluxing mixture. Average the results of the duplicates to the nearest 
0.5 [deg]C (1.0 [deg]F).
    S6.6 Corrosion. Evaluate the corrosiveness of a brake fluid by 
running duplicate samples according to the following procedure.
    S6.6.1 Summary of the procedure. Six specified metal corrosion test 
strips are polished, cleaned, and weighed, then assembled as described. 
Assembly is placed on a standard wheel cylinder cup in a corrosion test 
jar, immersed in the water-wet brake fluid, capped and placed in an oven 
at 100 [deg]C. (212 [deg]F.) for 120 hours. Upon removal and cooling, 
the strips, fluid, and cups are examined and tested.
    S6.6.2 Equipment. (a) Balance. An analytical balance having a 
minimum capacity of 50 grams and capable of weighing to the nearest 0.1 
mg.
    (b) Desiccators. Desiccators containing silica gel or other suitable 
desiccant.
    (c) Oven. Gravity convection oven capable of maintaining the desired 
set point within 2 [deg]C. (3.6 [deg]F.).

[[Page 356]]

    (d) Micrometer. A machinist's micrometer 25 to 50 mm. (1 to 2 
inches) capacity, or an optical comparator, capable of measuring the 
diameter of the SBR wheel cylinder (WC) cups to the nearest 0.02 mm. 
(0.001 inch).
    S6.6.3 Materials. (a) Corrosion test strips. Two sets of strips from 
each of the metals listed in appendix C of SAE Standard J1703b. Each 
strip shall be approximately 8 cm. long, 1.3 cm. wide, not more than 0.6 
cm. thick, and have a surface area of 25 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 sq. cm. 
and a hole 4 to 5 mm. (0.16 to 0.20 inch) in diameter on the centerline 
about 6 mm. from one end. The hole shall be clean and free from burrs. 
Tinned iron strips shall be unused. Other strips, if used, shall not be 
employed if they cannot be polished to a high finish.
    (b) SBR cups. Two unused standard SAE SBR wheel cylinder (WC) cups, 
as specified in S7.6.
    (c) Corrosion test jars and lids. Two screw-top straight-sided round 
glass jars, each having a capacity of approximately 475 ml. and inner 
dimensions of approximately 100 mm. in height and 75 mm. in diameter, 
and a tinned steel lid (no insert or organic coating) vented with a hole 
0.8 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 mm. (0.031 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.004 
inch) in diameter (No. 68 drill).
    (d) Machine screws and nuts. Clean, rust and oil-free, uncoated mild 
steel round or fillister head machine screws, size 6 or 8-32 UNC-Class 
2A, five-eighths or three-fourths inch long (or equivalent metric 
sizes), and matching uncoated nuts.
    (e) Supplies for polishing strips. Waterproof silicon carbide paper, 
grit No. 320 A; grade 00 steel wool, lint-free polishing cloth.
    (f) Distilled water as specified in S7.1.
    (g) Ethanol as specified in S7.3.
    (h) Isopropanol as specified in S7.7.
    S6.6.4 Preparation.
    (a) Corrosion test strips. Except for the tinned iron strips, abrade 
corrosion test strips on all surface areas with silicon carbide paper 
wet with ethanol (isopropanol when testing DOT 5 SBBF fluids) until all 
surface scratches, cuts and pits are removed. Use a new piece of paper 
for each different type of metal. Polish the strips with the 00 grade 
steel wool. Wash all strips, including the tinned iron and the assembly 
hardware, with ethanol (isopropanol when testing DOT 5 SBBF fluids); dry 
the strips and assembly hardware with a clean lint free cloth or use 
filtered compressed air and place the strips and hardware in a 
desiccator containing silica gel or other suitable desiccant and 
maintained at 23[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.), for at least 1 hour. Handle the strips with 
forceps after polishing. Weigh and record the weight of each strip to 
the nearest 0.1 mg. Assemble the strips on a clean dry machine screw, 
with matching plain nut, in the order of tinned iron, steel, aluminum, 
cast iron, brass, and copper. Bend the strips, other than the cast iron, 
so that there is a separation of 3 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/2\ mm. (\1/
8\ <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/64\ inch) between adjacent strips for a 
distance of about 5 cm. (2 inches) from the free end of the strips. (See 
Figure 4.) Tighten the screw on each test strip assembly so that the 
strips are in electrolytic contact, and can be lifted by either of the 
outer strips (tinned iron or copper) without any of the strips moving 
relative to the others when held horizontally. Immerse the strip 
assemblies in 90 percent ethyl alcohol. Dry with dried filtered 
compressed air, then desiccate at least 1 hour before use.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.046

                    Fig. 4--Corrosion Strip Assembly
    (b) SBR WC cups. Measure the base diameters of the two standard SBR 
cups, using an optical comparator or micrometer, to the nearest 0.02 mm. 
(0.001 inch) along the centerline of the SAE and rubber-type 
identifications and at right angles to this centerline. Take the 
measurements at least 0.4

[[Page 357]]

mm. (0.015 inch) above the bottom edge and parallel to the base of the 
cup. Discard any cup if the two measured diameters differ by more than 
0.08 mm. (0.003 inch). Average the two readings on each cup. Determine 
the hardness of the cups according to S7.4.
    S6.6.5 Procedure. Rinse the cups in ethanol (isopropanol when 
testing DOT 5 SBBF fluids) for not more than 30 seconds and wipe dry 
with a clean lint-free cloth. Place one cup with lip edge facing up, in 
each jar. Insert a metal strip assembly inside each cup with the 
fastened end down and the free end extending upward. (See Figure 5.) 
When testing brake fluids, except DOT 5 SBBF, mix 760 ml. of brake fluid 
with 40 ml. of distilled water. When testing DOT 5 SBBF's, humidify 800 
ml. of brake fluid in accordance with S6.2, eliminating determination of 
the ERBP. Using this water-wet mixture, cover each strip assembly to a 
minimum depth of 10 mm. above the tops of the strips. Tighten the lids 
and place the jars for 120 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 hours in an oven 
maintained at 100[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (212[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.). Allow the jars to cool at 23[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.) 
for 60 to 90 minutes. Immediately remove the strips from the jars using 
forceps, agitating the strip assembly in the fluid to remove loose 
adhering sediment. Examine the test strips and jars for adhering 
crystalline deposits. Disassemble the metal strips, and remove adhering 
fluid by flushing with water; clean each strip by wiping with a clean 
cloth wetted with ethanol (isopropanol when testing DOT 5 fluids). 
Examine the strips for evidence of corrosion and pitting. Disregard 
staining or discoloration. Place the strips in a desiccator containing 
silica gel or other suitable desiccant, maintained at 23[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.), 
for at least 1 hour. Weigh each strip to the nearest 0.1 mg. Determine 
the change in weight of each metal strip. Average the results for the 
two strips of each type of metal. Immediately following the cooling 
period, remove the cups from the jars with forceps. Remove loose 
adhering sediment by agitation of the cups in the mixture. Rinse the 
cups in ethanol (isopropanol when testing DOT 5 fluids) and air-dry. 
Examine the cups for evidence of sloughing, blisters, and other forms of 
disintegration. Measure the base diameter and hardness of each cup 
within 15 minutes after removal from the mixture. Examine the mixture 
for gelling. Agitate the mixture to suspend and uniformly disperse 
sediment. From each jar, transfer a 100 ml. portion of the mixture to an 
ASTM cone-shaped centrifuge tube. Determine the percent sediment after 
centrifuging as described in S7.5. Measure the pH value of the corrosion 
text fluid according to S6.4.6. Measure the pH value of the test mixture 
according to S6.4.6.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.047

                    Fig. 5--Corrosion Test Apparatus
    S6.6.6 Calculation. (a) Measure the area of each type of test strip 
to the nearest square centimeter. Divide the average change in mass for 
each type by the area of that type.
    (b) Note other data and evaluations indicating compliance with 
S5.1.6. In the event of a marginal pass on inspection by attributes, or 
of a failure in one of the duplicates, run another set of duplicate 
samples. Both repeat samples shall meet all requirements of S5.1.6.
    S6.7 Fluidity and appearance at low temperatures. Determine the 
fluidity and appearance of a sample of brake fluid at each of two 
selected temperatures by the following procedure.
    S6.7.1 Summary of procedure. Brake fluid is chilled to expected 
minimum exposure temperatures and observed for clarity, gellation, 
sediment, separation of components, excessive viscosity or thixotropy.

[[Page 358]]

    S6.7.2 Apparatus. (a) Oil sample bottle. Two clear flint glass 4-
ounce bottles made especially for sampling oil and other liquids, with a 
capacity of approximately 125 ml., an outside diameter of 37 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 mm. and an overall height of 165 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 mm.
    (b) Cold chamber. An air bath cold chamber capable of maintaining 
storage temperatures down to minus 55 [deg]C. (minus 67 [deg]F.) with an 
accuracy of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (3.6 [deg]F.).
    (c) Timing device. A timing device in accordance with S6.3.2(e).
    S6.7.3 Procedure. (a) Place 100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. of brake 
fluid at room temperature in an oil sample bottle. Stopper the bottle 
with an unused cork and place in the cold chamber at the higher storage 
temperature specified in Table II (S5.1.7(c)). After 144 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>4 hours remove the bottle from the chamber, quickly wipe 
it with a clean, lint-free cloth, saturated with ethanol (isopropanol 
when testing DOT 5 fluids) or acetone. Examine the fluid for evidence of 
sludging, sedimentation, crystallization, or stratification. Invert the 
bottle and determine the number of seconds required for the air bubble 
to travel to the top of the fluid. Let sample warm to room temperature 
and examine.
    (b) Repeat S6.7.3(a), substituting the lower cold chamber 
temperature specified in Table II, and a storage period of 6 hours 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>12 minutes.

    Note: Test specimens from either storage temperature may be used for 
the other only after warming up to room temperature.

    S6.8 Evaporation. The evaporation residue, and pour point of the 
evaporation residue of brake fluid, are determined by the following 
procedure. Four replicate samples are run.
    S6.8.1 Summary of the procedure. The volatile diluent portion of a 
brake fluid is evaporated in an oven at 100 [deg]C. (212 [deg]F.). The 
nonvolatile lubricant portion (evaporation residue) is measured and 
examined for grittiness; the residues are then combined and checked to 
assure fluidity at minus 5 [deg]C. (23 [deg]F.).
    S6.8.2 Apparatus.
    (a) Petri dishes. Four covered glass petri dishes approximately 100 
mm. in diameter and 15 mm. in height.
    (b) Oven. A top-vented gravity-convection oven capable of 
maintaining a temperature of 100[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. 
(212[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.).
    (c) Balance. A balance having a capacity of at least 100 grams, 
capable of weighing to the nearest 0.01 gram, and suitable for weighing 
the petri dishes.
    (d) Oil sample bottle. A glass sample bottle as described in 
S6.7.2(a).
    (e) Cold chamber. Air bath cold chamber capable of maintaining an 
oil sample bottle at minus 5[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 [deg]C. 
(23[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]F.).
    (f) Timing device. A timing device as described in S6.3.2(e).
    S6.8.3 Procedure. Obtain the tare weight of each of the four covered 
petri dishes to the nearest 0.01 gram. Place 25 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 
ml. of brake fluid in each dish, replace proper covers and reweigh. 
Determine the weight of each brake fluid test specimen by the 
difference. Place the four dishes, each inside its inverted cover, in 
the oven at 100[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (212[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>4 [deg]F.) for 46 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 hours. (Note: 
Do not simultaneously heat more than one fluid in the same oven.) Remove 
the dishes from the oven, allow to cool to 23[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.), 
and weigh. Return to the oven for an additional 24 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 hours. If at the end of 72 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>4 
hours the average loss by evaporation is less than 60 percent, 
discontinue the evaporation procedure and proceed with examination of 
the residue. Otherwise, continue this procedure either until equilibrium 
is reached as evidenced by an incremental mass loss of less than 0.25 
gram in 24 hours on all individual dishes or for a maximum of 7 days. 
During the heating and weighing operation, if it is necessary to remove 
the dishes from the oven for a period of longer than 1 hour, the dishes 
shall be stored in a desiccator as soon as cooled to room temperature. 
Calculate the percentage of fluid evaporated from each dish. Examine the 
residue in the dishes at the end of 1 hour at 23[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.). 
Rub any sediment with the fingertip to determine grittiness or 
abrasiveness. Combine the residues from all four dishes in a 118 mL (4-
ounce) oil-sample bottle and store vertically in a cold chamber at minus 
5[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 [deg]C. (23[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 
[deg]F.) for 60 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 minutes. Quickly remove the 
bottle and place in the horizontal position. The residue must flow at 
least 5 mm (0.2 inch) along the tube within 5 seconds.
    S6.8.4 Calculation. The average of the percentage evaporated from 
all four dishes is the loss by evaporation.

[[Page 359]]

    S6.9 Water tolerance. Evaluate the water tolerance characteristics 
of a brake fluid by running one test specimen according to the following 
procedure.
    S6.9.1 Summary of the procedure.
    Brake fluid, except DOT 5 SBBF, is diluted with 3.5 percent water 
(DOT 5 SBBF is humidified), then stored at minus 40 [deg]C. (minus 40 
[deg]F.) for 120 hours. The cold, water-wet fluid is first examined for 
clarity, stratification, and sedimentation, then placed in an oven at 60 
[deg]C. (140 [deg]F.) for 24 hours. On removal, it is again examined for 
stratification, and the volume percent of sediment determined by 
centrifuging.
    S6.9.2 Apparatus.
    (a) Centrifuge tube. See S7.5.1(a).
    (b) Centrifuge. See S7.5.1(b).
    (c) Cold chamber. See S6.7.2(b).
    (d) Oven. Gravity or forced convection oven.
    (e) Timing device. See S6.3.2(e).
    S6.9.3 Procedure.
    (a) At low temperature. Humidify 100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. of 
DOT 5 SBBF brake fluid in accordance with S6.2 eliminating determination 
of the ERBP. When testing brake fluids except DOT 5 SBBF, mix 3.5 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 ml. of distilled water with 100 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. of the brake fluid; pour into a centrifuge tube. 
Stopper the tube with a clean cork and place in the cold chamber 
maintained at minus 40 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (minus 40 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.). After 120 hours <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 
hours remove the tube, quickly wipe with clean lint-free cloth saturated 
with ethanol or acetone and examine the fluid for evidence of sludging, 
sedimentation, crystallization, or stratification. Invert the tube and 
determine the number of seconds required for the air bubble to travel to 
the top of the fluid. (The air bubble is considered to have reached the 
top of the fluid when the top of the bubble reaches the 2 ml. graduation 
of the centrifuge tube.) If the wet fluid has become cloudy, warm to 23 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.) 
and note appearance and fluidity.
    (b) At 60 [deg]C. (140 [deg]F.). Place tube and brake fluid from 
S6.9.3(a) in an oven maintained at 60[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 
[deg]C. (140[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.) for 24 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 hours. Remove the tube and immediately examine the 
contents for evidence of stratification. Determine the percent sediment 
by centrifuging as described in S7.5.
    S6.10 Compatibility. The compatibility of a brake fluid with other 
brake fluids shall be evaluated by running one test sample according to 
the following procedure.
    S6.10.1 Summary of the procedure.
    Brake fluid is mixed with an equal volume of SAE RM-66-04 
Compatibility Fluid, then tested in the same way as for water tolerance 
(S6.9) except that the bubble flow time is not measured. This test is an 
indication of the compatibility of the test fluid with other motor 
vehicle brake fluids at both high and low temperatures.
    S6.10.2 Apparatus and materials.
    (a) Centrifuge tube. See S7.5.1(a).
    (b) Centrifuge. See S7.5.1(b).
    (c) Cold Chamber. See S6.7.2(b)
    (d) Oven. See S6.9.2(d)
    (e) SAE RM-66-04 Compatibility Fluid. As described in appendix B of 
SAE Standard J1703 JAN 1995 ``Motor Vehicle Brake Fluid.'' (SAE RM-66-03 
Compatibility Fluid as described in appendix A of SAE Standard J1703 
NOV83, ``Motor Vehicle Brake Fluid,'' November 1983, may be used in 
place of SAE RM-66-04 until January 1, 1995.)
    S6.10.3 Procedure.
    (a) At low temperature.
    Mix 50 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 mL of brake fluid with 50 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 mL of SAE RM-66-04 Compatibility Fluid. Pour this 
mixture into a centrifuge tube and stopper with a clean dry cork. Place 
tube in the cold chamber maintained at minus 40[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (minus 40[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>4 
[deg]F). After 24 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 hours, remove tube, quickly 
wipe with a clean lint-free cloth saturated with ethanol (isopropanol 
when testing DOT 5 fluids) or acetone. Examine the test specimen for 
evidence of slugging, sedimentation, or crystallization. Test fluids, 
except DOT 5 SBBF, shall be examined for stratification.
    S6.11 Resistance to oxidation. The stability of a brake fluid under 
oxidative conditions shall be evaluated by running duplicate samples 
according to the following procedure.
    S6.11.1 Summary of procedure.
    Brake fluids, except DOT 5 SBBF, are activated with a mixture of 
approximately 0.2 percent benzoyl peroxide and 5 percent water. DOT 5 
SBBF is humidified in accordance with S6.2 eliminating determination of 
the ERBP, and then approximately 0.2 percent benzoyl

[[Page 360]]

peroxide is added. A corrosion test strip assembly consisting of cast 
iron and an aluminum strip separated by tinfoil squares at each end is 
then rested on a piece of SBR WC cup positioned so that the test strip 
is half immersed in the fluid and oven aged at 70 [deg]C. (158 [deg]F.) 
for 168 hours. At the end of this period, the metal strips are examined 
for pitting, etching, and loss of mass.
    S6.11.2 Equipment.
    (a) Balance. See S6.6.2(a).
    (b) Desiccators. See S6.6.2(b).
    (c) Oven. See S6.6.2(c).
    (d) Three glass test tubes approximately 22 mm. outside diameter by 
175 mm. in length.
    S6.11.3 Reagents and materials.
    (a) Benzoyl peroxide, reagent grade, 96 percent. (Benzoyl peroxide 
that is brownish, or dusty, or has less than 90 percent purity, must be 
discarded.) Reagent strength may be evaluated by ASTM E298-68, 
``Standard Methods for Assay of Organic Peroxides.''
    (b) Corrosion test strips. Two sets of cast iron and aluminum metal 
test strips as described in appendix C of SAE Standard J1703b.
    (c) Tinfoil. Four unused pieces of tinfoil approximately 12 mm. (\1/
2\ inch) square and between 0.02 and 0.06 mm. (0.0008 and 0.0024 inch) 
in thickness. The foil shall be at least 99.9 percent tin and contain 
not more than 0.025 percent lead.
    (d) SBR cups. Two unused, approximately one-eighth sections of a 
standard SAE SBR WC cup (as described in S7.6).
    (e) Machine screw and nut. Two clean oil-free, No. 6 or 8-32x\3/8\- 
or \1/2\-inch long (or equivalent metric size), round or fillister head, 
uncoated mild steel machine screws, with matching plain nuts.
    S6.11.4 Preparation.
    (a) Corrosion test strips. Prepare two sets of aluminum and cast 
iron test strips according to S6.6.4(a) except for assembly. Weigh each 
strip to the nearest 0.1 mg. and assemble a strip of each metal on a 
machine screw, separating the strips at each end with a piece of 
tinfoil. Tighten the nut enough to hold both pieces of foil firmly in 
place.
    (b) Test mixture.Place 30 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. of the brake 
fluid under test in a 22 by 175 mm. test tube. For all fluids except DOT 
5 SBBF, add 0.060 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>.002 grams of benzoyl peroxide, 
and 1.50 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 ml. of distilled water. For DOT 5 
SBBF, use test fluid humidified in accordance with S6.2, and add only 
the benzoyl peroxide. Stopper the tube loosely with a clean dry cork, 
shake, and place in an oven for 2 hours at 70[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (158[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.). 
Shake every 15 minutes to effect solution of the peroxide, but do not 
wet cork. Remove the tube from the oven and allow to cool to 23[deg] 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 
[deg]F.) Begin testing according to paragraph S6.11.5 not later than 24 
hours after removal of tube from oven.
    S6.11.5 Procedure. Place a one-eighth SBR cup section in the bottom 
of each tube. Add 10 ml. of prepared test mixture to each test tube. 
Place a metal-strip assembly in each, the end of the strip without the 
screw resting on the rubber, and the solution covering about one-half 
the length of the strips. Stopper the tubes with clean dry corks and 
store upright for 70 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 hours at 23[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.). 
Loosen the corks and place the tubes for 168 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 
hours in an oven maintained at 70[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. 
(158[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.). Afterwards remove and 
disassemble strips. Examine the strips and note any gum deposits. Wipe 
the strips with a clean cloth wet with ethanol (isopropanol when testing 
DOT 5 fluids) and note any pitting, etching or roughening of surface 
disregarding stain or discoloration. Place the strips in a desiccator 
over silica gel or other suitable desiccant, at 23[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.) 
for at least 1 hour. Again weigh each strip to the nearest 0.1 mg.
    S6.11.6 Calculation. Determine corrosion loss by dividing the change 
in mass of each metal strip by the total surface area of each strip 
measured in square millimeters (mm<SUP>2</SUP>), to the nearest square 
millimeter (mm<SUP>2</SUP>). Average the results for the two strips of 
each type of metal, rounding to the nearest 0.05 mg. per 100 square 
millimeter (mm<SUP>2</SUP>). If only one of the duplicates fails for any 
reason, run a second set of duplicate samples. Both repeat samples shall 
meet all requirements of S5.1.11.
    S6.12 Effect on SBR cups. The effects of a brake fluid in swelling, 
softening, and otherwise affecting standard SBR WC cups shall be 
evaluated by the following procedure.

[[Page 361]]

    S6.12.1 Summary of the procedure. Four standard SAE SBR WC cups are 
measured and their hardnesses determined. The cups, two to a jar, are 
immersed in the test brake fluid. One jar is heated for 70 hours at 70 
[deg]C. (158 [deg]F), and the other for 70 hours at 120 [deg]C (248 
[deg]F). Afterwards, the cups are washed, examined for disintegration, 
remeasured and their hardnesses redetermined.
    S6.12.2 Equipment and supplies.
    (a) Oven. See S6.6.2(c).
    (b) Glass jars and lids. Two screw-top, straight-sided round glass 
jars, each having a capacity of approximately 250 ml. and inner 
dimensions of approximately 125 mm. in height and 50 mm. in diameter, 
and a tinned steel lid (no insert or organic coating).
    (c) SBR cups. See S7.6.
    S6.12.3 Preparation. Measure the base diameters of the SBR cups as 
described in S6.6.4(b), and the hardness of each as described in S7.4.
    S6.12.4 Procedure. Wash the cups in 90 percent ethanol (isopropanol 
when testing DOT 5 fluids) (see S7.3), for not longer than 30 seconds 
and quickly dry with a clean, lint-free cloth. Using forceps, place two 
cups into each of the two jars; add 75 ml. of brake fluid to each jar 
and cap tightly. Place one jar in an oven held at 70[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (158 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.) for 70 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 hours. Place the other jar in an oven held at 
120[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (248[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.) for 70 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 hours. Allow 
each jar to cool for 60 to 90 minutes at 23[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 
[deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.). Remove cups, wash 
with ethanol (isopropanol when testing DOT 5 fluids) for not longer than 
30 seconds, and quickly dry. Examine the cups for disintegration as 
evidenced by stickiness, blisters, or sloughing. Measure the base 
diameter and hardness of each cup within 15 minutes after removal from 
the fluid.
    S6.12.5 Calculation. (a) Calculate the change in base diameter for 
each cup. If the two values, at each temperature, do not differ by more 
than 0.10 mm. (0.004 inch) average them to the nearest 0.02 mm. (0.001 
inch). If the two values differ by more than 0.10 mm., repeat the test 
at the appropriate temperature and average the four values as the change 
in base diameter.
    (b) Calculate the change in hardness for each cup. The average of 
the two values for each pair is the change in hardness.
    (c) Note disintegration as evidenced by stickiness, blisters, or 
sloughing.
    S6.13 Stroking properties. Evaluate the lubricating properties, 
component compatibility, resistance to leakage, and related qualities of 
a brake fluid by running one sample according to the following 
procedures.
    S6.13.1 Summary of the procedure. Brake fluid is stroked under 
controlled conditions at an elevated temperature in a simulated motor 
vehicle hydraulic braking system consisting of three slave wheel 
cylinders and an actuating master cylinder connected by steel tubing. 
Referee standard parts are used. All parts are carefully cleaned, 
examined, and certain measurements made immediately prior to assembly 
for test. During the test, temperature, rate of pressure rise, maximum 
pressure, and rate of stroking are specified and controlled. The system 
is examined periodically during stroking to assure that excessive 
leakage of fluid is not occurring. Afterwards, the system is torn down. 
Metal parts and SBR cups are examined and remeasured. The brake fluid 
and any resultant sludge and debris are collected, examined, and tested.
    S6.13.2 Apparatus and equipment.
    Either the drum and shoe type of stroking apparatus (see Figure 1 of 
SAE Standard J1703b) except using only three sets of drum and shoe 
assemblies, or the stroking fixture type apparatus as shown in Figure 2 
of SAE J1703Nov83, with the components arranged as shown in Figure 1 of 
SAE J1703Nov83. The following components are required.
    (a) Brake assemblies. With the drum and shoe apparatus: three drum 
and shoe assembly units (SAE RM-29a) consisting of three forward brake 
shoes and three reverse brake shoes with linings and three front wheel 
brake drum assemblies with assembly component parts. With stroking 
fixture type apparatus: three fixture units including appropriate 
adapter mounting plates to hold brake wheel cylinder assemblies.
    (b) Braking pressure actuation mechanism. An actuating mechanism for 
applying a force to the master cylinder pushrod without side thrust. The

[[Page 362]]

amount of force applied by the actuating mechanism shall be adjustable 
and capable of applying sufficient thrust to the master cylinder to 
create a pressure of at least 6895 kPa (1,000 p.s.i.) in the simulated 
brake system. A hydraulic gage or pressure recorder, having a range of 
at least 0 to 6895 kPa (0 to 1,000 p.s.i), shall be installed between 
the master cylinder and the brake assemblies and shall be provided with 
a shutoff valve and with a bleeding valve for removing air from the 
connecting tubing. The actuating mechanism shall be designed to permit 
adjustable stroking rates of approximately 1,000 strokes per hour. Use a 
mechanical or electrical counter to record the total number of strokes.
    (c) Heated air bath cabinet. An insulated cabinet or oven having 
sufficient capacity to house the three mounted brake assemblies or 
stroking fixture assemblies, master cylinder, and necessary connections. 
A thermostatically controlled heating system is required to maintain a 
temperature of 70[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C (158[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F) or 120[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C 
(248[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F). Heaters shall be shielded to 
prevent direct radiation to wheel or master cylinder.
    (d) Master cylinder (MC) assembly (SAE RM-15a). One cast iron 
housing hydraulic brake system cylinder having a diameter of 
approximately 28 mm. (1\1/8\ inch) and fitted for a filler cap and 
standpipe (see S6.13.2(e)). The MC piston shall be made from SAE CA360 
copperbase alloy (half hard). A new MC assembly is required for each 
test.
    (e) Filler cap and standpipe. MC filler cap provided with a glass or 
uncoated steel standpipe. Standpipe must provide adequate volume for 
thermal expansion, yet permit measurement and adjustment of the fluid 
level in the system to <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 ml. Cap and standpipe may 
be cleaned and reused.
    (f) Wheel cylinder (WC) assemblies (SAE RM-14a). Three unused cast 
iron housing straight bore hydraulic brake WC assemblies having 
diameters of approximately 28 mm (1\1/8\ inch) for each test. Pistons 
shall be made from unanodized SAE AA 2024 aluminum alloy.
    (g) Micrometer. Same as S6.6.2(d).
    S6.13.3 Materials.
    (a) Standard SBR brake cups. Six standard SAE SBR wheel cylinder 
test cups, one primary MC test cup, and one secondary MC test cup, all 
as described in S7.6, for each test.
    (b) Steel tubing. Double wall steel tubing meeting SAE specification 
J527. A complete replacement of tubing is essential when visual 
inspection indicates any corrosion or deposits on inner surface of 
tubing. Tubing from master cylinder to one wheel cylinder shall be 
replaced for each test (minimum length .9 m.) Uniformity in tubing size 
is required between master cylinder and wheel cylinder. The standard 
master cylinder has two outlets for tubing, both of which must be used.
    S6.13.4 Preparation of test apparatus.
    (a) Wheel cylinder assemblies. Use unused wheel cylinder assemblies. 
Disassemble cylinders and discard cups. Clean all metal parts with 
ethanol (isopropanol when testing DOT 5 fluids). Inspect the working 
surfaces of all metal parts for scoring, galling, or pitting and 
cylinder bore roughness, and discard all defective parts. Remove any 
stains on cylinder walls with crocus cloth and ethanol (isopropanol when 
testing DOT 5 fluids). If stains cannot be removed, discard the 
cylinder. Measure the internal diameter of each cylinder at a location 
approximately 19 mm. (0.75 inch) from each end of the cylinder bore, 
taking measurements in line with the hydraulic inlet opening and at 
right angles to this centerline. Discard the cylinder if any of these 
four readings exceeds the maximum or minimum limits of 28.66 to 28.60 
mm. (1.128 to 1.126 inch). Measure the outside diameter of each piston 
at two points approximately 90[deg] apart. Discard any piston if either 
reading exceeds the maximum or minimum limits of 28.55 to 28.52 mm. 
(1.124 to 1.123 inch). Select parts to insure that the clearance between 
each piston and mating cylinder is within 0.08 to 0.13 mm. (0.003 to 
0.005 inch). Use unused SBR cups. To remove dirt and debris, rinse the 
cups in 90 percent ethyl alcohol for not more than 30 seconds and wipe 
dry with a clean lint-free cloth. Discard any cups showing defects such 
as cuts, molding flaws, or blisters. Measure the lip and base diameters 
of all cups with an optical comparator or micrometer to the

[[Page 363]]

nearest 0.02 mm. (0.001 inch) along the centerline of the SAE and 
rubber-type identifications and at right angles to this centerline. 
Determine base diameter measurements at least 0.4 mm. (0.015 inch) above 
the bottom edge and parallel to the base of the cup. Discard any cup if 
the two measured lip or base diameters differ by more than 0.08 mm. 
(0.003 inch). Average the lip and base diameters of each cup. Determine 
the hardness of all cups according to S7.4. Dip the rubber and metal 
parts of wheel cylinders, except housing and rubber boots, in the fluid 
to be tested and install them in accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions. Manually stroke the cylinders to insure that they operate 
easily. Install cylinders in the simulated brake system.
    (b) Master cylinder assembly. Use an unused master cylinder and 
unused standard SBR primary and secondary MC cups which have been 
inspected, measured and cleaned in the manner specified in S6.13.4(a), 
omitting hardness of the secondary MC cup. However, prior to determining 
the lip and base diameters of the secondary cup, dip the cup in test 
brake fluid, assemble on the MC piston, and maintain the assembly in a 
vertical position at 23[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.) for at least 12 hours. Inspect the 
relief and supply ports of the master cylinder; discard the cylinder if 
ports have burrs or wire edges. Measure the internal diameter of the 
cylinder at two locations (approximately midway between the relief and 
supply ports and approximately 19 mm. (0.75 inch) beyond the relief port 
toward the bottom or discharge end of the bore), taking measurements at 
each location on the vertical and horizontal centerline of the bore. 
Discard the cylinder if any reading exceeds the maximum or minimum 
limits of 28.65 to 28.57 mm. (1.128 to 1.125 inch). Measure the outside 
diameter of each end of the master cylinder piston at two points 
approximately 90[deg] apart. Discard the piston if any of these four 
readings exceed the maximum or minimum limits of 28.55 to 28.52 mm. 
(1.124 to 1.123 inch). Dip the rubber and metal parts of the master 
cylinder, except the housing and push rod-boot assembly, in the brake 
fluid and install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 
Manually stroke the master cylinder to insure that it operates easily. 
Install the master cylinder in the simulated brake system.
    (c) Assembly and adjustment of test apparatus.
    (1) When using a shoe and drum type apparatus, adjust the brake shoe 
toe clearances to 1.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 mm (0.040 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.004 inch). Fill the system with brake fluid, bleeding 
all wheel cylinders and the pressure gage to remove entrapped air. 
Operate the actuator manually to apply a pressure greater than the 
required operating pressure and inspect the system for leaks. Adjust the 
actuator and/or pressure relief valve to obtain a pressure of 6895 kPa 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>345 kPa (1,000 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>50 p.s.i.). A 
smooth pressure stroke pattern is required when using a shoe and drum 
type apparatus. The pressure is relatively low during the first part of 
the stroke and then builds up smoothly to the maximum stroking pressure 
at the end of the stroke, to permit the primary cup to pass the 
compensating hole at a relatively low pressure. Using stroking fixtures, 
adjust the actuator and/or pressure relief valve to obtain a pressure of 
6895 kPa <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>345 kPa (1,000 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>50 
p.s.i.).
    (2) Adjust the stroking rate to 1,000 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>100 
strokes per hour. Record the fluid level in the master cylinder 
standpipe.
    S6.13.5 Procedure. Operate the system for 16,000 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1,000 cycles at 23[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. 
(73.4[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.). Repair any leakage, 
readjust the brake shoe clearances, and add fluid to the master cylinder 
standpipe to bring to the level originally recorded, if necessary. Start 
the test again and raise the temperature of the cabinet within 6 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 hours to 120[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. 
(248[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.). During the test observe 
operation of wheel cylinders for improper functioning and record the 
amount of fluid required to replenish any loss, at intervals of 24,000 
strokes. Stop the test at the end of 85,000 total recorded strokes. 
These totals shall include the number of strokes during operation at 
23[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.) and the number of strokes required to bring 
the system to the operating temperature. Allow equipment to cool to room 
temperature. Examine the wheel cylinders for leakage. Stroke the 
assembly an additional 100 strokes, examine wheel cylinders for leakage 
and record volume

[[Page 364]]

loss of fluid. Within 16 hours after stopping the test, remove the 
master and wheel cylinders from the system, retaining the fluid in the 
cylinders by immediately capping or plugging the ports. Disassemble the 
cylinders, collecting the fluid from the master cylinder and wheel 
cylinders in a glass jar. When collecting the stroked fluid, remove all 
residue which has deposited on rubber and metal internal parts by 
rinsing and agitating such parts in the stroked fluid and using a soft 
brush to assure that all loose adhering sediment is collected. Clean SBR 
cups in ethanol (isopropanol when testing DOT 5 fluids) and dry. Inspect 
the cups for stickiness, scuffing, blistering, cracking, chipping, and 
change in shape from original appearance. Within 1 hour after 
disassembly, measure the lip and base diameters of each cylinder cup by 
the procedures specified in S6.13.4 (a) and (b) with the exception that 
lip or base diameters of cups may now differ by more than 0.08 mm. 
(0.003 inch). Determine the hardness of each cup according to S7.4. Note 
any sludge or gel present in the test fluid. Within 1 hour after 
draining the cylinders, agitate the fluid in a glass jar to suspend and 
uniformly disperse sediment and transfer a 100 ml. portion of this fluid 
to a centrifuge tube and determine percent sediment as described in 
S7.5. Allow the tube and fluid to stand for 24 hours, recentrifuge and 
record any additional sediment recovered. Inspect cylinder parts, note 
any gumming or any pitting on pistons and cylinder walls. Disregard 
staining or discoloration. Rub any deposits adhering to cylinder walls 
with a clean soft cloth wetted with ethanol (isopropanol when testing 
DOT 5 fluids) to determine abrasiveness and removability. Clean cylinder 
parts in ethanol (isopropanol when testing DOT 5 fluids) and dry. 
Measure and record diameters of pistons and cylinders according to 
S6.13.4(a) and (b). Repeat the test if mechanical failure occurs that 
may affect the evaluation of the brake fluid.
    S6.13.6 Calculation. (a) Calculate the changes in diameters of 
cylinders and pistons (see S5.1.13(b)).
    (b) Calculate the average decrease in hardness of the seven cups 
tested, as well as the individual values (see S5.1.13(c)).
    (c) Calculate the increases in base diameters of the eight cups (see 
S5.1.13(e)).
    (d) Calculate the lip diameter interference set for each of the 
eight cups by the following formula and average the eight values (see 
S5.1.13(f)).

[(D<INF>1</INF>-D<INF>2</INF>)/(D<INF>1</INF>-
    D<INF>3</INF>)]x100=percentage Lip Diameter Interference Set
where:

D<INF>1</INF>=Original lip diameter.
D<INF>2</INF>=Final lip diameter.
D<INF>3</INF>=Original cylinder bore diameter.

    S6.14 Container information. Each container with information marked 
directly on the container surface or on a label (labels) affixed to the 
container pursuant to S5.2.2.2 or S5.2.2.3 is subjected to the following 
procedure:
    (a) If the container has a label affixed to it, make a single 
vertical cut all the way through the label with the container in the 
vertical position.
    (b) Immerse the container in the same brake fluid or hydraulic 
system mineral oil contained therein for 15 minutes at room temperature 
(23 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C; 73.4 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 
[deg]F).
    (c) Within 5 minutes after removing the container from the fluid or 
oil, remove excess liquid from the surface of the container by wiping 
with a clean dry cloth.
    S7. Auxiliary test methods and reagent standards.
    S7.1 Distilled water. Nonreferee reagent water as specified in ASTM 
D1193-70, ``Standard Specifications for Reagent Water,'' or water of 
equal purity.
    S7.2 Water content of motor vehicle brake fluids. Use analytical 
methods based on ASTM D1123-59, ``Standard Method of Test for Water in 
Concentrated Engine Antifreezes by the Iodine Reagent Method,'' for 
determining the water content of brake fluids, or other methods of 
analysis yielding comparable results. To be acceptable for use, such 
other method must measure the weight of water added to samples of the 
SAE RM-66-04 and TEGME Compatibility Fluids within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>15 percent of the water added for additions up to 0.8 
percent by weight, and within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent of the 
water added for additions greater than 0.8 percent by

[[Page 365]]

weight. The SAE RM-66-04 Compatibility Fluid used to prepare the samples 
must have an original ERBP of not less than 205 [deg]C (401 [deg]F) when 
tested in accordance with S6.1. The SAE TEGME fluid used to prepare the 
samples must have an original ERBP of not less than 240 [deg]C (464 
[deg]F) when tested in accordance with S6.1.
    S7.3 Ethanol. 95 percent (190 proof) ethyl alcohol, USP or ACS, or 
Formula 3-A Specially Denatured Alcohol of the same concentration (as 
specified at 27 CFR 21.35). For pretest washings of equipment, use 
approximately 90 percent ethyl alcohol, obtained by adding 5 parts of 
distilled water to 95 parts of ethanol.
    S7.4 Measuring the hardness of SBR brake cups. Hardness measurements 
on SBR wheel cylinder cups and master cylinder primary cups shall be 
made by using the following apparatus and the following procedure.
    S7.4.1 Apparatus.
    (a) Anvil. A rubber anvil having a flat circular top 20 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1 mm. (\13/16\ <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/16\ inch) in 
diameter, a thickness of at least 9 mm. (\3/8\ inch) and a hardness 
within 5 IRHDs of the SBR test cup.
    (b) Hardness tester. A hardness tester meeting the requirements for 
the standard instrument as described in ASTM D1415-68, ``Standard Method 
of Test for International Hardness of Vulcanized Natural and Synthetic 
Rubbers,'' and graduated directly in IRHD units.
    S7.4.2 Procedure. Make hardness measurements at 23[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>4 [deg]F.). 
Equilibrate the tester and anvils at this temperature prior to use. 
Center brake cups lip side down on an anvil of appropriate hardness. 
Following the manufacturer's operating instructions for the hardness 
tester, make one measurement at each of four points 6 mm from the center 
of the cup and spaced 90[deg] apart. Average the four values, and round 
off to the nearest IRHD.
    S7.5 Sediment by centrifuging. The amount of sediment in the test 
fluid shall be determined by the following procedure.
    S7.5.1 Apparatus.
    (a) Centrifuge tube. Cone-shaped centrifuge tubes conforming to the 
dimensions given in Figure 6, and made of thoroughly annealed glass. The 
graduations shall be numbered as shown in Figure 6, and shall be clear 
and distinct. Scale-error tolerances and smallest graduations between 
various calibration marks are given in Table V and apply to calibrations 
made with air-free water at 20 [deg]C. (68 [deg]F.).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.048

                   Fig. 6--ASTM 8-in. Centrifuge Tube

       Table V--Calibration Tolerances for 8-Inch Centrifuge Tube
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Volume
                   Range, ml                    Subdivision,  tolerance,
                                                     ml           ml
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0 to 0.1......................................         0.05       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h0.02
Above 0.1 to 0.3..............................         0.05       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h0.03
Above 0.3 to 0.5..............................         0.05       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h0.05
Above 0.5 to 1................................         0.10       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h0.05
Above 1 to 2..................................         0.10       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h0.10
Above 2 to 3..................................         0.20       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h0.10
Above 3 to 5..................................          0.5       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h0.20
Above 5 to 10.................................           1.       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h0.50
Above 10 to 25................................           5.       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h1.00
Above 25 to 100...............................          25.       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h1.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Centrifuge. A centrifuge capable of whirling two or more filled 
centrifuge tubes at a speed which can be controlled to give a relative 
centrifugal force (r.c.f.) between 600 and 700 at the tip of the tubes. 
The revolving head, trunnion rings, and trunnion cups, including the 
rubber cushion, shall withstand the maximum centrifugal force

[[Page 366]]

capable of being delivered by the power source. The trunnion cups and 
cushions shall firmly support the tubes when the centrifuge is in 
motion. Calculate the speed of the rotating head using this equation:

r.p.m. = 265[[radic]25.4xr.c.f./d]

Where:
r.c.f. = Relative centrifugal force, and
d = Diameter of swing, in millimeters, measured between tips of opposing 
tubes when in rotating position.

    Table VI shows the relationship between diameter, swing, relative 
centrifugal force (r.c.f.), and revolutions per minute.

     Table VI--Rotation Speeds for Centrifuges of Various Diameters
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               r.p.m. at
        Diameter of swing in millimeters a          r.p.m. at     700
                                                    600 r.c.f    r.c.f.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
483...............................................       1490       1610
508...............................................       1450       1570
533...............................................       1420       1530
559...............................................       1390       1500
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a Measured in millimeters between tips of opposite tubes when in
  rotating position.

    S7.5.2 Procedure. Balance the corked centrifuge tubes with their 
respective trunnion cups in pairs by weight on a scale, according to the 
centrifuge manufacturer's instructions, and place them on opposite sides 
of the centrifuge head. Use a dummy assembly when one sample is tested. 
Then whirl them for 10 minutes, at a rate sufficient to produce a r.c.f. 
between 600 and 700 at the tips of the whirling tubes. Repeat until the 
volume of sediment in each tube remains constant for three consecutive 
readings.
    S7.5.3 Calculation. Read the volume of the solid sediment at the 
bottom of the centrifuge tube and report the percent sediment by volume. 
Where replicate determinations are specified, report the average value.
    S7.6 Standard styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR) brake cups. SBR brake 
cups for testing motor vehicle brake fluids shall be manufactured using 
the following formulation:

                     Formulation of Rubber Compound
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Parts by
                         Ingredient                             weight
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SBR type 1503 \a\...........................................         100
Oil furnace black (NBS 378).................................          40
Zinc oxide (NBS 370)........................................           5
Sulfur (NBS 371)............................................        0.25
Stearic Acid (NBS 372)......................................           1
n-tertiary butyl-2-benzothiazole sulfenamide (NBS 384)......           1
Symmetrical dibetanaphthyl-p-phenylenediamine...............         1.5
Dicumyl peroxide (40 percent on precipitated CaCO3) \b\.....         4.5
                                                             -----------
 Total......................................................      153.25
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\a\ Philprene 1503 has been found suitable.
\b\ Use only within 90 days of manufacture and store at temperature
  below 27 [deg]C. (80 [deg]F.).
 
Note: The ingredients labeled (NBS) must have properties identical with
  those supplied by the National Bureau of Standards.


Compounding, vulcanization, physical properties, size of the finished 
cups, and other details shall be as specified in appendix B of SAE 
J1703b. The cups shall be used in testing brake fluids either within 6 
months from date of manufacture when stored at room temperature below 30 
[deg]C. (86 [deg]F.) or within 36 months from date of manufacture when 
stored at temperatures below minus 15 [deg]C. (+5 [deg]F.). After 
removal of cups from refrigeration they shall be conditioned base down 
on a flat surface for at least 12 hours at room temperature in order to 
allow cups to reach their true configuration before measurement.
    S7.7 Isopropanol. ACS or reagent grade.

[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.116, see the List of Sections Affected, which appears in the Finding 
Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 571.117  Standard No. 117; Retreaded pneumatic tires.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies performance, labeling, and 
certification requirements for retreaded pneumatic passenger car tires.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to require retreaded 
pneumatic passenger car tires to meet safety criteria similar to those 
for new pneumatic passenger car tires.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to retreaded pneumatic tires 
for use on passenger cars manufactured after 1948.
    S4. Definitions.

[[Page 367]]

    S4.1 Casing means a used tire to which additional tread may be 
attached for the purpose of retreading.
    Retreaded means manufactured by a process in which a tread is 
attached to a casing.
    S4.2 All terms defined in Sec. Sec. 571.109 and 571.110 are used as 
defined therein.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 Retreaded tires.
    S5.1.1 Except as specified in S5.1.3, each retreaded tire, when 
mounted on a test rim of the width specified for the tire's size 
designation in appendix A of Sec. 571.109 shall comply with the 
following requirements of Sec. 571.109:
    (a) S4.1 (Size and construction).
    (b) S4.2.1 (General).
    (c) S4.2.2.3 (Tubeless tire resistance to bead unseating).
    (d) S4.2.2.4 (Tire strength).
    S5.1.2 Except as specified in S5.1.3, each retreaded tire, when 
mounted on a test rim of the width specified for the tire's size 
designation in appendix A of Sec. 571.109, shall comply with the 
requirements of S4.2.2.2 of Sec. 571.109, except that the tire's 
section width shall not be more than 110 percent of the section width 
specified, and the tire's size factor shall be at least 97 percent of 
the size factor specified, in appendix A of Sec. 571.109 for the tire's 
size designation.
    S5.1.3 Each retreaded tire shall be capable of meeting the 
requirements of S5.1.1 and S5.1.2 when mounted on any rim in accordance 
with those sections.
    S5.1.4 No retreaded tire shall have a size designation, recommended 
maximum load rating, or maximum permissible inflation pressure that is 
greater than that originally specified on the casing pursuant to S4.3 of 
Sec. 571.109, or specified for the casing in Table I.
    S5.2 Casings.
    S5.2.1 No retreaded tire shall be manufactured with a casing--
    (a) On which bead wire or cord fabric is exposed before processing.
    (b) On which any cord fabric is exposed during processing, except 
that cord fabric that is located at a splice, i.e., where two or more 
segments of the same ply overlap, or cord fabric that is part of the 
belt material, may be exposed but shall not be penetrated or removed to 
any extent whatsoever.
    S5.2.2 No retreaded tire shall be manufactured with a casing--
    (a) From which a belt or ply, or part thereof, is removed during 
processing; or
    (b) On which a belt or ply, or part thereof, is added or replaced 
during processing.
    S5.2.3 Each retreaded tire shall be manufactured with a casing that 
bears, permanently molded at the time of its original manufacture into 
or onto the tire sidewall, each of the following:
    (a) The symbol DOT;
    (b) The size of the tire; and
    (c) The actual number of plies or ply rating.
    S5.2.4 [Reserved]
    S6. Certification and labeling.
    S6.1 Each manufacturer of a retreaded tire shall certify that its 
product complies with this standard pursuant to Section 30115 of Title 
49, United States Code, by labeling the tire with the symbol DOT in the 
location specified in section 574.5 of this chapter.
    S6.2 [Reserved]
    S6.3 Each retreaded tire shall bear permanent labeling through 
molding, branding, or other method that will produce a permanent label, 
or through the retention of the original casing labeling, in at least 
one location on the tire sidewall, in letters and numbers not less than 
2 mm (0.078 inch) high, consisting of the following information:
    (a) The tire's size designation;
    (b) The tire's maximum permissible inflation pressure, either as it 
appears on the casing or as set forth in Table 1;
    (c) The tire's maximum load, either as it appears on the casing or 
as set forth in Table 1;
    (d) The actual number of plies in or the ply rating of the tire 
sidewall and, if different, the actual number of plies in or the ply 
rating of the tread area;
    (e) The generic name of each cord material used in the plies of both 
sidewall and the tread area of the tire;
    (f) The word ``tubeless'' if the tire is a tubeless tire, or the 
words ``tube-type'' if the tire is a tube-type tire;
    (g) If the tire is of bias/belted construction, the words ``bias/
belted;''
    (h) If the tire is of radial construction, the word ``radial.''

[[Page 368]]

    The information shall either be retained from the casing used in the 
manufacture of the tire, or may be labeled onto the tire during the 
retreading process.

[[Page 369]]



                                                                     Table I--Plies
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   2ply-4ply (4 ply rating)              4 ply (6 ply rating)                4 ply (8 ply rating)
                                             -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Maximum load         Maximum        Maximum load         Maximum        Maximum load         Maximum
                  Tire Size                  ------------------     Inflation    ------------------     Inflation    ------------------     Inflation
                                                                    Pressure                            Pressure                            Pressure
                                                 lb       kg   ------------------    lb       kg   ------------------    lb       kg   -----------------
                                                                  psi      kPa                        psi      kPa                        psi      kPa
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.00-13.....................................     1010      458       32      220     1080      499       36      250     1140      517       40      275
6.50-13.....................................     1150      552       32      220     1230      558       36      250     1300      590       40      275
7.00-13.....................................     1270      576       32      220     1360      617       36      250     1440      653       40      275
6.45-14.....................................     1120      508       32      220     1200      544       36      250     1270      576       40      275
6.95-14.....................................     1230      558       32      220     1310      594       36      250     1390      630       40      275
7.35-14.....................................     1360      617       32      220     1450      658       36      250     1540      698       40      275
7.75-14.....................................     1500      680       32      220     1600      726       36      250     1690      767       40      275
8.25-14.....................................     1620      735       32      220     1730      785       36      250     1830      830       40      275
8.55-14.....................................     1770      803       32      220     1890      857       36      250     2000      907       40      275
8.85-14.....................................     1860      844       32      220     1990      903       36      250     2100      953       40      275
5.60-15.....................................     0970      440       32      220     1040      472       36      250     1105      501       40      275
5.90-15.....................................     1050      476       32      220     1130      513       36      250     1200      544       40      275
6.85-15.....................................     1230      558       32      220     1320      599       36      250     1390      630       40      275
7.35-15.....................................     1390      630       32      220     1480      671       36      250     1570      712       40      275
7.75-15.....................................     1490      676       32      220     1590      721       36      250     1690      767       40      275
8.15-15.....................................     1610      730       32      220     1720      780       36      250     1820      826       40      275
8.25-15.....................................     1620      735       32      220     1730      785       36      250     1830      830       40      275
8.45-15.....................................     1740      789       32      220     1860      844       36      250     1970      894       40      275
8.55-15.....................................     1770      803       32      220     1890      857       36      250     2000      907       40      275
8.85-15.....................................     1860      844       32      220     1980      898       36      250     2100      953       40      275
9.00-15.....................................     1900      862       32      220     2030      721       36      250     2150      975       40      275
9.15-15.....................................     1970      894       32      220     2100      953       36      250     2230     1012       40      275
8.90-15.....................................     2210     1002       32      220     2360     1070       36      250     2500     1134       40      275
A70-13......................................     1060      481       32      220     1130      513       36      250     1200      544       40      275
D70-13......................................     1320      599       32      220     1410      640       36      250     1490      676       40      275
D70-14......................................     1320      599       32      220     1410      640       36      250     1490      676       40      275
E70-14......................................     1400      635       32      220     1490      676       36      250     1580      717       40      275
F70-14......................................     1500      680       32      220     1610      730       36      250     1700      771       40      275
G70-14......................................     1620      735       32      220     1730      785       36      250     1830      830       40      275
H70-14......................................      177      803       32      220     1890      857       36      250     2010      912       40      275
J70-14......................................     1860      844       32      220     1980      898       36      250     2100      953       40      275
L70-14......................................     1970      894       32      220     2180      989       36      250     2230     1012       40      275
C70-15......................................     1230      558       32      220     1320      599       36      250     1390      630       40      275
D70-15......................................     1320      599       32      220     1410      640       36      250     1490      676       40      275
E70-15......................................     1400      635       32      220     1490      676       36      250     1580      717       40      275
F70-15......................................     1500      680       32      220     1610      730       36      250     1700      771       40      275
G70-15......................................     1620      735       32      220     1730      785       36      250     1830      830       40      275
H70-15......................................     1770      803       32      220     1890      857       36      250     2010      912       40      275
J70-15......................................     1860      844       32      220     1980      898       36      250     2100      953       40      275
K70-15......................................     1900      862       32      220     2030      721       36      250     2150      975       40      275
L70-15......................................     1970      894       32      220     2100      953       36      250     2230     1012       40      275
165-13......................................     1050      476       32      220     1130      513       36      250     1200      544       40      275

[[Page 370]]

 
175-13......................................     1150      552       32      220     1240      562       36      250     1350      612       40      275
185-13......................................     1270      576       32      220     1390      630       36      250     1510      685       40      275
155R13......................................      950      431       32      220     1015      460       36      250     1075      488       40      275
155R14......................................     1010      458       32      220     1080      499       36      250     1140      517       40      275
155R14......................................     1015      460       32      220     1085      492       36      250     1150      552       40      275
165R13......................................     1010      458       32      220     1080      499       36      250     1140      517       40      275
165R14......................................     1120      508       32      220     1200      544       36      250     1370      621       40      275
165R15......................................     1130      513       32      220     1200      544       36      250     1270      576       40      275
175R14......................................     1230      558       32      220     1310      594       36      250     1390      630       40      275
185R14......................................     1360      617       32      220     1450      658       36      250     1540      698       40      275
185/70R13...................................     1090      494       32      220     1140      517       36      250     1190      540       40      275
145-14 1....................................      865      392       32      220      905      411       36      250      935      424       40      275
145-15......................................      895      406       32      220      940      426       36      250      975      442       40      275
195-15......................................     1550      703       32      220     1680      762       36      250     1820      826       40      275
205-15......................................     1770      803       32      220     1840      835       36      250     2000      907       40      275
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1 Dash Radial--Not an ``R'' Radial.


[[Page 371]]


[37 FR 5952, Mar. 23, 1972, as amended at 37 FR 11775, June 14, 1972; 38 
FR 2982, Jan. 31, 1973; 38 FR 6999, Mar. 15, 1973; 38 FR 9688, Apr. 19, 
1973; 39 FR 1443, Jan. 9, 1974; 39 FR 3553, Jan. 28, 1974; 39 FR 36016, 
Oct. 7, 1974; 39 FR 39884, Nov. 12, 1974; 61 FR 29494, June 11, 1996; 63 
FR 28920, May 27, 1998]

    Editorial Note: For an interpretation of Sec. 571.117, see 38 FR 
10940, May 3, 1973.

    Effective Date Notes: 1. At 67 FR 69627, Nov. 18, 2002, Sec. 
571.117 was amended by revising S6.3 (including removing Table 1 and the 
undesignated paragraph following S6.3(h)) and adding S7, S7.1, S7.2, and 
S7.3, effective Sept. 1, 2003. At 68 FR 33655, June 5, 2003, the 
effective date was delayed until Sept. 1, 2004. At 69 FR 31306, June 3, 
2004, the effective date was further delayed until Sept. 1, 2005. For 
the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 571.117  Standard No. 117; Retreaded pneumatic tires.

                                * * * * *

    S6.3 Labeling. Each retreaded tire shall comply, according to the 
phase-in schedule specified in S7 of this standard, with the 
requirements of S5.5. of Sec. 571.139.
    S7. Phase-In Schedule for labeling
    S7.1 Tires retreaded on or after September 1, 2004 and before 
September 1, 2005. For tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 
and before September 1, 2005, the number of tires complying with S6.3 of 
this standard must be equal to not less than 40% of the retreader's 
production during that period.
    S7.2 Tires retreaded on or after September 1, 2005 and before 
September 1, 2006. For tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 
and before September 1, 2006, the number of tires complying with S6.3 of 
this standard must be equal to not less than 70% of the retreader's 
production during that period.
    S7.3 Tires retreaded on or after September 1, 2006. Each tire must 
comply with S6.3 of this standard.
    2. At 69 FR 31319, June 3, 2004, Sec. 571.117 was amended by 
revising paragraphs S6.3, S7.1, S7.2 and S7.3, effective Sept. 1, 2005. 
For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as 
follows:

Sec. 571.117  Standard No. 117; Retreaded pneumatic tires.

                                * * * * *

    S6.3. Labeling. Each retreaded tire shall comply, according to the 
phase-in schedule specified in S7 of this standard, with the 
requirements of S5.5 and S5.5.1 of Sec. 571.139.

                                * * * * *

    S7.1. Tires retreaded on or after September 1, 2005 and before 
September 1, 2006. For tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 
and before September 1, 2006, the number of tires complying with S6.3 of 
this standard must be equal to not less than 40% of the retreader's 
production during that period.
    S7.2. Tires retreaded on or after September 1, 2006 and before 
September 1, 2007. For tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2006 
and before September 1, 2007, the number of tires complying with S6.3 of 
this standard must be equal to not less than 70% of the retreader's 
production during that period.
    S7.3. Tires retreaded on or after September 1, 2007. Each tire must 
comply with S6.3 of this standard.


<R05>
Sec. 571.118  Standard No. 118; Power-operated window, partition, and roof panel systems.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard specifies requirements for 
power operated window, partition, and roof panel systems to minimize the 
likelihood of death or injury from their accidental operation.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, and trucks with a gross vehicle weight 
rating of 4536 kilograms or less. The standard's requirements for power-
operated roof panel systems need not be met for vehicles manufactured 
before September 1, 1993.
    S3. Definition. ``Power operated roof panel systems'' mean moveable 
panels in the vehicle roof which close by vehicle supplied power either 
by a sliding or hinged motion, and do not include convertible top 
systems.
    S4. Operating requirements. Except as provided in S5, power operated 
window, partition, or roof panel systems may be closed only in the 
following circumstances:
    (a) When the key that controls activation of the vehicle's engine is 
in the ``ON'', ``START'', or ``ACCESSORY'' position;
    (b) By muscular force unassisted by vehicle supplied power;
    (c) Upon continuous activation by a locking system on the exterior 
of the vehicle;
    (d) Upon continuous activation of a remote actuation device, 
provided that

[[Page 372]]

the remote actuation device shall be incapable of closing the power 
window, partition or roof panel from a distance of more than 6 meters 
from the vehicle;
    (e) During the interval between the time the locking device which 
controls the activation of the vehicle's engine is turned off and the 
opening of either of a two-door vehicle's doors or, in the case of a 
vehicle with more than two doors, the opening of either of its front 
doors;
    (f) If the window, partition, or roof panel is in a static position 
before starting to close and in that position creates an opening so 
small that a 4 mm diameter semi-rigid cylindrical rod cannot be placed 
through the opening at any location around its edge in the manner 
described in S5(b); or
    (g) Upon continuous activation of a remote actuation device, 
provided that the remote actuation device shall be incapable of closing 
the power window, partition or roof panel if the device and the vehicle 
are separated by an opaque surface and provided that the remote 
actuation device shall be incapable of closing the power window, 
partition or roof panel from a distance of more than 11 meters from the 
vehicle.
    S5. (a) Notwithstanding S4, a power operated window, partition or 
roof panel system may close if it meets the following requirements--
    (1) While closing, the window, partition or roof panel system must 
reverse direction before contacting, or before exerting a squeezing 
force of 100 newtons or more on, a semi-rigid cylindrical rod from 4 mm 
to 200 mm in diameter that has the force-deflection ratio described in 
S5(c), and that is placed through the window, partition or roof panel 
system opening at any location, in the manner described in S5(b); and
    (2) Upon such reversal, the window, partition or roof panel system 
must open to one of the following positions, at the manufacturer's 
option:
    (i) A position that is at least as open as the position at the time 
closing was initiated;
    (ii) A position that is not less than 125 millimeters more open than 
the position at the time the window reversed direction; or
    (iii) A position that permits a semi-rigid cylindrical rod that is 
200 mm in diameter to be placed through the opening at the same contact 
point(s) as the rod described in S5(a)(1).
    (b) The test rod is placed through the window, partition or roof 
panel opening from the inside of the vehicle such that the cylindrical 
surface of the rod contacts any part of the structure with which the 
window, partition or roof panel mates. Typical placements of test rods 
are illustrated in Figure 1.
    (c) The force-deflection ratio of the test rod is at least 65 N/mm 
for a rod 25 mm or smaller in diameter, and at least 20 N/mm for a rod 
larger than 25 mm in diameter.

[[Page 373]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.050


[56 FR 15294, Apr. 16, 1991, as amended at 57 FR 23963, June 5, 1992; 57 
FR 28012, June 23, 1992; 58 FR 16785, Mar. 31, 1993; 60 FR 13644, Mar. 
14, 1995]

    Effective Date Notes: 1. At 69 FR 55531, Sept. 15, 2004, Sec. 
571.118 was amended by revising paragraph S2 and by adding paragraph S6, 
effective Nov. 15, 2004. For the convenience of the user, the revised 
and added text is set forth as follows:

[[Page 374]]

Sec. 571.118  Standard No. 118; Power-operated window, partition, and 
          roof panel systems.

                                * * * * *

    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, and trucks with a gross vehicle weight 
rating of 4,536 kilograms or less. This standard's requirements for 
actuation devices, as provided in S6, need not be met for vehicles 
manufactured before October 1, 2008.

                                * * * * *

    S6. Actuation Devices.
    (a) Any actuation device that is mounted in the occupant compartment 
of a vehicle and can be used to close a power-operated window, 
partition, or roof panel, shall not cause such window, partition, or 
roof panel to begin to close from any open position when tested in 
accordance with paragraphs (b) and (c) of S6.
    (b)(1) Using a hemisphere with a smooth, rigid spherical surface and 
a radius of 20 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1 mm, place the spherical 
surface of the hemisphere against any portion of the actuation device.
    (2) Apply a force not to exceed 135 Newtons (30 lbs.) to the 
geometric center of and perpendicular (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 3 degrees) 
to the flat face of the hemisphere.
    (3) While this force level is being applied, the plane of the flat 
face of the hemisphere may be at any angle.
    (c) For actuation devices that cannot be contacted by the hemisphere 
specified in S6(b)(1) prior to the application of force, apply a force 
up to the level specified in S6(b)(2) at any angle in an attempt to make 
contact with the actuation device. The hemisphere is directionally 
applied in such a manner that, if unimpeded, it would make contact with 
the actuation device.
    (d) The requirement in S6(a) does not apply to either--
    (1) Actuation devices that are mounted in a vehicle's roof, 
headliner, or overhead console and that can close a window, partition, 
or roof panel only by continuous rather than momentary switch actuation, 
or
    (2) Actuation devices for closing power-operated windows, 
partitions, and roof panels that comply with S5 of this standard.
    2. At 69 FR 55544, Sept. 15, 2004, Sec. 571.118, was amended in S3, 
by revising the heading and adding a definition for ``infrared 
reflectance'' in alphabetical order; by revising S5; and by adding new 
paragraphs S5.1, S5.2, S5.3, S7, S7.1, S7.2, S8, S8.1, S8.2, S8.3, S9, 
Figure 2 and Figure 3, effective Sept. 1, 2005. For the convenience of 
the user, the revised and added text, is set forth as follows:

571.118  Standard No. 118; Power-operated window, partition, and roof 
          panel systems.

                                * * * * *

    S3. Definitions.

                                * * * * *

    ``Infrared reflectance'' means the ratio of the intensity of 
infrared light reflected and scattered by a flat sample of the test rod 
material to the intensity of infrared light reflected and scattered by a 
mirror that reflects 99.99 percent of the infrared radiation incident on 
its surface as measured by the apparatus show in Figure 2.

                                * * * * *

    S5. Automatic reversal systems. A power-operated window, partition, 
or roof panel system that is capable of closing or of being closed under 
any circumstances other than those specified in S4 shall meet the 
requirements of S5.1, S5.2, and, if applicable, S5.3.
    S5.1. While closing, the power-operated window, partition, or roof 
panel shall stop and reverse direction either before contacting a test 
rod with properties described in S8.2 or S8.3, or before exerting a 
squeezing force of 100 newtons (N) or more on a semi-rigid cylindrical 
test rod with the properties described in S8.1, when such test rod is 
placed through the window, partition, or roof panel opening at any 
location in the manner described in the applicable test under S7.
    S5.2. Upon reversal, the power-operated window, partition, or roof 
panel system must open to one of the following positions, at the 
manufacturer's option:
    (a) A position that is at least as open as the position at the time 
closing was initiated;
    (b) A position that is not less than 125 millimeters (mm) more open 
than the position at the time the window reversed direction; or
    (c) A position that permits a semi-rigid cylindrical rod that is 200 
mm in diameter to be placed through the opening at the same location as 
the rod described in S7.1 or S7.2(b).
    S5.3. If a vehicle uses proximity detection by infrared reflection 
to stop and reverse a power-operated window, partition, or roof panel, 
the infrared source shall project infrared light at a wavelength of not 
less than 850 nm and not more than 1050 nm. The system shall meet the 
requirements in S5.1 and S5.2 in all ambient light conditions from total 
darkness to 64,500 lux (6,000 foot candles) incandescent light 
intensity.

                                * * * * *

    S7. Test procedures.

[[Page 375]]

    S7.1. Test procedure for testing power-operated window, partition, 
or roof panel systems designed to detect obstructions by physical 
contact or by light beam interruption: Place the test rod of the type 
specified in S8.1 or S8.2, as appropriate, through the window, 
partition, or roof panel opening from the inside of the vehicle such 
that the cylindrical surface of the rod contacts any part of the 
structure with which the window, partition, or roof panel mates. Typical 
placements of test rods are illustrated in Figure 1. Attempt to close 
the power window, partition, or roof panel by operating the actuation 
device provided in the vehicle for that purpose.
    S7.2. Test procedure for testing power-operated window, partition, 
or roof panel systems designed to detect the proximity of obstructions 
using infrared reflectance:
    (a) Place the vehicle under incandescent lighting that projects 
64,500 lux (6,000 foot candles) onto the infrared sensor. The light is 
projected onto the infrared sensor by aiming the optical axis of a light 
source outside the vehicle as perpendicular as possible to the lens of 
the infrared sensor. The intensity of light is measured perpendicular to 
the plane of the lens of the infrared sensor, as close as possible to 
the center of the lens of the infrared sensor.
    (b) Place a test rod of the type specified in S8.3 in the window, 
partition, or roof panel opening, with the window, partition, or roof 
panel in any position. While keeping the rod stationary, attempt to 
close the window, partition, or roof panel by operating the actuation 
device provided in the vehicle for that purpose. Remove the test rod. 
Fully open the window, partition, or roof panel, and then begin to close 
it. While the window, partition, or roof panel is closing, move a test 
rod so that it approaches and ultimately extends through (if necessary) 
the window, partition, or roof panel opening, or its frame, in any 
orientation from the interior of the vehicle. For power partitions that 
have occupant compartment space on both sides of the partition, move the 
test rod into the partition opening from either side of the partition.
    (c) Repeat the steps in S7.2(a) and (b) with other ambient light 
conditions within the range specified in S5.3.
    S8. Test rods.
    S8.1. Rods for testing systems designed to detect obstructions by 
physical contact:
    (a) Each test rod is of cylindrical shape with any diameter in the 
range from 4 mm to 200 mm and is of sufficient length that it can be 
hand-held during the test specified in S7 with only the test rod making 
any contact with any part of the window, partition, or roof panel or 
mating surfaces of the window, partition, or roof panel.
    (b) Each test rod has a force-deflection ratio of not less than 65 
N/mm for rods 25 mm or smaller in diameter, and not less than 20 N/mm 
for rods larger than 25 mm in diameter.
    S8.2. Rods for testing systems designed to detect obstructions by 
light beam interruption: Each test rod has the shape and dimensions 
specified in S8.1 and is, in addition, opaque to infrared, visible, and 
ultraviolet light.
    S8.3. Rods for testing systems designed to detect the proximity of 
obstructions using infrared reflection:
    (a) Each rod is constructed so that its surface has an infrared 
reflectance of not more than 1.0 percent when measured by the apparatus 
in Figure 2, in accordance with the procedure in S9.
    (b) Each rod has the shape and dimensions specified in Figure 3.
    S9. Procedure for measuring infrared reflectance of test rod surface 
material.
    (a) The infrared reflectance of the rod surface material is measured 
using a flat sample and an infrared light source and sensor operating at 
a wavelength of 950 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 100 nm.
    (b) The intensity of incident infrared light is determined using a 
reference mirror of nominally 100 percent reflectance mounted in place 
of the sample in the test apparatus in Figure 2.
    (c) Infrared reflectance measurements of each sample of test rod 
surface material and of the reference mirror are corrected to remove the 
contribution of infrared light reflected and scattered by the sample 
holder and other parts of the apparatus before computation of the 
infrared reflectance ratio.

                                * * * * *

[[Page 376]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15SE04.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15SE04.021


[[Page 377]]




<R05>
Sec. 571.119  Standard No. 119; New pneumatic tires for vehicles other 
than passenger cars.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes performance and marking 
requirements for tires for use on multipurpose passenger vehicles, 
trucks, buses, trailers, and motorcycles.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to provide safe 
operational performance levels for tires used on motor vehicles other 
than passenger cars, and to place sufficient information on the tires to 
permit their proper selection and use.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to new pneumatic tires 
designed for highway use on multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, 
buses, trailers, and motorcycles manufactured after 1948.
    S4. Definitions. All terms defined in the Act and the rules and 
standards issued under its authority are used as defined therein.
    Light truck tire means a tire designated by its manuafacturer as 
primarily intended for use on lightweight trucks or multipurpose 
passenger vehicles.
    Model rim assembly means a test device that (a) includes a rim which 
conforms to the published dimensions of a commercially available rim, 
(b) includes an air valve assembly when used for testing tubeless tires 
or an innertube and flap (as required) when used for testing tubetype 
tires, and (c) undergoes no permanent rim deformation and allows no loss 
of air through the portion that it comprises of the tire-rim pressure 
chamber when a tire is properly mounted on the assembly and subjected to 
the requirements of this standard.
    S5. Tire and rim matching information.
    S5.1 Each manufacturer of tires shall ensure that a listing of the 
rims that may be used with each tire that he produces is provided to the 
public. For purposes of this section each rim listing shall include 
dimensional specifications and a diagram of the rim. However a listing 
compiled in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section need not 
include dimensional specifications or a diagram of a rim if the rim's 
dimensional specifications and diagram are contained in each listing 
published in accordance with paragraph (b) of this standard. The listing 
shall be in one of the following forms:
    (a) Listed by manufacturer name or brand name in a document 
furnished to dealers of the manufacturer's tires, to any person upon 
request, and in duplicate to: Docket Section, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20590; or
    (b) Contained in publications, current at the date of manufacture of 
the tire or any later date, of at least one of the following 
organizations:

The Tire and Rim Association
The European Tyre and Rim Technical Organisation
Japan Automobile Tire Manufacturers' Association, Inc.
Deutsche Industrie Norm
British Standards Institution
Scandinavian Tire and Rim Organization
The Tyre and Rim Association of Australia

    S5.2 Information contained in a publication specified in S5.1(b) 
which lists general categories of tires and rims by size designation, 
type of construction, and/or intended use, shall be considered to be 
manufacturer's information pursuant to S5.1 for the listed tires, unless 
the publication itself or specific information provided according to 
S5.1(a) indicates otherwise.
    S6. Requirements. Each tire shall be capable of meeting any of the 
applicable requirements set forth below, when mounted on a model rim 
assembly corresponding to any rim designated by the tire manufacturer 
for use with the tire in accordance with S5. However, a particular tire 
need not meet further requirements after having been subjected to and 
met the endurance test (S6.1), strength test (S6.2), or high speed 
performance test (S6.3).
    S6.1 Endurance.
    S6.1.1 Prior to testing in accordance with the procedures of S7.2, a 
tire shall exhibit no visual evidence of tread, sidewall, ply, cord, 
innerliner, or bead separation, chunking, broken cords, cracking, or 
open splices.
    S6.1.2 When tested in accordance with the procedures of S7.2:
    (a) There shall be no visual evidence of tread, sidewall, ply, cord, 
innerliner, or bead separation, chunking, broken cords, cracking, or 
open splices.

[[Page 378]]

    (b) The tire pressure at the end of the test shall be not less than 
the initial pressure specified in S7.2(a).
    S6.2 Strength. When tested in accordance with the procedures of S7.3 
a tire's average breaking energy value shall be not less than the value 
specified in Table II for that tire's size and load range.
    S6.3 High speed performance. When tested in accordance with the 
procedures of S7.3, a tire shall meet the requirements set forth in 
S6.1.1 and S6.1.2(a) and (b). However, this requirement applies only to 
motorcycle tires and to non-speed-restricted tires of nominal rim 
diameter code 14.5 or less marked load range A, B, C, or D.
    S6.4 Treadwear indicators. Except as specified in this paragraph, 
each tire shall have at least six treadwear indicators spaced 
approximately equally around the circumference of the tire that enable a 
person inspecting the tire to determine visually whether the tire has 
worn to a tread depth of 1.6 mm (one-sixteenth of an inch). Tires with a 
rim diameter code of 12 or smaller shall have at least three such 
treadwear indicators. Motorcycle tires shall have at least three such 
indicators which permit visual determination that the tire has worn to a 
tread depth of 0.8 mm (one-thirty-second of an inch).
    S6.5 Tire markings. Except as specified in this paragraph, each tire 
shall be marked on each sidewall with the information specified in 
paragraphs (a) through (j) of this section. The markings shall be placed 
between the maximum section width (exclusive of sidewall decorations or 
curb ribs) and the bead on at least one sidewall, unless the maximum 
section width of the tire is located in an area which is not more than 
one-fourth of the distance from the bead to the shoulder of the tire. If 
the maximum section width falls within that area, the markings shall 
appear between the bead and a point one-half the distance from the bead 
to the shoulder of the tire, on at least one sidewall. The markings 
shall be in letters and numerals not less than 2 mm (0.078 inch) high 
and raised above or sunk below the tire surface not less that 0.4 mm 
(0.015 inch), except that the marking depth shall be not less than 
0.25mm (0.010 inch) in the case of motorcycle tires. The tire 
identification and the DOT symbol labeling shall comply with part 574 of 
this chapter. Markings may appear on only one sidewall and the entire 
sidewall area may be used in the case of motorcycle tires and 
recreational, boat, baggage, and special trailer tires.
    (a) The symbol DOT, which shall constitute a certification that the 
tire conforms to applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards. This 
symbol may be marked on only one sidewall.
    (b) The tire identification number required by part 574 of this 
chapter. This number may be marked on only one sidewall.
    (c) The tire size designation as listed in the documents and 
publications designated in S5.1.
    (d) The maximum load rating and corresponding inflation pressure of 
the tire, shown as follows:

    (Mark on tires rated for single and dual load): Max load single ----
kg (----lb) at ----kPa (----psi) cold. Max load dual ----kg (----lb) at 
----kPa (----psi) cold.
    (Mark on tires rated only for single load): Max load ----kg (----lb) 
at ----kPa (----psi) cold.

    (e) The speed restriction of the tire, if 88 km/h (55 mph) or less, 
shown as follows:

Max speed ----km/h (----mph).
    (f) The actual number of plies and the composition of the ply cord 
material in the sidewall and, if different, in the tread area;
    (g) The words ``tubeless'' or ``tube type'' as applicable.
    (h) The word ``regroovable'' if the tire is designed for regrooving.
    (i) The word ``radial'' if a radial tire.
    (j) The letter designating the tire load range.
    S6.6 Maximum load rating. If the maximum load rating for a 
particular tire size is shown in one or more of the publications 
described in S5.1(b), each tire of that size designation shall have a 
maximum load rating that is not less than the published maximum load 
rating, or if there are differing published ratings for the same tire 
size designation, not less than the lowest published maximum load rating 
for the size designation.
    S7. Test procedures.

[[Page 379]]

    S7.1 General conditions.
    S7.1.1 The tests are performed using an appropriate new tube, tube 
valve and flap assembly (as required) that allows no loss of air for 
testing of tube-type tires under S7.2, S7.3, and S7.4, and tubeless 
tires under S7.3.
    S7.1.2 The tire must be capable of meeting the requirements of S7.2 
and S7.4 when conditioned to a temperature of 35 [deg]C (95 [deg]F) for 
3 hours before the test is conducted, and with an ambient temperature 
maintained at 35 [deg]C (95 [deg]F) during all phases of testing. The 
tire must be capable of meeting the requirements of S7.3 when 
conditioned at a temperature of 21 [deg]C (70 [deg]F) for 3 hours before 
the test is conducted.
    S7.2 Endurance. (a) Mount the tire on a model rim assembly and 
inflate it to the inflation pressure corresponding to the maximum load 
rating marked on the tire. Use a single maximum load value when the tire 
is marked with both single and dual maximum load.
    (b) After conditioning the tire-rim assembly in accordance with 
S7.1.2, adjust the tire pressure to that specified in (a) immediately 
before mounting the tire rim assembly.
    (c) Mount the tire-rim assembly on an axle and press it against a 
flat-faced steel test wheel that is 1708 mm (67.23 inches) in diameter 
and at least as wide as the tread of the tire.
    (d) Apply the test load and rotate the test wheel as indicated in 
Table III for the type of tire tested conducting each successive phase 
of the test without interruption.
    (e) Immediately after running the tire the required time, measure 
the tire inflation pressure. Remove the tire from the model rim 
assembly, and inspect the tire.
    S7.3 Strength. (a) Mount the tire on a model rim assembly and 
inflate it to the pressure corresponding to the maximum load, or maximum 
dual load where there is both a single and dual load marked on the tire. 
If the tire is tubeless, a tube may be inserted to prevent loss of air 
during the test in the event of puncture.
    (b) After conditioning the tire-rim assembly in accordance with 
S7.1.2, adjust the tire pressure to that specified in (a).
    (c) Force a cylindrical steel plunger, with a hemispherical end and 
of the diameter specified in Table I for the tire size, perpendicularly 
into a raised tread element as near as possible to the centerline of the 
tread, at a rate of 50 mm (2 inches) per minute, until the tire breaks 
or the plunger is stopped by the rim.
    (d) Record the force and the distance of penetration just before the 
tire breaks, or if it fails to break, just before the plunger is stopped 
by the rim.
    (e) Repeat the plunger application at 72[deg] intervals around the 
circumference of the tire, until five measurements are made. However, in 
the case of tires of 12 inch rim diameter code or smaller, repeat the 
plunger application at 120[deg] intervals around the circumference of 
the tire, until three measurements are made.
    (f) Compute the breaking energy for each test point by one of the 
two following formulas:
    (1) W = [(F x P)/2] x 10<SUP>-3</SUP> (joules)

Where:

W = Breaking energy (in joules) (kJ)
F = Force in newtons (N) and
P = Penetration in millimeters (mm), or;

    (2) W = (FP/2)

Where:

W = Breaking energy in inch-pounds,
F = Force in pounds,
P = Penetration in inches.

    (g) Determine the average breaking energy value for the tire by 
computing the average of the values obtained in accordance with 
paragraph (f).
    S7.4 High speed performance. (a) Perform steps (a) through (c) of 
S7.2.
    (b) Apply a force of 88 percent of the maximum load rating marked on 
the tire (use single maximum load value when the tire is marked with 
both single and dual maximum loads), and rotate the test wheel at 250 
rpm for 2 hours.
    (c) Remove the load, allow the tire to cool to 35 [deg]C (95 
[deg]F), and then adjust the pressure to that marked on the tire for 
single tire use.
    (d) Reapply the same load, and without interruption or readjustment 
of inflation pressure, rotate the test wheel at 375 rpm for 30 minutes, 
then at 400 rpm for 30 minutes, and then at 425 rpm for 30 minutes.

[[Page 380]]

    (e) Immediately after running the tire the required time, measure 
the tire inflation pressure. Remove the tire from the model rim 
assembly, and inspect the tire.

                 Table I--Strength Test Plunger Diameter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Plunger diameter
                                               -------------------------
                                                    (mm)       (inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tire type:
    Light truck...............................        19.05        \3/4\
    Motorcycle................................  ...........       \5/16\
    Tires for 12 rim diameter code or smaller         19.05        \3/4\
     rims except motorcycle...................
Tires other than the above types:
    Tubeless:
        17.5 diameter code or smaller rims....        19.05        \3/4\
    Larger than 17.5 rim diameter code rims:
        Load range F or less..................        31.75       1\1/4\
        Load range over F.....................        38.10       1\1/2\
    Tube type:
        Load range F or less..................        31.75       1\1/4\
        Load range over F.....................        38.10       1\1/2\
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 381]]


                                                        Table II--Minimum Static Breaking Energy (Joules (J) and Inch-Pounds (inch-lbs))
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Load range                             All 12 rim diameter    Light truck 17.5 rim          Tube type            Tubeless             Tube type            Tubeless
-------------------------------------------------------------   code or smaller rim      diameter code or    -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Tire characteristic                 Motorcycle                 size            smaller rim tubeless
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------          1\1/4\<gr-thn-                            1\1/2\<gr-thn-
                                              \5/16\<gr-thn-           \3/4\<gr-thn-           \3/4\<gr-thn-  31.75 J  eq>  inch-lbs     J      inch-   38.10 J  eq>  inch-lbs     J      inch-
  Plunger diameter (mm and inches)    7.94 J   eq>  inch-lbs  19.05 J  eq>  inch-lbs  19.05 J  eq>  inch-lbs                                     lbs                                       lbs
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A..................................       16          150          67         600         225       2,000     .......  .............  .......  .......  .......  .............  .......  .......
B..................................       33          300         135       1,200         293       2,600     .......  .............  .......  .......  .......  .............  .......  .......
C..................................       45          400         203       1,800         361       3,200         768       6,800         576    5,100  .......  .............  .......  .......
D..................................  .......  ..............      271       2,400         514       4,550         892       7,900         734    6,500  .......  .............  .......  .......
E..................................  .......  ..............      338       3,000         576       5,100       1,412      12,500         971    8,600  .......  .............  .......  .......
F..................................  .......  ..............      406       3,600         644       5,700       1,785      15,800       1,412   12,500  .......  .............  .......  .......
G..................................  .......  ..............  .......  .............      711       6,300     .......  .............  .......  .......    2,282      20,200       1,694   15,000
H..................................  .......  ..............  .......  .............      768       6,800     .......  .............  .......  .......    2,598      23,000       2,090   18,500
J..................................  .......  ..............  .......  .............  .......  .............  .......  .............  .......  .......    2,824      25,000       2,203   19,500
L..................................  .......  ..............  .......  .............  .......  .............  .......  .............  .......  .......    3,050      27,000     .......  .......
M..................................  .......  ..............  .......  .............  .......  .............  .......  .............  .......  .......    3,220      28,500     .......  .......
N..................................  .......  ..............  .......  .............  .......  .............  .......  .............  .......  .......    3,389      30,000     .......  .......
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: For rayon cord tires, applicable energy values are 60 percent of those in table.
*J measurements are rounded down to the nearest whole number.


[[Page 382]]


                                                           Table III--Endurance Test Schedule
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                        Test load: Percent of maximum load
                                                                                                                      rating                  Total best
                  Description                                  Load range                 Test wheel --------------------------------------- revolutions
                                                                                         speed (r/m)                  II--16      III--24    (thousands)
                                                                                                       I--7 hours     hours        hours
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Speed restricted service:
    88 km/h (55 mph)...........................
    80 km/h (50 mph)...........................  All...................................          125           66           84          101        352.0
                                                 C, D..................................          150           75           97          114        432.0
    56 km/h (35 mph)...........................  E, F, G, H, J, L......................          100           66           84          101        282.5
Motorcycle.....................................  All...................................           75           66           84          101        211.0
All other......................................  All...................................          250      \1\ 100      \2\ 108          117        510.0
                                                 A, B, C, D............................          250           75       \2\ 97          114  ...........
                                                 E.....................................          200           70           88          106        546.0
                                                 F.....................................          200           66           84          101        564.0
                                                 G.....................................          175           66           84          101        493.5
                                                 H, J, L, N............................          150           66           84          101        423.5
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 4 hr., for tire sizes subject to high speed requirements (S6.3).
\2\ 6 hr., for tire sizes subject to high speed requirements (S6.3)


(Secs. 113, 201, 80 Stat. 718 (15 U.S.C. 1402, 1421); secs. 103, 112, 
119, 201, 203, Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 (15 U.S.C. 1392, 1401, 1421, 
1423); delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50)

[38 FR 31301, Nov. 13, 1973, as amended at 39 FR 4087, Feb. 1, 1974; 39 
FR 5192, Feb. 11, 1974; 39 FR 12105, Apr. 3, 1974; 39 FR 19481, June 3, 
1974; 40 FR 5530, Feb. 6, 1975; 43 FR 30542, July 17, 1978; 43 FR 50441, 
Oct. 30, 1978; 48 FR 25209, June 6, 1983; 50 FR 10773, Mar. 18, 1985; 54 
FR 38386, Sept. 18, 1989; 61 FR 29494, June 11, 1996; 63 FR 28921, May 
27, 1998]

    Effective Date Note: At 68 FR 38148, June 26, 2003, Sec. 571.119 
was amended by revising its heading, S1, S2, S3, and tables I, II, and 
III, effective June 1, 2007. For the convenience of the user, the 
revised text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 571.119  Standard No. 119; New pneumatic tires for motor vehicles 
          with a GVWR of more than 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) and 
          motorcycles.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes performance and marking 
requirements for tires for use on motor vehicles with a GVWR of more 
than 10,000 pounds and motorcycles.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to provide safe 
operational performance levels for tires used on motor vehicles with a 
GVWR of more than 10,000 pounds, trailers, and motorcycles, and to place 
sufficient information on the tires to permit their proper selection and 
use.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to new pneumatic tires 
designed for highway use on motor vehicles with a GVWR of more than 
4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds), trailers, and motorcycles manufactured 
after 1948.

                                * * * * *

                Table I.--Strength Test Plunger Diameter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                      Plunger diameter
                                                   ---------------------
                                                       (mm)     (inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tire type:
  Light truck.....................................      19.05      \3/4\
  Motorcycle......................................  .........        \5/
                                                                16\[sec]
  Tires for 12-inch or smaller rims, except             19.05      \3/4\
   motorcycle.....................................
Tires other than above types:
 Tubeless:
    17.5-inch or smaller rims.....................      19.05      \3/4\
Larger than 17.5-inch rims:
      Load range F................................      31.75     1\1/4\
      Load range over F...........................      38.10     1\1/2\
 Tube type:
      Load range F................................      31.75     1\1/4\
      Load range over F...........................      38.10     1\1/2\
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 383]]


                                                                            Table II.--Minimum Static Breaking Energy
                                                                            [Joules (J)) and Inch-Pounds (inch-lbs)]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Load range                                          All 12 rim     Light truck 17.5      Tube type         Tubeless          Tube type         Tubeless
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- diameter code or   rim diameter or -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Tire characteristic                             Motorcycle    smaller rim size     smaller rim
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------     tubeless
                                                                                                       ------------------ 31.75 J    1\1/      J      Inche-  38.10 J    1\1/      J      Inche-
                 Plunger diameter  (mm and inches)                    7.94J     \5/   19.05 J    \3/               \3/             4\[sec]             lbs               2\''              lbs
                                                                               16\''           4\[sec]  19.05 J  4\[sec]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A..................................................................       16     150  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......
B..................................................................       33     300  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......
C..................................................................       45     400  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......
D..................................................................  .......  ......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......
E..................................................................  .......  ......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......
F..................................................................  .......  ......      406    3,600      644    5,700    1,785   15,800    1,412   12,500  .......  .......  .......  .......
G..................................................................  .......  ......  .......  .......      711    6,300  .......  .......  .......  .......    2,282   20,200    1,694   15,000
H..................................................................  .......  ......  .......  .......      768    6,800  .......  .......  .......  .......    2,598   23,000    2.090   18,500
J..................................................................  .......  ......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......    2,824   25,000    2,203   19,500
L..................................................................  .......  ......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......    3,050   27,000  .......  .......
M..................................................................  .......  ......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......    3,220   28,500  .......  .......
N..................................................................  .......  ......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......  .......    3,389   30,000  .......  .......
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 384]]


                                       Table III.--Endurance Test Schedule
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Test load: Percent of maximum
                                                            Test              load rating             Total best
           Description                  Load range         wheel   --------------------------------- revolutions
                                                         speed  (r/    I--7     II--  16  III--  24
                                                             m)       hours      hours      hours    (thousands)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Speed restricted service:
    88 km/h (55 mph).............  F, G, H, J, L, M, N.        125         66         84        101       352.0
    80 km/h (50 mph).............  F, G, H, J, L.......        100         66         84        101       282.5
    56 km/h (35 mph).............  All.................         75         66         84        101       211.0
Motorcycle.......................  All.................        250    \1\ 100    \2\ 108        117       510.0
All other........................  F...................        200         66         84        101       564.0
                                   G...................        175         66         84        101       493.5
                                   H, J, L, N..........        150         66         84        101       423.5
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 4 hr. for tire sizes subject to high speed requirements (S6.3).
\2\ 6 hr. for tire sizes subject to high speed requirements (S6.3).


<R05>
Sec. 571.120  Standard No. 120; Tire selection and rims for motor 
vehicles other than passenger cars.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies tire and rim selection 
requirements and rim marking requirements.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to provide safe 
operational performance by ensuring that vehicles to which it applies 
are equipped with tires of adequate size and load rating and with rims 
of appropriate size and type designation.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to multipurpose passenger 
vehicles, trucks, buses, trailers, and motor cycles, to rims for use on 
those vehicles, and to non-pneumatic spare tire assemblies for use on 
those vehicles.
    S4. Definitions. All terms defined in the Act and the rules and 
standards issued under its authority are used as defined therein.
    Rim base means the portion of a rim remaining after removal of all 
split or continuous rim flanges, side rings, and locking rings that can 
be detached from the rim.
    Rim size designation means rim diameter and width.
    Rim diameter means nominal diameter of the bead seat.
    Rim width means nominal distance between rim flanges.
    Rim type designation means the industry or manufacturer's 
designation for a rim by style or code.
    Weather side means the surface area of the rim not covered by the 
inflated tire.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 Tire and rim selection.
    S5.1.1 Except as specified in S5.1.3, each vehicle equipped with 
pneumatic tires for highway service shall be equipped with tires that 
meet the requirements of Sec. 571.109, New pneumatic tires, or Sec. 
571.119, New pneumatic tires for vehicles other than passenger cars, and 
rims that are listed by the manufacturer of the tires as suitable for 
use with those tires, in accordance with S4.4 of Sec. 571.109 or S5.1 
of Sec. 571.119, as applicable, except that vehicles may be equipped 
with a non-pneumatic spare tire assembly that meets the requirements of 
Sec. 571.129, New non-pneumatic tires for passenger cars, and S8 of 
this standard. Vehicles equipped with such an assembly shall meet the 
requirements of S5.3.3, S7, and S9 of this standard.
    S5.1.2 Except in the case of a vehicle which has a speed attainable 
in 3.2 kilometers of 80 kilometers per hour or less, the sum of the 
maximum load ratings of the tires fitted to an axle shall be not less 
than the gross axle weight rating (GAWR) of the axle system as specified 
on the vehicle's certification label required by 49 CFR part 567. Except 
in the case of a vehicle which has a speed attainable in 2 miles of 50 
mph or less, the sum of the maximum load ratings of the tires fitted to 
an axle shall be not less than the gross axle weight rating (GAWR) of 
the axle system as specified on the vehicle's certification label 
required by 49 CFR part 567. If the certification label shows more than 
one GAWR for the axle system, the sum shall be not less than the GAWR 
corresponding to the size designation of the tires fitted to the axle. 
If the size designation of the tires

[[Page 385]]

fitted to the axle does not appear on the certification label, the sum 
shall be not less than the lowest GAWR appearing on the label. When a 
tire subject to FMVSS No. 109 is installed on a multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck, bus, or trailer, the tire's load rating shall be reduced 
by dividing by 1.10 before calculating the sum (i.e., the sum of the 
load ratings of the tires on each axle, when the tires' load carrying 
capacity at the recommended tire cold inflation pressure is reduced by 
dividing by 1.10, must be appropriate for the GAWR).
    S5.1.3 In place of tires that meet the requirements of Standard No. 
119, a truck, bus, or trailer may at the request of a purchaser be 
equipped at the place of manufacture of the vehicle with retreaded or 
used tires owned or leased by the purchaser, if the sum of the maximum 
load ratings meets the requirements of S5.1.2. Used tires employed under 
this provision must have been originally manufactured to comply with 
Standard No. 119, as evidenced by the DOT symbol.
    S5.2 Rim marking. Each rim or, at the option of the manufacturer in 
the case of a single-piece wheel, wheel disc shall be marked with the 
information listed in paragraphs (a) through (e) of this paragraph, in 
lettering not less than 3 millimeters high, impressed to a depth or, at 
the option of the manufacturer, embossed to a height of not less than 
0.125 millimeters. The information listed in paragraphs (a) through (c) 
of this paragraph shall appear on the weather side. In the case of rims 
of multi piece construction, the information listed in paragraphs (a) 
through (e) of this paragraph shall appear on the rim base and the 
information listed in paragraphs (b) and (d) of this paragraph shall 
also appear on each other part of the rim.
    (a) A designation which indicates the source of the rim's published 
nominal dimensions, as follows:
    (1) ``T'' indicates The Tire and Rim Association.
    (2) ``E'' indicates The European Tyre and Rim Technical Organisation
    (3) ``J'' indicates Japan Automobile Tire Manufacturers' 
Association, Inc.
    (4) ``D'' indicates Deutsche Industrie Norm.
    (5) ``B'' indicates British Standards Institution.
    (6) ``S'' indicates Scandinavian Tire and Rim Organization.
    (7) ``A'' indicates The Tyre and Rim Association of Australia.
    (8) ``N'' indicates an independent listing pursuant to S4.4.1(a) of 
Standard No. 109 or S5.1(a) of Standard No. 119.
    (b) The rim size designation, and in case of multipiece rims, the 
rim type designation. For example: 20x5.50, or 20x5.5.
    (c) The symbol DOT, constituting a certification by the manufacturer 
of the rim that the rim complies with all applicable motor vehicle 
safety standards.
    (d) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the rim by 
name, trademark, or symbol.
    (e) The month, day and year or the month and year of manufacture, 
expressed either numerically or by use of a symbol, at the option of the 
manufacturer. For example:

    ``September 4, 1976'' may be expressed numerically as:

90476, 904, or 76
 76 904

    ``September 1976'' may be expressed as:

976, 9, or 76
 76 9

    (1) Any manufacturer that elects to express the date of manufacture 
by means of a symbol shall notify NHTSA in writing of the full names and 
addresses of all manufacturers and brand name owners utilizing that 
symbol and the name and address of the trademark owner of that symbol, 
if any. The notification shall describe in narrative form and in detail 
how the month, day, and year or the month and year are depicted by the 
symbol. Such description shall include an actual size graphic depiction 
of the symbol, showing and/or explaining the interrelationship of the 
component parts of the symbol as they will appear on the rim or single 
piece wheel disc, including dimensional specifications, and where the 
symbol will be located on the rim or single piece wheel disc. The 
notification shall be received by NHTSA at least 60 calendar days prior 
to first use of the symbol. The notification shall be mailed to the 
Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance,

[[Page 386]]

National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., 
Washington, DC 20590. All information provided to NHTSA under this 
paragraph will be placed in the public docket.
    (2) Each manufacturer of wheels shall provide an explanation of its 
date of manufacture symbol to any person upon request.
    S5.3 Each vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of more 
than 10,000 pounds, and motorcycles, shall show the information 
specified in S5.3.1 and S5.3.2 and, in the case of a vehicle equipped 
with a non-pneumatic spare tire, the information specified in S5.3.3, in 
the English language, lettered in block capitals and numerals not less 
than 2.4 millimeters high and in the format set forth following this 
paragraph. This information shall appear either--
    (a) After each GAWR listed on the certification label required by 
Sec. 567.4 or Sec. 567.5 of this chapter; or at the option of the 
manufacturer,
    (b) On the tire information label affixed to the vehicle in the 
manner, location, and form described in Sec. 567.4 (b) through (f) of 
this chapter as appropriate of each GVWR-GAWR combination listed on the 
certification label.
    S5.3.1 Tires. The size designation (not necessarily for the tires on 
the vehicle) and the recommended cold inflation pressure for those tires 
such that the sum of the load ratings of the tires on each axle (when 
the tires' load carrying capacity at the specified pressure is reduced 
by dividing by 1.10, in the case of a tire subject to FMVSS No. 109) is 
appropriate for the GAWR as calculated in accordance with S5.1.2.
    S5.3.2. Rims. The size designation and, if applicable, the type 
designation of Rims (not necessarily those on the vehicle) appropriate 
for those tires.

                 TRUCK EXAMPLE--SUITABLE TIRE-RIM CHOICE

GVWR: 7,840 KG (17,289 LB)
GAWR: FRONT--2,850 KG (6,280 LB) WITH 7.50-20(D) TIRES, 20x6.00 RIMS AT 
520 KPA (75 PSI) COLD SINGLE
GAWR: REAR--4,990 KG (11,000 LB) WITH 7.50-20(D) TIRES, 20x6.00 RIMS, AT 
450 KPA (65 PSI) COLD DUAL
GVWR: 13,280 KG (29,279 LB)
GAWR: FRONT--4,826 KG (10,640 LB) WITH 10.00-20(F) TIRES, 20x7.50 RIMS, 
AT 620 KPA (90 PSI) COLD SINGLE
GAWR: REAR--8,454 KG (18,639 LB) WITH 10.00-20(F) TIRES, 20x2.70 RIMS, 
AT 550 KPA (80 PSI) COLD DUAL

    S5.3.3 The non-pneumatic tire identification code, with which that 
assembly is labeled pursuant to S4.3(a) of Sec. 571.129.
    S6. Load Limits for Non-Pneumatic Spare Tires. The highest vehicle 
maximum load on the tire for the vehicle shall not be greater than the 
load rating for the non-pneumatic spare tire.
    S7 Labeling Requirements for Non-Pneumatic Spare Tires or Tire 
Assemblies. Each non-pneumatic tire or, in the case of a non-pneumatic 
tire assembly in which the non-pneumatic tire is an integral part of the 
assembly, each non-pneumatic tire assembly shall include, in letters or 
numerals not less than 4 millimeters high, the information specified in 
paragraphs S7 (a) and (b). The information shall be permanently molded, 
stamped, or otherwise permanently marked into or onto the non-pneumatic 
tire or non-pneumatic tire assembly, or shall appear on a label that is 
permanently attached to the tire or tire assembly. If a label is used, 
it shall be subsurface printed, made of material that is resistant to 
fade, heat, moisture and abrasion, and attached in such a manner that it 
cannot be removed without destroying or defacing the label on the non-
pneumatic tire or tire assembly. The information specified in paragraphs 
S7 (a) and (b) shall appear on both sides of the non-pneumatic tire or 
tire assembly, except, in the case of a non-pneumatic tire assembly 
which has a particular side that must always face outward when mounted 
on a vehicle, in which case the information specified in paragraphs S7 
(a) and (b) shall only be required on the outward facing side. The 
information shall be positioned on the tire or tire assembly such that 
it is not placed on the tread or the outermost edge of the tire and is 
not obstructed by any portion of any non-pneumatic rim or wheel center 
member designated for use with that tire in this standard or in Standard 
No. 129.
    (a) FOR TEMPORARY USE ONLY; and

[[Page 387]]

    (b) MAXIMUM 80 KM/H (50 M.P.H.).
    S8. Requirements for Vehicles Equipped with Non-Pneumatic Spare Tire 
Assemblies
    S8.1 Vehicle Placarding Requirements. A placard, permanently affixed 
to the inside of the spare tire stowage area or equally accessible 
location adjacent to the non-pneumatic spare tire assembly, shall 
display the information set forth in S7 in block capitals and numerals 
not less than 6 millimeters high preceded by the words ``IMPORTANT--USE 
OF SPARE TIRE'' in letters not less than 9 millimeters high.
    S8.2 Supplementary Information. The owner's manual of the vehicle 
shall contain, in writing in the English language and in not less than 
10 point type, the following information under the heading ``IMPORTANT--
USE OF SPARE TIRE'':
    (a) A statement indicating the information related to appropriate 
use for the non-pneumatic spare tire including at a minimum the 
information set forth in S8 (a) and (b) and either the information set 
forth in S5.3.6 or a statement that the information set forth in S5.3.6 
is located on the vehicle placard and on the non-pneumatic tire;
    (b) An instruction to drive carefully when the non-pneumatic spare 
tire is in use, and to install the proper pneumatic tire and rim at the 
first reasonable opportunity; and
    (c) A statement that operation of the vehicle is not recommended 
with more than one non-pneumatic spare tire in use at the same time.
    S9 Non-Pneumatic Rims and Wheel Center Members
    S9.1 Non-Pneumatic Rim Requirements. Each non-pneumatic rim that is 
part of a separable non-pneumatic spare tire assembly shall be 
constructed to the dimensions of a non-pneumatic rim that is listed 
pursuant to S4.4 of Sec. 571.129 for use with the non-pneumatic tire, 
designated by its non-pneumatic tire identification code, with which the 
vehicle is equipped.
    S9.2 Wheel Center Member Requirements. Each wheel center member that 
is part of a separable non-pneumatic spare tire assembly shall be 
constructed to the dimensions of a wheel center member that is listed 
pursuant to S4.4 of Sec. 571.129 for use with the non-pneumatic tire, 
designated by its non-pneumatic tire identification code, with which the 
vehicle is equipped.

(Authority: Secs. 102, 119, and 202, Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 (15 
U.S.C. 1392, 1407, and 1422); delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50)

[42 FR 7144, Feb. 7, 1977, as amended at 49 FR 20824, May 17, 1984; 54 
FR 38386, Sept. 18, 1989; 55 FR 29589, July 20, 1990; 56 FR 19311, Apr. 
26, 1991; 58 FR 13426, Mar. 11, 1993; 59 FR 25578, May 17, 1994; 60 FR 
13644, Mar. 14, 1995; 61 FR 29495, June 11, 1996; 63 FR 28922, May 27, 
1998; 68 FR 37982, June 26, 2004]

    Effective Date Notes: 1. At 67 FR 69627, Nov. 18, 2002, Sec. 
571.120 was amended by revising the heading, and S3, effective Sept. 1, 
2003. At 68 FR 33655, June 5, 2003, the effective date was delayed until 
Sept. 1, 2004. At 69 FR 31306, June 3, 2004, the effective date was 
further delayed until Sept. 1, 2005. For the convenience of the user, 
the revised text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 571.120  Standard No. 120; Tire selection and rims for motor 
          vehicles with a GVWR of more than 4,536 kilograms (10,000 
          pounds).

                                * * * * *

    S3. Application. This standard applies to motor vehicles with a 
gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of more than 10,000 pounds and 
motorcycles, to rims for use on those vehicles, and to non-pneumatic 
spare tire assemblies for use on those vehicles.

                                * * * * *

    2. At 68 FR 38149, June 26, 2003, Sec. 571.120 was amended by 
revising its heading, S3, S5.1.1, S5.1.2, and S5.3, effective June 1, 
2007. For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as 
follows:

Sec. 571.120  Standard No. 120; Tire selection and rims for motor 
          vehicles with a GVWR of more than 4,536 kilograms (10,000 
          pounds).

                                * * * * *

    S3. Application. This standard applies to motor vehicles with a 
gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of more than 4,536 kilograms (10,000 
pounds and motorcycles, to rims for use on those vehicles, and to non-
pneumatic spare tire assemblies for use on those vehicles.
    S5.1.1 Except as specified in S5.1.3, each vehicle equipped with 
pneumatic tires for highway service shall be equipped with tires that 
meet the requirements of Sec. 571.119, New pneumatic tires for motor 
vehicles with a GVWR of more than 10,000 pounds, and rims that are 
listed by the manufacturer of the

[[Page 388]]

tires as suitable for use with those tires, in accordance with S5.1 of 
Sec. 571.119, except that vehicles may be equipped with a non-pneumatic 
spare tire assembly that meets the requirements of Sec. 571.129, New 
non-pneumatic tires for passenger cars, and S8 of this standard. 
Vehicles equipped with such an assembly shall meet the requirements of 
S5.3.3, S7, and S9 of this standard.
    S5.1.2 Except in the case of a vehicle which has a speed attainable 
in 3.2 kilometers of 80 kilometers per hour or less, the sum of the 
maximum load ratings of the tires fitted to an axle shall be not less 
than the gross axle weight rating (GAWR) of the axle system as specified 
on the vehicle's certification label required by 49 CFR part 567. Except 
in the case of a vehicle which has a speed attainable in 2 miles of 50 
mph or less, the sum of the maximum load ratings of the tires fitted to 
an axle shall be not less than the gross axle weight rating (GAWR) of 
the axle system as specified on the vehicle's certification label 
required by 49 CFR part 567. If the certification label shows more than 
one GAWR for the axle system, the sum shall be not less than the GAWR 
corresponding to the size designation of the tires fitted to the axle. 
If the size designation of the tires fitted to the axle does not appear 
on the certification label, the sum shall be not less than the lowest 
GAWR appearing on the label. When a tire subject to FMVSS No. 109 or 139 
is installed on a multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, bus, or 
trailer, the tire's load rating shall be reduced by dividing by 1.10 
before calculating the sum (i.e., the sum of the load ratings of the 
tires on each axle, when the tires' load carrying capacity at the 
recommended tire cold inflation pressure is reduced by dividing by 1.10, 
must be appropriate for the GAWR).

                                * * * * *

    S5.3 Each vehicle shall show the information specified in S5.3.1 and 
S5.3.2 and, in the case of a vehicle equipped with a non-pneumatic spare 
tire, the information specified in S5.3.3, in the English language, 
lettered in block capitals and numerals not less than 2.4 millimeters 
high and in the format set forth following this paragraph. This 
information shall appear either--
    (a) After each GAWR listed on the certification label required by 
Sec. 567.4 or Sec. 567.5 of this chapter; or at the option of the 
manufacturer,
    (b) On the tire information label affixed to the vehicle in the 
manner, location, and form described in Sec. 567.4 (b) through (f) of 
this chapter as appropriate of each GVWR-GAWR combination listed on the 
certification label.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 571.121  Standard No. 121; Air brake systems.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes performance and equipment 
requirements for braking systems on vehicles equipped with air brake 
systems.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to insure safe braking 
performance under normal and emergency conditions.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to trucks, buses, and 
trailers equipped with air brake systems. However, it does not apply to:
    (a) Any trailer that has a width of more than 102.36 inches with 
extendable equipment in the fully retracted position and is equipped 
with two short track axles in a line across the width of the trailer.
    (b) Any vehicle equipped with an axle that has a gross axle weight 
rating (GAWR) of 29,000 pounds or more;
    (c) Any truck or bus that has a speed attainable in 2 miles of not 
more than 33 mph;
    (d) Any truck that has a speed attainable in 2 miles of not more 
than 45 mph, an unloaded vehicle weight that is not less than 95 percent 
of its gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR), and no capacity to carry 
occupants other than the driver and operating crew;
    (e) Any trailer that has a GVWR of more than 120,000 pounds and 
whose body conforms to that described in the definition of heavy hauler 
trailer set forth in S4;
    (f) Any trailer that has an unloaded vehicle weight which is not 
less than 95 percent of its GVWR; and
    (g) Any load divider dolly.
    S4. Definitions.
    Agricultural commodity trailer means a trailer that is designed to 
transport bulk agricultural commodities in off-road harvesting sites and 
to a processing plant or storage location, as evidenced by skeletal 
construction that accommodates harvest containers, a maximum length of 
28 feet, and an arrangement of air control lines and reservoirs that 
minimizes damage in field operations.
    Air brake system means a system that uses air as a medium for 
transmitting pressure or force from the driver control to the service 
brake, including an air-over-hydraulic brake subsystem,

[[Page 389]]

but does not include a system that uses compressed air or vacuum only to 
assist the driver in applying muscular force to hydraulic or mechanical 
components.
    Air-over-hydraulic brake subsystem means a subsystem of the air 
brake system that uses compressed air to transmit a force from the 
driver control to a hydraulic brake system to actuate the service 
brakes.
    Antilock brake system or ABS means a portion of a service brake 
system that automatically controls the degree of rotational wheel slip 
during braking by:
    (1) Sensing the rate of angular rotation of the wheels;
    (2) Transmitting signals regarding the rate of wheel angular 
rotation to one or more controlling devices which interpret those 
signals and generate responsive controlling output signals; and
    (3) Transmitting those controlling signals to one or more modulators 
which adjust brake actuating forces in response to those signals.
    Auto transporter means a truck and a trailer designed for use in 
combination to transport motor vehicles, in that the towing vehicle is 
designed to carry cargo at a location other than the fifth wheel and to 
load this cargo only by means of the towed vehicle.
    Common diaphragm means a single brake chamber diaphragm which is a 
component of the parking, emergency, and service brake systems.
    Container chassis trailer means a semitrailer of skeleton 
construction limited to a bottom frame, one or more axles, specially 
built and fitted with locking devices for the transport of intermodal 
shipping containers, so that when the chassis and container are 
assembled, the units serve the same function as an over the road 
trailer.
    Directly controlled wheel means a wheel for which the degree of 
rotational wheel slip is sensed, either at that wheel or on the axle 
shaft for that wheel and corresponding signals are transmitted to one or 
more modulators that adjust the brake actuating forces at that wheel. 
Each modulator may also adjust the brake actuating forces at other 
wheels that are on the same axle or in the same axle set in response to 
the same signal or signals.
    Effective projected luminous lens area means that area of the 
projection on a plane perpendicular to the lamp axis of that portion of 
the light-emitting surface that directs light to the photometric test 
pattern, and does not include mounting hole bosses, reflex reflector 
area, beads or rims that may glow or produce small areas of increased 
intensity as a result of uncontrolled light from small areas (\1/2\ 
degree radius around the test point).
    Full-treadle brake application means a brake application in which 
the treadle valve pressure in any of the valve's output circuits reaches 
85 pounds per square inch (psi) within 0.2 seconds after the application 
is initiated, or in which maximum treadle travel is achieved within 0.2 
seconds after the application is initiated.
    Heavy hauler trailer means a trailer which has one or more of the 
following characteristics, but which is not a container chassis trailer:
    (1) Its brake lines are designed to adapt to separation or extension 
of the vehicle frame; or
    (2) Its body consists only of a platform whose primary cargo-
carrying surface is not more than 40 inches above the ground in an 
unloaded condition, except that it may include sides that are designed 
to be easily removable and a permanent ``front end structure'' as that 
term is used in Sec. 393.106 of this title.
    Independently controlled wheel means a directly controlled wheel for 
which the modulator does not adjust the brake actuating forces at any 
other wheel on the same axle.
    Indirectly controlled wheel means a wheel at which the degree of 
rotational wheel slip is not sensed, but at which the modulator of an 
antilock braking system adjusts its brake actuating forces in response 
to signals from one or more sensed wheel(s).
    Initial brake temperature means the average temperature of the 
service brakes on the hottest axle of the vehicle 0.2 mile before any 
brake application in the case of road tests, or 18 seconds before any 
brake application in the case of dynamometer testing.

[[Page 390]]

    Intermodal shipping container means a reusable, transportable 
enclosure that is especially designed with integral locking devices for 
securing the container to the trailer to facilitate the efficient and 
bulk shipping and transfer of goods by, or between various modes of 
transport, such as highway, rail, sea and air.
    Load divider dolly means a trailer composed of a trailer chassis and 
one or more axles, with no solid bed, body, or container attached, and 
which is designed exclusively to support a portion of the load on a 
trailer or truck excluded from all the requirements of this standard.
    Maximum drive-through speed means the highest possible constant 
speed at which the vehicle can be driven through 200 feet of a 500-foot 
radius curve arc without leaving the 12-foot lane.
    Maximum treadle travel means the distance that the treadle moves 
from its position when no force is applied to its position when the 
treadle reaches a full stop.
    Peak friction coefficient or PFC means the ratio of the maximum 
value of braking test wheel longitudinal force to the simultaneous 
vertical force occurring prior to wheel lockup, as the braking torque is 
progressively increased.
    Pulpwood trailer means a trailer that is designed exclusively for 
harvesting logs or pulpwood and constructed with a skeletal frame with 
no means for attachment of a solid bed, body, or container, and with an 
arrangement of air control lines and reservoirs designed to minimize 
damage in off-road operations.
    Tandem axle means a group or set of two or more axles placed in a 
close arrangement, one behind the other, with the centerlines of 
adjacent axles not more than 72 inches apart.
    Straddle trailer means a trailer that is designed to transport bulk 
agricultural commodities from the harvesting location as evidenced by a 
framework that is driven over the cargo and lifting arms that suspend 
the cargo for transit.
    Wheel lockup means 100 percent wheel slip.
    S5. Requirements. Each vehicle shall meet the following requirements 
under the conditions specified in S6.
    S5.1 Required equipment for trucks and buses. Each truck and bus 
shall have the following equipment:
    S5.1.1 Air compressor. An air compressor of sufficient capacity to 
increase air pressure in the supply and service reservoirs from 85 psi 
to 100 psi when the engine is operating at the vehicle manufacturer's 
maximum recommended r.p.m. within a time, in seconds, determined by the 
quotient (Actual reservoir capacityx25)/Required reservoir capacity.
    S5.1.1.1 Air compressor cut-in pressure. The air compressor governor 
cut-in pressure for each bus shall be 85 p.s.i. or greater. The air 
compressor governor cut-in pressure for each truck shall be 100 p.s.i. 
or greater.
    S5.1.2 Reservoirs. One or more service reservoir systems, from which 
air is delivered to the brake chambers, and either an automatic 
condensate drain valve for each service reservoir or a supply reservoir 
between the service reservoir system and the source of air pressure.
    S5.1.2.1 The combined volume of all service reservoirs and supply 
reservoirs shall be at least 12 times the combined volume of all service 
brake chambers. For each brake chamber type having a full stroke at 
least as great as the first number in Column 1 of Table V, but no more 
than the second number in Column 1 of Table V, the volume of each brake 
chamber for purposes of calculating the required combined service and 
supply reservoir volume shall be either that specified in Column 2 of 
Table V or the actual volume of the brake chamber at maximum travel of 
the brake piston or pushrod, whichever is lower. The volume of a brake 
chamber not listed in Table V is the volume of the brake chamber at 
maximum travel of the brake piston or pushrod. The reservoirs of the 
truck portion of an auto transporter need not meet this requirement for 
reservoir volume.
    S5.1.2.2 Each reservoir shall be capable of withstanding an internal 
hydrostatic pressure of five times the compressor cutout pressure or 500 
psi, whichever is greater, for 10 minutes.

[[Page 391]]

    S5.1.2.3 Each service reservoir system shall be protected against 
loss of air pressure due to failure or leakage in the system between the 
service reservoir and the source of air pressure, by check valves or 
equivalent devices whose proper functioning can be checked without 
disconnecting any air line or fitting.
    S5.1.2.4 Each reservoir shall have a condensate drain valve that can 
be manually operated.
    S5.1.3 Towing vehicle protection system. If the vehicle is intended 
to tow another vehicle equipped with air brakes, a system to protect the 
air pressure in the towing vehicle from the effects of a loss of air 
pressure in the towed vehicle.
    S5.1.4 Pressure gauge. A pressure gauge in each service brake 
system, readily visible to a person seated in the normal driving 
position, that indicates the service reservoir system air pressure. The 
accuracy of the gauge shall be within plus or minus 7 percent of the 
compressor cut-out pressure.
    S5.1.5 Warning signal. A signal, other than a pressure gauge, that 
gives a continuous warning to a person in the normal driving position 
when the ignition is in the ``on'' (``run'') position and the air 
pressure in the service reservoir system is below 60 psi. The signal 
shall be either visible within the driver's forward field of view, or 
both audible and visible.
    S5.1.6 Antilock brake system.
    S5.1.6.1(a) Each single-unit vehicle manufactured on or after March 
1, 1998, shall be equipped with an antilock brake system that directly 
controls the wheels of at least one front axle and the wheels of at 
least one rear axle of the vehicle. Wheels on other axles of the vehicle 
may be indirectly controlled by the antilock brake system.
    (b) Each truck tractor manufactured on or after March 1, 1997, shall 
be equipped with an antilock brake system that directly controls the 
wheels of at least one front axle and the wheels of at least one rear 
axle of the vehicle, with the wheels of at least one axle being 
independently controlled. Wheels on other axles of the vehicle may be 
indirectly controlled by the antilock brake system. A truck tractor 
shall have no more than three wheels controlled by one modulator.
    S5.1.6.2 Antilock malfunction signal and circuit.
    (a) Each truck tractor manufactured on or after March 1, 1997, and 
each single unit vehicle manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, shall 
be equipped with an indicator lamp, mounted in front of and in clear 
view of the driver, which is activated whenever there is a malfunction 
that affects the generation or transmission of response or control 
signals in the vehicle's antilock brake system. The indicator lamp shall 
remain activated as long as such a malfunction exists, whenever the 
ignition (start) switch is in the ``on'' (``run'') position, whether or 
not the engine is running. Each message about the existence of such a 
malfunction shall be stored in the antilock brake system after the 
ignition switch is turned to the ``off'' position and automatically 
reactivated when the ignition switch is again turned to the ``on'' 
(``run'') position. The indicator lamp shall also be activated as a 
check of lamp function whenever the ignition is turned to the ``on'' 
(``run'') position. The indicator lamp shall be deactivated at the end 
of the check of lamp function unless there is a malfunction or a message 
about a malfunction that existed when the key switch was last turned to 
the ``off'' position.
    (b) Each truck tractor manufactured on or after March 1, 2001, and 
each single unit vehicle manufactured on or after March 1, 2001, that is 
equipped to tow another air-braked vehicle, shall be equipped with an 
electrical circuit that is capable of transmitting a malfunction signal 
from the antilock brake system(s) on one or more towed vehicle(s) (e.g., 
trailer(s) and dolly(ies)) to the trailer ABS malfunction lamp in the 
cab of the towing vehicle, and shall have the means for connection of 
this electrical circuit to the towed vehicle. Each such truck tractor 
and single unit vehicle shall also be equipped with an indicator lamp, 
separate from the lamp required in S5.1.6.2(a), mounted in front of and 
in clear view of the driver, which is activated whenever the malfunction 
signal circuit described above receives a signal indicating an ABS

[[Page 392]]

malfunction on one or more towed vehicle(s). The indicator lamp shall 
remain activated as long as an ABS malfunction signal from one or more 
towed vehicle(s) is present, whenever the ignition (start) switch is in 
the ``on'' (``run'') position, whether or not the engine is running. The 
indicator lamp shall also be activated as a check of lamp function 
whenever the ignition is turned to the ``on'' (``run'') position. The 
indicator lamp shall be deactivated at the end of the check of lamp 
function unless a trailer ABS malfunction signal is present.
    (c) [Reserved]
    S5.1.6.3 Antilock power circuit for towed vehicles. Each truck 
tractor manufactured on or after March 1, 1997, and each single unit 
vehicle manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, that is equipped to tow 
another air-braked vehicle shall be equipped with one or more electrical 
circuits that provide continuous power to the antilock system on the 
towed vehicle or vehicles whenever the ignition (start) switch is in the 
``on'' (``run'') position. Such a circuit shall be adequate to enable 
the antilock system on each towed vehicle to be fully operable.
    S5.1.7 Service brake stop lamp switch. A switch that lights the stop 
lamps when the service brake control is statically depressed to a point 
that produces a pressure of 6 psi or less in the service brake chambers.
    S5.1.8 Brake distribution and automatic adjustment. Each vehicle 
shall be equipped with a service brake system acting on all wheels.
    (a) Brake adjuster. Wear of the service brakes shall be compensated 
for by means of a system of automatic adjustment. When inspected 
pursuant to S5.9, the adjustment of the service brakes shall be within 
the limits recommended by the vehicle manufacturer.
    (b) Brake indicator. For each brake equipped with an external 
automatic adjustment mechanism and having an exposed pushrod, the 
condition of service brake under-adjustment shall be displayed by a 
brake adjustment indicator that is discernible when viewed with 20/40 
vision from a location adjacent to or underneath the vehicle, when 
inspected pursuant to S5.9.
    S5.2 Required equipment for trailers. Each trailer shall have the 
following equipment:
    S5.2.1 Reservoirs. One or more reservoirs to which the air is 
delivered from the towing vehicle.
    S5.2.1.1 The total volume of each service reservoir shall be at 
least eight times the combined volume of all service brake chambers 
serviced by that reservoir. For each brake chamber type having a full 
stroke at least as great as the first number in Column 1 of Table V, but 
no more than the second number in column 1, the volume of each brake 
chamber for purposes of calculating the required total service reservoir 
volume shall be either the number specified in Column 2 of Table V or 
the actual volume of the brake chamber at maximum travel of the brake 
piston or pushrod, whichever is lower. The volume of a brake chamber not 
listed in Table V is the volume of the brake chamber at maximum travel 
of the brake piston or pushrod. The reservoirs on a heavy hauler trailer 
and the trailer portion of an auto transporter need not meet this 
requirement for reservoir volume.
    S5.2.1.2 Each reservoir shall be capable of withstanding an internal 
hydrostatic pressure of 500 psi for 10 minutes.
    S5.2.1.3 Each reservoir shall have a condensate drain valve that can 
be manually operated.
    S5.2.1.4 Each service reservoir shall be protected against loss of 
air pressure due to failure or leakage in the system between the service 
reservoir and its source of air pressure by check valves or equivalent 
devices.
    S5.2.2 Brake distribution and automatic adjustment. Each vehicle 
shall be equipped with a service brake system acting on all wheels.
    (a) Brake adjuster. Wear of the service brakes shall be compensated 
for by means of a system of automatic adjustment. When inspected 
pursuant to S5.9, the adjustment of the service brakes shall be within 
the limits recommended by the vehicle manufacturer.
    (b) Brake indicator. For each brake equipped with an external 
automatic adjustment mechanism and having an exposed pushrod, the 
condition of service brake under-adjustment shall be

[[Page 393]]

displayed by a brake adjustment indicator in a manner that is 
discernible when viewed with 20/40 vision from a location adjacent to or 
underneath the vehicle, when inspected pursuant to S5.9.
    S5.2.3 Antilock brake system.
    S5.2.3.1(a) Each semitrailer (including a trailer converter dolly) 
manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, shall be equipped with an 
antilock brake system that directly controls the wheels of at least one 
axle of the vehicle. Wheels on other axles of the vehicle may be 
indirectly controlled by the antilock brake system.
    (b) Each full trailer manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, shall 
be equipped with an antilock brake system that directly controls the 
wheels of at least one front axle of the vehicle and at least one rear 
axle of the vehicle. Wheels on other axles of the vehicle may be 
indirectly controlled by the antilock brake system.
    S5.2.3.2 Antilock malfunction signal. Each trailer (including a 
trailer converter dolly) manufactured on or after March 1, 2001, that is 
equipped with an antilock brake system shall be equipped with an 
electrical circuit that is capable of signaling a malfunction in the 
trailer's antilock brake system, and shall have the means for connection 
of this antilock brake system malfunction signal circuit to the towing 
vehicle. The electrical circuit need not be separate or dedicated 
exclusively to this malfunction signaling function. The signal shall be 
present whenever there is a malfunction that affects the generation or 
transmission of response or control signals in the trailer's antilock 
brake system. The signal shall remain present as long as the malfunction 
exists, whenever power is supplied to the antilock brake system. Each 
message about the existence of such a malfunction shall be stored in the 
antilock brake system whenever power is no longer supplied to the 
system, and the malfunction signal shall be automatically reactivated 
whenever power is again supplied to the trailer's antilock brake system. 
In addition, each trailer manufactured on or after March 1, 2001, that 
is designed to tow other air-brake equipped trailers shall be capable of 
transmitting a malfunction signal from the antilock brake systems of 
additional trailers it tows to the vehicle towing it.
    S5.2.3.3 Antilock malfunction indicator.
    (a) In addition to the requirements of S5.2.3.2, each trailer and 
trailer converter dolly manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, and 
before March 1, 2009, shall be equipped with an external antilock 
malfunction indicator lamp that meets the requirements of S5.2.3.3 (b) 
through (d).
    (b)(1) The lamp shall be designed to conform to the performance 
requirements of Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Recommended 
Practice J592 JUN92, or J592e, July 1972, Clearance, Side Marker, and 
Identification Lamps, for combination, clearance, and side marker lamps, 
which are marked with a ``PC'' or ``P2'' on the lens or housing, in 
accordance with SAE J759 Jan 95, Lighting Identification Code. SAE J592 
June 92, SAE J592e July 1972, and SAE J759 January 1995, are 
incorporated by reference and thereby are made part of this standard. 
The Director of the Federal Register approved the material incorporated 
by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. 
Copies of the material may be inspected at NHTSA's Docket Section, 400 
Seventh Street, SW., room 5109, Washington, DC, or at the National 
Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For information on the 
availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: 
http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--federal--
regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    (2) The color of the lamp shall be yellow.
    (3) The letters ``ABS'' shall be permanently molded, stamped, or 
otherwise marked or labeled in letters not less than 10 mm (0.4 inches) 
high on the lamp lens or its housing to identify the function of the 
lamp. Alternatively, the letters ``ABS'' may be painted on the trailer 
body or dolly or a plaque with the letters ``ABS'' may be affixed to the 
trailer body or converter dolly; the letters ``ABS'' shall be not less 
than 25 mm (1 inch) high. A portion of one of the letters in the 
alternative identification shall be not more than 150 mm

[[Page 394]]

(5.9 inches) from the edge of the lamp lens.
    (c) Location requirements. (1) Each trailer that is not a trailer 
converter dolly shall be equipped with a lamp mounted on a permanent 
structure on the left side of the trailer as viewed from the rear, no 
closer than 150 mm (5.9 inches), and no farther than 600 mm (23.6 
inches) from the red rear side marker lamp, when measured between the 
closest edge of the effective projected luminous lens area of each lamp.
    (2) Each trailer converter dolly shall be equipped with a lamp 
mounted on a permanent structure of the dolly so that the lamp is not 
less than 375 mm (14.8 inches) above the road surface when measured from 
the center of the lamp with the dolly at curb weight. When a person, 
standing 3 meters (9.8 feet) from the lamp, views the lamp from a 
perspective perpendicular to the vehicle's centerline, no portion of the 
lamp shall be obscured by any structure on the dolly.
    (3) Each trailer that is not a trailer converter dolly and on which 
the malfunction indicator lamp cannot be placed within the location 
specified in S5.2.3.3(c)(1) shall be equipped with a lamp mounted on a 
permanent structure on the left side of the trailer as viewed from the 
rear, near the red rear side marker lamp or on the front face of the 
left rear fender of a trailer equipped with fenders.
    (d) The lamp shall be illuminated whenever power is supplied to the 
antilock brake system and there is a malfunction that affects the 
generation or transmission of response or control signals in the 
trailer's antilock brake system. The lamp shall remain illuminated as 
long as such a malfunction exists and power is supplied to the antilock 
brake system. Each message about the existence of such a malfunction 
shall be stored in the antilock brake system whenever power is no longer 
supplied to the system. The lamp shall be automatically reactivated when 
power is again supplied to the trailer's antilock brake system. The lamp 
shall also be activated as a check of lamp function whenever power is 
first supplied to the antilock brake system and the vehicle is 
stationary. The lamp shall be deactivated at the end of the check of 
lamp function, unless there is a malfunction or a message about a 
malfunction that existed when power was last supplied to the antilock 
brake system.
    S5.3 Service brakes--road tests. The service brake system on each 
truck tractor shall, under the conditions of S6, meet the requirements 
of S5.3.1, S5.3.3, S5.3.4, and S5.3.6, when tested without adjustments 
other than those specified in this standard. The service brake system on 
each bus and truck (other than a truck tractor shall) manufactured 
before July 1, 2005 and each bus and truck (other than a truck tractor) 
manufactured in two or more stages shall, under the conditions of S6, 
meet the requirements of S5.3.1, S5.3.3, and S5.3.4 when tested without 
adjustments other than those specified in this standard. The service 
brake system on each bus and truck (other than a truck tractor) 
manufactured on or after July 1, 2005 and each bus and truck (other than 
a truck tractor) manufactured in two or more stages on or after July 1, 
2006 shall, under the conditions of S6, meet the requirements of S5.3.1, 
S5.3.3, S5.3.4, and S5.3.6, when tested without adjustments other than 
those specified in this standard. The service brake system on each 
trailer shall, under the conditions of S6, meet the requirements of 
S5.3.3, S5.3.4, and S5.3.5 when tested without adjustments other than 
those specified in this standard. However, a heavy hauler trailer and 
the truck and trailer portions of an auto transporter need not met the 
requirements of S5.3.
    S5.3.1 Stopping distance--trucks and buses. When stopped six times 
for each combination of vehicle type, weight, and speed specified in 
S5.3.1.1, in the sequence specified in Table I, each truck tractor 
manufactured on or after March 1, 1997, and each single unit vehicle 
manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, shall stop at least once in not 
more than the distance specified in Table II, measured from the point at 
which movement of the service brake control begins, without any part of 
the vehicle leaving the roadway, and with wheel lockup permitted only as 
follows:

[[Page 395]]

    (a) At vehicle speeds above 20 mph, any wheel on a nonsteerable axle 
other than the two rearmost nonliftable, nonsteerable axles may lock up, 
for any duration. The wheels on the two rearmost nonliftable, 
nonsteerable axles may lock up according to S5.3.1(b).
    (b) At vehicle speeds above 20 mph, one wheel on any axle or two 
wheels on any tandem may lock up for any duration.
    (c) At vehicle speeds above 20 mph, any wheel not permitted to lock 
in S5.3.1 (a) or (b) may lock up repeatedly, with each lockup occurring 
for a duration of one second or less.
    (d) At vehicle speeds of 20 mph or less, any wheel may lock up for 
any duration.
    S5.3.1.1 Stop the vehicle from 60 mph on a surface with a peak 
friction coefficient of 0.9 with the vehicle loaded as follows:
    (a) Loaded to its GVWR so that the load on each axle, measured at 
the tire-ground interface, is most nearly proportional to the axles' 
respective GAWRs, without exceeding the GAWR of any axle.
    (b) In the truck tractor only configuration plus up to 500 lbs. or, 
at the manufacturer's option, at its unloaded weight plus up to 500 lbs. 
(including driver and instrumentation) and plus not more than an 
additional 1,000 lbs. for a roll bar structure on the vehicle, and
    (c) At its unloaded vehicle weight (except for truck tractors) plus 
up to 500 lbs. (including driver and instrumentation) or, at the 
manufacturer's option, at its unloaded weight plus up to 500 lbs. 
(including driver and instrumentation) plus not more than an additional 
1,000 lbs. for a roll bar structure on the vehicle. If the speed 
attainable in two miles is less than 60 mph, the vehicle shall stop from 
a speed in Table II that is four to eight mph less than the speed 
attainable in two miles.
    S5.3.2 [Reserved]
    S5.3.3 Brake actuation time. Each service brake system shall meet 
the requirements of S5.3.3.1 (a) and (b).
    S5.3.3.1(a) With an initial service reservoir system air pressure of 
100 psi, the air pressure in each brake chamber shall, when measured 
from the first movement of the service brake control, reach 60 psi in 
not more than 0.45 second in the case of trucks and buses, 0.50 second 
in the case of trailers, other than trailer converter dollies, designed 
to tow another vehicle equipped with air brakes, 0.55 second in the case 
of trailer converter dollies, and 0.60 second in the case of trailers 
other than trailers designed to tow another vehicle equipped with air 
brakes. A vehicle designed to tow another vehicle equipped with air 
brakes shall meet the above actuation time requirement with a 50-cubic-
inch test reservoir connected to the control line output coupling. A 
trailer, including a trailer converter dolly, shall meet the above 
actuation time requirement with its control line input coupling 
connected to the test rig shown in Figure 1.
    (b) For a vehicle that is designed to tow another vehicle equipped 
with air brakes, the pressure in the 50-cubic-inch test reservoir 
referred to in S5.3.3.1(a) shall, when measured from the first movement 
of the service brake control, reach 60 psi not later than the time the 
fastest brake chamber on the vehicle reaches 60 psi or, at the option of 
the manufacturer, in not more than 0.35 second in the case of trucks and 
buses, 0.55 second in the case of trailer converter dollies, and 0.50 
second in the case of trailers other than trailer converter dollies.
    S5.3.4 Brake release time. Each service brake system shall meet the 
requirements of S5.3.4.1 (a) and (b).
    S5.3.4.1(a) With an initial service brake chamber air pressure of 95 
psi, the air pressure in each brake chamber shall, when measured from 
the first movement of the service brake control, fall to 5 psi in not 
more than 0.55 second in the case of trucks and buses; 1.00 second in 
the case of trailers, other than trailer converter dollies, designed to 
tow another vehicle equipped with air brakes; 1.10 seconds in the case 
of trailer converter dollies; and 1.20 seconds in the case of trailers 
other than trailers designed to tow another vehicle equipped with air 
brakes. A vehicle designated to tow another vehicle equipped with air 
brakes shall meet the above release time requirement with a 50-cubic-
inch test reservoir connected to the control line output coupling. A

[[Page 396]]

trailer, including a trailer converter dolly, shall meet the above 
release time requirement with its control line input coupling connected 
to the test rig shown in Figure 1.
    (b) For vehicles designed to tow another vehicle equipped with air 
brakes, the pressure in the 50-cubic-inch test reservoir referred to in 
S5.3.4.1(a) shall, when measured from the first movement of the service 
brake control, fall to 5 psi in not more than 0.75 seconds in the case 
of trucks and buses, 1.10 seconds in the case of trailer converter 
dollies, and 1.00 seconds in the case of trailers other than trailer 
converter dollies.
    S5.3.5 Control signal pressure differential--converter dollies and 
trailers designed to tow another vehicle equipped with air brakes.
    (a) For a trailer designed to tow another vehicle equipped with air 
brakes, the pressure differential between the control line input 
coupling and a 50-cubic-inch test reservoir attached to the control line 
output coupling shall not exceed the values specified in S5.3.5(a) (1), 
(2), and (3) under the conditions specified in S5.3.5(b) (1) through 
(4):
    (1) 1 psi at all input pressures equal to or greater than 5 psi, but 
not greater than 20 psi;
    (2) 2 psi at all input pressures equal to or greater than 20 psi but 
not greater than 40 psi; and
    (3) Not more than a 5-percent differential at any input pressure 
equal to or greater than 40 psi.
    (b) The requirements in S5.3.5(a) shall be met--
    (1) When the pressure at the input coupling is steady, increasing or 
decreasing;
    (2) When air is applied to or released from the control line input 
coupling using the trailer test rig shown in Figure 1;
    (3) With a fixed orifice consisting of a 0.0180 inch diameter hole 
(no. 77 drill bit) in a 0.032 inch thick disc installed in the control 
line between the trailer test rig coupling and the vehicle's control 
line input coupling; and
    (4) Operating the trailer test rig in the same manner and under the 
same conditions as it is operated during testing to measure brake 
actuation and release times, as specified in S5.3.3 and S5.3.4, except 
for the installation of the orifice in the control line to restrict 
airflow rate.
    S5.3.6 Stability and control during braking--trucks and buses. When 
stopped four consecutive times for each combination of weight, speed, 
and road conditions specified in S5.3.6.1 and S5.3.6.2, each truck 
tractor shall stop at least three times within the 12-foot lane, without 
any part of the vehicle leaving the roadway. When stopped four 
consecutive times for each combination of weight, speed, and road 
conditions specified in S5.3.6.1 and S5.3.6.2, each bus and truck (other 
than a truck tractor) manufactured on or after July 1, 2005, and each 
bus and truck (other than a truck tractor) manufactured in two or more 
stages on or after July 1, 2006, shall stop at least three times within 
the 12-foot lane, without any part of the vehicle leaving the roadway.
    S5.3.6.1 Using a full-treadle brake application for the duration of 
the stop, stop the vehicle from 30 mph or 75 percent of the maximum 
drive-through speed, whichever is less, on a 500-foot radius curved 
roadway with a wet level surface having a peak friction coefficient of 
0.5 when measured on a straight or curved section of the curved roadway 
using an American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) E1136 
standard reference tire, in accordance with ASTM Method E1337-90, at a 
speed of 40 mph, with water delivery.
    S5.3.6.2 Stop the vehicle, with the vehicle:
    (a) Loaded to its GVWR, for a truck tractor, and
    (b) At its unloaded weight plus up to 500 pounds (including driver 
and instrumentation), or at the manufacturer's option, at its unloaded 
weight plus up to 500 pounds (including driver and instrumentation) and 
plus not more than an additional 1000 pounds for a roll bar structure on 
the vehicle, for a truck, bus, or truck tractor.
    S5.4 Service brake system--dynamometer tests. When tested without 
prior road testing, under the conditions of S6.2, each brake assembly 
shall meet the requirements of S5.4.1, S5.4.2, and S5.4.3 when tested in 
sequence and without adjustments other than those

[[Page 397]]

specified in the standard. For purposes of the requirements of S5.4.2 
and S5.4.3, an average deceleration rate is the change in velocity 
divided by the deceleration time measured from the onset of 
deceleration.
    S5.4.1 Brake retardation force. The sum of the retardation forces 
exerted by the brakes on each vehicle designed to be towed by another 
vehicle equipped with air brakes shall be such that the quotient sum of 
the brake retardation forces / sum of GAWR's relative to brake chamber 
air pressure, and shall have values not less than those shown in Column 
1 of Table III. Retardation force shall be determined as follows:
    S5.4.1.1 After burnishing the brake pursuant to S6.2.6, retain the 
brake assembly on the inertia dynamometer. With an initial brake 
temperature between 125 [deg]F. and 200 [deg]F., conduct a stop from 50 
m.p.h., maintaining brake chamber air pressure at a constant 20 psi. 
Measure the average torque exerted by the brake from the time the 
specified air pressure is reached until the brake stops and divide by 
the static loaded tire radius specified by the tire manufacturer to 
determine the retardation force. Repeat the procedure six times, 
increasing the brake chamber air pressure by 10 psi each time. After 
each stop, rotate the brake drum or disc until the temperature of the 
brake falls to between 125 [deg]F. and 200 [deg]F.
    S5.4.2 Brake power. When mounted on an inertia dynamometer, each 
brake shall be capable of making 10 consecutive decelerations at an 
average rate of 9 f.p.s.p.s. from 50 m.p.h. to 15 m.p.h., at equal 
intervals of 72 seconds, and shall be capable of decelerating to a stop 
from 20 m.p.h. at an average deceleration rate of 14 f.p.s.p.s. 1 minute 
after the 10th deceleration. The series of decelerations shall be 
conducted as follows:
    S5.4.2.1 With an initial brake temperature between 150 [deg]F. and 
200 [deg]F. for the first brake application, and the drum or disc 
rotating at a speed equivalent to 50 m.p.h., apply the brake and 
decelerate at an average deceleration rate of 9 f.p.s.p.s. to 15 m.p.h. 
Upon reaching 15 m.p.h., accelerate to 50 m.p.h. and apply the brake for 
a second time 72 seconds after the start of the first application. 
Repeat the cycle until 10 decelerations have been made. The service line 
air pressure shall not exceed 100 psi during any deceleration.
    S5.4.2.2 One minute after the end of the last deceleration required 
by S5.4.2.1 and with the drum or disc rotating at a speed of 20 m.p.h., 
decelerate to a stop at an average deceleration rate of 14 f.p.s.p.s.
    S5.4.3 Brake recovery. Except as provided in S5.4.3(a) and (b), 
starting two minutes after completing the tests required by S5.4.2, a 
vehicle's brake shall be capable of making 20 consecutive stops from 30 
mph at an average deceleration rate of 12 f.p.s.p.s., at equal intervals 
of one minute measured from the start of each brake application. The 
service line air pressure needed to attain a rate of 12 f.p.s.p.s. shall 
be not more than 85 lb/in\2\, and not less than 20lb/in<SUP>2</SUP> for 
a brake not subject to the control of an antilock system, or 12 lb/
in<SUP>2</SUP> for a brake subject to the control of an antilock system.
    (a) Notwithstanding S5.4.3, neither front axle brake of a truck-
tractor is subject to the requirements set forth in S5.4.3.
    (b) Notwithstanding S5.4.3, neither front axle brake of a bus or a 
truck other than a truck-tractor is subject to the requirement set forth 
in S5.4.3 prohibiting the service line air pressure from being less than 
20 lb/in<SUP>2</SUP> for a brake not subject to the control of an 
antilock system or 12 lb/in<SUP>2</SUP> for a brake subject to the 
control of an antilock system.
    S5.5 Antilock system.
    S5.5.1 Antilock system malfunction. On a truck tractor manufactured 
on or after March 1, 1997, that is equipped with an antilock brake 
system and a single unit vehicle manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, 
that is equipped with an antilock brake system, a malfunction that 
affects the generation or transmission of response or control signals of 
any part of the antilock system shall not increase the actuation and 
release times of the service brakes.
    S5.5.2 Antilock system power--trailers. On a trailer (including a 
trailer converter dolly) manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, that is 
equipped with an antilock system that requires electrical power for 
operation, the power

[[Page 398]]

shall be obtained from the towing vehicle through one or more electrical 
circuits which provide continuous power whenever the powered vehicle's 
ignition (start) switch is in the ``on'' (``run'') position. The 
antilock system shall automatically receive power from the stoplamp 
circuit, if the primary circuit or circuits are not functioning. Each 
trailer (including a trailer converter dolly) manufactured on or after 
March 1, 1998, that is equipped to tow another air-braked vehicle shall 
be equipped with one or more circuits which provide continuous power to 
the antilock system on the vehicle(s) it tows. Such circuits shall be 
adequate to enable the antilock system on each towed vehicle to be fully 
operable.
    S5.6 Parking brakes.
    (a) Except as provided in S5.6(b) and S5.6(c), each vehicle other 
than a trailer converter dolly shall have a parking brake system that 
under the conditions of S6.1 meets the requirements of:
    (1) S5.6.1 or S5.6.2, at the manufacturer's option, and
    (2) S5.6.3, S5.6.4, S5.6.5, and S5.6.6.
    (b) At the option of the manufacturer, for vehicles equipped with 
brake systems which incorporate a common diaphragm, the performance 
requirements specified in S5.6(a) which must be met with any single 
leakage-type failure in a common diaphragm may instead be met with the 
level of leakage-type failure determined in S5.6.7. The election of this 
option does not affect the performance requirements specified in S5.6(a) 
which apply with single leakage-type failures other than failures in a 
common diaphragm.
    (c) At the option of the manufacturer, the trailer portion of any 
agricultural commodity trailer, heavy hauler trailer, or pulpwood 
trailer may meet the requirements of Sec. 393.43 of this title instead 
of the requirements of S5.6(a).
    S5.6.1 Static retardation force. With all other brakes made 
inoperative, during a static drawbar pull in a forward or rearward 
direction, the static retardation force produced by the application of 
the parking brakes shall be:
    (a) In the case of a vehicle other than a truck-tractor that is 
equipped with more than two axles, such that the quotient static 
retardation force/GAWR is not less than 0.28 for any axle other than a 
steerable front axle; and
    (b) In the case of a truck-tractor that is equipped with more than 
two axles, such that the quotient static retardation force/GVWR is not 
less than 0.14.
    S5.6.2 Grade holding. With all parking brakes applied, the vehicle 
shall remain stationary facing uphill and facing downhill on a smooth, 
dry portland cement concrete roadway with a 20-percent grade, both
    (a) When loaded to its GVWR, and
    (b) At its unloaded vehicle weight plus 1500 pounds (including 
driver and instrumentation and roll bar).
    S5.6.3 Application and holding. Each parking brake system shall meet 
the requirements of S5.6.3.1 through S5.6.3.4.
    S5.6.3.1 The parking brake system shall be capable of achieving the 
minimum performance specified either in S5.6.1 or S5.6.2 with any single 
leakage-type failure, in any other brake system, of a part designed to 
contain compressed air or brake fluid (excluding failure of a component 
of a brake chamber housing but including failure of any brake chamber 
diaphragm that is part of any other brake system including a diaphragm 
which is common to the parking brake system and any other brake system), 
when the pressures in the vehicle's parking brake chambers are at the 
levels determined in S5.6.3.4.
    S5.6.3.2 A mechanical means shall be provided that, after a parking 
brake application is made with the pressures in the vehicle's parking 
brake chambers at the levels determined in S5.6.3.4, and all air and 
fluid pressures in the vehicle's braking systems are then bled down to 
zero, and without using electrical power, holds the parking brake 
application with sufficient parking retardation force to meet the 
minimum performance specified in S5.6.3.1 and in either S5.6.1 or 
S5.6.2.
    S5.6.3.3 For trucks and buses, with an initial reservoir system 
pressure of 100 psi and, if designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air 
brakes, with a 50 cubic inch test reservoir connected to the supply line 
coupling, no later than three seconds from the time of actuation of the 
parking brake control, the mechanical means referred to in

[[Page 399]]

S5.6.3.2 shall be actuated. For trailers, with the supply line initially 
pressurized to 100 psi using the supply line portion of the trailer test 
rig (Figure 1) and, if designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air 
brakes, with a 50 cubic inch test reservoir connected to the rear supply 
line coupling, no later than three seconds from the time venting to the 
atmosphere of the front supply line coupling is initiated, the 
mechanical means referred to in S5.6.3.2 shall be actuated. This 
requirement shall be met for trucks, buses and trailers both with and 
without any single leakage-type failure, in any other brake system, of a 
part designed to contain compressed air or brake fluid (consistent with 
the parenthetical phrase specified in S5.6.3.1).
    S5.6.3.4 The parking brake chamber pressures for S5.6.3.1 and 
S5.6.3.2 are determined as follows. For trucks and buses, with an 
initial reservoir system pressure of 100 psi and, if designed to tow a 
vehicle equipped with air brakes, with a 50 cubic inch test reservoir 
connected to the supply line coupling, any single leakage type failure, 
in any other brake system, of a part designed to contain compressed air 
or brake fluid (consistent with the parenthetical phrase specified in 
S5.6.3.1), is introduced in the brake system. The parking brake control 
is actuated and the pressures in the vehicle's parking brake chambers 
are measured three seconds after that actuation is initiated. For 
trailers, with the supply line initially pressurized to 100 psi using 
the supply line portion of the trailer test rig (Figure 1) and, if 
designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air brakes, with a 50 cubic inch 
test reservoir connected to the rear supply line coupling, any single 
leakage type failure, in any other brake system, of a part designed to 
contain compressed air or brake fluid (consistent with the parenthetical 
phrase specified in S5.6.3.1), is introduced in the brake system. The 
front supply line coupling is vented to the atmosphere and the pressures 
in the vehicle's parking brake chambers are measured three seconds after 
that venting is initiated.
    S5.6.4 Parking brake control--trucks and buses. The parking brake 
control shall be separate from the service brake control. It shall be 
operable by a person seated in the normal driving position. The control 
shall be identified in a manner that specifies the method of control 
operation. The parking brake control shall control the parking brakes of 
the vehicle and of any air braked vehicle that it is designed to tow.
    S5.6.5 Release Performance. Each parking brake system shall meet the 
requirements specified in S5.6.5.1 through S5.6.5.4.
    S5.6.5.1 For trucks and buses, with initial conditions as specified 
in S5.6.5.2, at all times after an application actuation of the parking 
brake control, and with any subsequent level of pressure, or combination 
of levels of pressure, in the reservoirs of any of the vehicle's brake 
systems, no reduction in parking brake retardation force shall result 
from a release actuation of the parking brake control unless the parking 
brakes are capable, after such release, of being reapplied at a level 
meeting the minimum performance specified either in S5.6.1 or S5.6.2. 
This requirement shall be met both with and without the engine on, and 
with and without single leakage-type failure, in any other brake system, 
of a part designed to contain compressed air or brake fluid (consistent 
with the parenthetical phrase specified in S5.6.3.1).
    S5.6.5.2 The initial conditions for S5.6.5.1 are as follows: The 
reservoir system pressure is 100 psi. If the vehicle is designed to tow 
a vehicle equipped with air brakes, a 50 cubic inch test reservoir is 
connected to the supply line coupling.
    S5.6.5.3 For trailers, with initial conditions as specified in 
S5.6.5.4, at all times after actuation of the parking brakes by venting 
the front supply line coupling to the atmosphere, and with any 
subsequent level of pressure, or combination of levels of pressure, in 
the reservoirs of any of the vehicle's brake systems, the parking brakes 
shall not be releasable by repressurizing the supply line using the 
supply line portion of the trailer test rig (Figure 1) to any pressure 
above 70 psi, unless the parking brakes are capable, after such release, 
of reapplication by subsequent venting of the front supply

[[Page 400]]

line coupling to the atmosphere, at a level meeting the minimum 
performance specified either in S5.6.1 or S5.6.2. This requirement shall 
be met both with and without any single leakage-type failure, in any 
other brake system, of a part designed to contain compressed air or 
brake fluid (consistent with the parenthetical phrase specified in 
S5.6.3.1).
    S5.6.5.4 The initial conditions for S5.6.5.3 are as follows: The 
reservoir system and supply line are pressurized to 100 psi, using the 
supply line portion of the trailer test rig (Figure 1). If the vehicle 
is designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air brakes, a 50 cubic inch 
test reservoir is connected to the rear supply line coupling.
    S5.6.6 Accumulation of actuation energy. Each parking brake system 
shall meet the requirements specified in S5.6.6.1 through S5.6.6.6.
    S5.6.6.1 For trucks and buses, with initial conditions as specified 
in S5.6.6.2, the parking brake system shall be capable of meeting the 
minimum performance specified either in S5.6.1 or S5.6.2, with any 
single leakage-type failure, in any other brake system, of a part 
designed to contain compressed air or brake fluid (consistent with the 
parenthetical phrase specified in S5.6.3.1) at the conclusion of the 
test sequence specified in S5.6.6.3.
    S5.6.6.2 The initial conditions for S5.6.6.1 are as follows: The 
engine is on. The reservoir system pressure is 100 psi. If the vehicle 
is designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air brakes, a 50 cubic inch 
test reservoir is connected to the supply line coupling.
    S5.6.6.3 The test sequence for S5.6.6.1 is as follows: The engine is 
turned off. Any single leakage type failure, in any other brake system, 
of a part designed to contain compressed air or brake fluid (consistent 
with the parenthetical phrase specified in S5.6.3.1), is then introduced 
in the brake system. An application actuation of the parking brake 
control is then made. Thirty seconds after such actuation, a release 
actuation of the parking brake control is made. Thirty seconds after the 
release actuation, a final application actuation of the parking brake 
control is made.
    S5.6.6.4 For trailers, with initial conditions as specified in 
S5.6.6.5, the parking brake system shall be capable of meeting the 
minimum performance specified either in S5.6.1 or S5.6.2, with any 
single leakage-type failure, in any other brake system, of a part 
designed to contain compressed air or brake fluid (consistent with the 
parenthetical phrase specified in S5.6.3.1), at the conclusion of the 
test sequence specified in S5.6.6.6.
    S5.6.6.5 The initial conditions for S5.6.6.4 are as follows: The 
reservoir system and supply line are pressurized to 100 psi, using the 
supply line portion of the trailer test rig (Figure 1). If the vehicle 
is designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air brakes, a 50 cubic inch 
test reservoir is connected to the rear supply line coupling.
    S5.6.6.6 The test sequence for S5.6.6.4 is as follows. Any single 
leakage type failure, in any other brake system, of a part designed to 
contain compressed air or brake fluid (consistent with the parenthetical 
phrase specified in S5.6.3.1), is introduced in the brake system. The 
front supply line coupling is vented to the atmosphere. Thirty seconds 
after the initiation of such venting, the supply line is repressurized 
with the trailer test rig (Figure 1). Thirty seconds after the 
initiation of such repressurizing of the supply line, the front supply 
line is vented to the atmosphere. This procedure is conducted either by 
connection and disconnection of the supply line coupling or by use of a 
valve installed in the supply line portion of the trailer test rig near 
the supply line coupling.
    S5.6.7 Maximum level of common diaphragm leakage-type failure/ 
Equivalent level of leakage from the air chamber containing that 
diaphragm. In the case of vehicles for which the option in S5.6(b) has 
been elected, determine the maximum level of common diaphragm leakage-
type failure (or equivalent level of leakage from the air chamber 
containing that diaphragm) according to the procedures set forth in 
S5.6.7.1 through S5.6.7.2.3.
    S5.6.7.1 Trucks and buses.
    S5.6.7.1.1 According to the following procedure, determine the 
threshold level of common diaphragm leakage-type failure (or equivalent 
level of

[[Page 401]]

leakage from the air chamber containing that diaphragm) at which the 
vehicle's parking brakes become unreleasable. With an initial reservoir 
system pressure of 100 psi, the engine turned off, no application of any 
of the vehicle's brakes, and, if the vehicle is designed to tow a 
vehicle equipped with air brakes, a 50 cubic inch test reservoir 
connected to the supply line coupling, introduce a leakage-type failure 
of the common diaphragm (or equivalent leakage from the air chamber 
containing that diaphragm). Apply the parking brakes by making an 
application actuation of the parking brake control. Reduce the pressures 
in all of the vehicle's reservoirs to zero, turn on the engine and allow 
it to idle, and allow the pressures in the vehicle's reservoirs to rise 
until they stabilize or until the compressor shut-off point is reached. 
At that time, make a release actuation of the parking brake control, and 
determine whether all of the mechanical means referred to in S5.6.3.2 
continue to be actuated and hold the parking brake applications with 
sufficient parking retardation force to meet the minimum performance 
specified in either S5.6.1 or S5.6.2. Repeat this procedure with 
progressively decreasing or increasing levels (whichever is applicable) 
of leakage-type diaphragm failures or equivalent leakages, to determine 
the minimum level of common diaphragm leakage-type failure (or 
equivalent level of leakage from the air chamber containing that 
diaphragm) at which all of the mechanical means referred to in S5.6.3.2 
continue to be actuated and hold the parking brake applications with 
sufficient parking retardation forces to meet the minimum performance 
specified in either S5.6.1 or S5.6.2.
    S5.6.7.1.2 At the level of common diaphragm leakage-type failure (or 
equivalent level of leakage from the air chamber containing that 
diaphragm) determined in S5.6.7.1.1, and using the following procedure, 
determine the threshold maximum reservoir rate (in psi per minute). With 
an initial reservoir system pressure of 100 psi, the engine turned off, 
no application of any of the vehicle's brakes and, if the vehicle is 
designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air brakes, a 50 cubic inch test 
reservoir connected to the supply line coupling, make an application 
actuation of the parking brake control. Determine the maximum reservoir 
leakage rate (in psi per minute), which is the maximum rate of decrease 
in air pressure of any of the vehicle's reservoirs that results after 
that parking brake application.
    S5.6.7.1.3 Using the following procedure, introduce a leakage-type 
failure of the common diaphragm (or equivalent leakage from the air 
chamber containing that diaphragm) that results in a maximum reservoir 
leakage rate that is three times the threshold maximum reservoir leakage 
rate determined in S5.6.7.1.2. With an initial reservoir system pressure 
of 100 psi, the engine turned off, no application of any of the 
vehicle's brakes and, if the vehicle is designed to tow a vehicle 
equipped with air brakes, a 50 cubic inch test reservoir connected to 
the supply line coupling, make an application actuation of the parking 
brake control. Determine the maximum reservoir leakage rate (in psi per 
minute), which is the maximum rate of decrease in air pressure of any of 
the vehicle's reservoirs that results after that parking brake 
application. The level of common diaphragm leakage-type failure (or 
equivalent level of leakage from the air chamber containing that 
diaphragm) associated with this reservoir leakage rate is the level that 
is to be used under the option set forth in S5.6(b).
    S5.6.7.2 Trailers.
    S5.6.7.2.1 According to the following procedure, determine the 
threshold level of common diaphragm leakage-type failure (or equivalent 
level of leakage from the air chamber containing that diaphragm) at 
which the vehicle's parking brakes become unreleasable. With an initial 
reservoir system and supply line pressure of 100 psi, no application of 
any of the vehicle's brakes, and, if the vehicle is designed to tow a 
vehicle equipped with air brakes, a 50 cubic inch test reservoir 
connected to the supply line coupling, introduce a leakage-type failure 
of the common diaphragm (or equivalent leakage from the air chamber 
containing that diaphragm). Make a parking brake application by venting

[[Page 402]]

the front supply line coupling to the atmosphere, and reduce the 
pressures in all of the vehicle's reservoirs to zero. Pressurize the 
supply line by connecting the trailer's front supply line coupling to 
the supply line portion of the trailer test rig (Figure 1) with the 
regulator of the trailer test rig set at 100 psi, and determine whether 
all of the mechanical means referred to in S5.6.3.2 continue to be 
actuated and hold the parking brake applications with sufficient parking 
retardation forces to meet the minimum performance specified in either 
S5.6.1 or S5.6.2. Repeat this procedure with progressively decreasing or 
increasing levels (whichever is applicable) of leakage-type diaphragm 
failures or equivalent leakages, to determine the minimum level of 
common diaphragm leakage-type failure (or equivalent level of leakage 
from the air chamber containing that diaphragm) at which all of the 
mechanical means referred to in S5.6.3.2 continue to be actuated and 
hold the parking brake applications with sufficient parking retardation 
forces to meet the minimum performance specified in either S5.6.1 or 
S5.6.2.
    S5.6.7.2.2 At the level of common diaphragm leakage-type failure (or 
equivalent level of leakage from the air chamber containing that 
diaphragm) determined in S5.6.7.2.1, and using the following procedure, 
determine the threshold maximum reservoir leakage rate (in psi per 
minute). With an initial reservoir system and supply line pressure of 
100 psi, no application of any of the vehicle's brakes and, if the 
vehicle is designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air brakes, a 50 
cubic inch test reservoir connected to the rear supply line coupling, 
make a parking brake application by venting the front supply line 
coupling to the atmosphere. Determine the maximum reservoir leakage rate 
(in psi per minute), which is the maximum rate of decrease in air 
pressure of any of the vehicle's reservoirs that results after that 
parking brake application.
    S5.6.7.2.3 Using the following procedure, a leakage-type failure of 
the common diaphragm (or equivalent leakage from the air chamber 
containing that diaphragm) that results in a maximum reservoir leakage 
rate that is three times the threshold maximum reservoir leakage rate 
determined in S5.6.7.2.2. With an initial reservoir system and supply 
line pressure of 100 psi, no application of any of the vehicle's brakes 
and, if the vehicle is designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air 
brakes, a 50 cubic inch test reservoir connected to the rear supply line 
coupling, make a parking brake application by venting the front supply 
line coupling to the atmosphere. Determine the maximum reservoir leakage 
rate (in psi per minute), which is the maximum rate of decrease in air 
pressure of any of the vehicle's reservoirs that results after that 
parking brake application. The level of common diaphragm leakage-type 
failure (or equivalent level of leakage from the air chamber containing 
that diaphragm) associated with this reservoir leakage rate is the level 
that is to be used under the option set forth in S5.6(b).
    S5.7 Emergency brake system for trucks and buses. Each vehicle shall 
be equipped with an emergency brake system which, under the conditions 
of S6.1, conforms to the requirements of S5.7.1 through S5.7.3. However, 
the truck portion of an auto transporter need not meet the road test 
requirements of S5.7.1 and S5.7.3.
    S5.7.1 Emergency brake system performance. When stopped six times 
for each combination of weight and speed specified in S5.3.1.1, except 
for a loaded truck tractor with an unbraked control trailer, on a road 
surface having a PFC of 0.9, with a single failure in the service brake 
system of a part designed to contain compressed air or brake fluid 
(except failure of a common valve, manifold, brake fluid housing, or 
brake chamber housing), the vehicle shall stop at least once in not more 
than the distance specified in Column 5 of Table II, measured from the 
point at which movement of the service brake control begins, except that 
a truck-tractor tested at its unloaded vehicle weight plus up to 1500 
pounds shall stop at least once in not more than the distance specified 
in Column 6 of Table II. The stop shall be made without any part of the 
vehicle leaving the roadway, and with unlimited wheel lockup permitted 
at any speed.

[[Page 403]]

    S5.7.2 Emergency brake system operation. The emergency brake system 
shall be applied and released, and be capable of modulation, by means of 
the service brake control.
    S5.7.3 Towing vehicle emergency brake requirements. In addition to 
meeting the other requirements of S5.7, a vehicle designed to tow 
another vehicle equipped with air brakes shall--
    (a) In the case of a truck-tractor in the unloaded condition and a 
single unit truck which is capable of towing an airbrake equipped 
vehicle and is loaded to GVWR, be capable of meeting the requirements of 
S5.7.1 by operation of the service brake control only, with the trailer 
air supply line and air control line from the towing vehicle vented to 
the atmosphere in accordance with S6.1.14;
    (b) Be capable of modulating the air in the supply or control line 
to the trailer by means of the service brake control with a single 
failure in the towing vehicle service brake system as specified in 
S5.7.1.
    (c) [Reserved]
    S5.8 Emergency brakes for trailers. Each trailer shall meet the 
requirements of S5.8.1 through S5.8.3.
    S5.8.1 Emergency braking capability. Each trailer other than a 
trailer converter dolly shall have a parking brake system that conforms 
to S5.6 and that applies with the force specified in S5.6.1 or S5.6.2 
when the air pressure in the supply line is at atmospheric pressure. A 
trailer converter dolly shall have, at the manufacturer's option--
    (a) A parking brake system that conforms to S5.6 and that applies 
with the force specified in S5.6.1 or S5.6.2 when the air pressure in 
the supply line is at atmospheric pressure, or
    (b) An emergency system that automatically applies the service 
brakes when the service reservoir is at any pressure above 20 lb/in\2\ 
and the supply line is at atmospheric pressure. However, any 
agricultural commodity trailer, heavy hauler trailer, or pulpwood 
trailer shall meet the requirements of S5.8.1 or, at the option of the 
manufacturer, the requirements of Sec. 393.43 of this title.
    S5.8.2 Supply line pressure retention. Any single leakage type 
failure in the service brake system (except for a failure of the supply 
line, a valve directly connected to the supply line or a component of a 
brake chamber housing) shall not result in the pressure in the supply 
line falling below 70 psi, measured at the forward trailer supply 
coupling. A trailer shall meet the above supply line pressure retention 
requirement with its brake system connected to the trailer test rig 
shown in Figure 1, with the reservoirs of the trailer and test rig 
initially pressurized to 100 psi and the regulator of the trailer test 
rig set at 100 psi; except that a trailer equipped with an air-applied, 
mechanically-held parking brake system and not designed to tow a vehicle 
equipped with air brakes, at the manufacturer's option, may meet the 
requirements of S5.8.4 rather than those of S5.8.2 and S5.8.3.
    S5.8.3 Automatic application of parking brakes. With an initial 
reservoir system pressure of 100 psi and initial supply line pressure of 
100 psi, and if designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air brakes, with 
a 50 cubic inch test reservoir connected to the rear supply line 
coupling, and with any subsequent single leakage type failure in any 
other brake system, of a part designed to contain compressed air or 
brake fluid (consistent with the parenthetical phrase specified in 
S5.6.3.1), whenever the air pressure in the supply line is 70 psi or 
higher, the parking brakes shall not provide any brake retardation as a 
result of complete or partial automatic application of the parking 
brakes.
    S5.8.4 Automatic application of air-applied, mechanically held 
parking brakes. With its brake system connected to the supply line 
portion of the trailer test rig (Figure 1) and the regulator of the 
trailer test rig set at 100 psi, and with any single leakage type 
failure in the service brake system (except for a failure of the supply 
line, a valve directly connected to the supply line or a component of a 
brake chamber, but including failure of any common diaphragm), the 
parking brakes shall not provide any brake retardation as a result of 
complete or partial automatic application of the parking brakes.
    S5.9 Final inspection. Inspect the service brake system for the 
condition

[[Page 404]]

of adjustment and for the brake indicator display in accordance with 
S5.1.8 and S5.2.2.
    S6. Conditions. The requirements of S5 shall be met by a vehicle 
when it is tested according to the conditions set in this S6, without 
replacing any brake system part or making any adjustments to the brake 
system except as specified. Unless otherwise specified, where a range of 
conditions is specified, the vehicle must be capable of meeting the 
requirements at all points within the range. On vehicles equipped with 
automatic brake adjusters, the automatic brake adjusters must remain 
activated at all times. Compliance of vehicles manufactured in two or 
more stages may, at the option of the final-stage manufacturer, be 
demonstrated to comply with this standard by adherence to the 
instructions of the incomplete vehicle manufacturer provided with the 
vehicle in accordance with Sec. 568.4(a)(7)(ii) and Sec. 568.5 of 
title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
    S6.1 Road test conditions.
    S6.1.1 Except as otherwise specified, the vehicle is loaded to its 
GVWR, distributed proportionally to its GAWRs. During the burnish 
procedure specified in S6.1.8, truck tractors shall be loaded to their 
GVWR, by coupling them to an unbraked flatbed semitrailer, which 
semitrailer shall be loaded so that the weight of the tractor-trailer 
combination equals the GVWR of the truck tractor. The load on the 
unbraked flatbed semitrailer shall be located so that the truck 
tractor's wheels do not lock during burnish.
    S6.1.2 The inflation pressure is as specified by the vehicle 
manufacturer for the GVWR.
    S6.1.3 Unless otherwise specified, the transmission selector control 
is in neutral or the clutch is disengaged during all decelerations and 
during static parking brake tests.
    S6.1.4 All vehicle openings (doors, windows, hood, trunk, cargo 
doors, etc.) are in a closed position except as required for 
instrumentation purposes.
    S6.1.5 The ambient temperature is between 32 [deg]F. and 100 [deg]F.
    S6.1.6 The wind velocity is zero.
    S6.1.7 Unless otherwise specified, stopping tests are conducted on a 
12-foot wide level, straight roadway having a peak friction coefficient 
of 0.9. For road tests in S5.3, the vehicle is aligned in the center of 
the roadway at the beginning of a stop. Peak friction coefficient is 
measured using an ASTM E1136 standard reference test tire in accordance 
with ASTM method E1337-90, at a speed of 40 mph, without water delivery 
for the surface with PFC of 0.9, and with water delivery for the surface 
with PFC of 0.5.
    S6.1.8 For vehicles with parking brake systems not utilizing the 
service brake friction elements, burnish the friction elements of such 
systems prior to the parking brake test according to the manufacturer's 
recommendations. For vehicles with parking brake systems utilizing the 
service brake friction elements, burnish the brakes as follows: With the 
transmission in the highest gear appropriate for a speed of 40 mph, make 
500 snubs between 40 mph and 20 mph at a deceleration rate of 10 
f.p.s.p.s., or at the vehicle's maximum deceleration rate if less than 
10 f.p.s.p.s. Except where an adjustment is specified, after each brake 
application accelerate to 40 mph and maintain that speed until making 
the next brake application at a point 1 mile from the initial point of 
the previous brake application. If the vehicle cannot attain a speed of 
40 mph in 1 mile, continue to accelerate until the vehicle reaches 40 
mph or until the vehicle has traveled 1.5 miles from the initial point 
of the previous brake application, whichever occurs first. Any automatic 
pressure limiting valve is in use to limit pressure as designed. The 
brakes may be adjusted up to three times during the burnish procedure, 
at intervals specified by the vehicle manufacturer, and may be adjusted 
at the conclusion of the burnishing, in accordance with the vehicle 
manufacturer's recommendation.
    S6.1.9 Static parking brake tests for a semitrailer are conducted 
with the front-end supported by an unbraked dolly. The weight of the 
dolly is included as part of the trailer load.
    S6.1.10 In a test other than a static parking test, a truck tractor 
is tested at its GVWR by coupling it to an unbraked flatbed semi-trailer 
(hereafter, control trailer) as specified in S6.1.10.2 to S6.1.10.4.

[[Page 405]]

    S6.1.10.1 [Reserved]
    S6.1.10.2 The center of gravity height of the ballast on the loaded 
control trailer shall be less than 24 inches above the top of the 
tractor's fifth wheel.
    S6.1.10.3 The control trailer has a single axle with a GAWR of 
18,000 pounds and a length, measured from the transverse centerline of 
the axle to the centerline of the kingpin, of 258 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>6 inches.
    S6.1.10.4 The control trailer is loaded so that its axle is loaded 
at 4,500 pounds and the tractor is loaded to its GVWR, loaded above the 
kingpin only, with the tractor's fifth wheel adjusted so that the load 
on each axle measured at the tire-ground interface is most nearly 
proportional to the axles' respective GAWRs, without exceeding the GAWR 
of the tractor's axle or axles or control trailer's axle.
    S6.1.11 Special drive conditions. A vehicle equipped with an 
interlocking axle system or a front wheel drive system that is engaged 
and disengaged by the driver is tested with the system disengaged.
    S6.1.12 Liftable axles. A vehicle with a liftable axle is tested at 
GVWR with the liftable axle down and at unloaded vehicle weight with the 
liftable axle up.
    S6.1.13 Trailer test rig.
    The trailer test rig shown in Figure 1 is calibrated in accordance 
with the calibration curves shown in Figure 3. For the requirements of 
S5.3.3.1 and S5.3.4.1, the pressure in the trailer test rig reservoir is 
initially set at 100 psi for actuation tests and 95 psi for release 
tests.
    S6.1.14 In testing the emergency braking system of towing vehicles 
under S5.7.3(a), the hose(s) is vented to the atmosphere at any time not 
less than 1 second and not more than 1 minute before the emergency stop 
begins, while the vehicle is moving at the speed from which the stop is 
to be made and any manual control for the towing vehicle protection 
system is in the position to supply air and brake control signals to the 
vehicle being towed. No brake application is made from the time the 
line(s) is vented until the emergency stop begins and no manual 
operation of the parking brake system or towing vehicle protection 
system occurs from the time the line(s) is vented until the stop is 
completed.
    S6.1.15 Initial brake temperature. Unless otherwise specified, the 
initial brake temperature is not less than 150[deg] F and not more than 
200[deg] F.
    S6.1.16 Thermocouples.
    The brake temperature is measured by plug-type thermocouples 
installed in the approximate center of the facing length and width of 
the most heavily loaded shoe or disc pad, one per brake, as shown in 
Figure 2. A second thermocouple may be installed at the beginning of the 
test sequence if the lining wear is expected to reach a point causing 
the first thermocouple to contact the rubbing surface of a drum or 
rotor. The second thermocouple shall be installed at a depth of .080 
inch and located within 1 inch circumferentially of the thermocouple 
installed at .040 inch depth. For centergrooved shoes or pads, 
thermocouples are installed within one-eighth of an inch to one-quarter 
of an inch of the groove and as close to the center as possible.
    S6.1.17 Selection of compliance options. Where manufacturer options 
are specified, the manufacturer shall select the option by the time it 
certifies the vehicle and may not thereafter select a different option 
for the vehicle. Each manufacturer shall, upon request from the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, provide information regarding 
which of the compliance options it has selected for a particular vehicle 
or make/model.
    S6.2 Dynamometer test conditions.
    S6.2.1 The dynamometer inertia for each wheel is equivalent to the 
load on the wheel with the axle loaded to its GAWR. For a vehicle having 
additional GAWRs specified for operation at reduced speeds, the GAWR 
used is that specified for a speed of 50 mph, or, at the option of the 
manufacturer, any speed greater than 50 mph.
    S6.2.2 The ambient temperature is between 75[deg] F. and 100[deg] F.
    S6.2.3 Air at ambient temperature is directed uniformly and 
continuously over the brake drum or disc at a velocity of 2,200 feet per 
minute.
    S6.2.4 The temperature of each brake is measured by a single plug-
type thermocouple installed in the center of

[[Page 406]]

the lining surface of the most heavily loaded shoe or pad as shown in 
Figure 2. The thermocouple is outside any center groove.
    S6.2.5 The rate of brake drum or disc rotation on a dynamometer 
corresponding to the rate of rotation on a vehicle at a given speed is 
calculated by assuming a tire radius equal to the static loaded radius 
specified by the tire manufacturer.
    S6.2.6 Brakes are burnished before testing as follows: place the 
brake assembly on an inertia dynamometer and adjust the brake as 
recommended by the vehicle manufacturer. Make 200 stops from 40 mph at a 
deceleration of 10 f.p.s.p.s., with an initial brake temperature on each 
stop of not less than 315[deg] F and not more than 385[deg] F. Make 200 
additional stops from 40 mph at a deceleration of 10 f.p.s.p.s. with an 
initial brake temperature on each stop of not less than 450[deg] F and 
not more than 550[deg] F. The brakes may be adjusted up to three times 
during the burnish procedure, at intervals specified by the vehicle 
manufacturer, and may be adjusted at the conclusion of the burnishing, 
in accordance with the vehicle manufacturer's recommendation.
    S6.2.7 The brake temperature is increased to a specified level by 
conducting one or more stops from 40 m.p.h. at a deceleration of 10 
f.p.s.p.s. The brake temperature is decreased to a specified level by 
rotating the drum or disc at a constant 30 m.p.h.

[[Page 407]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.051


[[Page 408]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.053


[[Page 409]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.054


[[Page 410]]



                       Table I.--Stopping Sequence
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Single
                                                      Truck       unit
                                                     tractors    trucks
                                                               and buses
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Burnish...........................................          1          1
Stability and Control at GVWR (PFC 0.5)...........          2        N/A
Stability and Control at LLVW (PFC 0.5)...........          3          5
Manual Adjustment of Brakes.......................          4        N/A
60 mph Service Brake Stops at GVWR (PFC 0.9)......          5          2
60 mph Emergency Service Brake Stops at GVWR (PFC         N/A          3
 0.9).............................................
Parking Brake Test at GVWR........................          6          4
Manual Adjustment of Brakes.......................          7          6
60 mph Service Brake Stops at LLVW (PFC 0.9)......          8          7
60 mph Emergency Service Brake Stops at LLVW (PFC           9          8
 0.9).............................................
Parking Brake Test at LLVW........................         10          9
Final Inspection..................................         11         10
------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                       Table II--Stopping Distance in Feet
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                       Service brake             Emergency brake
                                                           -----------------------------------------------------
              Vehicle speed in miles per hour                 PFC      PFC      PFC      PFC      PFC      PFC
                                                              0.9      0.9      0.9      0.9      0.9      0.9
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)
                                                           ----------
20........................................................       32       35       38       40       83       85
25........................................................       49       54       59       62      123      131
30........................................................       70       78       84       89      170      186
35........................................................       96      106      114      121      225      250
40........................................................      125      138      149      158      288      325
45........................................................      158      175      189      200      358      409
50........................................................      195      216      233      247      435      504
55........................................................      236      261      281      299      520      608
60........................................................      280      310      335      355      613      720
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: (1) Loaded and unloaded buses; (2) Loaded single unit trucks; (3) Unloaded truck tractors and single unit
  trucks; (4) Loaded truck tractors tested with an unbraked control trailer; (5) All vehicles except truck
  tractors; (6) Unloaded truck tractors.


                   Table III--Brake Retardation Force
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Column 2
                                                                brake
           Column 1 brake retardation force/GAWR               chamber
                                                              pressure,
                                                                 PSI
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0.05.......................................................           20
0.12.......................................................           30
0.18.......................................................           40
0.25.......................................................           50
0.31.......................................................           60
0.37.......................................................           70
0.41.......................................................           80
------------------------------------------------------------------------


                           Table IV [Reserved]
 
 


                  Table V--Brake Chamber Rated Volumes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Column 2
                                                    Column 1     rated
 Brake Chamber type  (nominal area of piston or   full stroke    volume
           diaphragm in square inches)              (inches)     (cubic
                                                                inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Type 9..........................................    1.75/2.10         25
Type 12.........................................    1.75/2.10         30
Type 14.........................................    2.25/2.70         40
Type 16.........................................    2.25/2.70         46
Type 18.........................................    2.25/2.70         50
Type 20.........................................    2.25/2.70         54
Type 24.........................................    2.50/3.20         67
Type 30.........................................    2.50/3.20         89
Type 36.........................................    3.00/3.60        135
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[61 FR 27290, May 31, 1996, as amended at 61 FR 49695, Sept. 23, 1996; 
61 FR 60636, Nov. 29, 1996; 63 FR 7727, Feb. 17, 1998; 66 FR 64158, Dec. 
12, 2001; 67 FR 36820, May 28, 2002; 68 FR 47497, Aug. 11, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 571.122  Standard No. 122; Motorcycle brake systems.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies performance requirements for 
motorcycle brake systems.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of the standard is to insure safe 
motorcycle braking performance under normal and emergency conditions.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to motorcycles.
    S4. Definitions.
    Braking interval means the distance measured from the start of one 
brake application to the start of the next brake application.
    Initial brake temperature means the temperature of the hottest 
service brake of the vehicle 0.2 mile before any brake application.

[[Page 411]]

    Skid number means the frictional resistance of a pavement measured 
in accordance with American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) 
Method E-274-70 (as revised July, 1974) at 40 mph, omitting water 
delivery as specified in paragraphs 7.1 and 7.2 of that method.
    Stopping distance means the distance traveled by a vehicle from the 
start of the brake application to the point where the vehicle stops.
    Split service brake system means a brake system consisting of two or 
more subsystems actuated by a single control designed so that a leakage-
type failure of a pressure component in a single subsystem (except 
structural failure of a housing that is common to all subsystems) shall 
not impair the operation of the other subsystem(s).
    S5. Requirements. Each motorcycle shall meet the following 
requirements under the conditions specified in S6, when tested according 
to the procedures and in the sequence specified in S7. Corresponding 
test procedures of S7 are indicated in parentheses. If a motorcycle is 
incapable of attaining a specified speed, its service brakes shall be 
capable of stopping the vehicle from the multiple of 5 m.p.h. that is 4 
m.p.h. to 8 m.p.h. less than the speed attainable in 1 mile, within 
stopping distances that do not exceed the stopping distances specified 
in Table 1.
    S5.1 Required equipment--split service brake system. Each motorcycle 
shall have either a split service brake system or two independently 
actuated service brake systems.
    S5.1.1 Mechanical service brake system. Failure of any component in 
a mechanical service brake system shall not result in a loss of braking 
ability in the other service brake system on the vehicle.
    S5.1.2 Hydraulic service brake system. A leakage failure in a 
hydraulic service brake system shall not result in a loss of braking 
ability in the other service brake system on the vehicle. Each 
motorcycle equipped with a hydraulic brake system shall have the 
equipment specified in S5.1.2.1 and S5.1.2.2.
    S5.1.2.1 Master cylinder reservoirs. Each master cylinder shall have 
a separate reservoir for each brake circuit, with each reservoir filler 
opening having its own cover, seal, and cover retention device. Each 
reservoir shall have a minimum capacity equivalent to one and one-half 
times the total fluid displacement resulting when all the wheel 
cylinders or caliper pistons serviced by the reservoir move from a new 
lining, fully retracted position to a fully worn, fully applied 
position. Where adjustment is a factor, the worst condition of 
adjustment shall be used for this measurement.
    S5.1.2.2 Reservoir labeling. Each motorcycle shall have a brake 
fluid warning statement that reads as follows, in letters at least three 
thirty-seconds of an inch high:
    Warning: Clean filler cap before removing. Use only ------ fluid 
from a sealed container. (Inserting the recommended type of brake fluid 
as specified in 49 CFR 571.116, e.g., DOT 3.)
    The lettering shall be:--
    (a) Permanently affixed, engraved, or embossed;
    (b) Located so as to be visible by direct view, either on or within 
4 inches of the brake-fluid reservoir filler plug or cap; and
    (c) Of a color that contrasts with its background, if it is not 
engraved or embossed.
    S5.1.3 Split service brake system. In addition to the equipment 
required by S5.1.2 each motorcycle equipped with a split service brake 
system shall have a failure indicator lamp as specified in S5.1.3.1.
    S5.1.3.1 Failure indicator lamp.
    (a) One or more electrically operated service brake system failure 
indicator lamps that is mounted in front of and in clear view of the 
driver, and that is activated--
    (1) In the event of pressure failure in any part of the service 
brake system, other than a structural failure of either a brake master 
cylinder body in a split integral body type master cylinder system or a 
service brake system failure indicator body, before or upon application 
of not more than 20 pounds of pedal force upon the service brake.
    (2) Without the application of pedal force, when the level of brake 
fluid in a master cylinder reservoir drops to less than the recommended 
safe level specified by the manufacturer or to less

[[Page 412]]

than one-half the fluid reservoir capacity, whichever is the greater.
    (b) All failure indicator lamps shall be activated when the ignition 
switch is turned from the ``off'' to the ``on'' or to the ``start'' 
position.
    (c) Except for the momentary activation required by S5.1.3.1(b), 
each indicator lamp, once activated, shall remain activated as long as 
the condition exists, whenever the ignition switch is in the ``on'' 
position. An indicator lamp activated when the ignition is turned to the 
``start'' position shall be deactivated upon return of the switch to the 
``on'' position unless a failure exists in the service brake system.
    (d) Each indicator lamp shall have a red lens with the legend 
``Brake Failure'' on or adjacent to it in letters not less than three 
thirty-seconds of an inch high that shall be legible to the driver in 
daylight when lighted.
    S5.1.4 Parking brake. Each three-wheeled motorcycle shall be 
equipped with a parking brake of a friction type with a solely 
mechanical means to retain engagement.
    S5.1.5 Other requirements. The brake system shall be installed so 
that the lining thickness of drum brake shoes may be visually inspected, 
either directly or by use of a mirror without removing the drums, and so 
that disc brake friction lining thickness may be visually inspected 
without removing the pads.
    S5.2 Service brake system--first (preburnish) effectiveness.
    S5.2.1 Service brake system. The service brakes shall be capable of 
stopping the motorcycle from 30 m.p.h. and 60 m.p.h. within stopping 
distances which do not exceed the stopping distances specified in Column 
I of Table I (S7.3.1).
    S5.2.2 Partial service brake system. Each independently actuated 
service brake system on each motorcycle shall be capable of stopping the 
motorcycle from 30 m.p.h. and 60 m.p.h. within stopping distances which 
do not exceed the stopping distances specified in Column II of Table I 
(S7.3.2).
    S5.3 Service brake system--second effectiveness. The service brakes 
shall be capable of stopping the motorcycle from 30 m.p.h., 60 m.p.h., 
80 m.p.h., and the multiple of 5 m.p.h. that is 4 m.p.h. to 8 m.p.h. 
less than the speed attainable in 1 mile if this speed is 95 m.p.h. or 
greater, within stopping distances that do not exceed the stopping 
distances specified in Column III of Table I (S7.5).
    S5.4 Service brake system--fade and recovery. These requirements do 
not apply to a motor-driven cycle whose speed attainable in 1 mile is 30 
m.p.h. or less.
    S5.4.1 Baseline check--minimum and maximum pedal forces. The pedal 
and lever forces used in establishing the fade baseline check average 
shall be within the limits specified in S6.10 (S7.6.1).
    S5.4.2 Fade. Each motorcycle shall be capable of making 10 fade 
stops from 60 m.p.h. at not less than 15 f.p.s.p.s. for each stop 
(S7.6.2).
    S5.4.3 Fade recovery. Each motorcycle shall be capable of making 
five recovery stops with a pedal force that does not exceed 400 Newtons 
(90 pounds), and a hand lever force that does not exceed 245 Newtons (55 
pounds) for any of the first four recovery stops and that for the fifth 
recovery stop, is within, plus 89 Newtons (20 pounds) and minus 44 
Newtons (10 pounds) of the fade test baseline check average force 
(S7.6.3), but not less than 0 Newtons (0 pounds).
    S5.5 Service brake system--final effectiveness. These requirements 
do not apply to a motor-driven cycle whose speed attainable in 1 mile is 
30 mph or less.
    S5.5.1 Service brake system. The service brakes shall be capable of 
stopping the motorcycle in a manner that complies with S5.3 (S7.8.1).
    S5.5.2 Hydraulic service brake system--partial failure. In the event 
of a pressure component leakage failure, other than a structural failure 
of either a brake master cylinder body in a split integral body type 
master cylinder system or a service brake system failure indicator body, 
the remaining portion of the service brake system shall continue to 
operate and shall be capable of stopping the motorcycle from 30 m.p.h. 
and 60 m.p.h. within stopping distances that do not exceed the stopping 
distances specified in Column IV of Table I (S7.8.2).
    S5.6 Parking brake system. The parking brake system shall be capable 
of

[[Page 413]]

holding the motorcycle stationary (to the limits of traction of the 
braked wheels), for 5 minutes, in both forward and reverse directions, 
on a 30 percent grade, with an applied force of not more than 90 pounds 
for a foot-operated system and 55 pounds for a hand-operated system 
(S7.9).
    S5.7 Service brake system--water recovery.
    S5.7.1 Baseline check. The pedal and lever forces used in 
establishing the water recovery baseline check average shall be within 
the limits specified in S6.10 (S7.10.1).
    S5.7.2 Water recovery test. Each motorcycle shall be capable of 
making five recovery stops with a pedal force that does not exceed 400 
Newtons (90 pounds), and hand lever force that does not exceed 245 
Newtons (55 pounds), for any of the first four recovery stops, and that 
for the fifth recovery stop, is within, plus 89 Newtons (20 pounds) and 
minus 44 Newtons (10 pounds) of the water recovery baseline check 
average force (S7.10.2), but not less than 0 Newtons (0 pounds).
    S5.8 Service brake system design durability. Each motorcycle shall 
be capable of completing all braking requirements of S5 without 
detachment of brake linings from the shoes or pad, detachment or 
fracture of any brake system components, or leakage of fluid or 
lubricant at the wheel cylinder, and master cylinder reservoir cover, 
seal, or retention device (S7.11).
    S6 Test conditions. The requirements of S5 shall be met under the 
following conditions. Where a range of conditions is specified, the 
motorcycle shall be capable of meeting the requirements at all points 
within the range.
    S6.1 Vehicle weight. Motorcycle weight is unloaded vehicle weight 
plus 200 pounds (including driver and instrumentation), with the added 
weight distributed in the saddle or carrier if so equipped.
    S6.2 Tire inflation pressure. Tire inflation pressure is the 
pressure recommended by the manufacturer for the vehicle weight 
specified in paragraph S6.1.
    S6.3 Transmission. Unless otherwise specified, all stops are made 
with the clutch disengaged.
    S6.4 Engine. Engine idle speed and ignition timing settings are 
according to the manufacturer's recommendations. If the vehicle is 
equipped with an adjustable engine speed governor, it is adjusted 
according to the manufacturer's recommendation.
    S6.5 Ambient temperature. The ambient temperature is between 32 
[deg]F. and 100 [deg]F.
    S6.6 Wind velocity. The wind velocity is zero.
    S6.7 Road surface. Road tests are conducted on level roadway having 
a skid number of 81. The roadway is 8 feet wide for two-wheeled 
motorcycles, and overall vehicle width plus 5 feet for three-wheeled 
motorcycles. The parking brake test surface is clean, dry, smooth 
portland cement concrete.
    S6.8 Vehicle position. The motorcycle is aligned in the center of 
the roadway at the start of each brake application. Stops are made 
without any part of the motorcycle leaving the roadway and without 
lockup of any wheel.
    S6.9 Thermocouples. The brake temperature is measured by plug-type 
thermocouples installed in the approximate center of the facing length 
and width of the most heavily loaded shoe or disc pad, one per brake, as 
shown in Figure 1.
    S6.10 Brake actuation forces. Except for the requirements of the 
fifth recovery stop in S5.4.3 and S5.7.2 (S7.6.3 and S7.10.2), the hand 
lever force is not less than 10 Newtons (2.3 pounds) and not more than 
245 Newtons (55 pounds) and the foot pedal force is not less than 25 
Newtons (5.6 pounds) and not more than 400 Newtons (90 pounds). The 
point of initial application of the lever forces is 1.2 inches from the 
end of the brake lever grip. The direction of the force is perpendicular 
to the handle grip on the plane along which the brake lever rotates, and 
the point of application of the pedal force is the center of the foot 
contact pad of the brake pedal. The direction of the force is 
perpendicular to the foot contact pad on the plane along which the brake 
pedal rotates, as shown in Figure 2.
    S7. Test procedures and sequence. Each motorcycle shall be capable 
of meeting all the requirements of this standard when tested according 
to the procedures and in the sequence set forth

[[Page 414]]

below without replacing any brake system part, or making any adjustments 
to the brake system other than as permitted in S7.4. A motorcycle shall 
be deemed to comply with S5.2, S5.3 and S5.5 if at least one of the 
stops specified in S7.3, S7.5 and S7.8 is made within the stopping 
distances specified in Table I.
    S7.1 Braking warming. If the initial brake temperature for the first 
stop in a test procedure (other than S7.10) has not been reached, heat 
the brakes to the initial brake temperature by making up to 10 stops 
from 30 m.p.h. at a deceleration of not more than 10 f.p.s.p.s. On 
independently operated brake systems, the coldest brake shall be within 
10 [deg]F. of the hottest brake.
    S7.2 Pretest instrumentation check. Conduct a general check of test 
instrumentation by making not more than 10 stops from a speed of not 
more than 30 m.p.h. at a deceleration of not more than 10 f.p.s.p.s. If 
test instrument repair, replacement, or adjustment is necessary, make 
not more than 10 additional stops after such repair, replacement or 
adjustment.
    S7.3 Service brake system--first (preburnished) effectiveness test.
    S7.3.1 Service brake system. Make six stops from 30 m.p.h. and then 
six stops from 60 m.p.h. with an initial brake temperature between 130 
[deg]F. and 150 [deg]F.
    S7.3.2 Partial service brake system. For a motorcycle with two 
independently actuated service brake systems, repeat S7.3.1 using each 
service brake system individually.
    S7.4 Service brake system--burnish procedure. Burnish the brakes by 
making 200 stops from 30 m.p.h. at 12 f.p.s.p.s. The braking interval 
shall be either the distance necessary to reduce the initial brake 
temperature to between 130 [deg]F. and 150 [deg]F. or 1 mile, whichever 
occurs first. Accelerate at maximum rate to 30 m.p.h. immediately after 
each stop and maintain that speed until making the next stop. After 
burnishing adjust the brakes in accordance with the manufacturer's 
recommendation.
    S7.5 Service brake system--second effectiveness test. Repeat S7.3.1. 
Then, make four stops from 80 m.p.h. and four stops from the multiple of 
5 m.p.h. that is 4 m.p.h. to 8 m.p.h. less than the speed attainable in 
1 mile if that speed is 95 m.p.h. or greater.
    S7.6 Service brake system--fade and recovery test. These 
requirements do not apply to a motor-driven cycle whose speed attainable 
in 1 mile is 30 m.p.h. or less.
    S7.6.1 Baseline check stops. Make three stops from 30 m.p.h. at 10 
to 11 f.p.s.p.s. for each stop. Compute the average of the maximum brake 
pedal forces and the maximum brake lever forces required for the three 
stops.
    S7.6.2 Fade stops. Make 10 stops from 60 m.p.h. at not less than 15 
f.p.s.p.s. for each stop. The initial brake temperature before the first 
brake application shall be between 130 [deg]F. and 150 [deg]F. Initial 
brake temperatures before brake applications for subsequent stops shall 
be those occurring at the distance intervals. Attain the required 
deceleration as quickly as possible and maintain at least this rate for 
not less than three-fourths of the total stopping distance for each 
stop. The interval between the starts of service brake applications 
shall be 0.4 mile. Drive 1 mile at 30 m.p.h. after the last fade stop 
and immediately conduct the recovery test specified in S7.6.3.
    S7.6.3 Recovery test. Make five stops from 30 m.p.h. at 10 to 11 
f.p.s.p.s. for each stop. The braking interval shall not be more than 1 
mile. Immediately after each stop accelerate at maximum rate to 30 
m.p.h. and maintain that speed until making the next stop.
    S7.7 Service brake system--reburnish. Repeat S7.4 except make 35 
burnish stops instead of 200 stops. Brakes may be adjusted after 
reburnish if no tools are used. These requirements do not apply to a 
motor-driven cycle whose speed attainable in 1 mile is 30 m.p.h. or 
less.
    S7.8 Service brake system--final effectiveness test. These 
requirements do not apply to a motor-driven cycle whose speed attainable 
in 1 mile is 30 m.p.h. or less.
    S7.8.1 Service brake system. Repeat S7.5 including S7.3.1.
    S7.8.2 Partial service brake system test. Alter the service brake 
system on three-wheeled motorcycles to induce a complete loss of braking 
in any one subsystem. Determine the line pressure or pedal force 
necessary to cause the

[[Page 415]]

brake system failure indicator to operate. Make six stops from 30 m.p.h. 
and then six stops from 60 m.p.h. with an initial brake temperature 
between 130 [deg]F. and 150 [deg]F. Repeat for each subsystem. Determine 
that the brake failure indicator is operating when the master cylinder 
fluid level is less than the level specified in S5.1.3.1(a)(2), and that 
it complies with S5.1.3.1(c). Check for proper operation with each 
reservoir in turn at a low level. Restore the service brake system to 
normal at completion of this test.
    S7.9 Parking brake test. Starting with an initial brake temperature 
of not more than 150 [deg]F., drive the motorcycle downhill on the 30 
percent grade with the longitudinal axis of the motorcycle in the 
direction of the grade. Apply the service brakes with a force not 
exceeding 90 pounds to stop the motorcycle and place the transmission in 
neutral. Apply the parking brake by exerting a force not exceeding those 
specified in S5.6. Release the service brake and allow the motorcycle to 
remain at rest (to the limit of traction of the braked wheels) for 5 
minutes. Repeat the test with the motorcycle parked in the reversed 
(uphill) position on the grade.
    S7.10 Service brake system--water recovery test.
    S7.10.1 Baseline check stops. Make three stops from 30 m.p.h. at 10 
to 11 f.p.s.p.s. for each stop. Compute the average of the maximum brake 
pedal forces and of the maximum brake lever forces required for the 
three stops.
    S7.10.2 Wet brake recovery stops. Completely immerse the rear brake 
assembly of the motorcycle in water for 2 minutes with the brake fully 
released. Next completely immerse the front brake assembly of the 
motorcycle in water for 2 minutes with the brake fully released. Perform 
the entire wetting procedure in not more than 7 minutes. Immediately 
after removal of the front brake from water, accelerate at a maximum 
rate to 30 mi/h without a brake application. Immediately upon reaching 
that speed make five stops, each from 30 mi/h at 10 to 11 ft/s\2\ for 
each stop. After each stop (except the last) accelerate the motorcycle 
immediately at a maximum rate to 30 mi/h and begin the next stop.
    S7.11 Final inspection. Upon completion of all the tests inspect the 
brake system in an assembled condition, for compliance with the brake 
lining inspection requirements. Disassemble all brakes and inspect:
    (a) The entire brake system for detachment or fracture of any 
component.
    (b) Brake linings for detachment from the shoe or pad.
    (c) Wheel cylinder, master cylinder, and axle seals for fluid or 
lubricant leakage.
    (d) Master cylinder for reservoir capacity and retention device.
    (e) Master cylinder label for compliance with S5.1.2.2.

                  Table I--Stopping Distances for Effectiveness, Fade and Partial System Tests
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                     Stopping distance, feet--Effectiveness tests
                                     ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Preburnish
                                          Preburnish       effectiveness      Effectiveness      Effectiveness
     Vehicle test speed, m.p.h.         effectiveness         partial          total system    partial hydraulic
                                         total system        mechanical     (S5.4) (SS5.7.1)-- systems (S5.7.2)--
                                         (S5.2.1)--I     systems (S5.2.2)--        III                 IV
                                                                 II
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..................................                 13                 30                 11                 25
20..................................                 24                 54                 19                 44
25..................................                 37                 84                 30                 68
30..................................                 54                121                 43                 97
35..................................                 74                165                 58                132
40..................................                 96                216                 75                173
45..................................                121                273                 95                218
50..................................                150                337                128                264
55..................................                181                407                155                326
60..................................                216                484                185                388
65..................................  .................  .................                217                455
70..................................  .................  .................                264                527
75..................................  .................  .................                303                606
80..................................  .................  .................                345                689
85..................................  .................  .................                389                778
90..................................  .................  .................                484                872

[[Page 416]]

 
95..................................  .................  .................                540                971
100.................................  .................  .................                598               1076
105.................................  .................  .................                659               1188
110.................................  .................  .................                723               1302
115.................................  .................  .................                791               1423
120.................................  .................  .................                861               1549
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


             Table II--Brake Test Sequence and Requirements
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Sequence L.C.              Test procedure      Requirements
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Instrumentation check..........               S7.2  .................
2. First (Preburnish)
 effectiveness test:
  (a) Service brake system........             S7.3.1             S5.2.1
  (b) Partial service brake system             S7.3.2             S5.2.2
3. Burnish procedure..............               S7.4  .................
4. Second effectiveness test......               S7.5               S5.3
5. First fade and recovery test...               S7.6               S5.4
6. Reburnish......................               S7.7  .................
7. Final effectiveness test:
  (a) Service brake system........             S7.8.1             S5.5.1
  (b) Partial service brake system             S7.8.2             S5.5.2
8. Parking brake test (three-                    S7.9               S5.6
 wheeled motorcycles only)........
9. Water recovery test............              S7.10               S5.7
10. Design durability.............              S7.11               S5.8
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 417]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.059


(Authority: Delegation of authority at 38 FR 12147; secs. 102, 103, 119, 
Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 (15 U.S.C. 1391, 1392, 1407); delegations 
of authority at 49 CFR 1.50 and 49 CFR 501.8)

[37 FR 5034, Mar. 9, 1972, as amended at 37 FR 11974, June 16, 1972; 38 
FR 14753, June 5, 1973; 39 FR 32914, Sept. 12, 1974; 39 FR 43075, Dec. 
10, 1974; 41 FR 24593, June 17, 1976; 43 FR 9606, Mar. 9, 1978; 43 FR 
46548, Oct. 10, 1978; 66 FR 42617, Aug. 14, 2001]

[[Page 418]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.123  Standard No. 123; Motorcycle controls and displays.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for the location, 
operation, identification, and illumination of motorcycle controls and 
displays, and requirements for motorcycle stands and footrests.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to minimize accidents 
caused by operator error in responding to the motoring environment, by 
standardizing certain motorcycle controls and displays.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to motorcycles equipped with 
handlebars, except for motorcycles that are designed, and sold 
exclusively for use by law enforcement agencies.
    S4. Definitions. Clockwise and counterclockwise mean opposing 
directions of rotation around the following axes, as applicable.
    (a) The operational axis of the ignition control, viewed from in 
front of the ignition lock opening;
    (b) The axis of the right handlebar on which the twist-grip throttle 
is located, viewed from the end of that handlebar;
    (c) The axis perpendicular to the center of the speedometer, viewed 
from the operator's normal eye position.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1. Each motorcycle shall be equipped with a supplemental engine 
stop control, located and operable as specified in Table 1.
    S5.2 Each motorcycle to which this standard applies shall meet the 
following requirements:
    S5.2.1 Control location and operation. If any item of equipment 
listed in Table 1, Column 1, is provided, the control for such item 
shall be located as specified in Column 2, and operable as specified in 
Column 3. Each control located on a right handlebar shall be operable by 
the operator's right hand throughout its full range without removal of 
the operator's right hand from the throttle. Each control located on a 
left handlebar shall be operable by the operator's left hand throughout 
its full range without removal of the operator's left hand from the 
handgrip. If a motorcycle with an automatic clutch is equipped with a 
supplemental rear brake control, the control shall be located on the 
left handlebar. If a motorcycle is equipped with self-proportioning or 
antilock braking devices utilizing a single control for front and rear 
brakes, the control shall be located and operable in the same manner as 
a rear brake control.
    S5.2.2 Display illumination and operation. If an item of equipment 
listed in Table 2, Column 1, is provided, the display for such item 
shall be visible to a seated operator under daylight conditions, shall 
illuminate as specified in Column 2, and shall operate as specified in 
Column 3.
    S5.2.3 Control and display identification. If an item of equipment 
in Table 3, Column 1, is provided, the item and its operational function 
shall be identified by:
    (a) A symbol substantially in the form shown in Column 3; or
    (b) Wording shown in both Column 2 and Column 4; or
    (c) A symbol substantially in the form shown in Column 3 and wording 
shown in both Column 2 and Column 4.
    (d) The abbreviations ``M.P.H.'', ``km/h'', ``r/min'', ``Hi'', 
``Lo'', ``L'', ``R'', and ``Res'' appearing in Column 2 and Column 4 may 
be spelled in full. Symbols and words may be provided for equipment 
items where none are shown in Column 2, Column 3, and Column 4. Any 
identification provided shall be placed on or adjacent to the control or 
display position, and shall appear upright to the operator.
    S5.2.4 Stands. A stand shall fold rearward and upward if it contacts 
the ground when the motorcycle is moving forward.
    S5.2.5 Footrests. Footrests shall be provided for each designated 
seating position. Each footrests for a passenger other than an operator 
shall fold rearward and upward when not in use.

                         Table 1--Motorcycle Control Location and Operation Requirements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Equipment control--Column 1             Location--Column 2                  Operation--Column 3
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Manual clutch or integrated clutch     Left handlebar..............  Squeeze to disengage clutch.
 and gear change.

[[Page 419]]

 
2. Foot operated gear change............  Left foot control...........  An upward motion of the operator's toe
                                                                         shifts transmission toward lower
                                                                         numerical gear ratios (commonly
                                                                         referred to as ``higher gears''), and a
                                                                         downward motion toward higher numerical
                                                                         gear ratios (commonly referred to as
                                                                         ``lower gears''). If three or more
                                                                         gears are provided it shall not be
                                                                         possible to shift from the highest gear
                                                                         directly to the lowest gear, or vice
                                                                         versa.
3. Headlamp upper-lower beam control....  Left handlebar..............  Up for upper beam, down for lower beam.
                                                                         If combined with the headlight on-off
                                                                         switch, means shall be provided to
                                                                         prevent inadvertent actuation of the
                                                                         ``off'' function.
4. Horn.................................  ......do....................  Push to activate.
5. Turn signal lamps....................  Handlebars..................
6. Ignition.............................  ............................  ``Off''--counterclockwise from other
                                                                         positions.
7. Manual fuel shutoff control..........  ............................  Rotate to operate. ``On'' and ``Off''
                                                                         are separated by 90 degrees of
                                                                         rotation. ``Off'' and ``Reserve'' (if
                                                                         provided) are separated by 90 degrees
                                                                         of rotation. Sequence order: ``On''--
                                                                         ``Off''--``Reserve''.
8. Twist-grip throttle..................  Right handlebar.............  Self-closing to idle in a clockwise
                                                                         direction after release of hand.
9. Supplemental engine stop.............  ......do....................
10. Front wheel brake...................  ......do....................  Squeeze to engage.
11. Rear wheel brakes...................  Right foot control \1\......  Depress to engage.
                                          Left handlebar permissible
                                           for motor-driven cycles.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See S5.2.1 for requirements for vehicles with a single control for front and rear brakes, and with a
  supplemental rear brake control.


                       Table 2--Motorcycle Display Illumination and Operation Requirements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Display--Column 1                  Illumination--Column 2                Operation--Column 3
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Speedometer.........................  Yes............................  The display is illuminated whenever
                                                                           the headlamp is activated.
2. Neutral indication..................  Green display lamp.............  The display lamp illuminates when the
                                                                           gear selector is in neutral position.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 420]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR24SE98.035


[37 FR 7207, Apr. 12, 1972, as amended at 37 FR 17475, Aug. 29, 1972; 39 
FR 32915, Sept. 12, 1974; 48 FR 42819, Sept. 20, 1983; 49 FR 35381, 
Sept. 7, 1984; 49 FR 35504, Sept. 10, 1984; 56 FR 61387, Dec. 3, 1991; 
63 FR 28933, May 27, 1998; 63 FR 51001, Sept. 24, 1998]

[[Page 421]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.124  Standard No. 124; Accelerator control systems.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes requirements for the return of 
a vehicle's throttle to the idle position when the driver removes the 
actuating force from the accelerator control, or in the event of a 
severance or disconnection in the accelerator control system.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries resulting from engine overspeed caused by malfunctions in the 
accelerator control system.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, multi-
purpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses.
    S4. Definitions.
    S4.1 Driver-operated accelerator control system means all vehicle 
components, except the fuel metering device, that regulate engine speed 
in direct response to movement of the driver-operated control and that 
return the throttle to the idle position upon release of the actuating 
force.
    Fuel metering device means the carburetor, or in the case of certain 
engines the fuel injector, fuel distributor or fuel injection pump.
    Throttle means the component of the fuel metering device that 
connects to the driver-operated accelerator control system and that by 
input from the driver-operated accelerator control system controls the 
engine speed.
    Idle position means the position of the throttle at which it first 
comes in contact with an engine idle speed control appropriate for 
existing conditions according to the manufacturers' recommendations. 
These conditions include, but are not limited to, engine speed 
adjustments for cold engine, air conditioning, and emission control, and 
the use of throttle setting devices.
    Ambient temperature means the surrounding air temperature, at a 
distance such that it is not significantly affected by heat from the 
vehicle under test.
    S4.2 In the case of vehicles powered by electric motors, the words 
throttle and idle refer to the motor speed controller and motor 
shutdown, respectively.
    S5. Requirements. The vehicle shall meet the following requirements 
when the engine is running under any load condition, and at any ambient 
temperature between -40 degrees Celsius and +52 degrees Celsius after 12 
hours of conditioning at any temperature within that range.
    S5.1 There shall be at least two sources of energy capable of 
returning the throttle to the idle position within the time limit 
specified by S5.3 from any accelerator position or speed whenever the 
driver removes the opposing actuating force. In the event of failure of 
one source of energy by a single severance or disconnection, the 
throttle shall return to the idle position within the time limits 
specified by S5.3, from any accelerator position or speed whenever the 
driver removes the opposing actuating force.
    S5.2 The throttle shall return to the idle position from any 
accelerator position or any speed of which the engine is capable 
whenever any one component of the accelerator control system is 
disconnected or severed at a single point. The return to idle shall 
occur within the time limit specified by S5.3, measured either from the 
time of severance or disconnection or from the first removal of the 
opposing actuating force by the driver.
    S5.3 Except as provided below, maximum time to return to idle 
position shall be 1 second for vehicles of 4536 kilograms or less GVWR, 
and 2 seconds for vehicles of more than 4536 kilograms GVWR. Maximum 
time to return to idle position shall be 3 seconds for any vehicle that 
is exposed to ambient air at -18 degrees Celsius to -40 degrees Celsius 
during the test or for any portion of the 12-hour conditioning period.

[38 FR 2980, Jan. 31, 1973; as amended at 60 FR 13645, Mar. 14, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 571.125  Standard No. 125; Warning devices.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes requirements for devices, 
without self-contained energy sources, that are designed to be carried 
in motor vehicles and used to warn approaching traffic of the presence 
of a stopped vehicle, except for devices designed to be permanently 
affixed to the vehicle.

[[Page 422]]

    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries due to rear end collisions between moving traffic and disabled 
vehicles.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to devices, without self-
contained energy sources, that are designed to be carried in buses and 
trucks that have a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) greater than 
10,000 pounds. These devices are used to warn approaching traffic of the 
presence of a stopped vehicle, except for devices designed to be 
permanently affixed to the vehicle.
    S4. Definitions. Entrance angle means the angle having as its sides 
the line through the center, and normal to the face, of the object to be 
tested, and the line from the center of the object to the center of the 
source of illumination (Figure 2).
    Fluorescent means the property of emitting visible light due to the 
absorption of radiation of a shorter wavelength which may be outside the 
visible spectrum.
    Observation angle means the angle having as its sides the line from 
the observation point to the center of the object to be tested and the 
line from the center of that object to the center of the source of 
illumination (Figure 2).
    Reflex reflective means reflective of light in directions close to 
the direction of incident light, over a wide range of variations in the 
direction of incident light.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 Equipment.
    S5.1.1 Reflex reflective material and fluorescent material that meet 
the requirements of this standard shall be affixed to both faces of the 
warning device. Alternatively, a dual purpose orange fluorescent and red 
reflective material that meets the requirements of this standard 
(hereafter referred to as ``dual purpose material'') may be affixed to 
both faces in places of the reflective and fluorescent materials.
    S5.1.2 Each warning device shall be protected from damage and 
deterioration--
    (a) By enclosure in an opaque protective reusable container, except 
that two or three warning devices intended to be sold for use as a set 
with a single vehicle may be enclosed in a single container; or
    (b) By secure attachment to any light-tight, enclosed, and easily 
accessible compartment of a new motor vehicle with which it is supplied 
by the vehicle manufacturer.
    S5.1.3 The warning device shall be designed to be erected, and 
replaced in its container, without the use of tools.
    S5.1.4 The warning device shall be permanently and legibly marked 
with:
    (a) Name of manufacturer;
    (b) Month and year of manufacture, which may be expressed 
numerically, as ``6/72''; and
    (c) The symbol DOT, or the statement that the warning device 
complies with all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards.
    S5.1.5 Each warning device shall have instructions for its erection 
and display.
    (a) The instructions shall be either indelibly printed on the 
warning device or attached in such a manner that they cannot be easily 
removed.
    (b) Instructions for each warning device shall include a 
recommendation that the driver activate the vehicular hazard warning 
signal lamps before leaving the vehicle to erect the warning device.
    (c) Instructions shall include the illustration depicted in Figure 3 
indicating recommended positioning.
    S5.2 Configuration.
    S5.2.1 When the warning device is erected on level ground:
    (a) Part of the warning device shall form an equilateral triangle 
that stands in a plane not more than 10[deg] from the vertical, with the 
lower edge of the base of the triangle horizontal and not less than 1 
inch above the ground.
    (b) None of the required portion of the reflective material and 
fluorescent material shall be obscured by any other part of the warning 
device except for any portion of the material over which it is necessary 
to provide fasteners, pivoting beads or other means to allow 
collapsibility or support of the device. In any event, sufficient 
reflective and fluorescent material shall be used on the triangle to 
meet the requirements of S5.4 and S5.5.
    S5.2.2 Each of the three sides of the triangular portion of the 
warning device shall not be less than 17 and not

[[Page 423]]

more than 22 inches long, and not less than 2 and not more than 3 inches 
wide (Figure 1).
    S5.2.3 Each face of the triangular portion of the warning device 
shall have an outer border of red reflex reflective material of uniform 
width and not less than 0.75 and not more than 1.75 inches wide, and an 
inner border of orange fluorescent material of uniform width and not 
less than 1.25 and not more than 1.30 inches wide (Figure 1). However, 
this requirement shall not apply if the dual purpose material is used.
    S5.2.4 Each vertex of the triangular portion of the warning device 
shall have a radius of not less than 0.25 inch and not more than 0.50 
inch.
    S5.2.5 All edges shall be rounded or chamfered, as necessary, to 
reduce the possibility of cutting or harm to the user.
    S5.2.6 The device shall consist entirely of the triangular portion 
and attachments necessary for its support and enclosure, without 
additional visible shapes or attachments.
    S5.3 Color.
    S5.3.1 The color of the red reflex reflective material on the 
warning device shall have the following characteristics, both before and 
after the warning device has been conditioned in accordance with S6.1, 
when the source of illumination is a lamp with a tungsten filament 
operating at 2856[deg] Kelvin color temperature. Expressed in terms of 
the International Commission on Illumination (CIE) 1931 standard 
colorimetric observer system (CIE chromaticity diagram, Figure 4), the 
chromaticity coordinates of the red reflex reflective material shall lie 
within the region bounded by the spectrum locus and the lines on the 
diagram defined by the following equations:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Boundary                             Equations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yellow....................................  y=0.33
White.....................................  x+y=0.98
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S5.3.2 The color of the orange fluorescent material on the warning 
device shall have the following characteristics, both before and after 
the warning device has been conditioned in accordance with S6.1, when 
the source of illumination is a 150-watt high pressure xenon compact arc 
lamp. Expressed in terms of the International Commission on Illumination 
(CIE) 1931 standard colorimetric observer system, the chromaticity 
coordinates of the orange fluorescent material shall lie within the 
region bounded by the spectrum locus and the lines on the diagram 
defined by the following equations:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Boundary                             Equations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yellow....................................  y=0.49 x+0.17
White.....................................  x+y=0.93
Red.......................................  y=0.35
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The 150-watt high pressure xenon compact arc lamp shall illuminate 
the sample using the unmodified spectrum at an angle of incidence of 
45[deg] and an angle of observation of 90[deg]. If dual purpose material 
is being tested, it shall be illuminated by a 150-watt high pressure 
xenon compact arc lamp, whose light is diffused by an integrating 
sphere.
    S5.4 Reflectivity. When the red reflex reflective material on the 
warning device is tested in accordance with S6.2, both before and after 
the warning device has been conditioned in accordance with S6.1, its 
total candlepower per incident foot candle shall be not less than the 
values specified in Table I for each of the listed entrance angles.
    S5.5 Luminance. When the orange fluorescent material on the warning 
device is tested in accordance with S6.3, both before and after the 
warning device has been conditioned in accordance with S6.1, it shall 
have a minimum relative luminance of 25 percent of a flat magnesium 
oxide surface and a minimum product of that relative luminance and width 
in inches of 44.
    S5.6 Stability. When the warning device is erected on a horizontal 
brushed concrete surface both with and against the brush marks and 
subjected to a horizontal wind of 40 miles per hour in any direction for 
3 minutes--
    (a) No part of it shall slide more than 3 inches from its initial 
position;
    (b) Its triangular portion shall not tilt to a position that is more 
than 10[deg] from the vertical; and
    (c) Its triangular position shall not turn through a horizontal 
angle of more than 10[deg] in either direction from the initial 
position.

[[Page 424]]

    S5.7 Durability. When the warning device is conditioned in 
accordance with S6.1, no part of the warning device shall become warped 
or separated from the rest of the warning device.
    S6. Test Procedures.
    S6.1 Conditions.
    S6.1.1 Submit the warning device to the following conditioning 
sequence, returning the device after each step in the sequence to 
ambient air at 68 [deg]F. for at least 2 hours.
    (a) Minus 40 [deg]F. for 16 hours in a circulating air chamber using 
ambient air which would have not less than 30 percent and not more than 
70 percent relative humidity at 70 [deg]F.;
    (b) 150 [deg]F. for 16 hours in a circulating air oven using ambient 
air which would have not less than 30 percent and not more than 70 
percent relative humidity at 70 [deg]F.;
    (c) 100 [deg]F. and 90 percent relative humidity for 16 hours;
    (d) Salt spray (fog) test in accordance with American Society of 
Testing and Materials Standard B-117, Standard Method of Salt Spray 
(fog) testing, August 1964, except that the test shall be for 4 hours 
rather than 40 hours; and
    (e) Immersion for 2 hours in water at a temperature of 100 [deg]F.
    S6.2 Reflectivity Test. Test the red reflex reflective materials as 
follows:
    (a) Unless dual purpose material is used, prevent the orange 
fluorescent material from affecting the photometric measurement of the 
reflectivity of the red reflex reflective material, either by separation 
or masking.
    (b) Use a lamp with a tungsten filament operating at 2856[deg] 
Kelvin color temperature as the source of illumination.
    (c) Place the source of illumination 100 feet from the red reflex 
reflective material (Figure 2).
    (d) Place the observation point directly above the source of 
illumination (Figure 2).
    (e) Calculate the total candlepower per incident foot candle of the 
red reflex reflective material at each of the entrance and observation 
angles specified in Table 1.
    S6.3 Luminance Test. Test the orange fluorescent material as 
follows:
    (a) Unless dual purpose material is used, prevent the red reflex 
reflective material from affecting the photometric measurement of the 
luminance of the orange fluorescent material.
    (b) Using a 150-watt high pressure xenon compact arc lamp as the 
light source, illuminate the test sample at an angle of incidence of 
45[deg] and an angle of observation of 90[deg]. If dual purpose material 
is being tested, illuminate the sample diffusely through an integrating 
sphere.
    (c) Measure the luminance of the material at a perpendicular viewing 
angle, with no ray of the viewing beam more than 5[deg] from the 
perpendicular to the specimen.
    (d) Repeat the procedure for a flat magnesium oxide surface, and 
compute the quotient (percentage) of the luminance of the material 
relative to that of the magnesium oxide surface.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.061

              Fig. 1--Dimensions of Warning Device (Inches)

[[Page 425]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.062


[[Page 426]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.063


[39 FR 28636, Aug. 9, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 4, Jan. 2, 1975; 59 FR 
49591, Sept. 29, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 571.126-571.128  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 571.129  Standard No. 129; New non-pneumatic tires for passenger cars.

    S1 Scope. This standard specifies tire dimensions and laboratory 
test requirements for lateral strength, strength, endurance, and high 
speed performance; defines the tire load rating; and specifies labeling 
requirements for non-pneumatic spare tires.
    S2 Application. This standard applies to new temporary spare non-
pneumatic tires for use on passenger cars.
    S3 Definitions.
    Carcass means the tire structure except for the tread which provides 
the major portion of the tire's capability

[[Page 427]]

to deflect in response to the vertical loads and tractive forces that 
the tire transmits from the roadway to the non-pneumatic rim, the wheel 
center member, or the vehicle and which attaches to the vehicle or 
attaches, either integrally or separably, to the wheel center member or 
non-pneumatic rim.
    Carcass separation means the pulling away of the carcass from the 
non-pneumatic rim or wheel center member.
    Chunking means the breaking away of pieces of the carcass or tread.
    Cracking means any parting within the carcass, tread, or any 
components that connect the tire to the non-pneumatic rim or wheel 
center member and, if the non-pneumatic tire is integral with the non-
pneumatic rim or wheel center member, any parting within the non-
pneumatic rim, or wheel center member.
    Load rating means the maximum load a tire is rated to carry.
    Maximum tire width means the greater of either the linear distance 
between the exterior edges of the carcass or the linear distance between 
the exterior edges of the tread, both being measured parallel to the 
rolling axis of the tire.
    Non-pneumatic rim means a mechanical device which, when a non-
pneumatic tire assembly incorporates a wheel, supports the tire, and 
attaches, either integrally or separably, to the wheel center member and 
upon which the tire is attached.
    Non-pneumatic test rim means with reference to a tire to be tested, 
any non-pneumatic rim that is listed as appropriate for use with that 
tire in accordance with S4.4.
    Non-pneumatic tire means a mechanical device which transmits, either 
directly or through a wheel or wheel center member, the vertical load 
and tractive forces from the roadway to the vehicle, generates the 
tractive forces that provide the directional control of the vehicle and 
does not rely on the containment of any gas or fluid for providing those 
functions.
    Non-pneumatic tire assembly means a non-pneumatic tire, alone or in 
combination with a wheel or wheel center member, which can be mounted on 
a vehicle.
    Non-pneumatic tire identification code means an alphanumeric code 
that is assigned by the manufacturer to identify the tire with regard to 
its size, application to a specific non-pneumatic rim or wheel center 
member or application to a specific vehicle.
    Test wheel center member means with reference to a tire to be 
tested, any wheel center member that is listed as appropriate for use 
with that tire in accordance with S4.4.
    Tread means that portion of the tire that comes in contact with the 
road.
    Tread separation means pulling away of the tread from the carcass.
    Wheel means a mechanical device which consists of a non-pneumatic 
rim and wheel center member and which, in the case of a non-pneumatic 
tire assembly incorporating a wheel, provides the connection between the 
tire and the vehicle.
    Wheel center member means, in the case of a non-pneumatic tire 
assembly incorporating a wheel, a mechanical device which attaches, 
either integrally or separably, to the non-pneumatic rim and provides 
the connection between the non-pneumatic rim and the vehicle; or in the 
case of a non-pneumatic tire assembly not incorporating a wheel, a 
mechanical device which attaches, either integrally or separably, to the 
non-pneumatic tire and provides the connection between the tire and the 
vehicle.
    S4 Requirements.
    S4.1 Size and Construction. Each tire shall be designed to fit each 
non-pneumatic rim or wheel center member specified for its non-pneumatic 
tire identification code designation in a listing in accordance with 
section S4.4.
    S4.2 Performance Requirements
    S4.2.1 General. Each tire shall conform to the following:
    (a) Its load rating shall be that specified in a submission made by 
a manufacturer, pursuant to S4.4(a), or in one of the publications 
described in S4.4(b) for its non-pneumatic tire identification code 
designation.
    (b) It shall incorporate a tread wear indicator that will provide a 
visual indication that the tire has worn to a tread depth of \1/16\ 
inch.
    (c) It shall, before being subjected to either the endurance test 
procedure

[[Page 428]]

specified in S5.4 or the high speed performance procedure specified in 
S5.5, exhibit no visual evidence of tread or carcass separation, 
chunking or cracking.
    (d) It shall meet the requirements of S4.2.2.5 and S4.2.2.6 when 
tested on a test wheel described in S5.4.2.1 either alone or 
simultaneously with up to 5 tires.
    S4.2.2 Test Requirements.
    S.4.2.2.1 Test Sample. For each test sample use:
    (a) One tire for physical dimensions, lateral strength, and strength 
in sequence;
    (b) A second tire for tire endurance; and
    (c) A third tire for high speed performance.
    S4.2.2.2 Physical Dimensions. For a non-pneumatic tire assembly in 
which the tire is separable from the non-pneumatic rim or wheel center 
member, the dimensions, measured in accordance with S5.1, for that 
portion of the tire that attaches to that non-pneumatic rim or wheel 
center member shall satisfy the dimensional specifications contained in 
the submission made by an individual manufacturer, pursuant to S4.4(a), 
or in one of the publications described in S4.4(b) for that tire's non-
pneumatic tire identification code designation.
    S4.2.2.3 Lateral Strength. There shall be no visual evidence of 
tread or carcass separation, cracking or chunking, when a tire is tested 
in accordance with S5.2 to a load of:
    (a) 1,500 pounds for tires with a load rating less than 880 pounds;
    (b) 2,000 pounds for tires with a load rating of 880 pounds or more 
but less than 1,400 pounds.
    (c) 2,500 pounds for tires with a load rating of 1,400 pounds or 
more, using the load rating marked on the tire or tire assembly.
    S4.2.2.4 Tire Strength. There shall be no visual evidence of tread 
carcass separation, cracking or chunking, when a tire is tested in 
accordance with S5.3 to a minimum energy level of:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Load rating                     Minimum energy level
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Below 880 pounds......................  1950 inch pounds.
880 pounds and above..................  2600 inch pounds.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S4.2.2.5 Tire Endurance. When the tire has been subjected to the 
laboratory endurance test specified in S5.4, using, if applicable, a 
non-pneumatic test rim or test wheel center member that undergoes no 
permanent deformation, there shall be no visual evidence of tread or 
carcass separation, cracking or chunking. In the case of a non-pneumatic 
tire assembly in which the non-pneumatic tire is an integral part of the 
assembly, the assembly shall undergo no permanent deformation with the 
exception of wear of the tread.
    S4.2.2.6 High Speed Performance. When the tire has been subjected to 
the laboratory high speed performance test specified in S5.5, using if 
applicable, a non-pneumatic test rim or test wheel center member that 
undergoes no permanent deformation, there shall be no visual evidence of 
tread or carcass separation, cracking or chunking. In the case of a non-
pneumatic tire assembly in which the non-pneumatic tire is an integral 
part of the assembly, the assembly shall undergo no permanent 
deformation with the exception of wear of the tread.
    S4.3 Labeling Requirements. Each non-pneumatic tire or, in the case 
of a non-pneumatic tire assembly in which the non-pneumatic tire is an 
integral part of the assembly, each non-pneumatic tire assembly shall 
include, in letters or numerals not less than 0.078 inches high, the 
information specified in paragraphs S4.3 (a) through (f). The 
information shall be permanently molded, stamped or otherwise 
permanently marked into or onto the non-pneumatic tire or non-pneumatic 
tire assembly, except that the information specified in S4.3(d) and 
S4.3(g) may appear on a label that is permanently attached to the tire 
or tire assembly. If a label is used, it shall be subsurface printed, 
made of a material that is resistant to fade, heat, moisture, and 
abrasion, and attached in such a manner that it cannot be removed 
without destroying or defacing the label on the non-pneumatic tire or 
tire assembly. The information shall appear on both sides of the non-
pneumatic tire or non-pneumatic tire assembly, except, in the case of a 
non-pneumatic tire assembly which has a particular side that must always 
face outward when mounted on

[[Page 429]]

a vehicle, in which case the information shown in paragraphs S4.3 (a) 
through (g) shall only be required on the outward facing side. The 
information shall be positioned on the tire or tire assembly such that 
it is not placed on the tread or the outermost edge of the tire and is 
not obstructed by any portion of any non-pneumatic rim or wheel center 
member designated for use with that tire in S4.4 of this standard or in 
49 CFR 571.110 or 49 CFR 571.120.
    (a) The non-pneumatic tire identification code (``NPTIC'');
    (b) Load rating, which, if expressed in kilograms, shall be followed 
in parenthesis by the equivalent load rating in pounds, rounded to the 
nearest whole pound;
    (c) For a non-pneumatic tire that is not an integral part of a non-
pneumatic tire assembly, the size and type designation of the non-
pneumatic rim or wheel center member that is contained in the submission 
made by a manufacturer, pursuant to S4.4(a), or in one of the 
publications described in S4.4(b) for that tire's non-pneumatic tire 
identification code designation;
    (d) The name of the manufacturer or brand name;
    (e) The symbol DOT in the manner specified in part 574 of this 
chapter, which shall constitute a certification that the tire conforms 
to applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards;
    (f) The tire identification number required by Sec. 574.5 of this 
chapter;
    (g) The labeling requirements set forth in S6 of Standard No. 110 
(Sec. 571.110), or S8 of Standard No. 120 (Sec. 571.120).
    S4.4 Non-Pneumatic Tire Identification Code and Non-Pneumatic Rim/
Wheel Center Member Matching Information. For purposes of this standard, 
S8 of 49 CFR 571.110 and S10 of 49 CFR 571.120, each manufacturer of a 
non-pneumatic tire that is not an integral part of a non-pneumatic tire 
assembly shall ensure that it provides a listing to the public for each 
non-pneumatic tire that it produces. The listing shall include the non-
pneumatic tire identification code, tire load rating, dimensional 
specifications and a diagram of the portion of the tire that attaches to 
the non-pneumatic rim or wheel center member, and a list of the non-
pneumatic rims or wheel center members that may be used with that tire. 
For each non-pneumatic rim or wheel center member included in such a 
listing, the information provided shall include a size and type 
designation for the non-pneumatic rim or wheel center member, and 
dimensional specifications and a diagram of the non-pneumatic rim or 
portion of the wheel center member that attaches to the tire. A listing 
compiled in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section need not 
include dimensional specifications or a diagram of the non-pneumatic rim 
or portion of the wheel center member that attaches to the tire if the 
non-pneumatic rim's or portion of the wheel center member's dimensional 
specifications and diagram are contained in each listing published in 
accordance with paragraph (b) of this section. The listing shall be in 
one of the following forms:
    (a) Listed by manufacturer name or brand name in a document 
furnished to dealers of the manufacturer's tires or, in the case of non-
pneumatic tires supplied only as a temporary spare tire on a vehicle, in 
a document furnished to dealers of vehicles equipped with the tires, to 
any person upon request, and in duplicate to the Office of Vehicle 
Safety Standards, Crash Avoidance Division, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, DC 
20590; or
    (b) Contained in publications, current at the date of manufacture of 
the tire or any later date, of at least one of the following 
organizations:

The Tire and Rim Association
The European Tyre and Rim Technical Organization
Japan Automobile Tire Manufacturers' Association, Inc.
Deutche Industrie Norm
British Standards Institute
Scandinavian Tire and Rim Organization
Tyre and Rim Association of Australia

    S5. Test Procedures.
    S5.1 Physical Dimensions. After conditioning the tire at room 
temperature for at least 24 hours, using equipment with minimum 
measurement capabilities of one-half the smallest tolerance specified in 
the listing contained in the

[[Page 430]]

submission made by a manufacturer pursuant to S4.4(a), or in one of the 
publications described in S4.4(b) for that tire's non-pneumatic tire 
identification code designation, measure the portion of the tire that 
attaches to the non-pneumatic rim or the wheel center member. For any 
inner diameter dimensional specifications, or other dimensional 
specifications that are uniform or uniformly spaced around some 
circumference of the tire, these measurements shall be taken at least 
six points around the tire, or, if specified, at the points specified in 
the listing contained in the submission made by an individual 
manufacturer, pursuant to S4.4(a), or in one of the publications 
described in S4.4(b) for that tire's non-pneumatic tire identification 
code designation.
    S5.2 Lateral Strength.
    S5.2.1 Preparation of the tire.
    S5.2.1.1 If applicable, mount a new tire on a non-pneumatic test rim 
or test wheel center member.
    S5.2.1.2 Mount the tire assembly in a fixture as shown in Figure 1 
with the surface of the tire assembly that would face outward when 
mounted on a vehicle facing toward the lateral strength test block shown 
in Figure 2 and force the lateral strength test block against the tire.
    S5.2.2 Test Procedure.
    S5.2.2.1 Apply a load through the block to the tire at a rate of 2 
inches per minute, with the load arm parallel to the tire assembly at 
the time of engagement and the first point of contact with the test 
block being the test block centerline shown in Figure 2, at the 
following distances, B, in sequence, as shown in Figure 1:

B=A--1 inch
B=A--2 inches
B=A--3 inches
B=A--4 inches
B=A--5 inches, and
B=A--6 inches.


However, if at any time during the conduct of the test, the test block 
comes in contact with the non-pneumatic test rim or test wheel center 
member, the test shall be suspended and no further testing at smaller 
values of the distance B shall be conducted. When tested to the above 
procedure, satisfying the requirements of S4.2.2.3 for all values of B 
greater than that for which contact between the non-pneumatic test rim 
or test wheel center member and the test block is made, shall constitute 
compliance to the requirements set forth in S4.2.2.3.
    S5.3 Tire Strength.
    S5.3.1 Preparation of the Tire.
    S5.3.1.1 If applicable, mount the tire on a non-pneumatic test rim 
or test wheel center member.
    S5.3.1.2 Condition the tire assembly at room temperature for at 
least three hours.
    S5.3.2 Test Procedures.
    S5.3.2.1 Force the test cleat, as defined in S5.3.2.2, with its 
length axis (see S5.3.2.2(a)) parallel to the rolling axis of the non-
pneumatic tire assembly, and its height axis (see S5.3.2.2(c)), 
coinciding with a radius of the non-pneumatic tire assembly, into the 
tread of the tire at five test points equally spaced around the 
circumference of the tire. At each test point, the test cleat is forced 
into the tire at a rate of two inches per minute until the applicable 
minimum energy level, as shown in S4.2.2.4, calculated using the formula 
contained in S5.3.2.3, is reached.
    S5.3.2.2 The test cleat is made of steel and has the following 
dimensions;
    (a) Minimum length of one inch greater than the maximum tire width 
of the tire,
    (b) Width of one-half inch with the surface which contacts the 
tire's tread having one-quarter inch radius, and
    (c) Minimum height of one inch greater than the difference between 
the unloaded radius of the non-pneumatic tire assembly and the maximum 
radius of the non-pneumatic rim or wheel center member, if used with the 
non-pneumatic tire assembly being tested.
    S5.3.2.3 The energy level is calculated by the following formula:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.066
    
where

E=Energy level, inch-pounds;
F=Force, pounds; and
P=Penetration, inches

    S5.4 Tire Endurance.
    S5.4.1 Preparation of the tire.

[[Page 431]]

    S5.4.1.1 If applicable, mount a new tire on a non-pneumatic test rim 
or test wheel center member.
    S5.4.1.2 Condition the tire assembly to 100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 
[deg]F. for at least three hours.
    S5.4.2 Test Procedure.
    S5.4.2.1 Mount the tire assembly on a test axle and press it against 
a flat-faced steel test wheel 67.23 inches in diameter and at least as 
wide as the maximum tire width of the tire to be tested or an approved 
equivalent test wheel, with the applicable test load specified in the 
table in S5.4.2.3 for the tire's non-pneumatic tire identification code 
designation.
    S5.4.2.2 During the test, the air surrounding the test area shall be 
100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]F.
    S5.4.2.3 Conduct the test at 50 miles per hour (m.p.h.) in 
accordance with the following schedule without interruption: The loads 
for the following periods are the specified percentage of the load 
rating marked on the tire or tire assembly:

                                                                 Percent
4 hours...............................................................85
86 hours..............................................................90
24 hours.............................................................100
    S5.4.2.4 Immediately after running the tire the required time, allow 
the tire to cool for one hour, then, if applicable, detach it from the 
non-pneumatic test rim or test wheel center member, and inspect it for 
the conditions specified in S4.2.2.5.
    S5.5 High Speed Endurance.
    S5.5.1 After preparing the tire in accordance with S5.4.1, if 
applicable, mount the tire assembly in accordance with S5.4.2.1, and 
press it against the test wheel with a load of 88 percent of the tire's 
load rating as marked on the tire or tire assembly.
    S5.5.2 Break in the tire by running it for 2 hours at 50 m.p.h.
    S5.5.3 Allow to cool to 100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]F.
    S5.5.4 Test at 75 m.p.h. for 30 minutes, 80 m.p.h. for 30 minutes 
and 85 m.p.h. for 30 minutes.
    S5.5.5 Immediately after running the tire for the required time, 
allow the tire to cool for one hour, then, if applicable, detach it from 
the non-pneumatic test rim or test wheel center member, and inspect it 
for the conditions specified in S4.2.2.6.
    S6. Nonconforming tires. Any non-pneumatic tire that is designed for 
use on passenger cars that does not conform to all the requirements of 
this standard, shall not be sold, offered for sale, introduced or 
delivered for introduction into interstate commerce, or imported into 
the United States, for any purpose.

[[Page 432]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.067


[[Page 433]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.068


[55 FR 29590, July 20, 1990, as amended at 56 FR 19312, Apr. 26, 1991]

    Effective Date Notes: 1. At 67 FR 69627, Nov. 18, 2002, Sec. 
571.129 was amended by revising S4.3 and adding S7, S7.1, S7.2, and 
S7.3, effective Sept. 1, 2003. At 68 FR 33655, June 5, 2003, the 
effective date was delayed until Sept. 1, 2004. At 69 FR 31306, June 3, 
2004, the

[[Page 434]]

effective date was further delayed until Sept. 1, 2005. For the 
convenience of the user, the added and revised text is set forth as 
follows:

Sec. 571.129  Standard No. 129; New non-pneumatic tires for passenger 
          cars.

                                * * * * *

    S4. * * *
    S4.3. Labeling Requirements. Each new non-pneumatic tire shall 
comply, according to the phase-in schedule specified in S7 of this 
standard, with the requirements of S5.5 of Sec. 571.139.

                                * * * * *

    S7. Phase-In Schedule for labeling requirements.
    S7.1 Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 and before 
September 1, 2005. For tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 
and before September 1, 2005, the number of tires complying with S4.3 of 
this standard must be equal to not less than 40% of the manufacturer's 
production during that period.
    S7.2 Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 and before 
September 1, 2006. For tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 
and before September 1, 2006, the number of tires complying with S4.3 of 
this standard must be equal to not less than 70% of the manufacturer's 
production during that period.
    S7.3 Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2006. Each tire 
must comply with S6.3 of this standard.

                                * * * * *

    2. At 69 FR 31319, June 3, 2004, Sec. 571.129 was amended by 
revising paragraphs S4.3, S7.1, S7.2 and S7.3, effective Sept. 1, 2005. 
For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as 
follows:

Sec. 571.129  Standard No. 129; New non-pneumatic tires for passenger 
          cars.

                                * * * * *

    S4.3. Labeling requirements. Each new non-pneumatic tire shall 
comply, according to the phase-in schedule specified in S7 of this 
standard, with the requirements of S5.5 and S5.5.1 of Sec. 571.139.

                                * * * * *

    S7.1. Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 and before 
September 1, 2006. For tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 
and before September 1, 2006, the number of tires complying with S4.3 of 
this standard must be equal to not less than 40% of the manufacturer's 
production during that period.
    S7.2. Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2006 and before 
September 1, 2007. For tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2006 
and before September 1, 2007, the number of tires complying with S4.3 of 
this standard must be equal to not less than 70% of the manufacturer's 
production during that period.
    S7.3. Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2007. Each tire 
must comply with S6.3 of this standard.


<R05>
Sec. 571.131  Standard No. 131; School bus pedestrian safety devices.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes requirements for devices that 
can be installed on school buses to improve the safety of pedestrians in 
the vicinity of stopped school buses.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries by minimizing the likelihood of vehicles passing a stopped 
school bus and striking pedestrians in the vicinity of the bus.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to school buses other than 
multifunction school activity buses.
    S4. Definitions.
    Stop signal arm means a device that can be extended outward from the 
side of a school bus to provide a signal to other motorists not to pass 
the bus because it has stopped to load or discharge passengers.
    S5. Requirements. Each school bus shall be equipped with a stop 
signal arm meeting the requirements of S5.1 through S5.5 as depicted in 
Figure 1.

[[Page 435]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.069

    S5.1 The stop signal arm shall be a regular octagon which is at 
least 450 mmx450 mm (17.72 inchesx17.72 inches) in diameter.
    S5.2 The stop signal arm shall be red on both sides, except as 
provided in S5.2.1 and S5.2.2, and S5.2.3.
    S5.2.1 The stop signal arm shall have a white border at least 12 mm 
(0.47 inches) wide on both sides, except as provided in S5.2.3. Mounting 
brackets, clips, bolts, or other components necessary to the mechanical 
or electrical operation of the stop signal arm may not obscure more than 
15 percent of the border on each side of the stop arm. The portion of 
the border that may be obscured is in addition to that portion which may 
be obscured by the two red lamps specified in S5.3.2.
    S.5.2.2 The stop signal arm shall have the word ``STOP'' displayed 
in white upper-case letters on both sides, except as provided in S5.2.3. 
The letters shall be at least 150 mm (5.9 inches) in height. The letters 
shall have a stroke width of at least 20 mm (0.79 inches), except as 
provided in S.5.3.1.1.
    S5.2.3 When two stop signal arms are installed on a school bus, the 
rearmost stop signal arm shall not contain any lettering, symbols, or 
markings on the forward side.
    S5.3 Conspicuity. The stop signal arm shall comply with either 
S5.3.1 or S5.3.2, or both.
    S5.3.1 Except as provided in S5.3.1.1, S5.3.1.2, or S5.3.1.3, the 
entire surface of both sides of each stop signal arm shall be 
reflectorized with Type III retroreflectorized material that meets the 
minimum specific intensity requirements of S6.1 and Table I.
    S.5.3.1.1 The legend of the retroreflective stop arm may be 
illuminated in a manner such that light is emitted from the surface of 
each letter or from the area immediately surrounding each letter. Only 
red lamps may be used. They shall form the complete shape of each letter 
of the legend, and shall be affixed to all letters (or to the areas 
immediately surrounding all letters) in the legend. The shape of each 
letter shall remain constant and, if the lamps are contained within each 
letter, the net stroke width (stroke width minus the width of the 
lamp(s)) of each letter of the legend, specified in S5.2.2, shall not be 
less than 15 mm

[[Page 436]]

(0.59 inch). When the stop arm is extended, the lamps shall flash at the 
rate specified in S6.2.2, with a current ``on'' time specified in 
S6.2.2.1. All lamps shall be positioned in one of the two following 
ways:
    (1) centered within the stroke of each letter of the legend, or
    (2) outlining each letter of the legend.
    S5.3.1.2 Nonreflectorized mounting brackets, clips, bolts, or other 
components necessary to the mechanical or electrical operation of the 
stop signal arm shall not obscure more than 7.5 percent of the total 
surface area of either side of the stop signal arm.
    S5.3.1.3 When two stop signal arms are installed on a school bus, 
the forward side of the rearmost stop signal arm shall not be 
reflectorized.
    S5.3.2 Each side of the stop signal arm shall have at least two red 
lamps that meet the requirements of S6.2. The lamps shall be centered on 
the vertical centerline of the stop arm. One of the lamps shall be 
located at the extreme top of the stop arm and the other at its extreme 
bottom.
    S5.4 The stop signal arm shall be installed on the left side of the 
bus.
    S5.4.1 The stop signal arm shall be located such that, when in the 
extended position:
    (a) The stop signal arm is perpendicular to the side of the bus, 
plus or minus five degrees;
    (b) The top edge of the stop signal arm is parallel to and not more 
than 6 inches from a horizontal plane tangent to the lower edge of the 
frame of the passenger window immediately behind the driver's window; 
and
    (c) The vertical centerline of the stop signal arm is not less than 
9 inches away from the side of the school bus.
    S5.4.2 A second stop signal arm may be installed on a school bus. 
That stop signal arm shall comply with S5.4 and S5.4.1.
    S5.5 The stop signal arm shall be automatically extended in such a 
manner that it complies with S5.4.1, at a minimum whenever the red 
signal lamps required by S5.1.4 of Standard No. 108 are activated; 
except that a device may be installed that prevents the automatic 
extension of a stop signal arm. The mechanism for activating the device 
shall be within the reach of the driver. While the device is activated, 
a continuous or intermittent signal audible to the driver shall sound. 
The audible signal may be equipped with a timing device requiring the 
signal to sound for at least 60 seconds. If a timing device is used, it 
shall automatically recycle every time the service entry door is opened 
while the engine is running and the manual override is engaged.
    S6 Test Procedures.
    S6.1 Reflectivity Test. When tested under the conditions specified 
in S6.2 (b), (c), and (d) of Federal motor vehicle safety standard 125, 
Warning Devices, (49 CFR 571.125), the retroreflective materials shall 
meet the criteria specified in table 1.

         Table 1--Minimum Specific Intensity Per Unit Area (SIA)
                (Candelas per Footcandle Per Square Foot)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              Entrance
         Observation Angle ([deg])             Angle     White     Red
                                              ([deg])
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                Type III Retroreflective Element Material
------------------------------------------------------------------------
             A--Glass Bead Retroreflective Element Material
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0.2........................................         -4      250       45
0.2........................................        +30      150       25
0.5........................................         -4       95       15
0.5........................................        +30       65       10
--------------------------------------------
              B--Prismatic Retroreflective Element Material
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0.2........................................         -4      250       45
0.2........................................        +30       95     13.3
0.5........................................         -4      200       28
0.5........................................        +30       65       10
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S6.2 Lighting Tests.
    S6.2.1 Color. The procedure shall be done in accordance with the 
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) J578, Color Specification (May 
1988), 1990 SAE Handbook, Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc. Along 
with the incorporation by reference in S6.2.3, this incorporation by 
reference was approved by the Director of the Federal Register in 
accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. Copies may be 
obtained from the Society of Automotive Engineers, 400 Commonwealth 
Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096-0001. Copies may be inspected at Docket 
Room, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh 
Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590 or at the National Archives and 
Records Administration

[[Page 437]]

(NARA). For information on the availability of this material at NARA, 
call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/
code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html. When visually 
compared to the light emitted from a filter/source with a combination of 
chromaticity coordinates as explained in SAE J578, Color Specification 
(May 1988), within specific boundaries [y=0.33 (yellow boundary) and 
y=0.98--x(purple boundary)] the color of light emitted from the test 
object shall not be less saturated (paler), yellower, or purpler. The 
test object shall be placed perpendicular to the light source to 
simulate lamps on stop signal arms. In making visual comparisons, the 
light from the test object shall light one portion of a comparison field 
and the light from the filter/source standard shall light an adjacent 
area. To make a valid visual comparison, the two fields to be viewed 
shall be of near equal luminance.
    S6.2.2. Flash rate. The lamps on each side of the stop signal arm, 
when operated at the manufacturer's design load, shall flash alternately 
at a rate of 60 to 120 flashes per minute.
    S6.2.2.1 Lamps, except those subject to S6.2.2.2, shall have a 
current ``on'' time of 30 to 75 percent of the total flash cycle. The 
total current ``on'' time for the two terminals shall be between 90 and 
110 percent of the total flash cycle.
    S6.2.2.2 Xenon short-arc gaseous discharge lamps shall have an 
``off'' time before each flash of at least 50 percent of the total flash 
cycle.
    S6.2.3 Vibration, Moisture, Dust, Corrosion, Photometry, and Warpage 
Tests. The procedure shall be done in accordance with the Society of 
Automotive Engineers (SAE) J575, Tests for Motor Vehicle Lighting 
Devices and Components, (July 1983) and Society of Automotive Engineers 
(SAE) J1133, School Bus Stop Arm, (April 1984), 1990 SAE Handbook, 
Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc. Lamps and lighting components 
shall meet the criteria for vibration, moisture, dust, corrosion, 
photometry, and warpage in SAE J575, Tests for Motor Vehicle Lighting 
Devices and Components, (July 1983) and SAE J1133, School Bus Stop Arm, 
(April 1984) under the test conditions specified herein.

[56 FR 20370, May 3, 1991, as amended at 57 FR 40134, Sept. 2, 1992; 59 
FR 26761, May 24, 1994; 63 FR 29143, May 28, 1998; 68 FR 44901, July 31, 
2003]


<R05>
Sec. 571.135  Standard No. 135; Passenger car brake systems.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for service brake 
and associated parking brake systems.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to ensure safe braking 
performance under normal and emergency driving conditions.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2000 and to multi-purpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a gross vehicle weight rating 
(GVWR) of 3,500 kilograms (7,716 pounds) or less, manufactured on or 
after September 1, 2002. In addition, at the option of the manufacturer, 
passenger cars manufactured before September 1, 2000, and multi-purpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a GVWR of 3,500 kilograms 
(7,716 pounds) or less, manufactured before September 1, 2002, may meet 
the requirements of this standard instead of Federal Motor Vehicle No. 
105, Hydraulic Brake Systems.
    S4. Definitions.
    Adhesion utilization curves means curves showing, for specified load 
conditions, the adhesion utilized by each axle of a vehicle plotted 
against the braking ratio of the vehicle.
    Antilock brake system or ABS means a portion of a service brake 
system that automatically controls the degree of rotational wheel slip 
during braking by:
    (1) Sensing the rate of angular rotation of the wheels;
    (2) Transmitting signals regarding the rate of wheel angular 
rotation to one or more controlling devices which interpret those 
signals and generate responsive controlling output signals; and
    (3) Transmitting those controlling signals to one or more modulator 
devices which adjust brake actuating forces in response to those 
signals.
    Backup system means a portion of a service brake system, such as a 
pump,

[[Page 438]]

that automatically supplies energy in the event of a primary brake power 
source failure.
    Brake factor means the slope of the linear least squares regression 
equation best representing the measured torque output of a brake as a 
function of the measured applied line pressure during a given brake 
application for which no wheel lockup occurs.
    Brake hold-off pressure means the maximum applied line pressure for 
which no brake torque is developed, as predicted by the pressure axis 
intercept of the linear least squares regression equation best 
representing the measured torque output of a brake as a function of the 
measured applied line pressure during a given brake application.
    Brake power assist unit means a device installed in a hydraulic 
brake system that reduces the amount of muscular force that a driver 
must apply to actuate the system, and that, if inoperative, does not 
prevent the driver from braking the vehicle by a continued application 
of muscular force on the service brake control.
    Brake power unit means a device installed in a brake system that 
provides the energy required to actuate the brakes, either directly or 
indirectly through an auxiliary device, with driver action consisting 
only of modulating the energy application level.
    Braking ratio means the deceleration of the vehicle divided by the 
gravitational acceleration constant.
    Electric vehicle or EV means a motor vehicle that is powered by an 
electric motor drawing current from rechargeable storage batteries, fuel 
cells, or other portable sources of electrical current, and which may 
include a non-electrical source of power designed to charge batteries 
and components thereof.
    Electrically-actuated service brakes means service brakes that 
utilize electrical energy to actuate the foundation brakes.
    Functional failure means a failure of a component (either electrical 
or mechanical in nature) which renders the system totally or partially 
inoperative yet the structural integrity of the system is maintained.
    Hydraulic brake system means a system that uses hydraulic fluid as a 
medium for transmitting force from a service brake control to the 
service brake and that may incorporate a brake power assist unit, or a 
brake power unit.
    Initial brake temperature or IBT means the average temperature of 
the service brakes on the hottest axle of the vehicle 0.32 km (0.2 
miles) before any brake application.
    Lightly loaded vehicle weight or LLVW means unloaded vehicle weight 
plus the weight of a mass of 180 kg (396 pounds), including driver and 
instrumentation.
    Maximum speed of a vehicle or VMax means the highest speed 
attainable by accelerating at a maximum rate from a standing start for a 
distance of 3.2 km (2 miles) on a level surface, with the vehicle at its 
lightly loaded vehicle weight, and, if an EV, with the propulsion 
batteries at a state of charge of not less than 95 percent at the 
beginning of the run.
    Objective brake factor means the arithmetic average of all the brake 
factors measured over the twenty brake applications defined in S7.4, for 
all wheel positions having a given brake configuration.
    Peak friction coefficient or PFC means the ratio of the maximum 
value of braking test wheel longitudinal force to the simultaneous 
vertical force occurring prior to wheel lockup, as the braking torque is 
progressively increased.
    Pressure component means a brake system component that contains the 
brake system fluid and controls or senses the fluid pressure.
    Regenerative braking system or RBS means an electrical energy system 
that is installed in an EV for recovering or dissipating kinetic energy, 
and which uses the propulsion motor(s) as a retarder for partial braking 
of the EV while returning electrical energy to the propulsion battery(s) 
or dissipating electrical energy.
    Snub means the braking deceleration of a vehicle from a higher 
reference speed to a lower reference speed that is greater than zero.
    Split service brake system means a brake system consisting of two or 
more

[[Page 439]]

subsystems actuated by a single control, designed so that a single 
failure in any subsystem (such as a leakage-type failure of a pressure 
component of a hydraulic subsystem except structural failure of a 
housing that is common to two or more subsystems, or an electrical 
failure in an electric subsystem) does not impair the operation of any 
other subsystem.
    Stopping distance means the distance traveled by a vehicle from the 
point of application of force to the brake control to the point at which 
the vehicle reaches a full stop.
    Variable brake proportioning system means a system that has one or 
more proportioning devices which automatically change the brake pressure 
ratio between any two or more wheels to compensate for changes in wheel 
loading due to static load changes and/or dynamic weight transfer, or 
due to deceleration.
    Wheel lockup means 100 percent wheel slip.
    S5. Equipment requirements.
    S5.1. Service brake system. Each vehicle shall be equipped with a 
service brake system acting on all wheels.
    S5.1.1. Wear adjustment. Wear of the service brakes shall be 
compensated for by means of a system of automatic adjustment.
    S5.1.2. Wear status. The wear condition of all service brakes shall 
be indicated by either:
    (a) Acoustic or optical devices warning the driver at his or her 
driving position when lining replacement is necessary, or
    (b) A means of visually checking the degree of brake lining wear, 
from the outside or underside of the vehicle, utilizing only the tools 
or equipment normally supplied with the vehicle. The removal of wheels 
is permitted for this purpose.
    S5.1.3 Regenerative braking system. (a) For an EV equipped with RBS, 
the RBS is considered to be part of the service brake system if it is 
automatically activated by an application of the service brake control, 
if there is no means provided for the driver to disconnect or otherwise 
deactivate it, and if it is activated in all transmission positions, 
including neutral.
    (b) For an EV that is equipped with both ABS and RBS that is part of 
the service brake system, the ABS must control the RBS.
    S5.2. Parking brake system. Each vehicle shall be equipped with a 
parking brake system of a friction type with solely mechanical means to 
retain engagement.
    S5.3. Controls.
    S5.3.1. The service brakes shall be activated by means of a foot 
control. The control of the parking brake shall be independent of the 
service brake control, and may be either a hand or foot control.
    S5.3.2. For vehicles equipped with ABS, a control to manually 
disable the ABS, either fully or partially, is prohibited.
    S5.4. Reservoirs.
    S5.4.1. Master cylinder reservoirs. A master cylinder shall have a 
reservoir compartment for each service brake subsystem serviced by the 
master cylinder. Loss of fluid from one compartment shall not result in 
a complete loss of brake fluid from another compartment.
    S5.4.2. Reservoir capacity. Reservoirs, whether for master cylinders 
or other type systems, shall have a total minimum capacity equivalent to 
the fluid displacement resulting when all the wheel cylinders or caliper 
pistons serviced by the reservoirs move from a new lining, fully 
retracted position (as adjusted initially to the manufacturer's 
recommended setting) to a fully worn, fully applied position, as 
determined in accordance with S7.17(c) of this standard. Reservoirs 
shall have completely separate compartments for each subsystem except 
that in reservoir systems utilizing a portion of the reservoir for a 
common supply to two or more subsystems, individual partial compartments 
shall each have a minimum volume of fluid equal to at least the volume 
displaced by the master cylinder piston servicing the subsystem, during 
a full stroke of the piston. Each brake power unit reservoir servicing 
only the brake system shall have a minimum capacity equivalent to the 
fluid displacement required to charge the system piston(s) or 
accumulator(s) to normal operating pressure plus the displacement 
resulting when

[[Page 440]]

all the wheel cylinders or caliper pistons serviced by the reservoir or 
accumulator(s) move from a new lining, fully retracted position (as 
adjusted initially to the manufacturer's recommended setting) to a fully 
worn, fully applied position.
    S5.4.3. Reservoir labeling. Each vehicle equipped with hydraulic 
brakes shall have a brake fluid warning statement that reads as follows, 
in letters at least 3.2 mm (\1/8\ inch) high: ``WARNING: Clean filler 
cap before removing. Use only ------ fluid from a sealed container.'' 
(Inserting the recommended type of brake fluid as specified in 49 CFR 
571.116, e.g., ``DOT 3.'') The lettering shall be:
    (a) Permanently affixed, engraved or embossed;
    (b) Located so as to be visible by direct view, either on or within 
100 mm (3.94 inches) of the brake fluid reservoir filler plug or cap; 
and
    (c) Of a color that contrasts with its background, if it is not 
engraved or embossed.
    S5.4.4. Fluid level indication. Brake fluid reservoirs shall be so 
constructed that the level of fluid can be checked without need for the 
reservoir to be opened. This requirement is deemed to have been met if 
the vehicle is equipped with a transparent brake fluid reservoir or a 
brake fluid level indicator meeting the requirements of S5.5.1(a)(1).
    S5.5. Brake system warning indicator. Each vehicle shall have one or 
more visual brake system warning indicators, mounted in front of and in 
clear view of the driver, which meet the requirements of S5.5.1 through 
S5.5.5. In addition, a vehicle manufactured without a split service 
brake system shall be equipped with an audible warning signal that 
activates under the conditions specified in S5.5.1(a).
    S5.5.1. Activation. An indicator shall be activated when the 
ignition (start) switch is in the ``on'' (``run'') position and whenever 
any of conditions (a) through (g) occur:
    (a) A gross loss of fluid or fluid pressure (such as caused by 
rupture of a brake line but not by a structural failure of a housing 
that is common to two or more subsystems) as indicated by one of the 
following conditions (chosen at the option of the manufacturer):
    (1) A drop in the level of the brake fluid in any master cylinder 
reservoir compartment to less than the recommended safe level specified 
by the manufacturer or to one-fourth of the fluid capacity of that 
reservoir compartment, whichever is greater.
    (2) For vehicles equipped with a split service brake system, a 
differential pressure of 1.5 MPa (218 psi) between the intact and failed 
brake subsystems measured at a master cylinder outlet or a slave 
cylinder outlet.
    (3) A drop in the supply pressure in a brake power unit to one-half 
of the normal system pressure.
    (b) Any electrical functional failure in an antilock or variable 
brake proportioning system.
    (c) Application of the parking brake.
    (d) Brake lining wear-out, if the manufacturer has elected to use an 
electrical device to provide an optical warning to meet the requirements 
of S5.1.2(a).
    (e) For a vehicle with electrically-actuated service brakes, failure 
of the source of electric power to those brakes, or diminution of state 
of charge of the batteries to less than a level specified by the 
manufacturer for the purpose of warning a driver of degraded brake 
performance.
    (f) For a vehicle with electric transmission of the service brake 
control signal, failure of a brake control circuit.
    (g) For an EV with a regenerative braking system that is part of the 
service brake system, failure of the RBS.
    S5.5.2. Function check. (a) All indicators shall be activated as a 
check function by either:
    (1) Automatic activation when the ignition (start) switch is turned 
to the ``on'' (``run'') position when the engine is not running, or when 
the ignition (``start'') switch is in a position between ``on'' 
(``run'') and ``start'' that is designated by the manufacturer as a 
check position, or
    (2) A single manual action by the driver, such as momentary 
activation of a test button or switch mounted on the instrument panel in 
front of and in clear view of the driver, or, in the case of an 
indicator for application of the

[[Page 441]]

parking brake, by applying the parking brake when the ignition is in the 
``on'' (``run'') position.
    (b) In the case of a vehicle that has an interlock device that 
prevents the engine from being started under one or more conditions, 
check functions meeting the requirements of S5.5.2(a) need not be 
operational under any condition in which the engine cannot be started.
    (c) The manufacturer shall explain the brake check function test 
procedure in the owner's manual.
    S5.5.3. Duration. Each indicator activated due to a condition 
specified in S5.5.1 shall remain activated as long as the condition 
exists, whenever the ignition (``start'') switch is in the ``on'' 
(``run'') position, whether or not the engine is running.
    S5.5.4. Function. When a visual warning indicator is activated, it 
may be continuous or flashing, except that the visual warning indicator 
on a vehicle not equipped with a split service brake system shall be 
flashing. The audible warning required for a vehicle manufactured 
without a split service brake system may be continuous or intermittent.
    S5.5.5. Labeling. (a) Each visual indicator shall display a word or 
words in accordance with the requirements of Standard No. 101 (49 CFR 
571.101) and this section, which shall be legible to the driver under 
all daytime and nighttime conditions when activated. Unless otherwise 
specified, the words shall have letters not less than 3.2 mm (\1/8\ 
inch) high and the letters and background shall be of contrasting 
colors, one of which is red. Words or symbols in addition to those 
required by Standard No. 101 and this section may be provided for 
purposes of clarity.
    (b) Vehicles manufactured with a split service brake system may use 
a common brake warning indicator to indicate two or more of the 
functions described in S5.5.1(a) through S5.5.1(d). If a common 
indicator is used, it shall display the word ``Brake.''
    (c) A vehicle manufactured without a split service brake system 
shall use a separate indicator to indicate the failure condition in 
S5.5.1(a). This indicator shall display the words ``STOP--BRAKE 
FAILURE'' in block capital letters not less than 6.4 mm (\1/4\ inch) in 
height.
    (d) If separate indicators are used for one or more of the 
conditions described in S5.5.1(a) through S5.5.1(g), the indicators 
shall display the following wording:
    (1) If a separate indicator is provided for the low brake fluid 
condition in S5.5.1(a)(1), the words ``Brake Fluid'' shall be used 
except for vehicles using hydraulic system mineral oil.
    (2) If a separate indicator is provided for the gross loss of 
pressure condition in S5.5.1(a)(2), the words ``Brake Pressure'' shall 
be used.
    (3) If a separate indicator is provided for the condition specified 
in S5.5.1(b), the letters and background shall be of contrasting colors, 
one of which is yellow. The indicator shall be labeled with the words 
``Antilock'' or ``Anti-lock'' or ``ABS''; or ``Brake Proportioning,'' in 
accordance with Table 2 of Standard No. 101.
    (4) If a separate indicator is provided for application of the 
parking brake as specified for S5.5.1(c), the single word ``Park'' or 
the words ``Parking Brake'' may be used.
    (5) If a separate indicator is provided to indicate brake lining 
wear-out as specified in S5.5.1(d), the words ``Brake Wear'' shall be 
used.
    (6) If a separate indicator is provided for the condition specified 
in S5.5.1(g), the letters and background shall be of contrasting colors, 
one of which is yellow. The indicator shall be labeled with the symbol 
``RBS.'' RBS failure in a system that is part of the service brake 
system may also be indicated by a yellow lamp that also indicates 
``ABS'' failure and displays the symbol ``ABS/RBS.''
    (7) If a separate indicator is provided for any other function, the 
display shall include the word ``Brake'' and the appropriate additional 
labeling.
    S5.6. Brake system integrity. Each vehicle shall meet the complete 
performance requirements of this standard without:
    (a) Detachment or fracture of any component of the braking system, 
such as brake springs and brake shoes or disc pad facings other than 
minor cracks that do not impair attachment of the friction facings. All 
mechanical

[[Page 442]]

components of the braking system shall be intact and functional. 
Friction facing tearout (complete detachment of lining) shall not exceed 
10 percent of the lining on any single frictional element.
    (b) Any visible brake fluid or lubricant on the friction surface of 
the brake, or leakage at the master cylinder or brake power unit 
reservoir cover, seal, and filler openings.
    S6. General test conditions. Each vehicle must meet the performance 
requirements specified in S7 under the following test conditions and in 
accordance with the test procedures and test sequence specified. Where a 
range of conditions is specified, the vehicle must meet the requirements 
at all points within the range.
    S6.1. Ambient conditions.
    S6.1.1. Ambient temperature. The ambient temperature is any 
temperature between 0 [deg]C (32 [deg]F) and 40 [deg]C (104 [deg]F).
    S6.1.2. Wind speed. The wind speed is not greater than 5 m/s (11.2 
mph).
    S6.2. Road test surface.
    S6.2.1. Pavement friction. Unless otherwise specified, the road test 
surface produces a peak friction coefficient (PFC) of 0.9 when measured 
using an American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) E1136 
standard reference test tire, in accordance with ASTM Method E 1337-90, 
at a speed of 64.4 km/h (40 mph), without water delivery.
    S6.2.2. Gradient. Except for the parking brake gradient holding 
test, the test surface has no more than a 1% gradient in the direction 
of testing and no more than a 2% gradient perpendicular to the direction 
of testing.
    S6.2.3. Lane width. Road tests are conducted on a test lane 3.5 m 
(11.5 ft) wide.
    S6.3. Vehicle conditions.
    S6.3.1. Vehicle weight.
    S6.3.1.1. For the tests at GVWR, the vehicle is loaded to its GVWR 
such that the weight on each axle as measured at the tire-ground 
interface is in proportion to its GAWR, with the fuel tank filled to 
100% of capacity. However, if the weight on any axle of a vehicle at 
LLVW exceeds the axle's proportional share of the GVWR, the load 
required to reach GVWR is placed so that the weight on that axle remains 
the same as at LLVW.
    S6.3.1.2. For the test at LLVW, the vehicle is loaded to its LLVW 
such that the added weight is distributed in the front passenger seat 
area.
    S6.3.2. Fuel tank loading. The fuel tank is filled to 100% of 
capacity at the beginning of testing and may not be less than 75% of 
capacity during any part of the testing.
    S6.3.3. Lining preparation. At the beginning of preparation for the 
road tests, the brakes of the vehicle are in the same condition as when 
the vehicle was manufactured. No burnishing or other special preparation 
is allowed, unless all vehicles sold to the public are similarly 
prepared as a part of the manufacturing process.
    S6.3.4. Adjustments and repairs. These requirements must be met 
without replacing any brake system parts or making any adjustments to 
the brake system except as specified in this standard. Where brake 
adjustments are specified (S7.1.3), adjust the brakes, including the 
parking brakes, in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation. No 
brake adjustments are allowed during or between subsequent tests in the 
test sequence.
    S6.3.5. Automatic brake adjusters. Automatic adjusters are 
operational throughout the entire test sequence. They may be adjusted 
either manually or by other means, as recommended by the manufacturer, 
only prior to the beginning of the road test sequence.
    S6.3.6. Antilock brake system (ABS). If a car is equipped with an 
ABS, the ABS is fully operational for all tests, except where specified 
in the following sections.
    S6.3.7. Variable brake proportioning valve. If a car is equipped 
with a variable brake proportioning system, the proportioning valve is 
fully operational for all tests except the test for failed variable 
brake proportioning system.
    S6.3.8. Tire inflation pressure. Tires are inflated to the pressure 
recommended by the vehicle manufacturer for the GVWR of the vehicle.
    S6.3.9. Engine. Engine idle speed and ignition timing are set 
according to the manufacturer's recommendations.

[[Page 443]]

If the vehicle is equipped with an adjustable engine speed governor, it 
is adjusted according to the manufacturer's recommendations.
    S6.3.10. Vehicle openings. All vehicle openings (doors, windows, 
hood, trunk, convertible top, cargo doors, etc.) are closed except as 
required for instrumentation purposes.
    S6.3.11 State of charge of batteries for EVs.
    S6.3.11.1 The state of charge of the propulsion batteries is 
determined in accordance with SAE Recommended Practice J227a, Electric 
Vehicle Test Procedure, February 1976. The applicable sections of J227a 
are 3.2.1 through 3.2.4, 3.3.1 through 3.3.2.2, 3.4.1 and 3.4.2, 4.2.1, 
5.2, 5.2.1 and 5.3.
    S6.3.11.2 At the beginning of the burnish procedure (S7.1 of this 
standard) in the test sequence, each propulsion battery is at the 
maximum state of charge recommended by the manufacturer, as stated in 
the vehicle operator's manual or on a label that is permanently attached 
to the vehicle, of, if the manufacturer has made no recommendation, not 
less than 95 percent. During the 200-stop burnish procedure, the 
propulsion batteries are restored to the maximum state of charge 
determined as above, after each increment of 40 burnish stops until the 
burnish procedure is complete. The batteries may be charged at a more 
frequent interval during a particular 40-stop increment only if the EV 
is incapable of achieving the initial burnish test speed during that 
increment. During the burnish procedure, the propulsion batteries may be 
charged by external means or replaced by batteries that are at a state 
of charge of not less than 95 percent. For an EV having a manual control 
for setting the level of regenerative braking, the manual control, at 
the beginning of the burnish procedure, is set to provide maximum 
regenerative braking throughout the burnish.
    S6.3.11.3 At the beginning of each performance test in the test 
sequence (S7.2 through S7.17 of this standard), unless otherwise 
specified, an EV's propulsion batteries are at the state of charge 
recommended by the manufacturer, as stated in the vehicle operator's 
manual or on a label that is permanently attached to the vehicle, or, if 
the manufacturer has made no recommendation, at a state of charge of not 
less than 95 percent. No further charging of any propulsion battery 
occurs during any of the performance tests in the test sequence of this 
standard. If the propulsion batteries are depleted during a test 
sequence such that the vehicle reaches automatic shut-down, will not 
accelerate, or the low state of charge brake warning lamp is 
illuminated, the vehicle is to be accelerated to brake test speed by 
auxiliary means. If a battery is replaced rather than recharged, the 
replacement battery shall be charged and measured for state of charge in 
accordance with these procedures.
    S6.3.12 State of charge of batteries for electrically-actuated 
service brakes. A vehicle equipped with electrically-actuated service 
brakes also performs the following test series. Conduct 10 stopping 
tests from a speed of 100 kph or the maximum vehicle speed, whichever is 
less. At least two of the 10 stopping distances must be less than or 
equal to 70 meters. The vehicle is loaded to GVWR and the transmission 
is in the neutral position when the service brake control is actuated 
and throughout the remainder of the test. Each battery providing power 
to the electrically-actuated service brakes, shall be in a depleted 
state of charge for conditions (a), (b), or (c) of this paragraph as 
appropriate. An auxiliary means may be used to accelerate an EV to test 
speed.
    (a) For an EV equipped with electrically-actuated service brakes 
deriving power from the propulsion batteries and with automatic shut-
down capability of the propulsion motor(s), the propulsion batteries are 
at not more than five percent above the EV actual automatic shut-down 
critical value. The critical value is determined by measuring the state-
of-charge of each propulsion battery at the instant that automatic shut-
down occurs.
    (b) For an EV equipped with electrically-actuated service brakes 
deriving power from the propulsion batteries and with no automatic shut-
down capability of the propulsion motor(s), the propulsion batteries are 
at an average of not more than five percent above the actual state of

[[Page 444]]

charge at which the brake failure warning signal, required by S5.5.1(e) 
of this standard, is illuminated.
    (c) For a vehicle which has one or more auxiliary batteries that 
provides electrical energy to operate the electrically-actuated service 
brakes, each auxiliary battery is at not more than five percent above 
the actual state of charge at which the brake failure warning signal, 
required by S5.5.1(e) of this standard, is illuminated.
    S6.3.13 Electric vehicles.
    S6.3.13.1 (a) For an EV equipped with an RBS that is part of the 
service brake system, the RBS is operational during the burnish and all 
tests, except for the test of a failed RBS.
    (b) For an EV equipped with an RBS that is not part of the service 
brake system, the RBS is operational and set to produce the maximum 
regenerative braking effect during the burnish, and is disabled during 
the test procedures. If the vehicle is equipped with a neutral gear that 
automatically disables the RBS, the test procedures which are designated 
to be conducted in gear may be conducted in neutral.
    S6.3.13.2 For tests conducted ``in neutral'', the operator of an EV 
with no ``neutral'' position (or other means such as a clutch for 
disconnecting the drive train from the propulsion motor(s)) does not 
apply any electromotive force to the propulsion motor(s). Any 
electromotive force that is applied to the propulsion motor(s) 
automatically remains in effect unless otherwise specified by the test 
procedure.
    S6.4. Instrumentation.
    S6.4.1. Brake temperature measurement. The brake temperature is 
measured by plug-type thermocouples installed in the approximate center 
of the facing length and width of the most heavily loaded shoe or disc 
pad, one per brake, as shown in Figure 1. A second thermocouple may be 
installed at the beginning of the test sequence if the lining wear is 
expected to reach a point causing the first thermocouple to contact the 
metal rubbing surface of a drum or rotor. For center-grooved shoes or 
pads, thermocouples are installed within 3 mm (.12 in) to 6 mm (.24 in) 
of the groove and as close to the center as possible.
    S6.4.2. Brake line pressure measurement for the torque wheel test. 
The vehicle shall be fitted with pressure transducers in each hydraulic 
circuit. On hydraulically proportioned circuits, the pressure transducer 
shall be downstream of the operative proportioning valve.
    S6.4.3. Brake torque measurement for the torque wheel test. The 
vehicle shall be fitted with torque wheels at each wheel position, 
including slip ring assemblies and wheel speed indicators to permit 
wheel lock to be detected.

[[Page 445]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.070

    S6.5. Procedural conditions.
    S6.5.1. Brake control. All service brake system performance 
requirements, including the partial system requirements of S7.7, S7.10 
and S7.11, must be met solely by use of the service brake control.
    S6.5.2. Test speeds. If a vehicle is incapable of attaining the 
specified normal test speed, it is tested at a speed that is a multiple 
of 5 km/h (3.1 mph) that is 4 to 8 km/h (2.5 to 5.0 mph) less than its 
maximum speed and its performance must be within a stopping distance 
given by the formula provided for the specific requirement.
    S6.5.3. Stopping distance.
    S6.5.3.1. The braking performance of a vehicle is determined by 
measuring the stopping distance from a given initial speed.
    S6.5.3.2. Unless otherwise specified, the vehicle is stopped in the 
shortest distance achievable (best effort) on all stops. Where more than 
one stop is required for a given set of test conditions, a vehicle is 
deemed to comply with the corresponding stopping distance requirements 
if at least one of the stops is made within the prescribed distance.

[[Page 446]]

    S6.5.3.3. In the stopping distance formulas given for each 
applicable test (such as S<=0.10V+0.0060V<SUP>2</SUP>), S is the maximum 
stopping distance in meters, and V is the test speed in km/h.
    S6.5.4. Vehicle position and attitude.
    S6.5.4.1. The vehicle is aligned in the center of the lane at the 
start of each brake application. Steering corrections are permitted 
during each stop.
    S6.5.4.2. Stops are made without any part of the vehicle leaving the 
lane and without rotation of the vehicle about its vertical axis of more 
than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>15[deg] from the center line of the test lane 
at any time during any stop.
    S6.5.5. Transmission selector control.
    S6.5.5.1. For tests in neutral, a stop or snub is made in accordance 
with the following procedures:
    (a) Exceed the test speed by 6 to 12 km/h (3.7 to 7.5 mph);
    (b) Close the throttle and coast in gear to approximately 3 km/h 
(1.9 mph) above the test speed;
    (c) Shift to neutral; and
    (d) When the test speed is reached, apply the brakes.
    S6.5.5.2. For tests in gear, a stop or snub is made in accordance 
with the following procedures:
    (a) With the transmission selector in the control position 
recommended by the manufacturer for driving on a level surface at the 
applicable test speed, exceed the test speed by 6 to 12 km/h (3.7 to 7.5 
mph);
    (b) Close the throttle and coast in gear; and
    (c) When the test speed is reached apply the brakes.
    (d) To avoid engine stall, a manual transmission may be shifted to 
neutral (or the clutch disengaged) when the vehicle speed is below 30 
km/h (18.6 mph).
    S6.5.6. Initial brake temperature (IBT). If the lower limit of the 
specified IBT for the first stop in a test sequence (other than a 
parking brake grade holding test) has not been reached, the brakes are 
heated to the IBT by making one or more brake applications from a speed 
of 50 km/h (31.1 mph), at a deceleration rate not greater than 3 m/s\2\ 
(9.8 fps\2\).
    S7. Road test procedures and performance requirements. Each vehicle 
shall meet all the applicable requirements of this section, when tested 
according to the conditions and procedures set forth below and in S6, in 
the sequence specified in Table 1:

                       Table 1--Road Test Sequence
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Section
                        Testing order                             No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vehicle loaded to GVWR:
  1 Burnish..................................................      S7.1
  2 Wheel lock sequence......................................      S7.2
Vehicle loaded to LLVW:
  3 Wheel lock sequence......................................      S7.2
  4 ABS performance..........................................      S7.3
  5 Torque wheel.............................................      S7.4
Vehicle loaded to GVWR:
  6 Torque wheel.............................................      S7.4
  7 Cold effectiveness.......................................      S7.5
  8 High speed effectiveness.................................      S7.6
  9 Stops with engine off....................................      S7.7
Vehicle loaded to LLVW:
  10 Cold effectiveness......................................      S7.5
  11 High speed effectiveness................................      S7.6
  12 Failed antilock.........................................      S7.8
  13 Failed proportioning valve..............................      S7.9
  14 Hydraulic circuit failure...............................      S7.10
Vehicle loaded to GVWR:
  15 Hydraulic circuit failure...............................      S7.10
  16 Failed antilock.........................................      S7.8
  17 Failed proportioning valve..............................      S7.9
  18 Power brake unit failure................................      S7.11
  19 Parking brake...........................................      S7.12
  20 Heating Snubs...........................................      S7.13
  21 Hot Performance.........................................      S7.14
  22 Brake cooling...........................................      S7.15
  23 Recovery Performance....................................      S7.16
  24 Final Inspection........................................      S7.17
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S7.1. Burnish.
    S7.1.1. General information. Any pretest instrumentation checks are 
conducted as part of the burnish procedure, including any necessary 
rechecks after instrumentation repair, replacement or adjustment. 
Instrumentation check test conditions must be in accordance with the 
burnish test procedure specified in S7.1.2 and S7.1.3.
    S7.1.2. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR only.
    (b) Transmission position: In gear.
    S7.1.3. Test conditions and procedures. The road test surface 
conditions specified in S6.2 do not apply to the burnish procedure.
    (a) IBT: <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speed: 80 km/h (49.7 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: Adjust as necessary to maintain specified constant 
deceleration rate.
    (d) Deceleration rate: Maintain a constant deceleration rate of 3.0 
m/s\2\ (9.8 fps\2\).

[[Page 447]]

    (e) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel allowed for longer than 0.1 
seconds at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (f) Number of runs: 200 stops.
    (g) Interval between runs: The interval from the start of one 
service brake application to the start of the next is either the time 
necessary to reduce the IBT to 100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F) or less, or the 
distance of 2 km (1.24 miles), whichever occurs first.
    (h) Accelerate to 80 km/h (49.7 mph) after each stop and maintain 
that speed until making the next stop.
    (i) After burnishing, adjust the brakes as specified in S6.3.4.
    S7.2 Wheel lockup sequence.
    S7.2.1 General information. (a) The purpose of this test is to 
ensure that lockup of both front wheels occurs either simultaneously 
with, or at a lower deceleration rate than, the lockup of both rear 
wheels, when tested on road surfaces affording adhesion such that wheel 
lockup of the first axle occurs at a braking ratio of between 0.15 and 
0.80, inclusive.
    (b) This test is for vehicles without antilock brake systems.
    (c) This wheel lock sequence test is to be used as a screening test 
to evaluate a vehicle's axle lockup sequence and to determine whether 
the torque wheel test in S7.4 must be conducted.
    (d) For this test, a simultaneous lockup of the front and rear 
wheels refers to the conditions when the time interval between the first 
occurrence of lockup of the last (second) wheel on the rear axle and the 
first occurrence of lockup of the last (second) wheel on the front axle 
is <= 0.1 second for vehicle speeds <ls-thn-eq> 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) A front or rear axle lockup is defined as the point in time when 
the last (second) wheel on an axle locks up.
    (f) Vehicles that lock their front axle simultaneously or at lower 
deceleration rates than their rear axle need not be tested to the torque 
wheel procedure.
    (g) Vehicles which lock their rear axle at deceleration rates lower 
than the front axle shall also be tested in accordance with the torque 
wheel procedure in S7.4.
    (h) Any determination of noncompliance for failing adhesion 
utilization requirements shall be based on torque wheel test results.
    S7.2.2 Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR and LLVW.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    S7.2.3. Test Conditions and Procedures. (a) IBT: <=65 [deg]C (149 
[deg]F), <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speed: 65 km/h (40.4 mph) for a braking ratio <= 0.50; 100 
km/h (62.1 mph) for a braking ratio <ls-thn-eq> 0.50.
    (c) Pedal force:
    (1) Pedal force is applied and controlled by the vehicle driver or 
by a mechanical brake pedal actuator.
    (2) Pedal force is increased at a linear rate such that the first 
axle lockup occurs no less than one-half (0.5) second and no more than 
one and one-half (1.5) seconds after the initial application of the 
pedal.
    (3) The pedal is released when the second axle locks, or when the 
pedal force reaches 1kN (225 lbs), or 0.1 seconds after first axle 
lockup, whichever occurs first.
    (d) Wheel lockup: Only wheel lockups above a vehicle speed of 15 km/
h (9.3 mph) are considered in determining the results of this test.
    (e) Test surfaces: This test is conducted, for each loading 
condition, on two different test surfaces that will result in a braking 
ratio of between 0.15 and 0.80, inclusive. NHTSA reserves the right to 
choose the test surfaces to be used based on adhesion utilization curves 
or any other method of determining ``worst case'' conditions.
    (f) The data recording equipment shall have a minimum sampling rate 
of 40 Hz.
    (g) Data to be recorded. The following information must be 
automatically recorded in phase continuously throughout each test run 
such that values of the variables can be cross referenced in real time.
    (1) Vehicle speed.
    (2) Brake pedal force.
    (3) Angular velocity at each wheel.
    (4) Actual instantaneous vehicle deceleration or the deceleration 
calculated by differentiation of the vehicle speed.
    (h) Speed channel filtration. For analog instrumentation, the speed 
channel shall be filtered by using a low-pass filter having a cut-off 
frequency of less than one fourth the sampling rate.

[[Page 448]]

    (i) Test procedure. For each test surface, three runs meeting the 
pedal force application and time for wheel lockup requirements shall be 
made. Up to a total of six runs will be allowed to obtain three valid 
runs. Only the first three valid runs obtained shall be used for data 
analysis purposes.
    S7.2.4. Performance requirements. (a) In order to pass this test a 
vehicle shall be capable of meeting the test requirements on all test 
surfaces that will result in a braking ratio of between 0.15 and 0.80, 
inclusive.
    (b) If all three valid runs on each surface result in the front axle 
locking before or simultaneously with the rear axle, or the front axle 
locks up with only one or no wheels locking on the rear axle, the torque 
wheel procedure need not be run, and the vehicle is considered to meet 
the adhesion utilization requirements of this Standard. This performance 
requirement shall be met for all vehicle braking ratios between 0.15 and 
0.80.
    (c) If any one of the three valid runs on any surface results in the 
rear axle locking before the front axle or the rear axle locks up with 
only one or no wheels locking on the front axle the torque wheel 
procedure shall be performed. This performance requirement shall be met 
for all vehicle braking ratios between 0.15 and 0.80.
    (d) If any one of the three valid runs on any surface results in 
neither axle locking (i.e., only one or no wheels locked on each axle) 
before a pedal force of 1kN (225 lbs) is reached, the vehicle shall be 
tested to the torque wheel procedure.
    (e) If the conditions listed in paragraph (c) or (d) of this section 
occur, vehicle compliance shall be determined from the results of a 
torquesults of a torque wheel test performed in accordance with S7.4.
    (f) An EV with RBS that is part of the service brake system shall 
meet the performance requirements over the entire normal operating range 
of the RBS.
    S7.3. ABS performance. [Reserved]
    S7.4. Adhesion utilization (Torque Wheel Method).
    S7.4.1. General information. This test is for vehicles without any 
ABS. The purpose of the test is to determine the adhesion utilization of 
a vehicle.
    S7.4.2. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR and LLVW.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    (c) Tires: For this test, a separate set of tires, identical to 
those used for all other tests under Section 7.0, may be used.
    S7.4.3. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: <=65 [deg]C (149 
[deg]F), <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speeds: 100 km/h (62.1 mph), and 50 km/h (31.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: Pedal force is increased at a linear rate between 
100 and 150 N/sec (22.5 and 33.7 lbs/sec) for the 100 km/h test speed, 
or between 100 and 200 N/sec (22.5 and 45.0 lbs/sec) for the 50 km/h 
test speed, until the first axle locks or until a pedal force of 1 kN 
(225 lbs) is reached, whichever occurs first.
    (d) Cooling: Between brake applications, the vehicle is driven at 
speeds up to 100 km/h (62.1 mph) until the IBT specified in S7.4.3(a) is 
reached.
    (e) Number of runs: With the vehicle at LLVW, run five stops from a 
speed of 100 km/h (62.1 mph) and five stops from a speed of 50 km/h 
(31.1 mph), while alternating between the two test speeds after each 
stop. With the vehicle at GVWR, repeat the five stops at each test speed 
while alternating between the two test speeds.
    (f) Test surface: PFC of at least 0.9.
    (g) Data to be recorded. The following information must be 
automatically recorded in phase continuously throughout each test run 
such that values of the variables can be cross referenced in real time:
    (1) Vehicle speed.
    (2) Brake pedal force.
    (3) Angular velocity at each wheel.
    (4) Brake torque at each wheel.
    (5) Hydraulic brake line pressure in each brake circuit. 
Hydraulically proportioned circuits shall be fitted with transducers on 
at least one front wheel and one rear wheel downstream of the operative 
proportioning or pressure limiting valve(s).
    (6) Vehicle deceleration.
    (h) Sample rate: All data acquisition and recording equipment shall 
support a minimum sample rate of 40 Hz on all channels.
    (i) Determination of front versus rear brake pressure. Determine the 
front

[[Page 449]]

versus rear brake pressure relationship over the entire range of line 
pressures. Unless the vehicle has a variable brake proportioning system, 
this determination is made by static test. If the vehicle has a variable 
brake proportioning system, dynamic tests are run with the vehicle both 
empty and loaded. 15 snubs from 50 km/h (31.1 mph) are made for each of 
the two load conditions, using the same initial conditions specified in 
this section.
    S7.4.4. Data reduction. (a) The data from each brake application 
under S7.4.3 is filtered using a five-point, on-center moving average 
for each data channel.
    (b) For each brake application under S7.4.3 determine the slope 
(brake factor) and pressure axis intercept (brake hold-off pressure) of 
the linear least squares equation best describing the measured torque 
output at each braked wheel as a function of measured line pressure 
applied at the same wheel. Only torque output values obtained from data 
collected when the vehicle deceleration is within the range of 0.15g to 
0.80g are used in the regression analysis.
    (c) Average the results of paragraph (b) of this section to 
calculate the average brake factor and brake hold-off pressure for all 
brake applications for the front axle.
    (d) Average the results of paragraph (b) of this section to 
calculate the average brake factor and brake hold-off pressure for all 
brake applications for the rear axle.
    (e) Using the relationship between front and rear brake line 
pressure determined in S7.4.3(i) and the tire rolling radius, calculate 
the braking force at each axle as a function of front brake line 
pressure.
    (f) Calculate the braking ratio of the vehicle as a function of the 
front brake line pressure using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.071

where z = braking ratio at a given front line pressure;
T<INF>1</INF>, T<INF>2</INF> = Braking forces at the front and rear 
axles, respectively, corresponding to the same front brake line 
pressure, and
P = total vehicle weight.

    (g) Calculate the adhesion utilized at each axle as a function of 
braking ratio using the following equations:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02FE95.014

where f<INF>i</INF> = adhesion utilized by axle i
T<INF>i</INF> = braking force at axle i (from (e))
P<INF>i</INF> = static weight on axle i
i = 1 for the front axle, or 2 for the rear axle
z = braking ratio (from (f))
h = height of center of gravity of the vehicle
P = total vehicle weight
E = wheelbase

    (h) Plot f<INF>1</INF> and f<INF>2</INF> obtained in (g) as a 
function of z, for both GVWR and LLVW load conditions. These are the 
adhesion utilization curves for the vehicle, which are compared to the 
performance requirements in S7.4.5. shown graphically in Figure 2:

[[Page 450]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.072

    S7.4.5. Performance requirements. For all braking ratios between 
0.15 and 0.80, each adhesion utilization curve for a rear axle shall be 
situated below a line defined by z=0.9k where z is the braking ratio and 
k is the PFC.
    S7.4.5.1 An EV with RBS that is part of the service brake system 
shall meet the performance requirement over the entire normal operating 
range of the RBS.
    S7.5. Cold effectiveness.
    S7.5.1. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR and LLVW.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    S7.5.2. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: <=65 [deg]C (149 
[deg]F), <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speed: 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: <=65N (14.6 lbs), <=500N (112.4 lbs).
    (d) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel for longer than 0.1 seconds 
allowed at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) Number of runs: 6 stops.
    (f) Test surface: PFC of 0.9.
    (g) For each stop, bring the vehicle to test speed and then stop the 
vehicle in the shortest possible distance under the specified 
conditions.

[[Page 451]]

    S7.5.3. Performance requirements. (a) Stopping distance for 100 km/h 
test speed: <=70m (230 ft).
    (b) Stopping distance for reduced test speed: S<=0.10V+0.0060V\2\.
    S7.6. High speed effectiveness. This test is not run if vehicle 
maximum speed is less than or equal to 125 km/h (77.7 mph).
    S7.6.1. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR and LLVW.
    (b) Transmission position: In gear.
    S7.6.2. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: <=65 [deg]C (149 
[deg]F), <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speed: 80% of vehicle maximum speed if 125 km/h (77.7 mph) 
< vehicle maximum speed < 200 km/h (124.3 mph), or 160 km/h (99.4 mph) 
if vehicle maximum speed <= 200 km/h (124.3 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: <=65N (14.6 lbs), <=500N (112.4 lbs).
    (d) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel for longer than 0.1 seconds 
allowed at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) Number of runs: 6 stops.
    (f) Test surface: PFC of 0.9.
    S7.6.3. Performance requirements.
    Stopping distance: S<=0.10V+0.0067V\2\.
    S7.7. Stops with Engine Off.
    S7.7.1. General information. This test is for vehicles equipped with 
one or more brake power units or brake power assist units. This test is 
also for EVs.
    S7.7.2. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR only.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    (c) Vehicle engine: Off (not running).
    (d) Ignition key position: May be returned to ``on'' position after 
turning engine off, or a device may be used to ``kill'' the engine while 
leaving the ignition key in the ``on'' position.
    S7.7.3. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: <=65 [deg]C (149 
[deg]F), <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speed: 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: <=65N (14.6 lbs), <=500N (112.4 lbs).
    (d) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel allowed for longer than 0.1 
seconds at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) Number of runs: 6 stops.
    (f) Test surface: PFC of 0.9.
    (g) All system reservoirs (brake power and/or assist units) are 
fully charged and the vehicle's engine is off (not running) at the 
beginning of each stop.
    (h) For an EV, this test is conducted with no electrical power 
supplied to the vehicle's propulsion motor(s), but with the RBS and 
brake power or power assist still operating, unless cutting off the 
supply of electrical power to the propulsion motor(s) also disables 
those systems.
    S7.7.4. Performance requirements. (a) Stopping distance for 100 km/h 
test speed: <=70m (230 ft.)
    (b) Stopping distance for reduced test speed: S <= 0.10V + 
0.0060V\2\.
    S7.8. Antilock functional failure.
    S7.8.1. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle loading: LLVW and GVWR.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    S7.8.2. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: <=65 [deg]C (149 
[deg]F), <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speed: 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: <= 65 N (14.6 lbs), <= 500 N (112.4 lbs).
    (d) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel for more than 0.1 seconds 
allowed at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) Number of runs: 6 stops.
    (f) Test surface: PFC of 0.9.
    (g) Functional failure simulation:
    (1) Disconnect the functional power source, or any other electrical 
connector that creates a functional failure.
    (2) Determine whether the brake system indicator is activated when 
any electrical functional failure of the antilock system is created.
    (3) Restore the system to normal at the completion of this test.
    (h) If more than one antilock brake subsystem is provided, repeat 
test for each subsystem.
    S7.8.3. Performance requirements. For service brakes on a vehicle 
equipped with one or more antilock systems, in the event of any single 
functional failure in any such system, the service brake system shall 
continue to operate and shall stop the vehicle as specified in S7.8.3(a) 
or S7.8.3(b).
    (a) Stopping distance for 100 km/h test speed: <= 85 m (279 ft).
    (b) Stopping distance for reduced test speed: S <= 0.10V + 
0.0075V\2\.
    S7.9. Variable brake proportioning system functional failure.
    S7.9.1. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: LLVW and GVWR.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.

[[Page 452]]

    S7.9.2. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: <=65 [deg]C (149 
[deg]F), <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speed: 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: <= 65 N (14.6 lbs), <= 500 N (112.4 lbs).
    (d) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel for longer than 0.1 seconds 
allowed at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) Number of runs: 6 stops.
    (f) Test surface: PFC of 0.9.
    (g) Functional failure simulation:
    (1) Disconnect the functional power source or mechanical linkage to 
render the variable brake proportioning system inoperative.
    (2) If the system utilizes electrical components, determine whether 
the brake system indicator is activated when any electrical functional 
failure of the variable proportioning system is created.
    (3) Restore the system to normal at the completion of this test.
    (h) If more than one variable brake proportioning subsystem is 
provided, repeat the test for each subsystem.
    S7.9.3. Performance requirements. The service brakes on a vehicle 
equipped with one or more variable brake proportioning systems, in the 
event of any single functional failure in any such system, shall 
continue to operate and shall stop the vehicle as specified in S7.9.3(a) 
or S7.9.3(b).
    (a) Stopping distance for 100 km/h test speed: <= 110 m (361 ft).
    (b) Stopping distance for reduced test speed: S <=0.10V + 
0.0100V\2\.
    S7.10. Hydraulic circuit failure.
    S7.10.1. General information. This test is for vehicles manufactured 
with or without a split service brake system.
    S7.10.2. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: LLVW and GVWR.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    S7.10.3. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: <=65 [deg]C (149 
[deg]F), <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speed: 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: <=65N (14.6 lbs), <=500 N (112.4 lbs).
    (d) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel for longer than 0.1 seconds 
allowed at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) Test surface: PFC of 0.9.
    (f) Alter the service brake system to produce any single failure. 
For a hydraulic circuit, this may be any single rupture or leakage type 
failure, other than a structural failure of a housing that is common to 
two or more subsystems. For a vehicle in which the brake signal is 
transmitted electrically between the brake pedal and some or all of the 
foundation brakes, regardless of the means of actuation of the 
foundation brakes, this may be any single failure in any circuit that 
electrically transmits the brake signal. For an EV with RBS that is part 
of the service brake system, this may be any single failure in the RBS.
    (g) Determine the control force pressure level or fluid level (as 
appropriate for the indicator being tested) necessary to activate the 
brake warning indicator.
    (h) Number of runs: After the brake warning indicator has been 
activated, make the following stops depending on the type of brake 
system:
    (1) 4 stops for a split service brake system.
    (2) 10 consecutive stops for a non-split service brake system.
    (i) Each stop is made by a continuous application of the service 
brake control.
    (j) Restore the service brake system to normal at the completion of 
this test.
    (k) Repeat the entire sequence for each of the other subsystems.
    S7.10.4 Performance requirements. For vehicles manufactured with a 
split service brake system, in the event of any failure in a single 
subsystem, as specified in S7.10.3(f) of this standard, and after 
activation of the brake system indicator as specified in S5.5.1, the 
remaining portions of the service brake system shall continue to operate 
and shall stop the vehicle as specified in S7.10.4(a) or S7.10.4(b). For 
vehicles not manufactured with a split service brake system, in the 
event of any failure in any component of the service brake system, as 
specified in S7.10.3(f), and after activation of the brake system 
indicator as specified in S5.5.1 of this standard, the vehicle shall, by 
operation of the service brake control, stop 10 times consecutively as 
specified in S7.10.4(a) or S7.10.4(b).
    (a) Stopping distance from 100 km/h test speed: <= 168 m (551 ft).

[[Page 453]]

    (b) Stopping distance for reduced test speed: S <= 0.10V + 
0.0158V<SUP>2</SUP>.
    S7.11. Brake power unit or brake power assist unit inoperative 
(System depleted).
    S7.11.1. General information. This test is for vehicles equipped 
with one or more brake power units or brake power assist units.
    S7.11.2. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR only.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    S7.11.3. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: <=65 [deg]C (149 
[deg]F), <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speed: 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: <= 65 N (14.6 lbs), <= 500 N (112.4 lbs).
    (d) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel for longer than 0.1 seconds 
allowed at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) Number of runs: 6 stops.
    (f) Test surface: PFC of 0.9.
    (g) Disconnect the primary source of power for one brake power 
assist unit or brake power unit, or one of the brake power unit or brake 
power assist unit subsystems if two or more subsystems are provided.
    (h) If the brake power unit or power assist unit operates in 
conjunction with a backup system and the backup system is automatically 
activated in the event of a primary power service failure, the backup 
system is operative during this test.
    (i) Exhaust any residual brake power reserve capability of the 
disconnected system.
    (j) Make each of the 6 stops by a continuous application of the 
service brake control.
    (k) Restore the system to normal at completion of this test.
    (l) For vehicles equipped with more than one brake power unit or 
brake power assist unit, conduct tests for each in turn.
    (m) For vehicles with electrically-actuated service brakes (brake 
power unit), this test is conducted with any single electrical failure 
in the electrically-actuated service brakes instead of a failure of any 
other brake power or brake power assist unit, and all other systems 
intact.
    S7.11.4. Performance requirements. The service brakes on a vehicle 
equipped with one or more brake power assist units or brake power units, 
with one such unit inoperative and depleted of all reserve capability, 
shall stop the vehicle as specified in S7.11.4(a) or S7.11.4(b).
    (a) Stopping distance from 100 km/h test speed: <= 168 m (551 ft).
    (b) Stopping distance for reduced test speed: S <= 0.10V + 
0.0158V<SUP>2</SUP>.
    S7.12. Parking brake.
    S7.12.1. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR only.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    (c) Parking brake burnish:
    (1) For vehicles with parking brake systems not utilizing the 
service friction elements, the friction elements of such a system are 
burnished prior to the parking brake test according to the published 
recommendations furnished to the purchaser by the manufacturer.
    (2) If no recommendations are furnished, the vehicle's parking brake 
system is tested in an unburnished condition.
    (d) Parking brake applications: 1 application and up to 2 
reapplications, if necessary.
    S7.12.2. Test conditions and procedures.
    (a) IBT:
    (1) Parking brake systems utilizing service brake friction materials 
shall be tested with the IBT <= 100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F) and shall have 
no additional burnishing or artificial heating prior to the start of the 
parking brake test.
    (2) Parking brake systems utilizing non-service brake friction 
materials shall be tested with the friction materials at ambient 
temperature at the start of the test. The friction materials shall have 
no additional burnishing or artificial heating prior to or during the 
parking brake test.
    (b) Parking brake control force: Hand control <= 400 N (89.9 lbs); 
foot control <= 500 N (112.4 lbs).
    (c) Hand force measurement locations: The force required for 
actuation of a hand-operated brake system is measured at the center of 
the hand grip area or at a distance of 40 mm (1.57 in) from the end of 
the actuation lever as illustrated in Figure 3.
    (d) Parking brake applications: 1 application and up to 2 
reapplications, if necessary.

[[Page 454]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.073

    (e) Test surface gradient: 20% grade.
    (f) Drive the vehicle onto the grade with the longitudinal axis of 
the vehicle in the direction of the slope of the grade.
    (g) Stop the vehicle and hold it stationary by applying the service 
brake control and place the transmission in neutral.
    (h) With the service brake applied sufficiently to just keep the 
vehicle from rolling, apply the parking brake as specified in S7.12.2(i) 
or S7.12.2(j).
    (i) For a vehicle equipped with mechanically-applied parking brakes, 
make a single application of the parking brake control with a force not 
exceeding the limits specified in S7.12.2(b). For a vehicle using an 
electrically-activated parking brake, apply the parking brake by 
activating the parking brake control.
    (j) In the case of a parking brake system that does not allow 
application of the specified force in a single application, a series of 
applications may be made to achieve the specified force.
    (k) Following the application of the parking brakes, release all 
force on the service brake control and, if the vehicle remains 
stationary, start the measurement of time.
    (l) If the vehicle does not remain stationary, reapplication of a 
force to the parking brake control at the level specified in S7.12.2(b) 
as appropriate for the vehicle being tested (without release of the 
ratcheting or other holding mechanism of the parking brake) is used up 
to two times to attain a stationary position.
    (m) Verify the operation of the parking brake application indicator.
    (n) Following observation of the vehicle in a stationary condition 
for the specified time in one direction, repeat

[[Page 455]]

the same test procedure with the vehicle orientation in the opposite 
direction on the same grade.
    S7.12.3. Performance requirement. The parking brake system shall 
hold the vehicle stationary for 5 minutes in both a forward and reverse 
direction on the grade.
    S7.13. Heating Snubs.
    S7.13.1. General information. The purpose of the snubs is to heat up 
the brakes in preparation for the hot performance test which follows 
immediately.
    S7.13.2. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR only.
    (b) Transmission position: In gear.
    S7.13.3. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT:
    (1) Establish an IBT before the first brake application (snub) of 
<=55 [deg]C (131 [deg]F), <=65 [deg]C (149 [deg]F).
    (2) IBT before subsequent snubs are those occurring at the distance 
intervals.
    (b) Number of snubs: 15.
    (c) Test speeds: The initial speed for each snub is 120 km/h (74.6 
mph) or 80% of Vmax, whichever is slower. Each snub is terminated at 
one-half the initial speed.
    (d) Deceleration rate:
    (1) Maintain a constant deceleration rate of 3.0 m/s<SUP>2</SUP> 
(9.8 fps<SUP>2</SUP>).
    (2) Attain the specified deceleration within one second and maintain 
it for the remainder of the snub.
    (e) Pedal force: Adjust as necessary to maintain the specified 
constant deceleration rate.
    (f) Time interval: Maintain an interval of 45 seconds between the 
start of brake applications (snubs).
    (g) Accelerate as rapidly as possible to the initial test speed 
immediately after each snub.
    (h) Immediately after the 15th snub, accelerate to 100 km/h (62.1 
mph) and commence the hot performance test.
    S7.14. Hot performance.
    S7.14.1. General information. The hot performance test is conducted 
immediately after completion of the 15th heating snub.
    S7.14.2. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR only.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    S7.14.3. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: Temperature 
achieved at completion of heating snubs.
    (b) Test speed: 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force:
    (1) The first stop is done with an average pedal force not greater 
than the average pedal force recorded during the shortest GVWR cold 
effectiveness stop.
    (2) The second stop is done with a pedal force not greater than 500 
N (112.4 lbs).
    (d) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel for longer than 0.1 seconds 
allowed at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) Number of runs: 2 stops.
    (f) Immediately after the 15th heating snub, accelerate to 100 km/h 
(62.1 mph) and commence the first stop of the hot performance test.
    (g) If the vehicle is incapable of attaining 100 km/h, it is tested 
at the same speed used for the GVWR cold effectiveness test.
    (h) Immediately after completion of the first hot performance stop, 
accelerate as rapidly as possible to the specified test speed and 
conduct the second hot performance stop.
    (i) Immediately after completion of the second hot performance stop, 
drive 1.5 km (0.93 mi) at 50 km/h (31.1 mph) before the first cooling 
stop.
    S7.14.4. Performance requirements. (a) For the first hot stop, the 
stopping distance must be less than or equal to a calculated distance 
which is based on 60 percent of the deceleration actually achieved on 
the shortest GVWR cold effectiveness stop. The following equations shall 
be used in calculating the performance requirement:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02FE95.015

where d<INF>c</INF> = the average deceleration actually achieved during 
the shortest cold effectiveness stop at GVWR (m/s<SUP>2</SUP>),
S<INF>c</INF> = actual stopping distance measured on the shortest cold 
effectiveness stop at GVWR (m), and
V = cold effectiveness test speed (km/h).


[[Page 456]]


    (b) In addition to the requirement in S7.14.4(a), the stopping 
distance for at least one of the two hot stops must be S <= 89 m (292 
ft) from a test speed of 100 km/h (62.1 mph) or, for reduced test speed, 
S <= 0.10V + 0.0079V<SUP>2</SUP>. The results of the second stop may not 
be used to meet the requirements of S7.14.4(a).
    S7.15. Brake cooling stops.
    S7.15.1. General information. The cooling stops are conducted 
immediately after completion of the hot performance test.
    S7.15.2. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR only.
    (b) Transmission position: In gear.
    S7.15.3. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: Temperature 
achieved at completion of hot performance.
    (b) Test speed: 50 km/h (31.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: Adjust as necessary to maintain specified constant 
deceleration rate.
    (d) Deceleration rate: Maintain a constant deceleration rate of 3.0 
m/s<SUP>2</SUP> (9.8 fps<SUP>2</SUP>).
    (e) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel for longer than 0.1 seconds 
allowed at speeds greater than 15

km/h (9.3 mph).
    (f) Number of runs: 4 stops.
    (g) Immediately after the hot performance stops drive 1.5 km (0.93 
mi) at 50 km/h (31.1 mph) before the first cooling stop.
    (h) For the first through the third cooling stops:
    (1) After each stop, immediately accelerate at the maximum rate to 
50 km/h (31.1 mph).
    (2) Maintain that speed until beginning the next stop at a distance 
of 1.5 km (0.93 mi) from the beginning of the previous stop.
    (i) For the fourth cooling stop:
    (1) Immediately after the fourth stop, accelerate at the maximum 
rate to 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (2) Maintain that speed until beginning the recovery performance 
stops at a distance of 1.5 km (0.93 mi) after the beginning of the 
fourth cooling stop.
    S7.16. Recovery performance.
    S7.16.1. General information. The recovery performance test is 
conducted immediately after completion of the brake cooling stops.
    S7.16.2. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR only.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    S7.16.3. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: Temperature 
achieved at completion of cooling stops.
    (b) Test speed: 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: The average pedal force shall not be greater than 
the average pedal force recorded during the shortest GVWR cold 
effectiveness stop.
    (d) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel for longer than 0.1 seconds 
allowed at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) Number of runs: 2 stops.
    (f) Immediately after the fourth cooling stop, accelerate at the 
maximum rate to 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (g) Maintain that speed until beginning the first recovery 
performance stop at a distance of 1.5 km (0.93 mi) after the beginning 
of the fourth cooling stop.
    (h) If the vehicle is incapable of attaining 100 km/h, it is tested 
at the same speed used for the GVWR cold effectiveness test.
    (i) Immediately after completion of the first recovery performance 
stop accelerate as rapidly as possible to the specified test speed and 
conduct the second recovery performance stop.
    S7.16.4. Performance requirements.
    The stopping distance, S, for at least one of the two stops must be 
within the following limits:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02FE95.016

where d<INF>c</INF> and V are defined in S7.14.4(a).

    S7.17. Final Inspection. Inspect:
    (a) The service brake system for detachment or fracture of any 
components, such as brake springs and brake shoes or disc pad facings.
    (b) The friction surface of the brake, the master cylinder or brake 
power unit reservoir cover, and seal and filler openings, for leakage of 
brake fluid or lubricant.
    (c) The master cylinder or brake power unit reservoir for compliance 
with the volume and labeling requirements of S5.4.2 and S5.4.3. In 
determining the fully applied worn condition, assume that the lining is 
worn to (1) rivet or bolt heads on riveted or bolted linings or (2) 
within 0.8 mm (1/32

[[Page 457]]

inch) of shoe or pad mounting surface on bonded linings or (3) the limit 
recommended by the manufacturer, whichever is larger relative to the 
total possible shoe or pad movement. Drums or rotors are assumed to be 
at nominal design drum diameter or rotor thickness. Linings are assumed 
adjusted for normal operating clearance in the released position.
    (d) The brake system indicators, for compliance with operation in 
various key positions, lens color, labeling, and location, in accordance 
with S5.5.

[60 FR 6434, Feb. 2, 1995; as amended at 60 FR 37847, July 24, 1995; 60 
FR 44548, Aug. 28, 1995; 62 FR 46917, Sept. 5, 1997; 62 FR 51070, Sept. 
30, 1997; 65 FR 6332, Feb. 9, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 571.138  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 571.139  Standard No. 139; New pneumatic tires for light vehicles.

    S1. Scope and purpose. This standard specifies tire dimensions, test 
requirements, labeling requirements, and defines tire load ratings.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to new pneumatic tires for 
use on motor vehicles (other than motorcycles and low speed vehicles) 
that have a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 10,000 pounds or less 
and that were manufactured after 1975.
    S3. Definitions.
    Intended outboard sidewall means:
    (1) The sidewall that contains a whitewall, bears white lettering or 
bears manufacturer, brand, and/or model name molding that is higher or 
deeper than the same molding on the other sidewall of the tire, or
    (2) The outward facing sidewall of an asymmetrical tire that has a 
particular side that must always face outward when mounted on a vehicle.
    S4. Tire and rim matching information.
    S4.1. Each manufacturer of tires must ensure that a listing of the 
rims that may be used with each tire that it produces is provided to the 
public in accordance with S4.1.1 and S4.1.2.
    S4.1.1 Each rim listing for a tire must include dimensional 
specifications and a diagram of the rim and must be in one of the 
following forms:
    (a) Listed by manufacturer name or brand name in a document 
furnished to dealers of the manufacturer's tires, to any person upon 
request, and in duplicate to: Docket Section, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590; or
    (b) Contained in publications, current at the date of manufacture of 
the tire or any later date, of at least one of the following 
organizations:
    (1) The Tire and Rim Association.
    (2) The European Tyre and Rim Technical Organization.
    (3) Japan Automobile Tire Manufacturers' Association, Inc.
    (4) Tyre & Rim Association of Australia.
    (5) Associacao Latino Americana de Pneus e Aros (Brazil).
    (6) South African Bureau of Standards.
    S4.1.2 A listing compiled in accordance with paragraph (a) of S4.1.1 
need not include dimensional specifications or a diagram of a rim whose 
dimensional specifications and diagram are contained in a listing 
published in accordance with paragraph (b) of S4.1.1.
    S4.2. Information contained in a publication specified in S4.1.1(b) 
that lists general categories of tires and rims by size designation, 
type of construction, and/or intended use, is considered to be 
manufacturer's information required by S4.1 for the listed tires, unless 
the publication itself or specific information provided according to 
S4.1(a) indicates otherwise.
    S5. General requirements. [Reserved]
    S5.5 Tire Markings. Except as specified in paragraphs (a) through 
(h) of S5.5, each tire must be marked on each sidewall with the 
information specified in S5.5 (a) through (d) and on one sidewall with 
the information specified in S5.5 (e) through (h) according to the 
phase-in schedule specified in S7 of this standard. The markings must be 
placed between the maximum section width and the bead on at least one 
sidewall, unless the maximum section width of the tire is located in an 
area that is not more than one-fourth of the distance from the bead to 
the shoulder of the tire. If the maximum section width falls within that 
area, those markings must appear between the bead and a point one-half 
the distance from the bead to the shoulder of the tire, on at least one 
sidewall. The markings must

[[Page 458]]

be in letters and numerals not less than 0.078 inches high and raised 
above or sunk below the tire surface not less than 0.015 inch. The tire 
identification and DOT symbol labeling must comply with part 574 of this 
chapter.
    (a) The symbol DOT, which constitutes a certification that the tire 
conforms to applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards;
    (b) The tire size designation as listed in the documents and 
publications specified in S4.1.1;
    (c) The maximum permissible inflation pressure, subject to the 
limitations of S5.5.4 through S5.5.6;
    (d) The maximum load rating;
    (e) The generic name of each cord material used in the plies (both 
sidewall and tread area) of the tire;
    (f) The actual number of plies in the sidewall, and the actual 
number of plies in the tread area, if different;
    (g) The term ``tubeless'' or ``tube type,'' as applicable; and
    (h) The word ``radial,'' if the tire is a radial ply tire.
    S5.5.1 Each tire must be labeled with the tire identification number 
required by 49 CFR part 574 on the intended outboard sidewall of the 
tire. Either the tire identification number or a partial tire 
identification number, containing all characters in the tire 
identification number, except for the date code, must be labeled on the 
other sidewall of the tire. If a tire does not have an intended outboard 
sidewall, the tire must be labeled with the tire identification number 
required by 49 CFR part 574 on one sidewall and with either the tire 
identification number or a partial tire identification number, 
containing all characters in the tire identification number except for 
the date code, on the other sidewall.
    S5.5.2 [Reserved]
    S5.5.3 Each tire must be labeled with the name of the manufacturer, 
or brand name and number assigned to the manufacturer in the manner 
specified in 49 CFR part 574.
    S5.5.4 If the maximum inflation pressure of a tire is 240, 280, 290, 
300, 330, 340, 350 or 390 kPa, then:
    (a) Each marking of that inflation pressure pursuant to S5.5(c) must 
be followed in parenthesis by the equivalent psi, rounded to the next 
higher whole number; and
    (b) Each marking of the tire's maximum load rating pursuant to 
S5.5(d) in kilograms must be followed in parenthesis by the equivalent 
load rating in pounds, rounded to the nearest whole number.
    S5.5.5 If the maximum inflation pressure of a tire is 420 kPa (60 
psi), the tire must have permanently molded into or onto both sidewalls, 
in letters and numerals not less than \1/2\ inch high, the words 
``Inflate to 60 psi'' or ``Inflate to 420 kPa (60 psi).'' On both 
sidewalls, the words must be positioned in an area between the tire 
shoulder and the bead of the tire. However, the words must be also 
positioned on the tire so that they are not obstructed by the flange of 
any rim designated for use with that tire in this standard or in 
Standard No. 110 (Sec. 571.110 of this part).
    S5.5.6 For LT tires, the maximum permissible inflation pressure 
shown must be the inflation pressure that corresponds to the maximum 
load of the tire for the tire size as specified in one of the 
publications described in S4.1.1.(b) of Sec. 571.139. At the 
manufacturer's option, the shown inflation pressure may be as much as 10 
psi (69 kPa) greater than the inflation pressure corresponding to the 
specified maximum load.
    S6. Test procedures, conditions and performance requirements. 
[Reserved]
    S7. Phase-in schedule for tire markings.
    S7.1 Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 and before 
September 1, 2005. For tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 
and before September 1, 2005, the number of tires complying with S4 and 
S5.5 of this standard must be equal to not less than 40% of the 
manufacturer's production during that period.
    S7.2 Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 and before 
September 1, 2006. For tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 
and before September 1, 2006, the number of tires complying with S4 and 
S5.5 of this standard must be equal to not less than 70% of the 
manufacturer's production during that period.

[[Page 459]]

    S7.3 Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2006. Each tire 
must comply with S6.3 of this standard.

[67 FR 69627, Nov. 18, 2002]

    Effective Date Notes: 1. At 67 FR 69627, Nov. 18, 2002, Sec. 
571.139 was added, effective Sept. 1, 2003. At 68 FR 33655, June 5, 
2003, the effective date was delayed until Sept. 1, 2004. At 69 FR 
31306, June 3, 2004 the effective date was further delayed until Sept. 
1, 2005.
    2. At 68 FR 38150, June 26, 2003, Sec. 571.139 was amended by 
revising S3 and S5, adding S5.1 through S5.4, adding the text of S6, and 
adding S6.1 through S6.6, effective June 1, 2007. For the convenience of 
the user, the revised and added text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 571.139  Standard No. 139; New pneumatic radial tires for light 
          vehicles.

                                * * * * *

    S3. Definitions
    Bead means the part of the tire that is made of steel wires, wrapped 
or reinforced by ply cords and that is shaped to fit the rim.
    Bead separation means a breakdown of the bond between components in 
the bead.
    Bias ply tire means a pneumatic tire in which the ply cords that 
extend to the beads are laid at alternate angles substantially less than 
90 degrees to the centerline of the tread.
    Carcass means the tire structure, except tread and sidewall rubber 
which, when inflated, bears the load.
    Chunking means the breaking away of pieces of the tread or sidewall.
    Cord means the strands forming the plies in the tire.
    Cord separation means the parting of cords from adjacent rubber 
compounds.
    Cracking means any parting within the tread, sidewall, or inner 
liner of the tire extending to cord material.
    CT means a pneumatic tire with an inverted flange tire and rim 
system in which the rim is designed with rim flanges pointed radially 
inward and the tire is designed to fit on the underside of the rim in a 
manner that encloses the rim flanges inside the air cavity of the tire.
    Extra load tire means a tire designed to operate at higher loads and 
at higher inflation pressures than the corresponding standard tire.
    Groove means the space between two adjacent tread ribs.
    Innerliner means the layer(s) forming the inside surface of a 
tubeless tire that contains the inflating medium within the tire.
    Innerliner separation means the parting of the innerliner from cord 
material in the carcass.
    Light truck (LT) tire means a tire designated by its manufacturer as 
primarily intended for use on lightweight trucks or multipurpose 
passenger vehicles.
    Load rating means the maximum load that a tire is rated to carry for 
a given inflation pressure.
    Maximum load rating means the load rating for a tire at the maximum 
permissible inflation pressure for that tire.
    Maximum permissible inflation pressure means the maximum cold 
inflation pressure to which a tire may be inflated.
    Measuring rim means the rim on which a tire is fitted for physical 
dimension requirements.
    Open splice means any parting at any junction of tread, sidewall, or 
innerliner that extends to cord material.
    Outer diameter means the overall diameter of an inflated new tire.
    Overall width means the linear distance between the exteriors of the 
sidewalls of an inflated tire, including elevations due to labeling, 
decorations, or protective bands or ribs.
    Ply means a layer of rubber-coated parallel cords.
    Ply separation means a parting of rubber compound between adjacent 
plies.
    Pneumatic tire means a mechanical device made of rubber, chemicals, 
fabric and steel or other materials, that, when mounted on an automotive 
wheel, provides the traction and contains the gas or fluid that sustains 
the load.
    Radial ply tire means a pneumatic tire in which the ply cords that 
extend to the beads are laid at substantially 90 degrees to the 
centerline of the tread.
    Reinforced tire means a tire designed to operate at higher loads and 
at higher inflation pressures than the corresponding standard tire.
    Rim means a metal support for a tire or a tire and tube assembly 
upon which the tire beads are seated.
    Section width means the linear distance between the exteriors of the 
sidewalls of an inflated tire, excluding elevations due to labeling, 
decoration, or protective bands.
    Sidewall means that portion of a tire between the tread and bead.
    Sidewall separation means the parting of the rubber compound from 
the cord material in the sidewall.
    Test rim means the rim on which a tire is fitted for testing, and 
may be any rim listed as appropriate for use with that tire.
    Tread means that portion of a tire that comes into contact with the 
road.
    Tread rib means a tread section running circumferentially around a 
tire.
    Tread separation means pulling away of the tread from the tire 
carcass.
    Treadwear indicators (TWI) means the projections within the 
principal grooves designed to give a visual indication of the degrees of 
wear of the tread.

[[Page 460]]

    Wheel-holding fixture means the fixture used to hold the wheel and 
tire assembly securely during testing.

                                * * * * *

                        S5. General requirements

    S5.1. Size and construction. Each tire shall fit each rim specified 
for its size designation in accordance with S4.1.
    S5.2. Performance requirements. Each tire shall conform to each of 
the following:
    (a) It shall meet the requirements specified in S6 for its tire size 
designation, type, and maximum permissible inflation pressure.
    (b) It shall meet each of the applicable requirements set forth in 
paragraphs (c) and (d) of this S5.2, when mounted on a model rim 
assembly corresponding to any rim designated by the tire manufacturer 
for use with the tire in accordance with S4.
    (c) Except in the case of a CT tire, its maximum permissible 
inflation pressure shall be 240, 280, 300, 340, or 350 kPa. For a CT 
tire, the maximum permissible inflation pressure shall be 290, 330, 350, 
or 390 kPa.
    (d) Its load rating shall be that specified either in a submission 
made by an individual manufacturer, pursuant to S4, or in one of the 
publications described in S4 for its size designation, type and each 
appropriate inflation pressure. If the maximum load rating for a 
particular tire size is shown in more than one of the publications 
described in S4, each tire of that size designation shall have a maximum 
load rating that is not less than the published maximum load rating, or 
if there are differing maximum load ratings for the same tire size 
designation, not less then the lowest published maximum load rating.
    S5.3. Test sample. For the tests specified in S6, use:
    (a) One tire for high speed;
    (b) Another tire for endurance and low inflation pressure 
performance; and
    (c) A third tire for physical dimensions, resistance to bead 
unseating, and strength, in sequence.
    S5.4. Treadwear indicators. Except in the case of tires with a 12-
inch or smaller rim diameter, each tire shall have not less than six 
treadwear indicators spaced approximately equally around the 
circumference of the tire that enable a person inspecting the tire to 
determine visually whether the tire has worn to a tread depth of one 
sixteenth of an inch. Tires with 12-inch or smaller rim diameter shall 
have not less than three such treadwear indicators.

                                * * * * *

    S6. Test procedures, conditions and performance requirements. Each 
tire shall meet all of the applicable requirements of this section when 
tested according to the conditions and procedures set forth in S5 and 
S6.1 through S6.7.

                          S6.1. Tire dimensions

    S6.1.1 Test conditions and procedures.
    S6.1.1.1 Tire Preparation.
    S6.1.1.1.1 Mount the tire on the measuring rim specified by the tire 
manufacturer or in one of the publications listed in S4.1.1
    S6.1.1.1.2 In the case of a P-metric tire, inflate it to the 
pressure specified in the following table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Inflation pressure  (kPa)       T-type           CT Tires  (kPa)
----------------------------- temporary use ----------------------------
                                  spare
                                inflation
   Standard      Reinforced      pressure       Standard     Reinforced
                                  (kPa)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
         180            220            420            230           270
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S6.1.1.1.3 In the case of a LT tire, inflate it to the pressure at 
maximum load as labeled on sidewall.
    S6.1.1.1.4 Condition the assembly at an ambient room temperature of 
38 [deg]C for not less than 24 hours.
    S6.1.1.1.5 Readjust the tire pressure to that specified in S6.1.1.2.
    S6.1.1.2 Test Procedure.
    S6.1.1.2.1 Measure the section width and overall width by caliper at 
six points approximately equally spaced around the circumference of the 
tire, avoiding measurement of the additional thickness of the special 
protective ribs or bands. The average of the measurements so obtained 
are taken as the section width and overall width, respectively.
    S6.1.1.2.2 Determine the outer diameter by measuring the maximum 
circumference of the tire and dividing the figure so obtained by Pi 
(3.14).
    S6.1.2 Performance Requirements. The actual section width and 
overall width for each tire measured in accordance with S6.1.1.2, shall 
not exceed the section width specified in a submission made by an 
individual manufacturer, pursuant to S4.1.1(a) or in one of the 
publications described in S4.1.1(b) for its size designation and type by 
more than:
    (a) (For tires with a maximum permissible inflation pressure of 32, 
36, or 40 psi) 7 percent, or
    (b) (For tires with a maximum permissible inflation pressure of 240, 
280, 290, 300, 330, 350

[[Page 461]]

or 390 kPa, or 60 psi) 7 percent or 10 mm (0.4 inches), whichever is 
larger.

                       S6.2 High Speed Performance

    S6.2.1 Test conditions and procedures.
    S6.2.1.1 Preparation of tire.
    S6.2.1.1.1 Mount the tire on a test rim and inflate it to the 
pressure specified for the tire in the following table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Test pressure
                   Tire application                          (kPa)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
P-metric:
    Standard load....................................                220
    Extra load.......................................                260
Load Range C.........................................                320
Load Range D.........................................                410
Load Range E.........................................                500
CT:
  Standard load......................................                270
  Extra load.........................................                310
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S6.2.1.1.2 Condition the assembly at 38 [deg]C for not less than 
three hours.
    S6.2.1.1.3 Before or after mounting the assembly on a test axle, 
readjust the tire pressure to that specified in S6.2.1.1.1.
    S6.2.1.2 Test procedure.
    S6.2.1.2.1 Press the assembly against the outer face of a test drum 
with a diameter of 1.70 m <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1%.
    S6.2.1.2.2 Apply to the test axle a load equal to 85% of the tire's 
maximum load carrying capacity.
    S6.2.1.2.3 Break-in the tire by running it for 2 hours at 80 km/h.
    S6.2.1.2.4 Allow tire to cool to 38 [deg]C and readjust inflation 
pressure to applicable pressure in 6.2.1.1.1 immediately before the 
test.
    S6.2.1.2.5 Throughout the test, the inflation pressure is not 
corrected and the test load is maintained at the value applied in 
S6.2.1.2.2.
    S6.2.1.2.6 During the test, the ambient temperature, measured at a 
distance of not less than 150 mm and not more than 1 m from the tire, 
shall be maintained at not less than 38 [deg]C.
    S6.2.1.2.7 The test is conducted, continuously and uninterrupted, 
for ninety minutes through three thirty-minute consecutive test stages 
at the following speeds: 140, 150, and 160 km/h.
    S6.2.1.2.8 Allow the tire to cool for one hour. Measure its 
inflation pressure. Then, deflate the tire, remove it from the test rim, 
and inspect it for the conditions specified in S6.2.2(a).
    S6.2.2 Performance requirements. When the tire is tested in 
accordance with S6.2.1:
    (a) There shall be no visual evidence of tread, sidewall, ply, cord, 
innerliner, belt or bead separation, chunking, open splices, cracking, 
or broken cords.
    (b) The tire pressure, when measured at least 1 hour after the end 
of the test, shall not be less than the initial pressure specified in 
S6.2.1.

                           S6.3 Tire Endurance

    S6.3.1 Test conditions and procedures.
    S6.3.1.1 Preparation of Tire.
    S6.3.1.1.1 Mount the tire on a test rim and inflate it to the 
pressure specified for the tire in the following table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Test Pressure
                   Tire application                          (kPa)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
P-metric:
  Standard load......................................                180
  Extra load.........................................                220
LT:
  Load Range C.......................................                260
  Load Range D.......................................                340
  Load Range E.......................................                410
CT:
  Standard load......................................                230
  Extra load.........................................                270
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S6.3.1.1.2 Condition the assembly at 38 [deg]C for not less than 
three hours.
    S6.3.1.1.3 Readjust the pressure to the value specified in 
S6.3.1.1.1 immediately before testing.
    S6.3.1.2 Test Procedure.
    S6.3.1.2.1 Mount the assembly on a test axle and press it against 
the outer face of a smooth wheel having a diameter of 1.70 m <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 1%.
    S6.3.1.2.2 During the test, the ambient temperature, measured at a 
distance of not less than 150 mm and not more than 1 m from the tire, 
shall not be less than 38 [deg]C.
    S6.3.1.2.3 Conduct the test, without interruptions, at not less than 
120 km/h test speed with loads and test periods not less than those 
shown in the following table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Load as a percentage of
     Test period          Duration  (hours)     tire maximum load rating
------------------------------------------------------------------------
             1                        4                        85%
             2                        6                        90
             3                       24                       100
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S6.3.1.2.4 Throughout the test, the inflation pressure is not 
corrected and the test loads are maintained at the value corresponding 
to each test period, as shown in the table in S6.3.1.2.3.
    S6.3.1.2.5 Allow the tire to cool for one hour after running the 
tire for the time specified in the table in S6.3.1.2.3, measure its 
inflation pressure. Inspect the tire externally on the test rim for the 
conditions specified in S6.3.2(a).
    S6.3.2 Performance requirements. When the tire is tested in 
accordance with S6.3.1:
    (a) There shall be no visual evidence of tread, sidewall, ply, cord, 
belt or bead separation, chunking, open splices, cracking or broken 
cords.
    (b) The tire pressure, when measured at least one hour after the end 
of the test, shall

[[Page 462]]

not be less than the initial pressure specified in S6.3.1.

                 S6.4 Low Inflation Pressure Performance

    S6.4.1 Test conditions and procedures.
    S6.4.1.1 Preparation of tire.
    S6.4.1.1.1 This test is conducted following completion of the tire 
endurance test using the same tire and rim assembly tested in accordance 
with S6.3 with the tire deflated to the following appropriate pressure:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Test pressure
                   Tire application                          (kPa)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
P-metric:
  Standard load......................................                140
  Extra load.........................................                160
LT:
  Load Range C.......................................                200
  Load Range D.......................................                260
  Load Range E.......................................                320
CT:
  Standard load......................................                170
  Extra load.........................................                180
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S6.4.1.1.2 The assembly is conditioned at not less than 38 [deg]C.
    S6.4.1.1.3 Before or after mounting the assembly on a test axle, 
readjust the tire pressure to that specified in S6.4.1.1.1.
    S6.4.1.2 Test procedure.
    S6.4.1.2.1 The test is conducted for ninety minutes at the end of 
the test specified in S6.3, continuous and uninterrupted, at a speed of 
120 km/h (75 mph).
    S6.4.1.2.2 Press the assembly against the outer face of a test drum 
with a diameter of 1.70 m + 1%.
    S6.4.1.2.3 Apply to the test axle a load equal to 100% of the tire's 
maximum load carrying capacity.
    S6.4.1.2.4 Throughout the test, the inflation pressure is not 
corrected and the test load is maintained at the initial level.
    S6.4.1.2.5 During the test, the ambient temperature, at a distance 
of not less than 150 mm and not more than 1 m from the tire, is 
maintained at not less than 38 [deg]C.
    S6.4.1.2.6 Allow the tire to cool for one hour. Measure its 
inflation pressure. Then, deflate the tire, remove it from the test rim, 
and inspect it for the conditions specified in S6.4.2(a).
    S6.4.2 Performance requirements. When the tire is tested in 
accordance with S6.4.1:
    (a) There shall be no visual evidence of tread, sidewall, ply, cord, 
innerliner, belt or bead separation, chunking, open splices, cracking, 
or broken cords, and
    (b) The tire pressure, when measured at least one hour after the end 
of the test, shall not be less than the initial pressure specified in 
S6.4.1.
    S6.5 Tire strength.
    S6.5.1 Tire strength for P-metric tires. Each tire shall comply with 
the requirements of S5.3 of Sec. 571.109.
    S6.5.2 Tire strength for LT tires. Each tire shall comply with the 
requirements of S7.3 of Sec. 571.119.
    S6.6 Tubeless tire bead unseating resistance. Each tire shall comply 
with the requirements of S5.2 of Sec. 571.109.

                                * * * * *

    3. At 69 FR 31319, June 3, 2004, Sec. 571.139 was amended by 
revising its heading, S2, S5.5, S5.5.1, 5.5.4, S7.1, S7.2 and S7.3, 
effective Sept. 1, 2005. For the convenience of the user the revised 
text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 571.139  Standard No. 139; New pneumatic radial tires for light 
          vehicles.

                                * * * * *

    S2. Application. This standard applies to new pneumatic radial tires 
for use on motor vehicles (other than motorcycles and low speed 
vehicles) that have a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 10,000 
pounds or less and that were manufactured after 1975. This standard does 
not apply to special tires (ST) for trailers in highway service, tires 
for use on farm implements (FI) in agricultural service with 
intermittent highway use, and tires with rim diameters of 8 inches and 
below.

                                * * * * *

    S5.5 Tire Markings. Except as specified in paragraphs (a) through 
(h) of S5.5, each tire must be marked on each sidewall with the 
information specified in S5.5 (a) through (d) and on one sidewall with 
the information specified in S5.5 (e) through (h) according to the 
phase-in schedule specified in S7 of this standard. The markings must be 
placed between the maximum section width and the bead on at least one 
sidewall, unless the maximum section width of the tire is located in an 
area that is not more than one-fourth of the distance from the bead to 
the shoulder of the tire. If the maximum section width falls within that 
area, those markings must appear between the bead and a point one-half 
the distance from the bead to the shoulder of the tire, on at least one 
sidewall. The markings must be in letters and numerals not less than 
0.078 inches high and raised above or sunk below the tire surface not 
less than 0.015 inch.
    (a) The symbol DOT, which constitutes a certification that the tire 
conforms to applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards;
    (b) The tire size designation as listed in the documents and 
publications specified in S4.1.1 of this standard;
    (c) The maximum permissible inflation pressure, subject to the 
limitations of S5.5.4 through S5.5.6 of this standard;

[[Page 463]]

    (d) The maximum load rating;
    (e) The generic name of each cord material used in the plies (both 
sidewall and tread area) of the tire;
    (f) The actual number of plies in the sidewall, and the actual 
number of plies in the tread area, if different;
    (g) The term ``tubeless'' or ``tube type,'' as applicable; and
    (h) The word ``radial,'' if the tire is a radial ply tire.
    S5.5.1 Tire identification number.
    (a) Tires manufactured before September 1, 2009. Each tire must be 
labeled with the tire identification number required by 49 CFR part 574 
on a sidewall of the tire. Except for retreaded tires, either the tire 
identification number or a partial tire identification number, 
containing all characters in the tire identification number, except for 
the date code and, at the discretion of the manufacturer, any optional 
code, must be labeled on the other sidewall of the tire.
    (b) Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2009. Each tire must 
be labeled with the tire identification number required by 49 CFR part 
574 on the intended outboard sidewall of the tire. Except for retreaded 
tires, either the tire identification number or a partial tire 
identification number, containing all characters in the tire 
identification number, except for the date code and, at the discretion 
of the manufacturer, any optional code, must be labeled on the other 
sidewall of the tire. Except for retreaded tires, if a tire does not 
have an intended outboard sidewall, the tire must be labeled with the 
tire identification number required by 49 CFR part 574 on one sidewall 
and with either the tire identification number or a partial tire 
identification number, containing all characters in the tire 
identification number except for the date code and, at the discretion of 
the manufacturer, any optional code, on the other sidewall.

                                * * * * *

    S5.5.4 For passenger car tires, if the maximum inflation pressure of 
a tire is 240, 280, 290, 300, 330, 340, 350 or 390 kPa, then:
    (a) Each marking of that inflation pressure pursuant to S5.5(c) must 
be followed in parenthesis by the equivalent psi, rounded to the next 
higher whole number; and
    (b) Each marking of the tire's maximum load rating pursuant to 
S5.5(d) in kilograms must be followed in parenthesis by the equivalent 
load rating in pounds, rounded to the nearest whole number.

                                * * * * *

    S7.1 Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 and before 
September 1, 2006. For tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 
and before September 1, 2006, the number of tires complying with S4, 
S5.5, S5.5.1, S5.5.2, S5.5.3, S5.5.4, S5.5.5, and S5.5.6 of this 
standard must be equal to not less than 40% of the manufacturer's 
production during that period.
    S7.2 Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2006 and before 
September 1, 2007. For tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2006 
and before September 1, 2007, the number of tires complying with S4, 
S5.5, S5.5.1, S5.5.2, S5.5.3, S5.5.4, S5.5.5, and S5.5.6 of this 
standard must be equal to not less than 70% of the manufacturer's 
production during that period.
    S7.3 Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2007. Each tire 
must comply with S4, S5.5, S5.5.1, S5.5.2, S5.5.3, S5.5.4, S5.5.5, and 
S5.5.6 of this standard.


<R05>
Sec. 571.201  Standard No. 201; Occupant protection in interior impact.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard specifies requirements to 
afford impact protection for occupants.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses with a GVWR of 4,536 
kilograms or less, except that the requirements of S6 do not apply to 
buses with a GVWR of more than 3,860 kilograms.
    S3. Definitions.
    A-pillar means any pillar that is entirely forward of a transverse 
vertical plane passing through the seating reference point of the 
driver's seat.
    Ambulance means a motor vehicle designed exclusively for the purpose 
of emergency medical care, as evidenced by the presence of a passenger 
compartment to accommodate emergency medical personnel, one or more 
patients on litters or cots, and equipment and supplies for emergency 
care at a location or during transport.
    B-pillar means the forwardmost pillar on each side of the vehicle 
that is, in whole or in part, rearward of a transverse vertical plane 
passing through the seating reference point of the driver's seat, 
unless:
    (1) There is only one pillar rearward of that plane and it is also a 
rearmost pillar; or
    (2) There is a door frame rearward of the A-pillar and forward of 
any other pillar or rearmost pillar.
    Brace means a fixed diagonal structural member in an open body 
vehicle that is used to brace the roll-bar and

[[Page 464]]

that connects the roll-bar to the main body of the vehicle structure.
    Convertible means a vehicle whose A-pillars are not joined with the 
B-pillars (or rearmost pillars) by a fixed, rigid structural member.
    Convertible roof frame means the frame of a convertible roof.
    Convertible roof linkage mechanism means any anchorage, fastener, or 
device necessary to deploy a convertible roof frame.
    Daylight opening means, for openings on the side of the vehicle, 
other than a door opening, the locus of all points where a horizontal 
line, perpendicular to the vehicle longitudinal centerline, is tangent 
to the periphery of the opening. For openings on the front and rear of 
the vehicle, other than a door opening, daylight opening means the locus 
of all points where a horizontal line, parallel to the vehicle 
longitudinal centerline, is tangent to the periphery of the opening. If 
the horizontal line is tangent to the periphery at more than one point 
at any location, the most inboard point is used to determine the 
daylight opening.
    Door frame means the rearmost perimeter structure, including trim 
but excluding glass, of the forward door and the forwardmost perimeter 
structure, including trim but excluding glass, of the rear door of a 
pair of adjacent side doors that:
    (1) Have opposing hinges;
    (2) Latch together without engaging or contacting an intervening 
pillar;
    (3) Are forward of any pillar other than the A-pillar on the same 
side of the vehicle; and
    (4) Are rearward of the A-pillar.
    Door opening means, for door openings on the side of the vehicle, 
the locus of all points where a horizontal line, perpendicular to the 
vehicle longitudinal centerline, is tangent to the periphery of the side 
door opening. For door openings on the back end of the vehicle, door 
opening means the locus of all points where a horizontal line, parallel 
to the vehicle longitudinal centerline, is tangent to the periphery of 
the back door opening. If the horizontal line is tangent to the 
periphery at more than one point at any location, the most inboard point 
is the door opening.
    Dynamically deployed upper interior head protection system means a 
protective device or devices which are integrated into a vehicle and 
which, when activated by an impact, provide, through means requiring no 
action from occupants, protection against head impacts with upper 
interior structures and components of the vehicle in crashes.
    Forehead impact zone means the part of the free motion headform 
surface area that is determined in accordance with the procedure set 
forth in S8.10.
    Free motion headform means a test device which conforms to the 
specifications of part 572, subpart L of this chapter.
    Mid-sagittal plane of a dummy means a longitudinal vertical plane 
passing through the seating reference point of a designated seating 
position.
    Motor Home means a motor vehicle with motive power that is designed 
to provide temporary residential accommodations, as evidenced by the 
presence of at least four of the following facilities: Cooking; 
refrigeration or ice box; self-contained toilet; heating and/or air 
conditioning; a potable water supply system including a faucet and a 
sink; and a separate 110-125 volt electrical power supply and/or an LP 
gas supply.
    Other door frame means the rearmost perimeter structure, including 
trim but excluding glass, of the forward door and the forwardmost 
perimeter structure, including trim but excluding glass, of the rear 
door of a pair of adjacent side doors that:
    (1) Have opposing hinges;
    (2) Latch together without engaging or contacting an intervening 
pillar; and
    (3) Are rearward of the B-pillar.
    Other pillar means any pillar which is not an A-pillar, a B-pillar, 
or a rearmost pillar.
    Pillar means any structure, excluding glazing and the vertical 
portion of door window frames, but including accompanying moldings, 
attached components such as safety belt anchorages and coat hooks, 
which:
    (1) Supports either a roof or any other structure (such as a roll-
bar) that is above the driver's head, or

[[Page 465]]

    (2) Is located along the side edge of a window.
    Roll-bar means a fixed overhead structural member, including its 
vertical support structure, that extends from the left to the right side 
of the passenger compartment of any open body vehicles and convertibles. 
It does not include a header.
    Seat belt anchorage means any component involved in transferring 
seat belt loads to the vehicle structure, including, but not limited to, 
the attachment hardware, but excluding webbing or straps, seat frames, 
seat pedestals, and the vehicle structure itself, whose failure causes 
separation of the belt from the vehicle structure.
    Seat belt mounting structure means a component of the vehicle body 
or frame, including trim, extending above a horizontal plane 460 mm 
above the seating reference point, SgRP, of the closest outboard 
designated seating position, with an upper seat belt anchorage 
conforming to the requirements of S4.2.1. and S4.3.2 of Standard No. 210 
(49 CFR 571.210) attached to it, and is not a pillar, roll bar, brace or 
stiffener, side rail, seat, or part of the roof.
    Sliding door track means a track structure along the upper edge of a 
side door opening that secures the door in the closed position and 
guides the door when moving to and from the open position.
    Stiffener means a fixed overhead structural member that connects one 
roll-bar to another roll-bar or to a header of any open body vehicle or 
convertible.
    Upper roof means the area of the vehicle interior that is determined 
in accordance with the procedure set forth in S8.15.
    Windshield trim means molding of any material between the windshield 
glazing and the exterior roof surface, including material that covers a 
part of either the windshield glazing or exterior roof surface.
    S4 Requirements
    S4.1 Except as provided in S4.2, each vehicle shall comply with 
either:
    (a) The requirements specified in S5, or,
    (b) The requirements specified in S5 and S6.
    S4.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1998 shall 
comply with the requirements of S5 and S6.
    S5 Requirements for instrument panels, seat backs, interior 
compartment doors, sun visors, and armrests. Each vehicle shall comply 
with the requirements specified in S5.1 through S5.5.2.
    S5.1 Instrument panels. Except as provided in S5.1.1, when that area 
of the instrument panel that is within the head impact area is impacted 
in accordance with S5.1.2 by a 6.8 kilogram, 165 mm diameter head form 
at--
    (a) A relative velocity of 24 kilometers per hour for all vehicles 
except those specified in paragraph (b) of this section,
    (b) A relative velocity of 19 kilometers per hour for vehicles that 
meet the occupant crash protection requirements of S5.1 of 49 CFR 
571.208 by means of inflatable restraint systems and meet the 
requirements of S4.1.5.1(a)(3) by means of a Type 2 seat belt assembly 
at the right front designated seating position, the deceleration of the 
head form shall not exceed 80 g continuously for more than 3 
milliseconds.
    S5.1.1 The requirements of S5.1 do not apply to:
    (a) Console assemblies;
    (b) Areas less than 125 mm inboard from the juncture of the 
instrument panel attachment to the body side inner structure;
    (c) Areas closer to the windshield juncture than those statically 
contactable by the head form with the windshield in place;
    (d) Areas outboard of any point of tangency on the instrument panel 
of a 165 mm diameter head form tangent to and inboard of a vertical 
longitudinal plane tangent to the inboard edge of the steering wheel; or
    (e) Areas below any point at which a vertical line is tangent to the 
rearmost surface of the panel.
    S5.1.2 Demonstration procedures. Tests shall be performed as 
described in Society of Automotive Engineers Recommended Practice J921, 
``Instrument Panel Laboratory Impact Test Procedure,'' June 1965, using 
the specified instrumentation or instrumentation that meets the 
performance requirements specified in Society of

[[Page 466]]

Automotive Engineers Recommended Practice J977, ``Instrumentation for 
Laboratory Impact Tests,'' November 1966, except that:
    (a) The origin of the line tangent to the instrument panel surface 
shall be a point on a transverse horizontal line through a point 125 mm 
horizontally forward of the seating reference point of the front 
outboard passenger designated seating position, displaced vertically an 
amount equal to the rise which results from a 125 mm forward adjustment 
of the seat or 19 mm; and
    (b) Direction of impact shall be either:
    (1) In a vertical plane parallel to the vehicle longitudinal axis; 
or
    (2) In a plane normal to the surface at the point of contact.
    S5.2 Seat Backs. Except as provided in S5.2.1, when that area of the 
seat back that is within the head impact area is impacted in accordance 
with S5.2.2 by a 6.8 kilogram, 165 mm diameter head form at a relative 
velocity of 24 kilometers per hour, the deceleration of the head form 
shall not exceed 80g continuously for more than 3 milliseconds.
    S5.2.1 The requirements of S5.2 do not apply to seats installed in 
school buses which comply with the requirements of Standard No. 222, 
School Bus Passenger Seating and Occupant Protection (49 CFR 571.222) or 
to rearmost side-facing, back-to-back, folding auxiliary jump, and 
temporary seats.
    S5.2.2 Demonstration procedures. Tests shall be performed as 
described in Society of Automotive Engineers Recommended Practice J921, 
``Instrument Panel Laboratory Impact Test Procedure,'' June 1965, using 
the specified instrumentation or instrumentation that meets the 
performance requirements specified in Society of Automotive Engineers 
Recommended Practice J977, ``Instrumentation for Laboratory Impact 
Tests,'' November 1966, except that:
    (a) The origin of the line tangent to the uppermost seat back frame 
component shall be a point on a transverse horizontal line through the 
seating reference point of the right rear designated seating position, 
with adjustable forward seats in their rearmost design driving position 
and reclinable forward seat backs in their nominal design driving 
position;
    (b) Direction of impact shall be either:
    (1) In a vertical plane parallel to the vehicle longitudinal axis; 
or
    (2) In a plane normal to the surface at the point of contact.
    (c) For seats without head restraints installed, tests shall be 
performed for each individual split or bucket seat back at points within 
100 mm left and right of its centerline, and for each bench seat back 
between points 100 mm outboard of the centerline of each outboard 
designated seating position;
    (d) For seats having head restraints installed, each test shall be 
conducted with the head restraints in place at its lowest adjusted 
position, at a point on the head restraint centerline; and
    (e) For a seat that is installed in more than one body style, tests 
conducted at the fore and aft extremes identified by application of 
subparagraph (a) shall be deemed to have demonstrated all intermediate 
conditions.
    S5.3 Interior compartment doors. Each interior compartment door 
assembly located in an instrument panel, console assembly, seat back, or 
side panel adjacent to a designated seating position shall remain closed 
when tested in accordance with either S5.3.1(a) and S5.3.1(b) or 
S5.3.1(a) and S5.3.1(c). Additionally, any interior compartment door 
located in an instrument panel or seat back shall remain closed when the 
instrument panel or seat back is tested in accordance with S5.1 and 
S5.2. All interior compartment door assemblies with a locking device 
must be tested with the locking device in an unlocked position.
    S5.3.1 Demonstration procedures.
    (a) Subject the interior compartment door latch system to an inertia 
load of 10g in a horizontal transverse direction and an inertia load of 
10g in a vertical direction in accordance with the procedure described 
in section 5 of SAE Recommended Practice J839b, ``Passenger Car Side 
Door Latch Systems,'' May 1965, or an approved equivalent.
    (b) Impact the vehicle perpendicularly into a fixed collision 
barrier at a forward longitudinal velocity of 48 kilometers per hour.

[[Page 467]]

    (c) Subject the interior compartment door latch system to a 
horizontal inertia load of 30g in a longitudinal direction in accordance 
with the procedure described in section 5 of SAE Recommended Practice 
J839b, ``Passenger Car Side Door Latch Systems,'' May 1965, or an 
approved equivalent.
    S5.4 Sun visors.
    S5.4.1 A sun visor that is constructed of or covered with energy-
absorbing material shall be provided for each front outboard designated 
seating position.
    S5.4.2 Each sun visor mounting shall present no rigid material edge 
radius of less than 3.2 mm that is statically contactable by a spherical 
165 mm diameter head form.
    S5.5 Armrests.
    S5.5.1 General. Each installed armrest shall conform to at least one 
of the following:
    (a) It shall be constructed with energy-absorbing material and shall 
deflect or collapse laterally at least 50 mm without permitting contact 
with any underlying rigid material.
    (b) It shall be constructed with energy-absorbing material that 
deflects or collapses to within 32 mm of a rigid test panel surface 
without permitting contact with any rigid material. Any rigid material 
between 13 and 32 mm from the panel surface shall have a minimum 
vertical height of not less than 25 mm.
    (c) Along not less than 50 continuous mm of its length, the armrest 
shall, when measured vertically in side elevation, provide at least 50 
mm of coverage within the pelvic impact area.
    S5.5.2 Folding armrests. Each armrest that folds into the seat back 
or between two seat backs shall either:
    (a) Meet the requirements of S5.5.1; or
    (b) Be constructed of or covered with energy-absorbing material.
    S6 Requirements for upper interior components.
    S6.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1998. Except as 
provided in S6.3 and S6.1.4, for vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1998 and before September 1, 2002, a percentage of the 
manufacturer's production, as specified in S6.1.1, S6.1.2, or S6.1.3 
shall conform, at the manufacturer's option, to either S6.1(a) or 
S6.1(b). For vehicles manufactured by final stage manufacturers on or 
after September 1, 1998 and before September 1, 2006, a percentage of 
the manufacturer's production as specified in S6.1.4 shall, except as 
provided in S6.3, conform, to either S6.1(a) or S6.1(b). The 
manufacturer shall select the option by the time it certifies the 
vehicle and may not thereafter select a different option for the 
vehicle.
    (a) When tested under the conditions of S8, comply with the 
requirements specified in S7 at the target locations specified in S10 
when impacted by the free motion headform specified in S8.9 at any speed 
up to and including 24 km/h (15 mph). The requirements do not apply to 
any target that cannot be located using the procedures of S10.
    (b) When equipped with a dynamically deployed upper interior head 
protection system and tested under the conditions of S8, comply with the 
requirements specified in S7 at the target locations specified in S10 as 
follows:
    (1) Targets that are not located over any point inside the area 
measured along the contour of the vehicle surface within 50 mm (2.0 
inch) of the periphery of the stowed system projected perpendicularly 
onto the vehicle interior surface, including mounting and inflation 
components but exclusive of any cover or covers, shall be impacted by 
the free motion headform specified in S8.9 at any speed up to and 
including 24 km/h (15 mph). The requirements do not apply to any targets 
that can not be located by using the procedures of S10.
    (2) Targets that are over any point inside the area measured along 
the contour of the vehicle interior within 50 mm (2.0 inch) of the 
periphery of the stowed system projected perpendicularly onto the 
vehicle interior surface, including mounting and inflation components 
but exclusive of any cover or covers, when the dynamically deployed 
upper interior head protection system is not deployed, shall be impacted 
by the free motion headform specified in S8.9 at any speed up to and 
including 19 km/h (12 mph) with the system undeployed. The requirements 
do not apply to any target that can not be located using the procedures 
of S10.

[[Page 468]]

    (3) Each vehicle shall, when equipped with a dummy test device 
specified in Part 572, Subpart M, and tested as specified in S8.16 
through S8.28, comply with the requirements specified in S7 when crashed 
into a fixed, rigid pole of 254 mm in diameter, at any velocity between 
24 kilometers per hour (15 mph) and 29 kilometers per hour (18 mph).
    S6.1.1 Phase-in Schedule #1
    S6.1.1.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1998 and 
before September 1, 1999. Subject to S6.1.5(a), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 1998 and before 
September 1, 1999, the amount of vehicles complying with S7 shall be not 
less than 10 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1996 and before September 1, 1999, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 1998 and 
before September 1, 1999.
    S6.1.1.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 and 
before September 1, 2000. Subject to S6.1.5(b), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 1999 and before 
September 1, 2000, the amount of vehicles complying with S7 shall be not 
less than 25 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1997 and before September 1, 2000, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 1999 and 
before September 1, 2000.
    S6.1.1.3 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2000 and 
before September 1, 2001. Subject to S6.1.5(c), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2000 and before 
September 1, 2001, the amount of vehicles complying with S7 shall be not 
less than 40 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1998 and before September 1, 2001, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2000 and 
before September 1, 2001.
    S6.1.1.4 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2001 and 
before September 1, 2002. Subject to S6.1.5(d), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2001 and before 
September 1, 2002, the amount of vehicles complying with S7 shall be not 
less than 70 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 and before September 1, 2002, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2001 and 
before September 1, 2002.
    S6.1.2 Phase-in Schedule #2
    S6.1.2.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1998 and 
before September 1, 1999. Subject to S6.1.5(a), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 1998 and before 
September 1, 1999, the amount of vehicles complying with S7 shall be not 
less than seven percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1996 and before September 1, 1999, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 1998 and 
before September 1, 1999.
    S6.1.2.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 and 
before September 1, 2000. Subject to S6.1.5(b), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 1999 and before 
September 1, 2000, the amount of vehicles complying with S7 shall be not 
less than 31 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1997 and before September 1, 2000, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 1999 and 
before September 1, 2000.
    S6.1.2.3 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2000 and 
before September 1, 2001. Subject to S6.1.5(c), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2000 and before 
September 1, 2001, the amount of vehicles complying with S7 shall be not 
less than 40 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1998 and before September 1, 2001, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2000 and 
before September 1, 2001.

[[Page 469]]

    S6.1.2.4 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2001 and 
before September 1, 2002. Subject to S6.1.5(d), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2001 and before 
September 1, 2002, the amount of vehicles complying with S7 shall be not 
less than 70 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 and before September 1, 2002, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2001 and 
before September 1, 2002.
    S6.1.3 Phase-in Schedule #3
    S6.1.3.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1998 and 
before September 1, 1999 are not required to comply with the 
requirements specified in S7.
    S6.1.3.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 shall 
comply with the requirements specified in S7.
    S6.1.4 Phase-in Schedule #4 A final stage manufacturer or alterer 
may, at its option, comply with the requirements set forth in S6.1.4.1 
and S6.1.4.2.
    S6.1.4.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1998 and 
before September 1, 2006 are not required to comply with the 
requirements specified in S7.
    S6.1.4.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2006 shall 
comply with the requirements specified in S7.
    S6.1.5 Calculation of complying vehicles.
    (a) For the purposes of complying with S6.1.1.1 or S6.1.2.1, a 
manufacturer may count a vehicle if it is manufactured on or after May 
8, 1997, but before September 1, 1999.
    (b) For the purposes of complying with S6.1.1.2 or S6.1.2.2, a 
manufacturer may count a vehicle if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after May 8, 1997, but before September 1, 
2000, and
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S6.1.1.1 or S6.1.2.1, as 
appropriate.
    (c) For the purposes of complying with S6.1.1.3 or S6.1.2.3, a 
manufacturer may count a vehicle if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after May 8, 1997, but before September 1, 
2001, and
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S6.1.1.1, S6.1.1.2, 
S6.1.2.1, or S6.1.2.2, as appropriate.
    (d) For the purposes of complying with S6.1.1.4 or S6.1.2.4, a 
manufacturer may count a vehicle if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after May 8, 1997, but before September 1, 
2002, and
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S6.1.1.1, S6.1.1.2, 
S6.1.1.3, S6.1.2.1, S6.1.2.2, or S6.1.2.3, as appropriate.
    S6.1.6 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S6.1.6.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S6.1.1 through S6.1.4, a vehicle produced by 
more than one manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer 
as follows, subject to S6.1.6.2.
    (a) A vehicle which is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer which markets the vehicle.
    S6.1.6.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 589, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S6.1.6.1.
    S6.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2002 and 
vehicles built in two or more stages manufactured after September 1, 
2006. Except as provided in S6.1.4 and S6.3, vehicles manufactured on or 
after September 1, 2002 shall, when tested under the conditions of S8, 
conform, at the manufacturer's option, to either S6.2(a) or S6.2(b). 
Vehicles manufactured by final stage manufacturers on or after September 
1, 2006 shall, except as provided in S6.3, when tested under the 
conditions of S8, conform, at the manufacturer's option, to either 
S6.2(a) or S6.2(b). The manufacturer shall select the option by the time 
it certifies the vehicle and may not thereafter select a different 
option for the vehicle.

[[Page 470]]

    (a) When tested under the conditions of S8, comply with the 
requirements specified in S7 at the target locations specified in S10 
when impacted by the free motion headform specified in S8.9 at any speed 
up to and including 24 km/h (15 mph). The requirements do not apply to 
any target that cannot be located using the procedures of S10.
    (b) When equipped with a dynamically deployed upper interior head 
protection system and tested under the conditions of S8, comply with the 
requirements specified in S7 at the target locations specified in S10 as 
follows:
    (1) Targets that are not located over any point inside the area 
measured along the contour of the vehicle surface within 50 mm (2.0 
inch) of the periphery of the stowed system projected perpendicularly 
onto the vehicle interior surface, including mounting and inflation 
components but exclusive of any cover or covers, shall be impacted by 
the free motion headform specified in S8.9 at any speed up to and 
including 24 km/h (15 mph). The requirements do not apply to any targets 
that cannot be located by using the procedures of S10.
    (2) Targets that are over any point inside the area measured along 
the contour of the vehicle interior within 50 mm (2.0 inch) of the 
periphery of the stowed system projected perpendicularly onto the 
vehicle interior surface, including mounting and inflation components 
but exclusive of any cover or covers, when the dynamically deployed 
upper interior head protection system is not deployed, shall be impacted 
by the free motion headform specified in S8.9 at any speed up to and 
including 19 km/h (12 mph) with the system undeployed. The requirements 
do not apply to any target that cannot be located using the procedures 
of S10.
    (3) Each vehicle shall, when equipped with a dummy test device 
specified in Part 572, Subpart M, and tested as specified in S8.16 
through S8.28, comply with the requirements specified in S7 when crashed 
into a fixed, rigid pole of 254 mm in diameter, at any velocity between 
24 kilometers per hour (15 mph) and 29 kilometers per hour (18 mph).
    S6.3 A vehicle need not meet the requirements of S6.1 through S6.2 
for:
    (a) Any target located on a convertible roof frame or a convertible 
roof linkage mechanism.
    (b) Any target located rearward of a vertical plane 600 mm behind 
the seating reference point of the rearmost designated seating position.
    (c) Any target located rearward of a vertical plane 600 mm behind 
the seating reference point of the driver's seating position in an 
ambulance or a motor home.
    (d) Any target in a walk-in van-type vehicles.
    (e) Any target located on the seat belt mounting structures, door 
frames and other door frames before September 1, 2005.
    S7 Performance Criterion. The HIC(d) shall not exceed 1000 when 
calculated in accordance with the following formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04AU98.002


Where the term a is the resultant head acceleration expressed as a 
multiple of g (the acceleration of gravity), and t1 and t2 are any two 
points in time during the impact which are separated by not more than a 
36 millisecond time interval.
    (a) For the free motion headform; HIC(d)=0.75446 (free motion 
headform HIC)+166.4.
    (b) For the part 572, subpart M, anthropomorphic test dummy; 
HIC(d)=HIC.
    S8 Target location and test conditions. The vehicle shall be tested 
and the targets specified in S10 located under the following conditions.
    S8.1 Vehicle test attitude.
    (a) The vehicle is supported off its suspension at an attitude 
determined in accordance with S8.1(b).
    (b) Directly above each wheel opening, determine the vertical 
distance between a level surface and a standard reference point on the 
test vehicle's body under the conditions of S8.1(b)(1) through 
S8.1(b)(3).
    (1) The vehicle is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight, plus its 
rated cargo and luggage capacity or 136 kg, whichever is less, secured 
in the luggage area. The load placed in the cargo

[[Page 471]]

area is centered over the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle.
    (2) The vehicle is filled to 100 percent of all fluid capacities.
    (3) All tires are inflated to the manufacturer's specifications 
listed on the vehicle's tire placard.
    S8.2 Windows and Sunroofs.
    (a) Movable vehicle windows are placed in the fully open position.
    (b) For testing, any window on the opposite side of the longitudinal 
centerline of the vehicle from the target to be impacted may be removed.
    (c) For testing, movable sunroofs are placed in the fully open 
position.
    S8.3 Convertible tops. The top, if any, of convertibles and open-
body type vehicles is in the closed passenger compartment configuration.
    S8.4 Doors.
    (a) Except as provided in S8.4(b) or S8.4(c), doors, including any 
rear hatchback or tailgate, are fully closed and latched but not locked.
    (b) During testing, any side door on the opposite side of the 
longitudinal centerline of the vehicle from the target to be impacted 
may be open or removed.
    (c) During testing, any rear hatchback or tailgate may be open or 
removed for testing any target except targets on the rear header, 
rearmost pillars, or the rearmost other side rail on either side of the 
vehicle.
    S8.5 Sun visors. Each sun visor shall be placed in any position 
where one side of the visor is in contact with the vehicle interior 
surface (windshield, side rail, front header, roof, etc.).
    S8.6 Steering wheel and seats.
    (a) During targeting, the steering wheel and seats may be placed in 
any position intended for use while the vehicle is in motion.
    (b) During testing, the steering wheel and seats may be removed from 
the vehicle.
    S8.7 Seat belt anchorages. If a target is on a seat belt anchorage, 
and if the seat belt anchorage is adjustable, tests are conducted with 
the anchorage adjusted to a point midway between the two extreme 
adjustment positions. If the anchorage has distinct adjustment 
positions, none of which is midway between the two extreme positions, 
tests are conducted with the anchorage adjusted to the nearest position 
above the midpoint of the two extreme positions.
    S8.8 Temperature and humidity.
    (a) The ambient temperature is between 19 degrees C. and 26 degrees 
C., at any relative humidity between 10 percent and 70 percent.
    (b) Tests are not conducted unless the headform specified in S8.9 is 
exposed to the conditions specified in S8.8(a) for a period not less 
than four hours.
    S8.9 Headform. The headform used for testing conforms to the 
specifications of part 572, subpart L of this chapter.
    S8.10 Forehead impact zone. The forehead impact zone of the headform 
is determined according to the procedure specified in (a) through (f).
    (a) Position the headform so that the baseplate of the skull is 
horizontal. The midsagittal plane of the headform is designated as Plane 
S.
    (b) From the center of the threaded hole on top of the headform, 
draw a 69 mm line forward toward the forehead, coincident with Plane S, 
along the contour of the outer skin of the headform. The front end of 
the line is designated as Point P. From Point P, draw a 100 mm line 
forward toward the forehead, coincident with Plane S, along the contour 
of the outer skin of the headform. The front end of the line is 
designated as Point O.
    (c) Draw a 125 mm line which is coincident with a horizontal plane 
along the contour of the outer skin of the forehead from left to right 
through Point O so that the line is bisected at Point O. The end of the 
line on the left side of the headform is designated as Point a and the 
end on the right as Point b.
    (d) Draw another 125 mm line which is coincident with a vertical 
plane along the contour of the outer skin of the forehead through Point 
P so that the line is bisected at Point P. The end of the line on the 
left side of the headform is designated as Point c and the end on the 
right as Point d.
    (e) Draw a line from Point a to Point c along the contour of the 
outer skin of the headform using a flexible steel tape. Using the same 
method, draw a line from Point b to Point d.

[[Page 472]]

    (f) The forehead impact zone is the surface area on the FMH forehead 
bounded by lines a-O-b and c-P-d, and a-c and b-d.
    S8.11 Target circle. The area of the vehicle to be impacted by the 
headform is marked with a solid circle 12.7 mm in diameter, centered on 
the targets specified in S10, using any transferable opaque coloring 
medium.
    S8.12 Location of head center of gravity.
    (a) Location of head center of gravity for front outboard designated 
seating positions (CG-F). For determination of head center of gravity, 
all directions are in reference to the seat orientation.
    (1) Location of rearmost CG-F (CG-F2). For front outboard designated 
seating positions, the head center of gravity with the seat in its 
rearmost normal design driving or riding position (CG-F2) is located 160 
mm rearward and 660 mm upward from the seating reference point.
    (2) Location of forwardmost CG-F (CG-F1). For front outboard 
designated seating positions, the head center of gravity with the seat 
in its forwardmost adjustment position (CG-F1) is located horizontally 
forward of CG-F2 by the distance equal to the fore-aft distance of the 
seat track.
    (b) Location of head center of gravity for rear outboard designated 
seating positions (CG-R). For rear outboard designated seating 
positions, the head center of gravity (CG-R) is located 160 mm rearward, 
relative to the seat orientation, and 660 mm upward from the seating 
reference point.
    S8.13 Impact configuration.
    S8.13.1 The headform is launched from any location inside the 
vehicle which meets the conditions of S8.13.4. At the time of launch, 
the midsagittal plane of the headform is vertical and the headform is 
upright.
    S8.13.2 The headform travels freely through the air, along a 
velocity vector that is perpendicular to the headform's skull cap plate, 
not less than 25 mm before making any contact with the vehicle.
    S8.13.3 At the time of initial contact between the headform and the 
vehicle interior surface, some portion of the forehead impact zone of 
the headform must contact some portion of the target circle.
    S8.13.4 Approach angles. The headform launching angle is as 
specified in Table 1. For components for which Table 1 specifies a range 
of angles, the headform launching angle is within the limits determined 
using the procedures specified in S8.13.4.1 and S8.13.4.2, and within 
the range specified in Table 1, using the orthogonal reference system 
specified in S9.

               Table 1--Approach Angle Limits (in Degrees)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Target component           Horizontal Angle     Vertical angle
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Front Header...................  180................  0-50
Rear Header....................  0 or 360...........  0-50
Left Side Rail.................  270................  0-50
Right Side Rail................  90.................  0-50
Left Sliding Door Track........  270................  0-50
Right Sliding Door Track.......  90.................  0-50
Left A-Pillar..................  195-255............  -5-50
Right A-Pillar.................  105-165............  -5-50
Left B-Pillar..................  195-345............  -10-50
Right B-Pillar.................  15-165.............  -10-50
Left Door Frame................  195-345............  -10-50
Right Door Frame...............  15--165............  -10-50
Other Left Pillars.............  270................  -10-50
Other Right Pillars............  90.................  -10-50
Other Left Door Frame..........  270................  -10-50
Other Right Door Frame.........  90.................  -10-50
Left Rearmost Pillar...........  270-345............  -10-50
Right Rearmost Pillar..........  15-90..............  -10-50
Upper Roof.....................  Any................  0-50
Overhead Rollbar...............  0 or 180...........  0-50
Brace or Stiffener.............  90 or 270..........  0-50
Left Seat Belt Mounting          195-345............  -10-50
 Structure.
Right Seat Belt Mounting         15-165.............  -10-50
 Structure.
Seat Belt Anchorages...........  Any................  0-50
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 473]]

    S8.13.4.1 Horizontal Approach Angles for Headform Impacts.
    (a) Left A-Pillar Horizontal Approach Angles.
    (1) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F1 for the left seat and the right A-pillar. The maximum horizontal 
approach angle for the left A-pillar equals 360 degrees minus the angle 
formed by that line and the X-axis of the vehicle, measured 
counterclockwise.
    (2) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F2 for the left seat and the left A-pillar. The minimum horizontal 
approach angle for the left A-pillar impact equals the angle formed by 
that line and the X-axis of the vehicle, measured counterclockwise.
    (b) Right A-Pillar Horizontal Approach Angles.
    (1) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F1 for the right seat and the left A-pillar. The minimum horizontal 
approach angle for the right A-pillar equals 360 degrees minus the angle 
formed by that line and the X-axis of the vehicle, measured 
counterclockwise.
    (2) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F2 for the right seat and the right A-pillar. The maximum horizontal 
approach angle for the right A-pillar impact equals the angle formed by 
that line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured counterclockwise.
    (c) Left B-Pillar Horizontal Approach Angles.
    (1) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F2 for the left seat and the left B-pillar. The maximum horizontal 
approach angle for the left B-pillar equals the angle formed by that 
line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured counterclockwise, or 270 
degrees, whichever is greater.
    (2) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-R for the left seat and the left B-pillar. The minimum horizontal 
approach angle for the left B-pillar equals the angle formed by that 
line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured counterclockwise.
    (d) Right B-Pillar Horizontal Approach Angles.
    (1) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F2 for the right seat and the right B-pillar. The minimum horizontal 
approach angle for the right B-pillar equals the angle formed by that 
line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured counterclockwise, or 90 
degrees, whichever is less.
    (2) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-R for the right seat and the right B-pillar. The maximum horizontal 
approach angle for the right B-pillar equals the angle between that line 
and the X-axis of the vehicle measured counterclockwise.
    (e) Left door frame horizontal approach angles.
    (1) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F2 for the left seat and the left door frame. The maximum horizontal 
approach angle for the left door frame equals the angle formed by that 
line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured counterclockwise, or 270 
degrees, whichever is greater.
    (2) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-R for the left seat and the left door frame. The minimum horizontal 
approach angle for the left door frame equals the angle formed by that 
line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured counterclockwise.
    (f) Right door frame horizontal approach angles.
    (1) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F2 for the right seat and the right door frame. The minimum 
horizontal approach angle for the right door frame equals the angle 
formed by that line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured 
counterclockwise, or 90 degrees, whichever is less.
    (2) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-R for the right seat and the right door frame. The maximum horizontal 
approach angle for the right door frame equals the angle formed by that 
line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured counterclockwise
    (g) Left seat belt mounting structure horizontal approach angles.
    (1) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F2

[[Page 474]]

for the left seat and the left seat belt mounting structure. If the seat 
belt mounting structure is below a horizontal plane passing through CG-
F2 for the left seat, locate the point 200 mm directly below CG-F2 and 
locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between that 
point and the left seat belt mounting structure. The maximum horizontal 
approach angle for the left seat belt mounting structure equals the 
angle formed by that line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured 
counterclockwise, or 270 degrees, whichever is greater.
    (2) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-R for the left seat and the left seat belt mounting structure. If the 
seat belt mounting structure is below a horizontal plane passing through 
CG-R for the left seat, locate the point 200 mm directly below CG-R and 
locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between that 
point and the left seat belt mounting structure. The minimum horizontal 
approach angle for the left seat belt mounting structure equals the 
angle formed by that line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured 
counterclockwise. If the CG-R does not exist, or is forward of the seat 
belt mounting structure, the maximum horizontal approach angle is 270 
degrees.
    (h) Right seat belt mounting structure horizontal approach angles.
    (1) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F2 for the right seat and the right seat belt mounting structure. If 
the seat belt mounting structure is below a horizontal plane passing 
through CG-F2 for the right seat, locate the point 200 mm directly below 
that CG-F2 and locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance 
between that point and the right seat belt mounting structure. The 
minimum horizontal approach angle for the right seat belt mounting 
structure equals the angle formed by that line and the X-axis of the 
vehicle measured counterclockwise, or 90 degrees, whichever is less.
    (2) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-R for the right seat and the right seat belt mounting structure. If 
the seat belt mounting structure is below a horizontal plane passing 
through CG-R, locate the point 200 mm directly below CG-R and locate a 
line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between that point and 
the right seat belt mounting structure. The maximum horizontal approach 
angle for the right seat belt mounting structure equals the angle formed 
by that line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured counterclockwise. If 
the CG-R does not exist, or is forward of the seat belt mounting 
structure, the maximum horizontal approach angle is 90 degrees.
    S8.13.4.2 Vertical Approach Angles
    (a) Position the forehead impact zone in contact with the selected 
target at the prescribed horizontal approach angle. If a range of 
horizontal approach angles is prescribed, position the forehead impact 
zone in contact with the selected target at any horizontal approach 
angle within the range which may be used for testing.
    (b) Keeping the forehead impact zone in contact with the target, 
rotate the FMH upward until the lip, chin or other part of the FMH 
contacts the component or other portion of the vehicle interior.
    (1) Except as provided in S8.13.4.2(b)(2), keeping the forehead 
impact zone in contact with the target, rotate the FMH downward by 5 
degrees for each target to determine the maximum vertical angle.
    (2) For all pillars, except A-pillars, and all door frames and seat 
belt mounting structures, keeping the forehead impact zone in contact 
with the target, rotate the FMH downward by 10 degrees for each target 
to determine the maximum vertical angle.
    S8.14 Multiple impacts.
    (a) A vehicle being tested may be impacted multiple times, subject 
to the limitations in S8.14(b), (c), (d) and (e).
    (b) As measured as provided in S8.14(d), impacts within 300 mm of 
each other may not occur less than 30 minutes apart.
    (c) As measured as provided in S8.14(d), no impact may occur within 
150 mm of any other impact.
    (d) For S8.14(b) and S8.14(c), the distance between impacts is the 
distance between the center of the target circle specified in S8.11 for 
each impact, measured along the vehicle interior.

[[Page 475]]

    (e) No impact may occur within the ``exclusion zone'' of any pillar 
target specified in S10.1 through S10.4, door frame target specified in 
S10.14 and S10.15, upper roof target specified in S10.9, or seat belt 
mounting structure target specified in S10.16. The ``exclusion zone'' is 
determined according to the procedure in S8.14(f) through S8.14(k).
    (f) Locate the point, Point X, at the center of the target circle 
specified in S8.11 for the tested target.
    (g) Determine two spheres centered on Point X. Radii of these 
spheres are 150 mm and 200 mm, respectively.
    (h) Locate a horizontal plane passing through Point X. Determine the 
intersection points, if they exist, of the small sphere surface, the 
horizontal plane, and the vehicle interior surface. Relative to Point X, 
the point on the left is Point L and the point on the right is Point R.
    (i) Locate a vertical plane, Plane Z, passing through Point X and 
coincident (within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5[deg]) with the horizontal 
approach angle used or intended for use in testing the target centered 
on Point X.
    (j) If either Point L or Point R does not exist, extend Line LX and/
or Line RX, as appropriate, perpendicular to Plane Z beyond Point X by 
150 mm. The end of the line is designated as Point L or Point R, as 
appropriate.
    (k) Locate a vertical plane, Plane ZL, passing through Point L and 
parallel to Plane Z. Locate another vertical plane, Plane ZR, passing 
through Point R and parallel to Plane Z. The ``exclusion zone'' is the 
vehicle interior surface area between Plane ZL and Plane ZR below the 
upper boundary of the smaller sphere and above the lower boundary of the 
larger sphere. Points on the intersection of the vehicle interior 
surface and the large sphere below the target, the small sphere above 
the target, Plane ZL and Plane ZR are not included in the ``exclusion 
zone.''
    S8.15 Upper Roof. The upper roof of a vehicle is determined 
according to the procedure specified in S8.15 (a) through (h).
    (a) Locate the transverse vertical plane A at the forwardmost point 
where it contacts the interior roof (including trim) at the vehicle 
centerline.
    (b) Locate the transverse vertical plane B at the rearmost point 
where it contacts the interior roof (including trim) at the vehicle 
centerline.
    (c) Measure the horizontal distance (D1) between Plane A and Plane 
B.
    (d) Locate the vertical longitudinal plane C at the leftmost point 
at which a vertical transverse plane, located 300 mm rearward of the A-
pillar reference point described in S10.1(a), contacts the interior roof 
(including trim).
    (e) Locate the vertical longitudinal plane D at the rightmost point 
at which a vertical transverse plane, located 300 mm rearward of the A-
pillar reference point described in S10.1(a), contacts the interior roof 
(including trim).
    (f) Measure the horizontal distance (D2) between Plane C and Plane 
D.
    (g) Locate a point (Point M) on the interior roof surface, midway 
between Plane A and Plane B along the vehicle longitudinal centerline.
    (h) The upper roof zone is the area of the vehicle upper interior 
surface bounded by the four planes described in S8.15(h)(1) and 
S8.15(h)(2):
    (1) A transverse vertical plane E located at a distance of (.35 D1) 
forward of Point M and a transverse vertical plane F located at a 
distance of (.35 D1) rearward of Point M, measured horizontally.
    (2) A longitudinal vertical plane G located at a distance of (.35 
D2) to the left of Point M and a longitudinal vertical plane H located 
at a distance of (.35 D2) to the right of Point M, measured 
horizontally.
    S8.16 Test weight--vehicle to pole test. Each vehicle shall be 
loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight, plus 136 kilograms (300 pounds) 
or its rated cargo and luggage capacity (whichever is less), secured in 
the luggage or load-carrying area, plus the weight of the necessary 
anthropomorphic test dummy. Any added test equipment shall be located 
away from impact areas in secure places in the vehicle.
    S8.17 Vehicle test attitude--vehicle to pole test. Determine the 
distance between a level surface and a standard reference point on the 
test vehicle's

[[Page 476]]

body, directly above each wheel opening, when the vehicle is in its ``as 
delivered'' condition. The ``as delivered'' condition is the vehicle as 
received at the test site, filled to 100 percent of all fluid capacities 
and with all tires inflated to the manufacturer's specifications listed 
on the vehicle's tire placard. Determine the distance between the same 
level surface and the same standard reference points in the vehicle's 
``fully loaded condition.'' The ``fully loaded condition'' is the test 
vehicle loaded in accordance with S8.16. The load placed in the cargo 
area shall be centered over the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle. 
The pretest vehicle attitude shall be the same as either the ``as 
delivered'' or ``fully loaded'' attitude or is between the ``as 
delivered'' attitude and the ``fully loaded'' attitude. If the test 
configuration requires that the vehicle be elevated off the ground, the 
pretest vehicle attitude must be maintained.
    S8.18 Adjustable seats--vehicle to pole test. Initially, adjustable 
seats shall be adjusted as specified in S6.3 of Standard 214 (49 CFR 
571.214).
    S8.19 Adjustable seat back placement--vehicle to pole test. 
Initially, position adjustable seat backs in the manner specified in 
S6.4 of Standard 214 (49 CFR 571.214).
    S8.20 Adjustable steering wheels--vehicle to pole test. Adjustable 
steering controls shall be adjusted so that the steering wheel hub is at 
the geometric center of the locus it describes when it is moved through 
its full range of driving positions.
    S8.21 Windows and sunroof--vehicle to pole test. Movable windows and 
vents shall be placed in the fully open position. Any sunroof shall be 
placed in the fully closed position.
    S8.22 Convertible tops--vehicle to pole test. The top, if any, of 
convertibles and open-body type vehicles shall be in the closed 
passenger compartment configuration.
    S8.23 Doors--vehicle to pole test. Doors, including any rear 
hatchback or tailgate, shall be fully closed and latched but not locked.
    S8.24 Impact reference line--vehicle to pole test. On the striking 
side of the vehicle, place an impact reference line at the intersection 
of the vehicle exterior and a transverse vertical plane passing through 
the center of gravity of the head of the dummy seated in accordance with 
S8.28, in the front outboard designated seating position.
    S8.25 Rigid Pole--vehicle to pole test. The rigid pole is a vertical 
metal structure beginning no more than 102 millimeters (4 inches) above 
the lowest point of the tires on the striking side of the test vehicle 
when the vehicle is loaded as specified in S8.16 and extending above the 
highest point of the roof of the test vehicle. The pole is 254 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 mm (10 inches) in diameter and set off from any 
mounting surface, such as a barrier or other structure, so that the test 
vehicle will not contact such a mount or support at any time within 100 
milliseconds of the initiation of vehicle to pole contact.
    S8.26 Impact configuration--vehicle to pole test. The rigid pole 
shall be stationary. The test vehicle shall be propelled sideways so 
that its line of forward motion forms an angle of 90 degrees ( <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 degrees) with the vehicle's longitudinal center line. 
The impact reference line shall be aligned with the center line of the 
rigid pole so that, when the vehicle-to-pole contact occurs, the center 
line of the pole contacts the vehicle area bounded by two transverse 
vertical planes 38 mm (1.5 inches) forward and aft of the impact 
reference line.
    S8.27 Anthropomorphic test dummy--vehicle to pole test.
    S8.27.1 The anthropomorphic test dummy used for evaluation of a 
vehicle's head impact protection shall conform to the requirements of 
subpart M of part 572 of this chapter (49 CFR part 572, subpart M). In a 
test in which the test vehicle is striking its left side, the dummy is 
to be configured and instrumented to strike on its left side, in 
accordance with subpart M of part 572. In a test in which the test 
vehicle is striking its right side, the dummy is to be configured and 
instrumented to strike its right side, in accordance with subpart M of 
part 572.
    S8.27.2 The part 572, subpart M, test dummy specified is clothed in 
form fitting cotton stretch garments with short sleeves and midcalf 
length pants. Each foot of the test dummy is equipped with a size 11EEE 
shoe, which

[[Page 477]]

meets the configuration size, sole, and heel thickness specifications of 
MIL-S-13192 (1976) and weighs 0.57 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.09 kilograms 
(1.25 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 pounds).
    S8.27.3 Limb joints shall be set at between 1 and 2 g's. Leg joints 
are adjusted with the torso in the supine position.
    S8.27.4 The stabilized temperature of the test dummy at the time of 
the side impact test shall be at any temperature between 20.6 degrees C. 
and 22.2 degrees C.
    S8.27.5 The acceleration data from the accelerometers installed 
inside the skull cavity of the test dummy are processed according to the 
practices set forth in SAE Recommended Practice J211, March 1995, 
``Instrumentation for Impact Tests,'' Class 1000.
    S8.28 Positioning procedure for the Part 572 Subpart M Test Dummy--
vehicle to pole test. The part 572, subpart M, test dummy shall be 
initially positioned in the front outboard seating position on the 
struck side of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of S7 of 
Standard 214, 49 CFR 571.214, and the vehicle seat shall be positioned 
as specified in S6.3 and S6.4 of that standard. The position of the 
dummy shall then be measured as follows. Locate the horizontal plane 
passing through the dummy head center of gravity. Identify the rearmost 
point on the dummy head in that plane. Construct a line in the plane 
that contains the rearward point of the front door daylight opening and 
is perpendicular to the longitudinal vehicle centerline. Measure the 
longitudinal distance between the rearmost point on the dummy head and 
this line. If this distance is less than 50 mm (2 inches) or the point 
is not forward of the line, then the seat and/or dummy positions shall 
be adjusted as follows. First, the seat back angle is adjusted, a 
maximum of 5 degrees, until a 50 mm (2 inches) distance is achieved. If 
this is not sufficient to produce the 50 mm (2 inches) distance, the 
seat is moved forward until the 50 mm (2 inches) distance is achieved or 
until the knees of the dummy contact the dashboard or knee bolster, 
whichever comes first. If the required distance cannot be achieved 
through movement of the seat, the seat back angle shall be adjusted even 
further forward until the 50mm (2 inches) distance is obtained or until 
the seat back is in its full upright locking position.
    S9. Orthogonal Reference System. The approach angles specified in 
S8.13.4 are determined using the reference system specified in S9.1 
through S9.4.
    S9.1 An orthogonal reference system consisting of a longitudinal X 
axis and a transverse Y axis in the same horizontal plane and a vertical 
Z axis through the intersection of X and Y is used to define the 
horizontal direction of approach of the headform. The X-Z plane is the 
vertical longitudinal zero plane and is parallel to the longitudinal 
centerline of the vehicle. The X-Y plane is the horizontal zero plane 
parallel to the ground. The Y-Z plane is the vertical transverse zero 
plane that is perpendicular to the X-Y and X-Z planes. The X coordinate 
is negative forward of the Y-Z plane and positive to the rear. The Y 
coordinate is negative to the left of the X-Z plane and positive to the 
right. The Z coordinate is negative below the X-Y plane and positive 
above it. (See Figure 1.)
    S9.2 The origin of the reference system is the center of gravity of 
the headform at the time immediately prior to launch for each test.
    S9.3 The horizontal approach angle is the angle between the X axis 
and the headform impact velocity vector projected onto the horizontal 
zero plane, measured in the horizontal zero plane in the counter-
clockwise direction. A 0 degree horizontal vector and a 360 degree 
horizontal vector point in the positive X direction; a 90 degree 
horizontal vector points in the positive Y direction; a 180 degree 
horizontal vector points in the negative X direction; and a 270 
horizontal degree vector points in the negative Y direction. (See Figure 
2.)
    S9.4 The vertical approach angle is the angle between the horizontal 
plane and the velocity vector, measured in the midsagittal plane of the 
headform. A 0 degree vertical vector in Table I coincides with the 
horizontal plane and a vertical vector of greater than 0 degrees in 
Table I makes a upward angle of the same number of degrees with that 
plane.
    S10 Target Locations.

[[Page 478]]

    (a) The target locations specified in S10.1 through S10.16 are 
located on both sides of the vehicle and, except as specified in S10(b), 
are determined using the procedures specified in those paragraphs.
    (b) Except as specified in S10(c), if there is no combination of 
horizontal and vertical angles specified in S8.13.4 at which the 
forehead impact zone of the free motion headform can contact one of the 
targets located using the procedures in S10.1 through S10.16, the center 
of that target is moved to any location within a sphere with a radius of 
25 mm, centered on the center of the original target, which the forehead 
impact zone can contact at one or more combination of angles.
    (c) If there is no point within the sphere specified in S10(b) which 
the forehead impact zone of the free motion headform can contact at one 
or more combination of horizontal and vertical angles specified in 
S8.13.4, the radius of the sphere is increased by 25 mm increments until 
the sphere contains at least one point that can be contacted at one or 
more combination of angles.
    S10.1 A-pillar targets
    (a) A-pillar reference point and target AP1. On the vehicle 
exterior, locate a transverse vertical plane (Plane 1) which contacts 
the rearmost point of the windshield trim. The intersection of Plane 1 
and the vehicle exterior surface is Line 1. Measuring along the vehicle 
exterior surface, locate a point (Point 1) on Line 1 that is 125 mm 
inboard of the intersection of Line 1 and a vertical plane tangent to 
the vehicle at the outboardmost point on Line 1 with the vehicle side 
door open. Measuring along the vehicle exterior surface in a 
longitudinal vertical plane (Plane 2) passing through Point 1, locate a 
point (Point 2) 50 mm rearward of Point 1. Locate the A-pillar reference 
point (Point APR) at the intersection of the interior roof surface and a 
line that is perpendicular to the vehicle exterior surface at Point 2. 
Target AP1 is located at point APR.
    (b) Target AP2. Locate the horizontal plane (Plane 3) which 
intersects point APR. Locate the horizontal plane (Plane 4) which is 88 
mm below Plane 3. Target AP2 is the point in Plane 4 and on the A-pillar 
which is closest to CG-F2 for the nearest seating position.
    (c) Target AP3. Locate the horizontal plane (Plane 5) containing the 
highest point at the intersection of the dashboard and the A-pillar. 
Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 6) half-way between Plane 3 and Plane 
5. Target AP3 is the point on Plane 6 and the A-pillar which is closest 
to CG-F1 for the nearest seating position.
    S10.2 B-pillar targets.
    (a) B-pillar reference point and target BP1. Locate the point (Point 
3) on the vehicle interior at the intersection of the horizontal plane 
passing through the highest point of the forwardmost door opening and 
the centerline of the width of the B-pillar, as viewed laterally. Locate 
a transverse vertical plane (Plane 7) which passes through Point 3. 
Locate the point (Point 4) at the intersection of the interior roof 
surface, Plane 7, and the plane, described in S8.15(h), defining the 
nearest edge of the upper roof. The B-pillar reference point (Point BPR) 
is the point located at the middle of the line from Point 3 to Point 4 
in Plane 7, measured along the vehicle interior surface. Target BP1 is 
located at Point BPR.
    (b) Target BP2. If a seat belt anchorage is located on the B-pillar, 
Target BP2 is located at any point on the anchorage.
    (c) Target BP3. Target BP3 is located in accordance with this 
paragraph. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 8) which intersects Point 
BPR. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 9) which passes through the lowest 
point of the daylight opening forward of the pillar. Locate a horizontal 
plane (Plane 10) half-way between Plane 8 and Plane 9. Target BP3 is the 
point located in Plane 10 and on the interior surface of the B-pillar, 
which is closest to CG-F(2) for the nearest seating position.
    (d) Target BP4. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 11) half-way 
between Plane 9 and Plane 10. Target BP4 is the point located in Plane 
11 and on the interior surface of the B-pillar which is closest to CG-R 
for the nearest seating position.
    S10.3 Other pillar targets.
    (a) Target OP1.
    (1) Except as provided in S10.3(a)(2), target OP1 is located in 
accordance

[[Page 479]]

with this paragraph. Locate the point (Point 5), on the vehicle 
interior, at the intersection of the horizontal plane through the 
highest point of the highest adjacent door opening or daylight opening 
(if no adjacent door opening) and the centerline of the width of the 
other pillar, as viewed laterally. Locate a transverse vertical plane 
(Plane 12) passing through Point 5. Locate the point (Point 6) at the 
intersection of the interior roof surface, Plane 12 and the plane, 
described in S8.15(h), defining the nearest edge of the upper roof. The 
other pillar reference point (Point OPR) is the point located at the 
middle of the line between Point 5 and Point 6 in Plane 12, measured 
along the vehicle interior surface. Target OP1 is located at Point OPR.
    (2) If a seat belt anchorage is located on the pillar, Target OP1 is 
any point on the anchorage.
    (b) Target OP2. Locate the horizontal plane (Plane 13) intersecting 
Point OPR. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 14) passing through the 
lowest point of the daylight opening forward of the pillar. Locate a 
horizontal plane (Plane 15) half-way between Plane 13 and Plane 14. 
Target OP2 is the point located on the interior surface of the pillar at 
the intersection of Plane 15 and the centerline of the width of the 
pillar, as viewed laterally.
    S10.4 Rearmost pillar targets
    (a) Rearmost pillar reference point and target RP1. Locate the point 
(Point 7) at the corner of the upper roof nearest to the pillar. The 
distance between Point M, as described in S8.15(g), and Point 7, as 
measured along the vehicle interior surface, is D. Extend the line from 
Point M to Point 7 along the vehicle interior surface in the same 
vertical plane by (3*D/7) beyond Point 7 or until the edge of a daylight 
opening, whichever comes first, to locate Point 8. The rearmost pillar 
reference point (Point RPR) is at the midpoint of the line between Point 
7 and Point 8, measured along the vehicle interior. Target RP1 is 
located at Point RPR.
    (b) Target RP2.
    (1) Except as provided in S10.4(b)(2), target RP2 is located in 
accordance with this paragraph. Locate the horizontal plane (Plane 16) 
through Point RPR. Locate the horizontal plane (Plane 17) 150 mm below 
Plane 16. Target RP2 is located in Plane 17 and on the pillar at the 
location closest to CG-R for the nearest designated seating position.
    (2) If a seat belt anchorage is located on the pillar, Target RP2 is 
any point on the anchorage.
    S10.5 Front header targets.
    (a) Target FH1. Locate the contour line (Line 2) on the vehicle 
interior trim which passes through the APR and is parallel to the 
contour line (Line 3) at the upper edge of the windshield on the vehicle 
interior. Locate the point (Point 9) on Line 2 that is 125 mm inboard of 
the APR, measured along that line. Locate a longitudinal vertical plane 
(Plane 18) that passes through Point 9. Target FH1 is located at the 
intersection of Plane 18 and the upper vehicle interior, halfway between 
a transverse vertical plane (Plane 19) through Point 9 and a transverse 
vertical plane (Plane 20) through the intersection of Plane 18 and Line 
3.
    (b) Target FH2.
    (1) Except as provided in S10.5(b)(2), target FH2 is located in 
accordance with this paragraph. Locate a point (Point 10) 275 mm inboard 
of Point APR, along Line 2. Locate a longitudinal vertical plane (Plane 
21) that passes through Point 10. Target FH2 is located at the 
intersection of Plane 21 and the upper vehicle interior, halfway between 
a transverse vertical plane (Plane 22) through Point 10 and a transverse 
vertical plane (Plane 23) through the intersection of Plane 21 and Line 
3.
    (2) If a sun roof opening is located forward of the front edge of 
the upper roof and intersects the mid-sagittal plane of a dummy seated 
in either front outboard seating position, target FH2 is the nearest 
point that is forward of a transverse vertical plane (Plane 24) through 
CG-F(2) and on the intersection of the mid-sagittal plane and the 
interior sunroof opening.
    S10.6 Targets on the side rail between the A-pillar and the B-pillar 
or rearmost pillar in vehicles with only two pillars on each side of the 
vehicle.
    (a) Target SR1. Locate a transverse vertical plane (Plane 25) 150 mm 
rearward of Point APR. Locate the point (Point 11) at the intersection 
of Plane 25 and the upper edge of the

[[Page 480]]

forwardmost door opening. Locate the point (Point 12) at the 
intersection of the interior roof surface, Plane 25 and the plane, 
described in S8.15(h), defining the nearest edge of the upper roof. 
Target SR1 is located at the middle of the line between Point 11 and 
Point 12 in Plane 25, measured along the vehicle interior.
    (b) Target SR2. Locate a transverse vertical plane (Plane 26) 300 mm 
rearward of the APR or 300 mm forward of the BPR (or the RPR in vehicles 
with no B-pillar). Locate the point (Point 13) at the intersection of 
Plane 26 and the upper edge of the forwardmost door opening. Locate the 
point (Point 14) at the intersection of the interior roof surface, Plane 
26 and the plane, described in S8.15(h), defining the nearest edge of 
the upper roof. Target SR2 is located at the middle of the line between 
Point 13 and Point 14 in Plane 26, measured along the vehicle interior.
    S10.7 Other side rail target (target SR3).
    (a) Except as provided in S10.7(b), target SR3 is located in 
accordance with this paragraph. Locate a transverse vertical plane 
(Plane 27) 150 mm rearward of either Point BPR or Point OPR. Locate the 
point (Point 15) as provided in either S10.7(a)(1) or S10.7(a)(2), as 
appropriate. Locate the point (Point 16) at the intersection of the 
interior roof surface, Plane 27 and the plane, described in S8.15(h), 
defining the nearest edge of the upper roof. Target SR3 is located at 
the middle of the line between Point 15 and Point 16 in Plane 27, 
measured along the vehicle interior surface.
    (1) If Plane 27 intersects a door or daylight opening, the Point 15 
is located at the intersection of Plane 27 and the upper edge of the 
door opening or daylight opening.
    (2) If Plane 27 does not intersect a door or daylight opening, the 
Point 15 is located on the vehicle interior at the intersection of Plane 
27 and the horizontal plane through the highest point of the door or 
daylight opening nearest Plane 27. If the adjacent door(s) or daylight 
opening(s) are equidistant to Plane 27, Point 15 is located on the 
vehicle interior at the intersection of Plane 27 and either horizontal 
plane through the highest point of each door or daylight opening.
    (b) Except as provided in S10.7(c), if a grab handle is located on 
the side rail, target SR3 is located at any point on the anchorage of 
the grab-handle. Folding grab-handles are in their stowed position for 
testing.
    (c) If a seat belt anchorage is located on the side rail, target SR3 
is located at any point on the anchorage.
    S10.8 Rear header target (target RH). Locate the point (Point 17) at 
the intersection of the surface of the upper vehicle interior, the mid-
sagittal plane (Plane 28) of the outboard rearmost dummy and the plane, 
described in S8.15(h), defining the rear edge of the upper roof. Locate 
the point (Point 18) as provided in S10.8(a) or S10.8(b), as 
appropriate. Except as provided in S10.8(c), Target RH is located at the 
mid-point of the line that is between Point 17 and Point 18 and is in 
Plane 28, as measured along the surface of the vehicle interior.
    (a) If Plane 28 intersects a rear door opening or daylight opening, 
then Point 18 is located at the intersection of Plane 28 and the upper 
edge of the door opening or the daylight opening (if no door opening).
    (b) If Plane 28 does not intersect a rear door opening or daylight 
opening, then Point 18 is located on the vehicle interior at the 
intersection of Plane 28 and a horizontal plane through the highest 
point of the door or daylight opening nearest to Plane 28. If the 
adjacent door(s) or daylight opening(s) are equidistant to Plane 28, 
Point 18 is located on the vehicle interior at the intersection of Plane 
28 and either horizontal plane through the highest point of each door or 
daylight opening.
    (c) If Target RH is more than 112 mm from Point 18 on the line that 
is between Point 17 and Point 18 and is in Plane 28, as measured along 
the surface of the vehicle interior, then Target RH is the point on that 
line which is 112 mm from Point 18.
    S10.9 Upper roof target (target UR). Target UR is any point on the 
upper roof.
    S10.10 Sliding door track target (target SD). Locate the transverse 
vertical plane (Plane 29) passing through the middle of the widest 
opening of the

[[Page 481]]

sliding door, measured horizontally and parallel to the vehicle 
longitudinal centerline. Locate the point (Point 19) at the intersection 
of the surface of the upper vehicle interior, Plane 29 and the plane, 
described in S8.15(h), defining the nearest edge of the upper roof. 
Locate the point (Point 20) at the intersection of Plane 29 and the 
upper edge of the sliding door opening. Target SD is located at the 
middle of the line between Point 19 and Point 20 in Plane 29, measured 
along the vehicle interior.
    S10.11 Roll-bar targets.
    (a) Target RB1. Locate a longitudinal vertical plane (Plane 30) at 
the mid-sagittal plane of a dummy seated in any outboard designated 
seating position. Target RB1 is located on the roll-bar and in Plane 30 
at the location closest to either CG-F2 or CG-R, as appropriate, for the 
same dummy.
    (b) Target RB2. If a seat belt anchorage is located on the roll-bar, 
Target RB2 is any point on the anchorage.
    S10.12 Stiffener targets.
    (a) Target ST1. Locate a transverse vertical plane (Plane 31) 
containing either CG-F2 or CG-R, as appropriate, for any outboard 
designated seating position. Target ST1 is located on the stiffener and 
in Plane 31 at the location closest to either CG-F2 or CG-R, as 
appropriate.
    (b) Target ST2. If a seat belt anchorage is located on the 
stiffener, Target ST2 is any point on the anchorage.
    S10.13 Brace target (target BT) Target BT is any point on the width 
of the brace as viewed laterally from inside the passenger compartment.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP97.008


[[Page 482]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP97.009

    S10.14 Door frame targets.
    (a) Target DF 1. Locate the point (Point 21) on the vehicle interior 
at the intersection of the horizontal plane passing through the highest 
point of the forward door opening and a transverse vertical plane (Plane 
32 ) tangent to the rearmost edge of the forward door, as viewed 
laterally with the adjacent door open. Locate the point (Point 22) at 
the intersection of the interior roof surface, Plane 32, and the plane, 
described in S8.15(h), defining the nearest edge of the upper roof. The 
door frame reference point (Point DFR) is the point located at the 
middle of the line from Point 21 to Point 22 in Plane 32, measured along 
the vehicle interior surface. Target DF1 is located at Point DFR.
    (b) Target DF2. If a seat belt anchorage is located on the door 
frame, Target DF2 is located at any point on the anchorage.
    (c) Target DF3. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 33) which 
intersects Point

[[Page 483]]

DFR. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 34) that passes through the lowest 
point of the adjacent daylight opening forward of the door frame. Locate 
a horizontal plane (Plane 35) half-way between Plane 33 and Plane 34. 
Target DF3 is the point located in Plane 35 and on the interior surface 
of the door frame, which is closest to CG-F2 for the nearest seating 
position.
    (d) Target DF4. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 36) half-way 
between Plane 34 and Plane 35. Target DF4 is the point located in Plane 
36 and on the interior surface of the door frame that is closest to CG-R 
for the nearest seating position.
    S10.15 Other door frame targets.
    (a) Target OD1.
    (1) Except as provided in S10.15(a)(2), target OD1 is located in 
accordance with this paragraph. Locate the point (Point 23) on the 
vehicle interior, at the intersection of the horizontal plane through 
the highest point of the highest adjacent door opening or daylight 
opening (if there is no adjacent door opening) and the center line of 
the width of the other door frame, as viewed laterally with the doors in 
the closed position. Locate a transverse vertical plane (Plane 37) 
passing through Point 23. Locate the point (Point 24) at the 
intersection of the interior roof surface, Plane 37 and the plane, 
described in S8.15(h), defining the nearest edge of the upper roof. The 
other door frame reference point (Point ODR) is the point located at the 
middle of the line between Point 23 and Point 24 in Plane 37, measured 
along the vehicle interior surface. Target OD1 is located at Point ODR.
    (2) If a seat belt anchorage is located on the door frame, Target 
OD1 is any point on the anchorage.
    (b) Target OD2. Locate the horizontal plane (Plane 38) intersecting 
Point ODR. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 39) passing through the 
lowest point of the daylight opening forward of the door frame. Locate a 
horizontal plane (Plane 40) half-way between Plane 38 and Plane 39. 
Target OD2 is the point located on the interior surface of the door 
frame at the intersection of Plane 40 and the center line of the width 
of the door frames, as viewed laterally, with the doors in the closed 
position.
    S10.16 Seat belt mounting structure targets.
    (a) Target SB1. Target SB1 is located at any point on the seat belt 
anchorage mounted on the seat belt mounting structure.
    (b) Target SB2. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 41), containing 
either CG-F2 or CG-R, as appropriate, for any outboard designated 
seating position whose seating reference point, SgRP, is forward of and 
closest to, the vertical center line of the width of the seat belt 
mounting structure as viewed laterally. Target SB2 is located on the 
seat belt mounting structure and in Plane 41 at the location closest to 
either CG-F2 or CG-R, as appropriate.
    (c) Target SB3. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 42), containing CG-
R for any outboard designated seating position rearward of the 
forwardmost designated seating position or positions whose seating 
reference point, SgRP, is rearward of and closest to, the vertical 
center line of the width of the seat belt mounting structure, as viewed 
laterally. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 43) 200 mm below Plane 42. 
Target SB3 is located on the seat belt mounting structure and in Plane 
43 at the location closest to CG-R, as appropriate.

[62 FR 16725, Apr. 8, 1997; 63 FR 28, Jan. 2, 1998; 63 FR 41464, Aug. 4, 
1998; 63 FR 45965, Aug. 28, 1998; 64 FR 7140, Feb. 12, 1999; 64 FR 
69671, Dec. 14, 1999; 67 FR 41354, June 18, 2002; 68 FR 51711, Aug. 28, 
2003; 69 FR 9226, Feb. 27, 2004; 69 FR 54249, Sept. 8, 2004]

    Effective Date Note: At 67 FR 79439, Dec. 23, 2002, Sec. 571.201 
was amended by removing the definition of motor home in S3, Definitions, 
effective Dec. 27, 2004.


<R05>
Sec. 571.202  Standard No. 202; Head restraints.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard specifies requirements for head 
restraints to reduce the frequency and severity of neck injury in rear-
end and other collisions.

[[Page 484]]

    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a GVWR of 4,536 
kg or less.
    S3. Definitions. Head restraint means a device that limits rearward 
angular displacement of the occupant's head relative to his torso line.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 Each passenger car shall comply with S4.3.
    S4.2 Each truck, multipurpose passenger vehicle and bus with a GVWR 
of 4,536 kg or less, shall comply with S4.3.
    S4.3 Performance levels. Except for school buses, a head restraint 
that conforms to either (a) or (b) shall be provided at each outboard 
front designated seating position. For school buses, a head restraint 
that conforms to either (a) or (b) shall be provided for the driver's 
seating position.
    (a) It shall, when tested in accordance with S5.1, during a forward 
acceleration of at least 78 m/s<SUP>2</SUP> on the seat supporting 
structure, limit rearward angular displacement of the head reference 
line to 45[deg] from the torso reference line; or
    (b) It shall, when adjusted to its fully extended design position, 
conform to each of the following--
    (1) When measured parallel to torso line, the top of the head 
restraint shall not be less than 700 mm above the seating reference 
point;
    (2) When measured either 64 mm below the top of the head restraint 
or 635 mm above the seating reference point, the lateral width of the 
head restraint shall be not less than--
    (i) 254 mm for use with bench-type seats; and
    (ii) 171 mm for use with individual seats:
    (3) When tested in accordance with S5.2, the rearmost portion of the 
head form shall not be displaced to more than 102 mm perpendicularly 
rearward of the displaced extended torso reference line during the 
application of the load specified in S5.2(c); and
    (4) When tested in accordance with S5.2, the head restraint shall 
withstand an increasing load until one of the following occurs:
    (i) Failure of the seat or seat back; or
    (ii) Application of a load of 890 N.
    S5. Demonstration procedures.
    S5.1 Compliance with S4.3(a) shall be demonstrated in accordance 
with the following with the head restraint in its fully extended design 
position:
    (a) On the exterior profile of the head and torso of a dummy having 
the weight and seated height of a 95th percentile adult male with an 
approved representation of a human, articulated neck structure, or an 
approved equivalent test device, establish reference lines by the 
following method:
    (1) Position the dummy's back on a horizontal flat surface with the 
lumbar joints in a straight line.
    (2) Rotate the head of the dummy rearward until the back of the head 
contacts the same flat horizontal surface in paragraph (1).
    (3) Position the SAE J-826 two-dimensional manikin's back against 
the flat surface in S5.1(a)(1), alongside the dummy with the h-point of 
the manikin aligned with the h-point of the dummy.
    (4) Establish the torso line of the manikin as defined in SAE 
Aerospace-Automotive Drawing Standards, sec. 2.3.6, P.E1.01, September 
1963.
    (5) Establish the dummy torso reference line by superimposing the 
torso line of the manikin on the torso of the dummy.
    (6) Establish the head reference line by extending the dummy torso 
reference line onto the head.
    (b) At each designated seating position having a head restraint, 
place the dummy, snugly restrained by a Type 1 seat belt, in the 
manufacturer's recommended design seated position.
    (c) During forward acceleration applied to the structure supporting 
the seat as described in this paragraph, measure the maximum rearward 
angular displacement between the dummy torso reference line and head 
reference line. When graphically depicted, the magnitude of the 
acceleration curve shall not be less than that of a half-sine wave 
having the amplitude of 78 m/s<SUP>2</SUP> and a duration of 80 
milliseconds and not more than that of a half-sine wave curve having an 
amplitude of 94 m/s<SUP>2</SUP> and a duration of 96 milliseconds.
    S5.2 Compliance with S4.3(b) shall be demonstrated in accordance 
with the following with the head restraint in its fully extended design 
position:

[[Page 485]]

    (a) Place a test device, having the back plan dimensions and torso 
line (centerline of the head room probe in full back position), of the 
three dimensional SAE J826 manikin, at the manufacturer's recommended 
design seated position.
    (b) Establish the displaced torso reference line by applying a 
rearward moment of 373 Nm moment about the seating reference point to 
the seat back through the test device back pan located in (a).
    (c) After removing the back pan, using a 165 mm diameter spherical 
head form or cylindrical head form having a 165 mm diameter in plan view 
and a 152 mm height in profile view, apply, perpendicular to the 
displaced torso reference line, a rearward initial load 64 mm below the 
top of the head restraint that will produce a 373 Nm moment about the 
seating reference point.
    (d) Gradually increase this initial load to 890 N or until the seat 
or seat back fails, whichever occurs first.

[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, as amended at 54 FR 39187, Sept. 25, 1989; 
61 FR 27025, May 30, 1996; 63 FR 28935, May 27, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 571.203  Standard No. 203; Impact protection for the driver from 
the steering control system.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard specifies requirements for 
steering control systems that will minimize chest, neck, and facial 
injuries to the driver as a result of impact.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a gross vehicle 
weight rating of 4,536 kg or less. However, it does not apply to 
vehicles that conform to the frontal barrier crash requirements (S5.1) 
of Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208) by means of other than seat belt 
assemblies. It also does not apply to walk-in vans.
    S3. Definitions. Steering control system means the basic steering 
mechanism and its associated trim hardware, including any portion of a 
steering column assembly that provides energy absorption upon impact.
    S4. Requirements. Each passenger car and each multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck and bus with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kg or 
less manufactured on or after September 1, 1981 shall meet the 
requirements of S5.1 and S5.2.
    S5. Impact protection requirements.
    S5.1 Except as provided in this paragraph, the steering control 
system of any vehicle to which this standard applies shall be impacted 
in accordance with S5.1(a). However, the steering control system of any 
such vehicle manufactured on or before August 31, 1996, may be impacted 
in accordance with S5.1(b).
    (a) When the steering control system is impacted by a body block in 
accordance with SAE Recommended Practice J944 JUN80 Steering Control 
System--Passenger Car--Laboratory Test Procedure, at a relative velocity 
of 24 km/h, the impact force developed on the chest of the body block 
transmitted to the steering control system shall not exceed 11,120 N, 
except for intervals whose cumulative duration is not more than 3 
milliseconds.
    (b) When the steering control system is impacted in accordance with 
Society of Automotive Engineers Recommended Practice J944, ``Steering 
Wheel Assembly Laboratory Test Procedure,'' December 1965, or an 
approved equivalent, at a relative velocity of 24 km/h, the impact force 
developed on the chest of the body block transmitted to the steering 
control system shall not exceed 11,120 N, except for intervals whose 
cumulative duration is not more than 3 milliseconds.
    S5.2 The steering control system shall be so constructed that no 
components or attachments, including horn actuating mechanisms and trim 
hardware, can catch the driver's clothing or jewelry during normal 
driving maneuvers.
    Note: The term jewelry refers to watches, rings, and bracelets 
without loosely attached or dangling members.

[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, as amended at 44 FR 68475, Nov. 29, 1979; 47 
FR 47842, Oct. 28, 1982; 58 FR 26527, May 4, 1993; 58 FR 63304, Dec. 1, 
1993; 63 FR 28935, May 27, 1998; 63 FR 51003, Sept. 24, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 571.204  Standard No. 204; Steering control rearward displacement.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard specifies requirements limiting 
the rearward displacement of the steering

[[Page 486]]

control into the passenger compartment to reduce the likelihood of 
chest, neck, or head injury.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses. However, it does not 
apply to walk-in vans.
    S3. Definitions.
    Steering column means a structural housing that surrounds a steering 
shaft.
    Steering shaft means a component that transmits steering torque from 
the steering wheel to the steering gear.
    S4 Requirements.
    S4.1 Vehicles manufactured before September 1, 1991. When a 
passenger car or a truck, bus, or multipurpose passenger vehicle with a 
gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less and an unloaded 
vehicle weight of 4,000 pounds or less is tested under the conditions of 
S5 in a 30 mile per hour perpendicular impact into a fixed collision 
barrier, the upper end of the steering column and shaft in the vehicle 
shall not be displaced more than 5 inches in a horizontal rearward 
direction parallel to the longitudinal axis of the vehicle. The amount 
of displacement shall be measured relative to an undisturbed point on 
the vehicle and shall represent the maximum dynamic movement of the 
upper end of the steering column and shaft during the crash test.
    S4.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1991. When a 
passenger car or a truck, bus or multipurpose passenger vehicle with a 
gross vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kg or less and an unloaded vehicle 
weight of 2,495 kg or less is tested under the conditions of S5 in a 48 
km/h perpendicular impact into a fixed collision barrier, the upper end 
of the steering column and shaft in the vehicle shall not be displaced 
more than 127 mm in a horizontal rearward direction parallel to the 
longitudinal axis of the vehicle. The amount of displacement shall be 
measured relative to an undisturbed point on the vehicle and shall 
represent the maximum dynamic movement of the upper end of the steering 
column and shaft during the crash test.
    S5. Test conditions. The requirements of S4 shall be met when the 
vehicle is tested in accordance with the following conditions.
    S5.1 The vehicle, including test devices and instrumentation, is 
loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight.
    S5.2 Adjustable steering controls are adjusted so that a tilting 
steering wheel hub is at the geometric center of the locus it describes 
when it is moved through its full range of driving positions. A 
telescoping steering control is set at the adjustment position midway 
between the forwardmost and rearwardmost position.
    S5.3 Convertibles and open-body type vehicles have the top, if any, 
in place in the closed passenger compartment configuration.
    S5.4 Doors are fully closed and latched but not locked.
    S5.5 The fuel tank is filled to any level from 90 to 95 percent of 
capacity.
    S5.6 The parking brake is disengaged and the transmission is in 
neutral.
    S5.7 Tires are inflated to the vehicle manufacturer's 
specifications.

[52 FR 44897, Nov. 23, 1987, as amended at 63 FR 28935, May 27, 1998; 63 
FR 51003, Sept. 24, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 571.205  Standard No. 205, Glazing materials.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for glazing 
materials for use in motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce injuries 
resulting from impact to glazing surfaces, to ensure a necessary degree 
of transparency in motor vehicle windows for driver visibility, and to 
minimize the possibility of occupants being thrown through the vehicle 
windows in collisions.
    S3. Application and Incorporation by Reference.
    S3.1 Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, buses, motorcycles, slide-in 
campers, pickup covers designed to carry persons while in motion, and 
low speed vehicles, and to glazing materials for use in those vehicles. 
For motor vehicles and glazing equipment manufactured before September 
1, 2006, the manufacturer may, at its option, comply with 49 CFR

[[Page 487]]

571.205 revised as of October 1, 2003 instead of this version.
    S3.2 Incorporation by Reference.
    (a) ``American National Standard for Safety Glazing Materials for 
Glazing Motor Vehicles and Motor Vehicle Equipment Operating on Land 
Highways-Safety Standard'' ANSI/SAE Z26.1-1996, Approved by American 
National Standards Institute August 11, 1997 (ANSI/SAE Z26.1-1996) is 
incorporated by reference in Section 5.1 and is hereby made part of this 
Standard. The Director of the Federal Register approved the material 
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR 
part 51 (see Sec. 571.5 of this part). A copy of ANSI/SAE Z26.1-1996 
may be obtained from the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., 400 
Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096-0007. A copy of ANSI/SAE Z26.1-
1996 may be inspected at NHTSA's technical reference library, 400 
Seventh Street, SW., Room 5109, Washington, DC or at the Office of the 
Federal Register, 900 North Capitol Street, NW., Suite 700, Washington, 
DC.
    (b) The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Recommended Practice 
J673, revised April 1993, ``Automotive Safety Glasses'' (SAE J673, rev. 
April 93) is incorporated by reference in Section S5.1, and is hereby 
made part of this Standard. The Director of the Federal Register 
approved the material incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 
U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51 (see Sec. 571.5 of this part). A copy 
of SAE J673, rev. April 93 may be obtained from SAE at the Society of 
Automotive Engineers, Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 
15096. A copy of SAE J673, rev. April 93 may be inspected at NHTSA's 
technical reference library, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Room 5109, 
Washington, DC, or at the Office of the Federal Register, 900 North 
Capitol Street, NW., Suite 700, Washington, DC.
    (c) The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Recommended Practice 
J100, revised June 1995, ``Class `A' Vehicle Glazing Shade Bands'' (SAE 
J100, rev. June 95) is incorporated by reference in Section S5.3, and is 
hereby made part of this Standard. The Director of the Federal Register 
approved the material incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 
U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51 (see Sec. 571.5 of this part). A copy 
of SAE J100, rev. June 95 may be obtained from SAE at the Society of 
Automotive Engineers, Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 
15096. A copy of SAE J100, rev. 95 may be inspected at NHTSA's technical 
reference library, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Room 5109, Washington, DC, 
or at the Office of the Federal Register, 900 North Capitol Street, NW., 
Suite 700, Washington, DC.
    S4. Definitions.
    Bullet resistant shield means a shield or barrier that is installed 
completely inside a motor vehicle behind and separate from glazing 
materials that independently comply with the requirements of this 
standard.
    Camper means a structure designed to be mounted in the cargo area of 
a truck, or attached to an incomplete vehicle with motive power, for the 
purpose of providing shelter for persons.
    Glass-plastic glazing material means a laminate of one or more 
layers of glass and one or more layers of plastic in which a plastic 
surface of the glazing faces inward when the glazing is installed in a 
vehicle.
    Motor home means a multipurpose passenger vehicle that provides 
living accommodations for persons.
    Pickup cover means a camper having a roof and sides but without a 
floor, designed to be mounted on and removable from the cargo area of a 
truck by the user.
    Prime glazing manufacturer means a manufacturer that fabricates, 
laminates, or tempers glazing materials.
    Slide-in camper means a camper having a roof, floor, and sides, 
designed to be mounted on and removable from the cargo area of a truck 
by the user.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 Glazing materials for use in motor vehicles must conform to 
ANSI/SAE Z26.1-1996 unless this standard provides otherwise.
    S5.2 NHTSA may test any portion of the glazing when doing the 
fracture test (Test No. 7) described in section 5.7 of ANSI/SAE Z26.1-
1996.
    S5.3 Shade bands. Shade band areas for windshields shall comply with 
SAE J100, rev. June 95 except that the value of 7 degrees must be used 
in place of

[[Page 488]]

the value of 5 degrees specified in Section 4, Shade Band Boundary 
Requirements, of SAE J100, rev. June 95.
    S5.4 Low speed vehicles. Windshields of low speed vehicles must meet 
the ANSI/SAE Z26.1-1996 specifications for either AS-1 or AS-4 glazing.
    S5.5 Item 4A Glazing. Item 4A glazing, as specified in ANSI/SAE 
Z26.1-1996, may only be used in side windows rearward of the ``C'' 
pillar.
    S6. Certification and marking.
    S6.1 A prime glazing material manufacturer must certify, in 
accordance with 49 U.S.C. 30115, each piece of glazing material to which 
this standard applies that is designed--
    (a) As a component of any specific motor vehicle or camper; or
    (b) To be cut into components for use in motor vehicles or items of 
motor vehicle equipment.
    S6.2 A prime glazing manufacturer certifies its glazing by adding to 
the marks required by section 7 of ANSI/SAE Z26.1-1996, in letters and 
numerals of the same size, the symbol ``DOT'' and a manufacturer's code 
mark that NHTSA assigns to the manufacturer. NHTSA will assign a code 
mark to a manufacturer after the manufacturer submits a written request 
to the Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. 
The request must include the company name, address, and a statement from 
the manufacturer certifying its status as a prime glazing manufacturer 
as defined in S4.
    S6.3 A manufacturer or distributor who cuts a section of glazing 
material to which this standard applies, for use in a motor vehicle or 
camper, must--
    (a) Mark that material in accordance with section 7 of ANSI/SAE 
Z26.1-1996; and
    (b) Certify that its product complies with this standard in 
accordance with 49 U.S.C. 30115.

[37 FR 12239, June 21, 1972, as amended at 37 FR 13097, July 1, 1972; 37 
FR 24036, Nov. 11, 1972; 37 FR 24826, Nov. 22, 1972; 42 FR 61466, Dec. 
5, 1977; 45 FR 47151, July 14, 1980; 46 FR 43690, Aug. 31, 1981; 48 FR 
52065, Nov. 16, 1983; 49 FR 6734, Feb. 23, 1984; 56 FR 12674, Mar. 27, 
1991; 56 FR 18531, Apr. 23, 1991; 56 FR 49149, Sept. 27, 1991; 57 FR 
1654, Jan. 15, 1992; 57 FR 13656, Apr. 17, 1992; 57 FR 30164, July 8, 
1992; 57 FR 58150, Dec. 9, 1992; 60 FR 13646, Mar. 14, 1995; 61 FR 
41743, Aug. 12, 1996; 68 FR 43971, July 25, 2003; 68 FR 55545, Sept. 26, 
2003; 69 FR 51191, Aug. 18, 2004]

    Effective Date Note: At 67 FR 79439, Dec. 27, 2002, Sec. 571.205 
was amended by removing the definition of motor home in S4, Definitions, 
effective Dec. 27, 2004.


<R05>
Sec. 571.206  Standard No. 206; Door locks and door retention components.

    S1. Purpose and Scope. This standard specifies requirements for door 
locks and door retention components including latches, hinges, and other 
supporting means, to minimize the likelihood of occupants being thrown 
from the vehicle as a result of impact.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, and trucks.
    S3. Definitions.
    Auxiliary door latch means a latch or latches, other than the 
primary latch or latches, fitted to a back door or back door system that 
is equipped with more than one latch.
    Back door means a door or door system on the back end of a motor 
vehicle through which passengers can enter or depart the vehicle, or 
cargo can be loaded or unloaded; but does not include:
    (a) A trunk lid; or
    (b) A door or window that is composed entirely of glazing material 
and whose latches and/or hinges are attached directly onto the glazing 
material.
    Cargo-Type Door means a door designed primarily to accommodate cargo 
loading including, but not limited to, a two-part door that latches to 
itself.
    Fork-bolt means the part of the door latch that engages the striker 
when in a latched position.

[[Page 489]]

    Fork-bolt opening means the direction opposite to that in which the 
striker enters to engage the fork-bolt.
    Primary door latch means, with respect to a back door or back door 
system, the latch or latches equipped with both the fully latched 
position and the secondary latched position.
    Side front door means a door that in a side view, has 50 percent or 
more of its opening area forward of the rearmost point on the driver's 
seatback, when the driver's seat is adjusted to its most vertical and 
rearward position.
    Side rear door means a door that, in a side view, has more than 50 
percent of its opening area to the rear of the rearmost point on the 
driver's seatback, when the driver's seat is adjusted to its most 
vertical and rearward position.
    Trunk lid means a movable body panel that provides access from 
outside the vehicle to a space wholly partitioned from the occupant 
compartment by a permanently attached partition or a fixed or fold-down 
seat back.
    S4. Requirments.
    (a) Components on side doors. Components on any side door that leads 
directly into a compartment that contains one or more seating 
accommodations shall conform to this standard.
    (b) Components on back doors. Components on any back door of a 
passenger car or multipurpose passenger vehicle with a gross vehicle 
weight rating (GVWR) of 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) or less that 
leads directly into a compartment that contains one or more seating 
accommodations shall conform to this standard, subject to the following 
compliance schedule:
    (1)(i) For those affected passenger cars and multipurpose passenger 
vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1997, and before 
September 1, 1998, the amount of such vehicles complying with this 
standard shall be not less than 60 percent of the combined total 
production of passenger cars and multipurpose passenger vehicles, based 
on:
    (A) The manufacturer's average annual production of such vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1996 and before September 1, 1998; 
or
    (B) The manufacturer's production of such vehicles on or after 
September 1, 1997 and before September 1, 1998.
    (ii) For calculating average annual production of affected passenger 
cars and multipurpose passenger vehicles for each manufacturer and the 
number of such vehicles manufactured by each manufacturer, a vehicle 
produced by more than one manufacturer shall be attributed to a single 
manufacturer as follows:
    (A) A vehicle that is imported shall be attributed to the importer;
    (B) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    (C) A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract between the manufacturer so specified and the 
manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be attributed under 
paragraph (b)(1)(ii)(A) or (B) of this section.
    (2) Components on the back doors of affected passenger cars and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles manufactured on and after September 1, 
1998 shall conform to all applicable requirements of this standard.
    (c) Components on folding doors, rollup doors, doors that are 
designed to be easily attached to or detached from motor vehicles 
manufactured for operation without doors, and doors that are equipped 
with the wheelchair lifts and that are linked to an alarm system 
consisting of either a flashing visible signal located in the driver's 
compartment or an alarm audible to the driver that is activated when the 
door is open, need not conform to this standard.
    (d) A particular latch or hinge assembly utilized as a test specimen 
need not meet further requirements after having been subjected to and 
having met any one of the requirements of S4 or S5.1 through S5.4.
    S4.1 Hinged Side Doors, Except Cargo-Type Doors.
    S4.1.1 Door Latches. Each door latch and striker assembly shall be 
provided with two positions consisting of--
    (a) A fully latched position; and
    (b) A secondary latched position.
    S4.1.1.1 Longitudinal Load. The door latch and striker assembly, 
when in the fully latched position, shall not

[[Page 490]]

separate when a longitudinal load of 11,000 Newtons (2,500 pounds) is 
applied. When in the secondary latched position, the door latch and 
striker assembly shall not separate when a longitudinal load of 4,450 
Newtons (1,000 pounds) is applied.
    S4.1.1.2 Transverse Load. The door latch and striker assembly, when 
in the fully latched position, shall not separate when a transverse load 
of 8,900 Newtons (2,000 pounds) is applied. When in the secondary 
latched position, the door latch and striker assembly shall not separate 
when a transverse load of 4,450 Newtons (1,000 pounds) is applied.
    S4.1.1.3 Inertia Load. The door latch shall not disengage from the 
fully latched position when a longitudinal or transverse inertia load of 
30g is applied to the door latch system (including the latch and its 
actuating mechanism with the locking mechanism disengaged).
    S4.1.2 Door Hinges. Each door hinge system shall support the door 
and shall not separate when a longitudinal load of 11,000 Newtons (2,500 
pounds) is applied. Similarly, each door hinge system shall not separate 
when a transverse load of 8,900 Newtons (2,000 pounds) is applied.
    S4.1.3 Door Locks. Each door shall be equipped with a locking 
mechanism with an operating means in the interior of the vehicle.
    S4.1.3.1 Side Front Door Locks. When the locking mechanism is 
engaged, the outside door handle or other outside latch release control 
shall be inoperative.
    S4.1.3.2 Side Rear Door Locks. In passenger cars and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles, when the locking mechanism is engaged both the 
outside and inside door handles or other latch release controls shall be 
inoperative.
    S4.2 Hinged Cargo-Type Side Doors.
    S4.2.1 Door Latches.
    S4.2.1.1 Longitudinal Load. Each latch system, when in the latched 
position, shall not separate when a longitudinal load of 11,000 Newtons 
(2,500 pounds) is applied.
    S4.2.1.2 Transverse Load. Each latch system, when in the latched 
position, shall not separate when a transverse load of 8,900 Newtons 
(2,000 pounds) is applied. When more than one latch system is used on a 
single door, the load requirement may be divided among the total number 
of latch systems.
    S4.2.2 Door Hinges. Each door hinge system shall support the door 
and shall not separate when a longitudinal load of 11,000 Newtons (2,500 
pounds) is applied, and when a transverse load of 8,900 Newtons (2,000 
pounds) is applied.
    S4.3 Sliding Side Doors. The track and slide combination or other 
supporting means for each sliding door shall not separate when a total 
transverse load of 17,800 Newtons (4,000 pounds) is applied, with the 
door in the closed position.
    S4.4. Hinged Back Doors.
    S4.4.1 Door Latches. Each back door system shall be equipped with at 
least one primary latch and striker assembly.
    S4.4.1.1 Load Test One. The primary door latch and striker assembly, 
when in the fully latched position, shall not separate when a load of 
11,000 Newtons (2,500 pounds) is applied in the direction perpendicular 
to the face of the latch (corresponding to the longitudinal load test 
for side door latches) such that the latch and the striker anchorage are 
not compressed against each other. When in the secondary latched 
position, the primary latch and striker assembly shall not separate when 
a load of 4,450 Newtons (1,000 pounds) is applied in the same direction.
    S4.4.1.2 Load Test Two. The primary door latch and striker assembly, 
when in the fully latched position, shall not separate when a load of 
8,900 Newtons (2,000 pounds) is applied in the direction of the fork-
bolt opening and parallel to the face of the latch (corresponding to the 
transverse load test). Figure 1 depicts the loading direction for this 
test. When in the secondary latched position, the primary latch and 
striker assembly shall not separate when a load of 4,450 Newtons (1,000 
pounds) is applied in the same direction.
    S4.4.1.3 Load Test Three. The primary door latch and striker 
assembly on back doors equipped with a latch and striker assembly at the 
bottom of the door and that open upward shall not disengage from the 
fully latched position when a load of 8,900 Newtons

[[Page 491]]

(2,000 pounds) is applied in a direction orthogonal to the directions 
specified in S4.4.1.1 and S4.4.1.2 above.
    S4.4.1.4 Inertia Load. The primary door latch shall not disengage 
from the fully latched position when an inertia load of 30g is applied 
to the door latch system, including the latch and its activation 
mechanism with the locking mechanism disengaged, in the directions 
specified in S4.4.1.1, S4.4.1.2, and S4.4.1.3.
    S4.4.1.5 Auxiliary Door Latches. Each auxiliary back door latch and 
striker assembly shall be provided with a fully latched position and 
shall comply with the requirements specified in S4.4.1.1, S4.4.1.2, and 
S4.4.1.4.
    S4.4.2 Door Locks. Each back door system equipped with interior door 
handles or that leads directly into a compartment that contains one or 
more seating accommodations shall be equipped with a locking mechanism 
with operating means in both the interior and exterior of the vehicle. 
When the locking mechanism is engaged, both the inside and outside door 
handles or other latch release controls shall be inoperative.
    S4.4.3 Door Hinges.
    S4.4.3.1 Load Test One. Each back door hinge system shall support 
the door and shall not separate when a load of 11,000 Newtons (2,500 
pounds) is applied perpendicular to the hinge face plate (longitudinal 
load test) such that the hinge plates are not compressed against each 
other.
    S4.4.3.2 Load Test Two. Each back door hinge system shall not 
separate when a load of 8,900 Newtons (2,000 pounds) is applied 
perpendicular to the axis of the hinge pin and parallel to the hinge 
face plate (transverse load test) such that the hinge plates are not 
compressed against each other.
    S4.4.3.3 Load Test Three. Each hinge system on back doors that open 
upward shall not separate when a load of 8,900 Newtons (2,000 pounds) is 
applied in the direction of the axis of the hinge pin.
    S4.5 Sliding Back Doors. The track and slide combination or other 
supporting means for each sliding door shall not separate when a total 
longitudinal load of 17,800 Newtons (4,000 pounds) is applied, with the 
door in the closed position.
    S5.1 Hinged Side Doors, Except Cargo-Type Doors.
    S5.1.1 Door Latches.
    S5.1.1.1 Longitudinal and Transverse Loads. Compliance with 
paragraphs S4.1.1.1 and S4.1.1.2 shall be demonstrated in accordance 
with paragraph 5 of Society of Automotive Engineers Recommended Practice 
J839, Passenger Car Side Door Latch Systems, June 1991.
    S5.1.1.2 Inertia Load. Compliance with S4.1.1.3 shall be 
demonstrated by approved tests or in accordance with paragraph 6 of 
Society of Automotive Engineers Recommended Practice J839, Passenger Car 
Side Door Latch Systems, June 1991.
    S5.1.2 Door Hinges. Compliance with S4.1.2 shall be demonstrated in 
accordance with paragraph 4 or 5, as appropriate, of Society of 
Automotive Engineers Recommended Practice J934, Vehicle Passenger Door 
Hinge Systems, July 1982. For piano-type hinges, the hinge spacing 
requirements of SAE J934 shall not be applicable and arrangement of the 
test fixture shall be altered as required so that the test load will be 
applied to the complete hinge.
    S5.2 Hinged Cargo-Type Side Doors.
    S5.2.1 Door Latches. Compliance with S4.2.1 shall be demonstrated in 
accordance with paragraphs 5.1 and 5.3, SAE Recommended Practice J839, 
Passenger Car Side Door Latch Systems, June 1991. An equivalent static 
test fixture may be substituted for that shown in Figure 2 of SAE J839, 
if required.
    S5.2.2 Door Hinges. Compliance with S4.2.2 shall be demonstrated in 
accordance with paragraph 4 or 5, as appropriate, of SAE Recommended 
Practice J934, Vehicle Passenger Door Hinge Systems, July 1982. For 
piano-type hinges, the hinge spacing requirement of SAE J934 shall not 
be applicable and arrangement of the test fixture shall be altered as 
required so that the test load will be applied to the complete hinge.
    S5.3 Sliding Side Doors. Compliance with S4.3 shall be demonstrated 
by applying an outward transverse load of 8,900 Newtons (2,000 pounds) 
to the load-bearing members at the opposite edges of the door (17,800 
Newtons (4,000 pounds) total). The demonstration may be performed either 
in the vehicle or

[[Page 492]]

with the door retention components in a bench test fixture.
    S5.4 Hinged Back Doors.
    S5.4.1.1 Load Tests One, Two, and Three. Compliance with S4.4.1.1, 
S4.4.1.2, and S4.4.1.3 shall be demonstrated in the same manner as 
specified in S5.1.1.1, except that the loads shall be in the directions 
specified in S4.4.1.1, S4.4.1.2, and S4.4.1.3. The same test device may 
be used for Load Tests Two and Three.
    S5.4.1.2 Inertia Load. Compliance with S4.4.1.4 shall be 
demonstrated in the same manner as specified in S5.1.1.2.
    S5.4.2 Door Hinges. Compliance with S4.4.3.1, S4.4.3.2, and S4.4.3.3 
shall be demonstrated in the same manner as specified in S5.1.2, except 
that the loads shall be in the directions specified in S4.4.3.1, 
S4.4.3.2, and S4.4.3.3. The same test device may be used for Load Tests 
Two and Three.
    S5.5 Sliding Back Doors. Compliance with S4.5 shall be demonstrated 
by applying an outward longitudinal load of 8,900 Newtons (2,000 pounds) 
to the load bearing members at the opposite edges of the door (17,000 
Newtons (4,000 pounds) total). The demonstration may be performed either 
in the vehicle or with the door retention components in a bench test 
fixture.

[[Page 493]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.077


[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, as amended at 37 FR 284, Jan. 8, 1972; 50 FR 
12031, Mar. 27, 1985; 60 FR 13646, Mar. 14, 1995; 60 FR 50134, Sept. 28, 
1995; 61 FR 39907, July 31, 1996]

[[Page 494]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.207  Standard No. 207; Seating systems.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard establishes requirements for 
seats, their attachment assemblies, and their installation to minimize 
the possibility of their failure by forces acting on them as a result of 
vehicle impact.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses.
    S3. Definitions. Occupant seat means a seat that provides at least 
one designated seating position.
    Seat adjuster means the part of the seat that provides forward and 
rearward positioning of the seat bench and back, and/or rotation around 
a vertical axis, including any fixed portion, such as a seat track. In 
the case of a seat equipped with seat adjusters at different levels, the 
term means the uppermost seat adjuster.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 Driver's seat. Each vehicle shall have an occupant seat for the 
driver.
    S.4.2 General performance requirements. When tested in accordance 
with S5., each occupant seat, other than a side-facing seat or a 
passenger seat on a bus, shall withstand the following forces, in 
newtons.
    (a) In any position to which it can be adjusted--20 times the mass 
of the seat in kilograms multiplied by 9.8 applied in a forward 
longitudinal direction;
    (b) In any position to which it can be adjusted--20 times the mass 
of the seat in kilograms multiplied by 9.8 applied in a rearward 
longitudinal direction;
    (c) For a seat belt assembly attached to the seat--the force 
specified in paragraph (a), if it is a forward facing seat, or paragraph 
(b), if it is a rearward facing seat, in each case applied 
simultaneously with the forces imposed on the seat by the seat belt 
assembly when it is loaded in accordance with S4.2 of Sec. 571.210; and
    (d) In its rearmost position--a force that produces a 373 newton 
meters moment about the seating reference point for each designated 
seating position that the seat provides, applied to the upper cross-
member of the seat back or the upper seat back, in a rearward 
longitudinal direction for forward-facing seats and in a forward 
longitudinal direction for rearward-facing seats.
    S4.2.1 Seat adjustment. Except for vertical movement of nonlocking 
suspension type occupant seats in trucks or buses, each seat shall 
remain in its adjusted position when tested in accordance with the test 
procedures specified in S5.
    S4.3. Restraining device for hinged or folding seats or seat backs. 
Except for a passenger seat in a bus or a seat having a back that is 
adjustable only for the comfort of its occupants, a hinged or folding 
occupant seat or occupant seat back shall--
    (a) Be equipped with a self-locking device for restraining the 
hinged or folding seat or seat back, and
    (b) If there are any designated seating positions or auxiliary 
seating accommodations behind the seat, either immediately to the rear 
or to the sides, be equipped with a control for releasing that 
restraining device.
    S4.3.1 Accessibility of release control. If there is a designated 
seating position immediately behind a seat equipped with a restraining 
device, the control for releasing the device shall be readily accessible 
to the occupant of the seat equipped with the device and, if access to 
the control is required in order to exit from the vehicle, to the 
occupant of the designated seating position immediately behind the seat.
    S4.3.2 Performance of restraining device.
    S4.3.2.1 Static force. (a) Once engaged, the restraining device for 
a forward-facing seat shall not release or fail when a forward 
longitudinal force, in newtons, equal to 20 times the mass of the hinged 
or folding portion of the seat in kilograms multiplied by 9.8 is applied 
through the center of gravity of that portion of the seat.
    (b) Once engaged, the restraining device for a rearward-facing seat 
shall not release or fail when a rearward longitudinal force, in 
newtons, equal to 8 times the mass of the hinged or folding portion of 
the seat in kilograms multiplied by 9.8 is applied through the center of 
gravity of that portion of the seat.
    S4.3.2.2 Acceleration. Once engaged, the restraining device shall 
not release or fail when the device is subjected to

[[Page 495]]

an acceleration of 20 g., in the longitudinal direction opposite to that 
in which the seat folds.
    S4.4 Labeling. Seats not designated for occupancy while the vehicle 
is in motion shall be conspicuously labeled to that effect.
    S5. Test procedures.
    S5.1 Apply the forces specified in S4.2(a) and S4.2(b) as follows:
    S5.1.1 For a seat whose seat back and seat bench are attached to the 
vehicle by the same attachments. (a) For a seat whose seat back and seat 
bench are attached to the vehicle by the same attachments and whose 
height is adjustable, the loads are applied when the seat is in its 
highest adjustment position in accordance with the procedure or 
procedures specified in S5.1.1(a)(1), S5.1.1(a)(2), or S5.1.1(a)(3), as 
appropriate.
    (1) For a seat whose center of gravity is in a horizontal plane that 
is above the seat adjuster or that passes through any part of the 
adjuster, use, at the manufacturer's option, either S5.1.1(b) or, if 
physically possible, S5.1.1(c).
    (2) For a seat specified in S5.1.1(a)(1) for which it is not 
physically possible to follow the procedure in S5.1.1(c), use S5.1.1(b).
    (3) For a seat whose center of gravity is in a horizontal plane that 
is below the seat adjuster, use S5.1.1(c).
    (4) For all other seats whose seat back and seat bench are attached 
to the vehicle by the same attachments, use S5.1.1(b).
    (b) Secure a strut on each side of the seat from a point on the 
outside of the seat frame in the horizontal plane of the seat's center 
of gravity to a point on the frame as far forward as possible of the 
seat anchorages. Between the upper ends of the struts attach a rigid 
cross-member, in front of the seat back frame for rearward loading and 
behind the seat back frame for forward loading. Apply the force 
specified by S4.2(a) or S4.2(b) horizontally through the rigid cross-
member as shown in Figure 1.
    (c) Find ``cg<INF>1</INF>,'' the center of gravity of the portion of 
the seat that is above the lowest surface of the seat adjuster. On each 
side of the seat, secure a strut from a point on the outside of the seat 
frame in the horizontal plane of cg<INF>1</INF> to a point on the frame 
as far forward as possible of the seat adjusted position. Between the 
upper ends of the struts attach a rigid cross-member, in front of the 
seat back frame for rearward loading and behind the seat back frame for 
forward loading. Find ``cg<INF>2</INF>,'' the center of gravity of the 
portion of the seat that is below the seat adjuster. Apply a force 
horizontally through cg<INF>1</INF> equal to 20 times the weight of the 
portion of the seat represented by cg<INF>1</INF>, and simultaneously 
apply a force horizontally through cg<INF>2</INF> equal to 20 times the 
weight of the portion of the seat represented by cg<INF>2</INF>.
    S5.1.2 If the seat back and the seat bench are attached to the 
vehicle by different attachments, attach to each component a fixture 
capable of transmitting a force to that component. Apply forces, in 
newtons, equal to 20 times the mass of the seat back in kilograms 
multiplied by 9.8 m/s\2\ horizontally through the center of gravity of 
the seat back, as shown in Figure 2 and apply forces, in newtons, equal 
to 20 times the mass of the seat bench in kilograms multiplied by 9.8 m/
s\2\ horizontally through the center of gravity of the seat bench, as 
shown in Figure 3.
    S5.2 Develop the moment specified in S4.2(d) as shown in Figure 4.
    S5.3 Apply the forces specified in S4.3.2.1(a) and (b) to a hinged 
or folding seat as shown in Figure 1 and to a hinged or folding seat 
back as shown in Figure 5.
    S5.4 Determine the center of gravity of a seat or seat component 
with all cushions and upholstery in place and with the head restraint in 
its fully extended design position.

[[Page 496]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.079


[[Page 497]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.081


[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, as amended at 52 FR 7868, Mar. 13, 1987; 53 
FR 30434, Aug. 12, 1988; 59 FR 37167, July 21, 1994; 60 FR 13647, Mar. 
14, 1995; 63 FR 28935, May 27, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 571.208  Standard No. 208; Occupant crash protection.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies performance requirements for the 
protection of vehicle occupants in crashes.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the number of 
deaths of vehicle occupants, and the severity of injuries, by specifying 
vehicle crashworthiness requirements in terms

[[Page 498]]

of forces and accelerations measured on anthropomorphic dummies in test 
crashes, and by specifying equipment requirements for active and passive 
restraint systems.
    S3. Application. (a) This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses. In addition, S9, 
Pressure vessels and explosive devices, applies to vessels designed to 
contain a pressurized fluid or gas, and to explosive devices, for use in 
the above types of motor vehicles as part of a system designed to 
provide protection to occupants in the event of a crash.
    (b) Notwithstanding any language to the contrary, any vehicle 
manufactured after March 19, 1997, and before September 1, 2006, that is 
subject to a dynamic crash test requirement conducted with unbelted 
dummies may meet the requirements specified in S5.1.2(a)(1), 
S5.1.2(a)(2), or S13 instead of the applicable unbelted requirement, 
unless the vehicle is certified to meet the requirements specified in 
S14.5, S15, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25.
    (c) For vehicles which are certified to meet the requirements 
specified in S13 instead of the otherwise applicable dynamic crash test 
requirement conducted with unbelted dummies, compliance with S13 shall, 
for purposes of Standards No. 201, 203 and 209, be deemed as compliance 
with the unbelted frontal barrier requirements of S5.1.2.
    S4. General requirements.
    S4.1 Passenger cars.
    S4.1.1 Passenger cars manufactured from January 1, 1972, to August 
31, 1973. Each passenger car manufactured from January 1, 1972, to 
August 31, 1973, inclusive, shall meet the requirements of S4.1.1.1, 
S4.1.1.2, or S4.1.1.3. A protection system that meets the requirements 
of S4.1.1.1, or S4.1.1.2 may be installed at one or more designated 
seating positions of a vehicle that otherwise meets the requirements of 
S4.1.1.3.
    S4.1.1.1 First option--complete passive protection system. The 
vehicle shall meet the crash protection requirements of S5. by means 
that require no action by vehicle occupants.
    S4.1.1.2 Second option--lap belt protection system with belt 
warning. The vehicle shall--
    (a) At each designated seating position have a Type 1 seatbelt 
assembly or a Type 2 seatbelt assembly with a detachable upper torso 
portion that conforms to S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard;
    (b) At each front outboard designated seating position, have a seat 
belt warning system that conforms to S7.3; and
    (c) Meet the frontal crash protection requirements of S5.1, in a 
perpendicular impact, with respect to anthropomorphic test devices in 
each front outboard designated seating position restrained only by Type 
1 seat belt assemblies.
    S4.1.1.3 Third option--lap and shoulder belt protection system with 
belt warning.
    S4.1.1.3.1 Except for convertibles and open-body vehicles, the 
vehicle shall--
    (a) At each front outboard designated seating position have a Type 2 
seatbelt assembly that conforms to Sec. 571.209 and S7.1 and S7.2 of 
this standard, with either an integral or detachable upper torso 
portion, and a seatbelt warning system that conforms to S7.3;
    (b) At each designated seating position other than the front 
outboard positions, have a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly that 
conforms to Sec. 571.209 and to S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard; and
    (c) When it perpendicularly impacts a fixed collision barrier, while 
moving longitudinally forward at any speed up to and including 30 
m.p.h., under the test conditions of S8.1 with anthropomorphic test 
devices at each front outboard position restrained by Type 2 seatbelt 
assemblies, experience no complete separation of any load-bearing 
element of a seatbelt assembly or anchorage.
    S4.1.1.3.2 Convertibles and open-body type vehicles shall at each 
designated seating position have a Type 1 or Type 2 seatbelt assembly 
that conforms to Sec. 571.209 and to S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard, 
and at each front outboard designated seating position have a seatbelt 
warning system that conforms to S7.3.
    S4.1.2 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1973, 
and before September 1, 1986. Each passenger car manufactured on or 
after September 1, 1973, and before September 1, 1986, shall

[[Page 499]]

meet the requirements of S4.1.2.1, S4.1.2.2 or S4.1.2.3. A protection 
system that meets the requirements of S4.1.2.1 or S4.1.2.2 may be 
installed at one or more designated seating positions of a vehicle that 
otherwise meets the requirements of S4.1.2.3.
    S4.1.2.1 First option--frontal/angular automatic protection system. 
The vehicle shall:
    (a) At each front outboard designated seating position meet the 
frontal crash protection requirements of S5.1 by means that require no 
action by vehicle occupants;
    (b) At the front center designated seating position and at each rear 
designated seating position have a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly 
that conforms to Standard No. 209 and to S7.1 and S7.2; and
    (c) Either. (1) Meet the lateral crash protection requirements of 
S5.2 and the rollover crash protection requirements of S5.3 by means 
that require no action by vehicle occupants; or
    (2) At each front outboard designated seating position have a Type 1 
or Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to Standard No. 209 and S7.1 
through S7.3, and that meets the requirements of S5.1 with front test 
dummies as required by S5.1, restrained by the Type 1 or Type 2 seat 
belt assembly (or the pelvic portion of any Type 2 seat belt assembly 
which has a detachable upper torso belt) in addition to the means that 
require no action by the vehicle occupant.
    S4.1.2.2 Second option--head-on automatic protection system. The 
vehicle shall--
    (a) At each designated seating position have a Type 1 seat belt 
assembly or Type 2 seat belt assembly with a detachable upper torso 
portion that conforms to S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard.
    (b) At each front outboard designated seating position, meet the 
frontal crash protecton requirements of S5.1, in a perpendicular impact, 
by means that require no action by vehicle occupants;
    (c) At each front outboard designated seating position, meet the 
frontal crash protection requirements of S5.1, in a perpendicular 
impact, with a test device restrained by a Type 1 seat belt assembly; 
and
    (d) At each front outboard designated seating position, have a seat 
belt warning system that conforms to S7.3.
    S4.1.2.3 Third option--lap and shoulder belt protection system with 
belt warning.
    S4.1.2.3.1 Except for convertibles and open-body vehicles, the 
vehicle shall--
    (a) At each front outboard designated seating position have a seat 
belt assembly that conforms to S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard, and a 
seat belt warning system that conforms to S7.3. The belt assembly shall 
be either a Type 2 seat belt assembly with a nondetachable shoulder belt 
that conforms to Standard No. 209 (Sec. 571.209), or a Type 1 seat belt 
assembly such that with a test device restrained by the assembly the 
vehicle meets the frontal crash protection requirements of S5.1 in a 
perpendicular impact.
    (b) At any center front designated seating position, have a Type 1 
or Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to Standard No. 209 (Sec. 
571.209) and to S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard, and a seat belt warning 
system that conforms to S7.3; and
    (c) At each other designated seating position, have a Type 1 or Type 
2 seat belt assembly that conforms to Standard No. 209 (Sec. 571.209) 
and S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard.
    S4.1.2.3.2 Convertibles and open-body type vehicles shall at each 
designated seating position have a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly 
that conforms to Standard No. 209 (Sec. 571.209) and to S7.1 and S7.2 
of this standard, and at each front designated seating position have a 
seat belt warning system that conforms to S7.3.
    S4.1.3 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1986, 
and before September 1, 1989.
    S4.1.3.1 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1986, 
and before September 1, 1987.
    S4.1.3.1.1 Subject to S4.1.3.1.2 and S4.1.3.4, each passenger car 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1986, and before September 1, 
1987, shall comply with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, S4.1.2.2 or 
S4.1.2.3. A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in noncompliance with this 
standard if its manufacturer establishes that it did not have reason to

[[Page 500]]

know in the exercise of due care that such vehicle is not in conformity 
with the requirement of this standard.
    S4.1.3.1.2 Subject to S4.1.3.4 and S4.1.5, the amount of passenger 
cars, specified in S4.1.3.1.1 complying with the requirements of 
S4.1.2.1 shall be not less than 10 percent of:
    (a) The average annual production of passenger cars manufactured on 
or after September 1, 1983, and before September 1, 1986, by each 
manufacturer, or
    (b) The manufacturer's annual production of passenger cars during 
the period specified in S4.1.3.1.1.
    S4.1.3.1.3 A manufacturer may exclude convertibles which do not 
comply with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, when it is calculating its 
average annual production under S4.1.3.1.2(a) or its annual production 
under S4.1.3.1.2(b).
    S4.1.3.2 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1987, 
and before September 1, 1988.
    S4.1.3.2.1 Subject to S4.1.3.2.2 and S4.1.3.4, each passenger car 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1987, and before September 1, 
1988, shall comply with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, S4.1.2.2 or 
S4.1.2.3. A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in noncompliance with this 
standard if its manufacturer establishes that it did not have reason to 
know in the exercise of due care that such vehicle is not in conformity 
with the requirement of this standard.
    S4.1.3.2.2 Subject to S4.1.3.4 and S4.1.5, the amount of passenger 
cars specified in S4.1.3.2.1 complying with the requirements of 
S4.1.2.1. shall be not less than 25 percent of:
    (a) The average annual production of passenger cars manufactured on 
or after September 1, 1984, and before September 1, 1987, by each 
manufacturer, or
    (b) The manufacturer's annual production of passenger cars during 
the period specified in S4.1.3.2.1.
    S4.1.3.2.3 A manufacturer may exclude convertibles which do not 
comply with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, when it is calculating its 
average annual production under S4.1.3.2.2(a) or its annual production 
under S4.1.3.2.2(b).
    S4.1.3.3 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1988, 
and before September 1, 1989.
    S4.1.3.3.1 Subject to S4.1.3.3.2 and S4.1.3.4, each passenger car 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1988, and before September 1, 
1989, shall comply with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, S4.1.2.2 or 
S4.1.2.3. A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in noncompliance with this 
standard if its manufacturer establishes that it did not have reason to 
know in the exercise of due care that such vehicle is not in conformity 
with the requirement of this standard.
    S4.1.3.3.2 Subject to S4.1.3.4 and S4.1.5, the amount of passenger 
cars specified in S4.1.3.3.1 complying with the requirements of S4.1.2.1 
shall be not less than 40 percent of:
    (a) The average annual production of passenger cars manufactured on 
or after September 1, 1985, and before September 1, 1988, by each 
manufacturer or
    (b) The manufacturer's annual production of passenger cars during 
the period specified in S4.1.3.3.1.
    S4.1.3.3.3 A manufacturer may exclude convertibles which do not 
comply with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, when it is calculating its 
average annual production under S4.1.3.3.2(a) or its annual production 
under S4.1.3.3.2(b).
    S4.1.3.4 Calculation of complying passenger cars. (a) For the 
purposes of calculating the numbers of cars manufactured under 
S4.1.3.1.2, S4.1.3.2.2, or S4.1.3.3.2 to comply with S4.1.2.1:
    (1) Each car whose driver's seating position complies with the 
requirements of S4.1.2.1(a) by means not including any type of seat belt 
and whose front right seating position will comply with the requirements 
of S4.1.2.1(a) by any means is counted as 1.5 vehicles, and
    (2) Each car whose driver's seating position complies with the 
requirements of S4.1.2.1(a) by means not including any type of seat belt 
and whose right front seat seating position is equipped with a manual 
Type 2 seat belt is counted as one vehicle.
    (b) For the purposes of complying with S4.1.3.1.2, a passenger car 
may be counted if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 1985, but before 
September 1, 1986, and
    (2) Complies with S4.1.2.1.

[[Page 501]]

    (c) For the purposes of complying with S4.1.3.2.2, a passenger car 
may be counted if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 1985, but before 
September 1, 1987,
    (2) Complies with S4.1.2.1, and
    (3) Is not counted toward compliance with S4.1.3.1.2
    (d) For the purposes of complying with S4.1.3.3.2, a passenger car 
may be counted if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 1985, but before 
September 1, 1988,
    (2) Complies with S4.1.2.1, and
    (3) Is not counted toward compliance with S4.1.3.1.2 or S4.1.3.2.2.
    S4.1.3.5 Passenger cars produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S4.1.3.5.1 For the purposes of calculating average annual production 
of passenger cars for each manufacturer and the amount of passenger cars 
manufactured by each manufacturer under S4.1.3.1.2, S4.1.3.2.2 or 
S4.1.3.3.2, a passenger car produced by more than one manufacturer shall 
be attributed to a single manufacturer as follows, subject to 
S4.1.3.5.2:
    (a) A passenger car which is imported shall be attributed to the 
importer.
    (b) A passenger car manufactured in the United States by more than 
one manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be 
attributed to the manufacturer which markets the vehicle.
    S4.1.3.5.2 A passenger car produced by more than one manufacturer 
shall be attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified 
by an express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S4.1.3.5.1.
    S4.1.4 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1989, 
but before September 1, 1996.
    S4.1.4.1 Except as provided in S4.1.4.2, each passenger car 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1989 shall comply with the 
requirements of S4.1.2.1. Any passenger car manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1989 and before September 1, 1993 whose driver's designated 
seating position complies with the requirements of S4.1.2.1(a) by means 
not including any type of seat belt and whose right front designated 
seating position is equipped with a manual Type 2 seat belt so that the 
seating position complies with the occupant crash protection 
requirements of S5.1, with the Type 2 seat belt assembly adjusted in 
accordance with S7.4.2, shall be counted as a vehicle complying with 
S4.1.2.1. A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in noncompliance with this 
standard if its manufacturer establishes that it did not know in the 
exercise of due care that such vehicle is not in conformity with this 
standard.
    S4.1.4.2 (a) Each passenger car, other than a convertible, 
manufactured before December 11, 1989 may be equipped with, and each 
passenger car, other than a convertible, manufactured on or after 
December 11, 1989 and before September 1, 1990 shall be equipped with a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly at every forward-facing rear outboard 
designated seating position. Type 2 seat belt assemblies installed 
pursuant to this provision shall comply with Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 
571.209) and with S7.1.1 of this standard.
    (b) Except as provided in S4.1.4.2.1 and S4.1.4.2.2, each passenger 
car, other than a convertible, manufactured on or after September 1, 
1990 and each convertible passenger car manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1991 shall be equipped with an integral Type 2 seat belt 
assembly at every forward-facing rear outboard designated seating 
position. Type 2 seat belt assemblies installed in compliance with this 
requirement shall comply with Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209) and with 
S7.1 an S7.2 of this standard. If a Type 2 seat belt assembly installed 
in compliance with this requirement incorporates any webbing tension-
relieving device, the vehicle owner's manual shall include the 
information specified in S7.4.2(b) of this standard for the tension 
relieving device, and the vehicle shall comply with S7.4.2(c) of this 
standard.
    (c) As used in this section, ``rear outboard designated seating 
position'' means any ``outboard designated seating position'' (as that 
term is defined at 49 CFR 571.3) that is rearward of the front seat(s), 
except any designated

[[Page 502]]

seating position adjacent to a walkway that is located between the seat 
and the near side of the vehicle and is designed to allow access to more 
rearward seating positions.
    S4.1.4.2.1 Any rear outboard designated seating position with a seat 
that can be adjusted to be forward-facing and to face some other 
direction shall either:
    (i) Meet the requirements of S4.1.4.2 with the seat in any position 
in which it can be occupied while the vehicle is in motion; or
    (ii) When the seat is in its forward-facing position, have a Type 2 
seat belt assembly with an upper torso restraint that conforms to S7.1 
and S7.2 of this standard and that adjusts by means of an emergency 
locking retractor that conforms with Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209), 
which upper torso restraint may be detachable at the buckle, and, when 
the seat is in any position in which it can be occupied while the 
vehicle is in motion, have a Type 1 seat belt or the pelvic portion of a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to S7.1 and S7.2 of this 
standard.
    S4.1.4.2.2 Any rear outboard designated seating position on a 
readily removable seat (that is, a seat designed to be easily removed 
and replaced by means installed by the manufacturer for that purpose) in 
a vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 1992 shall meet the 
requirements of S4.1.4.2 and may use an upper torso belt that detaches 
at either its upper or lower anchorage points, but not both anchorage 
points, to meet those requirements. The means for detaching the upper 
torso belt may use a pushbutton action.
    S4.1.5 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1996.
    S4.1.5.1 Frontal/angular automatic protection system. (a) Each 
passenger car manufactured on or after September 1, 1996 shall:
    (1) At each front outboard designated seating position meet the 
frontal crash protection requirements of S5.1 by means that require no 
action by vehicle occupants;
    (2) At any front designated seating positions that are not 
``outboard designated seating positions,'' as that term is defined at 49 
CFR 571.3, and at any rear designated seating positions that are not 
``rear outboard designated seating positions,'' as that term is defined 
at S4.1.4.2(c) of this standard, have a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt 
assembly that conforms to Standard No. 209 and S7.1 and S7.2 of this 
standard; and
    (3) At each front designated seating position that is an ``outboard 
designated seating position,'' as that term is defined at 49 CFR 571.3, 
and at each forward-facing rear designated seating position that is a 
``rear outboard designated seating positions,'' as that term is defined 
at S4.1.4.2(c) of this standard, have a Type 2 seat belt assembly that 
conforms to Standard No. 209 and S7.1 through S7.3 of this standard, 
and, in the case of the Type 2 seat belt assemblies installed at the 
front outboard designated seating positions, meet the frontal crash 
protection requirements with the appropriate anthropomorphic test dummy 
restrained by the Type 2 seat belt assembly in addition to the means 
that requires no action by the vehicle occupant.
    (b) For the purposes of sections S4.1.5 through S4.1.5.3 and S4.2.6 
through S4.2.6.2 of this standard, an inflatable restraint system means 
an air bag that is activated in a crash.
    S4.1.5.2 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1996 
and before September 1, 1997.
    S4.1.5.2.1 The amount of passenger cars complying with the 
requirement of S4.1.5.1(a)(1) by means of an inflatable restraint system 
at the driver's and right front passenger's position shall be not less 
than 95 percent of the manufacturer's total production of passenger cars 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1996, and before September 1, 
1997. A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in noncompliance with this 
standard if its manufacturer establishes that it did not have reason to 
know in the exercise of due care that such vehicle is not in conformity 
with the requirement of this standard.
    S4.1.5.2.2 Passenger cars produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S4.1.5.2.2.1 For the purpose of calculating the production of 
passenger cars by each manufacturer during the period specified in 
S4.1.5.2, a passenger car produced by more than one manufacturer shall 
be attributed to a single

[[Page 503]]

manufacturer as follows, subject to S4.1.5.2.2.2:
    (a) A passenger car that is imported into the United States shall be 
attributed to the importer.
    (b) A passenger car manufactured within the United States by more 
than one manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be 
attributed to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S4.1.5.2.2.2 A passenger car produced by more than one manufacturer 
shall be attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers, as 
specified in an express written contract, reported to the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration pursuant to part 585 of this 
chapter, between the manufacturer so specified and the manufacturer to 
which the vehicle otherwise would be attributed, pursuant to 
S4.1.5.2.2.1.
    S4.1.5.3 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1997. 
Each passenger car manufactured on or after September 1, 1997 shall 
comply with the requirement of S4.1.5.1(a)(1) by means of an inflatable 
restraint system at the driver's and right front passenger's position. A 
vehicle shall not be deemed to be in noncompliance with this standard if 
its manufacturer establishes that it did not have reason to know in the 
exercise of due care that such vehicle is not in conformity with the 
requirement of this standard.
    S4.1.5.4 Passenger cars certified to S14. Each passenger car 
certified to S14 shall, at each front outboard designated seating 
position, meet the applicable frontal crash protection requirements of 
S5.1.2(b) by means of an inflatable restraint system that requires no 
action by vehicle occupants.
    S4.2 Trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 
10,000 pounds or less. As used in this section, vehicles manufactured 
for operation by persons with disabilities means vehicles that 
incorporate a level change device (e.g., a wheelchair lift or a ramp) 
for onloading or offloading an occupant in a wheelchair, an interior 
element of design intended to provide the vertical clearance necessary 
to permit a person in a wheelchair to move between the lift or ramp and 
the driver's position or to occupy that position, and either an adaptive 
control or special driver seating accommodation to enable persons who 
have limited use of their arms or legs to operate a vehicle. For 
purposes of this definition, special driver seating accommodations 
include a driver's seat easily removable with means installed for that 
purpose or with simple tools, or a driver's seat with extended 
adjustment capability to allow a person to easily transfer from a 
wheelchair to the driver's seat.
    S4.2.1 Trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 
10,000 pounds or less, manufactured on or after January 1, 1976 and 
before September 1, 1991. Each truck and multipurpose passenger vehicle, 
with a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less, 
manufactured before September 1, 1991, shall meet the requirements of 
S4.1.2.1, or at the option of the manufacturer, S4.1.2.2 or S4.1.2.3 (as 
specified for passenger cars), except that forward control vehicles 
manufactured prior to September 1, 1981, convertibles, open-body type 
vehicles, walk-in van-type trucks, motor homes, vehicles designed to be 
exclusively sold to the U.S. Postal Service, and vehicles carrying 
chassis-mount campers may instead meet the requirements of S4.2.1.1 or 
S4.2.1.2.
    S4.2.1.1 First option--complete automatic protection system. The 
vehicle shall meet the crash protection requirements of S5 by means that 
require no action by vehicle occupants.
    S4.2.1.2 Second option--belt system. The vehicle shall have seat 
belt assemblies that conform to Standard 209 (49 CFR 571.209) installed 
as follows:
    (a) A Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly shall be installed for 
each designated seating position in convertibles, open-body type 
vehicles, and walk-in van-type trucks.
    (b) In vehicles manufactured for operation by persons with 
disabilities, a Type 2 or Type 2A seat belt assembly shall be installed 
for the driver's seating position, a Type 2 seat belt assembly shall be 
installed for each other outboard designated seating position that 
includes the windshield header within the head impact area, and a Type 1 
or Type 2 seat belt assembly shall be installed for each other 
designated seating position.
    (c) In all vehicles except those for which requirements are 
specified in

[[Page 504]]

S4.2.1.2 (a) or (b), a Type 2 seat belt assembly shall be installed for 
each outboard designated seating position that includes the windshield 
header within the head impact area, and a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt 
assembly shall be installed for each other designated seating position.
    S4.2.2 Trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 
8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or 
less, manufactured on or after September 1, 1991 and before September 1, 
1997. Except as provided in S4.2.4, each truck and multipurpose 
passenger vehicle, with a gross vehicle weight rating of 8,500 pounds or 
less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less, 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1991 and before September 1, 1997, 
shall meet the requirements of S4.1.2.1, or at the option of the 
manufacturer, S4.1.2.2 or S4.1.2.3 (as specified for passenger cars), 
except that convertibles, open-body type vehicles, walk-in van-type 
trucks, motor homes, vehicles designed to be exclusively sold to the 
U.S. Postal Service, vehicles carrying chassis-mount campers, and 
vehicles manufactured for operation by persons with disabilities may 
instead meet the requirements of S4.2.1.1 or S4.2.1.2. Each Type 2 seat 
belt assembly installed in a front outboard designated seating position 
in accordance with S4.1.2.3 shall meet the requirements of S4.6.
    S4.2.3 Trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles manufactured on or 
after September 1, 1991 with either a GVWR or more than 8,500 pounds but 
not greater than 10,000 pounds or with an unloaded vehicle weight 
greater than 5,500 pounds and a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less. Except as 
provided in S4.2.4, each truck and multipurpose passenger vehicle 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1991, that has either a gross 
vehicle weight rating which is greater than 8,500 pounds, but not 
greater than 10,000 pounds, or has an unloaded vehicle weight greater 
than 5,500 pounds and a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less, shall meet the 
requirements of S4.1.2.1, or at the option of the manufacturer, S4.1.2.2 
or S4.1.2.3 (as specified for passenger cars), except that convertibles, 
open-body type vehicles, walk-in van-type trucks, motor homes, vehicles 
designed to be exclusively sold to the U.S. Postal Service, and vehicles 
carrying chassis-mount campers may instead meet the requirements of 
S4.2.1.1 or S4.2.1.2.
    S4.2.4 Rear outboard seating positions in trucks and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1991 with a 
GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less. Except as provided in S4.2.4.2 and 
S4.2.4.3, each truck and each multipurpose passenger vehicle, other than 
a motor home, manufactured on or after September 1, 1991 that has a 
gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less shall be equipped 
with an integral Type 2 seat belt assembly at every forward-facing rear 
outboard designated seating position. Type 2 seat belt assemblies 
installed in compliance with this requirement shall comply with Standard 
No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209) and with S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard. If a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly installed in compliance with this requirement 
incorporates any webbing tension-relieving device, the vehicle owner's 
manual shall include the information specified in S7.4.2(b) of this 
standard for the tension relieving device, and the vehicle shall comply 
with S7.4.2(c) of this standard.
    S4.2.4.1 As used in this section--
    (a) Motor home means a motor vehicle with motive power that is 
designed to provide temporary residential accommodations, as evidenced 
by the presence of at least four of the following facilities: cooking; 
refrigeration or ice box; self-contained toilet; heating and/or air 
conditioning; a potable water supply system including a faucet and a 
sink; and a separate 110-125 volt electrical power supply and/or an LP 
gas supply.
    (b) Rear outboard designated seating position means any ``outboard 
designated seating position'' (as that term is defined at 49 CFR 571.3) 
that is rearward of the front seat(s), except any designated seating 
positions adjacent to a walkway located between the seat and the side of 
the vehicle, which walkway is designed to allow access to more rearward 
seating positions.
    S4.2.4.2 Any rear outboard designated seating position with a seat

[[Page 505]]

that can be adjusted to be forward-facing and to face some other 
direction shall either:
    (i) Meet the requirements of S4.2.4 with the seat in any position in 
which it can be occupied while the vehicle is in motion; or
    (ii) When the seat is in its forward-facing position, have a Type 2 
seat belt assembly with an upper torso restraint that conforms to S7.1 
and S7.2 of this standard and that adjusts by means of an emergency 
locking retractor that conforms with Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209), 
which upper torso restraint may be detachable at the buckle, and, when 
the seat is in any position in which it can be occupied while the 
vehicle is in motion, have a Type 1 seat belt or the pelvic portion of a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to S7.1 and S7.2 of this 
standard.
    S4.2.4.3 Any rear outboard designated seating position on a readily 
removable seat (that is, a seat designed to be easily removed and 
replaced by means installed by the manufacturer for that purpose) in a 
vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 1992 shall meet the 
requirements of S4.2.4 and may use an upper torso belt that detaches at 
either its upper or lower anchorage point, but not both anchorage 
points, to meet those requirements. The means for detaching the upper 
torso belt may use a pushbutton action.
    S4.2.5 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less manufactured on or after September 1, 1994, and before 
September 1, 1997.
    S4.2.5.1 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less manufactured on or after September 1, 1994, and before 
September 1, 1995.
    S4.2.5.1.1 Subject to S4.2.5.1.2 and S4.2.5.5 and except as provided 
in S4.2.4, each truck, bus and multipurpose passenger vehicle, other 
than walk-in van-type trucks, vehicles designed to be exclusively sold 
to the U.S. Postal Service, and vehicles manufactured for operation by 
persons with disabilities, with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an 
unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less that is manufactured on 
or after September 1, 1994 and before September 1, 1995, shall comply 
with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, S4.1.2.2, or S4.1.2.3 (as specified 
for passenger cars). A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in 
noncompliance with this standard if its manufacturer establishes that it 
did not have reason to know in the exercise of due care that such 
vehicle is not in conformity with the requirement of standard.
    S4.2.5.1.2 Subject to S4.2.5.5, the amount of trucks, buses, and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles specified in S4.2.5.1.1 complying with 
S4.1.2.1 (as specified for passenger cars) shall be not less than 20 
percent of:
    (a) The average annual production of trucks, buses, and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded 
vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1991, and before September 1, 1994, by each manufacturer 
that produced such vehicles during each of those annual production 
periods, or
    (b) The manufacturer's total production of trucks, buses, and 
multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and 
an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less during the period 
specified in S4.2.5.1.1.
    S4.2.5.2 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less manufactured on or after September 1, 1995 and before 
September 1, 1996.
    S4.2.5.2.1 Subject to S4.2.5.2.2 and S4.2.5.5 and except as provided 
in S4.2.4, each truck, bus, and multipurpose passenger vehicle, other 
than walk-in van-type trucks, vehicles designed to be exclusively sold 
to the U.S. Postal Service, and vehicles manufactured for operation by 
persons with disabilities, with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an 
unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less that is manufactured on 
or after September 1, 1995 and before September 1, 1996, shall comply 
with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, S4.1.2.2, or S4.1.2.3 (as specified 
for passenger cars). A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in 
noncompliance with this standard if its manufacturer establishes that it 
did not have reason to know in the exercise of due care that such 
vehicle is

[[Page 506]]

not in conformity with the requirement of this standard.
    S4.2.5.2.2 Subject to S4.2.5.5, the amount of trucks, buses, and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles specified in S4.2.5.2.1 complying with 
S4.1.2.1 (as specified for passenger cars) shall be not less than 50 
percent of:
    (a) The average annual production of trucks, buses, and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded 
vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1992, and before September 1, 1995, by each manufacturer 
that produced such vehicles during each of those annual production 
periods, or
    (b) The manufacturer's total production of trucks, buses, and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and 
an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less during the period 
specified in S4.2.5.2.1.
    S4.2.5.3 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less manufactured on or after September 1, 1996 and before 
September 1, 1997.
    S4.2.5.3.1 Subject to S4.2.5.3.2 and S4.2.5.5 and except as provided 
in S4.2.4, each truck, bus, and multipurpose passenger vehicle, other 
than walk-in van-type trucks, vehicles designed to be exclusively sold 
to the U.S. Postal Service, and vehicles manufactured for operation by 
persons with disabilities, with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an 
unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less that is manufactured on 
or after September 1, 1996 and before September 1, 1997, shall comply 
with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, S4.1.2.2, or S4.1.2.3 (as specified 
for passenger cars). A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in 
noncompliance with this standard if its manufacturer establishes that it 
did not have reason to know in the exercise of due care that such 
vehicle is not in conformity with the requirement of this standard.
    S4.2.5.3.2 Subject to S4.2.5.5, the amount of trucks, buses, and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles specified in S4.2.5.3.1 complying with 
S4.1.2.1 (as specified for passenger cars) shall be not less than 90 
percent of:
    (a) The average annual production of trucks, buses, and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded 
vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1993, and before September 1, 1996, by each manufacturer 
that produced such vehicles during each of those annual production 
periods, or
    (b) The manufacturer's total production of trucks, buses, and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and 
an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less during the period 
specified in S4.2.5.3.1.
    S4.2.5.4 Alternative phase-in schedule. A manufacturer may, at its 
option, comply with the requirements of this section instead of 
complying with the requirements set forth in S4.2.5.1, S4.2.5.2, and 
S4.2.5.3.
    (a) Except as provided in S4.2.4, each truck, bus, and multipurpose 
passenger vehicle, other than walk-in van-type trucks, vehicles designed 
to be exclusively sold to the U.S. Postal Service, and vehicles 
manufactured for operation by persons with disabilities, with a GVWR of 
8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or 
less that is manufactured on or after September 1, 1994 and before 
September 1, 1995 shall comply with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, 
S4.1.2.2, or S4.1.2.3 (as specified for passenger cars).
    (b) Except as provided in S4.2.4, each truck, bus, and multipurpose 
passenger vehicle, other than walk-in van-tape trucks, vehicles designed 
to be exclusively sold to the U.S. Postal Service, and vehicles 
manufactured for operation by persons with disabilities, with a GVWR of 
8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or 
less that is manufactured on or after September 1, 1995 shall comply 
with the requirements of S4.1.2.1 (as specified for passenger cars) of 
this standard. A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in noncompliance with 
this standard if its manufacturer establishes that it did not have 
reason to know in the exercise of due care that such vehicle is not in 
conformity with the requirement of this standard.
    (c) Each truck, bus, and multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR 
of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle

[[Page 507]]

weight of 5,500 pounds or less manufactured on or after September 1, 
1995, but before September 1, 1998, whose driver's seating position 
complies with the requirements of S4.1.2.1(a) of this standard by means 
not including any type of seat belt and whose right front passenger's 
seating position is equipped with a manual Type 2 seat belt that 
complies with S5.1 of this standard, with the seat belt assembly 
adjusted in accordance with S7.4.2, shall be counted as a vehicle 
complying with S4.1.2.1.
    S4.2.5.5 Calculation of complying trucks, buses, and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded 
vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less.
    (a) For the purposes of the calculations required in S4.2.5.1.2, 
S4.2.5.2.2, and S4.2.5.3.2 of the number of trucks, buses, and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and 
an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less that comply with 
S4.1.2.1 (as specified for passenger cars):
    (1) Each truck, bus, and multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR 
of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds 
or less whose driver's seating position complies with the requirements 
of S4.1.2.1(a) by means not including any type of seat belt and whose 
front right seating position complies with the requirements of 
S4.1.2.1(a) by any means is counted as 1.5 vehicles, and
    (2) Each truck, bus, and multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR 
of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds 
or less whose driver's seating position complies with the requirements 
of S4.1.2.1(a) by means not including any type of seat belt and whose 
right front passenger's seating position is equipped with a manual Type 
2 seat belt that complies with S5.1 of this standard, with the seat belt 
assembly adjusted in accordance with S7.4.2, is counted as one vehicle.
    (3) Each truck, bus, and multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR 
of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds 
or less that is manufactured in two or more stages or that is altered 
(within the meaning of Sec. 567.7 of this chapter) after having 
previously been certified in accordance with part 567 of this chapter is 
not subject to the requirements of S4.2.5.1.2, S4.2.5.2.2, and 
S4.2.5.3.2. Such vehicles may be excluded from all calculations of 
compliance with S4.2.5.1.2, S4.2.5.2.2, and S4.2.5.3.2.
    (b) For the purposes of complying with S4.2.5.1.2, a truck, bus, or 
multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and 
an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less may be counted if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 1992, but before 
September 1, 1994, and
    (2) Is certified as complying with S4.1.2.1 (as specified for 
passenger cars).
    (c) For the purposes of complying with S4.2.5.2.2, a truck, bus, or 
multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and 
an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less may be counted if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 1992, but before 
September 1, 1995,
    (2) Is certified as complying with S4.1.2.1 (as specified for 
passenger cars), and
    (3) Is not counted toward compliance with S4.2.5.1.2.
    (d) For the purposes of complying with S4.2.5.3.2, a truck, bus, or 
multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and 
an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less may be counted if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 1992, but before 
September 1, 1996,
    (2) Is certified as complying with S4.1.2.1 (as specified for 
passenger cars), and
    (3) Is not counted toward compliance with S4.2.5.1.2 or S4.2.5.2.2.
    S4.2.5.6 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S4.2.5.6.1 For the purposes of calculating average annual production 
for each manufacturer and the amount of vehicles manufactured by each 
manufacturer under S4.2.5.1.2, S4.2.5.2.2, or S4.2.5.3.2, a truck, bus, 
or multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR of 8,500

[[Page 508]]

pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less 
produced by more than one manufacturer shall be attributed to a single 
manufacturer as follows, subject to S4.2.5.6.2:
    (a) A vehicle that is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle that is manufactured in the United States by more than 
one manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be 
attributed to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S4.2.5.6.2 A truck, bus, or multipurpose passenger vehicle with, 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified in an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S4.2.5.6.1 of this standard.
    S4.2.6 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less manufactured on or after September 1, 1997. Each truck, 
bus, and multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or 
less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less, which is 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1997, shall comply with the 
requirements of S4.1.5.1 of this standard (as specified for passenger 
cars), except that walk-in van-type trucks and vehicles designed to be 
sold exclusively to the U.S. Postal Service may meet the requirements of 
S4.2.1.1 or S4.2.1.2 of this standard instead of the requirements of 
S4.1.5.1.
    S4.2.6.1 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less manufactured on or after September 1, 1997 and before 
September 1, 1998.
    S4.2.6.1.1 The amount of trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger 
vehicles complying with the requirements of S4.1.5.1(a)(1) of this 
standard by means of an inflatable restraint system shall be not less 
than 80 percent of the manufacturer's total combined production of 
subject vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1997 and before 
September 1, 1998. Each truck, bus, or multipurpose passenger vehicle 
with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 
5,500 pounds or less manufactured on or after September 1, 1997 and 
before September 1, 1998, whose driver's seating position complies with 
S4.1.5.1(a)(1) by means of an inflatable restraint system and whose 
right front passenger's seating position is equipped with a manual Type 
2 seat belt assembly that complies with S5.1 of this standard, with the 
seat belt assembly adjusted in accordance with S7.4.2 of this standard, 
shall be counted as a vehicle complying with S4.1.5.1(a)(1) by means of 
an inflatable restraint system. A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in 
noncompliance with this standard if its manufacturer establishes that it 
did not have reason to know in the exercise of due care that such 
vehicle is not in conformity with the requirement of this standard.
    S4.2.6.1.2 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S4.2.6.1.2.1 For the purpose of calculating the production by each 
manufacturer during the period specified in S4.2.6.1.1, a truck, bus, or 
multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and 
an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less produced by more than 
one manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer as 
follows, subject to S4.2.6.1.2.2:
    (a) A vehicle that is imported into the United States shall be 
attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured within the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S4.2.6.1.2.2 A truck, bus, or multipurpose passenger vehicle 
produced by more than one manufacturer shall be attributed to any one of 
the vehicle's manufacturers, as specified in an express written 
contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
pursuant to part 585 of

[[Page 509]]

this chapter, between the manufacturer so specified and the manufacturer 
to which the vehicle otherwise would be attributed, pursuant to 
S4.2.6.1.2.1.
    S4.2.6.2 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less manufactured on or after September 1, 1998. Each truck, 
bus, or multipurpose vehicle with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an 
unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1998 shall comply with the requirement of S4.1.5.1(a)(1) by 
means of an inflatable restraint system at the driver's and right front 
passenger's position. A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in 
noncompliance with this standard if its manufacturer establishes that it 
did not have reason to know in the exercise of due care that such 
vehicle is not in conformity with the requirement of this standard.
    S4.2.6.3 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles 
certified to S14. Each truck, bus, or multipurpose passenger vehicle 
with a GVWR of 3,855 kg (8,500 lb) or less and an unloaded vehicle 
weight of 2,495 kg (5,500 lb) or less certified to S14 shall, at each 
front outboard designated seating position, meet the applicable frontal 
crash protection requirements of S5.1.2(b) by means of an inflatable 
restraint system that requires no action by vehicle occupants.
    S4.3 Trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles, with GVWR of more 
than 10,000 pounds.
    S4.3.1 Trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 
more than 10,000 pounds, manufactured in or after January 1, 1972 and 
before September 1, 1990. Each truck and multipurpose passenger vehicle 
with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds, 
manufactured on or after January 1, 1972 and before September 1, 1990, 
shall meet the requirements of S4.3.1.1 or S4.3.1.2. A protection system 
that meets the requirements of S4.3.1.1 may be installed at one or more 
designated seating positions of a vehicle that otherwise meets the 
requirements of S4.3.1.2.
    S4.3.1.1 First option--complete passenger protection system. The 
vehicle shall meet the crash protection requirements of S5 by means that 
require no action by vehicle occupants.
    S4.3.1.2 Second option--belt system. The vehicle shall, at each 
designated seating position, have either a Type 1 or a Type 2 seat belt 
assembly that conforms to S571.209.
    S4.3.2 Trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 
more than 10,000 pounds, manufactured on or after September 1, 1990. 
Each truck and multipurpose passenger vehicle with a gross vehicle 
weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds, manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1990, shall meet the requirements of S4.3.2.1 or S4.3.2.2. 
A protection system that meets the requirements of S4.3.2.1 may be 
installed at one or more designated seating positions of a vehicle that 
otherwise meets the requirements of S4.3.2.2.
    S4.3.2.1 First option--complete passenger protection system. The 
vehicle shall meet the crash protection requirements of S5 by means that 
require no action by vehicle occupants.
    S4.3.2.2 Second option--belt system. The vehicle shall, at each 
designated seating position, have either a Type 1 or a Type 2 seat belt 
assembly that conforms to Sec. 571.209 of this part and S7.2 of this 
Standard. A Type 1 belt assembly or the pelvic portion of a dual 
retractor Type 2 belt assembly installed at a front outboard seating 
position shall include either an emergency locking retractor or an 
automatic locking retractor. If a seat belt assembly installed at a 
front outboard seating position includes an automatic locking retractor 
for the lap belt or the lap belt portion, that seat belt assembly shall 
comply with the following:
    (a) An automatic locking retractor used at a front outboard seating 
position that has some type of suspension system for the seat shall be 
attached to the seat structure that moves as the suspension system 
functions.
    (b) The lap belt or lap belt portion of a seat belt assembly 
equipped with an automatic locking retractor that is installed at a 
front outboard seating position must allow at least \3/4\ inch, but less 
than 3 inches, of webbing movement before retracting webbing to the next 
locking position.
    (c) Compliance with S4.3.2.2(b) of this standard is determined as 
follows:

[[Page 510]]

    (1) The seat belt assembly is buckled and the retractor end of the 
seat belt assembly is anchored to a horizontal surface. The webbing for 
the lap belt or lap belt portion of the seat belt assembly is extended 
to 75 percent of its length and the retractor is locked after the 
initial adjustment.
    (2) A load of 20 pounds is applied to the free end of the lap belt 
or the lap belt portion of the belt assembly (i.e., the end that is not 
anchored to the horizontal surface) in the direction away from the 
retractor. The position of the free end of the belt assembly is 
recorded.
    (3) Within a 30 second period, the 20 pound load is slowly 
decreased, until the retractor moves to the next locking position. The 
position of the free end of the belt assembly is recorded again.
    (4) The difference between the two positions recorded for the free 
end of the belt assembly shall be at least \3/4\ inch but less than 3 
inches.
    S4.4 Buses.
    S4.4.1 Buses manufactured on or after January 1, 1972 and before 
September 1, 1990. Each bus manufactured on or after January 1, 1972 and 
before September 1, 1990, shall meet the requirements of S4.4.1.1 or 
S4.4.1.2.
    S4.4.1.1 First option--complete passenger protection system--driver 
only. The vehicle shall meet the crash protection requirements of S5, 
with respect to an anthropomorphic test dummy in the driver's designated 
seating position, by means that require no action by vehicle occupants.
    S4.4.1.2 Second option--belt system--driver only. The vehicle shall, 
at the driver's designated seating position, have either a Type 1 or a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to S571.209.
    S4.4.2 Buses manufactured on or after September 1, 1990. Each bus 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1990, shall meet the requirements 
of S4.4.2.1 or S4.4.2.2.
    S4.4.2.1 First option--complete passenger protection system--driver 
only. The vehicle shall meet the crash protection requirements of S5, 
with respect to an anthropomorphic test dummy in the driver's designated 
seating position, by means that require no action by vehicle occupants.
    S4.4.2.2 Second option--belt system--driver only. The vehicle shall, 
at the driver's designated seating position, have either a Type 1 or a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to Sec. 571.209 of this part 
and S7.2 of this Standard. A Type 1 belt assembly or the pelvic portion 
of a dual retractor Type 2 belt assembly installed at the driver's 
seating position shall include either an emergency locking retractor or 
an automatic locking retractor. If a seat belt assembly installed at the 
driver's seating position includes an automatic locking retractor for 
the lap belt or the lap belt portion, that seat belt assembly shall 
comply with the following:
    (a) An automatic locking retractor used at a driver's seating 
position that has some type of suspension system for the seat shall be 
attached to the seat structure that moves as the suspension system 
functions.
    (b) The lap belt or lap belt portion of a seat belt assembly 
equipped with an automatic locking retractor that is installed at the 
driver's seating position must allow at least \3/4\ inch, but less than 
3 inches, of webbing movement before retracting webbing to the next 
locking position.
    (c) Compliance with S4.4.2.2(b) of this standard is determined as 
follows:
    (1) The seat belt assembly is buckled and the retractor end of the 
seat belt assembly is anchored to a horizontal surface. The webbing for 
the lap belt or lap belt portion of the seat belt assembly is extended 
to 75 percent of its length and the retractor is locked after the 
initial adjustment.
    (2) A load of 20 pounds is applied to the free end of the lap belt 
or the lap belt portion of the belt assembly (i.e., the end that is not 
anchored to the horizontal surface) in the direction away from the 
retractor. The position of the free end of the belt assembly is 
recorded.
    (3) Within a 30 second period, the 20 pound load is slowly 
decreased, until the retractor moves to the next locking position. The 
position of the free end of the belt assembly is recorded again.
    (4) The difference between the two positions recorded for the free 
end of

[[Page 511]]

the belt assembly shall be at least \3/4\ inch but less than 3 inches.
    S4.4.3 Buses manufactured on or after September 1, 1991.
    S4.4.3.1 Each bus with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 
10,000 pounds shall comply with the requirements S4.4.2.1 or S4.4.2.2.
    S4.4.3.2 Except as provided in S4.4.3.2.2 and S4.4.3.2.3, each bus 
with a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less, except a 
school bus, shall be equipped with an integral Type 2 seat belt assembly 
at the driver's designated seating position and at the front and every 
rear forward-facing outboard designated seating position, and with a 
Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly at all other designated seating 
positions. Type 2 seat belt asemblies installed in compliance with this 
requirement shall comply with Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209) and with 
S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard. If a Type 2 seat belt assembly installed 
in compliance with this requirement incorporates any webbing tension-
relieving device, the vehicle owner's manual shall include the 
information specified in S7.4.2(b) of this standard for the tension 
relieving device, and the vehicle shall comply with S7.4.2(c) of this 
standard.
    S4.4.3.2.1 As used in this section, a ``rear outboard designated 
position'' means any ``outboard designated seating position'' (as that 
term is defined at 49 CFR 571.3) that is rearward of the front seat(s), 
except any designated seating positions adjacent to a walkway located 
between the seat and the side of the vehicle, which walkway is designed 
to allow access to more rearward seating positions.
    S4.4.3.2.2 Any rear outboard designated seating position with a seat 
that can be adjusted to be forward-facing and to face some other 
direction shall either:
    (i) Meet the requirements of S4.4.3.2 with the seat in any position 
in which it can be occupied while the vehicle is in motion; or
    (ii) When the seat is in its forward-facing position, have a Type 2 
seat belt assembly with an upper torso restraint that conforms to S7.1 
and S7.2 of this standard and that adjusts by means of an emergency 
locking retractor that conforms with Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209), 
which upper torso restraint may be detachable at the buckle, and, when 
the seat is in any position in which it can be occupied while the 
vehicle is in motion, have a Type 1 seat belt or the pelvic portion of a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to S7.1 and S7.2 of this 
standard.
    S4.4.3.2.3 Any rear outboard designated seating position on a 
readily removable seat (that is, a seat designed to be easily removed 
and replaced by means installed by the manufacturer for that purpose) in 
a vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 1992 shall meet the 
requirements of S4.4.3.2 and may use an upper torso belt that detaches 
at either its upper or lower anchorage point, but not both anchorage 
points, to meet those requirements. The means for detaching the upper 
torso belt may use a pushbutton action.
    S4.4.3.3 Each school bus with a gross vehicle weight rating of 
10,000 pounds or less shall be equipped with an integral Type 2 seat 
belt assembly at the driver's designated seating position and at the 
right front passenger's designated seating position (if any), and with a 
Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly at all other designated seating 
positions. Type 2 seat belt assemblies installed in compliance with this 
requirement shall comply with Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209) and with 
S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard. The lap belt portion of a Type 2 seat 
belt assembly installed at the driver's designated seating position and 
at the right front passenger's designated seating position (if any) 
shall include either an emergency locking retractor or an automatic 
locking retractor, which retractor shall not retract webbing to the next 
locking position until at least \3/4\ inch of webbing has moved into the 
retractor. In determining whether an automatic locking retractor 
complies with this requirement, the webbing is extended to 75 percent of 
its length and the retractor is locked after the initial adjustment. If 
a Type 2 seat belt assembly installed in compliance with this 
requirement incorporates any webbing tension-relieving device, the 
vehicle owner's manual shall include the information specified in 
S7.4.2(b) of

[[Page 512]]

this standard for the tension-relieving device, and the vehicle shall 
comply with S7.4.2(c) of this standard.
    S4.4.4 Buses with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded 
vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1994. Each bus with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an 
unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1984 shall comply with the requirements of S4.2.5 and 
S4.2.6 of this standard, as applicable, for front seating positions, and 
with the requirements of S4.4.3.2 or S4.4.3.3 of this standard, as 
applicable, for all rear seating positions.
    S4.5 Other general requirements.
    S4.5.1 Labeling and owner's manual information.
    (a) Air bag maintenance or replacement information. If the vehicle 
manufacturer recommends periodic maintenance or replacement of an 
inflatable restraint system, as that term is defined in S4.1.5.1(b) of 
this standard, installed in a vehicle, that vehicle shall be labeled 
with the recommended schedule for maintenance or replacement. The 
schedule shall be specified by month and year, or in terms of vehicle 
mileage, or by intervals measured from the date appearing on the vehicle 
certification label provided pursuant to 49 CFR Part 567. The label 
shall be permanently affixed to the vehicle within the passenger 
compartment and lettered in English in block capital and numerals not 
less than three thirty-seconds of an inch high. This label may be 
combined with the label required by S4.5.1(b) of this standard to appear 
on the sun visor. If some regular maintenance or replacement of the 
inflatable restraint system(s) in a vehicle is recommended by the 
vehicle manufacturer, the owner's manual shall also set forth the 
recommended schedule for maintenance or replacement.
    (b) Sun visor air bag warning label. (1) Except as provided in 
S4.5.1(b)(2), each vehicle shall have a label permanently affixed to 
either side of the sun visor, at the manufacturer's option, at each 
front outboard seating position that is equipped with an inflatable 
restraint. The label shall conform in content to the label shown in 
either Figure 6a or 6b of this standard, as appropriate, and shall 
comply with the requirements of S4.5.1(b)(1)(i) through 
S4.5.1(b)(1)(iv).
    (i) The heading area shall be yellow with the word ``WARNING'' and 
the alert symbol in black.
    (ii) The message area shall be white with black text. The message 
area shall be no less than 30 cm<SUP>2</SUP> (4.7 in<SUP>2</SUP>).
    (iii) The pictogram shall be black with a red circle and slash on a 
white background. The pictogram shall be no less than 30 mm (1.2 in) in 
diameter.
    (iv) If the vehicle does not have a back seat, the label shown in 
Figure 6a or 6b may be modified by omitting the statements: ``The BACK 
SEAT is the SAFEST place for children.''
    (2) Vehicles certified to meet the requirements specified in S19, 
S21, or S23 before September 1, 2003 shall have a label permanently 
affixed to either side of the sun visor, at the manufacturer's option, 
at each front outboard seating position that is equipped with an 
inflatable restraint. The label shall conform in content to the label 
shown either in Figure 8 or Figure 11 of this standard, at the 
manufacturer's option, and shall comply with the requirements of 
S4.5.1(b)(2)(i) through S4.5.1(b)(2)(iv).
    (i) The heading area shall be yellow with the word ``WARNING'' and 
the alert symbol in black.
    (ii) The message area shall be white with black text. The message 
area shall be no less than 30 cm<SUP>2</SUP> (4.7 in<SUP>2</SUP>).
    (iii) The pictogram shall be black on a white background. The 
pictogram shall be no less than 30 mm (1.2 in) in length.
    (iv) If the vehicle does not have a back seat, the label shown in 
the figure may be modified by omitting the statement: ``The BACK SEAT is 
the SAFEST place for CHILDREN.''
    (v) If the vehicle does not have a back seat or the back seat is too 
small to accommodate a rear-facing child restraint consistent with 
S4.5.4.1, the label shown in the figure may be modified by omitting the 
statement: ``Never put a rear-facing child seat in the front.''
    (3) Vehicles certified to meet the requirements specified in S19, 
S21, or S23 on or after September 1, 2003 shall have a label permanently 
affixed to either

[[Page 513]]

side of the sun visor, at the manufacturer's option, at each front 
outboard seating position that is equipped with an inflatable restraint. 
The label shall conform in content to the label shown in Figure 11 of 
this standard and shall comply with the requirements of S4.5.1(b)(3)(i) 
through S4.5.1(b)(3)(iv).
    (i) The heading area shall be yellow with the word ``WARNING'' and 
the alert symbol in black.
    (ii) The message area shall be white with black text. The message 
area shall be no less than 30 cm\2\ (4.7 in\2\).
    (iii) The pictogram shall be black on a white background. The 
pictogram shall be no less than 30 mm (1.2 in) in length.
    (iv) If the vehicle does not have a back seat, the label shown in 
the figure may be modified by omitting the statement: ``The BACK SEAT is 
the SAFEST place for CHILDREN.''
    (v) If the vehicle does not have a back seat or the back seat is too 
small to accommodate a rear-facing child restraint consistent with 
S4.5.4.1, the label shown in the figure may be modified by omitting the 
statement: ``Never put a rear-facing child seat in the front.''
    (4) Design-specific information.
    (i) A manufacturer may request in writing that the Administrator 
authorize additional design-specific information to be placed on the air 
bag sun visor label for vehicles certified to meet the requirements 
specified in S19, S21, or S23. The label shall conform in content to the 
label shown in Figure 11 of this standard and shall comply with the 
requirements of S4.5.1(b)(3)(i) through S4.5.1(b)(3)(iv), except that 
the label may contain additional, design-specific information, if 
authorized by the Administrator.
    (ii) The request must meet the following criteria:
    (A) The request must provide a mock-up of the label with the 
specific language or pictogram the manufacturer requests permission to 
add to the label.
    (B) The additional information conveyed by the requested label must 
be specific to the design or technology of the air bag system in the 
vehicle and not applicable to all or most air bag systems.
    (C) The additional information conveyed by the requested label must 
address a situation in which foreseeable occupant behavior can affect 
air bag performance.
    (iii) The Administrator shall authorize or reject a request by a 
manufacturer submitted under S4.5.1(b)(4)(i) on the basis of whether the 
additional information could result in information overload or would 
otherwise make the label confusing or misleading. No determination will 
be made as to whether, in light of the above criteria, the particular 
information best prevents information overload or whether the 
information best addresses a particular air bag risk. Moreover, the 
Administrator will not verify or vouch for the accuracy of the 
information.
    (5) Limitations on additional labels.
    (i) Except for the information on an air bag maintenance label 
placed on the sun visor pursuant to S4.5.1(a) of this standard, or on a 
utility vehicle warning label placed on the sun visor that conforms in 
content, form, and sequence to the label shown in Figure 1 of 49 CFR 
575.105, no other information shall appear on the same side of the sun 
visor to which the sun visor air bag warning label is affixed.
    (ii) Except for the information in an air bag alert label placed on 
the sun visor pursuant to S4.5.1(c) of this standard, or on a utility 
vehicle warning label placed on the sun visor that conforms in content, 
form, and sequence to the label shown in Figure 1 of 49 CFR 575.105, no 
other information about air bags or the need to wear seat belts shall 
appear anywhere on the sun visor.
    (c) Air bag alert label. If the label required by S4.5.1(b) is not 
visible when the sun visor is in the stowed position, an air bag alert 
label shall be permanently affixed to that visor so that the label is 
visible when the visor is in that position. The label shall conform in 
content to the sun visor label shown in Figure 6(c) of this standard, 
and shall comply with the requirements of S4.5.1(c)(1) through 
S4.5.1(c)(3).
    (1) The message area shall be black with yellow text. The message 
area shall be no less than 20 square cm.

[[Page 514]]

    (2) The pictogram shall be black with a red circle and slash on a 
white background. The pictogram shall be no less than 20 mm in diameter.
    (3) If a vehicle does not have an inflatable restraint at any front 
seating position other than that for the driver, the pictogram may be 
omitted from the label shown in Figure 6c.
    (d) At the option of the manufacturer, the requirements in S4.5.1(b) 
and S4.5.1(c) for labels that are permanently affixed to specified parts 
of the vehicle may instead be met by permanent marking or molding of the 
required information.
    (e) Label on the dashboard. (1) Except as provided in S4.5.1(e)(2), 
each vehicle that is equipped with an inflatable restraint for the 
passenger position shall have a label attached to a location on the 
dashboard or the steering wheel hub that is clearly visible from all 
front seating positions. The label need not be permanently affixed to 
the vehicle. This label shall conform in content to the label shown in 
Figure 7 of this standard, and shall comply with the requirements of 
S4.5.1(e)(1)(i) through S4.5.1(e)(1)(iii).
    (i) The heading area shall be yellow with the word ``WARNING'' and 
the alert symbol in black.
    (ii) The message area shall be white with black text. The message 
area shall be no less than 30 cm<SUP>2</SUP> (4.7 in<SUP>2</SUP>).
    (iii) If the vehicle does not have a back seat, the label shown in 
Figure 7 may be modified by omitting the statement: ``The back seat is 
the safest place for children 12 and under.''
    (2) Vehicles certified to meet the requirements specified in S19, 
S21, and S23 before December 1, 2003, that are equipped with an 
inflatable restraint for the passenger position shall have a label 
attached to a location on the dashboard or the steering wheel hub that 
is clearly visible from all front seating positions. The label need not 
be permanently affixed to the vehicle. This label shall conform in 
content to the label shown in either Figure 9 or Figure 12 of this 
standard, at manufacturer's option, and shall comply with the 
requirements of S4.5.1(e)(2)(i) through S4.5.1(e)(2)(iv).
    (i) The heading area shall be yellow with black text.
    (ii) The message area shall be white with black text. The message 
area shall be no less than 30 cm<SUP>2</SUP> (4.7 in<SUP>2</SUP>).
    (iii) If the vehicle does not have a back seat, the labels shown in 
Figures 9 and 12 may be modified by omitting the statement: ``The back 
seat is the safest place for children.''
    (iv) If the vehicle does not have a back seat or the back seat is 
too small to accommodate a rear-facing child restraint consistent with 
S4.5.4.1, the label shown in Figure 12 may be modified by omitting the 
statement: ``Never put a rear-facing child seat in the front.''
    (3) Vehicles certified to meet the requirements specified in S19, 
S21, and S23 on or after December 1, 2003, that are equipped with an 
inflatable restraint for the passenger position shall have a label 
attached to a location on the dashboard or the steering wheel hub that 
is clearly visible from all front seating positions. The label need not 
be permanently affixed to the vehicle. This label shall conform in 
content to the label shown in Figure 12 of this standard and shall 
comply with the requirements of S4.5.1(e)(3)(i) through 
S4.5.1(e)(3)(iv).
    (i) The heading area shall be yellow with black text.
    (ii) The message area shall be white with black text. The message 
area shall be no less than 30 cm<SUP>2</SUP> (4.7 in<SUP>2</SUP>).
    (iii) If the vehicle does not have a back seat, the label shown in 
Figure 12 may be modified by omitting the statement: ``The back seat is 
the safest place for children.''
    (iv) If the vehicle does not have a back seat or the back seat is 
too small to accommodate a rear-facing child restraint consistent with 
S4.5.4.1, the label shown in Figure 12 may be modified by omitting the 
statement: ``Never put a rear-facing child seat in the front.''
    (f) Information to appear in owner's manual. (1) The owner's manual 
for any vehicle equipped with an inflatable restraint system shall 
include an accurate description of the vehicle's air bag system in an 
easily understandable format. The owner's manual shall include a 
statement to the effect that the vehicle is equipped with an air bag and 
lap/shoulder belt at both front outboard

[[Page 515]]

seating positions, and that the air bag is a supplemental restraint at 
those seating positions. The information shall emphasize that all 
occupants, including the driver, should always wear their seat belts 
whether or not an air bag is also provided at their seating position to 
minimize the risk of severe injury or death in the event of a crash. The 
owner's manual shall also provide any necessary precautions regarding 
the proper positioning of occupants, including children, at seating 
positions equipped with air bags to ensure maximum safety protection for 
those occupants. The owner's manual shall also explain that no objects 
should be placed over or near the air bag on the instrument panel, 
because any such objects could cause harm if the vehicle is in a crash 
severe enough to cause the air bag to inflate.
    (2) For any vehicle certified to meet the requirements specified in 
S14.5, S15, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25, the manufacturer shall also 
include in the vehicle owner's manual a discussion of the advanced 
passenger air bag system installed in the vehicle. The discussion shall 
explain the proper functioning of the advanced air bag system and shall 
provide a summary of the actions that may affect the proper functioning 
of the system. The discussion shall include, at a minimum, accurate 
information on the following topics:
    (i) A presentation and explanation of the main components of the 
advanced passenger air bag system.
    (ii) An explanation of how the components function together as part 
of the advanced passenger air bag system.
    (iii) The basic requirements for proper operation, including an 
explanation of the actions that may affect the proper functioning of the 
system.
    (iv) For vehicles certified to meet the requirements of S19.2, S21.2 
or S23.2, a complete description of the passenger air bag suppression 
system installed in the vehicle, including a discussion of any 
suppression zone.
    (v) An explanation of the interaction of the advanced passenger air 
bag system with other vehicle components, such as seat belts, seats or 
other components.
    (vi) A summary of the expected outcomes when child restraint 
systems, children and small teenagers or adults are both properly and 
improperly positioned in the passenger seat, including cautionary advice 
against improper placement of child restraint systems.
    (vii) For vehicles certified to meet the requirements of S19.2, 
S21.2 or S23.2, a discussion of the telltale light, specifying its 
location in the vehicle and explaining when the light is illuminated.
    (viii) Information on how to contact the vehicle manufacturer 
concerning modifications for persons with disabilities that may affect 
the advanced air bag system.
    (g) Additional labels placed elsewhere in the vehicle interior. The 
language on additional air bag warning labels placed elsewhere in the 
vehicle interior shall not cause confusion or contradiction of any of 
the statements required in the air bag sun visor label, and shall be 
expressed in symbols, words and abbreviations required by this standard.
    S4.5.2 Readiness indicator. An occupant protection system that 
deploys in the event of a crash shall have a monitoring system with a 
readiness indicator. The indicator shall monitor its own readiness and 
shall be clearly visible from the driver's designated seating position. 
If the vehicle is equipped with a single readiness indicator for both a 
driver and passenger air bag, and if the vehicle is equipped with an on-
off switch permitted by S4.5.4 of this standard, the readiness indicator 
shall monitor the readiness of the driver air bag when the passenger air 
bag has been deactivated by means of the on-off switch, and shall not 
illuminate solely because the passenger air bag has been deactivated by 
the manual on-off switch. A list of the elements of the system being 
monitored by the indicator shall be included with the information 
furnished in accordance with S4.5.1 but need not be included on the 
label.
    S4.5.3 Automatic belts. Except as provided in S4.5.3.1, a seat belt 
assembly that requires no action by vehicle occupants (hereinafter 
referred to as an ``automatic belt'') may be used to meet the crash 
protection requirements of any option under S4. and in place of any seat 
belt assembly otherwise required by that option.

[[Page 516]]

    S4.5.3.1. An automatic belt that provides only pelvic restraint may 
not be used pursuant to S4.5.3 to meet the requirements of an option 
that requires a Type 2 seat belt assembly. An automatic belt may not be 
used pursuant to S4.5.3 to meet the requirements of S4.1.5.1(a)(3) for a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly at any seating position equipped with an 
inflatable restraint system pursuant to S4.1.5.2, S4.1.5.3, S4.2.6.1, or 
S4.2.6.2 of this standard.
    S4.5.3.2 An automatic belt, furnished pursuant to S4.5.3, that 
provides both pelvic and upper torso restraint may have either a 
detachable or nondetachable upper torso portion, notwithstanding 
provisions of the option under which it is furnished.
    S4.5.3.3 An automatic belt furnished pursuant to S4.5.3 shall:
    (a) Conform to S7.1 and have a single emergency release mechanism 
whose components are readily accessible to a seated occupant.
    (b) In place of a warning system that conforms to S7.3 of this 
standard, be equipped with the following warning system: At the left 
front designated seating position (driver's position), a warning system 
that activates a continuous or intermittent audible signal for a period 
of not less than 4 seconds and not more than 8 seconds and that 
activates a continuous or flashing warning light visible to the driver 
for not less than 60 seconds (beginning when the vehicle ignition switch 
is moved to the ``on'' or the ``start'' position) when condition (A) 
exists simultaneously with condition (B), and that activates a 
continuous or flashing warning light, visible to the driver, displaying 
the identifying symbol for the seat belt telltale shown in Table 2 of 
Standard No. 101 (49 CFR 571.101), or, at the option of the manufacturer 
if permitted by Standard No. 101, displaying the words ``Fasten Seat 
Belts'' or ``Fasten Belts,'' for as long as condition (A) exists 
simultaneously with condition (C).
    (A) The vehicle's ignition switch is moved to the ``on'' position or 
to the ``start'' position.
    (B) The driver's automatic belt is not in use, as determined by the 
belt latch mechanism not being fastened, or, if the automatic belt is 
non-detachable, by the emergency release mechanism being in the released 
position. In the case of motorized automatic belts, the determination of 
use shall be made once the belt webbing is in its locked protective mode 
at the anchorage point.
    (C) The belt webbing of a motorized automatic belt system is not in 
its locked, protective mode at the anchorage point.
    S4.5.3.4 An automatic belt furnished pursuant to S4.5.3 that is not 
required to meet the perpendicular frontal crash protection requirements 
of S5.1 shall conform to the webbing, attachment hardware, and assembly 
performance requirements of Standard No. 209.
    S4.5.3.5 A replacement automatic belt shall meet the requirements of 
S4.1(k) of Standard No. 209.
    S4.5.4 Passenger air bag manual cut-off device. Passenger cars, 
trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles manufactured before 
September 1, 2012 may be equipped with a device that deactivates the air 
bag installed at the right front outboard seating position in the 
vehicle, if all the conditions in S4.5.4.1 through S4.5.4.4 are 
satisfied.
    S4.5.4.1 The vehicle complies with either S4.5.4.1(a) or 
S4.5.4.1(b).
    (a) The vehicle has no forward-facing designated seating positions 
to the rear of the front seating positions.
    (b) With the seats and seat backs adjusted as specified in S8.1.2 
and S8.1.3, the distance, measured along a longitudinal horizontal line 
tangent to the highest point of the rear seat bottom in the longitudinal 
vertical plane described in either S4.5.4.1(b)(1) or S4.5.4.1(b)(2), 
between the rearward surface of the front seat back and the forward 
surface of the rear seat back is less than 720 millimeters.
    (1) In a vehicle equipped with front bucket seats, the vertical 
plane at the centerline of the driver's seat cushion.
    (2) In a vehicle equipped with front bench seating, the vertical 
plane which passes through the center of the steering wheel rim.
    S4.5.4.2 The device is operable by means of the ignition key for the 
vehicle. The device shall be separate from the ignition switch for the 
vehicle, so that the driver must take some action

[[Page 517]]

with the ignition key other than inserting it or turning it in the 
ignition switch to deactivate the passenger air bag. Once deactivated, 
the passenger air bag shall remain deactivated until it is reactivated 
by means of the device.
    S4.5.4.3 A telltale light in the interior of the vehicle shall be 
illuminated whenever the passenger air bag is turned off by means of the 
on-off switch. The telltale shall be clearly visible to occupants of all 
front seating positions. ``Clearly visible'' means within the normal 
range of vision throughout normal driving operations. The telltale:
    (a) Shall be yellow;
    (b) Shall have the identifying words ``PASSENGER AIR BAG OFF'' or 
``PASS AIR BAG OFF'' on the telltale or within 25 millimeters of the 
telltale;
    (c) Shall remain illuminated for the entire time that the air bag is 
``off'';
    (d) Shall not be illuminated at any time when the air bag is ``on''; 
and,
    (e) Shall not be combined with the readiness indicator required by 
S4.5.2 of this standard.
    S4.5.4.4 The vehicle owner's manual shall provide, in a readily 
understandable format:
    (a) Complete instructions on the operation of the on-off switch;
    (b) A statement that the on-off switch should only be used when a 
member of a passenger risk group identified in the request form in 
Appendix B to part 595 of this chapter is occupying the right front 
passenger seating position; and,
    (c) A warning about the safety consequences of using the on-off 
switch at other times.
    S4.6 Dynamic testing of manual belt systems.
    S4.6.1 Each truck and multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR of 
8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded weight of less than 5,500 pounds 
that is manufactured on or after September 1, 1991, and is equipped with 
a Type 2 seat belt assembly at a front outboard designated seating 
position pursuant to S4.1.2.3 shall meet the frontal crash protection 
requirements of S5.1 at those designated seating positions with a test 
dummy restrained by a Type 2 seat belt assembly that has been adjusted 
in accordance with S7.4.2. A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in 
noncompliance with this standard if its manufacturer establishes that it 
did not have reason to know in the exercise of due care that such 
vehicle is not in conformity with the requirement of this standard.
    S4.6.2 Any manual seat belt assembly subject to the requirements of 
S5.1 of this standard by virtue of any provision of this standard other 
than S4.1.2.1(c)(2) does not have to meet the requirements of S4.2(a)-
(f) and S4.4 of Standard No. 209 (Sec. 571.209).
    S4.6.3 Any manual seat belt assembly subject to the requirements of 
S5.1 of this standard by virtue of S4.1.2.1(c)(2) does not have to meet 
the elongation requirements of S4.2(c), S4.4(a)(2), S4.4(b)(4), and 
S4.4(b)(5) of Standard No. 209 (Sec. 571.209).
    S4.7 Incorporation by reference. Society of Automotive Engineers 
(SAE) Recommended Practice J211/1 rev. Mar 95, ``Instrumentation for 
Impact Test--Part 1--Electronic Instrumentation,'' (SAE J211/1 rev. Mar 
95) is incorporated by reference in sections S4.13, S6.6, S13.1, 
S15.3.6, S19.4.4, S21.5.5, S23.5.5, and S25.4, Department of Defense 
MIL-S-13192P, 1988, ``Military Specification, Shoes, Men's, Dress, 
Oxford'', Amendment 1, October 14, 1994 (MIL-S-13192P) is incorporated 
by reference in section S8.1.8, and Department of Defense MIL-S-21711E, 
1982, ``Military Specification, Shoes, Women's'', Amendment 2, October 
14, 1994 (MIL-S-21711E) is incorporated by reference in section S16.2.5, 
and are thereby made part of this standard. The Director of the Federal 
Register approved the material incorporated by reference in accordance 
with 5 U.S.C. 552 (a) and 1 CFR Part 51. A copy of SAE J211/1 rev. Mar 
95 may be obtained from SAE at the Society of Automotive Engineers, 
Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096. A copy of SAE J211/1 
rev. Mar 95 and copies of MIL-S-13192P and MIL-S-21711E may be inspected 
at NHTSA's technical reference library, 400 Seventh Street, S.W., Room 
5109, Washington, DC, or at the National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this 
material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/

[[Page 518]]

federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    S4.8 Selection of compliance options. Where manufacturer options are 
specified, the manufacturer shall select the option by the time it 
certifies the vehicle and may not thereafter select a different option 
for the vehicle. Each manufacturer shall, upon request from the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, provide information regarding 
which of the compliance options it has selected for a particular vehicle 
or make/model.
    S4.9 Values and tolerances. Wherever a range of values or tolerances 
are specified, requirements shall be met at all values within the range 
of values or tolerances. With respect to the positioning of 
anthropomorphic dummies, torso and spine angle tolerances shall be 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 degrees unless otherwise stated, and leg, thigh, 
foot, and arm angle tolerances shall be <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees 
unless otherwise stated.
    S4.10 Metric values. Specifications and requirements are given in 
metric units with English units provided for reference. The metric 
values are controlling.
    S4.11 Test duration for purpose of measuring injury criteria.
    (a) For all barrier crashes, the injury criteria specified in this 
standard shall be met when calculated based on data recorded for 300 
milliseconds after the vehicle strikes the barrier.
    (b) For the 3-year-old and 6-year-old child dummy low risk 
deployment tests, the injury criteria specified in this standard shall 
be met when calculated on data recorded for 100 milliseconds after the 
initial deployment of the air bag.
    (c) For 12-month-old infant dummy low risk deployment tests, the 
injury criteria specified in the standard shall be met when calculated 
on data recorded for 125 milliseconds after the initiation of the final 
stage of air bag deployment designed to deploy in any full frontal rigid 
barrier crash up to 64 km/h (40 mph).
    (d) For driver-side low risk deployment tests, the injury criteria 
shall be met when calculated based on data recorded for 125 milliseconds 
after the initiation of the final stage of air bag deployment designed 
to deploy in any full frontal rigid barrier crash up to 26 km/h (16 
mph).
    (e) The requirements for dummy containment shall continue until both 
the vehicle and the dummies have ceased moving.
    S4.12 Suppression systems that do not detect dummies. For vehicles 
with occupant sensing systems that recognize humans and not dummies, 
such that the air bag or bags would not function in crash tests, the 
manufacturer shall provide NHTSA with information and equipment 
necessary to circumvent the suppression system for the crash test such 
that the restraint system operates as if 5th percentile adult female 
humans and 50th percentile adult male humans are seated in the vehicle.
    S4.13 Data channels. For vehicles manufactured on or after September 
1, 2001, all data channels used in injury criteria calculations shall be 
filtered using a phaseless digital filter, such as the Butterworth four-
pole phaseless digital filter specified in Appendix C of SAE J211/1, 
rev. Mar 95, incorporated by reference in S4.7.
    S5 Occupant crash protection requirements for the 50th percentile 
adult male dummy.
    S5.1 Frontal barrier crash test.
    S5.1.1 Belted test. (a) Vehicles not certified to S14. Impact a 
vehicle traveling longitudinally forward at any speed, up to and 
including 48 km/h (30 mph), into a fixed rigid barrier that is 
perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle, and at any angle up 
to 30 degrees in either direction from the perpendicular to the line of 
travel of the vehicle, under the applicable conditions of S8 and S10. 
The test dummy specified in S8.1.8 placed in each front outboard 
designated seating position shall meet the injury criteria of S6.1, 
S6.2(a), S6.3, S6.4(a), and S6.5 of this standard.
    (b) Vehicles certified to S14. (1) Vehicles certified to S14.1 or 
S14.2. Impact a vehicle traveling longitudinally forward at any speed, 
up to and including 48 km/h (30 mph), into a fixed rigid barrier that is 
perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle under the applicable 
conditions of S8 and S10. The test dummy specified in S8.1.8 placed in 
each front outboard designated seating position shall meet the injury 
criteria of S6.1,

[[Page 519]]

S6.2(b), S6.3, S6.4(b), S6.5, and S6.6 of this standard.
    (2) Vehicles certified to S14.3 or S14.4. Impact a vehicle traveling 
longitudinally forward at any speed, up to and including 56 km/h (35 
mph), into a fixed rigid barrier that is perpendicular to the line of 
travel of the vehicle under the applicable conditions of S8 and S10. The 
test dummy specified in S8.1.8 placed in each front outboard designated 
seating position shall meet the injury criteria of S6.1, S6.2(b), S6.3, 
S6.4(b), S6.5, and S6.6 of this standard.
    S5.1.2 Unbelted test. (a) Vehicles not certified to the requirements 
of S13 or S14. At the manufacturer's option, either one of the following 
unbelted tests shall be met:
    (1) Impact a vehicle traveling longitudinally forward at any speed 
up to and including 48 km/h (30 mph), into a fixed rigid barrier that is 
perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle, and at any angle up 
to 30 degrees in either direction from the perpendicular to the line of 
travel of the vehicle, under the applicable conditions of S8 and S10, 
excluding S10.7, S10.8, and S10.9. The test dummy specified in S8.1.8 
placed in each front outboard designated seating position shall meet the 
injury criteria of S6.1, S6.2(a), S6.3, S6.4(a), and S6.5 of this 
standard.
    (2) Impact a vehicle traveling longitudinally forward at any speed 
between 32 km/h (20 mph) and 40 km/h (25 mph), inclusive, into a fixed 
rigid barrier that is perpendicular to the line of travel of the 
vehicle, and at any angle up to 30 degrees in either direction from the 
perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle, under the applicable 
conditions of S8 and S10, excluding S10.7, S10.8, and S10.9. The test 
dummy specified in S8.1.8 placed in each front outboard designated 
seating position shall meet the injury criteria of S6.1, S6.2(b), S6.3, 
S6.4(b), S6.5, and S6.6 of this standard.
    (b) Vehicles certified to the requirements of S14. Impact a vehicle 
traveling longitudinally forward at any speed between 32 km/h (20 mph) 
and 40 km/h (25 mph), inclusive, into a fixed rigid barrier that is 
perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle, and at any angle up 
to 30 degrees in either direction from the perpendicular to the line of 
travel of the vehicle, under the applicable conditions of S8 and S10, 
excluding S10.7, S10.8, and S10.9. The test dummy specified in S8.1.8 
placed in each front outboard designated seating position shall meet the 
injury criteria of S6.1, S6.2(b), S6.3, S6.4(b), S6.5, and S6.6 of this 
standard.
    S5.2 Lateral moving barrier crash test. Impact a vehicle laterally 
on either side by a barrier moving at 20 mph under the applicable 
conditions of S8. The test dummy specified in S8.1.8 positioned in the 
front outboard designated seating position adjacent to the impacted side 
shall meet the injury criteria of S6.2 and S6.3 of this standard.
    S5.3 Rollover. Subject a vehicle to a rollover test in either 
lateral direction at 30 mph under the applicable conditions of S8 of 
this standard with a test dummy specified in S8.1.8 placed in the front 
outboard designated seating position on the vehicle's lower side as 
mounted on the test platform. The test dummy shall meet the injury 
criteria of S6.1 of this standard.
    S6 Injury criteria for the part 572, subpart E, Hybrid III test 
dummy.
    S6.1 All portions of the test dummy shall be contained within the 
outer surfaces of the vehicle passenger compartment.
    S6.2 Head injury criteria. (a)(1) For any two points in time, 
t<INF>1</INF> and t<INF>2</INF>, during the event which are separated by 
not more than a 36 millisecond time interval and where t<INF>1</INF> is 
less than t<INF>2</INF>, the head injury criterion (HIC<INF>36</INF>) 
shall be determined using the resultant head acceleration at the center 
of gravity of the dummy head, a<INF>r</INF>, expressed as a multiple of 
g (the acceleration of gravity) and shall be calculated using the 
expression:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12MY00.003

    (2) The maximum calculated HIC<INF>36</INF> value shall not exceed 
1,000.
    (b)(1) For any two points in time, t<INF>1</INF> and t<INF>2</INF>, 
during the event which are separated by not more than a 15 millisecond 
time interval and where t<INF>1</INF> is less than t<INF>2</INF>, the 
head injury criterion (HIC<INF>15</INF>) shall be determined using the

[[Page 520]]

resultant head acceleration at the center of gravity of the dummy head, 
a<INF>r</INF>, expressed as a multiple of g (the acceleration of 
gravity) and shall be calculated using the expression:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12MY00.004

    (2) The maximum calculated HIC<INF>15</INF> value shall not exceed 
700.
    S6.3 The resultant acceleration calculated from the output of the 
thoracic instrumentation shown in drawing 78051.218, revision R 
incorporated by reference in part 572, subpart E of this chapter shall 
not exceed 60 g's, except for intervals whose cumulative duration is not 
more than 3 milliseconds.
    S6.4 Chest deflection. (a) Compressive deflection of the sternum 
relative to the spine shall not exceed 76 mm (3.0 in).
    (b) Compressive deflection of the sternum relative to the spine 
shall not exceed 63 mm (2.5 in).
    S6.5 The force transmitted axially through each upper leg shall not 
exceed 2250 pounds.
    S6.6 Neck injury. When measuring neck injury, each of the following 
injury criteria shall be met.
    (a) Nij.
    (1) The shear force (Fx), axial force (Fz), and bending moment (My) 
shall be measured by the dummy upper neck load cell for the duration of 
the crash event as specified in S4.11. Shear force, axial force, and 
bending moment shall be filtered for Nij purposes at SAE J211/1 rev. Mar 
95 Channel Frequency Class 600 (see S4.7).
    (2) During the event, the axial force (Fz) can be either in tension 
or compression while the occipital condyle bending moment (Mocy) can be 
in either flexion or extension. This results in four possible loading 
conditions for Nij: tension-extension (Nte), tension-flexion (Ntf), 
compression-extension (Nce), or compression-flexion (Ncf).
    (3) When calculating Nij using equation S6.6(a)(4), the critical 
values, Fzc and Myc, are:
    (i) Fzc = 6806 N (1530 lbf) when Fz is in tension
    (ii) Fzc = 6160 N (1385 lbf) when Fz is in compression
    (iii) Myc = 310 Nm (229 lbf-ft) when a flexion moment exists at the 
occipital condyle
    (iv) Myc = 135 Nm (100 lbf-ft) when an extension moment exists at 
the occipital condyle.
    (4) At each point in time, only one of the four loading conditions 
occurs and the Nij value corresponding to that loading condition is 
computed and the three remaining loading modes shall be considered a 
value of zero. The expression for calculating each Nij loading condition 
is given by:

    Nij = (Fz/Fzc) + (Mocy/Myc)

    (5) None of the four Nij values shall exceed 1.0 at any time during 
the event.
    (b) Peak tension. Tension force (Fz), measured at the upper neck 
load cell, shall not exceed 4170 N (937 lbf) at any time.
    (c) Peak compression. Compression force (Fz), measured at the upper 
neck load cell, shall not exceed 4000 N (899 lbf) at any time.
    S6.7 Unless otherwise indicated, instrumentation for data 
acquisition, data channel frequency class, and moment calculations are 
the same as given for the 49 CFR Part 572, Subpart E Hybrid III test 
dummy.
    S7. Seat belt assembly requirements. As used in this section, a law 
enforcement vehicle means any vehicle manufactured primarily for use by 
the United States or by a State or local government for police or other 
law enforcement purposes.
    S7.1 Adjustment.
    S7.1.1 Except as specified in S7.1.1.1 and S7.1.1.2, the lap belt of 
any seat belt assembly furnished in accordance with S4.1.2 shall adjust 
by means of any emergency-locking or automatic-locking retractor that 
conforms to Sec. 571.209 to fit persons whose dimensions range from 
those of a 50th percentile 6-year-old child to those of a 95th 
percentile adult male and the upper torso restraint shall adjust by 
means of an emergency-locking retractor or a manual adjusting device 
that conforms to Sec. 571.209 to fit persons whose dimensions range 
from those of a 5th percentile adult female to those of a 95th 
percentile adult male, with the seat in any position, the seat back

[[Page 521]]

in the manufacturer's nominal design riding position, and any adjustable 
anchorages adjusted to the manufacturer's nominal design position for a 
50th percentile adult male occupant. However, an upper torso restraint 
furnished in accordance with S4.1.2.3.1(a) shall adjust by means of an 
emergency-locking retractor that conforms to Sec. 571.209.
    S7.1.1.1 A seat belt assembly installed at the driver's seating 
position shall adjust to fit persons whose dimensions range from those 
of a 5th-percentile adult female to those of a 95th-percentile adult 
male.
    S7.1.1.2 (a) A seat belt assembly installed in a motor vehicle other 
than a forward control vehicle at any designated seating position other 
than the outboard positions of the front and second seats shall adjust 
either by a retractor as specified in S7.1.1 or by a manual adjusting 
device that conforms to Sec. 571.209.
    (b) A seat belt assembly installed in a forward control vehicle at 
any designated seating position other than the front outboard seating 
positions shall adjust either by a retractor as specified in S7.1.1 or 
by a manual adjusting device that conforms to Sec. 571.209.
    (c) A seat belt assembly installed in a forward-facing rear outboard 
seating position in a law enforcement vehicle shall adjust either by a 
retractor as specified in S7.1.1 or by a manual adjusting device that 
conforms to Sec. 571.209.
    S7.1.1.3 A Type 1 lap belt or the lap belt portion of any Type 2 
seat belt assembly installed at any forward-facing outboard designated 
seating position of a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of 
10,000 pounds or less to comply with a requirement of this standard, 
except walk-in van-type vehicles and school buses, and except in rear 
seating positions in law enforcement vehicles, shall meet the 
requirements of S7.1 by means of an emergency locking retractor that 
conforms to Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209).
    S7.1.1.4 Notwithstanding the other provisions of S7.1--S7.1.1.3, 
emergency-locking retractors on belt assemblies located in positions 
other than front outboard designated seating postions may be equipped 
with a manual webbing adjustment device capable of causing the retractor 
that adjusts the lap belt to lock when the belt is buckled.
    S7.1.1.5 Passenger cars, and trucks, buses, and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less manufactured on 
or after September 1, 1995 shall meet the requirements of S7.1.1.5(a), 
S7.1.1.5(b) and S7.1.1.5(c), subject to S7.1.1.5(d).
    (a) Each designated seating position, except the driver's position, 
and except any right front seating position that is equipped with an 
automatic belt, that is in any motor vehicle, except walk-in van-type 
vehicles and vehicles manufactured to be sold exclusively to the U.S. 
Postal Service, and that is forward-facing or can be adjusted to be 
forward-facing, shall have a seat belt assembly whose lap belt portion 
is lockable so that the seat belt assembly can be used to tightly secure 
a child restraint system. The means provided to lock the lap belt or lap 
belt portion of the seat belt assembly shall not consist of any device 
that must be attached by the vehicle user to the seat belt webbing, 
retractor, or any other part of the vehicle. Additionally, the means 
provided to lock the lap belt or lap belt portion of the seat belt 
assembly shall not require any inverting, twisting or otherwise 
deforming of the belt webbing.
    (b) If the means provided pursuant to S7.1.1.5(a) to lock the lap 
belt or lap belt portion of any seat belt assembly makes it necessary 
for the vehicle user to take some action to activate the locking 
feature, the vehicle owner's manual shall include a description in words 
and/or diagrams describing how to activate the locking feature so that 
the seat belt assembly can tightly secure a child restraint system and 
how to deactivate the locking feature to remove the child restraint 
system.
    (c) Except for seat belt assemblies that have no retractor or that 
are equipped with an automatic locking retractor, compliance with 
S7.1.1.5(a) is demonstrated by the following procedure:
    (1) With the seat in any adjustment position, buckle the seat belt 
assembly. Complete any procedures recommended

[[Page 522]]

in the vehicle owner's manual, pursuant to S7.1.1.5(b), to activate any 
locking feature for the seat belt assembly.
    (2) Locate a reference point A on the safety belt buckle. Locate a 
reference point B on the attachment hardware or retractor assembly at 
the other end of the lap belt or lap belt portion of the seat belt 
assembly. Adjust the lap belt or lap belt portion of the seat belt 
assembly pursuant to S7.1.1.5(c)(1) as necessary so that the webbing 
between points A and B is at the maximum length allowed by the belt 
system. Measure and record the distance between points A and B along the 
longitudinal centerline of the webbing for the lap belt or lap belt 
portion of the seat belt assembly.
    (3) Readjust the belt system so that the webbing between points A 
and B is at any length that is 5 inches or more shorter than the maximum 
length of the webbing.
    (4) Apply a pre-load of 10 pounds, using the webbing tension pull 
device described in Figure 5 of this standard, to the lap belt or lap 
belt portion of the seat belt assembly in a vertical plane parallel to 
the longitudinal axis of the vehicle and passing through the seating 
reference point of the designated seating position whose belt system is 
being tested. Apply the pre-load in a horizontal direction toward the 
front of the vehicle with a force application angle of not less than 5 
degrees nor more than 15 degrees above the horizontal. Measure and 
record the length of belt between points A and B along the longitudinal 
centerline of the webbing for the lap belt or lap belt portion of the 
seat belt assembly while the pre-load is being applied.
    (5) Apply a load of 50 pounds, using the webbing tension pull device 
described in Figure 5 of this standard, to the lap belt or lap belt 
portion of the seat belt assembly in a vertical plane parallel to the 
longitudinal axis of the vehicle and passing through the seating 
reference point of the designated seating position whose belt system is 
being tested. The load is applied in a horizontal direction toward the 
front of the vehicle with a force application angle of not less than 5 
degrees nor more than 15 degrees above the horizontal at an onset rate 
of not more than 50 pounds per second. Attain the 50 pound load in not 
more than 5 seconds. If webbing sensitive emergency locking retroactive 
are installed as part of the lap belt assembly or lap belt portion of 
the seat belt assembly, apply the load at a rate less than the threshold 
value for lock-up specified by the manufacturer. Maintain the 50 pound 
load for at least 5 seconds before the measurements specified in 
S7.1.1.5(c)(6) are obtained and recorded.
    (6) Measure and record the length of belt between points A and B 
along the longitudinal centerline of the webbing for the lap belt or lap 
belt portion of the seat belt assembly.
    (7) The difference between the measurements recorded under 
S7.1.1.5(c) (6) and (4) shall not exceed 2 inches.
    (8) The difference between the measurements recorded under 
S7.1.1.5(c) (6) and (2) shall be 3 inches or more.
    (d) For passenger cars, and trucks and multipurpose passenger 
vehicles with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less, and buses with a GVWR of 
10,000 lb or less manufactured on or after September 1, 2012, each 
designated seating position that is equipped with a child restraint 
anchorage system meeting the requirements of Sec. 571.225 need not meet 
the requirements of this S7.1.1.5.
    S7.1.2 Except as provided in S7.1.2.1, S7.1.2.2, and S7.1.2.3, for 
each Type 2 seat belt assembly which is required by Standard No. 208 (49 
CFR 571.208), the upper anchorage, or the lower anchorage nearest the 
intersection of the torso belt and the lap belt, shall include a movable 
component which has a minimum of two adjustment positions. The distance 
between the geometric center of the movable component at the two extreme 
adjustment positions shall be not less than five centimeters, measured 
linearly. If the component required by this paragraph must be manually 
moved between adjustment positions, information shall be provided in the 
owner's manual to explain how to adjust the seat belt and warn that 
misadjustment could reduce the effectiveness of the safety belt in a 
crash.
    S7.1.2.1 As an alternative to meeting the requirement of S7.1.2, a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly shall provide a means of automatically moving 
the

[[Page 523]]

webbing in relation to either the upper anchorage, or the lower 
anchorage nearest the intersection of the torso belt and the lap belt. 
The distance between the midpoint of the webbing at the contact point of 
the webbing and the anchorage at the extreme adjustment positions shall 
be not less than five centimeters, measured linearly.
    S7.1.2.2 The requirements of S7.1.2 do not apply the anchorages of a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly installed:
    (a) At a seat which is adjustable fore and aft while the vehicle is 
in motion and whose seat frame above the fore-and-aft adjuster is part 
of each of the assembly's seat belt anchorages, as defined in S3 of 
Standard No. 210 (49 CFR 571.210).
    (b) At a seat that is not adjustable fore and aft while the vehicle 
is in motion.
    S7.1.2.3 The requirements of S7.1.2 do not apply to any truck with a 
gross vehicle weight rating of more than 8,500 pounds manufactured 
before January 1, 1998.
    S7.1.3 The intersection of the upper torso belt with the lap belt in 
any Type 2 seat belt assembly furnished in accordance with S4.1.1 or 
S4.1.2, with the upper torso manual adjusting device, if provided, 
adjusted in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, shall be at 
least 6 inches from the front vertical centerline of a 50th-percentile 
adult male occupant, measured along the centerline of the lap belt, with 
the seat in its rearmost and lowest adjustable position and with the 
seat back in the manufacturer's nominal design riding position.
    S7.1.4 The weights and dimensions of the vehicle occupants referred 
to in this standard are as follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  50th-percentile 6-    5th-percentile      50th-percentile     95th-percentile
                                    year old child       adult female         adult male          adult male
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Weight..........................  47.3 pounds.......  102 pounds........  164 pounds <plus-   215 pounds.
                                                                           minus<ls-thn-eq>3.
Erect sitting height............  25.4 inches.......  30.9 inches.......  35.7 inches <plus-  38 inches.
                                                                           minus<ls-thn-eq>.
                                                                           1.
Hip breadth (sitting)...........  8.4 inches........  12.8 inches.......  14.7 inches <plus-  16.5 inches.
                                                                           minus<ls-thn-eq>.
                                                                           7.
Hip circumference (sitting).....  23.9 inches.......  36.4 inches.......  42 inches.........  47.2 inches.
Waist circumference (sitting)...  20.8 inches.......  23.6 inches.......  32 inches <plus-    42.5 inches.
                                                                           minus<ls-thn-eq>.
                                                                           6.
Chest depth.....................  ..................  7.5 inches........  9.3 inches <plus-   10.5 inches.
                                                                           minus<ls-thn-eq>.
                                                                           2.
Chest circumference:
  (nipple)......................  ..................  30.5 inches.......  ..................  ..................
  (upper).......................  ..................  29.8 inches.......  37.4 inches <plus-  44.5 inches.
                                                                           minus<ls-thn-eq>.
                                                                           6.
  (lower).......................  ..................  26.6 inches.......  ..................  ..................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S7.2 Latch mechanism. Except as provided in S7.2(e), each seat belt 
assembly installed in any vehicle shall have a latch mechanism that 
complies with the requirements specified in S7.2(a) through (d).
    (a) The components of the latch mechanism shall be accessible to a 
seated occupant in both the stowed and operational positions;
    (b) The latch mechanism shall release both the upper torso restraint 
and the lap belt simultaneously, if the assembly has a lap belt and an 
upper torso restraint that require unlatching for release of the 
occupant;
    (c) The latch mechanism shall release at a single point; and;
    (d) The latch mechanism shall release by a pushbutton action.
    (e) The requirements of S7.2 do not apply to any automatic belt 
assembly. The requirements specified in S7.2(a) through (c) do not apply 
to any safety belt assembly installed at a forward-facing rear outboard 
seating position in a law enforcement vehicle.
    S7.3 (a) A seat belt assembly provided at the driver's seating 
position shall be equipped with a warning system that, at the option of 
the manufacturer, either--
    (1) Activates a continuous or intermittent audible signal for a 
period of not less than 4 seconds and not more than 8 seconds and that 
activates a continuous or flashing warning light visible to the driver 
displaying the identifying symbol for the seat belt telltale shown in 
Table 2 of FMVSS 101 or, at the option of the manufacturer if permitted 
by FMVSS 101, displaying the words ``Fasten Seat Belts'' or ``Fasten 
Belts'', for not less than 60 seconds (beginning when the vehicle 
ignition switch is moved to the ``on'' or the

[[Page 524]]

``start'' position) when condition (b) exists simultaneously with 
condition (c), or that
    (2) Activates, for a period of not less than 4 seconds and not more 
than 8 seconds (beginning when the vehicle ignition switch is moved to 
the ``on'' or the ``start'' position), a continuous or flashing warning 
light visible to the driver, displaying the identifying symbol of the 
seat belt telltale shown in Table 2 of FMVSS 101 or, at the option of 
the manufacturer if permitted by FMVSS 101, displaying the words 
``Fasten Seat Belts'' or ``Fasten Belts'', when condition (b) exists, 
and a continuous or intermittent audible signal when condition (b) 
exists simultaneously with condition (c).
    (b) The vehicle's ignition switch is moved to the ``on'' position or 
to the ``start'' position.
    (c) The driver's lap belt is not in use, as determined, at the 
option of the manufacturer, either by the belt latch mechanism not being 
fastened, or by the belt not being extended at least 4 inches from its 
stowed position.
    S7.4 Seat belt comfort and convenience.
    (a) Automatic seat belts. Automatic seat belts installed in any 
vehicle, other than walk-in van-type vehicles, which has a gross vehicle 
weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less, and which is manufactured on or 
after September 1, 1986, shall meet the requirements of S7.4.1, S7.4.2, 
and S7.4.3.
    (b) Manual seat belts.
    (1) Vehicles manufactured after September 1, 1986. Manual seat belts 
installed in any vehicle, other than manual Type 2 belt systems 
installed in the front outboard seating positions in passenger cars or 
manual belts in walk-in van-type vehicles, which have a gross vehicle 
weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less, shall meet the requirements of 
S7.4.3, S7.4.4, S7.4.5, and S7.4.6.
    (2) Vehicles manufactured after September 1, 1989.
    (i) If the automatic restraint requirement of S4.1.4 is rescinded 
pursuant to S4.1.5, then manual seat belts installed in a passenger car 
shall meet the requirements of S7.1.1.3(a), S7.4.2, S7.4.3, S7.4.4, 
S7.4.5, and S7.4.6.
    (ii) Manual seat belts installed in a bus, multipurpose passenger 
vehicle and truck with a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or 
less, except for walk-in van-type vehicles, shall meet the requirements 
of S7.4.3, S7.4.4, S7.4.5, and S7.4.6.
    S7.4.1 Convenience hooks. Any manual convenience hook or other 
device that is provided to stow seat belt webbing to facilitate entering 
or exiting the vehicle shall automatically release the webbing when the 
automatic belt system is otherwise operational and shall remain in the 
released mode for as long as (a) exists simultaneously with (b), or, at 
the manufacturer's option, for as long as (a) exists simultaneously with 
(c)--
    (a) The vehicle ignition switch is moved to the ``on'' or ``start'' 
position;
    (b) The vehicle's drive train is engaged;
    (c) The vehicle's parking brake is in the released mode 
(nonengaged).
    S7.4.2 Webbing tension-relieving device. Each vehicle with an 
automatic seat belt assembly or with a Type 2 manual seat belt assembly 
that must meet the occupant crash protection requirements of S5.1 of 
this standard installed at a front outboard designated seating position, 
and each vehicle with a Type 2 manual seat belt assembly installed at a 
rear outboard designated seating position in compliance with a 
requirement of this standard, that has either automatic or manual 
tension-relieving devices permitting the introduction of slack in the 
webbing of the shoulder belt (e.g., ``comfort clips'' or ``window-
shade'' devices) shall:
    (a) Comply with the requirements of S5.1 with the shoulder belt 
webbing adjusted to introduce the maximum amount of slack recommended by 
the vehicle manufacturer pursuant to S7.4.2(b).
    (b) Have a section in the vehicle owner's manual that explains how 
the tension-relieving device works and specifies the maximum amount of 
slack (in inches) recommended by the vehicle manufacturer to be 
introduced into the shoulder belt under normal use conditions. The 
explanation shall also warn that introducing slack beyond the amount 
specified by the manufacturer could significantly reduce the 
effectiveness of the shoulder belt in a crash; and

[[Page 525]]

    (c) Have, except for open-body vehicles with no doors, an automatic 
means to cancel any shoulder belt slack introduced into the belt system 
by a tension-relieving device. In the case of an automatic safety belt 
system, cancellation of the tension-relieving device shall occur each 
time the adjacent vehicle door is opened. In the case of a manual seat 
belt required to meet S5.1, cancellation of the tension-relieving device 
shall occur, at the manufacturer's option, either each time the adjacent 
door is opened or each time the latchplate is released from the buckle. 
In the case of a Type 2 manual seat belt assembly installed at a rear 
outboard designated seating position, cancellation of the tension-
relieving device shall occur, at the manufacturer's option either each 
time the door designed to allow the occupant of that seating position 
entry and egress of the vehicle is opened or each time the latchplate is 
released from the buckle. In the case of open-body vehicles with no 
doors, cancellation of the tension-relieving device may be done by a 
manual means.
    S7.4.3 Belt contact force. Except for manual or automatic seat belt 
assemblies that incorporate a webbing tension-relieving device, the 
upper torso webbing of any seat belt assembly shall not exert more than 
0.7 pounds of contact force when measured normal to and one inch from 
the chest of an anthropomorphic test dummy, positioned in accordance 
with S10 of this standard in the seating position for which that seat 
belt assembly is provided, at the point where the centerline of the 
torso belt crosses the midsagittal line on the dummy's chest.
    S7.4.4 Latchplate access. Any seat belt assembly latchplate that is 
located outboard of a front outboard seating position in accordance with 
S4.1.2 shall also be located within the outboard reach envelope of 
either the outboard arm or the inboard arm described in S10.7 and Figure 
3 of this standard, when the latchplate is in its normal stowed position 
and any adjustable anchorages are adjusted to the manufacturer's nominal 
design position for a 50th percentile adult male occupant. There shall 
be sufficient clearance between the vehicle seat and the side of the 
vehicle interior to allow the test block defined in Figure 4 of this 
standard unhindered transit to the latchplate or buckle.
    S7.4.5 Retraction. When tested under the conditions of S8.1.2 and 
S8.1.3, with anthropomorphic dummies whose arms have been removed and 
which are positioned in accordance with S10 of this standard in the 
front outboard seating positions and restrained by the belt systems for 
those positions, the torso and lap belt webbing of any of those seat 
belt systems shall automatically retract to a stowed position either 
when the adjacent vehicle door is in the open position and the seat belt 
latchplate is released, or, at the option of the manufacturer, when the 
latchplate is released. That stowed position shall prevent any part of 
the webbing or hardware from being pinched when the adjacent vehicle 
door is closed. A belt system with a tension-relieving device in an 
open-bodied vehicle with no doors shall fully retract when the tension-
relieving device is deactivated. For the purposes of these retraction 
requirements, outboard armrests, which are capable of being stowed, on 
vehicle seats shall be placed in their stowed position.
    S7.4.6 Seat belt guides and hardware.
    S7.4.6.1 (a) Any manual seat belt assembly whose webbing is designed 
to pass through the seat cushion or between the seat cushion and seat 
back shall be designed to maintain one of the following three seat belt 
parts (the seat belt latchplate, the buckle, or the seat belt webbing) 
on top of or above the seat cushion under normal conditions (i.e., 
conditions other than when belt hardware is intentionally pushed behind 
the seat by a vehicle occupant). In addition, the remaining two seat 
belt parts must be accessible under normal conditions.
    (b) The requirements of S7.4.6.1(a) do not apply to: (1) seats whose 
seat cushions are movable so that the seat back serves a function other 
than seating, (2) seats which are removable, or (3) seats which are 
movable so that the space formerly occupied by the seat can be used for 
a secondary function.
    S7.4.6.2 The buckle and latchplate of a manual seat belt assembly 
subject to S7.4.6.1 shall not pass through the

[[Page 526]]

guides or conduits provided for in S7.4.6.1 and fall behind the seat 
when the events listed below occur in the order specified: (a) The belt 
is completely retracted or, if the belt is nonretractable, the belt is 
unlatched; (b) the seat is moved to any position to which it is designed 
to be adjusted; and (c) the seat back, if foldable, is folded forward as 
far as possible and then moved backward into position. The inboard 
receptacle end of a seat belt assembly installed at a front outboard 
designated seating position shall be accessible with the center arm rest 
in any position to which it can be adjusted (without having to move the 
armrest).
    S8. Test conditions.
    S8.1 General conditions. The following conditions apply to the 
frontal, lateral, and rollover tests. Except for S8.1.1(d), the 
following conditions apply to the alternative unbelted sled test set 
forth in S13 from March 19, 1997 until September 1, 2001.
    S8.1.1 Except as provided in paragraph (c) of S8.1.1, the vehicle, 
including test devices and instrumentation, is loaded as follows:
    (a) Passenger cars. A passenger car is loaded to its unloaded 
vehicle weight plus its rated cargo and luggage capacity weight, secured 
in the luggage area, plus the weight of the necessary anthropomorphic 
test devices.
    (b) Multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses. A 
multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, or bus is loaded to its unloaded 
vehicle weight plus 300 pounds or its rated cargo and luggage capacity 
weight, whichever is less, secured in the load carrying area and 
distributed as nearly as possible in proportion to its gross axle weight 
ratings, plus the weight of the necessary anthropomorphic test devices. 
For the purposes of Sec. 8.1.1, unloaded vehicle weight does not 
include the weight of work-performing accessories. Vehicles are tested 
to a maximum unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds.
    (c) Fuel system capacity. With the test vehicle on a level surface, 
pump the fuel from the vehicle's fuel tank and then operate the engine 
until it stops. Then, add Stoddard solvent to the test vehicle's fuel 
tank in an amount which is equal to not less than 92 and not more than 
94 percent of the fuel tank's usable capacity stated by the vehicle's 
manufacturer. In addition, add the amount of Stoddard solvent needed to 
fill the entire fuel system from the fuel tank through the engine's 
induction system.
    (d) Vehicle test attitude. Determine the distance between a level 
surface and a standard reference point on the test vehicle's body, 
directly above each wheel opening, when the vehicle is in its ``as 
delivered'' condition. The ``as delivered'' condition is the vehicle as 
received at the test site, with 100 percent of all fluid capacities and 
all tires inflated to the manufacturer's specifications as listed on the 
vehicle's tire placard. Determine the distance between the same level 
surface and the same standard reference points in the vehicle's ``fully 
loaded condition.'' The ``fully loaded condition'' is the test vehicle 
loaded in accordance with S8.1.1 (a) or (b), as applicable. The load 
placed in the cargo area shall be center over the longitudinal 
centerline of the vehicle. The pretest vehicle attitude shall be equal 
to either the as delivered or fully loaded attitude or between the as 
delivered attitude and the fully loaded attitude.
    S8.1.2 Adjustable seats are in the adjustment position midway 
between the forwardmost and rearmost positions, and if separately 
adjustable in a vertical direction, are at the lowest position. If an 
adjustment position does not exist midway between the forwardmost and 
rearmost positions, the closest adjustment position to the rear of the 
midpoint is used.
    S8.1.3 Place adjustable seat backs in the manufacturer's nominal 
design riding position in the manner specified by the manufacturer. 
Place any adjustable anchorages at the manufacturer's nominal design 
position for a 50th percentile adult male occupant. Place each 
adjustable head restraint in its highest adjustment position. Adjustable 
lumbar supports are positioned so that the lumbar support is in its 
lowest adjustment position.
    S8.1.4 Adjustable steering controls are adjusted so that the 
steering wheel hub is at the geometric center of the locus it describes 
when it is moved through its full range of driving positions.

[[Page 527]]

    S8.1.5 Movable vehicle windows and vents are placed in the fully 
closed position, unless the vehicle manufacturer chooses to specify a 
different adjustment position prior to the time it certifies the 
vehicle.
    S8.1.6 Convertibles and open-body type vehicles have the top, if 
any, in place in the closed passenger compartment configuration.
    S8.1.7 Doors are fully closed and latched but not locked.
    S8.1.8 Anthropomorphic test dummies.
    S8.1.8.1 The anthropomorphic test dummies used for evaluation of 
occupant protection systems manufactured pursuant to applicable portions 
of S4.1.2, S4.1.3, and S4.1.4 of this standard shall conform to the 
requirements of subpart E of part 572 of this chapter.
    S8.1.8.2 Each test dummy is clothed in a form fitting cotton stretch 
short sleeve shirt with above-the-elbow sleeves and above-the-knee 
length pants. The weight of the shirt or pants shall not exceed 0.25 
pounds each. Each foot of the test dummy is equipped with a size 11XW 
shoe which meets the configuration size, sole, and heel thickness 
specifications of MIL-S 13192 change ``P'' and whose weight is 1.25 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 pounds.
    S8.1.8.3 Limb joints are set at 1g, barely restraining the weight of 
the limb when extended horizontally. Leg joints are adjusted with the 
torso in the supine position.
    S8.1.8.4 Instrumentation does not affect the motion of the dummies 
during impact or rollover.
    S8.1.8.5 The stabilized test temperature of the test dummy is at any 
temperature level between 69 degrees F and 72 degrees F, inclusive.
    S8.2 Lateral moving barrier crash test conditions. The following 
conditions apply to the lateral moving barrier crash test.
    S8.2.1 The moving barrier, including the impact surface, supporting 
structure, and carriage, weighs 4,000 pounds.
    S8.2.2 The impact surface of the barrier is a vertical, rigid, flat 
rectangle, 78 inches wide and 60 inches high, perpendicular to its 
direction of movement, with its lower edge horizontal and 5 inches above 
the ground surface.
    S8.2.3 During the entire impact sequence the barrier undergoes no 
significant amount of dynamic or static deformation, and absorbs no 
significant portion of the energy resulting from the impact, except for 
energy that results in translational rebound movement of the barrier.
    S8.2.4 During the entire impact sequence the barrier is guided so 
that it travels in a straight line, with no significant lateral, 
vertical or rotational movement.
    S8.2.5 The concrete surface upon which the vehicle is tested is 
level, rigid and of uniform construction, with a skidnumber of 75 when 
measured in accordance with American Society for Testing and Materials 
Method E-274-65T at 40 m.p.h., omitting water delivery as specified in 
paragraph 7.1 of that method.
    S8.2.6 The tested vehicle's brakes are disengaged and the 
transmission is in neutral.
    S8.2.7 The barrier and the test vehicle are positioned so that at 
impact--
    (a) The vehicle is at rest in its normal attitude;
    (b) The barrier is traveling in a direction perpendicular to the 
longitudinal axis of the vehicle at 20 m.p.h.; and
    (c) A vertical plane through the geometric center of the barrier 
impact surface and perpendicular to that surface passes through the 
driver's seating reference point in the tested vehicle.
    S8.3 Rollover test conditions. The following conditions apply to the 
rollover test.
    S8.3.1 The tested vehicle's brakes are disengaged and the 
transmission is in neutral.
    S8.3.2 The concrete surface on which the test is conducted is level, 
rigid, of uniform construction, and of a sufficient size that the 
vehicle remains on it throughout the entire rollover cycle. It has a 
skid number of 75 when measured in accordance with American Society for 
Testing and Materials Method E-274-65T at 40 m.p.h. omitting water 
delivery as specified in paragraph 7.1 of that method.
    S8.3.3 The vehicle is placed on a device, similar to that 
illustrated in Figure 2, having a platform in the form of a flat, rigid 
plane at an angle of 23[deg] from the horizontal. At the lower edge of 
the platform is an unyielding flange, perpendicular to the platform with 
a

[[Page 528]]

height of 4 inches and a length sufficient to hold in place the tires 
that rest against it. The intersection of the inner face of the flange 
with the upper face of the platform is 9 inches above the rollover 
surface. No other restraints are used to hold the vehicle in position 
during the deceleration of the platform and the departure of the 
vehicle.
    S8.3.4 With the vehicle on the test platform, the test devices 
remain as nearly as possible in the posture specified in S8.1.
    S8.3.5 Before the deceleration pulse, the platform is moving 
horizontally, and perpendicularly to the longitudinal axis of the 
vehicle, at a constant speed of 30 m.p.h. for a sufficient period of 
time for the vehicle to become motionless relative to the platform.
    S8.3.6 The platform is decelerated from 30 to 0 m.p.h. in a distance 
of not more than 3 feet, without change of direction and without 
transverse or rotational movement during the deceleration of the 
platform and the departure of the vehicle. The deceleration rate is at 
least 20g for a minimum of 0.04 seconds.
    S8.4 Frontal test condition. If the vehicle is equipped with a 
cutoff device permitted by S4.5.4 of this standard, the device is 
deactivated.
    S9. Pressure vessels and explosive devices.
    S9.1 Pressure vessels. A pressure vessel that is continuously 
pressurized shall conform to the requirements of Sec. Sec. 178.65-2, 
178.65-6(b), 178.65-7, 178.65-9 (a) and (b), and 178.65-10 of this 
title. It shall not leak or evidence visible distortion when tested in 
accordance with Sec. 178.65-11(a) of this title and shall not fail in 
any of the ways enumerated in Sec. 178.65-11(b) of this title when 
hydrostatically tested to destruction. It shall not crack when flattened 
in accordance with Sec. 178.65-12(a) of this title to the limit 
specified in Sec. 178.65-12(a)(4) of this title.
    S9.2 Explosive devices. An explosive device shall not exhibit any of 
the characteristics prohibited by Sec. 173.51 of this title. All 
explosive material shall be enclosed in a structure that is capable of 
containing the explosive energy without sudden release of pressure 
except through overpressure relief devices or parts designed to release 
the pressure during actuation.
    S10. Test dummy positioning procedures.
    S10.1 Head. The transverse instrumentation platform of the head 
shall be level within \1/2\ degree. To level the head of the test dummy, 
the following sequences must be followed. First, adjust the position of 
the H point within the limits set forth in S10.4.2.1 to level the 
transverse instrumentation platform of the head of the test dummy. If 
the transverse instrumentation platform of the head is still not level, 
then adjust the pelvic angle of the test dummy within the limits 
specified in S10.4.2.2 of this standard. If the transverse 
instrumentation platform of the head is still not level, then adjust the 
neck bracket of the dummy the minimum amount necessary from the non-
adjusted ``0'' setting to ensure that the transverse instrumentation 
platform of the head is horizontal within \1/2\ degree. The test dummy 
shall remain within the limits specified in S10.4.2.1 and S10.4.2.2. 
after any adjustment of the neck bracket.
    S10.2 Upper Arms.
    S10.2.1 The driver's upper arms shall be adjacent to the torso with 
the centerlines as close to a vertical plane as possible.
    S10.2.2 The passenger's upper arms shall be in contact with the seat 
back and the sides of the torso.
    S10.3 Hands.
    S10.3.1 The palms of the drivers test dummy shall be in contact with 
the outer part of the steering wheel rim at the rim's horizontal 
centerline. The thumbs shall be over the steering wheel rim and shall be 
lightly taped to the steering wheel rim so that if the hand of the test 
dummy is pushed upward by a force of not less than 2 pounds and not more 
than 5 pounds, the tape shall release the hand from the steering wheel 
rim.
    S10.3.2 The palms of the passenger test dummy shall be in contact 
with the outside of the thigh. The little finger shall be in contact 
with the seat cushion.
    S10.4 Torso.
    S10.4.1 Upper Torso.
    S10.4.1.1 In vehicles equipped with bench seats, the upper torso of 
the

[[Page 529]]

driver and passenger test dummies shall rest against the seat back. The 
midsagittal plane of the driver dummy shall be vertical and parallel to 
the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, and pass through the center of 
the steering wheel rim. The midsagittal plane of the passenger dummy 
shall be vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline 
and the same distance from the vehicle's longitudinal centerline as the 
midsagittal plane of the driver dummy.
    S10.4.1.2 In vehicles equipped with bucket seats, the upper torso of 
the driver and passenger test dummies shall rest against the seat back. 
The midsagittal plane of the driver and the passenger dummy shall be 
vertical and shall coincide with the longitudinal centerline of the 
bucket seat.
    S10.4.2 Lower Torso.
    S10.4.2.1 H-point. The H-points of the driver and passenger test 
dummies shall coincide within \1/2\ inch in the vertical dimension and 
\1/2\ inch in the horizontal dimension of a point \1/4\ inch below the 
position of the H-point determined by using the equipment and procedures 
specified in SAE J826 (APR 1980) except that the length of the lower leg 
and thigh segments of the H-point machine shall be adjusted to 16.3 and 
15.8 inches, respectively, instead of the 50th percentile values 
specified in Table 1 of SAE J826.
    S10.4.2.2 Pelvic angle. As determined using the pelvic angle gage 
(GM drawing 78051-532, incorporated by reference in part 572, subpart E 
of this chapter) which is inserted into the H-point gaging hole of the 
dummy, the angle measured from the horizontal on the three inch flat 
surface of the gage shall be 22\1/2\ degrees plus or minus 2\1/2\ 
degrees.
    S10.5 Legs. The upper legs of the driver and passenger test dummies 
shall rest against the seat cushion to the extent permitted by placement 
of the feet. The initial distance between the outboard knee clevis 
flange surfaces shall be 10.6 inches. To the extent practicable, the 
left leg of the driver dummy and both legs of the passenger dummy shall 
be in vertical longitudinal planes. To the extent practicable, the right 
leg of the driver dummy shall be in a vertical plane. Final adjustment 
to accommodate the placement of feet in accordance with S10.6 for 
various passenger compartment configurations is permitted.
    S10.6 Feet.
    S10.6.1 Driver's position.
    S10.6.1.1 If the vehicle has an adjustable accelerator pedal, adjust 
it to the full forward position. Rest the right foot of the test dummy 
on the undepressed accelerator pedal with the rearmost point of the heel 
on the floor pan in the plane of the pedal. If the foot cannot be placed 
on the accelerator pedal, set it initially perpendicular to the lower 
leg and then place it as far forward as possible in the direction of the 
pedal centerline with the rearmost point of the heel resting on the 
floor pan. If the vehicle has an adjustable accelerator pedal and the 
right foot is not touching the accelerator pedal when positioned as 
above, move the pedal rearward until it touches the right foot. If the 
accelerator pedal still does not touch the foot in the full rearward 
position, leave the pedal in that position.
    S10.6.1.2 Place the left foot on the toeboard with the rearmost 
point of the heel resting on the floor pan as close as possible to the 
point of intersection of the planes described by the toeboard and the 
floor pan and not on the wheelwell projection. If the foot cannot be 
positioned on the toeboard, set it initially perpendicular to the lower 
leg and place it as far forward as possible with the heel resting on the 
floor pan. If necessary to avoid contact with the vehicle's brake or 
clutch pedal, rotate the test dummy's left foot about the lower leg. If 
there is still pedal interference, rotate the left leg outboard about 
the hip the minimum distance necessary to avoid the pedal interference. 
For vehicles with a foot rest that does not elevate the left foot above 
the level of the right foot, place the left foot on the foot rest so 
that the upper and lower leg centerlines fall in a vertical plane.
    S10.6.2 Passenger's position.
    S10.6.2.1 Vehicles with a flat floor pan/toeboard. Place the right 
and left feet on the vehicle's toeboard with the heels resting on the 
floor pan as close as possible to the intersection point with the 
toeboard. If the feet cannot be

[[Page 530]]

placed flat on the toeboard, set them perpendicular to the lower leg 
centerlines and place them as far forward as possible with the heels 
resting on the floor pan.
    S10.6.2.2 Vehicles with wheelhouse projections in passenger 
compartment. Place the right and left feet in the well of the floor pan/
toeboard and not on the wheelhouse projection. If the feet cannot be 
placed flat on the toeboard, initially set them perpendicular to the 
lower leg centerlines and then place them as far forward as possible 
with the heels resting on the floor pan.
    S10.7 Test dummy positioning for latchplate access. The reach 
envelopes specified in S7.4.4 of this standard are obtained by 
positioning a test dummy in the driver's or passenger's seating position 
and adjusting that seating position to its forwardmost adjustment 
position. Attach the lines for the inboard and outboard arms to the test 
dummy as described in Figure 3 of this standard. Extend each line 
backward and outboard to generate the compliance arcs of the outboard 
reach envelope of the test dummy's arms.
    S10.8 Test dummy positioning for belt contact force. To determine 
compliance with S7.4.3 of this standard, position the test dummy in the 
vehicle in accordance with S10.1 through S10.6 of this standard and 
adjust the seating position in accordance with S8.1.2 and S8.1.3 of this 
standard. Pull the belt webbing three inches from the test dummy's chest 
and release until the webbing is within one inch of the test dummy's 
chest and measure the belt contact force.
    S10.9 Manual belt adjustment for dynamic testing. With the test 
dummy positioned in accordance with S10.1 through S10.6 of this standard 
and the seating position adjusted in accordance with S8.1.2 and S8.1.3 
of this standard, place the Type 2 manual belt around the test dummy and 
fasten the latch. Remove all slack from the lap belt portion. Pull the 
upper torso webbing out of the retractor and allow it to retract; repeat 
this four times. Apply a 2 to 4 pound tension load to the lap belt. If 
the belt system is equipped with a tension-relieving device, introduce 
the maximum amount of slack into the upper torso belt that is 
recommended by the vehicle manufacturer in the vehicle's owner's manual. 
If the belt system is not equipped with a tension-relieving device, 
allow the excess webbing in the upper torso belt to be retracted by the 
retractive force of the retractor.
    S11. [Reserved]
    S12. Temporary Exemption from Requirement for Inflatable Restraint 
System.
    S12.1 Scope. This section establishes procedures for filing and 
processing applications for temporary exemption from the requirements in 
this standard that vehicles be equipped with inflatable restraint 
systems.
    S12.2 Definitions.
    Line means a name that a manufacturer applies to a group of motor 
vehicles of the same make which have the same body or chassis, or 
otherwise are similar in construction or design. A line may, for 
example, include 2-door, 4-door, station wagon, and hatchback vehicles 
of the same make.
    S12.3 Standard of review. In order to receive a temporary exemption 
from the inflatable restraint requirement, a vehicle manufacturer must 
demonstrate in its application that there has been a disruption in the 
supply of one or more inflatable restraint system components, or a 
disruption in the use and installation by the manufacturer of any such 
component due to unavoidable events not under the control of the 
manufacturer, which will prevent a manufacturer from meeting its 
anticipated production volume of vehicles with inflatable restraint 
systems.
    S12.4 Exemption applications--General requirements. Each application 
for a temporary exemption from the inflatable restraint requirements 
must--
    (a) Be written in the English language;
    (b) Be submitted in three copies to: Administrator, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 
20590;
    (c) State the full name and address of the manufacturer, the nature 
of its organization (individual, partnership, corporation, etc.), and 
the name of the State or country under the laws of which it is 
organized;
    (d) Identify the motor vehicle line or lines for which the temporary 
exemption is being sought;

[[Page 531]]

    (e) Set forth in full the data, views, and arguments of the 
manufacturer that would support granting the temporary exemption, 
including the specific information required by S12.5; and
    (f) Specify and segregate any part of the information and data 
submitted in the application that should be withheld from public 
disclosure in accordance with part 512 of this chapter.
    S12.5 Exemption applications--Specific content requirements. Each 
application for a temporary exemption from the inflatable restraint 
requirement must include:
    (a) A clear and specific identification of any component in the 
inflatable restraint system that has become unavailable due to 
circumstances beyond the manufacturer's control, and a diagram showing 
the location of such component within the restraint system and within 
the vehicle;
    (b) A clear and specific explanation of the cause or causes of the 
disruption in the supply of the component, and a showing that such 
disruption is beyond the control of the manufacturer;
    (c) An estimate of the length of time that will be needed to correct 
the disruption and again incorporate the subject components into current 
production, or an explanation of why it is not possible to provide such 
an estimate;
    (d) A complete statement of the bases for the manufacturer's belief 
that NHTSA should grant a temporary exemption in response to this 
application;
    (e) An unconditional statement by the manufacturer that it will 
recall every vehicle for which a temporary exemption is requested in the 
application, to install all missing inflatable restraint systems;
    (f) A plan setting forth steps the manufacturer will take to ensure 
that as many exempted vehicles as possible will be returned for 
installation of missing inflatable restraint systems;
    (g) A proposed reasonable period of time after the disruption in the 
supply of inflatable restraint system components is corrected that the 
manufacturer estimates will ensure a sufficient quantity of components 
for both anticipated production and retrofit of those vehicles for which 
a temporary exemption is requested in the application, so that the 
vehicle manufacturer can recall those vehicles for which a temporary 
exemption is requested and install inflatable restraint systems in them, 
together with a demonstration of why the manufacturer believes this 
proposed period of time is reasonable for completing this recall, or an 
explanation of why it is not possible to provide such an estimate;
    (h) A proposed date for termination of the exemption;
    (i) A proposed date by which all exempted vehicles will have been 
recalled and had inflatable restraints installed (assuming owners 
returned their vehicles in a timely matter in response to a first notice 
by the manufacturer), or an explanation of why it is not possible to 
provide such an estimate.
    S12.6 Processing an application for a temporary exemption. (a) NHTSA 
will process any application for temporary exemption that contains the 
information specified in S12.4 and S12.5. If an application fails to 
provide the information specified in S12.4 and S12.5, NHTSA will not 
process the application, but will advise the manufacturer of the 
information that must be provided if the agency is to process the 
application.
    (b) Notice of each application for temporary exemption shall be 
published in the Federal Register.
    (c) NHTSA will issue its decision to grant or deny the requested 
temporary exemption not later than 15 days after the agency receives a 
complete petition, as defined in paragraph (a). However, a failure to 
issue a decision within this time does not result in a grant of the 
petition.
    (d) Notice of each decision to grant or deny a temporary exemption, 
and the reasons for granting or denying it, will be published in the 
Federal Register.
    (e) The Administrator may attach such conditions as he or she deems 
appropriate to a temporary exemption, including but not limited to 
requiring manufacturers to provide progress reports at specified times 
(including, as appropriate and to the extent possible, estimate of dates 
and times concerning when a supply disruption will be corrected and when 
recall will take place) and requiring manufacturers to take

[[Page 532]]

specific steps to ensure that as many exempted vehicles as possible will 
be returned for installation of missing inflatable restraint systems.
    (f) Unless a later effective date is specified in a notice 
announcing an agency decision to grant a temporary exemption, a 
temporary exemption from the inflatable restraint requirement will 
become effective upon the date the decision is issued.
    S12.7 Labels and written notice announcing temporary exemption.
    S12.7.1 It shall be a condition of every temporary exemption from 
the inflatable restraint requirement that the manufacturer of exempted 
vehicles comply with the provisions of S12.7.2 and S12.7.3.
    S12.7.2 (a) The manufacturer of any vehicle granted a temporary 
exemption from the inflatable restraint requirement shall affix a label 
within the passenger compartment of such vehicle. The label shall set 
forth the following information in block capital letters and numerals 
not less than three thirty-seconds of an inch high:

THIS VEHICLE DOES NOT CONTAIN AN AIR BAG IN CONFORMANCE WITH THE FEDERAL 
MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY STANDARD FOR OCCUPANT CRASH PROTECTION. IT WAS 
EXEMPTED PURSUANT TO NHTSA EXEMPTION NO. (insert number assigned by 
NHTSA).

    (b) This label shall not be removed until after the vehicle 
manufacturer has recalled the vehicle and installed an inflatable 
restraint system at those seating positions for which it was granted an 
exemption.
    S12.7.3 The manufacturer of any vehicle that is delivered without an 
inflatable restraint system, pursuant to a temporary exemption granted 
under this section, shall, at the time of delivery of the vehicle, 
provide a written notice to the dealer to whom the vehicle is delivered. 
The manufacturer shall also provide a written notice by registered mail 
to the first purchaser of the vehicle for purposes other than resale, 
within two weeks after purchase. Unless otherwise provided for by the 
Administrator in the exemption, such notice shall provide the following 
information:
    (a) This vehicle does not conform to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standard No. 208, because it is not equipped with an inflatable 
restraint at (insert the affected seating positions).
    (b) The vehicle was allowed to be sold pursuant to NHTSA Exemption 
No. (insert appropriate exemption number).
    (c) The reason this vehicle was exempted from the requirement for an 
inflatable restraint was because of factors beyond the manufacturer's 
control.
    (d) The manufacturer will recall this vehicle not later than (insert 
the time set forth in the exemption) and install the missing inflatable 
restraint at no charge.
    (e) If the reader has any questions or would like some further 
information, he or she may contact the manufacturer at (insert an 
address and telephone number).
    S13 Alternative unbelted test available, under S3(b) of this 
standard, for certain vehicles manufactured before September 1, 2006.
    S13.1 Instrumentation for Impact Test--Part 1--Electronic 
Instrumentation. Under the applicable conditions of S8, mount the 
vehicle on a dynamic test platform at the vehicle attitude set forth in 
S13.3, so that the longitudinal center line of the vehicle is parallel 
to the direction of the test platform travel and so that movement 
between the base of the vehicle and the test platform is prevented. The 
test platform is instrumented with an accelerometer and data processing 
system having a frequency response of 60 channel class as specified in 
SAE J211/1 rev. Mar 95 (see S4.7). The accelerometer sensitive axis is 
parallel to the direction of test platform travel. The test is conducted 
at a velocity change approximating 48 km/h (30 mph) with acceleration of 
the test platform such that all points on the crash pulse curve within 
the corridor identified in Figure 6 are covered. An inflatable restraint 
is to be activated at 20 ms <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 ms from the time 
that 0.5 g is measured on the dynamic test platform. The test dummy 
specified in S8.1.8, placed in each front outboard designated seating 
position as specified in S10, excluding S10.7, S10.8, and S10.9, shall 
meet the injury criteria of S6.1, S6.2(a), S6.3, S6.4(a), S6.5, and 
S13.2 of this standard.

[[Page 533]]

    S13.2 Neck injury criteria. A vehicle certified to this alternative 
test requirement shall, in addition to meeting the criteria specified in 
S13.1, meet the following injury criteria for the neck, measured with 
the six axis load cell (ref. Denton drawing C-1709) that is mounted 
between the bottom of the skull and the top of the neck as shown in 
Drawing 78051-218, in the unbelted sled test:
    (a) Flexion Bending Moment (calculated at the occipital condyle)--
190 Nm. SAE Class 600.
    (b) Extension Bending Moment (calculated at the occipital condyle)--
57 Nm. SAE Class 600.
    (c) Axial Tension--3300 peak N. SAE Class 1000.
    (d) Axial Compression--4000 peak N. SAE Class 1000.
    (e) Fore-and-Aft Shear--3100 peak N. SAE Class 1000.
    S13.3 Vehicle test attitude. When the vehicle is in its ``as 
delivered'' condition, measure the angle between the driver's door sill 
and the horizontal. Mark where the angle is taken on the door sill. The 
``as delivered'' condition is the vehicle as received at the test site, 
with 100 percent of all fluid capacities and all tires inflated to the 
manufacturer's specifications as listed on the vehicle's tire placard. 
When the vehicle is in its ``fully loaded'' condition, measure the angle 
between the driver's door sill and the horizontal, at the same place the 
``as delivered'' angle was measured. The ``fully loaded'' condition is 
the test vehicle loaded in accordance with S8.1.1(a) or (b) of Standard 
No. 208, as applicable. The load placed in the cargo area shall be 
centered over the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle. The pretest 
door sill angle, when the vehicle is on the sled, (measured at the same 
location as the as delivered and fully loaded condition) shall be equal 
to or between the as delivered and fully loaded door sill angle 
measurements.
    S13.4 Tires and wheels. Remove the tires and wheels.
    S13.5. Vehicle Securing. The engine, transmissions, axles, exhaust, 
vehicle frame, and vehicle body may be rigidly secured to the vehicle 
and/or the sled, and fluids, batteries and unsecured components may be 
removed, in order to assure that all points on the crash pulse curve are 
within the corridor defined in Figure 6.
    S14 Advanced air bag requirements for passenger cars and for trucks, 
buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 3,855 kg (8500 
pounds) or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 2,495 kg (5500 pounds) 
or less, except for walk-in van-type trucks or vehicles designed to be 
sold exclusively to the U.S. Postal Service.
    S14.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2003, and 
before September 1, 2006. (a) For vehicles manufactured for sale in the 
United States on or after September 1, 2003, and before September 1, 
2006, a percentage of the manufacturer's production, as specified in 
S14.1.1, shall meet the requirements specified in S14.5.1(a), S14.5.2, 
S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25 (in addition to the other 
requirements specified in this standard).
    (b) Manufacturers that sell three or fewer carlines, as that term is 
defined at 49 CFR 583.4, in the United States may, at the option of the 
manufacturer, meet the requirements of this paragraph instead of 
paragraph (a) of this section. Each vehicle manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2005 shall meet the requirement specified in S14.5.1(a), 
S14.5.2, S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25 (in addition to the 
other requirements specified in this standard).
    (c) Vehicles that are manufactured in two or more stages or that are 
altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having previously 
been certified in accordance with Part 567 of this chapter are not 
subject to the requirements of S14.1.
    (d) Vehicles that are manufactured by an original vehicle 
manufacturer that produces or assembles fewer than 5,000 vehicles 
annually for sale in the United States are not subject to the 
requirements of S14.1.
    S14.1.1 Phase-in schedule.
    S14.1.1.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2003, and 
before September 1, 2004. Subject to S14.1.2(a), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2003, and before 
September 1, 2004, the amount of vehicles complying with S14.5.1(a), 
S14.5.2, S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23,

[[Page 534]]

and S25, shall be not less than 20 percent of:
    (a) If the manufacturer has manufactured vehicles for sale in the 
United States during both of the two production years prior to September 
1, 2003, the manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2001, and before September 1, 
2004, or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2003, and 
before September 1, 2004.
    S14.1.1.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2004, and 
before September 1, 2005. Subject to S14.1.2(b), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2004, and before 
September 1, 2005, the amount of vehicles complying with S14.5.1(a), 
S14.5.2, S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25 shall be not less 
than 65 percent of:
    (a) If the manufacturer has manufactured vehicles for sale in the 
United States during both of the two production years prior to September 
1, 2004, the manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2002, and before September 1, 
2005, or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2004, and 
before September 1, 2005.
    S14.1.1.3 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2005, and 
before September 1, 2006. Subject to S14.1.2(c), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2005, and before 
September 1, 2006, the amount of vehicles complying with S14.5.1(a), 
S14.5.2, S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25 shall be 100 percent 
of the manufacturer's production during that period.
    S14.1.2 Calculation of complying vehicles.
    (a) For the purposes of complying with S14.1.1.1, a manufacturer may 
count a vehicle if it is manufactured on or after June 12, 2000, but 
before September 1, 2004.
    (b) For purposes of complying with S14.1.1.2, a manufacturer may 
count a vehicle if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after June 12, 2000, but before September 
1, 2005, and
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S14.1.1.1.
    (c) For purposes of complying with S14.1.1.3, a manufacturer may 
count a vehicle if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after June 12, 2000, but before September 
1, 2006, and (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S14.1.1.1 or 
S14.1.1.2.
    S14.1.3 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S14.1.3.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production 
of vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles 
manufactured by each manufacturer under S14.1.1, a vehicle produced by 
more than one manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer 
as follows, subject to S14.1.3.2.
    (a) A vehicle that is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S14.1.3.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR Part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S14.1.3.1.
    S14.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2006. Each 
vehicle shall meet the requirements specified in S14.5.1(a), S14.5.2, 
S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25 (in addition to the other 
requirements specified in this standard).
    S14.3 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2007, and 
before September 1, 2010.
    (a) For vehicles manufactured for sale in the United States on or 
after September 1, 2007, and before September 1, 2010, a percentage of 
the manufacturer's production, as specified in S14.3.1, shall meet the 
requirements specified in S14.5.1(b) (in addition to the other 
requirements of this standard).
    (b) Manufacturers that sell two or fewer carlines, as that term is 
defined at 49 CFR 583.4, in the United States

[[Page 535]]

may, at the option of the manufacturer, meet the requirements of this 
paragraph instead of paragraph (a) of this section. Each vehicle 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2008, and before September 1, 
2010, shall meet the requirements specified in S14.5.1(b) (in addition 
to the other requirements specified in this standard).
    (c) Vehicles that are manufactured in two or more stages or that are 
altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having been 
previously certified in accordance with Part 567 of this chapter are not 
subject to the requirements of S14.3.
    (d) Vehicles that are manufactured by an original vehicle 
manufacturer that produces or assembles fewer than 5,000 vehicles 
annually for sale in the United States are not subject to the 
requirements of S14.3.
    S14.3.1 Phase-in schedule.
    S14.3.1.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2007, and 
before September 1, 2008. Subject to S14.3.2(a), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2007, and before 
September 1, 2008, the amount of vehicles complying with S14.5.1(b), 
S14.5.2, S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25, shall be not less 
than 35 percent of:
    (a) If the manufacturer has manufactured vehicles for sale in the 
United States during both of the two production years prior to September 
1, 2007, the manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2005, and before September 1, 
2008, or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2007, and 
before September 1, 2008.
    S14.3.1.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2008, and 
before September 1, 2009. Subject to S14.3.2(b), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2008, and before 
September 1, 2009, the amount of vehicles complying with S14.5.1(b), 
S14.5.2, S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25 shall be not less 
than 65 percent of:
    (a) If the manufacturer has manufactured vehicles for sale in the 
United States during both of the two production years prior to September 
1, 2008, the manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2006 and before September 1, 2009, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2008, and 
before September 1, 2009.
    S14.3.1.3 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2009, and 
before September 1, 2010. Subject to S14.3.2(c), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2009, and before 
September 1, 2010, the amount of vehicles complying with S14.5.1(b), 
S14.5.2, S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25 shall be 100 percent 
of the manufacturer's production during that period.
    S14.3.2 Calculation of complying vehicles.
    (a) For the purposes of complying with S14.3.1.1, a manufacturer may 
count a vehicle if it is manufactured on or after September 1, 2006, but 
before September 1, 2008.
    (b) For purposes of complying with S14.3.1.2, a manufacturer may 
count a vehicle if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 2006, but before 
September 1, 2009, and
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S14.3.1.1.
    (c) For purposes of complying with S14.3.1.3, a manufacturer may 
count a vehicle if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 2006, but before 
September 1, 2010, and
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S14.3.1.1 or S14.3.1.2.
    S14.3.3  Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S14.3.3.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production 
of vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles 
manufactured by each manufacturer under S14.3.1, a vehicle produced by 
more than one manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer 
as follows, subject to S14.3.3.2.
    (a) A vehicle that is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.

[[Page 536]]

    S14.3.3.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR Part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S14.3.3.1.
    S14.4 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2010. Each 
vehicle shall meet the requirements specified in S14.5.1(b), S14.5.2, 
S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25 (in addition to the other 
requirements specified in this standard).
    S14.5 Barrier test requirements using 50th percentile adult male 
dummies.
    S14.5.1 Rigid barrier belted test. (a) Each vehicle that is 
certified as complying with S14.1 or S14.2 shall, at each front outboard 
designated seating position, meet the injury criteria specified in S6.1, 
S6.2(b), S6.3, S6.4(b), S6.5, and S6.6 when tested under S5.1.1(b)(1).
    (b) Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S14.3 or S14.4 
shall, at each front outboard designated seating position, meet the 
injury criteria specified in S6.1, S6.2(b), S6.3, S6.4(b), S6.5, and 
S6.6 when tested under S5.1.1(b)(2).
    S14.5.2 Rigid barrier unbelted test. Each vehicle that is certified 
as complying with S14 shall, at each front outboard designated seating 
position, meet the injury criteria specified in S6.1, S6.2(b), S6.3, 
S6.4(b), S6.5, and S6.6 when tested under S5.1.2(b).
    S15 Rigid barrier test requirements using 5th percentile adult 
female dummies.
    S15.1 Belted test. Each vehicle that is certified as complying with 
S14 shall, at each front outboard designated seating position, meet the 
injury criteria specified in S15.3 of this standard when the vehicle is 
crash tested in accordance with the procedures specified in S16.1(a) of 
this standard with the anthropomorphic test devices restrained by a Type 
2 seat belt assembly.
    S15.2 Unbelted test. Each vehicle that is certified as complying 
with S14 shall, at each front outboard designated seating position, meet 
the injury criteria specified in S15.3 of this standard when the vehicle 
is crash tested in accordance with the procedures specified in S16.1(b) 
of this standard with the anthropomorphic test devices unbelted.
    S15.3 Injury criteria for the 49 CFR Part 572, Subpart O Hybrid III 
5th percentile female test dummy.
    S15.3.1 All portions of the test dummy shall be contained within the 
outer surfaces of the vehicle passenger compartment.
    S15.3.2 Head injury criteria. (a) For any two points in time, 
t<INF>1</INF> and t<INF>2</INF>, during the event which are separated by 
not more than a 15 millisecond time interval and where t<INF>1</INF> is 
less than t<INF>2</INF>, the head injury criterion (HIC<INF>15</INF>) 
shall be determined using the resultant head acceleration at the center 
of gravity of the dummy head, a<INF>r</INF>, expressed as a multiple of 
g (the acceleration of gravity) and shall be calculated using the 
expression:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12MY00.005

    (b) The maximum calculated HIC<INF>15</INF> value shall not exceed 
700.
    S15.3.3 The resultant acceleration calculated from the output of the 
thoracic instrumentation shall not exceed 60 g's, except for intervals 
whose cumulative duration is not more than 3 milliseconds.
    S15.3.4 Compression deflection of the sternum relative to the spine, 
as determined by instrumentation, shown shall not exceed 52 mm (2.0 in).
    S15.3.5 The force transmitted axially through each femur shall not 
exceed 6805 N (1530 lb).
    S15.3.6 Neck injury. When measuring neck injury, each of the 
following injury criteria shall be met.
    (a) Nij.
    (1) The shear force (Fx), axial force (Fz), and bending moment (My) 
shall be measured by the dummy upper neck load cell for the duration of 
the crash event as specified in S4.11. Shear force, axial force, and 
bending moment shall be filtered for Nij purposes at SAE J211/1 rev. Mar 
95 Channel Frequency Class 600 (see S4.7).
    (2) During the event, the axial force (Fz) can be either in tension 
or compression while the occipital condyle

[[Page 537]]

bending moment (Mocy) can be in either flexion or extension. This 
results in four possible loading conditions for Nij: Tension-extension 
(Nte), tension-flexion (Ntf), compression-extension (Nce), or 
compression-flexion (Ncf).
    (3) When calculating Nij using equation S15.3.6(a)(4), the critical 
values, Fzc and Myc, are:
    (i) Fzc = 4287 N (964 lbf) when Fz is in tension
    (ii) Fzc = 3880 N (872 lbf) when Fz is in compression
    (iii) Myc = 155 Nm (114 lbf-ft) when a flexion moment exists at the 
occipital condyle
    (iv) Myc = 67 Nm (49 lbf-ft) when an extension moment exists at the 
occipital condyle.
    (4) At each point in time, only one of the four loading conditions 
occurs and the Nij value corresponding to that loading condition is 
computed and the three remaining loading modes shall be considered a 
value of zero. The expression for calculating each Nij loading condition 
is given by:

Nij = (Fz/Fzc) + (Mocy/Myc)

    (5) None of the four Nij values shall exceed 1.0 at any time during 
the event.
    (b) Peak tension. Tension force (Fz), measured at the upper neck 
load cell, shall not exceed 2620 N (589 lbf) at any time.
    (c) Peak compression. Compression force (Fz), measured at the upper 
neck load cell, shall not exceed 2520 N (566 lbf) at any time.
    S15.3.7 Unless otherwise indicated, instrumentation for data 
acquisition, data channel frequency class, and moment calculations are 
the same as given for the 49 CFR Part 572, Subpart O Hybrid III 5th 
percentile female test dummy.
    S16. Test procedures for rigid barrier test requirements using 5th 
percentile adult female dummies.
    S16.1 General provisions. Crash testing to determine compliance with 
the requirements of S15 of this standard is conducted as specified in 
the following paragraphs (a) and (b).
    (a) Belted test. Place a 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart O 5th percentile 
adult female test dummy at each front outboard seating position of a 
vehicle, in accordance with the procedures specified in S16.3 of this 
standard. Impact the vehicle traveling longitudinally forward at any 
speed, up to and including 48 km/h (30 mph), into a fixed rigid barrier 
that is perpendicular within a tolerance of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 
degrees to the line of travel of the vehicle under the applicable 
conditions of S16.2 of this standard.
    (b) Unbelted test. Place a 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart O 5th percentile 
adult female test dummy at each front outboard seating position of a 
vehicle, in accordance with the procedures specified in S16.3 of this 
standard, except S16.3.5. Impact the vehicle traveling longitudinally 
forward at any speed, from 32 km/h (20 mph) to 40 km/h (25 mph), 
inclusive, into a fixed rigid barrier that is perpendicular within a 
tolerance of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees to the line of travel of 
the vehicle under the applicable conditions of S16.2 of this standard.
    S16.2 Test conditions.
    S16.2.1 The vehicle, including test devices and instrumentation, is 
loaded as in S8.1.1.
    S16.2.2 Movable vehicle windows and vents are placed in the fully 
closed position, unless the vehicle manufacturer chooses to specify a 
different adjustment position prior to the time the vehicle is 
certified.
    S16.2.3 Convertibles and open-body type vehicles have the top, if 
any, in place in the closed passenger compartment configuration.
    S16.2.4 Doors are fully closed and latched but not locked.
    S16.2.5 The dummy is clothed in form fitting cotton stretch garments 
with short sleeves and above the knee length pants. A size 7 1/2W shoe 
which meets the configuration and size specifications of MIL-S-21711E 
(see S4.7) or its equivalent is placed on each foot of the test dummy.
    S16.2.6 Limb joints are set at one g, barely restraining the weight 
of the limb when extended horizontally. Leg joints are adjusted with the 
torso in the supine position.
    S16.2.7 Instrumentation shall not affect the motion of dummies 
during impact.
    S16.2.8 The stabilized temperature of the dummy is at any level 
between 20.6 [deg]C and 22.2 [deg]C ( 69 [deg]F to 72 [deg]F).
    S16.2.9 Steering wheel adjustment.

[[Page 538]]

    S16.2.9.1 Adjust a tiltable steering wheel, if possible, so that the 
steering wheel hub is at the geometric center of its full range of 
driving positions.
    S16.2.9.2 If there is no setting detent at the mid-position, lower 
the steering wheel to the detent just below the mid-position.
    S16.2.9.3 If the steering column is telescoping, place the steering 
column in the mid-position. If there is no mid-position, move the 
steering wheel rearward one position from the mid-position.
    S16.2.10 Driver and passenger seat set-up.
    S16.2.10.1 Lumbar support adjustment. Position adjustable lumbar 
supports so that the lumbar support is in its lowest, retracted or 
deflated adjustment position.
    S16.2.10.2 Other seat adjustments. Position any adjustable parts of 
the seat that provide additional support so that they are in the lowest 
or most open adjustment position. Position any adjustable head restraint 
in the lowest and most forward position.
    S16.2.10.3 Seat position adjustment. If the passenger seat does not 
adjust independently of the driver seat, the driver seat shall control 
the final position of the passenger seat.
    S16.2.10.3.1 Using only the controls that primarily move the seat 
and seat cushion independent of the seat back in the fore and aft 
directions, move the seat cushion reference point (SCRP) to the rearmost 
position. Using any part of any control, other than those just used, 
determine the full range of angles of the seat cushion reference line 
and set the seat cushion reference line to the middle of the range. 
Using any part of any control other than those that primarily move the 
seat or seat cushion fore and aft, while maintaining the seat cushion 
reference line angle, place the SCRP to its lowest position.
    S16.2.10.3.2 Using only the control that primarily moves the seat 
fore and aft, move the SCRP to the full forward position.
    S16.2.10.3.3 If the seat or seat cushion height is adjustable, other 
than by the controls that primarily move the seat or seat cushion fore 
and aft, determine the maximum and minimum heights of the SCRP, while 
maintaining, as closely as possible, the angle determined in 
S16.2.10.3.1. Set the SCRP at the midpoint height with the seat cushion 
reference line angle set as closely as possible to the angle determined 
in S16.2.10.3.1. Mark location of the seat for future reference.
    S16.3 Dummy seating positioning procedures. The 49 CFR Part 572 
Subpart O 5th percentile adult female test dummy is positioned as 
follows:
    S16.3.1 General provisions and definitions.
    S16.3.1.1 All angles are measured with respect to the horizontal 
plane unless otherwise stated.
    S16.3.1.2 The dummy's neck bracket is adjusted to align the zero 
degree index marks.
    S16.3.1.3 The term ``midsagittal plane'' refers to the vertical 
plane that separates the dummy into equal left and right halves.
    S16.3.1.4 The term ``vertical longitudinal plane'' refers to a 
vertical plane parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline.
    S16.3.1.5 The term ``vertical plane'' refers to a vertical plane, 
not necessarily parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline.
    S16.3.1.6 The term ``transverse instrumentation platform'' refers to 
the transverse instrumentation surface inside the dummy's skull casting 
to which the neck load cell mounts. This surface is perpendicular to the 
skull cap's machined inferior-superior mounting surface.
    S16.3.1.7 The term ``thigh'' refers to the femur between, but not 
including, the knee and the pelvis.
    S16.3.1.8 The term ``leg'' refers to the lower part of the entire 
leg, including the knee.
    S16.3.1.9 The term ``foot'' refers to the foot, including the ankle.
    S16.3.1.10 The longitudinal centerline of a bucket seat cushion is 
defined by a vertical plane that passes through the SgRP and is parallel 
to the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle.
    S16.3.1.11 For leg and thigh angles, use the following references:
    S16.3.1.11.1 Thigh--a straight line on the thigh skin between the 
center of the 1/2-13 UNC-2B tapped hole in the upper leg femur clamp 
(see drawings 880105-504 (left thigh) and 880105-505

[[Page 539]]

(right thigh), upper leg femur clamp) and the knee pivot shoulder bolt 
(part 880105-527 in drawing 880105-528R & 528L, sliding knee assembly 
without potentiometer).
    S16.3.1.11.2 Leg--a straight line on the leg skin between the center 
of the ankle shell (parts 880105-609 & 633 in drawing 880105-660, ankle 
assembly) and the knee pivot shoulder bolt (part 880105-527 in drawing 
880105-528R & 528L, sliding knee assembly without potentiometer).
    S16.3.1.12 The term ``seat cushion reference point'' (SCRP) means a 
point placed on the outboard side of the seat cushion at a horizontal 
distance between 150 mm (5.9 in) and 250 mm (9.8 in) from the front edge 
of the seat used as a guide in positioning the seat.
    S16.3.1.13 The term ``seat cushion reference line'' means a line on 
the side of the seat cushion, passing through the seat cushion reference 
point, whose projection in the vehicle vertical longitudinal plane is 
straight and has a known angle with respect to the horizontal.
    S16.3.2 Driver dummy positioning.
    S16.3.2.1 Driver torso/head/seat back angle positioning.
    S16.3.2.1.1 With the seat in the position determined in 
S16.2.10.3.3, use only the control that primarily moves the seat fore 
and aft to place the seat in the rearmost position. If the seat cushion 
reference line angle automatically changes as the seat is moved from the 
full forward position, maintain, as closely as possible, the seat 
cushion reference line angle determined in S16.2.10.3.1, for the final 
forward position when measuring the pelvic angle as specified in 
S16.3.2.1.11. The seat cushion reference angle position may be achieved 
through the use of any seat or seat cushion adjustments other than that 
which primarily moves the seat or seat cushion fore-aft.
    S16.3.2.1.2 Fully recline the seat back, if adjustable. Install the 
dummy into the driver's seat, such that when the legs are positioned 120 
degrees to the thighs, the calves of the legs are not touching the seat 
cushion.
    S16.3.2.1.3 Bucket seats. Place the dummy on the seat cushion so 
that its midsagittal plane is vertical and coincides with the vertical 
longitudinal plane through the center of the seat cushion, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    S16.3.2.1.4 Bench seats. Position the midsagittal plane of the dummy 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline and 
aligned within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 
in) of the center of the steering wheel rim.
    S16.3.2.1.5 Hold the dummy's thighs down and push rearward on the 
upper torso to maximize the dummy's pelvic angle.
    S16.3.2.1.6 Place the legs at 120 degrees to the thighs. Set the 
initial transverse distance between the longitudinal centerlines at the 
front of the dummy's knees at 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 6.7 in), with the 
thighs and legs of the dummy in vertical planes. Push rearward on the 
dummy's knees to force the pelvis into the seat so there is no gap 
between the pelvis and the seat back or until contact occurs between the 
back of the dummy's calves and the front of the seat cushion.
    S16.3.2.1.7 Gently rock the upper torso laterally in a side to side 
motion three times through a <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degree arc 
(approximately 51 mm (2 in) side to side).
    S16.3.2.1.8 If needed, extend the legs slightly so that the feet are 
not in contact with the floor pan. Let the thighs rest on the seat 
cushion to the extent permitted by the foot movement. Keeping the leg 
and the thigh in a vertical plane, place the foot in the vertical 
longitudinal plane that passes through the centerline of the accelerator 
pedal. Rotate the left thigh outboard about the hip until the center of 
the knee is the same distance from the midsagittal plane of the dummy as 
the right knee <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 
in). Using only the control that primarily moves the seat fore and aft, 
attempt to return the seat to the full forward position. If either of 
the dummy's legs first contacts the steering wheel, then adjust the 
steering wheel, if adjustable, upward until contact with the steering 
wheel is avoided. If the steering wheel is not adjustable, separate the 
knees enough to avoid steering wheel contact. Proceed with moving the 
seat forward until either the leg contacts the vehicle interior or the 
seat reaches the full forward position. (The right foot may contact and 
depress the accelerator and/or change

[[Page 540]]

the angle of the foot with respect to the leg during seat movement.) If 
necessary to avoid contact with the vehicles brake or clutch pedal, 
rotate the test dummy's left foot about the leg. If there is still 
interference, rotate the left thigh outboard about the hip the minimum 
distance necessary to avoid pedal interference. If a dummy leg contacts 
the vehicle interior before the full forward position is attained, 
position the seat at the next detent where there is no contact. If the 
seat is a power seat, move the seat fore and aft to avoid contact while 
assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) distance between the 
vehicle interior and the point on the dummy that would first contact the 
vehicle interior. If the steering wheel was moved, return it to the 
position described in S16.2.9. If the steering wheel contacts the 
dummy's leg(s) prior to attaining this position, adjust it to the next 
higher detent, or if infinitely adjustable, until there is 5 mm (0.2 in) 
clearance between the wheel and the dummy's leg(s).
    S16.3.2.1.9 For vehicles without adjustable seat backs, adjust the 
lower neck bracket to level the head as much as possible. For vehicles 
with adjustable seat backs, while holding the thighs in place, rotate 
the seat back forward until the transverse instrumentation platform of 
the head is level to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degree, making 
sure that the pelvis does not interfere with the seat bight. Inspect the 
abdomen to ensure that it is properly installed. If the torso contacts 
the steering wheel, adjust the steering wheel in the following order 
until there is no contact: telescoping adjustment, lowering adjustment, 
raising adjustment. If the vehicle has no adjustments, or contact with 
the steering wheel cannot be eliminated by adjustment, position the seat 
at the next detent where there is no contact with the steering wheel as 
adjusted in S16.2.9. If the seat is a power seat, position the seat to 
avoid contact while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
distance between the steering wheel as adjusted in S16.2.9 and the point 
of contact on the dummy.
    S16.3.2.1.10 If it is not possible to achieve the head level within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees, minimize the angle.
    S16.3.2.1.11 Measure and set the dummy's pelvic angle using the 
pelvic angle gauge (drawing TE-2504, incorporated by reference in 49 CFR 
Part 572, Subpart O of this chapter). The angle shall be set to 20.0 
degrees <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 degrees. If this is not possible, 
adjust the pelvic angle as close to 20.0 degrees as possible while 
keeping the transverse instrumentation platform of the head as level as 
possible by adjustments specified in S16.3.2.1.9 and S16.3.2.1.10.
    S16.3.2.1.12 If the dummy is contacting the vehicle interior after 
these adjustments, using only the control that primarily moves the seat 
fore and aft, move the seat rearward until there is a maximum of 5 mm 
(0.2 in) between the contact point of the dummy and the interior of the 
vehicle or if it has a manual seat adjustment, to the next rearward 
detent position. If after these adjustments, the dummy contact point is 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) from the vehicle interior and the seat is still 
not in its forwardmost position, move the seat forward until the contact 
point is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) from the vehicle interior, or if it 
has a manual seat adjustment, move the seat to the closest detent 
position that causes no contact, or until the seat reaches its 
forwardmost position, whichever occurs first.
    S16.3.2.2 Driver foot positioning.
    S16.3.2.2.1 If the vehicle has an adjustable accelerator pedal, 
adjust it to the full forward position. If the heel of the right foot 
can contact the floor pan, follow the positioning procedure in (a). If 
not, follow the positioning procedure in (b).
    (a) Rest the right foot of the test dummy on the undepressed 
accelerator pedal with the rearmost point of the heel on the floor pan 
in the plane of the pedal. If the foot cannot be placed on the 
accelerator pedal, set it initially perpendicular to the leg and then 
place it as far forward as possible in the direction of the pedal 
centerline with the rearmost point of the heel resting on the floor pan. 
If the vehicle has an adjustable accelerator pedal and the right foot is 
not touching the accelerator

[[Page 541]]

pedal when positioned as above, move the pedal rearward until it touches 
the right foot. If the accelerator pedal in the full rearward position 
still does not touch the foot, leave the pedal in that position. Extend 
the foot and lower leg by decreasing the knee flexion angle until any 
part of the foot contacts the undepressed accelerator pedal. If the foot 
does not contact the pedal, place the highest part of the foot at the 
same height as the highest part of the pedal.
    (b) Extend the foot and lower leg by decreasing the knee flexion 
angle until any part of the foot contacts the undepressed accelerator 
pedal or the highest part of the foot is at the same height as the 
highest part of the pedal. If the vehicle has an adjustable accelerator 
pedal and the right foot is not touching the accelerator pedal when 
positioned as above, move the pedal rearward until it touches the right 
foot.
    S16.3.2.2.2 If the ball of the right foot does not contact the 
pedal, increase the ankle plantar flexion angle such that the toe of the 
foot contacts or is as close as possible to contact with the undepressed 
accelerator pedal.
    S16.3.2.2.3 If, in its final position, the heel is off of the 
vehicle floor, a spacer block must be used under the heel to support the 
final foot position (see figure 13). The surface of the block in contact 
with the heel must have an inclination of 30 degrees, measured from the 
horizontal, with the highest surface towards the rear of the vehicle.
    S16.3.2.2.4 Place the left foot on the toe-board with the rearmost 
point of the heel resting on the floor pan as close as possible to the 
point of intersection of the planes described by the toe-board and floor 
pan.
    S16.3.2.2.5 If the left foot cannot be positioned on the toe board, 
place the foot perpendicular to the lower leg centerline as far forward 
as possible with the heel resting on the floor pan.
    S16.3.2.2.6 If the left foot does not contact the floor pan, place 
the foot parallel to the floor and place the lower leg as perpendicular 
to the thigh as possible.
    S16.3.2.2.7 When positioning the test dummy under S16.3.2.2.4, 
S16.3.2.2.5, and S16.2.2.6, avoid contact between the left foot of the 
test dummy and the vehicle's brake pedal, clutch pedal, wheel well 
projection, and foot rest. To avoid this contact, use the three foot 
position adjustments listed in paragraphs (a) through (c). The 
adjustment options are listed in priority order, with each subsequent 
option incorporating the previous. In making each adjustment, move the 
foot the minimum distance necessary to avoid contact. If it is not 
possible to avoid all prohibited foot contact, give priority to avoiding 
brake or clutch pedal contact.
    (a) Rotate (abduction/adduction) the test dummy's left foot about 
the lower leg,
    (b) Plantar flex the foot,
    (c) Rotate the left leg about the hip in either an outboard or 
inboard direction.
    S16.3.2.3 Driver arm/hand positioning.
    S16.3.2.3.1 Place the dummy's upper arms adjacent to the torso with 
the arm centerlines as close to a vertical longitudinal plane as 
possible.
    S16.3.2.3.2 Place the palms of the dummy in contact with the outer 
part of the steering wheel rim at its horizontal centerline with the 
thumbs over the steering wheel rim.
    S16.3.2.3.3 If it is not possible to position the thumbs inside the 
steering wheel rim at its horizontal centerline, then position them 
above and as close to the horizontal centerline of the steering wheel 
rim as possible.
    S16.3.2.3.4 Lightly tape the hands to the steering wheel rim so that 
if the hand of the test dummy is pushed upward by a force of not less 
than 9 N (2 lb) and not more than 22 N (5 lb), the tape releases the 
hand from the steering wheel rim.
    S16.3.3 Passenger dummy positioning.
    S16.3.3.1 Passenger torso/head/seat back angle positioning.
    S16.3.3.1.1 With the seat at the mid-height in the full forward 
position determined in S16.2.10.3.3, use only the control that primarily 
moves the seat fore and aft to place the seat in the rearmost position, 
without adjusting independent height controls. If the seat cushion 
reference line angle automatically changes as the seat is moved from the 
full forward position, maintain as closely as possible the seat cushion 
reference line angle in S16.2.10.3.1, for the final forward position 
when measuring

[[Page 542]]

the pelvic angle as specified in S16.3.3.1.11. The seat cushion 
reference line angle position may be achieved through the use of any 
seat or seat cushion adjustments other than that which primarily moves 
the seat or seat cushion fore-aft.
    S16.3.3.1.2 Fully recline the seat back, if adjustable. Install the 
dummy into the passenger seat, such that when the legs are 120 degrees 
to the thighs, the calves of the legs are not touching the seat cushion.
    S16.3.3.1.3 Bucket seats. Place the dummy on the seat cushion so 
that its midsagittal plane is vertical and coincides with the vertical 
longitudinal plane through the center of the seat cushion, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 mm).
    S16.3.3.1.4 Bench seats. Position the midsagittal plane of the dummy 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline and the 
same distance from the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in), as the midsagittal 
plane of the driver dummy.
    S16.3.3.1.5 Hold the dummy's thighs down and push rearward on the 
upper torso to maximize the dummy's pelvic angle.
    S16.3.3.1.6 Place the legs at 120 degrees to the thighs. Set the 
initial transverse distance between the longitudinal centerlines at the 
front of the dummy's knees at 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 6.7 in), with the 
thighs and legs of the dummy in vertical planes. Push rearward on the 
dummy's knees to force the pelvis into the seat so there is no gap 
between the pelvis and the seat back or until contact occurs between the 
back of the dummy's calves and the front of the seat cushion.
    S16.3.3.1.7 Gently rock the upper torso laterally side to side three 
times through a <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degree arc (approximately 51 mm 
(2 in) side to side).
    S16.3.3.1.8 If needed, extend the legs slightly so that the feet are 
not in contact with the floor pan. Let the thighs rest on the seat 
cushion to the extent permitted by the foot movement. With the feet 
perpendicular to the legs, place the heels on the floor pan. If a heel 
will not contact the floor pan, place it as close to the floor pan as 
possible. Using only the control that primarily moves the seat fore and 
aft, attempt to return the seat to the full forward position. If a dummy 
leg contacts the vehicle interior before the full forward position is 
attained, position the seat at the next detent where there is no 
contact. If the seats are power seats, position the seat to avoid 
contact while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) distance 
between the vehicle interior and the point on the dummy that would first 
contact the vehicle interior.
    S16.3.3.1.9 For vehicles without adjustable seat backs, adjust the 
lower neck bracket to level the head as much as possible. For vehicles 
with adjustable seat backs, while holding the thighs in place, rotate 
the seat back forward until the transverse instrumentation platform of 
the head is level to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees, making 
sure that the pelvis does not interfere with the seat bight. Inspect the 
abdomen to insure that it is properly installed.
    S16.3.3.1.10 If it is not possible to orient the head level within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees, minimize the angle.
    S16.3.3.1.11 Measure and set the dummy's pelvic angle using the 
pelvic angle gauge (drawing TE-2504, incorporated by reference in 49 CFR 
Part 572, Subpart O, of this chapter). The angle shall be set to 20.0 
degrees <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 degrees. If this is not possible, 
adjust the pelvic angle as close to 20.0 degrees as possible while 
keeping the transverse instrumentation platform of the head as level as 
possible, as specified in S16.3.3.1.9 and S16.3.3.1.10.
    S16.3.3.1.12 If the dummy is contacting the vehicle interior after 
these adjustments, using only the control that primarily moves the seat 
fore and aft, move the seat rearward until there is a maximum of 5 mm 
(0.2 in) between the contact point of the dummy and the interior of the 
vehicle or if it has a manual seat adjustment, to the next rearward 
detent position. If after these adjustments, the dummy contact point is 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) from the vehicle interior and the seat is still 
not in its forwardmost position, move the seat forward until the contact 
point is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) from the vehicle interior, or if it 
has a manual seat adjustment, move the seat to the closest detent 
position that causes no contact, or until the seat reaches its

[[Page 543]]

forwardmost position, whichever occurs first.
    S16.3.3.2 Passenger foot positioning.
    S16.3.3.2.1 Place the passenger's feet flat on the toe board.
    S16.3.3.2.2 If the feet cannot be placed flat on the toe board, set 
them perpendicular to the leg centerlines and place them as far forward 
as possible with the heels resting on the floor pan. If either foot does 
not contact the floor pan, place the foot parallel to the floor pan and 
place the lower leg as perpendicular to the thigh as possible.
    S16.3.3.3 Passenger arm/hand positioning.
    S16.3.3.3.1 Place the dummy's upper arms in contact with the seat 
back and the torso.
    S16.3.3.3.2 Place the palms of the dummy in contact with the outside 
of the thighs.
    S16.3.3.3.3 Place the little fingers in contact with the seat 
cushion.
    S16.3.4 Driver and passenger adjustable head restraints.
    S16.3.4.1 If the head restraint has an automatic adjustment, leave 
it where the system positions the restraint after the dummy is placed in 
the seat.
    S16.3.4.2 Adjust each head restraint to its lowest position.
    S16.3.4.3 Measure the vertical distance from the top most point of 
the head restraint to the bottom most point. Locate a horizontal plane 
through the midpoint of this distance. Adjust each head restraint 
vertically so that this horizontal plane is aligned with the center of 
gravity (CG) of the dummy head.
    S16.3.4.3 If the above position is not attainable, move the vertical 
center of the head restraint to the closest detent below the center of 
the head CG.
    S16.3.4.4 If the head restraint has a fore and aft adjustment, place 
the restraint in the forwardmost position or until contact with the head 
is made, whichever occurs first.
    S16.3.5 Driver and passenger manual belt adjustment (for tests 
conducted with a belted dummy)
    S16.3.5.1 If an adjustable seat belt D-ring anchorage exists, place 
it in the manufacturer's design position for a 5th percentile adult 
female with the seat in the position specified in S16.2.10.3.
    S16.3.5.2 Place the Type 2 manual belt around the test dummy and 
fasten the latch.
    S16.3.5.3 Ensure that the dummy's head remains as level as possible, 
as specified in S16.3.2.1.9 and S16.3.2.1.10 and S16.3.3.1.9 and 
S16.3.3.1.10.
    S16.3.5.4 Remove all slack from the lap belt. Pull the upper torso 
webbing out of the retractor and allow it to retract; repeat this 
operation four times. Apply a 9 N (2 lbf) to 18 N (4 lbf) tension load 
to the lap belt. If the belt system is equipped with a tension-relieving 
device, introduce the maximum amount of slack into the upper torso belt 
that is recommended by the manufacturer. If the belt system is not 
equipped with a tension-relieving device, allow the excess webbing in 
the shoulder belt to be retracted by the retractive force of the 
retractor.
    S17 Offset frontal deformable barrier requirements using 5th 
percentile adult female test dummies. Each vehicle that is certified as 
complying with S14 shall, at each front outboard designated seating 
position, meet the injury criteria specified in S15.3 of this standard 
when the vehicle is crash tested in accordance with the procedures 
specified in S18 of this standard with the anthropomorphic test devices 
restrained by a Type 2 seat belt assembly.
    S18 Test procedure for offset frontal deformable barrier 
requirements using 5th percentile adult female dummies.
    S18.1 General provisions. Place a 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart O 5th 
percentile adult female test dummy at each front outboard seating 
position of a vehicle, in accordance with the procedures specified in 
S16.3 of this standard. Impact the vehicle traveling longitudinally 
forward at any speed, up to and including 40 km/h (25 mph), into a fixed 
offset deformable barrier under the conditions and procedures specified 
in S18.2 of this standard, impacting only the left side of the vehicle.
    S18.2 Test conditions.
    S18.2.1 Offset frontal deformable barrier. The offset frontal 
deformable barrier shall conform to the specifications set forth in 
Subpart C of Part 587 of this chapter.

[[Page 544]]

    S18.2.2 General test conditions. All of the test conditions 
specified in S16.2 of this standard apply.
    S18.2.3 Dummy seating procedures. Position the anthropomorphic test 
dummies as specified in S16.3 of this standard.
    S18.2.4 Impact configuration. The test vehicle shall impact the 
barrier with the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle parallel to the 
line of travel and perpendicular to the barrier face within a tolerance 
of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees. The test vehicle shall be aligned so 
that the vehicle strikes the barrier with 40 percent overlap on the left 
side of the vehicle, with the vehicle's front engaging the barrier face 
such that the vehicle's longitudinal centerline is offset outboard of 
the edge of the barrier face by 10 percent of the vehicle's width <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>50 mm (2.0 in) as illustrated in Figure 10. The vehicle 
width is defined as the maximum dimension measured across the widest 
part of the vehicle, including bumpers and molding but excluding such 
components as exterior mirrors, flexible mud flaps, marker lamps, and 
dual rear wheel configurations.
    S19 Requirements to provide protection for infants in rear facing 
and convertible child restraints and car beds.
    S19.1 Each vehicle certified as complying with S14 shall, at the 
option of the manufacturer, meet the requirements specified in S19.2 or 
S19.3, under the test procedures specified in S20.
    S19.2 Option 1--Automatic suppression feature. Each vehicle shall 
meet the requirements specified in S19.2.1 through S19.2.3.
    S19.2.1 The vehicle shall be equipped with an automatic suppression 
feature for the passenger air bag which results in deactivation of the 
air bag during each of the static tests specified in S20.2 (using the 49 
CFR Part 572 Subpart R 12-month-old CRABI child dummy in any of the 
child restraints identified in sections B and C of appendix A of this 
standard and the 49 CFR part 572 subpart K Newborn Infant dummy in any 
of the car beds identified in section A of appendix A, as appropriate), 
and activation of the air bag system during each of the static tests 
specified in S20.3 (using the 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart O 5th percentile 
adult female dummy).
    S19.2.2 The vehicle shall be equipped with at least one telltale 
which emits light whenever the passenger air bag system is deactivated 
and does not emit light whenever the passenger air bag system is 
activated, except that the telltale(s) need not illuminate when the 
passenger seat is unoccupied. Each telltale:
    (a) Shall emit yellow light;
    (b) Shall have the identifying words ``PASSENGER AIR BAG OFF'' or 
``PASS AIR BAG OFF'' on the telltale or within 25 mm (1.0 in) of the 
telltale; and
    (c) Shall not be combined with the readiness indicator required by 
S4.5.2 of this standard.
    (d) Shall be located within the interior of the vehicle and forward 
of and above the design H-point of both the driver's and the right front 
passenger's seat in their forwardmost seating positions and shall not be 
located on or adjacent to a surface that can be used for temporary or 
permanent storage of objects that could obscure the telltale from either 
the driver's or right front passenger's view, or located where the 
telltale would be obscured from the driver's view if a rear-facing child 
restraint listed in Appendix A is installed in the right front 
passenger's seat.
    (e) Shall be visible and recognizable to a driver and right front 
passenger during night and day when the occupants have adapted to the 
ambient light roadway conditions.
    (f) Telltales need not be visible or recognizable when not 
activated.
    (g) Means shall be provided for making telltales visible and 
recognizable to the driver and right front passenger under all driving 
conditions. The means for providing the required visibility may be 
adjustable manually or automatically, except that the telltales may not 
be adjustable under any driving conditions to a level that they become 
invisible or not recognizable to the driver and right front passenger.
    (h) The telltale must not emit light except when the passenger air 
bag is turned off or during a bulb check upon vehicle starting.
    S19.2.3 The vehicle shall be equipped with a mechanism that 
indicates

[[Page 545]]

whether the air bag system is suppressed, regardless of whether the 
passenger seat is occupied. The mechanism need not be located in the 
occupant compartment unless it is the telltale described in S19.2.2.
    S19.3 Option 2--Low risk deployment. Each vehicle shall meet the 
injury criteria specified in S19.4 of this standard when the passenger 
air bag is deployed in accordance with the procedures specified in 
S20.4.
    S19.4 Injury criteria for the 49 CFR Part 572, Subpart R 12-month-
old CRABI test dummy.
    S19.4.1 All portions of the test dummy and child restraint shall be 
contained within the outer surfaces of the vehicle passenger 
compartment.
    S19.4.2 Head injury criteria.
    (a) For any two points in time, t<INF>1</INF> and t<INF>2</INF>, 
during the event which are separated by not more than a 15 millisecond 
time interval and where t<INF>1</INF> is less than t<INF>2</INF>, the 
head injury criterion (HIC<INF>15</INF>) shall be determined using the 
resultant head acceleration at the center of gravity of the dummy head, 
a<INF>r</INF>, expressed as a multiple of g (the acceleration of 
gravity) and shall be calculated using the expression:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18DE01.000

    (b) The maximum calculated HIC<INF>15</INF> value shall not exceed 
390.
    S19.4.3 The resultant acceleration calculated from the output of the 
thoracic instrumentation shall not exceed 50 g's, except for intervals 
whose cumulative duration is not more than 3 milliseconds.
    S19.4.4 Neck injury. When measuring neck injury, each of the 
following injury criteria shall be met.
    (a) Nij.
    (1) The shear force (Fx), axial force (Fz), and bending moment (My) 
shall be measured by the dummy upper neck load cell for the duration of 
the crash event as specified in S4.11. Shear force, axial force, and 
bending moment shall be filtered for Nij purposes at SAE J211/1 rev. 
Mar95 Channel Frequency Class 600 (see S4.7).
    (2) During the event, the axial force (Fz) can be either in tension 
or compression while the occipital condyle bending moment (Mocy) can be 
in either flexion or extension. This results in four possible loading 
conditions for Nij: tension-extension (Nte), tension-flexion (Ntf), 
compression-extension (Nce), or compression-flexion (Ncf).
    (3) When calculating Nij using equation S19.4.4(a)(4), the critical 
values, Fzc and Myc, are:
    (i) Fzc = 1460 N (328 lbf) when Fz is in tension
    (ii) Fzc = 1460 N (328 lbf) when Fz is in compression
    (iii) Myc = 43 Nm (32 lbf-ft) when a flexion moment exists at the 
occipital condyle
    (iv) Myc = 17 Nm (13 lbf-ft) when an extension moment exists at the 
occipital condyle.
    (4) At each point in time, only one of the four loading conditions 
occurs and the Nij value corresponding to that loading condition is 
computed and the three remaining loading modes shall be considered a 
value of zero. The expression for calculating each Nij loading condition 
is given by:

Nij ' (Fz / Fzc) + (Mocy / Myc)

    (5) None of the four Nij values shall exceed 1.0 at any time during 
the event.
    (b) Peak tension. Tension force (Fz), measured at the upper neck 
load cell, shall not exceed 780 N (175 lbf) at any time.
    (c) Peak compression. Compression force (Fz), measured at the upper 
neck load cell, shall not exceed 960 N (216 lbf) at any time.
    S19.4.5 Unless otherwise indicated, instrumentation for data 
acquisition, data channel frequency class, and moment calculations are 
the same as given for the 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart R 12-month-old CRABI 
test dummy.
    S20 Test procedure for S19.
    S20.1 General provisions.
    S20.1.1 Tests specifying the use of a car bed, a rear facing child 
restraint, or a convertible child restraint may be conducted using any 
such restraint listed in sections A, B, and C of Appendix A of this 
standard respectively. The car bed, rear facing child restraint, or 
convertible child restraint may be unused or have been previously used 
only for automatic suppression tests. If it

[[Page 546]]

has been used, there shall not be any visible damage prior to the test.
    S20.1.2 Unless otherwise specified, each vehicle certified to this 
option shall comply in tests conducted with the front outboard passenger 
seating position, if adjustable fore and aft, at full rearward, middle, 
and full forward positions. If the child restraint or dummy contacts the 
vehicle interior, move the seat rearward to the next detent that 
provides clearance, or if the seat is a power seat, using only the 
control that primarily moves the seat fore and aft, move the seat 
rearward while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
clearance between the dummy or child restraint and the vehicle interior.
    S20.1.3 If the car bed, rear facing child restraint, or convertible 
child restraint is equipped with a handle, the vehicle shall comply in 
tests conducted with the handle at both the child restraint 
manufacturer's recommended position for use in vehicles and in the 
upright position.
    S20.1.4 If the car bed, rear facing child restraint, or convertible 
child restraint is equipped with a sunshield, the vehicle shall comply 
in tests conducted with the sunshield both fully open and fully closed.
    S20.1.5 The vehicle shall comply in tests with the car bed, rear 
facing child restraint, or convertible child restraint uncovered and in 
tests with a towel or blanket weighing up to 1.0 kg (2.2 lb) placed on 
or over the restraint in any of the following positions:
    (a) with the blanket covering the top and sides of the restraint, 
and
    (b) with the blanket placed from the top of the vehicle's seat back 
to the forwardmost edge of the restraint.
    S20.1.6 Except as otherwise specified, if the car bed, rear facing 
child restraint, or convertible child restraint has an anchorage system 
as specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 and is tested in a vehicle with a 
front outboard passenger vehicle seat that has an anchorage system as 
specified in FMVSS No. 225, the vehicle shall comply in the belted tests 
with the restraint anchorage system attached to the vehicle seat 
anchorage system and the vehicle seat belt unattached. It shall also 
comply in the belted test requirements with the restraint anchorage 
system unattached to the vehicle seat anchorage system and the vehicle 
seat belt attached. The vehicle shall comply in the unbelted tests with 
the restraint anchorage system unattached to the vehicle seat anchorage 
system.
    S20.1.7 If the car bed, rear facing child restraint, or convertible 
child restraint comes equipped with a detachable base, the vehicle shall 
comply in tests conducted with the detachable base attached to the child 
restraint and with the detachable base unattached to the child 
restraint.
    S20.1.8 Do not attach any tethers.
    S20.1.9 Seat set-up. Unless otherwise stated.
    S20.1.9.1 Lumbar support adjustment. Position adjustable lumbar 
supports so that the lumbar support is in its lowest, retracted or 
deflated adjustment position.
    S20.1.9.2 Other seat adjustments. Position any adjustable parts of 
the seat that provide additional support so that they are in the lowest 
or most open adjustment position.
    S20.1.9.3 Set the seat and seat cushion in the position determined 
in S16.2.10.3.1.
    S20.1.9.4 Using only the control that primarily moves the seat in 
the fore and aft direction, determine the full rearward, middle, and 
full forward positions of the SCRP. Using any part of any seat or seat 
cushion adjustments, other than that which primarily moves the seat or 
seat cushion fore-aft, determine the SCRP mid-point height for each of 
the three fore-aft test positions, while maintaining, as closely as 
possible, the seat cushion reference line middle angle determined in 
S16.2.10.3.1.
    S20.1.9.5 The seat back angle, if adjustable, is set at the 
manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle for a 50th percentile 
adult male as specified in S8.1.3.
    S20.1.9.6 If adjustable, set the head restraint at the full down and 
full forward position.
    S20.1.10 The longitudinal centerline of a bucket seat cushion is 
defined by a vertical plane that passes through the SgRP and is parallel 
to the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle.

[[Page 547]]

    S20.2 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in deactivation of the passenger air bag. Each vehicle that is 
certified as complying with S19.2 shall meet the following test 
requirements.
    S20.2.1 Belted rear facing and convertible child restraints.
    S20.2.1.1 The vehicle shall comply in tests using any child 
restraint specified in section B and section C of Appendix A of this 
standard.
    S20.2.1.2 Locate a vertical plane through the longitudinal 
centerline of the child restraint. This will be referred to as 
``Plane''.
    S20.2.1.3 For bucket seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane 
parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline through the longitudinal 
centerline of the front outboard passenger vehicle seat cushion. For 
bench seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane through the front 
outboard passenger vehicle seat parallel to the vehicle longitudinal 
centerline the same distance from the longitudinal centerline of the 
vehicle as the center of the steering wheel.
    S20.2.1.4 Facing rear.
    (a) The vehicle shall comply in both of the following positions, if 
applicable:
    (1) Without attaching the child restraint anchorage system as 
specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 to a vehicle seat anchorage system 
specified in FMVSS No. 225, align the child restraint system facing 
rearward such that Plane A is aligned with Plane B.
    (2) If the child restraint is certified to S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213, 
and the vehicle seat has an anchorage system as specified in FMVSS No. 
225, attach the child restraint to the vehicle seat anchorage instead of 
aligning the planes. Do not attach the vehicle safety belt.
    (b) While maintaining the child restraint positions achieved in 
S20.2.1.4(a), secure the child restraint by following, to the extent 
possible, the child restraint manufacturer's directions regarding proper 
installation of the restraint in the rear facing mode.
    (c) Place any adjustable seat belt anchorages at the vehicle 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant. Cinch the vehicle belts to any tension from zero up to 134 N 
(30 lb) to secure the child restraint. Measure belt tension in a flat, 
straight section of the lap belt between the child restraint belt path 
and the contact point with the belt anchor or vehicle seat, on the side 
away from the buckle (to avoid interference from the shoulder portion of 
the belt).
    (d) Position the 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart R 12-month-old CRABI dummy 
in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.
    (e) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.2.1.5 Facing forward (convertible restraints only).
    (a) The vehicle shall comply in both of the following positions, if 
applicable:
    (1) Without attaching the child restraint anchorage system as 
specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 to a vehicle seat anchorage system 
specified in FMVSS No. 225, align the child restraint system facing 
forward such that Plane A is aligned with Plane B.
    (2) If the child restraint is certified to S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213, 
and the vehicle seat has an anchorage system as specified in FMVSS No. 
225, attach the child restraint to the vehicle seat anchorage instead of 
aligning the planes. Do not attach the vehicle safety belt.
    (b) While maintaining the child restraint positions achieved in 
S20.2.1.5(a), secure the child restraint by following, to the extent 
possible, the child restraint manufacturer's directions regarding proper 
installation of the restraint in the forward facing mode.
    (c) Place any adjustable seat belt anchorages at the vehicle 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant. Cinch the vehicle belts to any tension from zero up to 134 N 
(30 lb) to secure the child restraint. Measure belt tension in a flat, 
straight section of the lap belt between the child restraint belt path 
and the contact point with the belt anchor or vehicle seat, on the side 
away from the buckle (to avoid interference from the shoulder portion of 
the belt).

[[Page 548]]

    (d) Position the 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart R 12-month-old CRABI dummy 
in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.
    (e) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.2.2 Unbelted rear facing and convertible child restraints.
    S20.2.2.1 The vehicle shall comply in tests using any child 
restraint specified in section B and section C of appendix A of this 
standard.
    S20.2.2.2 Locate a vertical plane through the longitudinal 
centerline of the child restraint. This will be referred to as ``Plane 
A''.
    S20.2.2.3 For bucket seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane 
parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline through the longitudinal 
centerline of the front outboard passenger vehicle seat cushion. For 
bench seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane through the front 
outboard passenger seat parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline 
the same distance from the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle as the 
center of the steering wheel.
    S20.2.2.4 Facing rear.
    (a) Align the child restraint system facing rearward such that Plane 
A is aligned with Plane B and the child restraint is in contact with the 
seat back.
    (b) Position the 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart R 12-month-old CRABI dummy 
in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.
    (c) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.2.2.5 Facing forward.
    (a) Align the child restraint system facing forward such that Plane 
A is aligned with Plane B and the child restraint is in contact with the 
seat back.
    (b) Position the 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart R 12-month-old CRABI dummy 
in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.
    (c) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.2.3 Tests with a belted car bed.
    S20.2.3.1 The vehicle shall comply in tests using any car bed 
specified in section A of Appendix A of this standard.
    S20.2.3.2 (a) Install the car bed by following, to the extent 
possible, the car bed manufacturer's directions regarding proper 
installation of the car bed.
    (b) Place any adjustable seat belt anchorages at the vehicle 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant. Cinch the vehicle belts to secure the car bed.
    (c) Position the 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart K Newborn Infant dummy in 
the car bed by following, to the extent possible, the car bed 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the car bed for positioning 
infants.
    (d) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.3 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in activation of the passenger air bag system.
    S20.3.1 Each vehicle certified to this option shall comply in tests 
conducted with the front outboard passenger seating position, if 
adjustable fore and aft, at the mid-height, in the full rearward and 
middle positions determined in S20.1.9.4, and the forward position 
determined in S16.3.3.1.8.
    S20.3.2 Place a 49 CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile adult 
female test dummy at the front outboard passenger seating position of 
the vehicle, in accordance with procedures specified in S16.3.3 of this 
standard, except as specified in S20.3.1, subject to the fore-aft seat 
positions in S20.3.1. Do not fasten the seat belt.
    S20.3.3 Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position,

[[Page 549]]

whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close all 
vehicle doors.
    S20.3.4 Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag system is 
activated.
    S20.4 Low risk deployment test. Each vehicle that is certified as 
complying with S19.3 shall meet the following test requirements.
    S20.4.1 Position the front outboard passenger vehicle seat at the 
mid-height in the full forward position determined in S20.1.9.4, and 
adjust the seat back (if adjustable independent of the seat) to the 
nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male as specified in 
S8.1.3. Position adjustable lumbar supports so that the lumbar support 
is in its lowest, retracted or deflated adjustment position. Position 
any adjustable parts of the seat that provide additional support so that 
they are in the lowest or most open adjustment position. If adjustable, 
set the head restraint at the full down and most forward position. If 
the child restraint or dummy contacts the vehicle interior, do the 
following: using only the control that primarily moves the seat in the 
fore and aft direction, move the seat rearward to the next detent that 
provides clearance; or if the seat is a power seat, move the seat 
rearward while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
clearance.
    S20.4.2 The vehicle shall comply in tests using any child restraint 
specified in section B and section C of appendix A to this standard.
    S20.4.3 Locate a vertical plane through the longitudinal centerline 
of the child restraint. This will be referred to as ``Plane A''.
    S20.4.4 For bucket seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane 
parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline through the longitudinal 
centerline of the front outboard passenger seat cushion. For bench 
seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane through the front outboard 
passenger seat parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline that is 
the same distance from the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle as the 
center of the steering wheel.
    S20.4.5 Align the child restraint system facing rearward such that 
Plane A is aligned with Plane B.
    S20.4.6 If the child restraint is certified to S5.9 of FMVSS No. 
213, and the vehicle seat has an anchorage system as specified in FMVSS 
No. 225, attach the child restraint to the vehicle seat anchorage 
instead of aligning the planes. Do not attach the vehicle safety belt.
    S20.4.7 While maintaining the child restraint position achieved in 
S20.4.5, secure the child restraint by following, to the extent 
possible, the child restraint manufacturer's directions regarding proper 
installation of the restraint in the rear facing mode. Place any 
adjustable seat belt anchorages at the manufacturer's nominal design 
position for a 50th percentile adult male occupant. Cinch the vehicle 
belts to any tension from zero up to 134 N (30 lb) to secure the child 
restraint. Measure belt tension in a flat, straight section of the lap 
belt between the child restraint belt path and the contact point with 
the belt anchor or vehicle seat, on the side away from the buckle (to 
avoid interference from the shoulder portion of the belt).
    S20.4.8 Position the 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart R 12-month-old CRABI 
dummy in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.
    S20.4.9 Deploy the front outboard passenger frontal air bag system. 
If the air bag system contains a multistage inflator, the vehicle shall 
be able to comply at any stage or combination of stages or time delay 
between successive stages that could occur in the presence of an infant 
in a rear facing child restraint and a 49 CFR Part 572, Subpart R 12-
month-old CRABI dummy positioned according to S20.4, and also with the 
seat at the mid-height, in the middle and full rearward positions 
determined in S20.1.9.4, in a rigid barrier crash test at speeds up to 
64 km/h (40 mph).
    S21 Requirements using 3-year-old child dummies.
    S21.1 Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S14 shall, at 
the option of the manufacturer, meet the requirements specified in 
S21.2, S21.3, S21.4 or S21.5, under the test procedures specified in S22 
or S28, as applicable.

[[Page 550]]

    S21.2 Option 1--Automatic suppression feature. Each vehicle shall 
meet the requirements specified in S21.2.1 through S21.2.3.
    S21.2.1 The vehicle shall be equipped with an automatic suppression 
feature for the passenger air bag which results in deactivation of the 
air bag during each of the static tests specified in S22.2 (using a 49 
CFR Part 572 Subpart P 3-year-old child dummy and, as applicable, any 
child restraint specified in section C and section D of appendix A to 
this standard), and activation of the air bag system during each of the 
static tests specified in S22.3 (using a 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart O 5th 
percentile adult female dummy).
    S21.2.2 The vehicle shall be equipped with a telltale light meeting 
the requirements specified in S19.2.2.
    S21.2.3 The vehicle shall be equipped with a mechanism that 
indicates whether the air bag is suppressed, regardless of whether the 
passenger seat is occupied. The mechanism need not be located in the 
occupant compartment unless it is the telltale described in S21.2.2.
    S21.3 Option 2--Dynamic automatic suppression system that suppresses 
the air bag when an occupant is out of position. (This option is 
available under the conditions set forth in S27.1.) The vehicle shall be 
equipped with a dynamic automatic suppression system for the passenger 
air bag system which meets the requirements specified in S27.
    S21.4 Option 3--Low risk deployment. Each vehicle shall meet the 
injury criteria specified in S21.5 of this standard when the passenger 
air bag is deployed in accordance with both of the low risk deployment 
test procedures specified in S22.4.
    S21.5 Injury criteria for the 49 CFR Part 572, Subpart P 3-year-old 
child test dummy.
    S21.5.1 All portions of the test dummy shall be contained within the 
outer surfaces of the vehicle passenger compartment.
    S21.5.2 Head injury criteria.
    (a) For any two points in time, t<INF>1</INF> and t<INF>2</INF>, 
during the event which are separated by not more than a 15 millisecond 
time interval and where t<INF>1</INF> is less than t<INF>2</INF>, the 
head injury criterion (HIC<INF>15</INF>) shall be determined using the 
resultant head acceleration at the center of gravity of the dummy head, 
a<INF>r</INF>, expressed as a multiple of g (the acceleration of 
gravity) and shall be calculated using the expression:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18DE01.001

    (b) The maximum calculated HIC<INF>15</INF> value shall not exceed 
570.
    S21.5.3 The resultant acceleration calculated from the output of the 
thoracic instrumentation shall not exceed 55 g's, except for intervals 
whose cumulative duration is not more than 3 milliseconds.
    S21.5.4 Compression deflection of the sternum relative to the spine, 
as determined by instrumentation, shall not exceed 34 millimeters (1.3 
in).
    S21.5.5 Neck injury. When measuring neck injury, each of the 
following injury criteria shall be met.
    (a) Nij.
    (1) The shear force (Fx), axial force (Fz), and bending moment (My) 
shall be measured by the dummy upper neck load cell for the duration of 
the crash event as specified in S4.11. Shear force, axial force, and 
bending moment shall be filtered for Nij purposes at SAE J211/1 rev. 
Mar95 Channel Frequency Class 600 (see S4.7).
    (2) During the event, the axial force (Fz) can be either in tension 
or compression while the occipital condyle bending moment (Mocy) can be 
in either flexion or extension. This results in four possible loading 
conditions for Nij: Tension-extension (Nte), tension-flexion (Ntf), 
compression-extension (Nce), or compression-flexion (Ncf).
    (3) When calculating Nij using equation S21.5.5(a)(4), the critical 
values, Fzc and Myc, are:
    (i) Fzc = 2120 N (477 lbf) when Fz is in tension
    (ii) Fzc = 2120 N (477 lbf) when Fz is in compression
    (iii) Myc = 68 Nm (50 lbf-ft) when a flexion moment exists at the 
occipital condyle
    (iv) Myc = 27 Nm (20 lbf-ft) when an extension moment exists at the 
occipital condyle.
    (4) At each point in time, only one of the four loading conditions 
occurs and

[[Page 551]]

the Nij value corresponding to that loading condition is computed and 
the three remaining loading modes shall be considered a value of zero. 
The expression for calculating each Nij loading condition is given by:

Nij = (Fz / Fzc) + (Mocy / Myc)

    (5) None of the four Nij values shall exceed 1.0 at any time during 
the event.
    (b) Peak tension. Tension force (Fz), measured at the upper neck 
load cell, shall not exceed 1130 N (254 lbf) at any time.
    (c) Peak compression. Compression force (Fz), measured at the upper 
neck load cell, shall not exceed 1380 N (310 lbf) at any time.
    S21.5.6 Unless otherwise indicated, instrumentation for data 
acquisition, data channel frequency class, and moment calculations are 
the same as given in 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart P 3-year-old child test 
dummy.
    S22 Test procedure for S21.
    S22.1 General provisions and definitions.
    S22.1.1 Tests specifying the use of a forward facing child 
restraint, including a booster seat where applicable, may be conducted 
using any such restraint listed in section C and section D of Appendix A 
of this standard, respectively. The child restraint may be unused or 
have been previously used only for automatic suppression tests. If it 
has been used, there shall not be any visible damage prior to the test. 
Booster seats are to be used in the manner appropriate for a 3-year-old 
child of the same height and weight as the 3-year-old child dummy.
    S22.1.2 Unless otherwise specified, each vehicle certified to this 
option shall comply in tests conducted with the front outboard passenger 
seating position at the mid-height, in the full rearward, middle, and 
the full forward positions determined in S22.1.7.4. If the dummy 
contacts the vehicle interior, using only the control that primarily 
moves the seat fore and aft, move the seat rearward to the next detent 
that provides clearance. If the seat is a power seat, move the seat 
rearward while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
clearance.
    S22.1.3 Except as otherwise specified, if the child restraint has an 
anchorage system as specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 and is tested in 
a vehicle with a front outboard passenger vehicle seat that has an 
anchorage system as specified in FMVSS No. 225, the vehicle shall comply 
with the belted test conditions with the restraint anchorage system 
attached to the vehicle seat anchorage system and the vehicle seat belt 
unattached. It shall also comply with the belted test conditions with 
the restraint anchorage system unattached to the vehicle seat anchorage 
system and the vehicle seat belt attached.
    S22.1.4 Do not attach any tethers.
    S22.1.5 The definitions provided in S16.3.1 through S16.3.10 apply 
to the tests specified in S22.
    S22.1.6 For leg and thigh angles use the following references:
    (a) Thigh--a straight line on the thigh skin between the center of 
the \5/16\ x \1/2\ in. screw (part 9001024, item 10 in drawing 210-0000 
sheet 2 of 7, complete assembly (HYB III 3 YR OLD)) and the knee bolt 
(part 210-5301 in drawing 210-5000-1 & -1, leg assembly).
    (b) Leg--a straight line on the leg skin between the center of the 
ankle bolt (part 210-5701 in drawing 210-5000-1 & -2, leg assembly) and 
the knee bolt (part 210-5301 in drawing 210-5000-1 & -2, leg assembly).
    S22.1.7 Seat set-up. Unless otherwise stated,
    S22.1.7.1 Lumbar support adjustment. Position adjustable lumbar 
supports so that the lumbar support is in its lowest, retracted or 
deflated adjustment position.
    S22.1.7.2 Other seat adjustments. Position any adjustable parts of 
the seat that provide additional support so that they are in the lowest 
or most open adjustment position.
    S22.1.7.3 Set the seat and seat cushion in the position determined 
in S16.2.10.3.1.
    S22.1.7.4 Using only the control that primarily moves the seat in 
the fore and aft direction, determine the full rearward, middle, and 
full forward positions of the SCRP. Using any part of any seat or seat 
cushion adjustments other than that which primarily moves

[[Page 552]]

the seat or seat cushion fore-aft, determine the SCRP mid-point height 
for each of the three fore-aft test positions, while maintaining, as 
closely as possible, the seat cushion reference line angle determined in 
S16.2.10.3.1.
    S22.1.7.5 The seat back angle, if adjustable, is set at the 
manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle for a 50th percentile 
adult male as specified in S8.1.3.
    S22.1.7.6 If adjustable, set the head restraint at the full down and 
full forward position.
    S22.2 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in deactivation of the passenger air bag. Each vehicle that is 
certified as complying with S21.2 shall meet the following test 
requirements:
    S22.2.1 Belted test with forward facing child restraints or booster 
seats.
    S22.2.1.1 Install the restraint in the front outboard passenger 
vehicle seat in accordance, to the extent possible, with the child 
restraint manufacturer's instructions provided with the seat for use by 
children with the same height and weight as the 3-year-old child dummy.
    S22.2.1.2 Locate a vertical plane through the longitudinal 
centerline of the child restraint. This will be referred to as ``Plane 
A''.
    S22.2.1.3 For bucket seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical 
longitudinal plane through the longitudinal centerline of the seat 
cushion of the front outboard passenger vehicle seat. For bench seats, 
``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane through the front outboard 
passenger vehicle seat parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline 
the same distance from the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle as the 
center of the steering wheel.
    22.2.1.4 The vehicle shall comply in both of the following 
positions, if applicable:
    (a) Without attaching the child restraint anchorage system as 
specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 to a vehicle seat anchorage system 
specified in FMVSS No. 225 and without attaching any tethers, align the 
child restraint system facing forward such that Plane A is aligned with 
Plane B.
    (b) If the child restraint is certified to S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213, 
and the vehicle seat has an anchorage system as specified in FMVSS No. 
225, attach the child restraint to the vehicle seat anchorage instead of 
aligning the planes. Do not attach the vehicle safety belt.
    S22.2.1.5 Forward facing child restraint
    S22.2.1.5.1 Place any adjustable seat belt anchorages at the vehicle 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant. Cinch the vehicle belts to any tension from zero up to 134 N 
(30 lb) to secure the child restraint. Measure belt tension in a flat, 
straight section of the lap belt between the child restraint belt path 
and the contact point with the belt anchor or vehicle seat, on the side 
away from the buckle (to avoid interference from the shoulder portion of 
the belt).
    S22.2.1.5.2 Position the 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart P 3-year-old child 
dummy in the child restraint such that the dummy's lower torso is 
centered on the child restraint and the dummy's spine is against the 
seat back of the child restraint. Place the arms at the dummy's sides.
    S22.2.1.5.3 Attach all belts that come with the child restraint that 
are appropriate for a child of the same height and weight as the 3-year-
old child dummy, if any, by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating children.
    S22.2.1.6 Booster seat
    S22.2.1.6.1 Place any adjustable seat belt anchorages at the vehicle 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant. For booster seats designed to be secured to the vehicle seat 
even when empty, cinch the vehicle belts to any tension from zero up to 
134 N (30 lb) to secure the booster seat. Measure belt tension in a 
flat, straight section of the lap belt between the child restraint belt 
path and the contact point with the belt anchor or vehicle seat, on the 
side away from the buckle (to avoid interference from the shoulder 
portion of the belt).
    S22.2.1.6.2 Position the 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart P 3-year-old child 
dummy in the booster seat such that the dummy's lower torso is centered 
on the booster seat cushion and the dummy's back is parallel to and in 
contact with

[[Page 553]]

the booster seat back or, if there is no booster seat back, the vehicle 
seat back. Place the arms at the dummy's sides.
    S22.2.1.6.3 If applicable, attach all belts that come with the child 
restraint that are appropriate for a child of the same height and weight 
as the 3-year-old child dummy, if any, by following, to the extent 
possible, the manufacturer's instructions provided with the child 
restraint for seating children.
    S22.2.1.6.4 If applicable, place the Type 2 manual belt around the 
test dummy and fasten the latch. Remove all slack from the lap belt 
portion. Pull the upper torso webbing out of the retractor and allow it 
to retract; repeat this four times. Apply a 9 to 18 N (2 to 4 lb) 
tension load to the lap belt. Allow the excess webbing in the upper 
torso belt to be retracted by the retractive force of the retractor.
    S22.2.1.7 Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the 
``on'' position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then 
close all vehicle doors.
    S22.2.1.8 Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S22.2.2 Unbelted tests with dummies. Place the 49 CFR part 572 
subpart P 3-year-old child dummy on the front outboard passenger vehicle 
seat in any of the following positions (without using a child restraint 
or booster seat or the vehicle's seat belts):
    S22.2.2.1 Sitting on seat with back against seat back.
    (a) Place the dummy on the front outboard passenger seat.
    (b) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in), as the center of the steering wheel. In the 
case of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal 
plane of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the seat cushion, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in). Position the torso 
of the dummy against the seat back. Position the dummy's thighs against 
the seat cushion.
    (c) Allow the legs of the dummy to extend off the surface of the 
seat.
    (d) Rotate the dummy's upper arms down until they contact the seat 
back.
    (e) Rotate the dummy's lower arms until the dummy's hands contact 
the seat cushion.
    (f) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (g) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.2 Sitting on seat with back against reclined seat back. 
Repeat the test sequence in S22.2.2.1 with the seat back angle 25 
degrees rearward of the manufacturer's nominal design position for the 
50th percentile adult male. If the seat will not recline 25 degrees 
rearward of the nominal design position, use the closest position that 
does not exceed 25 degrees.
    S22.2.2.3 Sitting on seat with back not against seat back.
    (a) Place the dummy on the front outboard passenger seat.
    (b) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in), as the center of the steering wheel. In the 
case of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal 
plane of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the seat cushion, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in). Position the dummy 
with the spine vertical so that the horizontal distance from the dummy's 
back to the seat back is no less than 25 mm (1.0 in) and no more than 
150 mm (6.0 in), as measured along the dummy's midsagittal plane at the 
mid-sternum level. To keep the dummy in position, a material with a 
maximum breaking strength of 311 N (70 lb) may be used to hold the 
dummy.
    (c) Position the dummy's thighs against the seat cushion.
    (d) Allow the legs of the dummy to extend off the surface of the 
seat.
    (e) Position the upper arms parallel to the spine and rotate the 
dummy's

[[Page 554]]

lower arms until the dummy's hands contact the seat cushion.
    (f) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (g) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.4 Sitting on seat edge, spine vertical, hands by the dummy's 
sides.
    (a) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in), as the center of the steering wheel. In the 
case of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal 
plane of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the seat cushion, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    (b) Position the dummy in the seated position forward in the seat 
such that the legs are vertical and the back of the legs rest against 
the front of the seat with the spine vertical. If the dummy's feet 
contact the floor pan, rotate the legs forward until the dummy is 
resting on the seat with the feet positioned flat on the floor pan and 
the dummy spine vertical. To keep the dummy in position, a material with 
a maximum breaking strength of 311 N (70 lb) may be used to hold the 
dummy.
    (c) Place the upper arms parallel to the spine.
    (d) Lower the dummy's lower arms such that they contact the seat 
cushion.
    (e) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (f) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.5 Standing on seat, facing forward.
    (a) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in), as the center of the steering wheel rim. In the 
case of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal 
plane of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the seat cushion, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in). Position the dummy 
in a standing position on the front outboard passenger seat cushion 
facing the front of the vehicle while placing the heels of the dummy's 
feet in contact with the seat back.
    (b) Rest the dummy against the seat back, with the arms parallel to 
the spine.
    (c) If the head contacts the vehicle roof, recline the seat so that 
the head is no longer in contact with the vehicle roof, but allow no 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) distance between the head and the roof. If the 
seat does not sufficiently recline to allow clearance, omit the test.
    (d) If necessary use a material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) or spacer blocks to keep the dummy in position.
    (e) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (f) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.6 Kneeling on seat, facing forward.
    (a) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in), as the center of the steering wheel. In the 
case of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal 
plane of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the seat cushion, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    (b) Position the dummy in a kneeling position in the front outboard 
passenger vehicle seat with the dummy facing the front of the vehicle 
with its toes at the intersection of the seat back and seat cushion. 
Position the dummy so that the spine is vertical. Push down on the legs 
so that they contact the seat as much as possible

[[Page 555]]

and then release. Place the arms parallel to the spine.
    (c) If necessary use a material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) or spacer blocks to keep the dummy in position.
    (d) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (e) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.7 Kneeling on seat, facing rearward.
    (a) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in), as the center of the steering wheel. In the 
case of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal 
plane of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the seat cushion, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    (b) Position the dummy in a kneeling position in the front outboard 
passenger vehicle seat with the dummy facing the rear of the vehicle. 
Position the dummy such that the dummy's head and torso are in contact 
with the seat back. Push down on the legs so that they contact the seat 
as much as possible and then release. Place the arms parallel to the 
spine.
    (c) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (d) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.8 Lying on seat. This test is performed only in vehicles 
with 3 designated front seating positions.
    (a) Lay the dummy on the front outboard passenger vehicle seat such 
that the following criteria are met:
    (1) The midsagittal plane of the dummy is horizontal,
    (2) The dummy's spine is perpendicular to the vehicle's longitudinal 
axis,
    (3) The dummy's arms are parallel to its spine,
    (4) A plane passing through the two shoulder joints of the dummy is 
vertical,
    (5) The anterior of the dummy is facing the vehicle front,
    (6) The head of the dummy is positioned towards the passenger door, 
and
    (7) The horizontal distance from the topmost point of the dummy's 
head to the vehicle door is 50 to 100 mm (2-4 in).
    (8) The dummy is as far back in the seat as possible.
    (b) Rotate the thighs as much as possible toward the chest of the 
dummy and rotate the legs as much as possible against the thighs.
    (c) Move the dummy's upper left arm parallel to the vehicle's 
transverse plane and the lower left arm 90 degrees to the upper arm. 
Rotate the lower left arm about the elbow joint and toward the dummy's 
head until movement is obstructed.
    (d) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (e) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.3 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in activation of the passenger air bag system.
    S22.3.1 Each vehicle certified to this option shall comply in tests 
conducted with the front outboard passenger seating position at the mid-
height, in the full rearward, and middle positions determined in 
S22.1.7.4, and the forward position determined in S16.3.3.1.8.
    S22.3.2 Place a 49 CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile adult 
female test dummy at the front outboard passenger seating position of 
the vehicle, in accordance with procedures specified in S16.3.3 of this 
standard, except as specified in S22.3.1. Do not fasten the seat belt.
    S22.3.3 Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    S22.3.4 Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag system is 
activated.
    S22.4 Low risk deployment tests.

[[Page 556]]

    S22.4.1 Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S21.4 shall 
meet the following test requirements with the 49 CFR Part 572, Subpart P 
3-year-old child dummy in both of the following positions: Position 1 
(S22.4.2) and Position 2 (S22.4.3).
    S22.4.1.1 Locate and mark a point on the front of the dummy's chest 
jacket on the midsagittal plane that is 114 mm (4.5 in) <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 in) along the surface of 
the skin from the top of the skin at the neck line. This is referred to 
as ``Point 1.''
    S22.4.1.2 Mark a point on the instrument panel that is 
longitudinally and transversely, as measured along the surface of the 
instrument panel, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>6 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 in) of the point that is defined by the intersection 
of the instrument panel and a line between the volumetric center of the 
smallest volume that can encompass the folded undeployed air bag and the 
volumetric center of the static fully inflated air bag.
    S22.4.1.3 Locate the vertical plane parallel to the vehicle 
longitudinal centerline through the point located in S22.4.1.2. This is 
referred to as ``Plane D.''
    S22.4.1.4 Locate the horizontal plane through the point located in 
S22.4.1.2. This is referred to as ``Plane C.''
    S22.4.2 Position 1 (chest on instrument panel).
    S22.4.2.1 Set the seat and seat cushion in the positions determined 
in S16.2.10.3.1. If the seat back is adjustable independent of the seat, 
place the seat back at the manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle 
for a 50th percentile adult male as specified in S8.1.3. Position any 
adjustable parts of the seat that provide additional support so that 
they are in the lowest or most open adjustment position. If adjustable, 
set the head restraint in the lowest and most forward position.
    S22.4.2.2 Place the dummy in the front outboard passenger seat such 
that:
    S22.4.2.2.1 The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane D within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    S22.4.2.2.2 The legs are initially vertical to the floor pan. The 
legs and thighs shall be adjusted to the extent necessary for the head/
torso to contact the instrument panel as specified in S22.4.2.3.
    S22.4.2.2.3 The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands 
are in contact with the thighs.
    S22.4.2.3 Without changing the seat position and with the dummy's 
thorax instrument cavity rear face vertical, move the dummy forward 
until the dummy head/torso contacts the instrument panel. If the dummy 
loses contact with the seat cushion because of the forward movement, 
maintain the height of the dummy and the angle of the thigh with respect 
to the torso. Once contact is made, raise the dummy vertically until 
Point 1 lies in Plane C within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in). If the dummy's head contacts the windshield and 
keeps Point 1 from reaching Plane C, lower the dummy until there is no 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance between the head and the windshield. 
(The dummy shall remain in contact with the instrument panel while being 
raised or lowered, which may change the dummy's fore-aft position.)
    S22.4.2.4 If possible, position the legs of the dummy so that the 
legs are vertical and the feet rest flat on the floor pan of the 
vehicle. If the positioning against the instrument panel does not allow 
the feet to be on the floor pan, the feet shall be parallel to the floor 
pan.
    S22.4.2.5 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S22.4.3 Position 2 (head on instrument panel).
    S22.4.3.1 Place the front outboard passenger seat at the mid-height, 
in full rearward seating position determined in S22.1.7.4. Place the 
seat back, if adjustable independent of the seat, at the manufacturer's 
nominal design seat back angle for a 50th percentile adult male as 
specified in S8.1.3. Position any adjustable parts of the seat that 
provide additional support so that

[[Page 557]]

they are in the lowest or most open adjustment position. If adjustable, 
set the head restraint in the lowest and most forward position.
    S22.4.3.2 Place the dummy in the front outboard passenger seat such 
that:
    S22.4.3.2.1 The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane D within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    S22.4.3.2.2 The legs are vertical to the floor pan, the back of the 
legs are in contact with the seat cushion, and the dummy's thorax 
instrument cavity rear face is vertical. If it is not possible to 
position the dummy with the legs in the prescribed position, rotate the 
legs forward until the dummy is resting on the seat with the feet 
positioned flat on the floor pan, and the back of the legs are in 
contact with the front of the seat cushion. Set the transverse distance 
between the longitudinal centerlines at the front of the dummy's knees 
at 86 to 91 mm (3.4 to 3.6 in), with the thighs and the legs of the 
dummy in vertical planes.
    S22.4.3.2.3 The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands 
are in contact with the thighs.
    S22.4.3.3 Using only the control that primarily moves the seat in 
the fore and aft direction, move the seat forward, while maintaining the 
thorax instrument cavity rear face orientation until any part of the 
dummy contacts the vehicle's instrument panel.
    S22.4.3.4 If dummy contact has not been made with the vehicle's 
instrument panel at the full forward seating position of the seat, slide 
the dummy forward until contact is made. Maintain the thorax instrument 
cavity rear face vertical orientation. If the dummy loses contact with 
the seat, from that point forward, maintain the height of the dummy. 
Except as provided in S22.4.3.5, maintain the angle of the thigh with 
respect to the horizontal.
    S22.4.3.5 If head/torso contact with the instrument panel has not 
been made, maintain the angle of the thighs with respect to the 
horizontal while applying a force towards the front of the vehicle on 
the spine of the dummy between the shoulder joints, perpendicular to the 
thorax instrument cavity rear face, until the head or torso comes into 
contact with the vehicle's instrument panel or until a maximum force of 
222 N (50 lb) is achieved. If the head/torso is still not in contact 
with the instrument panel, hold the femurs and release the 222 N (50 lb) 
force. While maintaining the relative angle between the torso and the 
femurs, roll the dummy forward on the seat cushion, without sliding, 
until head/torso contact with the instrument panel is achieved. If seat 
contact is lost prior to or during femur rotation out of the horizontal 
plane, constrain the dummy to rotate about the dummy H-point. If the 
dummy cannot be rolled forward on the seat due to contact of the dummy 
feet with the floor pan, extend the lower legs forward, at the knees, 
until floor pan contact is avoided.
    S22.4.3.6 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S22.4.4 Deploy the front outboard passenger frontal air bag system. 
If the frontal air bag system contains a multistage inflator, the 
vehicle shall be able to comply with the injury criteria at any stage or 
combination of stages or time delay between successive stages that could 
occur in a rigid barrier crash test at or below 26 km/h (16 mph), under 
the test procedure specified in S22.5.
    S22.5 Test procedure for determining stages of air bag systems 
subject to low risk deployment (low speed crashes) test requirement.
    S22.5.1 The test described in S22.5.2 shall be conducted with an 
unbelted 50th percentile adult male test dummy in the driver seating 
position according to S8 as it applies to that seating position and an 
unbelted 5th percentile adult female test dummy either in the front 
outboard passenger vehicle seating position according to S16 as it 
applies to that seating position or at any fore-aft seat position on the 
passenger side.
    S22.5.2 Impact the vehicle traveling longitudinally forward at any 
speed, up

[[Page 558]]

to and including 26 km/h (16 mph) into a fixed rigid barrier that is 
perpendicular <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees to the line of travel of 
the vehicle under the applicable conditions of S8, S10, and S16 
excluding S10.7, S10.8, S10.9, and S16.3.5.
    S22.5.3 Determine which inflation stage or combination of stages are 
fired and determine the time delay between successive stages. That stage 
or combination of stages, with time delay between successive stages, 
shall be used in deploying the air bag when conducting the low risk 
deployment tests described in S22.4, S24.4, and S26.
    S22.5.4 If the air bag does not deploy in the impact described in 
S22.5.2, the low risk deployment tests described in S22.4, S24.4, and 
S26 shall be conducted with all stages using the maximum time delay 
between stages.
    S23 Requirements using 6-year-old child dummies.
    S23.1 Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S14 shall, at 
the option of the manufacturer, meet the requirements specified in 
S23.2, S23.3, or S23.4, under the test procedures specified in S24 or 
S28, as applicable.
    S23.2 Option 1--Automatic suppression feature. Each vehicle shall 
meet the requirements specified in S23.2.1 through S23.2.3.
    S23.2.1 The vehicle shall be equipped with an automatic suppression 
feature for the passenger frontal air bag system which results in 
deactivation of the air bag during each of the static tests specified in 
S24.2 (using a 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart N 6-year-old child dummy in any 
of the child restraints specified in section D of Appendix A of this 
standard), and activation of the air bag system during each of the 
static tests specified in S24.3 (using a 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart O 5th 
percentile adult female dummy).
    S23.2.2 The vehicle shall be equipped with a telltale light meeting 
the requirements specified in S19.2.2.
    S23.2.3 The vehicle shall be equipped with a mechanism that 
indicates whether the air bag is suppressed, regardless of whether the 
passenger seat is occupied. The mechanism need not be located in the 
occupant compartment unless it is the telltale described in S23.2.2.
    S23.3 Option 2--Dynamic automatic suppression system that suppresses 
the air bag when an occupant is out of position. (This option is 
available under the conditions set forth in S27.1.) The vehicle shall be 
equipped with a dynamic automatic suppression system for the passenger 
frontal air bag system which meets the requirements specified in S27.
    S23.4 Option 3--Low risk deployment. Each vehicle shall meet the 
injury criteria specified in S23.5 of this standard when the passenger 
air bag is statically deployed in accordance with both of the low risk 
deployment test procedures specified in S24.4.
    S23.5 Injury criteria for the 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart N 6-year-old 
child dummy.
    S23.5.1 All portions of the test dummy shall be contained within the 
outer surfaces of the vehicle passenger compartment.
    S23.5.2 Head injury criteria.
    (a) For any two points in time, t<INF>1</INF> and t<INF>2</INF>, 
during the event which are separated by not more than a 15 millisecond 
time interval and where t<INF>1</INF> is less than t<INF>2</INF>, the 
head injury criterion (HIC<INF>15</INF>) shall be determined using the 
resultant head acceleration at the center of gravity of the dummy head, 
a<INF>r</INF>, expressed as a multiple of g (the acceleration of 
gravity) and shall be calculated using the expression:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18DE01.001

    (b) The maximum calculated HIC<INF>15</INF> value shall not exceed 
700.
    S23.5.3 The resultant acceleration calculated from the output of the 
thoracic instrumentation shall not exceed 60 g's, except for intervals 
whose cumulative duration is not more than 3 milliseconds.
    S23.5.4 Compression deflection of the sternum relative to the spine, 
as determined by instrumentation, shall not exceed 40 mm (l.6 in).
    S23.5.5 Neck injury. When measuring neck injury, each of the 
following injury criteria shall be met.
    (a) Nij.
    (1) The shear force (Fx), axial force (Fz), and bending moment (My) 
shall be

[[Page 559]]

measured by the dummy upper neck load cell for the duration of the crash 
event as specified in S4.11. Shear force, axial force, and bending 
moment shall be filtered for Nij purposes at SAE J211/1 rev. Mar95 
Channel Frequency Class 600 (see S4.7).
    (2) During the event, the axial force (Fz) can be either in tension 
or compression while the occipital condyle bending moment (Mocy) can be 
in either flexion or extension. This results in four possible loading 
conditions for Nij: tension-extension (Nte), tension-flexion (Ntf), 
compression-extension (Nce), or compression-flexion (Ncf).
    (3) When calculating Nij using equation S23.5.5(a)(4), the critical 
values, Fzc and Myc, are:
    (i) Fzc = 2800 N (629 lbf) when Fz is in tension
    (ii) Fzc = 2800 N (629 lbf) when Fz is in compression
    (iii) Myc = 93 Nm (69 lbf-ft) when a flexion moment exists at the 
occipital condyle
    (iv) Myc = 37 Nm (27 lbf-ft) when an extension moment exists at the 
occipital condyle.
    (4) At each point in time, only one of the four loading conditions 
occurs and the Nij value corresponding to that loading condition is 
computed and the three remaining loading modes shall be considered a 
value of zero. The expression for calculating each Nij loading condition 
is given by:

Nij = (Fz / Fzc) + (Mocy / Myc)

    (5) None of the four Nij values shall exceed 1.0 at any time during 
the event.
    (b) Peak tension. Tension force (Fz), measured at the upper neck 
load cell, shall not exceed 1490 N (335 lbf) at any time.
    (c) Peak compression. Compression force (Fz), measured at the upper 
neck load cell, shall not exceed 1820 N (409 lbf) at any time.
    S23.5.6 Unless otherwise indicated, instrumentation for data 
acquisition, data channel frequency class, and moment calculations are 
the same as given for the 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart N 6-year-old child 
test dummy.
    S24 Test procedure for S23.
    S24.1 General provisions and definitions.
    S24.1.1 Tests specifying the use of a booster seat may be conducted 
using any such restraint listed in section D of Appendix A of this 
standard. The booster seat may be unused or have been previously used 
only for automatic suppression. If it has been used, there shall not be 
any visible damage prior to the test. Booster seats are to be used in 
the manner appropriate for a 6-year-old child of the same height and 
weight as the 6-year-old child dummy.
    S24.1.2 Unless otherwise specified, each vehicle certified to this 
option shall comply in tests conducted with the front outboard passenger 
seating position at the mid-height, in the full rearward seat track 
position, the middle seat track position, and the full forward seat 
track position as determined in this section. Using only the control 
that primarily moves the seat in the fore and aft direction, determine 
the full rearward, middle, and full forward positions of the SCRP. Using 
any seat or seat cushion adjustments other than that which primarily 
moves the seat fore-aft, determine the SCRP mid-point height for each of 
the three fore-aft test positions, while maintaining as closely as 
possible, the seat cushion angle determined in S16.2.10.3.1. Set the 
seat back angle, if adjustable independent of the seat, at the 
manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle for a 50th percentile 
adult male as specified in S8.1.3. If the dummy contacts the vehicle 
interior, move the seat rearward to the next detent that provides 
clearance. If the seat is a power seat, move the seat rearward while 
assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) distance between the 
vehicle interior and the point on the dummy that would first contact the 
vehicle interior.
    S24.1.3 Except as otherwise specified, if the booster seat has an 
anchorage system as specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 and is used under 
this standard in testing a vehicle with a front outboard passenger 
vehicle seat that has an anchorage system as specified in FMVSS No. 225, 
the vehicle shall comply with the belted test conditions with the 
restraint anchorage system attached to the FMVSS No. 225 vehicle seat 
anchorage system and the vehicle

[[Page 560]]

seat belt unattached. It shall also comply with the belted test 
conditions with the restraint anchorage system unattached to the FMVSS 
No. 225 vehicle seat anchorage system and the vehicle seat belt 
attached. The vehicle shall comply with the unbelted test conditions 
with the restraint anchorage system unattached to the FMVSS No. 225 
vehicle seat anchorage system.
    S24.1.4 Do not attach any tethers.
    S24.1.5 The definitions provided in S16.3.1 through S16.3.10 apply 
to the tests specified in S24.
    S24.1.6 For leg and thigh angles, use the following references:
    S24.1.6.1 Thigh--a straight line on the thigh skin between the 
center of the 5/16-18 UNC-2B threaded access hole in the upper leg clamp 
(drawing 127-4004, 6 YR H3--upper leg clamp) and the knee screw (part 
9000248 in drawing 127-4000-1 & -2, leg assembly).
    S24.1.6.2 Leg--a straight line on the leg skin between the center of 
the lower leg screw (part 9001170 in drawing 127-4000-1 & -2, leg 
assembly) and the knee screw (part 9000248 in drawing 127-4000-1 & -2, 
leg assembly).
    S24.2 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in deactivation of the passenger air bag. Each vehicle that is 
certified as complying with S23.2 shall meet the following test 
requirements.
    S24.2.1 Except as provided in S24.2.2, conduct all tests as 
specified in S22.2, except that the 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart N 6-year-old 
child dummy shall be used.
    S24.2.2 Exceptions. The tests specified in the following paragraphs 
of S22.2 need not be conducted: S22.2.1.5, S22.2.2.3, S22.2.2.5, 
S22.2.2.6, S22.2.2.7, and S22.2.2.8.
    S24.2.3 Sitting back in the seat and leaning on the front outboard 
passenger door.
    (a) Place the dummy in the seated position in the front outboard 
passenger vehicle seat. For bucket seats, position the midsagittal plane 
of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the longitudinal 
centerline of the seat cushion, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm 
(<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in). For bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the longitudinal 
centerline of the vehicle, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in), as the center of the steering wheel.
    (b) Place the dummy's back against the seat back and rest the 
dummy's thighs on the seat cushion.
    (c) Allow the legs and feet of the dummy to extend off the surface 
of the seat. If this positioning of the dummy's legs is prevented by 
contact with the instrument panel, using only the control that primarily 
moves the seat fore and aft, move the seat rearward to the next detent 
that provides clearance. If the seat is a power seat, move the seat 
rearward, while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
distance between the vehicle interior and the part of the dummy that was 
in contact with the vehicle interior.
    (d) Rotate the dummy's upper arms toward the seat back until they 
make contact.
    (e) Rotate the dummy's lower arms down until they contact the seat.
    (f) Close the vehicle's passenger-side door and then start the 
vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' position, whichever 
will turn on the suppression system.
    (g) Push against the dummy's left shoulder to lean the dummy against 
the door; close all remaining doors.
    (h) Wait ten seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S24.3 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in activation of the passenger air bag system.
    S24.3.1 Each vehicle certified to this option shall comply in tests 
conducted with the front outboard passenger seating position at the mid-
height, in the full rearward and middle positions determined in S24.1.2, 
and the forward position determined in S16.3.3.1.8.
    S24.3.2 Place a 49 CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile adult 
female test dummy at the front outboard passenger seating position of 
the vehicle, in accordance with procedures specified in S16.3.3 of this 
standard, except as specified in S24.3.1. Do not fasten the seat belt.
    S24.3.3 Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.

[[Page 561]]

    S24.3.4 Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag system is 
activated.
    S24.4 Low risk deployment tests.
    S24.4.1 Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S23.4 shall 
meet the following test requirements with the 49 CFR Part 572, Subpart N 
6-year-old child dummy in both of the following positions: Position 1 
(S24.4.2) or Position 2 (S24.4.3).
    S24.4.1.1 Locate and mark a point on the front of the dummy's chest 
jacket on the midsagittal plane that is 139 mm (5.5 in) <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1in) along the surface of 
the skin from the top of the skin at the neckline. This is referred to 
as ``Point 1.''
    S24.4.1.2 Mark a point on the instrument panel that is 
longitudinally and transversely, as measured along the surface of the 
instrument panel, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>6 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 in) of the point that is defined by the intersection 
of the instrument panel and a line between the volumetric center of the 
smallest volume that can encompass the folded undeployed air bag and the 
volumetric center of the static fully inflated air bag.
    S22.4.1.3 Locate the vertical plane parallel to the vehicle 
longitudinal centerline through the point located in S24.4.1.2. This is 
referred to as ``Plane D.''
    S24.4.1.4 Locate the horizontal plane through the point located in 
S24.4.1.2. This is referred to as ``Plane C.''
    S24.4.2 Position 1 (chest on instrument panel).
    S24.4.2.1 Set the seat and seat cushion in the positions determined 
in S16.2.10.3.1. If the seat back is adjustable independent of the seat, 
place the seat back at the manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle 
for a 50th percentile adult male as specified in S8.1.3. Position any 
adjustable parts of the seat that provide additional support so that 
they are in the lowest or most open adjustment position. If adjustable, 
set the head restraint in the lowest and most forward position.
    S24.4.2.2 Remove the legs of the dummy at the pelvic interface.
    S24.4.2.3 Place the dummy in the front outboard passenger seat such 
that:
    (a) The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane D within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    (b) The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands are next 
to where the thighs would be.
    (c) Without changing the seat position and with the dummy's thorax 
instrument cavity rear face 6 degrees forward of the vertical, move the 
dummy forward until the dummy head/torso contacts the instrument panel. 
If the dummy loses contact with the seat cushion because of the forward 
movement, maintain the height of the dummy while moving the dummy 
forward. If the head contacts the windshield before head/torso contact 
with the instrument panel, maintain the thorax instrument cavity angle 
and move the dummy forward such that the head is following the angle of 
the windshield until there is head/torso contact with the instrument 
panel. Once contact is made, raise or lower the dummy vertically until 
Point 1 lies in Plane C within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in). If the dummy's head contacts the windshield and 
keeps Point 1 from reaching Plane C, lower the dummy until there is no 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance between the head and the windshield. 
(The dummy shall remain in contact with the instrument panel while being 
raised or lowered which may change the dummy's fore-aft position.)
    S24.4.2.4 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S24.4.3 Position 2 (head on instrument panel).
    S24.4.3.1 Place the front outboard passenger seat at the mid-height 
full rearward seating position determined in S24.1.2. Place the seat 
back, if adjustable independent of the seat, at the manufacturer's 
nominal design seat back angle for a 50th percentile adult male as 
specified in S8.1.3. Position any adjustable parts of the seat that 
provide additional support so that they

[[Page 562]]

are in the lowest or most open adjustment position. Position an 
adjustable head restraint in the lowest and most forward position.
    S24.4.3.2 Place the dummy in the front outboard passenger seat such 
that:
    (a) The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane D within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    (b) The legs are perpendicular to the floor pan, the back of the 
legs are in contact with the seat cushion, and the dummy's thorax 
instrument cavity rear face is 6 degrees forward of vertical. If it is 
not possible to position the dummy with the legs in the prescribed 
position, rotate the legs forward until the dummy is resting on the seat 
with the feet positioned flat on the floor pan and the back of the legs 
are in contact with the front of the seat cushion. Set the transverse 
distance between the longitudinal centerlines at the front of the 
dummy's knees at 112 to 117 mm (4.4 to 4.6 in), with the thighs and the 
legs of the dummy in vertical planes.
    (c) The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands are in 
contact with the thighs.
    S24.4.3.3 Using only the control that primarily moves the seat in 
the fore and aft direction, move the seat forward, while maintaining the 
thorax instrument cavity rear face orientation until any part of the 
dummy contacts the vehicle's instrument panel.
    S24.4.3.4 If dummy contact has not been made with the vehicle's 
instrument panel at the full forward seating position of the seat, slide 
the dummy forward on the seat until contact is made. Maintain the thorax 
instrument cavity rear face orientation. If the dummy loses contact with 
the seat, from that point forward maintain the height of the dummy. 
Except as provided in S24.4.3.5, maintain the angle of the thigh with 
respect to the horizontal.
    S24.4.3.5 If head/torso contact with the instrument panel has not 
been made, maintain the angle of the thighs with respect to the 
horizontal while applying a force towards the front of the vehicle on 
the spine of the dummy between the shoulder joints, perpendicular to the 
thorax instrument cavity rear face, until the head or torso comes into 
contact with the vehicle's instrument panel or until a maximum force of 
222 N (50 lb) is achieved. If the head/torso is still not in contact 
with the instrument panel, hold the femurs and release the 222 N (50 lb) 
force. While maintaining the relative angle between the torso and the 
femurs, roll the dummy forward on the seat cushion, without sliding, 
until head/torso contact with the instrument panel is achieved. If seat 
contact is lost prior to or during femur rotation out of the horizontal 
plane, constrain the dummy to rotate about the dummy H-point. If the 
dummy cannot be rolled forward on the seat due to contact of the dummy 
feet with the floor pan, extend the lower legs forward, at the knees, 
until floor pan contact is avoided.
    S24.4.3.6 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S24.4.4 Deploy the front outboard passenger frontal air bag system. 
If the frontal air bag system contains a multistage inflator, the 
vehicle shall be able to comply with the injury criteria at any stage or 
combination of stages or time delay between successive stages that could 
occur in a rigid barrier crash test at or below 26 km/h (16 mph), under 
the test procedure specified in S22.5.
    S25 Requirements using an out-of-position 5th percentile adult 
female dummy at the driver position.
    S25.1 Each vehicle certified as complying with S14 shall, at the 
option of the manufacturer, meet the requirements specified in S25.2 or 
S25.3 under the test procedures specified in S26 or S28, as appropriate.
    S25.2 Option 1--Dynamic automatic suppression system that suppresses 
the air bag when the driver is out of position. (This option is 
available under the conditions set forth in S27.1.) The vehicle

[[Page 563]]

shall be equipped with a dynamic automatic suppression system for the 
driver air bag which meets the requirements specified in S27.
    S25.3 Option 2--Low risk deployment. Each vehicle shall meet the 
injury criteria specified by S15.3 of this standard, except as modified 
in S25.4, when the driver air bag is statically deployed in accordance 
with both of the low risk deployment test procedures specified in S26.
    S25.4 Neck injury criteria driver low risk deployment tests. When 
measuring neck injury in low risk deployment tests for the driver 
position, each of the following neck injury criteria shall be met.
    (a) Nij.
    (1) The shear force (Fx), axial force (Fz), and bending moment (My) 
shall be measured by the dummy upper neck load cell for the duration of 
the crash event as specified in S4.11. Shear force, axial force, and 
bending moment shall be filtered for Nij purposes at SAE J211/1 rev. Mar 
95 Channel Frequency Class 600 (see S4.7).
    (2) During the event, the axial force (Fz) can be either in tension 
or compression while the occipital condyle bending moment (Mocy) can be 
in either flexion or extension. This results in four possible loading 
conditions for Nij: tension-extension (Nte), tension-flexion (Ntf), 
compression-extension (Nce), or compression-flexion (Ncf).
    (3) When calculating Nij using equation S25.4(a)(4), the critical 
values, Fzc and Myc, are:
    (i) Fzc = 3880 N (872 lbf) when Fz is in tension
    (ii) Fzc = 3880 N (872 lbf) when Fz is in compression
    (iii) Myc = 155 Nm (114 lbf-ft) when a flexion moment exists at the 
occipital condyle
    (iv) Myc = 61 Nm (45 lbf-ft) when an extension moment exists at the 
occipital condyle.
    (4) At each point in time, only one of the four loading conditions 
occurs and the Nij value corresponding to that loading condition is 
computed and the three remaining loading modes shall be considered a 
value of zero. The expression for calculating each Nij loading condition 
is given by:

Nij = (Fz / Fzc) + (Mocy / Myc)

    (5) None of the four Nij values shall exceed 1.0 at any time during 
the event.
    (b) Peak tension. Tension force (Fz), measured at the upper neck 
load cell, shall not exceed 2070 N (465 lbf) at any time.
    (c) Peak compression. Compression force (Fz), measured at the upper 
neck load cell, shall not exceed 2520 N (566 lbf) at any time.
    (d) Unless otherwise indicated, instrumentation for data 
acquisition, data channel frequency class, and moment calculations are 
the same as given in 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart O 5th percentile female 
test dummy.
    S26 Procedure for low risk deployment tests of driver air bag.
    S26.1 Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S25.3 shall 
meet the requirements of S25.3 and S25.4 with the 49 CFR Part 572 
Subpart O 5th percentile adult female dummy in both of the following 
positions: Driver position 1 (S26.2) and Driver position 2 (S26.3).
    S26.2 Driver position 1 (chin on module).
    S26.2.1 Adjust the steering controls so that the steering wheel hub 
is at the geometric center of the locus it describes when it is moved 
through its full range of driving positions. If there is no setting at 
the geometric center, position it one setting lower than the geometric 
center. Set the rotation of the steering wheel so that the vehicle 
wheels are pointed straight ahead.
    S26.2.2 Mark a point on the steering wheel cover that is 
longitudinally and transversely, as measured along the surface of the 
steering wheel cover, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>6 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 in) of the point that is defined by the intersection 
of the steering wheel cover and a line between the volumetric center of 
the smallest volume that can encompass the folded undeployed air bag and 
the volumetric center of the static fully inflated air bag. Locate the 
vertical plane parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline through 
the point located on the steering wheel cover. This is referred to as 
``Plane E.''
    S26.2.3 Place the seat and seat cushion in the position achieved in 
S16.2.10.3.1. If the seat or seat cushion is adjustable in the vertical 
direction by adjustments other than that which

[[Page 564]]

primarily moves the seat or seat cushion fore-aft, determine the maximum 
and minimum heights of the SCRP at this position, while maintaining the 
seat cushion reference line angle as closely as possible. Place the SCRP 
in the mid-height position. If the seat back is adjustable independent 
of the seat, place the seat back at the manufacturer's nominal design 
seat back angle for a 50th percentile adult male as specified in S8.1.3. 
Position any adjustable parts of the seat that provide additional 
support so that they are in the lowest or most open adjustment position. 
Position an adjustable head restraint in the lowest and most forward 
position.
    S26.2.4 Place the dummy in the driver's seat such that:
    S26.2.4.1 The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane E within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    S26.2.4.2 The legs are perpendicular to the floor pan and the back 
of the legs are in contact with the seat cushion. The legs may be 
adjusted if necessary to achieve the final head position.
    S26.2.4.3 The dummy's thorax instrument cavity rear face is 6 
degrees forward (toward the front of the vehicle) of the steering wheel 
angle (i.e., if the steering wheel angle is 25 degrees from vertical, 
the thorax instrument cavity rear face angle is 31 degrees).
    S26.2.4.4 The initial transverse distance between the longitudinal 
centerlines at the front of the dummy's knees is 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 
6.7 in), with the thighs and legs of the dummy in vertical planes.
    S26.2.4.5 The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands are 
in contact with the thighs.
    S26.2.5 Maintaining the spine angle, slide the dummy forward until 
the head/torso contacts the steering wheel.
    S26.2.6 While maintaining the spine angle, adjust the height of the 
dummy so that the bottom of the chin is in the same horizontal plane as 
the highest point of the air bag module cover (dummy height can be 
adjusted using the seat height adjustments and/or spacer blocks). If the 
seat prevents the bottom of the chin from being in the same horizontal 
plane as the module cover, adjust the dummy height to as close to the 
prescribed position as possible.
    S26.2.7 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S26.3 Driver position 2 (chin on rim).
    S26.3.1 Place the seat and seat cushion in the position achieved in 
S16.2.10.3.1. If the seat or seat cushion is adjustable in the vertical 
direction by adjustments other than that which primarily moves the seat 
or seat cushion fore-aft, determine the maximum and minimum heights of 
the SCRP at this position, while maintaining the seat cushion reference 
line angle as closely as possible. Place the SCRP in the mid-height 
position. If the seat back is adjustable independent of the seat, place 
the seat back at the manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle for a 
50th percentile adult male as specified in S8.1.3. Position any 
adjustable parts of the seat that provide additional support so that 
they are in the lowest or most open adjustment position. Position an 
adjustable head restraint in the lowest position.
    S26.3.2 Adjust the steering controls so that the steering wheel hub 
is at the geometric center of the locus it describes when it is moved 
through its full range of driving positions. If there is no setting at 
the geometric center, position it one setting lower than the geometric 
center. Set the rotation of the steering wheel so that the vehicle 
wheels are pointed straight ahead.
    S26.3.3 Mark a point on the steering wheel cover that is 
longitudinally and transversely, as measured along the surface of the 
steering wheel cover, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>6 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 in) of the point that is defined by the intersection 
of the steering wheel cover and a line between the volumetric center of 
the smallest volume that can encompass the folded undeployed air bag and 
the volumetric center of the static fully inflated air bag. Locate the 
vertical plane parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline

[[Page 565]]

through the point located on the steering wheel cover. This is referred 
to as ``Plane E.''
    S26.3.4 Place the dummy in the driver's seat position such that:
    S26.3.4.1 The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane E within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    S26.3.4.2 The legs are perpendicular to the floor pan and the back 
of the legs are in contact with the seat cushion. The legs may be 
adjusted if necessary to achieve the final head position.
    S26.3.4.3 The dummy's thorax instrument cavity rear face is 6 
degrees forward (toward the front of the vehicle) of the steering wheel 
angle (i.e., if the steering wheel angle is 25 degrees from vertical, 
the thorax instrument cavity rear face angle is 31 degrees).
    S26.3.4.4 The initial transverse distance between the longitudinal 
centerlines at the front of the dummy's knees is 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 
6.7 in), with the thighs and legs of the dummy in vertical planes.
    S26.3.4.5 The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands are 
in contact with the thighs.
    S26.3.5 Maintaining the spine angle, slide the dummy forward until 
the head/torso contacts the steering wheel.
    S26.3.6 While maintaining the spine angle, position the dummy so 
that a point on the chin 40 mm (1.6 in) <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 mm 
(<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 in) below the center of the mouth (chin 
point) is, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 
in), in contact with a point on the steering wheel rim surface closest 
to the dummy that is 10 mm (0.4 in) vertically below the highest point 
on the rim in Plane E. If the dummy's head contacts the vehicle 
windshield or upper interior before the prescribed position can be 
obtained, lower the dummy until there is no more than 5 mm (0.2 in) 
clearance between the vehicle's windshield or upper interior, as 
applicable.
    S26.3.7 If the steering wheel can be adjusted so that the chin point 
can be in contact with the rim of the uppermost portion of the steering 
wheel, adjust the steering wheel to that position. If the steering wheel 
contacts the dummy's leg(s) prior to attaining this position, adjust it 
to the next highest detent, or if infinitely adjustable, until there is 
a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance between the wheel and the dummy's 
leg(s). Readjust the dummy's torso such that the thorax instrument 
cavity rear face is 6 degrees forward of the steering wheel angle. 
Position the dummy so that the chin point is in contact, or if contact 
is not achieved, as close as possible to contact with the rim of the 
uppermost portion of the steering wheel.
    S26.3.8 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S26.4 Deploy the driver frontal air bag system. If the frontal air 
bag system contains a multistage inflator, the vehicle shall be able to 
comply with the injury criteria at any stage or combination of stages or 
time delay between successive stages that could occur in a rigid barrier 
crash test at or below 26 km/h (16 mph), under the test procedure 
specified in S22.5.
    S27 Option for dynamic automatic suppression system that suppresses 
the air bag when an occupant is out-of-position.
    S27.1 Availability of option. This option is available for either 
air bag, singly or in conjunction, subject to the requirements of S27, 
if:
    (a) A petition for rulemaking to establish dynamic automatic 
suppression system test procedures is submitted pursuant to Subpart B of 
Part 552 and a test procedure applicable to the vehicle is added to S28 
pursuant to the procedures specified by that subpart, or
    (b) A test procedure applicable to the vehicle is otherwise added to 
S28.
    S27.2 Definitions. For purposes of S27 and S28, the following 
definitions apply:
    Automatic suppression zone or ASZ means a three-dimensional zone 
adjacent to the air bag cover, specified by the vehicle manufacturer, 
where the deployment of the air bag will be suppressed by the DASS if a 
vehicle occupant enters the zone under specified conditions.

[[Page 566]]

    Dynamic automatic suppression system or DASS means a portion of an 
air bag system that automatically controls whether or not the air bag 
deploys during a crash by:
    (1) Sensing the location of an occupant, moving or still, in 
relation to the air bag;
    (2) Interpreting the occupant characteristics and location 
information to determine whether or not the air bag should deploy; and
    (3) Activating or suppressing the air bag system based on the 
interpretation of occupant characteristics and location information.
    S27.3 Requirements. Each vehicle shall, at each applicable front 
outboard designated seating position, when tested under the conditions 
of S28 of this standard, comply with the requirements specified in S27.4 
through S27.6.
    S27.4 Each vehicle shall be equipped with a DASS.
    S27.5 Static test requirement (low risk deployment for occupants 
outside the ASZ).
    S27.5.1 Driver (49 CFR Part 572 Subpart O 5th percentile female 
dummy). Each vehicle shall meet the injury criteria specified in S15.3 
of this standard when the driver air bag is deployed in accordance with 
the procedures specified in S28.1.
    S27.5.2 Passenger (49 CFR Part 572 Subpart P 3-year-old child dummy 
and 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart N 6-year-old child dummy). Each vehicle 
shall meet the injury criteria specified in S21.5 and S23.5, as 
appropriate, when the passenger air bag is deployed in accordance with 
the procedures specified in S28.2.
    S27.6 Dynamic test requirement (suppression of air bag for occupants 
inside the ASZ).
    S27.6.1 Driver. The DASS shall suppress the driver air bag before 
the head, neck, or torso of the specified test device enters the ASZ 
when the vehicle is tested under the procedures specified in S28.3.
    S27.6.2 Passenger. The DASS shall suppress the passenger air bag 
before head, neck, or torso of the specified test device enters the ASZ 
when the vehicle is tested under the procedures specified in S28.4.
    S28 Test procedure for S27 of this standard. [Reserved]
    S28.1 Driver suppression zone verification test (49 CFR Part 572 
Subpart O 5th percentile female dummy). [Reserved]
    S28.2 Passenger suppression zone verification test (49 CFR Part 572 
Subpart P 3-year-old child dummy and 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart N 6-year-
old child dummies). [Reserved]
    S28.3 Driver dynamic test procedure for DASS requirements. 
[Reserved]
    S28.4 Passenger dynamic test procedure for DASS requirements. 
[Reserved]
    S29 Manufacturer option to certify vehicles to certain static 
suppression test requirements using human beings rather than test 
dummies.
    S29.1 At the option of the manufacturer, instead of using test 
dummies in conducting the tests for the following automatic suppression 
and occupant recognition parts of the low risk deployment test 
requirements, human beings may be used as specified. If human beings are 
used, they shall assume, to the extent possible, the final physical 
position specified for the corresponding dummies for each test.
    (a) If a manufacturer decides to certify a vehicle using a human 
being for a test of the passenger automatic suppression, it shall use 
humans for the entire series of tests, e.g., 3-year-old children for 
each test of the system involving 3-year-old test dummies. If a 
manufacturer decides to certify a vehicle using a test dummy for a test 
of the system, it shall use test dummies for the entire series of tests, 
e.g., a Hybrid III 3-year-old child dummy for each test of the system 
involving 3-year-old child test dummies.
    (b) For S19.2, instead of using the 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart R 12-
month-old child dummy, a human child who weighs between 8.2 and 9.1 kg 
(18 and 20 lb), and who is between 61 and 66 cm (24 and 26 in) tall may 
be used.
    (c) For S19.2, instead of using the 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart K 
newborn infant dummy, a human child who weighs between 8.2 and 9.1 kg 
(18 and 20 lb), and who is between 61 and 66 cm (24 and 26 in) tall may 
be used.
    (d) For S21.2 and S21.5.1, instead of using the 49 CFR Part 572 
Subpart P 3-year-old child dummy, a human child

[[Page 567]]

who weighs between 13.4 and 18 kg (29.5 and 39.5 lb), and who is between 
89 and 99 cm (35 and 39 in) tall may be used.
    (e) For S23.2 and S23.5.1, instead of using the 49 CFR Part 572 
Subpart N 6-year-old child dummy, a human child who weighs between 21 
and 25.6 kg (46.5 and 56.5 lb), and who is between 114 and 124.5 cm (45 
and 49 in) tall may be used.
    (f) For S19.2, S21.2, and S23.2, instead of using the 49 CFR Part 
572 Subpart O 5th percentile adult female test dummy, a female who 
weighs between 46.7 and 51.25 kg (103 and 113 lb), and who is between 
139.7 and 150 cm (55 and 59 in) tall may be used.
    S29.2 Human beings shall be dressed in a cotton T-shirt, full length 
cotton trousers, and sneakers. Specified weights and heights include 
clothing.
    S29.3 A manufacturer exercising this option shall upon request:
    (a) Provide NHTSA with a method to deactivate the air bag during 
compliance testing under S20.2, S20.3, S22.2, S22.3, S24.2, and S24.3, 
and identify any parts or equipment necessary for deactivation; such 
assurance may be made by removing the air bag; and
    (b) Provide NHTSA with a method to assure that the same test results 
would be obtained if the air bag were not deactivated.

                        Figures to Sec. 571.208

                          Figure 1. [Reserved]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.084


[[Page 568]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.089


[[Page 569]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.087


[[Page 570]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.088


[[Page 571]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR28DE98.000


[[Page 572]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11JN03.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11JN03.007


[[Page 573]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27NO96.012


[[Page 574]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11JN03.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11JN03.009


[[Page 575]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11JN03.010


[[Page 576]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12MY00.011


[[Page 577]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06JA03.001


[[Page 578]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20AU03.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19NO03.000

    Appendix A to Sec. 571.208--Selection of Child Restraint Systems

    A. The following car bed, manufactured on or after December 1, 1999, 
may be used by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration to 
test the suppression system of a vehicle that is manufactured on or 
after the effective date specified in the table below and that has been 
certified as being in compliance with 49 CFR 571.208 S19:

[[Page 579]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Effective and termination dates
                                        ------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   January 17, 2002                   September 1, 2004.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cosco Dream Ride 02-719................  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    B. Any of the following rear facing child restraint systems, 
manufactured on or after December 1, 1999, may be used by the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration to test the suppression system of 
a vehicle that is manufactured on or after the effective date and prior 
to the termination date specified in the table below and that has been 
certified as being in compliance with 49 CFR 571.208 S19. When the 
restraint system comes equipped with a removable base, the test may be 
run either with the base attached or without the base.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Effective and termination dates
                                        ------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   January 17, 2002                    September 1, 2004
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Britax Handle with Care 191............  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
Century Assura 4553....................  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
Century Avanta SE 41530................  Effective..........................  Terminated.
Century Smart Fit 4543.................  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
Cosco Arriva 02727.....................  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
Cosco Opus 35 02603....................  Effective..........................  Terminated.
Evenflo Discovery Adjust Right 212.....  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
Evenflo First Choice 204...............  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
Evenflo On My Way Position Right V 282.  Effective..........................  Terminated.
Graco Infant 8457......................  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    C. Any of the following forward facing toddler and forward-facing 
convertible child restraint systems, manufactured on or after December 
1, 1999, may be used by the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration to test the suppression system of a vehicle that is 
manufactured on or after the effective date and prior to the termination 
date specified in the table below and that has been certified as being 
in compliance with 49 CFR 571.208 S19, or S21. (Note: Any child 
restraint listed in this subpart that is not recommended for use in a 
rear-facing position by its manufacturer is excluded from use in 
S20.2.1.4):

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Effective and termination dates
                                        ------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   January 17, 2002                    September 1, 2006
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Britax Roundabout 161..................  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
Britax Expressway......................  ...................................  Effective.
Century Encore 4612....................  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
Century STE 1000 4416..................  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
Cosco Olympian 02803...................  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
Cosco Touriva 02519....................  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
Evenflo Horizon V 425..................  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
Evenflo Medallion 254..................  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
Safety 1st Comfort Ride 22-400.........  ...................................  Effective.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    D. Any of the following forward-facing toddler/belt positioning 
booster systems and belt positioning booster systems, manufactured on or 
after December 1, 1999, may be used by the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration as test devices to test the suppression system of 
a vehicle that is manufactured on or after the effective date and prior 
to the termination date specified in the table below and that has been 
certified as being in compliance with 49 CFR 571.208 S21 or S23:

[[Page 580]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Effective and termination dates
                                        ------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   January 17, 2002                    September 1, 2004
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Britax Roadster 9004...................  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
Century Next Step 4920.................  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
Cosco High Back Booster 02-442.........  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
Evenflo Right Fit 245..................  Effective..........................  Remains Effective.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.208, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.

    Effective Date Note: At 67 FR 79439, Dec. 27, 2002, Sec. 571.208 
was amended by removing and reserving paragraph S4.2.4.1(a), effective 
Dec. 27, 2004.


<R05>
Sec. 571.208a  Optional test procedures for vehicles manufactured between January 27, 2004 and August 31, 2004.

    For vehicles manufactured between January 27, 2004 and August 31, 
2004, a manufacturer may, at its option, comply with certain 
requirements of Standard No. 208 in accordance with the test procedures 
set forth in this Sec. 571.208a instead of the corresponding test 
procedures in Sec. 571.208.
    S1 through S15 [Reserved] See Sec. 571.208, S1 through S15.
    S16. Test procedures for rigid barrier test requirements using 5th 
percentile adult female dummies.
    S16.1 General provisions. Crash testing to determine compliance with 
the requirements of S15 of this standard is conducted as specified in 
the following paragraphs (a) and (b).
    (a) Belted test. Place a 49 CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile 
adult female test dummy at each front outboard seating position of a 
vehicle, in accordance with the procedures specified in S16.3 of this 
standard. Impact the vehicle traveling longitudinally forward at any 
speed, up to and including 48 km/h (30 mph), into a fixed rigid barrier 
that is perpendicular within a tolerance of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 
degrees to the line of travel of the vehicle under the applicable 
conditions of S16.2 of this standard.
    (b) Unbelted test. Place a 49 CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile 
adult female test dummy at each front outboard seating position of a 
vehicle, in accordance with the procedures specified in S16.3 of this 
standard, except S16.3.5. Impact the vehicle traveling longitudinally 
forward at any speed, from 32 km/h (20 mph) to 40 km/h (25 mph), 
inclusive, into a fixed rigid barrier that is perpendicular within a 
tolerance of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 degrees to the line of travel of 
the vehicle under the applicable conditions of S16.2 of this standard.
    S16.2 Test conditions.
    S16.2.1 The vehicle, including test devices and instrumentation, is 
loaded as in S8.1.1 of FMVSS No. 208.
    S16.2.2 Movable vehicle windows and vents are placed in the fully 
closed position, unless the vehicle manufacturer chooses to specify a 
different adjustment position prior to the time the vehicle is 
certified.
    S16.2.3 Convertibles and open-body type vehicles have the top, if 
any, in place in the closed passenger compartment configuration.
    S16.2.4 Doors are fully closed and latched but not locked.
    S16.2.5 The dummy is clothed in form fitting cotton stretch garments 
with short sleeves and above the knee length pants. A size 7\1/2\W shoe 
which meets the configuration and size specifications of MIL-S-21711E 
(see S4.7) or its equivalent is placed on each foot of the test dummy.
    S16.2.6 Limb joints are set at one g, barely restraining the weight 
of the limb when extended horizontally. Leg joints are adjusted with the 
torso in the supine position.
    S16.2.7 Instrumentation shall not affect the motion of dummies 
during impact.
    S16.2.8 The stabilized temperature of the dummy is at any level 
between 20.6 [deg]C and 22.2 [deg]C (69 [deg]F to 72 [deg]F).
    S16.2.9 Steering wheel adjustment.

[[Page 581]]

    S16.2.9.1 Adjust a tiltable steering wheel, if possible, so that the 
steering wheel hub is at the geometric center of its full range of 
driving positions.
    S16.2.9.2 If there is no setting detent at the mid-position, lower 
the steering wheel to the detent just below the mid-position.
    S16.2.9.3 If the steering column is telescoping, place the steering 
column in the mid-position. If there is no mid-position, move the 
steering wheel rearward one position from the mid-position.
    S16.2.10 Driver and passenger seat set-up.
    S16.2.10.1 Lumbar support adjustment. Position adjustable lumbar 
supports so that the lumbar support is in its lowest, retracted or 
deflated adjustment position.
    S16.2.10.2 Other seat adjustments. Position any adjustable parts of 
the seat that provide additional support so that they are in the lowest 
or most open adjustment position.
    S16.2.10.3 Seat position adjustment. If the passenger seat does not 
adjust independently of the driver seat, the driver seat shall control 
the final position of the passenger seat.
    S16.2.10.3.1 If the seat is adjustable in the fore and aft and/or 
vertical directions, move the seat to the rearmost position at the full 
down height adjustment. If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, 
independent of the seat back, set this adjustment to the full rearward 
position. If the seat cushion contains a height adjustment, independent 
of the seat back, set this adjustment to the full down position. Record 
a seat cushion reference angle.
    S16.2.10.3.2 Using only controls which move the seat fore and aft, 
move the seat to the full forward position. If seat adjustments other 
than fore-aft are present and the seat cushion reference angle changes 
from that measured in S16.2.10.3.1, use those adjustments to maintain as 
closely as possible the angle recorded in S16.2.10.3.1.
    S16.2.10.3.3 If the seat height is adjustable, determine the maximum 
and minimum heights at this position, while maintaining, as closely as 
possible, the angle recorded in S16.2.10.3.1. Set the seat at the 
midpoint height with the seat cushion reference angle set as closely as 
possible to the angle recorded in S16.2.10.3.1. Mark location of the 
seat for future reference.
    S16.3 Dummy seating positioning procedures. The 49 CFR part 572 
subpart O 5th percentile adult female test dummy is positioned as 
follows:
    S16.3.1 General provisions and definitions.
    S16.3.1.1 All angles are measured with respect to the horizontal 
plane unless otherwise stated.
    S16.3.1.2 The dummy's neck bracket is adjusted to align the zero 
degree index marks.
    S16.3.1.3 The term ``midsagittal plane'' refers to the vertical 
plane that separates the dummy into equal left and right halves.
    S16.3.1.4 The term ``vertical longitudinal plane'' refers to a 
vertical plane parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline.
    S16.3.1.5 The term ``vertical plane'' refers to a vertical plane, 
not necessarily parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline.
    S16.3.1.6 The term ``transverse instrumentation platform'' refers to 
the transverse instrumentation surface inside the dummy's skull casting 
to which the neck load cell mounts. This surface is perpendicular to the 
skull cap's machined inferior-superior mounting surface.
    S16.3.1.7 The term ``thigh'' refers to the femur between, but not 
including, the knee and the pelvis.
    S16.3.1.8 The term ``leg'' refers to the lower part of the entire 
leg including the knee.
    S16.3.1.9 The term ``foot'' refers to the foot including the ankle.
    S16.3.1.10 The longitudinal centerline of a bucket seat cushion is 
determined at the widest part of the seat cushion. Measure perpendicular 
to the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle.
    S16.3.1.11 For leg and thigh angles use the following references:
    S16.3.1.11.1 Thigh--a straight line on the thigh skin between the 
center of the \1/2\-13 UNC-2B tapped hole in the upper leg femur clamp 
(see drawings 880105-504 (left thigh) and 880105-505 (right thigh), 
upper leg femur clamp) and the knee pivot shoulder bolt (part 880105-527 
in drawing 880105-528R & 528L, sliding knee assy. w/o pot).

[[Page 582]]

    S16.3.1.11.2 Leg--a straight line on the leg skin between the center 
of the ankle shell (parts 880105-609 & 633 in drawing 880105-660, ankle 
assembly) and the knee pivot shoulder bolt (part 880105-527 in drawing 
880105-528R & 528L, sliding knee assy. w/o pot).
    S16.3.2 Driver dummy positioning.
    S16.3.2.1 Driver torso/head/seat back angle positioning.
    S16.3.2.1.1 With the seat in the position determined in S16.2.10, 
use only the controls which move the seat fore and aft to place the seat 
in the rearmost position, without adjusting independent height controls. 
If the seat cushion reference angle automatically changes as the seat is 
moved from the full forward position, maintain, as closely as possible, 
the seat cushion reference angle in S16.2.10.3.1, for the final forward 
position when measuring the pelvic angle as specified in S16.3.2.1.11.
    S16.3.2.1.2 Fully recline the seat back, if adjustable. Install the 
dummy into the driver's seat, such that when the legs are positioned 120 
degrees to the thighs, the calves of the legs are not touching the seat 
cushion.
    S16.3.2.1.3 Bucket seats. Center the dummy on the seat cushion so 
that its midsagittal plane is vertical and coincides with the vertical 
longitudinal plane through the center of the seat cushion.
    S16.3.2.1.4 Bench seats. Position the midsagittal plane of the dummy 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline and 
aligned with the center of the steering wheel rim.
    S16.3.2.1.5 Hold the dummy's thighs down and push rearward on the 
upper torso to maximize the dummy's pelvic angle.
    S16.3.2.1.6 Place the legs at 120 degrees to the thighs. Set the 
initial transverse distance between the longitudinal centerlines at the 
front of the dummy's knees at 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 6.7 in), with the 
thighs and legs of the dummy in vertical planes. Push rearward on the 
dummy's knees to force the pelvis into the seat so there is no gap 
between the pelvis and the seat back or until contact occurs between the 
back of the dummy's calves and the front of the seat cushion.
    S16.3.2.1.7 Gently rock the upper torso relative to the lower torso 
laterally in a side to side motion three times through a <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 degree arc (approximately 51 mm (2 in) side to side) 
to reduce friction between the dummy and the seat.
    S16.3.2.1.8 If needed, extend the legs slightly so that the feet are 
not in contact with the floor pan. Let the thighs rest on the seat 
cushion to the extent permitted by the foot movement. Keeping the leg 
and the thigh in a vertical plane, place the foot in the vertical 
longitudinal plane that passes through the centerline of the accelerator 
pedal. Rotate the left thigh outboard about the hip until the center of 
the knee is the same distance from the midsagittal plane of the dummy as 
the right knee <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.2 
in). Using only controls which move the seat fore and aft, attempt to 
return the seat to the full forward position. If either of the dummy's 
legs first contacts the steering wheel, then adjust the steering wheel, 
if adjustable, upward until contact with the steering wheel is avoided. 
If the steering wheel is not adjustable, separate the knees enough to 
avoid steering wheel contact. Proceed with moving the seat forward until 
either the leg contacts the vehicle interior or the seat reaches the 
full forward position. (The right foot may contact and depress the 
accelerator and/or change the angle of the foot with respect to the leg 
during seat movement.) If necessary to avoid contact with the vehicles 
brake or clutch pedal, rotate the test dummy's left foot about the leg. 
If there is still interference, rotate the left thigh outboard about the 
hip the minimum distance necessary to avoid pedal interference. If a 
dummy leg contacts the vehicle interior before the full forward position 
is attained, position the seat at the next detent where there is no 
contact. If the seat is a power seat, move the seat fore and aft to 
avoid contact while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
distance between the vehicle interior and the point on the dummy that 
would first contact the vehicle interior. If the steering wheel was 
moved, return it to the position described in S16.2.9. If the steering 
wheel contacts the dummy's leg(s) prior to attaining this position,

[[Page 583]]

adjust it to the next higher detent, or if infinitely adjustable, until 
there is 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance between the wheel and the dummy's 
leg(s).
    S16.3.2.1.9 For vehicles without adjustable seat backs, adjust the 
lower neck bracket to level the head as much as possible. For vehicles 
with adjustable seat backs, while holding the thighs in place, rotate 
the seat back forward until the transverse instrumentation platform of 
the head is level to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degree, making 
sure that the pelvis does not interfere with the seat bight. Inspect the 
abdomen to ensure that it is properly installed. If the torso contacts 
the steering wheel, adjust the steering wheel in the following order 
until there is no contact: Telescoping adjustment, lowering adjustment, 
raising adjustment. If the vehicle has no adjustments or contact with 
the steering wheel cannot be eliminated by adjustment, position the seat 
at the next detent where there is no contact with the steering wheel as 
adjusted in S16.2.9. If the seat is a power seat, position the seat to 
avoid contact while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
distance between the steering wheel as adjusted in S16.2.9 and the point 
of contact on the dummy.
    S16.3.2.1.10 If it is not possible to achieve the head level within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees, minimize the angle.
    S16.3.2.1.11 Measure and set the dummy's pelvic angle using the 
pelvic angle gage (drawing TE-2504, incorporated by reference in 49 CFR 
part 572, subpart O, of this chapter). The angle shall be set to 20.0 
degrees <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2.5 degrees. If this is not possible, 
adjust the pelvic angle as close to 20.0 degrees as possible while 
keeping the transverse instrumentation platform of the head as level as 
possible by adjustments specified in S16.3.2.1.9 and S16.3.2.1.10.
    S16.3.2.1.12 If the dummy is contacting the vehicle interior after 
these adjustments, move the seat rearward until there is a maximum of 5 
mm (0.2 in) between the contact point of the dummy and the interior of 
the vehicle or if it has a manual seat adjustment, to the next rearward 
detent position. If after these adjustments, the dummy contact point is 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) from the vehicle interior and the seat is still 
not in its forwardmost position, move the seat forward until the contact 
point is 5 mm (0.2 in) or less from the vehicle interior, or if it has a 
manual seat adjustment, move the seat to the closest detent position 
without making contact, or until the seat reaches its forwardmost 
position, whichever occurs first.
    S16.3.2.2 Driver foot positioning.
    S16.3.2.2.1 If the vehicle has an adjustable accelerator pedal, 
adjust it to the full forward position. Rest the right foot of the test 
dummy on the undepressed accelerator pedal with the rearmost point of 
the heel on the floor pan in the plane of the pedal. If the foot cannot 
be placed on the accelerator pedal, set it initially perpendicular to 
the leg and then place it as far forward as possible in the direction of 
the pedal centerline with the rearmost point of the heel resting on the 
floor pan. If the vehicle has an adjustable accelerator pedal and the 
right foot is not touching the accelerator pedal when positioned as 
above, move the pedal rearward until it touches the right foot. If the 
accelerator pedal in the full rearward position still does not touch the 
foot, leave the pedal in that position.
    S16.3.2.2.2 If the ball of the foot does not contact the pedal, 
change the angle of the foot relative to the leg such that the toe of 
the foot contacts the undepressed accelerator pedal.
    S16.3.2.2.3 Place the left foot on the toe-board with the rearmost 
point of the heel resting on the floor pan as close as possible to the 
point of intersection of the planes described by the toe-board and floor 
pan, and not on the wheel-well projection or foot rest.
    S16.3.2.2.4 If the left foot cannot be positioned on the toe board, 
place the foot perpendicular to the lower leg centerline as far forward 
as possible with the heel resting on the floor pan.
    S16.3.2.2.5 If necessary to avoid contact with the vehicle's brake 
or clutch pedal, rotate the test dummy's left foot about the lower leg. 
If there is still pedal interference, rotate the left leg outboard about 
the hip the minimum distance necessary to avoid the pedal interference. 
If the left foot does not contact the floor pan, place the foot parallel 
to the floor and place the leg

[[Page 584]]

as perpendicular to the thigh as possible.
    S16.3.2.3 Driver arm/hand positioning.
    S16.3.2.3.1 Place the dummy's upper arms adjacent to the torso with 
the arm centerlines as close to a vertical longitudinal plane as 
possible.
    S16.3.2.3.2 Place the palms of the dummy in contact with the outer 
part of the steering wheel rim at its horizontal centerline with the 
thumbs over the steering wheel rim.
    S16.3.2.3.3 If it is not possible to position the thumbs inside the 
steering wheel rim at its horizontal centerline, then position them 
above and as close to the horizontal centerline of the steering wheel 
rim as possible.
    S16.3.2.3.4 Lightly tape the hands to the steering wheel rim so that 
if the hand of the test dummy is pushed upward by a force of not less 
than 9 N (2 lb) and not more than 22 N (5 lb), the tape releases the 
hand from the steering wheel rim.
    S16.3.3 Passenger dummy positioning.
    S16.3.3.1 Passenger torso/head/seat back angle positioning.
    S16.3.3.1.1 With the seat in the position determined in S16.2.10, 
use only the controls which move the seat fore and aft to place the seat 
in the rearmost position, without adjusting independent height controls. 
If the seat cushion reference angle automatically changes as the seat is 
moved from the full forward position, maintain as closely as possible 
the seat cushion reference angle in S16.2.10.3.1, for the final forward 
position when measuring the pelvic angle as specified in S16.3.3.1.11.
    S16.3.3.1.2 Fully recline the seat back, if adjustable. Install the 
dummy into the passenger's seat, such that when the legs are 120 degrees 
to the thighs, the calves of the legs are not touching the seat cushion.
    S16.3.3.1.3 Bucket seats. Center the dummy on the seat cushion so 
that its midsagittal plane is vertical and coincides with the vertical 
longitudinal plane through the center of the seat cushion.
    S16.3.3.1.4 Bench seats. Position the midsagittal plane of the dummy 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline and the 
same distance from the vehicle's longitudinal centerline as the 
midsagittal plane of the driver dummy.
    S16.3.3.1.5 Hold the dummy's thighs down and push rearward on the 
upper torso to maximize the dummy's pelvic angle.
    S16.3.3.1.6 Place the legs at 120 degrees to the thighs. Set the 
initial transverse distance between the longitudinal centerlines at the 
front of the dummy's knees at 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 6.7 in), with the 
thighs and legs of the dummy in vertical planes. Push rearward on the 
dummy's knees to force the pelvis into the seat so there is no gap 
between the pelvis and the seat back or until contact occurs between the 
back of the dummy's calves and the front of the seat cushion.
    S16.3.3.1.7 Gently rock the upper torso relative to the lower torso 
laterally side to side three times through a <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 
degree arc (approximately 51 mm (2 in) side to side).
    S16.3.3.1.8 If needed, extend the legs slightly so that the feet are 
not in contact with the floor pan. Let the thighs rest on the seat 
cushion to the extent permitted by the foot movement. With the feet 
perpendicular to the legs, place the heels on the floor pan. If a heel 
will not contact the floor pan, place it as close to the floor pan as 
possible. Using only controls which move the seat fore and aft, attempt 
to return the seat to the full forward position. If a dummy leg contacts 
the vehicle interior before the full forward position is attained, 
position the seat at the next detent where there is no contact. If the 
seats are power seats, position the seat to avoid contact while assuring 
that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) distance between the vehicle 
interior and the point on the dummy that would first contact the vehicle 
interior.
    S16.3.3.1.9 For vehicles without adjustable seat backs, adjust the 
lower neck bracket to level the head as much as possible. For vehicles 
with adjustable seat backs, while holding the thighs in place, rotate 
the seat back forward until the transverse instrumentation platform of 
the head is level to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees, making 
sure that the pelvis does not interfere with the seat bight. Inspect the 
abdomen to insure that it is properly installed.

[[Page 585]]

    S16.3.3.1.10 If it is not possible to orient the head level within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees, minimize the angle.
    S16.3.3.1.11 Measure and set the dummy's pelvic angle using the 
pelvic angle gage (drawing TE-2504, incorporated by reference in 49 CFR 
part 572, subpart O, of this chapter). The angle shall be set to 20.0 
degrees <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2.5 degrees. If this is not possible, 
adjust the pelvic angle as close to 20.0 degrees as possible while 
keeping the transverse instrumentation platform of the head as level as 
possible as specified in S16.3.3.1.9 and S16.3.3.1.10.
    S16.3.3.1.12 If the dummy is contacting the vehicle interior after 
these adjustments, move the seat rearward until there is a maximum of 5 
mm (0.2 in) between the contact point of the dummy and the interior of 
the vehicle or if it has a manual seat adjustment, to the next rearward 
detent position. If after these adjustments the dummy contact point is 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) from the vehicle interior and the seat is still 
not in its forward most position, move the seat forward until the 
contact point is 5 mm (0.2 in) or less from the vehicle interior, or if 
it has a manual seat adjustment, move the seat to the closest detent 
position without making contact, or until the seat reaches its forward 
most position, whichever occurs first.
    S16.3.3.2 Passenger foot positioning.
    S16.3.3.2.1 Place the passenger's feet flat on the toe board.
    S16.3.3.2.2 If the feet cannot be placed flat on the toe board, set 
them perpendicular to the leg center lines and place them as far forward 
as possible with the heels resting on the floor pan.
    S16.3.3.3 Passenger arm/hand positioning.
    S16.3.3.3.1 Place the dummy's upper arms in contact with the seat 
back and the torso.
    S16.3.3.3.2 Place the palms of the dummy in contact with the outside 
of the thighs.
    S16.3.3.3.3 Place the little fingers in contact with the seat 
cushion.
    S16.3.4 Driver and passenger adjustable head restraints.
    S16.3.4.1 If the head restraint has an automatic adjustment, leave 
it where the system positions the restraint after the dummy is placed in 
the seat.
    S16.3.4.2 Adjust each head restraint to its lowest position.
    S16.3.4.3 Measure the vertical distance from the top most point of 
the head restraint to the bottom most point. Locate a horizontal plane 
through the midpoint of this distance. Adjust each head restraint 
vertically so that this horizontal plane is aligned with the center of 
gravity (CG) of the dummy head.
    S16.3.4.4 If the above position is not attainable, move the vertical 
center of the head restraint to the closest detent below the center of 
the head CG.
    S16.3.4.5 If the head restraint has a fore and aft adjustment, place 
the restraint in the forwardmost position or until contact with the head 
is made, whichever occurs first.
    S16.3.5 Driver and passenger manual belt adjustment (for tests 
conducted with a belted dummy)
    S16.3.5.1 If an adjustable seat belt D-ring anchorage exists, place 
it in the manufacturer's design position for a 5th percentile adult 
female with the seat in the position specified in S16.2.10.3.
    S16.3.5.2 Place the Type 2 manual belt around the test dummy and 
fasten the latch.
    S16.3.5.3 Ensure that the dummy's head remains as level as possible, 
as specified in S16.3.2.1.9 and S16.3.2.1.10 and S16.3.3.1.9 and 
S16.3.3.1.10.
    S16.3.5.4 Remove all slack from the lap belt. Pull the upper torso 
webbing out of the retractor and allow it to retract; repeat this 
operation four times. Apply a 9 N (2 lbf) to 18 N (4 lbf) tension load 
to the lap belt. If the belt system is equipped with a tension-relieving 
device, introduce the maximum amount of slack into the upper torso belt 
that is recommended by the manufacturer. If the belt system is not 
equipped with a tension-relieving device, allow the excess webbing in 
the shoulder belt to be retracted by the retractive force of the 
retractor.
    S17 through S19 [Reserved] See Sec. 571.208, S17 through S19.
    S20 Test procedure for S19 of FMVSS No. 208.
    S20.1 General provisions.
    S20.1.1 Tests specifying the use of a car bed, a rear facing child 
restraint, or a convertible child restraint may be

[[Page 586]]

conducted using any such restraint listed in sections A, B, and C of 
Appendix A of FMVSS No. 208 respectively. The car bed, rear facing child 
restraint, or convertible child restraint may be unused or have been 
previously used only for automatic suppression tests. If it has been 
used, there shall not be any visible damage prior to the test.
    S20.1.2 Each vehicle certified to this option shall comply in tests 
conducted with the right front outboard seating position, if adjustable 
fore and aft, at full rearward, middle, and full forward positions. If 
the child restraint or dummy contacts the vehicle interior, move the 
seat rearward to the next detent that provides clearance. If the seat is 
a power seat, move the seat rearward while assuring that there is a 
maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance.
    S20.1.3 If the car bed, rear facing child restraint, or convertible 
child restraint is equipped with a handle, the vehicle shall comply in 
tests conducted with the handle at both the child restraint 
manufacturer's recommended position for use in vehicles and in the 
upright position.
    S20.1.4 If the car bed, rear facing child restraint, or convertible 
child restraint is equipped with a sunshield, the vehicle shall comply 
in tests conducted with the sunshield both fully open and fully closed.
    S20.1.5 The vehicle shall comply in tests with the car bed, rear 
facing child restraint, or convertible child restraint uncovered and in 
tests with a towel or blanket weighing up to 1.0 kg (2.2 lb) placed on 
or over the restraint in any of the following positions:
    (a) with the blanket covering the top and sides of the restraint, 
and
    (b) with the blanket placed from the top of the vehicle's seat back 
to the forwardmost edge of the restraint.
    S20.1.6 Except as otherwise specified, if the car bed, rear facing 
child restraint, or convertible child restraint has an anchorage system 
as specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 and is tested in a vehicle with a 
right front outboard vehicle seat that has an anchorage system as 
specified in FMVSS No. 225, the vehicle shall comply with the belted 
test conditions with the restraint anchorage system attached to the 
vehicle seat anchorage system and the vehicle seat belt unattached. It 
shall also comply with the belted test conditions with the restraint 
anchorage system unattached to the vehicle seat anchorage system and the 
vehicle seat belt attached. The vehicle shall comply with the unbelted 
test conditions with the restraint anchorage system unattached to the 
vehicle seat anchorage system.
    S20.1.7 If the car bed, rear facing child restraint, or convertible 
child restraint comes equipped with a detachable base, the vehicle shall 
comply in tests conducted with the detachable base attached to the child 
restraint and with the detachable base unattached to the child 
restraint.
    S20.1.8 Do not attach any tethers.
    S20.1.9 Seat set-up. Unless otherwise stated,
    S20.1.9.1 Lumbar support adjustment. Position adjustable lumbar 
supports so that the lumbar support is in its lowest, retracted or 
deflated adjustment position.
    S20.1.9.2 Other seat adjustments. Position any adjustable parts of 
the seat that provide additional support so that they are in the lowest 
or most open adjustment position.
    S20.1.9.3 If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, independent of 
the seat back, set this adjustment to the full rearward position.
    S20.1.9.4 If the seat height is adjustable, determine the maximum 
and minimum heights at the full rearward, middle, and full forward 
positions. Set the seat at the mid-point height for each of the three 
fore-aft test positions.
    S20.1.9.5 The seat back angle, if adjustable, is set at the 
manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle for a 50th percentile 
adult male as specified in S8.1.3 of FMVSS No. 208.
    S20.1.9.6 If adjustable, set the head restraint at the full down and 
full forward position.
    S20.1.10 The longitudinal centerline of a bucket seat cushion is 
determined at the widest part of the seat cushion. Measure perpendicular 
to the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle.
    S20.2 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in deactivation of the passenger air bag. Each vehicle that is 
certified as complying

[[Page 587]]

with S19.2 of FMVSS No. 208 shall meet the following test requirements.
    S20.2.1 Belted rear facing and convertible child restraints.
    S20.2.1.1 The vehicle shall comply in tests using any child 
restraint specified in section B and section C of Appendix A of FMVSS 
No. 208.
    S20.2.1.2 Locate a vertical plane through the longitudinal 
centerline of the child restraint. This will be referred to as 
``Plane.''
    S20.2.1.3 For bucket seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane 
parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline through the longitudinal 
centerline of the right front outboard vehicle seat cushion. For bench 
seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane through the right front 
outboard vehicle seat parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline 
the same distance from the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle as the 
center of the steering wheel.
    S20.2.1.4 Facing rear.
    (a) The vehicle shall comply in both of the following positions, if 
applicable:
    (1) Without attaching the child restraint anchorage system as 
specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 to a vehicle seat anchorage system 
specified in FMVSS No. 225, align the child restraint system facing 
rearward such that Plane A is aligned with Plane B.
    (2) If the child restraint is certified to S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213, 
and the vehicle seat has an anchorage system as specified in FMVSS No. 
225, attach the child restraint to the vehicle seat anchorage instead of 
aligning the planes. Do not attach the vehicle safety belt.
    (b) While maintaining the child restraint positions achieved in 
S20.2.1.4(a), secure the child restraint by following, to the extent 
possible, the child restraint manufacturer's directions regarding proper 
installation of the restraint in the rear facing mode.
    (c) Place any adjustable seat belt anchorages at the vehicle 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant. Cinch the vehicle belts to any tension from zero up to 134 N 
(30 lb) to secure the child restraint. Measure belt tension in a flat, 
straight section of the lap belt between the child restraint belt path 
and the contact point with the belt anchor or vehicle seat, on the side 
away from the buckle (to avoid interference from the shoulder portion of 
the belt).
    (d) Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart R 12-month-old CRABI dummy 
in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.
    (e) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.2.1.5 Facing forward (convertible restraints only).
    (a) The vehicle shall comply in both of the following positions, if 
applicable:
    (1) Without attaching the child restraint anchorage system as 
specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 to a vehicle seat anchorage system 
specified in FMVSS No. 225, align the child restraint system facing 
forward such that Plane A is aligned with Plane B.
    (2) If the child restraint is certified to S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213, 
and the vehicle seat has an anchorage system as specified in FMVSS No. 
225, attach the child restraint to the vehicle seat anchorage instead of 
aligning the planes. Do not attach the vehicle safety belt.
    (b) While maintaining the child restraint positions achieved in 
S20.2.1.5(a), secure the child restraint by following, to the extent 
possible, the child restraint manufacturer's directions regarding proper 
installation of the restraint in the forward facing mode.
    (c) Place any adjustable seat belt anchorages at the vehicle 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant. Cinch the vehicle belts to any tension from zero up to 134 N 
(30 lb) to secure the child restraint. Measure belt tension in a flat, 
straight section of the lap belt between the child restraint belt path 
and the contact point with the belt anchor or vehicle seat, on the side 
away from the buckle (to avoid interference from the shoulder portion of 
the belt).
    (d) Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart R 12-month-old CRABI dummy 
in the child restraint by following, to the

[[Page 588]]

extent possible, the manufacturer's instructions provided with the child 
restraint for seating infants.
    (e) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.2.2 Unbelted rear facing and convertible child restraints.
    S20.2.2.1 The vehicle shall comply in tests using any child 
restraint specified in section B and section C of Appendix A of FMVSS 
No. 208.
    S20.2.2.2 Locate a vertical plane through the longitudinal 
centerline of the child restraint. This will be referred to as ``Plane 
A''.
    S20.2.2.3 For bucket seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane 
parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline through the longitudinal 
centerline of the right front outboard vehicle seat cushion. For bench 
seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane through the right front 
outboard seat parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline the same 
distance from the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle as the center 
of the steering wheel.
    S20.2.2.4 Facing rear.
    (a) Align the child restraint system facing rearward such that Plane 
A is aligned with Plane B and the child restraint is in contact with the 
seat back.
    (b) Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart R 12-month-old CRABI dummy 
in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.
    (c) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.2.2.5 Facing forward.
    (a) Align the child restraint system facing forward such that Plane 
A is aligned with Plane B and the child restraint is in contact with the 
seat back.
    (b) Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart R 12-month-old CRABI dummy 
in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.
    (c) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.2.3 Tests with a belted car bed.
    S20.2.3.1 The vehicle shall comply in tests using any car bed 
specified in section A of Appendix A of FMVSS No. 208.
    S20.2.3.2(a) Install the car bed by following, to the extent 
possible, the car bed manufacturer's directions regarding proper 
installation of the car bed.
    (b) Place any adjustable seat belt anchorages at the vehicle 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant. Cinch the vehicle belts to secure the car bed.
    (c) Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart K Newborn Infant dummy in 
the car bed by following, to the extent possible, the car bed 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the car bed for positioning 
infants.
    (d) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.3 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in activation of the passenger air bag system.
    S20.3.1 Each vehicle certified to this option shall comply in tests 
conducted with the right front outboard seating position, if adjustable 
fore and aft, at the full rearward, middle, and, subject to S16.3.3.1.8, 
full forward positions. All tests are conducted with the seat height, if 
adjustable, in the mid-height position.
    S20.3.2 Place a 49 CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile adult 
female test dummy at the right front outboard seating position of the 
vehicle, in accordance with procedures specified in S16.3.3 of this 
standard, except as specified in S20.3.1, subject to the fore-aft seat 
positions in S20.3.1. Do not fasten the seat belt.
    S20.3.3 Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression

[[Page 589]]

system, and then close all vehicle doors.
    S20.3.4 Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag system is 
activated.
    S20.4 Low risk deployment test. Each vehicle that is certified as 
complying with S19.3 of FMVSS No. 208 shall meet the following test 
requirements.
    S20.4.1 Position the right front outboard vehicle seat in the full 
forward seat track position, adjust the seat height (if adjustable) to 
the mid-height position, and adjust the seat back (if adjustable) to the 
nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male as specified in 
S8.1.3 of FMVSS No. 208. Position adjustable lumbar supports so that the 
lumbar support is in its lowest, retracted or deflated adjustment 
position. Position any adjustable parts of the seat that provide 
additional support so that they are in the lowest or most open 
adjustment position. If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, 
independent of the seat back, set this adjustment to the full rearward 
position. If adjustable, set the head restraint at the full down 
position. If the child restraint or dummy contacts the vehicle interior, 
move the seat rearward to the next detent that provides clearance. If 
the seat is a power seat, move the seat rearward while assuring that 
there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance.
    S20.4.2 The vehicle shall comply in tests using any child restraint 
specified in section B and section C of Appendix A to FMVSS No. 208.
    S20.4.3 Locate a vertical plane through the longitudinal centerline 
of the child restraint. This will be referred to as ``Plane A''.
    S20.4.4 For bucket seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane 
parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline through the geometric 
center of the right front outboard seat cushion. For bench seats, 
``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane through the right front outboard 
seat parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline that is the same 
distance from the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle as the center 
of the steering wheel.
    S20.4.5 Align the child restraint system facing rearward such that 
Plane A is aligned with Plane B.
    S20.4.6 If the child restraint is certified to S5.9 of FMVSS No. 
213, and the vehicle seat has an anchorage system as specified in FMVSS 
No. 225, attach the child restraint to the vehicle seat anchorage 
instead of aligning the planes. Do not attach the vehicle safety belt.
    S20.4.7 While maintaining the child restraint position achieved in 
S20.4.5, secure the child restraint by following, to the extent 
possible, the child restraint manufacturer's directions regarding proper 
installation of the restraint in the rear facing mode. Place any 
adjustable seat belt anchorages at the manufacturer's nominal design 
position for a 50th percentile adult male occupant. Cinch the vehicle 
belts to any tension from zero up to 134 N (30 lb) to secure the child 
restraint. Measure belt tension in a flat, straight section of the lap 
belt between the child restraint belt path and the contact point with 
the belt anchor or vehicle seat, on the side away from the buckle (to 
avoid interference from the shoulder portion of the belt).
    S20.4.8 Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart R 12-month-old CRABI 
dummy in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.
    S20.4.9 Deploy the right front outboard frontal air bag system. If 
the air bag system contains a multistage inflator, the vehicle shall be 
able to comply at any stage or combination of stages or time delay 
between successive stages that could occur in the presence of an infant 
in a rear facing child restraint and a 49 CFR part 572, subpart R 12-
month-old CRABI dummy positioned according to S20.4 in a rigid barrier 
crash test at speeds up to 64 km/h (40 mph).
    S21 [Reserved] See Sec. 571.208, S21.
    S22 Test procedure for S21 of FMVSS No. 208.
    S22.1 General provisions and definitions.
    S22.1.1 Tests specifying the use of a forward facing child 
restraint, including a booster seat where applicable, may be conducted 
using any such restraint listed in section C and section D of Appendix A 
of FMVSS No. 208, respectively. The child restraint may be

[[Page 590]]

unused or have been previously used only for automatic suppression 
tests. If it has been used, there shall not be any visible damage prior 
to the test. Booster seats are to be used in the manner appropriate for 
a 3-year-old child of the same height and weight as the 3-year-old child 
dummy.
    S22.1.2 Unless otherwise specified, each vehicle certified to this 
option shall comply in tests conducted with the right front outboard 
seating position at the full rearward, middle, and the full forward 
positions. If the dummy contacts the vehicle interior, move the seat 
rearward to the next detent that provides clearance. If the seat is a 
power seat, move the seat rearward while assuring that there is a 
maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance.
    S22.1.3 Except as otherwise specified, if the child restraint has an 
anchorage system as specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 and is tested in 
a vehicle with a right front outboard vehicle seat that has an anchorage 
system as specified in FMVSS No. 225, the vehicle shall comply with the 
belted test conditions with the restraint anchorage system attached to 
the vehicle seat anchorage system and the vehicle seat belt unattached. 
It shall also comply with the belted test conditions with the restraint 
anchorage system unattached to the vehicle seat anchorage system and the 
vehicle seat belt attached.
    S22.1.4 Do not attach any tethers.
    S22.1.5 The definitions provided in S16.3.1 through S16.3.10 apply 
to the tests specified in S22.
    S22.1.6 For leg and thigh angles use the following references:
    (a) Thigh--a straight line on the thigh skin between the center of 
the \5/16\ x \1/2\ in. screw (part 9001024, item 10 in drawing 210-0000 
sheet 2 of 7, complete assembly (HYB III 3 YR OLD)) and the knee bolt 
(part 210-5301 in drawing 210-5000-1 & -1, leg assembly).
    (b) Leg--a straight line on the leg skin between the center of the 
ankle bolt (part 210-5701 in drawing 210-5000-1 & -2, leg assembly) and 
the knee bolt (part 210-5301 in drawing 210-5000-1 & -2, leg assembly).
    S22.1.7 Seat set-up. Unless otherwise stated,
    S22.1.7.1 Lumbar support adjustment. Position adjustable lumbar 
supports so that the lumbar support is in its lowest, retracted or 
deflated adjustment position.
    S22.1.7.2 Other seat adjustments. Position any adjustable parts of 
the seat that provide additional support so that they are in the lowest 
or most open adjustment position.
    S22.1.7.3 If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, independent of 
the seat back, set this adjustment to the full rearward position.
    S22.1.7.4 If the seat height is adjustable, determine the maximum 
and minimum heights at the full rearward seat track position, the middle 
seat track position, and the full forward seat track position. Set the 
seat at the mid-point height for each of the three fore-aft test 
positions.
    S22.1.7.5 The seat back angle, if adjustable, is set at the 
manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle for a 50th percentile 
adult male as specified in S8.1.3 of FMVSS No. 208.
    S22.1.7.6 If adjustable, set the head restraint at the full down and 
full forward position.
    S22.2 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in deactivation of the passenger air bag. Each vehicle that is 
certified as complying with S21.2 of FMVSS No. 208 shall meet the 
following test requirements:
    S22.2.1 Belted test with forward facing child restraints or booster 
seats.
    S22.2.1.1 Install the restraint in the right front outboard seat in 
accordance, to the extent possible, with the child restraint 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the seat for use by children 
with the same height and weight as the 3-year-old child dummy.
    S22.2.1.2 Locate a vertical plane through the longitudinal 
centerline of the child restraint. This will be referred to as ``Plane 
A''.
    S22.2.1.3 For bucket seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical 
longitudinal plane through the longitudinal centerline of the seat 
cushion of the right front outboard vehicle seat. For bench seats, 
``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane through the right front outboard 
vehicle seat parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline the same 
distance from the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle as the center 
of the steering wheel.

[[Page 591]]

    22.2.1.4 The vehicle shall comply in both of the following 
positions, if applicable:
    (a) Without attaching the child restraint anchorage system as 
specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 to a vehicle seat anchorage system 
specified in FMVSS No. 225 and without attaching any tethers, align the 
child restraint system facing forward such that Plane A is aligned with 
Plane B.
    (b) If the child restraint is certified to S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213, 
and the vehicle seat has an anchorage system as specified in FMVSS No. 
225, attach the child restraint to the vehicle seat anchorage instead of 
aligning the planes. Do not attach the vehicle safety belt.
    S22.2.1.5 Forward facing child restraint.
    S22.2.1.5.1 Place any adjustable seat belt anchorages at the vehicle 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant. Cinch the vehicle belts to any tension from zero up to 134 N 
(30 lb) to secure the child restraint. Measure belt tension in a flat, 
straight section of the lap belt between the child restraint belt path 
and the contact point with the belt anchor or vehicle seat, on the side 
away from the buckle (to avoid interference from the shoulder portion of 
the belt).
    S22.2.1.5.2 Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart P 3-year-old child 
dummy in the child restraint such that the dummy's lower torso is 
centered on the child restraint and the dummy's spine is against the 
seat back of the child restraint. Place the arms at the dummy's sides.
    S22.2.1.5.3 Attach all belts that come with the child restraint that 
are appropriate for a child of the same height and weight as the 3-year-
old child dummy, if any, by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating children.
    S22.2.1.6 Booster seat.
    S22.2.1.6.1 Place any adjustable seat belt anchorages at the vehicle 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant. For booster seats designed to be secured to the vehicle seat 
even when empty, cinch the vehicle belts to any tension from zero up to 
134 N (30 lb) to secure the booster seat. Measure belt tension in a 
flat, straight section of the lap belt between the child restraint belt 
path and the contact point with the belt anchor or vehicle seat, on the 
side away from the buckle (to avoid interference from the shoulder 
portion of the belt).
    S22.2.1.6.2 Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart P 3-year-old child 
dummy in the booster seat such that the dummy's lower torso is centered 
on the booster seat cushion and the dummy's back is parallel to and in 
contact with the booster seat back or, if there is no booster seat back, 
the vehicle seat back. Place the arms at the dummy's sides.
    S22.2.1.6.3 If applicable, attach all belts that come with the child 
restraint that are appropriate for a child of the same height and weight 
as the 3-year-old child dummy, if any, by following, to the extent 
possible, the manufacturer's instructions provided with the child 
restraint for seating children.
    S22.2.1.6.4 If applicable, place the Type 2 manual belt around the 
test dummy and fasten the latch. Remove all slack from the lap belt 
portion. Pull the upper torso webbing out of the retractor and allow it 
to retract; repeat this four times. Apply a 9 to 18 N (2 to 4 lb) 
tension load to the lap belt. Allow the excess webbing in the upper 
torso belt to be retracted by the retractive force of the retractor.
    S22.2.1.7 Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the 
``on'' position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then 
close all vehicle doors.
    S22.2.1.8 Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S22.2.2 Unbelted tests with dummies. Place the 49 CFR part 572 
subpart P 3-year-old child dummy on the right front outboard seat in any 
of the following positions (without using a child restraint or booster 
seat or the vehicle's seat belts):
    S22.2.2.1 Sitting on seat with back against seat back
    (a) Position the dummy in the seated position and place it on the 
right front outboard seat.
    (b) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy

[[Page 592]]

vertically and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline and the 
same distance from the vehicle's longitudinal centerline as the center 
of the steering wheel. In the case of vehicles equipped with bucket 
seats, position the midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically such that 
it coincides with the longitudinal centerline of the seat cushion. 
Position the torso of the dummy against the seat back. Position the 
dummy's thighs against the seat cushion.
    (c) Allow the legs of the dummy to extend off the surface of the 
seat.
    (d) Rotate the dummy's upper arms down until they contact the seat 
back.
    (e) Rotate the dummy's lower arms until the dummy's hands contact 
the seat cushion.
    (f) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (g) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.2 Sitting on seat with back against reclined seat back. 
Repeat the test sequence in S22.2.2.1 with the seat back angle 25 
degrees rearward of the manufacturer's nominal design position for the 
50th percentile adult male. If the seat will not recline 25 degrees 
rearward of the nominal design position, use the closest position that 
does not exceed 25 degrees.
    S22.2.2.3 Sitting on seat with back not against seat back.
    (a) Position the dummy in the seated position and place it on the 
right front outboard seat.
    (b) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline as the center of the steering wheel. In the case 
of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal plane 
of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the longitudinal 
centerline of the seat cushion. Position the dummy with the spine 
vertical so that the horizontal distance from the dummy's back to the 
seat back is no less than 25 mm (1.0 in) and no more than 150 mm (6.0 
in), as measured along the dummy's midsagittal plane at the mid-sternum 
level. To keep the dummy in position, a material with a maximum breaking 
strength of 311 N (70 lb) may be used to hold the dummy.
    (c) Position the dummy's thighs against the seat cushion.
    (d) Allow the legs of the dummy to extend off the surface of the 
seat.
    (e) Position the upper arms parallel to the spine and rotate the 
dummy's lower arms until the dummy's hands contact the seat cushion.
    (f) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (g) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.4 Sitting on seat edge, spine vertical, hands by the dummy's 
sides.
    (a) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline as the center of the steering wheel. In the case 
of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal plane 
of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the longitudinal 
centerline of the seat cushion.
    (b) Position the dummy in the seated position forward in the seat 
such that the legs are vertical and the back of the legs rest against 
the front of the seat with the spine vertical. If the dummy's feet 
contact the floor pan, rotate the legs forward until the dummy is 
resting on the seat with the feet positioned flat on the floor pan and 
the dummy spine vertical. To keep the dummy in position, a material with 
a maximum breaking strength of 311 N (70 lb) may be used to hold the 
dummy.
    (c) Place the upper arms parallel to the spine.
    (d) Lower the dummy's lower arms such that they contact the seat 
cushion.
    (e) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.

[[Page 593]]

    (f) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.5 Standing on seat, facing forward.
    (a) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline as the center of the steering wheel rim. In the 
case of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal 
plane of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the seat cushion. Position the dummy in a 
standing position on the right front outboard seat cushion facing the 
front of the vehicle while placing the heels of the dummy's feet in 
contact with the seat back.
    (b) Rest the dummy against the seat back, with the arms parallel to 
the spine.
    (c) If the head contacts the vehicle roof, recline the seat so that 
the head is no longer in contact with the vehicle roof, but allow no 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) distance between the head and the roof. If the 
seat does not sufficiently recline to allow clearance, omit the test.
    (d) If necessary use a material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) or spacer blocks to keep the dummy in position.
    (e) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (f) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.6 Kneeling on seat, facing forward.
    (a) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline as the center of the steering wheel. In the case 
of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal plane 
of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the longitudinal 
centerline of the seat cushion.
    (b) Position the dummy in a kneeling position in the right front 
outboard seat with the dummy facing the front of the vehicle with its 
toes at the intersection of the seat back and seat cushion. Position the 
dummy so that the spine is vertical. Push down on the legs so that they 
contact the seat as much as possible and then release. Place the arms 
parallel to the spine.
    (c) If necessary use a material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) or spacer blocks to keep the dummy in position.
    (d) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (e) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.7 Kneeling on seat, facing rearward.
    (a) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline as the center of the steering wheel. In the case 
of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal plane 
of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the longitudinal 
centerline of the seat cushion.
    (b) Position the dummy in a kneeling position in the right front 
outboard seat with the dummy facing the rear of the vehicle. Position 
the dummy such that the dummy's head and torso are in contact with the 
seat back. Push down on the legs so that they contact the seat as much 
as possible and then release. Place the arms parallel to the spine.
    (c) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (d) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.8 Lying on seat. This test is performed only in vehicles 
with 3 designated front seating positions.
    (a) Lay the dummy on the right front outboard seat such that the 
following criteria are met:

[[Page 594]]

    (1) The midsagittal plane of the dummy is horizontal,
    (2) The dummy's spine is perpendicular to the vehicle's longitudinal 
axis,
    (3) The dummy's arms are parallel to its spine,
    (4) A plane passing through the two shoulder joints of the dummy is 
vertical,
    (5) The anterior of the dummy is facing the vehicle front,
    (6) The head of the dummy is positioned towards the passenger door, 
and
    (7) The horizontal distance from the topmost point of the dummy's 
head to the vehicle door is 50 to 100 mm (2-4 in).
    (8) The dummy is as far back in the seat as possible.
    (b) Rotate the thighs as much as possible toward the chest of the 
dummy and rotate the legs as much as possible against the thighs.
    (c) Move the dummy's upper left arm parallel to the vehicle's 
transverse plane and the lower left arm 90 degrees to the upper arm. 
Rotate the lower left arm about the elbow joint and toward the dummy's 
head until movement is obstructed.
    (d) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (e) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.3 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in activation of the passenger air bag system.
    S22.3.1 Each vehicle certified to this option shall comply in tests 
conducted with the right front outboard seating position at the full 
rearward, middle, and, subject to S16.3.3.1.8, full forward positions. 
All tests are conducted with the seat height, if adjustable, in the mid-
height position.
    S22.3.2 Place a 49 CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile adult 
female test dummy at the right front outboard seating position of the 
vehicle, in accordance with procedures specified in S16.3.3 of this 
standard, except as specified in S22.3.1. Do not fasten the seat belt.
    S22.3.3 Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    S22.3.4 Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag system is 
activated.
    S22.4 Low risk deployment tests.
    S22.4.1 Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S21.4 shall 
meet the following test requirements with the 49 CFR part 572, subpart P 
3-year-old child dummy in both of the following positions: Position 1 
(S22.4.2) and Position 2 (S22.4.3).
    S22.4.1.1 Locate and mark a point on the front of the dummy's chest 
jacket on the midsaggital plane which is 114 mm (4.5 in) <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 3 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.1 in) along the surface 
of the skin from the top of the skin at the neck line. This is referred 
to as ``Point 1.''
    S22.4.1.2 Locate the vertical plane parallel to the vehicle 
longitudinal centerline through the geometric center of the opening 
through which the right front air bag deploys into the occupant 
compartment. This is referred to as ``Plane D.''
    S22.4.1.3 Locate the horizontal plane through the geometric center 
of the opening through which the right front air bag deploys into the 
occupant compartment. This is referred to as ``Plane C.''
    S22.4.2 Position 1 (chest on instrument panel).
    S22.4.2.1 If a seat is adjustable in the fore and aft and/or 
vertical directions, move the seat to the rear-most seating position and 
full-down height adjustment. If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, 
independent of the entire seat, adjust the seat cushion to the full-
rearward position. If the seat back is adjustable, place the seat back 
at the manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle for a 50th 
percentile adult male as specified in S8.1.3 of FMVSS No. 208. Position 
any adjustable parts of the seat that provide additional support so that 
they are in the lowest or most open adjustment position. If adjustable, 
set the head restraint in the lowest position.
    S22.4.2.2 Place the dummy in the front passenger seat such that:
    S22.4.2.2.1 The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane D.

[[Page 595]]

    S22.4.2.2.2 The legs are initially vertical to the floor pan. The 
legs and thighs shall be adjusted to the extent necessary for the head/
torso to contact the instrument panel as specified in S22.4.2.3.
    S22.4.2.2.3 The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands 
are in contact with the thighs.
    S22.4.2.3 Without changing the seat position and with the dummy's 
thorax instrument cavity rear face vertical, move the dummy forward 
until the dummy head/torso contacts the instrument panel. If the dummy 
loses contact with the seat cushion because of the forward movement, 
maintain the height of the dummy and the angle of the thigh with respect 
to the torso. Once contact is made, raise the dummy vertically until 
Point 1 lies in Plane C. If the dummy's head contacts the windshield and 
keeps Point 1 from reaching Plane C, lower the dummy until there is no 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance between the head and the windshield. 
(The dummy shall remain in contact with the instrument panel while being 
raised or lowered, which may change the dummy's fore-aft position.)
    S22.4.2.4 If possible, position the legs of the dummy so that the 
legs are vertical and the feet rest flat on the floor pan of the 
vehicle. If the positioning against the instrument panel does not allow 
the feet to be on the floor pan, the feet shall be parallel to the floor 
pan.
    S22.4.2.5 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S22.4.3 Position 2 (head on instrument panel).
    S22.4.3.1 Place the passenger seat in the full rearward seating 
position. Place the seat back at the manufacturer's nominal design seat 
back angle for a 50th percentile adult male as specified in S8.1.3 of 
FMVSS No. 208. If adjustable in the vertical direction, place the seat 
in the mid-height position. If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, 
independent of the entire seat, adjust the seat cushion to the full 
rearward position. Position any adjustable parts of the seat that 
provide additional support so that they are in the lowest or most open 
adjustment position. If adjustable, set the head restraint in the lowest 
position.
    S22.4.3.2 Place the dummy in the front passenger seat such that:
    S22.4.3.2.1 The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane D.
    S22.4.3.2.2 The legs are vertical to the floor pan, the back of the 
legs are in contact with the seat cushion, and the dummy's thorax 
instrument cavity rear face is vertical. If it is not possible to 
position the dummy with the legs in the prescribed position, rotate the 
legs forward until the dummy is resting on the seat with the feet 
positioned flat on the floor pan, and the back of the legs are in 
contact with the front of the seat cushion. Set the transverse distance 
between the longitudinal centerlines at the front of the dummy's knees 
at 86 to 91 mm (3.4 to 3.6 in), with the thighs and the legs of the 
dummy in vertical planes.
    S22.4.3.2.3 The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands 
are in contact with the thighs.
    S22.4.3.3 Move the seat forward, while maintaining the thorax 
instrument cavity rear face orientation until any part of the dummy 
contacts the vehicle's instrument panel.
    S22.4.3.4 If dummy contact has not been made with the vehicle's 
instrument panel at the full forward seating position of the seat, slide 
the dummy forward until contact is made. Maintain the thorax instrument 
cavity rear face vertical orientation, the height of the dummy, and the 
angle of the thigh with respect to the horizontal.
    S22.4.3.5 If head/torso contact with the instrument panel has not 
been made, maintain the angle of the thighs with respect to the 
horizontal while applying a force towards the front of the vehicle on 
the spine of the dummy between the shoulder joints until the head or 
torso comes into contact with the vehicle's instrument panel.
    S22.4.3.6 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used

[[Page 596]]

to support the dummy in position. The material should support the torso 
rather than the head. Support the dummy so that there is minimum 
interference with the full rotational and translational freedom for the 
upper torso of the dummy and the material does not interfere with the 
air bag.
    S22.4.4 Deploy the right front outboard frontal air bag system. If 
the frontal air bag system contains a multistage inflator, the vehicle 
shall be able to comply with the injury criteria at any stage or 
combination of stages or time delay between successive stages that could 
occur in a rigid barrier crash test at or below 26 km/h (16 mph), under 
the test procedure specified in S22.5.
    S22.5 Test procedure for determining stages of air bag systems 
subject to low risk deployment (low speed crashes) test requirement.
    S22.5.1 The test described in S22.5.2 shall be conducted with an 
unbelted 50th percentile adult male test dummy in the driver seating 
position according to S8 of FMVSS No. 208 as it applies to that seating 
position and an unbelted 5th percentile adult female test dummy either 
in the right front seating position according to S16 as it applies to 
that seating position or at any fore-aft seat position on the passenger 
side.
    S22.5.2 Impact the vehicle traveling longitudinally forward at any 
speed, up to and including 26 km/h (16 mph) into a fixed rigid barrier 
that is perpendicular <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 degrees to the line of 
travel of the vehicle under the applicable conditions of S8 and S10 of 
FMVSS No. 208, and S16 of this standard excluding S10.7, S10.8 and S10.9 
of FMVSS No. 208 and S16.3.5 of this standard.
    S22.5.3 Determine which inflation stage or combination of stages are 
fired and determine the time delay between successive stages. That stage 
or combination of stages, with time delay between successive stages, 
shall be used in deploying the air bag when conducting the low risk 
deployment tests described in S22.4, S24.4, and S26.
    S22.5.4 If the air bag does not deploy in the impact described in 
S22.5.2, the low risk deployment tests described in S22.4, S24.4, and 
S26 shall be conducted with all stages using the maximum time delay 
between stages.
    S23 [Reserved] See Sec. 571.208, S23.
    S24 Test procedure for S23 of FMVSS No. 208.
    S24.1 General provisions and definitions.
    S24.1.1 Tests specifying the use of a booster seat may be conducted 
using any such restraint listed in section D of Appendix A of FMVSS No. 
208. The booster seat may be unused or have been previously used only 
for automatic suppression. If it has been used, there shall not be any 
visible damage prior to the test. Booster seats are to be used in the 
manner appropriate for a 6-year-old child of the same height and weight 
as the 6-year-old child dummy.
    S24.1.2 Unless otherwise specified, each vehicle certified to this 
option shall comply in tests conducted with the right front outboard 
seating position at the full rearward seat track position, the middle 
seat track position, and the full forward seat track position. If the 
dummy contacts the vehicle interior, move the seat rearward to the next 
detent that provides clearance. If the seat is a power seat, move the 
seat rearward while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
distance between the vehicle interior and the point on the dummy that 
would first contact the vehicle interior. All tests are conducted with 
the seat height, if adjustable, in the mid-height position, and with the 
seat back angle, if adjustable, at the manufacturer's nominal design 
seat back angle for a 50th percentile adult male as specified in S8.1.3 
of FMVSS No. 208.
    S24.1.3 Except as otherwise specified, if the booster seat has an 
anchorage system as specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 and is tested in 
a vehicle with a right front outboard vehicle seat that has an anchorage 
system as specified in FMVSS No. 225, the vehicle shall comply with the 
belted test conditions with the restraint anchorage system attached to 
the vehicle seat anchorage system and the vehicle seat belt unattached. 
It shall also comply with the belted test conditions with the restraint 
anchorage system unattached to the vehicle seat anchorage system and the 
vehicle seat belt attached. The vehicle shall comply with the unbelted

[[Page 597]]

test conditions with the restraint anchorage system unattached to the 
vehicle seat anchorage system.
    S24.1.4 Do not attach any tethers.
    S24.1.5 The definitions provided in S16.3.1 through S16.3.10 apply 
to the tests specified in S24.
    S24.1.6 For leg and thigh angles, use the following references:
    S24.1.6.1 Thigh--a straight line on the thigh skin between the 
center of the 5/16-18 UNC-2B threaded access hole in the upper leg clamp 
(drawing 127-4004, 6 YR H3--upper leg clamp) and the knee screw (part 
9000248 in drawing 127-4000-1 & -2, leg assembly).
    S24.1.6.2 Leg--a straight line on the leg skin between the center of 
the lower leg screw (part 9001170 in drawing 127-4000-1 & -2, leg 
assembly) and the knee screw (part 9000248 in drawing 127-4000-1 & -2, 
leg assembly).
    S24.2 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in deactivation of the passenger air bag. Each vehicle that is 
certified as complying with S23.2 of FMVSS No. 208 shall meet the 
following test requirements.
    S24.2.1 Except as provided in S24.2.2, conduct all tests as 
specified in S22.2, except that the 49 CFR part 572 subpart N 6-year-old 
child dummy shall be used.
    S24.2.2 Exceptions. The tests specified in the following paragraphs 
of S22.2 need not be conducted: S22.2.1.5, S22.2.2.3, S22.2.2.5, 
S22.2.2.6, S22.2.2.7, and S22.2.2.8.
    S24.2.3 Sitting back in the seat and leaning on the right front 
passenger door.
    (a) Position the dummy in the seated position and place the dummy in 
the right front outboard seat. For bucket seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with 
the longitudinal center line of the seat cushion. For bench seats, 
position the midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to 
the vehicle's longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the 
longitudinal centerline of the vehicle as the center of the steering 
wheel.
    (b) Place the dummy's back against the seat back and rest the 
dummy's thighs on the seat cushion.
    (c) Allow the legs and feet of the dummy to extend off the surface 
of the seat. If this positioning of the dummy's legs is prevented by 
contact with the instrument panel, move the seat rearward to the next 
detent that provides clearance. If the seat is a power seat, move the 
seat rearward, while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
distance between the vehicle interior and the part of the dummy that was 
in contact with the vehicle interior.
    (d) Rotate the dummy's upper arms toward the seat back until they 
make contact.
    (e) Rotate the dummy's lower arms down until they contact the seat.
    (f) Close the vehicle's passenger-side door and then start the 
vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' position, whichever 
will turn on the suppression system.
    (g) Push against the dummy's left shoulder to lean the dummy against 
the door; close all remaining doors.
    (h) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S24.3 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in activation of the passenger air bag system.
    S24.3.1 Each vehicle certified to this option shall comply in tests 
conducted with the right front outboard seating position at the full 
rearward seat track position, the middle seat track position, and, 
subject to S16.3.3.1.8, the full forward seat track position. All tests 
are conducted with the seat height, if adjustable, in the mid-height 
position.
    S24.3.2 Place a 49 CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile adult 
female test dummy at the right front outboard seating position of the 
vehicle, in accordance with procedures specified in S16.3.3 of this 
standard, except as specified in S24.3.1. Do not fasten the seat belt.
    S24.3.3 Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    S24.3.4 Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag system is 
activated.
    S24.4 Low risk deployment tests.
    S24.4.1 Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S23.4 of 
FMVSS No. 208 shall meet the following test requirements with the 49 CFR 
part 572

[[Page 598]]

subpart N 6-year-old child dummy in both of the following positions: 
Position 1 (S24.4.2) or Position 2 (S24.4.3).
    S24.4.1.1 Locate and mark a point on the front of the dummy's chest 
jacket on the midsagittal plane which is 139 mm (5.5 in) <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 3 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.1 in) along the surface 
of the skin from the top of the skin at the neckline. This is referred 
to as ``Point 1.''
    S24.4.1.2 Locate the vertical plane parallel to the vehicle 
longitudinal centerline through the geometric center of the opening 
through which the right front air bag deploys into the occupant 
compartment. This is referred to as ``Plane D.''
    S24.4.1.3 Locate the horizontal plane through the geometric center 
of the opening through which the right front air bag deploys into the 
occupant compartment. This is referred to as ``Plane C.''
    S24.4.2 Position 1 (chest on instrument panel).
    S24.4.2.1 If a seat is adjustable in the fore and aft and/or 
vertical directions, move the seat to the rearmost seating position and 
full down height adjustment. If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, 
independent of the entire seat, adjust the seat cushion to the full 
rearward position. If the seat back is adjustable, place the seat back 
at the manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle for a 50th 
percentile adult male as specified in S8.1.3. Position any adjustable 
parts of the seat that provide additional support so that they are in 
the lowest or most open adjustment position. Position an adjustable head 
restraint in the lowest position.
    S24.4.2.2 Remove the legs of the dummy at the pelvic interface.
    S24.4.2.3 Place the dummy in the front passenger seat such that:
    (a) The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane D.
    (b) The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands are next 
to where the thighs would be.
    (c) Without changing the seat position and with the dummy's thorax 
instrument cavity rear face 6 degrees forward of the vertical, move the 
dummy forward until the dummy head/torso contacts the instrument panel. 
If the dummy loses contact with the seat cushion because of the forward 
movement, maintain the height of the dummy while moving the dummy 
forward. If the head contacts the windshield before head/torso contact 
with the instrument panel, maintain the thorax instrument cavity angle 
and move the dummy forward such that the head is following the angle of 
the windshield until there is head/torso contact with the instrument 
panel. Once contact is made, raise or lower the dummy vertically until 
Point 1 lies in Plane C. If the dummy's head contacts the windshield and 
keeps Point 1 from reaching Plane C, lower the dummy until there is no 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance between the head and the windshield. 
(The dummy shall remain in contact with the instrument panel while being 
raised or lowered which may change the dummy's fore-aft position.)
    S24.4.2.4 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S24.4.3 Position 2 (head on instrument panel).
    S24.4.3.1 Place the passenger seat in the full rearward seating 
position. Place the seat back at the manufacturer's nominal design seat 
back angle for a 50th percentile adult male as specified in S8.1.3 of 
FMVSS No. 208. If adjustable in the vertical direction, place the seat 
in the mid-height position. If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, 
independent of the entire seat, adjust the seat cushion to the full 
rearward position. Position any adjustable parts of the seat that 
provide additional support so that they are in the lowest or most open 
adjustment position. Position an adjustable head restraint in the lowest 
position.
    S24.4.3.2 Place the dummy in the front passenger seat such that:
    (a) The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane D.
    (b) The legs are perpendicular to the floor pan, the back of the 
legs are in contact with the seat cushion, and the dummy's thorax 
instrument cavity

[[Page 599]]

rear face is 6 degrees forward of vertical. If it is not possible to 
position the dummy with the legs in the prescribed position, rotate the 
legs forward until the dummy is resting on the seat with the feet 
positioned flat on the floor pan and the back of the legs are in contact 
with the front of the seat cushion. Set the transverse distance between 
the longitudinal centerlines at the front of the dummy's knees at 112 to 
117 mm (4.4. to 4.6 in), with the thighs and the legs of the dummy in 
vertical planes.
    (c) The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands are in 
contact with the thighs. S24.4.3.3 Move the seat forward, while 
maintaining the thorax instrument cavity rear face orientation until any 
part of the dummy contacts the vehicle's instrument panel.
    S24.4.3.4 If dummy contact has not been made with the vehicle's 
instrument panel at the full forward seating position of the seat, slide 
the dummy forward on the seat until contact is made. Maintain the thorax 
instrument cavity rear face orientation, the height of the dummy, and 
the angle of the thigh with respect to the horizontal.
    S24.4.3.5 If head/torso contact has not been made with the 
instrument panel, maintain the angle of the thighs with respect to the 
horizontal while applying a force towards the front of the vehicle on 
the spine of the dummy between the shoulder joints until the head/torso 
comes into contact with the vehicle's instrument panel.
    S24.4.3.6 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. Material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S24.4.4 Deploy the right front outboard frontal air bag system. If 
the frontal air bag system contains a multistage inflator, the vehicle 
shall be able to comply with the injury criteria at any stage or 
combination of stages and at any time delay between successive stages 
that could occur in a rigid barrier crash at speeds up to 26 km/h (16 
mph) under the test procedure specified in S22.5.
    S25 [Reserved] See Sec. 571.208, S25.
    S26 Procedure for low risk deployment tests of driver air bag.
    S26.1 Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S25.3 of 
FMVSS No. 208 shall meet the requirements of S25.3 and S25.4 with the 49 
CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile adult female dummy in both of the 
following positions: Driver position 1 (S26.2) and Driver position 2 
(S26.3).
    S26.2 Driver position 1 (chin on module).
    S26.2.1 Adjust the steering controls so that the steering wheel hub 
is at the geometric center of the locus it describes when it is moved 
through its full range of driving positions. If there is no setting at 
the geometric center, position it one setting lower than the geometric 
center. Set the rotation of the steering wheel so that the vehicle 
wheels are pointed straight ahead.
    S26.2.2 Locate the vertical plane parallel to the vehicle 
longitudinal axis which passes through the geometric center of the 
opening through which the driver air bag deploys into the occupant 
compartment. This is referred to as ``Plane E.''
    S26.2.3 Place the seat in the full rearward seating position. If 
adjustable in the vertical direction, place the seat in the mid-height 
position. If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, independent of the 
entire seat, adjust the seat cushion to the full rearward position. If 
the seat back is adjustable, place the seat back at the manufacturer's 
nominal design seat back angle for a 50th percentile adult male as 
specified in S8.1.3 of FMVSS No. 208. If the seat cushion contains an 
independent seat cushion angle adjustment mechanism, adjust the seat 
cushion angle to the middle of the range of seat cushion angles. 
Position any adjustable parts of the seat that provide additional 
support so that they are in the lowest or most open adjustment position. 
Position an adjustable head restraint in the lowest position.
    S26.2.4 Place the dummy in the driver's seat such that:
    S26.2.4.1 The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane E.

[[Page 600]]

    S26.2.4.2 The legs are perpendicular to the floor pan and the back 
of the legs are in contact with the seat cushion. The legs may be 
adjusted if necessary to achieve the final head position.
    S26.2.4.3 The dummy's thorax instrument cavity rear face is 6 
degrees forward (toward the front of the vehicle) of the steering wheel 
angle (i.e., if the steering wheel angle is 25 degrees from vertical, 
the thorax instrument cavity rear face angle is 31 degrees).
    S26.2.4.4 The initial transverse distance between the longitudinal 
centerlines at the front of the dummy's knees is 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 
6.7 in), with the thighs and legs of the dummy in vertical planes.
    S26.2.4.5 The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands are 
in contact with the thighs.
    S26.2.5 Maintaining the spine angle, slide the dummy forward until 
the head/torso contacts the steering wheel.
    S26.2.6 While maintaining the spine angle, adjust the height of the 
dummy so that the bottom of the chin is in the same horizontal plane as 
the highest point of the air bag module cover (dummy height can be 
adjusted using the seat height adjustments and/or spacer blocks). If the 
seat prevents the bottom of the chin from being in the same horizontal 
plane as the module cover, adjust the dummy height to as close to the 
prescribed position as possible.
    S26.2.7 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S26.3 Driver position 2 (chin on rim).
    S26.3.1 Place the seat in the full rearward seating position. If 
adjustable in the vertical direction, place the seat in the mid-height 
position. If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, independent of the 
entire seat, adjust the seat cushion to the full rearward position. If 
the seatback is adjustable, place the seat back at the manufacturer's 
nominal design seat back angle for a 50th percentile adult male as 
specified in S8.1.3 of FMVSS No. 208. If the seat cushion contains an 
independent seat cushion angle adjustment mechanism, adjust the seat 
cushion angle to the middle of the range of seat cushion angles. 
Position any adjustable parts of the seat that provide additional 
support so that they are in the lowest or most open adjustment position. 
Position an adjustable head restraint in the lowest position.
    S26.3.2 Adjust the steering controls so that the steering wheel hub 
is at the geometric center of the locus it describes when it is moved 
through its full range of driving positions. If there is no setting at 
the geometric center, position it one setting lower than the geometric 
center. Set the rotation of the steering wheel so that the vehicle 
wheels are pointed straight ahead.
    S26.3.3 Locate the vertical plane parallel to the vehicle 
longitudinal axis which passes through the geometric center of the 
opening through which the driver air bag deploys into the occupant 
compartment. This is referred to as ``Plane E.''
    S26.3.4 Place the dummy in the driver's seat position such that:
    S26.3.4.1 The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane E.
    S26.3.4.2 The legs are perpendicular to the floor pan and the back 
of the legs are in contact with the seat cushion. The legs may be 
adjusted if necessary to achieve the final head position.
    S26.3.4.3 The dummy's thorax instrument cavity rear face is 6 
degrees forward (toward the front of the vehicle) of the steering wheel 
angle (i.e., if the steering wheel angle is 25 degrees from vertical, 
the thorax instrument cavity rear face angle is 31 degrees).
    S26.3.4.4 The initial transverse distance between the longitudinal 
centerlines at the front of the dummy's knees is 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 
6.7 in), with the thighs and legs of the dummy in vertical planes.
    S26.3.4.5 The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands are 
in contact with the thighs.
    S26.3.5 Maintaining the spine angle, slide the dummy forward until 
the head/torso contacts the steering wheel.

[[Page 601]]

    S26.3.6 While maintaining the spine angle, position the dummy so 
that a point on the chin 40 mm below the center of the mouth (chin 
point) is in contact with the rim of the uppermost portion of the 
steering wheel. If the dummy's head contacts the vehicle windshield or 
upper interior before the prescribed position can be obtained, lower the 
dummy until there is no more than 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance between the 
vehicle's windshield or upper interior, as applicable.
    S26.3.7 If the steering wheel can be adjusted so that the chin point 
can be in contact with the rim of the uppermost portion of the steering 
wheel, adjust the steering wheel to that position and readjust the spine 
angle to coincide with the steering wheel angle. Position the dummy so 
that the chin point is in contact with the rim of the uppermost portion 
of the steering wheel.
    S26.3.8 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S26.4 Deploy the left front outboard frontal air bag system. If the 
air bag system contains a multistage inflator, the vehicle shall be able 
to comply with the injury criteria at any stage or combination of stages 
or time delay between successive stages that could occur in a rigid 
barrier crash at speeds up to 26 km/h (16 mph) under the test procedure 
specified in S22.5.
    S27 through S29 [Reserved] See Sec. 571.208, S27 through S29.

[69 FR 3840, Jan. 27, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 571.209  Standard No. 209; Seat belt assemblies.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard specifies requirements for seat 
belt assemblies.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to seat belt assemblies for 
use in passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and 
buses.
    S3. Definitions. Adjustment hardware means any or all hardware 
designed for adjusting the size of a seat belt assembly to fit the user, 
including such hardware that may be integral with a buckle, attachment 
hardware, or retractor.
    Attachment hardware means any or all hardware designed for securing 
the webbing of a seat belt assembly to a motor vehicle.
    Automatic-locking retractor means a retractor incorporating 
adjustment hardware by means of a positive self-locking mechanism which 
is capable when locked of withstanding restraint forces.
    Buckle means a quick release connector which fastens a person in a 
seat belt assembly.
    Emergency-locking retractor means a retractor incorporating 
adjustment hardware by means of a locking mechanism that is activated by 
vehicle acceleration, webbing movement relative to the vehicle, or other 
automatic action during an emergency and is capable when locked of 
withstanding restraint forces.
    Hardware means any metal or rigid plastic part of a seat belt 
assembly.
    Load-limiter means a seat belt assembly component or feature that 
controls tension on the seat belt to modulate the forces that are 
imparted to occupants restrained by the belt assembly during a crash.
    Nonlocking retractor means a retractor from which the webbing is 
extended to essentially its full length by a small external force, which 
provides no adjustment for assembly length, and which may or may not be 
capable of sustaining restraint forces at maximum webbing extension.
    Pelvic restraint means a seat belt assembly or portion thereof 
intended to restrain movement of the pelvis.
    Retractor means a device for storing part or all of the webbing in a 
seat belt assembly.
    Seat back retainer means the portion of some seat belt assemblies 
designed to restrict forward movement of a seat back.
    Seat belt assembly means any strap, webbing, or similar device 
designed to secure a person in a motor vehicle in order to mitigate the 
results of any accident, including all necessary buckles

[[Page 602]]

and other fasteners, and all hardware designed for installing such seat 
belt assembly in a motor vehicle.
    Strap means a narrow nonwoven material used in a seat belt assembly 
in place of webbing.
    Type 1 seat belt assembly is a lap belt for pelvic restraint.
    Type 2 seat belt assembly is a combination of pelvic and upper torso 
restraints.
    Type 2a shoulder belt is an upper torso restraint for use only in 
conjunction with a lap belt as a Type 2 seat belt assembly.
    Upper torso restraint means a portion of a seat belt assembly 
intended to restrain movement of the chest and shoulder regions.
    Webbing means a narrow fabric woven with continuous filling yarns 
and finished selvages.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 (a) Single occupancy. A seat belt assembly shall be designed 
for use by one, and only one, person at any one time.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) Upper torso restraint. A Type 2 seat belt assembly shall provide 
upper torso restraint without shifting the pelvic restraint into the 
abdominal region. An upper torso restraint shall be designed to minimize 
vertical forces on the shoulders and spine. Hardware for upper torso 
restraint shall be so designed and located in the seat belt assembly 
that the possibility of injury to the occupant is minimized.
    A Type 2a shoulder belt shall comply with applicable requirements 
for a Type 2 seat belt assembly in S4.1 to S4.4, inclusive.
    (d) Hardware. All hardware parts which contact under normal usage a 
person, clothing, or webbing shall be free from burrs and sharp edges.
    (e) Release. A Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly shall be provided 
with a buckle or buckles readily accessible to the occupant to permit 
his easy and rapid removal from the assembly. Buckle release mechanism 
shall be designed to minimize the possibility of accidental release. A 
buckle with release mechanism in the latched position shall have only 
one opening in which the tongue can be inserted on the end of the buckle 
designed to receive and latch the tongue.
    (f) Attachment hardware. A seat belt assembly shall include all 
hardware necessary for installation in a motor vehicle in accordance 
with Society of Automotive Engineers Recommended Practice J800c, ``Motor 
Vehicle Seat Belt Installation,'' November 1973. However, seat belt 
assemblies designed for installation in motor vehicles equipped with 
seat belt assembly anchorages that do not require anchorage nuts, 
plates, or washers, need not have such hardware, but shall have \7/16\-
20 UNF-2A or \1/2\-13UNC-2A attachment bolts or equivalent metric 
hardware. The hardware shall be designed to prevent attachment bolts and 
other parts from becoming disengaged from the vehicle while in service. 
Reinforcing plates or washers furnished for universal floor, 
installations shall be of steel, free from burrs and sharp edges on the 
peripheral edges adjacent to the vehicle, at least 1.5 mm in thickness 
and at least 2580 mm\2\ in projected area. The distance between any edge 
of the plate and the edge of the bolt hole shall be at least 15 mm. Any 
corner shall be rounded to a radius of not less than 6 mm or cut so that 
no corner angle is less than 135[deg] and no side is less than 6 mm in 
length.
    (g) Adjustment. (1) A Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly shall be 
capable of adjustment to fit occupants whose dimensions and weight range 
from those of a 5th-percentile adult female to those of a 95th-
percentile adult male. The seat belt assembly shall have either an 
automatic-locking retractor, an emergency-locking retractor, or an 
adjusting device that is within the reach of the occupant.
    (2) A Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly for use in a vehicle 
having seats that are adjustable shall conform to the requirements of 
S4.1(g)(1) regardless of seat position. However, if a seat has a back 
that is separately adjustable, the requirements of S4.1(g)(1) need be 
met only with the seat back in the manufacturer's nominal design riding 
position.
    (3) The adult occupants referred to in S4.1(g)(1) shall have the 
following measurements:

[[Page 603]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    5th percen- tile     95th percentile
                                      adult female         adult male
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Weight..........................  46.3 kg.............  97.5 kg.
Erect sitting height............  785 mm..............  965 mm.
Hip breadth (sitting)...........  325 mm..............  419 mm.
Hip circumference (sitting).....  925 mm..............  1199 mm.
Waist circumference (sitting)...  599 mm..............  1080 mm.
Chest depth.....................  190 mm..............  267 mm.
Chest circumference:
  Nipple........................  775 mm..............  1130 mm.
  Upper.........................  757 mm..............  1130 mm.
  Lower.........................  676 mm..............  1130 mm.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (h) Webbing. The ends of webbing in a seat belt assembly shall be 
protected or treated to prevent raveling. The end of webbing in a seat 
belt assembly having a metal-to-metal buckle that is used by the 
occupant to adjust the size of the assembly shall not pull out of the 
adjustment hardware at maximum size adjustment. Provision shall be made 
for essentially unimpeded movement of webbing routed between a seat back 
and seat cushion and attached to a retractor located behind the seat.
    (i) Strap. A strap used in a seat belt assembly to sustain restraint 
forces shall comply with the requirements for webbing in S4.2, and if 
the strap is made from a rigid material, it shall comply with applicable 
requirements in S4.2, S4.3, and S4.4.
    (j) Marking. Each seat belt assembly shall be permanently and 
legibly marked or labeled with year of manufacture, model, and name or 
trademark of manufacturer or distributor, or of importer if manufactured 
outside the United States. A model shall consist of a single combination 
of webbing having a specific type of fiber weave and construction, and 
hardware having a specific design. Webbings of various colors may be 
included under the same model, but webbing of each color shall comply 
with the requirements for webbing in S4.2.
    (k) Installation instructions. A seat belt assembly, other than a 
seat belt assembly installed in a motor vehicle by an automobile 
manufacturer, shall be accompanied by an instruction sheet providing 
sufficient information for installing the assembly in a motor vehicle. 
The installation instructions shall state whether the assembly is for 
universal installation or for installation only in specifically stated 
motor vehicles, and shall include at least those items specified in SAE 
Recommended Practice J800c, ``Motor Vehicle Seat Belt Installations,'' 
November 1973. If the assembly is for use only in specifically stated 
motor vehicles, the assembly shall either be permanently and legibly 
marked or labeled with the following statement, or the instruction sheet 
shall include the following statement:

    This seat belt assembly is for use only in [insert specific seating 
position(s), e.g., ``front right''] in [insert specific vehicle make(s) 
and model(s)].

    (l) Usage and maintenance instructions. A seat belt assembly or 
retractor shall be accompanied by written instructions for the proper 
use of the assembly, stressing particularly the importance of wearing 
the assembly snugly and properly located on the body, and on the 
maintenance f the assembly and periodic inspection of all components. 
The instructions shall show the proper manner of threading webbing in 
the hardware of seat belt assemblies in which the webbing is not 
permanently fastened. Instructions for a nonlocking retractor shall 
include a caution that the webbing must be fully extended from the 
retractor during use of the seat belt assembly unless the retractor is 
attached to the free end of webbing which is not subjected to any 
tension during restraint of an occupant by the assembly. Instructions 
for Type 2a shoulder belt shall include a warning that the shoulder belt 
is not to be used without a lap belt.
    (m) Workmanship. Seat belt assemblies shall have good workmanship in 
accordance with good commercial practice.
    S4.2 Requirements for webbing.
    (a) Width. The width of the webbing in a seat belt assembly shall be 
not less than 46 mm, except for portions that do not touch a 95th 
percentile adult male with the seat in any adjustment position and the 
seat back in the manufacturer's nominal design riding position when 
measured under the conditions prescribed in S5.1(a).
    (b) Breaking strength. The webbing in a seat belt assembly shall 
have not less than the following breaking strength when tested by the 
procedures specified in S5.1(b): Type 1 seat belt assembly--26,689 N; 
Type 2 seat belt assembly--

[[Page 604]]

22,241 N for webbing in pelvic restraint and 17,793 N for webbing in 
upper torso restraint.
    (c) Elongation. Except as provided in S4.5, the webbing in a seat 
belt assembly shall not extend to more than the following elongation 
when subjected to the specified forces in accordance with the procedure 
specified in S5.1(c): Type 1 seat belt assembly--20 percent at 11,120 N; 
Type 2 seat belt assembly 30 percent at 11,120 N for webbing in pelvic 
restraint and 40 percent at 11,120 N for webbing in upper torso 
restraint.
    (d) Resistance to abrasion. The webbing of a seat belt assembly, 
after being subjected to abrasion as specified in S5.1(d) or S5.3(c), 
shall have a breaking strength of not less than 75 percent of the 
breaking strength listed in S4.2(b) for that type of belt assembly.
    (e) Resistance to light. The webbing in a seat belt assembly after 
exposure to the light of a carbon arc and tested by the procedure 
specified in S5.1(e) shall have a breaking strength not less than 60 
percent of the strength before exposure to the carbon arc and shall have 
a color retention not less than No. 2 on the Geometric Gray Scale 
published by the American Association of Textile Chemists and Colorists, 
Post Office Box 886, Durham, NC.
    (f) Resistance to micro-organisms. The webbing in a seat belt 
assembly after being subjected to micro-organisms and tested by the 
procedures specified in S5.1(f) shall have a breaking strength not less 
than 85 percent of the strength before subjection to micro-organisms.
    S4.3 Requirements for hardware.
    (a) Corrosion resistance. (1) Attachment hardware of a seat belt 
assembly after being subjected to the conditions specified in S5.2(a) 
shall be free of ferrous corrosion on significant surfaces except for 
permissible ferrous corrosion at peripheral edges or edges of holes on 
underfloor reinforcing plates and washers. Alternatively, such hardware 
at or near the floor shall be protected against corrosion by at least an 
electrodeposited coating of nickel, or copper and nickel with at least a 
service condition number of SC2, and other attachment hardware shall be 
protected by an electrodeposited coating of nickel, or copper and nickel 
with a service condition number of SC1, in accordance with American 
Society for Testing and Materials B456-79, ``Standard Specification for 
Electrodeposited Coatings of Copper Plus Nickel Plus Chromium and Nickel 
Plus Chromium,'' but such hardware shall not be racked for 
electroplating in locations subjected to maximum stress.
    (2) Surfaces of buckles, retractors and metallic parts, other than 
attachment hardware, of a seat belt assembly after subjection to the 
conditions specified in S5.2(a) shall be free of ferrous or nonferrous 
corrosion which may be transferred, either directly or by means of the 
webbing, to the occupant or his clothing when the assembly is worn. 
After test, buckles shall conform to applicable requirements in 
paragraphs (d) to (g) of this section.
    (b) Temperature resistance. Plastic or other nonmetallic hardware 
parts of a seat belt assembly when subjected to the conditions specified 
in S5.2(b) shall not warp or otherwise deteriorate to cause the assembly 
to operate improperly or fail to comply with applicable requirements in 
this section and S4.4.
    (c) Attachment hardware. (1) Eye bolts, shoulder bolts, or other 
bolt used to secure the pelvic restraint of seat belt assembly to a 
motor vehicle shall withstand a force of 40,034 N when tested by the 
procedure specified in S5.2(c)(1), except that attachment bolts of a 
seat belt assembly designed for installation in specific models of motor 
vehicles in which the ends of two or more seat belt assemblies cannot be 
attached to the vehicle by a single bolt shall have breaking strength of 
not less than 22,241 N.
    (2) Other attachment hardware designed to receive the ends of two 
seat belt assemblies shall withstand a tensile force of at least 26,689 
N without fracture of a section when tested by the procedure specified 
in S5.2(c)(2).
    (3) A seat belt assembly having single attachment hooks of the 
quick-disconnect type for connecting webbing to an eye bolt shall be 
provided with a retaining latch or keeper which shall not move more than 
2 mm in either the vertical or horizontal direction when tested by the 
procedure specified in S5.2(c)(3).

[[Page 605]]

    (d) Buckle release. (1) The buckle of a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt 
assembly shall release when a force of not more than 133 N is applied.
    (2) A buckle designed for pushbutton application of buckle release 
force shall have a minimum area of 452 mm<SUP>2</SUP> with a minimum 
linear dimension of 10 mm for applying the release force, or a buckle 
designed for lever application of buckle release force shall permit the 
insertion of a cylinder 10 mm in diameter and 38 mm in length to at 
least the midpoint of the cylinder along the cylinder's entire length in 
the actuation portion of the buckle release. A buckle having other 
design for release shall have adequate access for two or more fingers to 
actuate release.
    (3) The buckle of a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly shall not 
release under a compressive force of 1779 N applied as prescribed in 
paragraph S5.2(d)(3). The buckle shall be operable and shall meet the 
applicable requirement of paragraph S4.4 after the compressive force has 
been removed.
    (e) Adjustment force. The force required to decrease the size of a 
seat belt assembly shall not exceed 49 N when measured by the procedure 
specified in S5.2(e).
    (f) Tilt-lock adjustment. The buckle of a seat belt assembly having 
tilt-lock adjustment shall lock the webbing when tested by the procedure 
specified in S5.2(f) at an angle of not less than 30 degrees between the 
base of the buckle and the anchor webbing.
    (g) Buckle latch. The buckle latch of a seat belt assembly when 
tested by the procedure specified in S5.2(g) shall not fail, nor gall or 
wear to an extent that normal latching and unlatching is impaired, and a 
metal-to-metal buckle shall separate when in any position of partial 
engagement by a force of not more than 22 N.
    (h) Nonlocking retractor. The webbing of a seat belt assembly shall 
extend from a nonlocking retractor within 6 mm of maximum length when a 
tension is applied as prescribed in S5.2(h). A nonlocking retractor on 
upper torso restraint shall be attached to the nonadjustable end of the 
assembly, the reel of the retractor shall be easily visible to an 
occupant while wearing the assembly, and the maximum retraction force 
shall not exceed 5 N in any strap or webbing that contacts the shoulder 
when measured by the procedure specified in S5.2(h), unless the 
retractor is attached to the free end of webbing which is not subjected 
to any tension during restraint of an occupant by the assembly.
    (i) Automatic-locking retractor. The webbing of a seat belt assembly 
equipped with an automatic locking retractor, when tested by the 
procedure specified in S5.2(i), shall not move more than 25 mm between 
locking positions of the retractor, and shall be retracted with a force 
under zero acceleration of not less than 3 N when attached to pelvic 
restraint, and not less that 2 N nor more than 5 N in any strap or 
webbing that contacts the shoulders of an occupant when the retractor is 
attached to upper torso restraint. An automatic locking retractor 
attached to upper torso restraint shall not increase the restraint on 
the occupant of the seat belt assembly during use in a vehicle traveling 
over rough roads as prescribed in S5.2(i).
    (j) Emergency-locking retractor. An emergency-locking retractor of a 
Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly, when tested in accordance with the 
procedures specified in paragraph S5.2(j)--
    (1) Shall lock before the webbing extends 25 mm when the retractor 
is subjected to an acceleration of 7 m/s\2\ (0.7 g);
    (2) Shall not lock, if the retractor is sensitive to webbing 
withdrawal, before the webbing extends 51 mm when the retractor is 
subjected to an acceleration of 3 m/s\2\ (0.3 g) or less.
    (3) Shall not lock, if the retractor is sensitive to vehicle 
acceleration, when the retractor is rotated in any direction to any 
angle of 15[deg] or less from its orientation in the vehicle;
    (4) Shall exert a retractive force of at least 3 N under zero 
acceleration when attached only to the pelvic restraint;
    (5) Shall exert a retractive force of not less than 1 N and not more 
than 5 N under zero acceleration when attached only to an upper torso 
restraint;
    (6) Shall exert a retractive force of not less than 1 N and not more 
than 7

[[Page 606]]

N under zero acceleration when attached to a strap or webbing that 
restrains both the upper torso and the pelvis.
    (k) Performance of retractor. A retractor used on a seat belt 
assembly after subjection to the tests specified in S5.2(k) shall comply 
with applicable requirements in paragraphs (h) to (j) of this section 
and S4.4, except that the retraction force shall be not less than 50 
percent of its original retraction force.
    S4.4 Requirements for assembly performance.
    (a) Type I seat belt assembly. Except as provided in S4.5, the 
complete seat belt assembly including webbing, straps, buckles, 
adjustment and attachment hardware, and retractors shall comply with the 
following requirements when tested by the procedures specified in 
S5.3(a):
    (1) The assembly loop shall withstand a force of not less than 
22,241 N; that is, each structural component of the assembly shall 
withstand a force of not less than 11,120 N.
    (2) The assembly loop shall extend not more than 7 inches or 178 mm 
when subjected to a force of 22,241 N; that is, the length of the 
assembly between anchorages shall not increase more than 356 mm.
    (3) Any webbing cut by the hardware during test shall have a 
breaking strength at the cut of not less than 18,683 N.
    (4) Complete fracture through any solid section of metal attachment 
hardware shall not occur during test.
    (b) Type 2 seat belt assembly. Except as provided in S4.5, the 
components of a Type 2 seat belt assembly including webbing, straps, 
buckles, adjustment and attachment hardware, and retractors shall comply 
with the following requirements when tested by the procedure specified 
in S5.3(b):
    (1) The structural components in the pelvic restraint shall 
withstand a force of not less than 11,120 N.
    (2) The structural components in the upper torso restraint shall 
withstand a force of not less than 6,672 N.
    (3) The structural components in the assembly that are common to 
pelvic and upper torso restraints shall withstand a force of not less 
than 13,345 N.
    (4) The length of the pelvic restraint between anchorages shall not 
increase more than 508 mm when subjected to a force of 11,120 N.
    (5) The length of the upper torso restraint between anchorages shall 
not increase more than 508 mm when subjected to a force of 6,672 N.
    (6) Any webbing cut by the hardware during test shall have a 
breaking strength of not less than 15,569 N at a cut in webbing of the 
pelvic restraint, or not less than 12,455 N at a cut in webbing of the 
upper torso restraint.
    (7) Complete fracture through any solid section of metal attachment 
hardware shall not occur during test.
    S4.5 Load-limiter. (a) A Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly that 
includes a load-limiter is not required to comply with the elongation 
requirements of S4.2(c), S4.4(a)(2), S4.4(b)(4) or S4.4(b)(5).
    (b) A seat belt assembly that includes a load limiter and that does 
not comply with the elongation requirements of this standard may be 
installed in motor vehicles at any designated seating position that is 
subject to the requirements of S5.1 of Standard No. 208 (Sec. 571.208).
    S4.6 Manual belts subject to crash protection requirements of 
Standard No. 208.
    (a)(1) A manual seat belt assembly, which is subject to the 
requirements of S5.1 of Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208) by virtue of 
any provision of Standard No. 208 other than S4.1.2.1(c)(2) of that 
standard, does not have to meet the requirements of S4.2(a)-(f) and S4.4 
of this standard.
    (2) A manual seat belt assembly subject to the requirements of S5.1 
of Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208) by virtue of S4.1.2.1(c)(2) of 
Standard No. 208 does not have to meet the elongation requirements of 
S4.2(c), S4.4(a)(2), S4.4(b)(4), and S4.4(b)(5) of this standard.
    S5. Demonstration procedures.
    S5.1 Webbing--(a) Width. The width of webbing from three seat belt 
assemblies shall be measured after conditioning for at least 24 hours in 
an atmosphere having relative humidity between 48 and 67 percent and a 
temperature of 23[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. The tension 
during measurement of width shall be not more than 22 N on webbing from 
a Type

[[Page 607]]

1 seat belt assembly, and 9786 N <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>450 N on webbing 
from a Type 2 seat belt assembly. The width of webbing from a Type 2 
seat belt assembly may be measured during the breaking strength test 
described in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) Breaking strength. Webbing from three seat belt assemblies shall 
be conditioned in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section and 
tested for breaking strength in a testing machine of capacity verified 
to have an error of not more than one percent in the range of the 
breaking strength of the webbing in accordance with American Society for 
Testing and Materials E4-79 ``Standard Methods of Load Verification of 
Testing Machines.'' The machine shall be equipped with split drum grips 
illustrated in Figure 1, having a diameter between 51 and 102 mm. The 
rate of grip separation shall be between 51 and 102 mm per minute. The 
distance between the centers of the grips at the start of the test shall 
be between 102 and 254 mm. After placing the specimen in the grips, the 
webbing shall be stretched continuously at a uniform rate to failure. 
Each value shall be not less than the applicable breaking strength 
requirement in S4.2(b), but the median value shall be used for 
determining the retention of breaking strength in paragraphs (d), (e) 
and (f) of this section.
    (c) Elongation. Elongation shall be measured during the breaking 
strength test described in paragraph (b) of this section by the 
following procedure: A preload between 196 N and 245 N shall be placed 
on the webbing mounted in the grips of the testing machine and the 
needle points of an extensometer, in which the points remain parallel 
during test, are inserted in the center of the specimen. Initially the 
points shall be set at a known distance apart between 102 and 203 mm. 
When the force on the webbing reaches the value specified in S4.2(c), 
the increase in separation of the points of the extensometer shall be 
measured and the percent elongation shall be calculated to the nearest 
0.5 percent. Each value shall be not more than the appropriate 
elongation requirement in S4.2(c).
    (d) Resistance to abrasion. The webbing from three seat belt 
assemblies shall be tested for resistance to abrasion by rubbing over 
the hexagon bar prescribed in Figure 2 in the following manner: The 
webbing shall be mounted in the apparatus shown schematically in Figure 
2. One end of the webbing (A) shall be attached to a mass (B) of 2.35 kg 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>.05 kg, except that a mass of 1.5 kg <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>.05 kg shall be used for webbing in pelvic and upper 
torso restraints of a belt assembly used in a child restraint system. 
The webbing shall be passed over the two new abrading edges of the 
hexagon bar (C) and the other end attached to an oscillating drum (D) 
which has a stroke of 330 mm. Suitable guides shall be used to prevent 
movement of the webbing along the axis of hexagonal bar C. Drum D shall 
be oscillated for 5,000 strokes or 2,500 cycles at a rate of 60 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 strokes per minute or 30 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 
cycles per minute. The abraded webbing shall be conditioned as 
prescribed in paragraph (a) of this section and tested for breaking 
strength by the procedure described in paragraph (b) of this section. 
The median values for the breaking strengths determined on abraded and 
unabraded specimens shall be used to calculate the percentage of 
breaking strength retained.
    (e) Resistance to light. Webbing at least 508 mm in length from 
three seat belt assemblies shall be suspended vertically on the inside 
of the specimen track in a Type E carbon-arc light exposure apparatus 
described in Standard Practice for Generating Light-Exposure Apparatus 
(Carbon-Arc Type) With and Without Water for Exposure of Nonmetallic 
Materials, ASTM Designation: G23 81, published by the American Society 
for Testing and Materials, except that the filter used for 100 percent 
polyester yarns shall be chemically strengthened soda-lime glass with a 
transmittance of less than 5 percent for wave lengths equal to or less 
than 305 nanometers and 90 percent or greater transmittance for wave 
lengths of 375 to 800 nanometers. The apparatus shall be operated 
without water spray at an air temperature of 60[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]Celsius ( [deg]C) measured at a point 25 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 mm outside the specimen rack and midway in height. The 
temperature sensing element shall be shielded from radiation. The 
specimens shall be exposed to light from the carbon-arc

[[Page 608]]

for 100 hours and then conditioned as prescribed in paragraph (a) of 
this section. The colorfastness of the exposed and conditioned specimens 
shall be determined on the Geometric Gray Scale issued by the American 
Association of Textile Chemists and Colorists. The breaking strength of 
the specimens shall be determined by the procedure prescribed in 
paragraph (b) of this section. The median values for the breaking 
strengths determined on exposed and unexposed specimens shall be used to 
calculate the percentage of breaking strength retained.
    (f) Resistance to micro-organisms. Webbing at least 508 millimeters 
(mm) in length from three seat belt assemblies shall first be 
preconditioned in accordance with Appendix A(1) and (2) of American 
Association of Textile Chemists and Colorists Test Method 381, 
``Fungicides Evaluation on Textiles; Mildew and Rot Resistance of 
Textiles,'' and then subjected to Test I, ``Soil Burial Test'' of that 
test method. After soil-burial for a period of 2 weeks, the specimen 
shall be washed in water, dried and conditioned as prescribed in 
paragraph (a) of this section. The breaking strengths of the specimens 
shall be determined by the procedure prescribed in paragraph (b) of this 
section. The median values for the breaking strengths determined on 
exposed and unexposed specimens shall be used to calculate the 
percentage of breaking strength retained.

    Note: This test shall not be required on webbing made from material 
which is inherently resistant to micro-organisms.

    S5.2 Hardware.
    (a) Corrosion resistance. Three seat belt assemblies shall be tested 
in accordance with American Society for Testing and Materials B11773, 
``Standard Method of Salt Spray (Fog) Testing.'' Any surface coating or 
material not intended for permanent retention on the metal parts during 
service life shall be removed prior to preparation of the test specimens 
for testing. The period of test shall be 50 hours for all attachment 
hardware at or near the floor, consisting of two periods of 24 hours 
exposure to salt spray followed by 1 hour drying and 25 hours for all 
other hardware, consisting of one period of 24 hours exposure to salt 
spray followed by 1 hour drying. In the salt spray test chamber, the 
parts from the three assemblies shall be oriented differently, selecting 
those orientations most likely to develop corrosion on the larger areas. 
At the end of test, the seat belt assembly shall be washed thoroughly 
with water to remove the salt. After drying for at least 24 hours under 
standard laboratory conditions specified in S5.1(a) attachment hardware 
shall be examined for ferrous corrosion on significant surfaces, that 
is, all surfaces that can be contacted by a sphere 19 mm in diameter, 
and other hardware shall be examined for ferrous and nonferrous 
corrosion which may be transferred, either directly or by means of the 
webbing, to a person or his clothing during use of a seat belt assembly 
incorporating the hardware.
    Note: When attachment and other hardware are permanently fastened, 
by sewing or other means, to the same piece of webbing, separate 
assemblies shall be used to test the two types of hardware. The test for 
corrosion resistance shall not be required for attachment hardware made 
from corrosion-resistant steel containing at least 11.5 percent chromium 
or for attachment hardware protected with an electrodeposited coating of 
nickel, or copper and nickel, as prescribed in S4.3(a). The assembly 
that has been used to test the corrosion resistance of the buckle shall 
be used to measure adjustment force, tilt-lock adjustment, and buckle 
latch in paragraphs (e), (f), and (g), respectively, of this section, 
assembly performance in S5.3 and buckle release force in paragraph (d) 
of this section.
    (b) Temperature resistance. Three seat belt assemblies having 
plastic or nonmetallic hardware or having retractors shall be subjected 
to the conditions prescribed in Procedure D of American Society for 
Testing and Materials D756-78, ``Standard Practice for Determination of 
Weight and Shape Changes of Plastics under Accelerated Service 
Conditions.'' The dimension and weight measurement shall be omitted. 
Buckles shall be unlatched and retractors shall be fully retracted 
during conditioning. The hardware parts after conditioning shall be used 
for all applicable tests in S4.3 and S4.4.
    (c) Attachment hardware. (1) Attachment bolts used to secure the 
pelvic restraint of a seat belt assembly to a motor vehicle shall be 
tested in a manner similar to that shown in Figure 3.

[[Page 609]]

The load shall be applied at an angle of 45[deg] to the axis of the bolt 
through attachment hardware from the seat belt assembly, or through a 
special fixture which simulates the loading applied by the attachment 
hardware. The attachment hardware or simulated fixture shall be fastened 
by the bolt to the anchorage shown in Figure 3, which has a standard \7/
16\-20UNF-2B or \1/2\-UNF-2B or metric equivalent threaded hole in a 
hardened steel plate at least 10 mm in thickness. The bolt shall be 
installed with two full threads exposed from the fully seated position. 
The appropriate force required by S4.3(c) shall be applied. A bolt from 
each of three seat belt assemblies shall be tested.
    (2) Attachment hardware, other than bolts, designed to receive the 
ends of two seat belt assemblies shall be subjected to a tensile force 
of 26,689 N in a manner simulating use. The hardware shall be examined 
for fracture after the force is released. Attachment hardware from three 
seat belt assemblies shall be tested.
    (3) Single attachment hook for connecting webbing to any eye bolt 
shall be tested in the following manner: The hook shall be held rigidly 
so that the retainer latch or keeper, with cotter pin or other locking 
device in place, is in a horizontal position as shown in Figure 4. A 
force of 667 N <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 N shall be applied vertically as 
near as possible to the free end of the retainer latch, and the movement 
of the latch by this force at the point of application shall be 
measured. The vertical force shall be released, and a force of 667 N 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 N shall be applied horizontally as near as 
possible to the free end of the retainer latch. The movement of the 
latch by this force at the point of load application shall be measured. 
Alternatively, the hook may be held in other positions, provided the 
forces are applied and the movements of the latch are measured at the 
points indicated in Figure 4. A single attachment hook from each of 
three seat belt assemblies shall be tested.
    (d) Buckle release. (1) Three seat belt assemblies shall be tested 
to determine compliance with the maximum buckle release force 
requirements, following the assembly test in S5.3. After subjection to 
the force applicable for the assembly being tested, the force shall be 
reduced and maintained at 667 N on the assembly loop of a Type 1 seat 
belt assembly, 334 N on the components of a Type 2 seat belt assembly. 
The buckle release force shall be measured by applying a force on the 
buckle in a manner and direction typical of those which would be 
employed by a seat belt occupant. For push button-release buckles, the 
force shall be applied at least 3 mm from the edge of the push button 
access opening of the buckle in a direction that produces maximum 
releasing effect. For lever-release buckles, the force shall be applied 
on the centerline of the buckle lever or finger tab in a direction that 
produces maximum releasing effect.
    (2) The area for application of release force on pushbutton actuated 
buckle shall be measured to the nearest 30 mm<SUP>2</SUP>. The cylinder 
specified in S4.3(d) shall be inserted in the actuation portion of a 
lever released buckle for determination of compliance with the 
requirement. A buckle with other release actuation shall be examined for 
access of release by fingers.
    (3) The buckle of a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly shall be 
subjected to a compressive force of 1779 N applied anywhere on a test 
line that is coincident with the center line of the belt extended 
through the buckle or on any line that extends over the center of the 
release mechanism and intersects the extended centerline of the belt at 
an angle of 60[deg]. The load shall be applied by using a curved 
cylindrical bar having a cross section diameter of 19 mm and a radius of 
curvature of 152 mm, placed with its longitudinal center line along the 
test line and its center directly above the point or the buckle to which 
the load will be applied. The buckle shall be latched, and a tensile 
force of 334 N shall be applied to the connected webbing during the 
application of the compressive force. Buckles from three seat belt 
assemblies shall be tested to determine compliance with paragraph 
S4.3(d)(3).
    (e) Adjustment Force. Three seat belt assemblies shall be tested for 
adjustment force on the webbing at the buckle, or other manual adjusting 
device normally used to adjust the size of the assembly. With no load on 
the anchor

[[Page 610]]

end, the webbing shall be drawn through the adjusting device at a rate 
of 508 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>50 mm per minute and the maximum force 
shall be measured to the nearest 1 N after the first 25 mm of webbing 
movement. The webbing shall be precycled 10 times prior to measurement.
    (f) Tilt-lock adjustment. This test shall be made on buckles or 
other manual adjusting devices having tilt-lock adjustment normally used 
to adjust the size of the assembly. Three buckles or devices shall be 
tested. The base of the adjustment mechanism and the anchor end of the 
webbing shall be oriented in planes normal to each other. The webbing 
shall be drawn through the adjustment mechanism in a direction to 
increase belt length at a rate of 508 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>50 mm per 
minute while the plane of the base is slowly rotated in a direction to 
lock the webbing. Rotation shall be stopped when the webbing locks, but 
the pull on the webbing shall be continued until there is a resistance 
of at least 89 N. The locking angle between the anchor end of the 
webbing and the base of the adjustment mechanism shall be measured to 
the nearest degree. The webbing shall be precycled 10 times prior to 
measurement.
    (g) Buckle latch. The buckles from three seat belt assemblies shall 
be opened fully and closed at least 10 times. Then the buckles shall be 
clamped or firmly held against a flat surface so as to permit normal 
movement of buckle part, but with the metal mating plate (metal-to-metal 
buckles) or of webbing end (metal-to-webbing buckles) withdrawn from the 
buckle. The release mechanism shall be moved 200 times through the 
maximum possible travel against its stop with a force of 133 N <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>13 N at a rate not to exceed 30 cycles per minute. The 
buckle shall be examined to determine compliance with the performance 
requirements of S4.3(g). A metal-to-metal buckle shall be examined to 
determine whether partial engagement is possible by means of any 
technique representative of actual use. If partial engagement is 
possible, the maximum force of separation when in such partial 
engagement shall be determined.
    (h) Nonlocking retractor. After the retractor is cycled 10 times by 
full extension and retraction of the webbing, the retractor and webbing 
shall be suspended vertically and a force of 18 N shall be applied to 
extend the webbing from the retractor. The force shall be reduced to 13 
N when attached to a pelvic restraint, or to 5 N per strap or webbing 
that contacts the shoulder of an occupant when retractor is attached to 
an upper torso restraint. The residual extension of the webbing shall be 
measured by manual rotation of the retractor drum or by disengaging the 
retraction mechanism. Measurements shall be made on three retractors. 
The location of the retractor attached to upper torso restraint shall be 
examined for visibility of reel during use of seat belt assembly in a 
vehicle.

    Note: This test shall not be required on a nonlocking retractor 
attached to the free end of webbing which is not subjected to any 
tension during restraint of an occupant by the assembly.

    (i) Automatic-locking retractor. Three retractors shall be tested in 
a manner to permit the retraction force to be determined exclusive of 
the gravitational forces on hardware or webbing being retracted. The 
webbing shall be fully extended from the retractor. While the webbing is 
being retracted, the average force or retraction within plus or minus 51 
mm of 75 percent extension (25 percent retraction) shall be determined 
and the webbing movement between adjacent locking segments shall be 
measured in the same region of extension. A seat belt assembly with 
automatic locking retractor in upper torso restraint shall be tested in 
a vehicle in a manner prescribed by the installation and usage 
instructions. The retraction force on the occupant of the seat belt 
assembly shall be determined before and after traveling for 10 minutes 
at a speed of 24 kilometers per hour (km/h) or more over a rough road 
(e.g., Belgian block road) where the occupant is subjected to 
displacement with respect to the vehicle in both horizontal and vertical 
directions. Measurements shall be made with the vehicle stopped and the 
occupant in the normal seated position.
    (j) Emergency-locking retractor. A retractor shall be tested in a 
manner that permits the retraction force to be

[[Page 611]]

determined exclusive of the gravitational forces on hardware or webbing 
being retracted. The webbing shall be fully extended from the retractor, 
passing over or through any hardware or other material specified in the 
installation instructions. While the webbing is being retracted, the 
lowest force of retraction within plus or minus 51 mm of 75 percent 
extension shall be determined. A retractor that is sensitive to webbing 
withdrawal shall be subjected to an acceleration of 3 m/s<SUP>2</SUP> 
(0.3 g) within a period of 50 milliseconds (ms) while the webbing is at 
75 percent extension, to determine compliance with S4.3(j)(2). The 
retractor shall be subjected to an acceleration of 7 m/s<SUP>2</SUP> 
(0.7 g) within a period of 50 milliseconds (ms), while the webbing is at 
75 percent extension, and the webbing movement before locking shall be 
measured under the following conditions: For a retractor sensitive to 
webbing withdrawal, the retractor shall be accelerated in the direction 
of webbing retraction while the retractor drum's central axis is 
oriented horizontally and at angles of 45[deg], 90[deg], 135[deg], and 
180[deg] to the horizontal plane. For a retractor sensitive to vehicle 
acceleration, the retractor shall be:
    (1) Accelerated in the horizontal plane in two directions normal to 
each other, while the retractor drum's central axis is oriented at the 
angle at which it is installed in the vehicle; and,
    (2) Accelerated in three directions normal to each other while the 
retractor drum's central axis is oriented at angles of 45[deg], 90[deg], 
135[deg], and 180[deg] from the angle at which it is installed in the 
vehicle, unless the retractor locks by gravitational force when tilted 
in any direction to any angle greater than 45[deg] from the angle at 
which it is installed in the vehicle.
    (k) Performance of retractor. After completion of the corrosion-
resistance test described in paragraph (a) of this section, the webbing 
shall be fully extended and allowed to dry for at least 24 hours under 
standard laboratory conditions specified in S5.1(a). The retractor shall 
be examined for ferrous and nonferrous corrosion which may be 
transferred, either directly or by means of the webbing, to a person or 
his clothing during use of a seat belt assembly incorporating the 
retractor, and for ferrous corrosion on significant surfaces if the 
retractor is part of the attachment hardware. The webbing shall be 
withdrawn manually and allowed to retract for 25 cycles. The retractor 
shall be mounted in an apparatus capable of extending the webbing fully, 
applying a force of 89 N at full extension, and allowing the webbing to 
retract freely and completely. The webbing shall be withdrawn from the 
retractor and allowed to retract repeatedly in this apparatus until 
2,500 cycles are completed. The retractor and webbing shall then be 
subjected to the temperature resistance test prescribed in paragraph (b) 
of this section. The retractor shall be subjected to 2,500 additional 
cycles of webbing withdrawal and retraction. Then, the retractor and 
webbing shall be subjected to dust in a chamber similar to one 
illustrated in Figure 8 containing about 0.9 kg of coarse grade dust 
conforming to the specification given in Society of Automotive 
Engineering Recommended Practice J726, ``Air Cleaner Test Code'' Sept. 
1979. The dust shall be agitated every 20 minutes for 5 seconds by 
compressed air, free of oil and moisture, at a gage pressure of 550 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>55 kPa entering through an orifice 1.5 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 mm in diameter. The webbing shall be extended to the 
top of the chamber and kept extended at all times except that the 
webbing shall be subjected to 10 cycles of complete retraction and 
extension within 1 to 2 minutes after each agitation of the dust. At the 
end of 5 hours, the assembly shall be removed from the chamber. The 
webbing shall be fully withdrawn from the retractor manually and allowed 
to retract completely for 25 cycles. An automatic-locking retractor or a 
nonlocking retractor attached to pelvic restraint shall be subjected to 
5,000 additional cycles of webbing withdrawal and retraction. An 
emergency locking retractor or a nonlocking retractor attached to upper 
torso restraint shall be subjected to 45,000 additional cycles of 
webbing withdrawal and retraction between 50 and 100 per cent extension. 
The locking mechanism of an emergency locking retractor shall be 
actuated at least 10,000 times within 50 to 100 percent extension of 
webbing during

[[Page 612]]

the 50,000 cycles. At the end of test, compliance of the retractors with 
applicable requirements in S4.3 (h), (i), and (j) shall be determined. 
Three retractors shall be tested for performance.
    S5.3 Assembly performance--(a) Type 1 seat belt assembly. Three 
complete seat belt assemblies, including webbing, straps, buckles, 
adjustment and attachment hardware, and retractors, arranged in the form 
of a loop as shown in Figure 5, shall be tested in the following manner:
    (1) The testing machine shall conform to the requirements specified 
in S5.1(b). A double-roller block shall be attached to one head of the 
testing machine. This block shall consist of two rollers 102 mm in 
diameter and sufficiently long so that no part of the seat belt assembly 
touches parts of the block other than the rollers during test. The 
rollers shall be mounted on antifriction bearings and spaced 305 mm 
between centers, and shall have sufficient capacity so that there is no 
brinelling, bending or other distortion of parts which may affect the 
results. An anchorage bar shall be fastened to the other head of the 
testing machine.
    (2) The attachment hardware furnished with the seat belt assembly 
shall be attached to the anchorage bar. The anchor points shall be 
spaced so that the webbing is parallel in the two sides of the loop. The 
attaching bolts shall be parallel to, or at an angle of 45[deg] or 
90[deg] to the webbing, whichever results in an angle nearest to 90[deg] 
between webbing and attachment hardware except that eye bolts shall be 
vertical, and attaching bolts or nonthreaded anchorages of a seat belt 
assembly designed for use in specific models of motor vehicles shall be 
installed to produce the maximum angle in use indicated by the 
installation instructions, utilizing special fixtures if necessary to 
simulate installation in the motor vehicle. Rigid adapters between 
anchorage bar and attachment hardware shall be used if necessary to 
locate and orient the adjustment hardware. The adapters shall have a 
flat support face perpendicular to the threaded hole for the attaching 
bolt and adequate in area to provide full support for the base of the 
attachment hardware connected to the webbing. If necessary, a washer 
shall be used under a swivel plate or other attachment hardware to 
prevent the webbing from being damaged as the attaching bolt is 
tightened.
    (3) The length of the assembly loop from attaching bolt to attaching 
bolt shall be adjusted to about 1295 mm, or as near thereto as possible. 
A force of 245 N shall be applied to the loop to remove any slack in 
webbing at hardware. The force shall be removed and the heads of the 
testing machine shall be adjusted for an assembly loop between 1220 and 
1270 mm in length. The length of the assembly loop shall then be 
adjusted by applying a force between 89 and 98 N to the free end of the 
webbing at the buckle, or by the retraction force of an automatic-
locking or emergency-locking retractor. A seat belt assembly that cannot 
be adjusted to this length shall be adjusted as closely as possible. An 
automatic-locking or emergency locking retractor when included in a seat 
belt assembly shall be locked at the start of the test with a tension on 
the webbing slightly in excess of the retractive force in order to keep 
the retractor locked. The buckle shall be in a location so that it does 
not touch the rollers during test, but to facilitate making the buckle 
release test in S5.2(d) the buckle should be between the rollers or near 
a roller in one leg.
    (4) The heads of the testing machine shall be separated at a rate 
between 51 and 102 mm per minute until a force of 22,241 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>222 N is applied to the assembly loop. The extension of 
the loop shall be determined from measurements of head separation before 
and after the force is applied. The force shall be decreased to 667 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>45 N and the buckle release force measured as 
prescribed in S5.2(d).
    (5) After the buckle is released, the webbing shall be examined for 
cutting by the hardware. If the yarns are partially or completely 
severed in a line for a distance of 10 percent or more of the webbing 
width, the cut webbing shall be tested for breaking strength as 
specified in S5.1(b) locating the cut in the free length between grips. 
If there is insufficient webbing on either side of

[[Page 613]]

the cut to make such a test for breaking strength, another seat belt 
assembly shall be used with the webbing repositioned in the hardware. A 
tensile force of 11,120 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>111 N shall be applied to 
the components or a force of 22,241 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>222 N shall be 
applied to the assembly loop. After the force is removed, the breaking 
strength of the cut webbing shall be determined as prescribed above.
    (6) If a Type 1 seat belt assembly includes an automatic-locking 
retractor or an emergency-locking retractor, the webbing and retractor 
shall be subjected to a tensile force of 11,120 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>111 N with the webbing fully extended from the 
retractor.
    (7) If a seat belt assembly has a buckle in which the tongue is 
capable of inverted insertion, one of the three assemblies shall be 
tested with the tongue inverted.
    (b) Type 2 seat belt assembly. Components of three seat belt 
assemblies shall be tested in the following manner:
    (1) The pelvic restraint between anchorages shall be adjusted to a 
length between 1220 and 1270 mm, or as near this length as possible if 
the design of the pelvic restraint does not permit its adjustment to 
this length. An automatic-locking or emergency-locking retractor when 
included in a seat belt assembly shall be locked at the start of the 
test with a tension on the webbing slightly in excess of the retractive 
force in order to keep the retractor locked. The attachment hardware 
shall be oriented to the webbing as specified in paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section and illustrated in Figure 5. A tensile force 11,120 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>111 N shall be applied on the components in any 
convenient manner and the extension between anchorages under this force 
shall be measured. The force shall be reduced to 334 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>22 N and the buckle release force measured as prescribed 
in S5.2(d).
    (2) The components of the upper torso restraint shall be subjected 
to a tensile force of 6,672 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>67 N following the 
procedure prescribed above for testing pelvic restraint and the 
extension between anchorages under this force shall be measured. If the 
testing apparatus permits, the pelvic and upper torso restraints may be 
tested simultaneously. The force shall be reduced to 334 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>22 N and the buckle release force measured as prescribed 
in S5.2(d).
    (3) Any component of the seat belt assembly common to both pelvic 
and upper torso restraint shall be subjected to a tensile force of 
13,344 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>134 N.
    (4) After the buckle is released in tests of pelvic and upper torso 
restraints, the webbing shall be examined for cutting by the hardware. 
If the yarns are partially or completely severed in a line for a 
distance of 10 percent or more of the webbing width, the cut webbing 
shall be tested for breaking strength as specified in S5.1(b) locating 
the cut in the free length between grips. If there is insufficient 
webbing on either side of the cut to make such a test for breaking 
strength, another seat belt assembly shall be used with the webbing 
repositioned in the hardware. The force applied shall be 11,120 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>111 N for components of pelvic restraint, and 6,672 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>67 N for components of upper torso restraint. 
After the force is removed, the breaking strength of the cut webbing 
shall be determined as prescribed above.
    (5) If a Type 2 seat belt assembly includes an automatic-locking 
retractor or an emergency-locking retractor the webbing and retractor 
shall be subjected to a tensile force of 11,120 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>111 N with the webbing fully extended from the 
retractor, or to a tensile force of 6,672 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>67 N 
with the webbing fully extended from the retractor if the design of the 
assembly permits only upper torso restraint forces on the retractor.
    (6) If a seat belt assembly has a buckle in which the tongue is 
capable of inverted insertion, one of the three assemblies shall be 
tested with the tongue inverted.
    (c) Resistance to buckle abrasion. Seat belt assemblies shall be 
tested for resistance to abrasion by each buckle or manual adjusting 
device normally used to adjust the size of the assembly. The webbing of 
the assembly to be used in this test shall be exposed for 4 hours to an 
atmosphere having relative humidity of 65 per cent and temperature of 18 
[deg]C. The webbing shall be pulled back and forth through the buckle or 
manual adjusting device as shown schematically in Figure 7. The anchor 
end of the webbing (A) shall be attached to

[[Page 614]]

a mass (B) of 1.4 kg. The webbing shall pass through the buckle (C), and 
the other end (D) shall be attached to a reciprocating device so that 
the webbing forms an angle of 8[deg] with the hinge stop (E). The 
reciprocating device shall be operated for 2,500 cycles at a rate of 18 
cycles per minute with a stroke length of 203 mm. The abraded webbing 
shall be tested for breaking strength by the procedure described in 
paragraph S5.1(b).

[[Page 615]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.090


[[Page 616]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.091


[[Page 617]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.092


[[Page 618]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.093


[44 FR 72139, Dec. 13, 1979, as amended at 45 FR 29048, May 1, 1980; 46 
FR 2620, Jan. 12, 1981; 48 FR 30140, June 30, 1983; 49 FR 36508, Sept. 
18, 1984; 51 FR 9813, Mar. 21, 1986; 51 FR 31774, Sept. 5, 1986; 52 FR 
44912, Nov. 23, 1987; 56 FR 15299, Apr. 16, 1991; 56 FR 56325, Nov. 4, 
1991; 59 FR 17994, Apr. 15, 1994; 61 FR 20171, May 6, 1996; 63 FR 28936, 
May 27, 1998; 63 FR 51003, Sept. 24, 1998; 64 FR 27206, May 19, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 571.210  Standard No. 210; Seat belt assembly anchorages.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard establishes requirements for 
seat belt assembly anchorages to insure their proper location for 
effective occupant restraint and to reduce the likelihood of their 
failure.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses.
    S3. Definition. Seat belt anchorage means any component, other than 
the webbing or straps, involved in transferring seat belt loads to the 
vehicle structure, including, but not limited to, the attachment 
hardware, seat frames, seat pedestals, the vehicle structure itself, and 
any part of the vehicle whose failure causes separation of the belt from 
the vehicle structure.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 Type.
    S4.1.1 Seat belt anchorages for a Type 1 or a Type 2 seat belt 
assembly shall be installed for each designated seating position for 
which a Type 1 or a Type 2 seat belt assembly is required by Standard 
No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208). Seat belt anchorages for a Type 2 seat belt 
assembly shall be installed for each designated seating position for 
which a Type 2 seat belt assembly is required by Standard No. 208 (49 
CFR 571.208).
    S4.1.2 (a) Notwithstanding the requirement of S4.1.1, each vehicle 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1987 that is equipped with an 
automatic restraint at the front right outboard designated seating 
position, which automatic restraint cannot be used for securing a child 
restraint system or cannot be adjusted by the vehicle owner to secure a 
child restraint system solely through the use of attachment hardware 
installed as an item of original equipment by the vehicle manufacturer, 
shall have, at the manufacturer's option, either anchorages for a Type 1 
seat belt assembly installed at that position or a Type 1 or Type 2

[[Page 619]]

seat belt assembly installed at that position. If a manufacturer elects 
to install anchorages for a Type 1 seat belt assembly to comply with 
this requirement, those anchorages shall consist of, at a minimum, holes 
threaded to accept bolts that comply with S4.1(f) of Standard No. 209 
(49 CFR 571.209).
    (b) The requirement in S4.1.1 of this standard that seat belt 
anchorages for a Type 1 or a Type 2 seat belt assembly shall be 
installed for certain designated seating positions does not apply to any 
such seating positions that are equipped with a seat belt assembly that 
meets the frontal crash protection requirements of S5.1 of Standard No. 
208 (49 CFR 571.208).
    S4.2 Strength.
    S4.2.1 Except as provided in S4.2.5, and except for side-facing 
seats, the anchorages, attachment hardware, and attachment bolts for any 
of the following seat belt assemblies shall withstand a 5,000 pound 
force when tested in accordance with S5.1 of this standard:
    (a) Type 1 seat belt assembly; and
    (b) Lap belt portion of either a Type 2 or automatic seat belt 
assembly, if such seat belt assembly is equipped with a detachable upper 
torso belt.
    S4.2.2 Except as provided in S4.2.5, and except for side facing 
seats, the anchorages, attachment hardware, and attachment bolts for any 
of the following seat belt assemblies shall withstand a 3,000 pound 
force applied to the lap belt portion of the seat belt assembly 
simultaneously with a 3,000 pound force applied to the shoulder belt 
portion of the seat belt assembly, when tested in accordance with S5.2 
of this standard:
    (a) Type 2 and automatic seat belt assemblies that are installed to 
comply with Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208); and
    (b) Type 2 and automatic seat belt assemblies that are installed at 
a seating position required to have a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt 
assembly by Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208).
    S4.2.3 Permanent deformation or rupture of a seat belt anchorage or 
its surrounding area is not considered to be a failure, if the required 
force is sustained for the specified time.
    S4.2.4 Anchorages, attachment hardware, and attachment bolts shall 
be tested by simultaneously loading them in accordance with the 
applicable procedures set forth in S5 of this standard if the anchorages 
are either:
    (a) For designated seating positions that are common to the same 
occupant seat and that face in the same direction, or
    (b) For laterally adjacent designated seating positions that are not 
common to the same occupant seat, but that face in the same direction, 
if the vertical centerline of the bolt hole for at least one of the 
anchorages for one of those designated seating positions is within 305 
mm of the vertical center line of the bolt hole for an anchorage for one 
of the adjacent seating positions.
    S4.2.5 The attachment hardware of a seat belt assembly, which is 
subject to the requirements of S5.1 of Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208) 
by virtue of any provision of Standard No. 208 other than S4.1.2.1(c)(2) 
of that standard, does not have to meet the requirements of S4.2.1 and 
S4.2.2 of this standard.
    S4.3 Location. As used in this section, ``forward'' means the 
direction in which the seat faces, and other directional references are 
to be interpreted accordingly. Anchorages for seat belt assemblies that 
meet the frontal crash protection requirements of S5.1 of Standard No. 
208 (49 CFR 571.208) are exempt from the location requirements of this 
section.
    S4.3.1 Seat belt anchorages for Type 1 seat belt assemblies and the 
pelvic portion of Type 2 seat belt assemblies.
    S4.3.1.1 In an installation in which the seat belt does not bear 
upon the seat frame:
    (a) If the seat is a nonadjustable seat, then a line from the 
seating reference point to the nearest contact point of the belt with 
the anchorage shall extend forward from the anchorage at an angle with 
the horizontal of not less than 30 degrees and not more than 75 degrees.
    (b) If the seat is an adjustable seat, then a line from a point 64 
mm forward of and 10 mm above the seating reference point to the nearest 
contact point of the belt with the anchorage shall extend forward from 
the anchorage at an angle with the horizontal of

[[Page 620]]

not less than 30 degrees and not more than 75 degrees.
    S4.3.1.2 In an installation in which the belt bears upon the seat 
frame, the seat belt anchorage, if not on the seat structure, shall be 
aft of the rearmost belt contact point on the seat frame with the seat 
in the rearmost position. The line from the seating reference point to 
the nearest belt contact point on the seat frame, with the seat 
positioned at the seating reference point, shall extend forward from 
that contact point at an angle with the horizontal of not less than 30 
degrees and not more than 75 degrees.
    S4.3.1.3 In an installation in which the seat belt attaches to the 
seat structure, the line from the seating reference point to the nearest 
contact point of the belt with the hardware attaching it to the seat 
structure shall extend forward from that contact point at an angle with 
the horizontal of not less than 30 degrees and not more than 75 degrees.
    S4.3.1.4 Anchorages for an individual seat belt assembly shall be 
located at least 165 mm apart laterally, measured between the vertical 
center line of the bolt holes or, for designs using other means of 
attachment to the vehicle structure, between the centroid of such means.
    S4.3.2 Seat belt anchorages for the upper torso portion of Type 2 
seat belt assemblies. Adjust the seat to its full rearward and downward 
position and adjust the seat back to its most upright position. With the 
seat and seat back so positioned, as specified by subsection (a) or (b) 
of this section, the upper end of the upper torso restraint shall be 
located within the acceptable range shown in Figure 1, with reference to 
a two-dimensional drafting template described in SAE Recommended 
Practice J826 (May 1987). The template's ``H'' point shall be at the 
design ``H'' point of the seat for its full rearward and full downward 
position, as defined in SAE Recommended Practice J1100 (June 1984), and 
the template's torso line shall be at the same angle from the vertical 
as the seat back.
    (a) For fixed anchorages, compliance with this section shall be 
determined at the vertical centerline of the bolt holes or, for designs 
using another means of attachment to the vehicle structure, at the 
centroid of such means.
    (b) For adjustable anchorages, compliance with this section shall be 
determined at the midpoint of the range of all adjustment positions.
    S5. Test procedures. Each vehicle shall meet the requirements of 
S4.2 of this standard when tested according to the following procedures. 
Where a range of values is specified, the vehicle shall be able to meet 
the requirements at all points within the range. For the testing 
specified in these procedures, the anchorage shall be connected to 
material whose breaking strength is equal to or greater than the 
breaking strength of the webbing for the seat belt assembly installed as 
original equipment at that seating position. The geometry of the 
attachment duplicates the geometry, at the initiation of the test, of 
the attachment of the originally installed seat belt assembly.
    S5.1 Seats with Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt anchorages. With the seat 
in its rearmost position, apply a force of 22,241 N in the direction in 
which the seat faces to a pelvic body block as described in Figure 2A, 
in a plane parallel to the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle, with 
an initial force application angle of not less than 5 degrees or more 
than 15 degrees above the horizontal. Apply the force at the onset rate 
of not more than 222,411 N per second. Attain the 22,241 N force in not 
more than 30 seconds and maintain it for 10 seconds. At the 
manufacturer's option, the pelvic body block described in Figure 2B may 
be substituted for the pelvic body block described in Figure 2A to apply 
the specified force to the center set(s) of anchorages for any group of 
three or more sets of anchorages that are simultaneously loaded in 
accordance with S4.2.4 of this standard.
    S5.2 Seats with Type 2 or automatic seat belt anchorages. With the 
seat in its rearmost position, apply forces of 13,345 N in the direction 
in which the seat faces simultaneously to a pelvic body block, as 
described in Figure 2A, and an upper torso body block, as described in 
Figure 3, in a plane parallel to the longitudinal centerline of the 
vehicle, with an initial force application angle of not less than 5 
degrees nor more

[[Page 621]]

than 15 degrees above the horizontal. Apply the forces at the onset rate 
of not more than 133,447 N per second. Attain the 13,345 N force in not 
more than 30 seconds and maintain it for 10 seconds. At the 
manufacturer's option, the pelvic body block described in Figure 2B may 
be substituted for the pelvic body block described in Figure 2A to apply 
the specified force to the center set(s) of anchorages for any group of 
three or more sets of anchorages that are simultaneously loaded in 
accordance with S4.2.4 of this standard.

[[Page 622]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.094


[[Page 623]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.005


[[Page 624]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.006

    S6. Owner's Manual Information. The owner's manual in each vehicle 
with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kg or less manufactured 
after September 1, 1987 shall include:
    (a) A section explaining that all child restraint systems are 
designed to be secured in vehicle seats by lap belts or the lap belt 
portion of a lap-shoulder belt. The section shall also explain that 
children could be endangered in a crash if their child restraints are 
not properly secured in the vehicle.
    (b) In a vehicle with rear designated seating positions, a statement 
alerting vehicle owners that, according to accident statistics, children 
are safer when properly restrained in the rear seating positions than in 
the front seating positions.

[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, as amended at 37 FR 9323, May 9, 1972; 43 FR 
21892, May 22, 1978; 43 FR 53442, Nov. 16, 1978; 50 FR 41359, Oct. 10, 
1985; 51 FR 9813, Mar. 21, 1986; 51 FR 29555, Aug. 19, 1986; 54 FR 
25278, June 14, 1989; 54 FR 46268, Nov. 2, 1989; 55 FR 17983, Apr. 30, 
1990; 55 FR 24241, June 15, 1990; 56 FR 63681, 63685, Dec. 5, 1991; 57 
FR 32904, July 24, 1992; 60 FR 3775, Jan. 19, 1995; 61 FR 19561, May 2, 
1996; 63 FR 28941, 28942, May 27, 1998; 63 FR 32143, June 12, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 571.211  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 571.212  Standard No. 212; Windshield mounting.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes windshield retention 
requirements for motor vehicles during crashes.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce crash 
injuries and fatalities by providing for retention of the vehicle 
windshield during a crash, thereby utilizing fully the penetration-
resistance and injury-avoidance properties of the windshield glazing 
material and preventing the ejection of occupants from the vehicle.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses having a gross 
vehicle weight rating of 4536 kilograms or less. However, it does not 
apply to forward control vehicles, walk-in van-type vehicles, or to 
open-body type vehicles with fold-down or removable windshields.
    S4. Definition. Passive restraint system means a system meeting the 
occupant crash protection requirements of S5. of Standard No. 208 by 
means that require no action by vehicle occupants.
    S5. Requirements. When the vehicle travelling longitudinally forward 
at any speed up to and including 48 kilometers per hour impacts a fixed 
collision barrier that is perpendicular to the line of travel of the 
vehicle, under the conditions of S6, the windshield

[[Page 625]]

mounting of the vehicle shall retain not less than the minimum portion 
of the windshield periphery specified in S5.1 and S5.2.
    S5.1 Vehicles equipped with passive restraints. Vehicles equipped 
with passive restraint systems shall retain not less than 50 percent of 
the portion of the windshield periphery on each side of the vehicle 
longitudinal centerline.
    S5.2 Vehicles not equipped with passive restraints. Vehicles not 
equipped with passive restraint systems shall retain not less than 75 
percent of the windshield periphery.
    S6. Test conditions. The requirements of S5. shall be met under the 
following conditions:
    S6.1 The vehicle, including test devices and instrumentation, is 
loaded as follows:
    (a) Except as specified in S6.2, a passenger car is loaded to its 
unloaded vehicle weight plus its cargo and luggage capacity weight, 
secured in the luggage area, plus a 50th-percentile test dummy as 
specified in part 572 of this chapter at each front outboard designated 
seating position and at any other position whose protection system is 
required to be tested by a dummy under the provisions of Standard No. 
208. Each dummy is restrained only by means that are installed for 
protection at its seating position.
    (b) Except as specified in S6.2, a multipurpose passenger vehicle, 
truck or bus is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight, plus 136 
kilograms or its rated cargo and luggage capacity, whichever is less, 
secured to the vehicle, plus a 50th-percentile test dummy as specified 
in part 572 of this chapter at each front outboard designated seating 
position and at any other position whose protection system is required 
to be tested by a dummy under the provisions of Standard No. 208. Each 
dummy is restrained only by means that are installed for protection at 
its seating position. The load is distributed so that the weight on each 
axle as measured at the tire-ground interface is in proportion to its 
GAWR. If the weight on any axle when the vehicle is loaded to its 
unloaded vehicle weight plus dummy weight exceeds the axle's 
proportional share of the test weight, the remaining weight is placed so 
that the weight on that axle remains the same. For the purposes of this 
section, unloaded vehicle weight does not include the weight of work-
performing accessories. Vehicles are tested to a maximum unloaded 
vehicle weight of 2,495 kilograms.
    S6.2 The fuel tank is filled to any level from 90 to 95 percent of 
capacity.
    S6.3 The parking brake is disengaged and the transmission is in 
neutral.
    S6.4 Tires are inflated to the vehicle manufacturer's 
specifications.
    S6.5 The windshield mounting material and all vehicle components in 
direct contact with the mounting material are at any temperature between 
-9 degrees Celsius and +43 degrees Celsius.

[41 FR 36494, Aug. 30, 1976, as amended at 42 FR 34289, July 5, 1977; 45 
FR 22046, Apr. 3, 1980; 60 FR 13647, Mar. 14, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 571.213  Standard No. 213; Child restraint systems.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for child restraint 
systems used in motor vehicles and aircraft.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the number of 
children killed or injured in motor vehicle crashes and in aircraft.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses, and to child 
restraint systems for use in motor vehicles and aircraft.
    S4. Definitions.
    Add-on child restraint system means any portable child restraint 
system.
    Backless child restraint system means a child restraint, other than 
a belt-positioning seat, that consists of a seating platform that does 
not extend up to provide a cushion for the child's back or head and has 
a structural element designed to restrain forward motion of the child's 
torso in a forward impact.
    Belt-positioning seat means a child restraint system that positions 
a child on a vehicle seat to improve the fit of a vehicle Type II belt 
system on the child and that lacks any component, such as a belt system 
or a structural element, designed to restrain forward movement of the 
child's torso in a forward impact.

[[Page 626]]

    Booster seat means either a backless child restraint system or a 
belt-positioning seat.
    Built-in child restraint system means a child restraint system that 
is designed to be an integral part of and permanently installed in a 
motor vehicle.
    Car bed means a child restraint system designed to restrain or 
position a child in the supine or prone position on a continuous flat 
surface.
    Child restraint anchorage system is defined in S3 of FMVSS No. 225 
(Sec. 571.225).
    Child restraint system means any device, except Type I or Type II 
seat belts, designed for use in a motor vehicle or aircraft to restrain, 
seat, or position children who weigh 30 kilograms (kg) or less.
    Contactable surface means any child restraint system surface (other 
than that of a belt, belt buckle, or belt adjustment hardware) that may 
contact any part of the head or torso of the appropriate test dummy, 
specified in S7, when a child restraint system is tested in accordance 
with S6.1.
    Factory-installed built-in child restraint system means a built-in 
child restraint system that has been or will be permanently installed in 
a motor vehicle before that vehicle is certified as a completed or 
altered vehicle in accordance with part 567 of this chapter.
    Harness means a combination pelvic and upper torso child restraint 
system that consists primarily of flexible material, such as straps, 
webbing or similar material, and that does not include a rigid seating 
structure for the child.
    Rear-facing child restraint system means a child restraint system, 
except a car bed, that positions a child to face in the direction 
opposite to the normal direction of travel of the motor vehicle.
    Representative aircraft passenger seat means either a Federal 
Aviation Administration approved production aircraft passenger seat or a 
simulated aircraft passenger seat conforming to Figure 6.
    Seat orientation reference line or SORL means the horizontal line 
through Point Z as illustrated in Figure 1A.
    Specific vehicle shell means the actual vehicle model part into 
which the built-in child restraint system is or is intended to be 
fabricated, including the complete surroundings of the built-in system. 
If the built-in child restraint system is or is intended to be 
fabricated as part of any seat other than a front seat, these 
surroundings include the back of the seat in front, the interior rear 
side door panels and trim, the floor pan, adjacent pillars (e.g., the B 
and C pillars), and the ceiling. If the built-in system is or is 
intended to be fabricated as part of the front seat, these surroundings 
include the dashboard, the steering mechanism and its associated trim 
hardware, any levers and knobs installed on the floor or on a console, 
the interior front side door panels and trim, the front seat, the floor 
pan, the A pillars and the ceiling.
    Tether anchorage is defined in S3 of FMVSS No. 225 (Sec. 571.225).
    Tether strap is defined in S3 of FMVSS No. 225 (Sec. 571.225).
    Tether hook is defined in S3 of FMVSS No. 225 (Sec. 571.225).
    Torso means the portion of the body of a seated anthropomorphic test 
dummy, excluding the thighs, that lies between the top of the child 
restraint system seating surface and the top of the shoulders of the 
test dummy.
    S5. Requirements. (a) Each motor vehicle with a built-in child 
restraint system shall meet the requirements in this section when, as 
specified, tested in accordance with S6.1 and this paragraph.
    (b) Each child restraint system manufactured for use in motor 
vehicles shall meet the requirements in this section when, as specified, 
tested in accordance with S6.1 and this paragraph. Each add-on system 
shall meet the requirements at each of the restraint's seat back angle 
adjustment positions and restraint belt routing positions, when the 
restraint is oriented in the direction recommended by the manufacturer 
(e.g., forward, rearward or laterally) pursuant to S5.6, and tested with 
the test dummy specified in S7.
    (c) Each child restraint system manufactured for use in aircraft 
shall meet the requirements in this section and the additional 
requirements in S8.
    (d) Each child restraint tested with a part 572 subpart N dummy that 
is weighted to weigh 28.2 kg need not meet S5.1.2 and S5.1.3.
    S5.1 Dynamic performance.

[[Page 627]]

    S5.1.1 Child restraint system integrity. When tested in accordance 
with S6.1, each child restraint system shall meet the requirements of 
paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section.
    (a) Exhibit no complete separation of any load bearing structural 
element and no partial separation exposing either surfaces with a radius 
of less than \1/4\ inch or surfaces with protrusions greater than \3/8\ 
inch above the immediate adjacent surrounding contactable surface of any 
structural element of the system.
    (b)(1) If adjustable to different positions, remain in the same 
adjustment position during the testing that it was in immediately before 
the testing, except as otherwise specified in paragraph (b)(2).
    (2)(i) Subject to paragraph (b)(2)(ii), a rear-facing child 
restraint system may have a means for repositioning the seating surface 
of the system that allows the system's occupant to move from a reclined 
position to an upright position and back to a reclined position during 
testing.
    (ii) No opening that is exposed and is larger than \1/4\ inch before 
the testing shall become smaller during the testing as a result of the 
movement of the seating surface relative to the restraint system as a 
whole.
    (c) If a front facing child restraint system, not allow the angle 
between the system's back support surfaces for the child and the 
system's seating surface to be less than 45 degrees at the completion of 
the test.
    S5.1.2 Injury criteria. When tested in accordance with S6.1 and with 
the test dummies specified in S7, each child restraint system 
manufactured before August 1, 2005, that, in accordance with S5.5.2, is 
recommended for use by children whose mass is more than 10 kg shall--
    (a) Limit the resultant acceleration at the location of the 
accelerometer mounted in the test dummy head as specified in part 572 
such that the expression:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.097


shall not exceed 1,000, where a is the resultant acceleration expressed 
as a multiple of g (the acceleration of gravity), and t<INF>1</INF> and 
t<INF>2</INF> are any two moments during the impacts.
    (b) Limit the resultant acceleration at the location of the 
accelerometer mounted in the test dummy upper thorax as specified in 
part 572 to not more than 60 g's, except for intervals whose cumulative 
duration is not more than 3 milliseconds.
    S5.1.2.1 When tested in accordance with S6.1 and with the test 
dummies specified in S7, each child restraint system manufactured on or 
after August 1, 2005 shall'
    (a) Limit the resultant acceleration at the location of the 
accelerometer mounted in the test dummy head such that, for any two 
points in time, t1 and t2, during the event which are separated by not 
more than a 36 millisecond time interval and where t1 is less than t2, 
the maximum calculated head injury criterion (HIC36) shall not exceed 
1,000, determined using the resultant head acceleration at the center of 
gravity of the dummy head, ar, expressed as a multiple of g (the 
acceleration of gravity), calculated using the expression:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18JN03.018

    (b) The resultant acceleration calculated from the output of the 
thoracic instrumentation shall not exceed 60 g's, except for intervals 
whose cumulative duration is not more than 3 milliseconds.
    S5.1.2.2 At the manufacturer's option (with said option irrevocably 
selected prior to, or at the time of, certification of the restraint), 
child restraint systems manufactured before August 1, 2005 may be tested 
to the requirements of S5 while using the test dummies specified in 
S7.1.2 of this standard according to the criteria for selecting test 
dummies specified in that paragraph. That paragraph specifies the 
dummies used to test child restraint systems manufactured on or after 
August 1, 2005. If a manufacturer selects the dummies specified in 
S7.1.2 to test its product, the injury criteria

[[Page 628]]

specified by S5.1.2.1 of this standard must be met. Child restraints 
manufactured on or after August 1, 2005 must be tested using the test 
dummies specified in S7.1.2.
    S5.1.3 Occupant excursion. When tested in accordance with S6.1 and 
the requirements specified in this section, each child restraint system 
shall meet the applicable excursion limit requirements specified in 
S5.1.3.1-S5.1.3.3.
    S5.1.3.1 Child restraint systems other than rear-facing ones and car 
beds. Each child restraint system, other than a rear-facing child 
restraint system or a car bed, shall retain the test dummy's torso 
within the system.
    (a) For each add-on child restraint system:
    (1) No portion of the test dummy's head shall pass through a 
vertical transverse plane that is 720 mm or 813 mm (as specified in the 
table in this S5.1.3.1) forward of point Z on the standard seat 
assembly, measured along the center SORL (as illustrated in figure 1B of 
this standard); and
    (2) Neither knee pivot point shall pass through a vertical 
transverse plane that is 915 mm forward of point Z on the standard seat 
assembly, measured along the center SORL.

                          Table to S5.1.3.1(a)--Add-On Forward-Facing Child Restraints
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                        Explanatory note: In the
                                                                                          test specified in 2nd
                                                                                            column, the child
                                      is tested in accordance   these excursion limits  restraint is attached to
  When this type of child restraint            with--                   apply            the test seat assembly
                                                                                         in the manner described
                                                                                            below, subject to
                                                                                           certain conditions
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Harnesses, backless booster seats     S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(A).....  Head 813 mm;...........  Attached with lap belt;
 and restraints designed for use by                            Knee 915 mm............   in addition, if a
 physically handicapped children.                                                        tether is provided, it
                                                                                         is attached.
Harnesses labeled per S5.3.1(b)(i)    S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(A).....  Head 813 mm;...........  Attached with seat back
 through S5.3.1(b)(iii) and Figure                             Knee 915 mm............   mount.
 12.
Belt-positioning seats..............  S6.1.2(a)(1)(ii).......  Head 813 mm;...........  Attached with lap and
                                                               Knee 915 mm............   shoulder belt; no
                                                                                         tether is attached.
All other child restraints,           S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(B).....  Head 813 mm;...........  Attached with lap belt;
 manufactured before September 1,                              Knee 915 mm............   no tether is attached.
 1999.
All other child restraints,           S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(B).....  Head 813 mm;...........  Attached with lap belt;
 manufactured on or after September                            Knee 915 mm............   no tether is attached.
 1, 1999.
                                      S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(D)                                Attached to lower
                                       (beginning September                              anchorages of child
                                       1, 2002).                                         restraint anchorage
                                                                                         system; no tether is
                                                                                         attached.
                                      S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(A).....  Head 720 mm;...........  Attached with lap belt;
                                                               Knee 915 mm............   in addition, if a
                                                                                         tether is provided, it
                                                                                         is attached.
                                      S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(C)                                Attached to lower
                                       (beginning September                              anchorages of child
                                       1, 2002).                                         restraint anchorage
                                                                                         system; in addition, if
                                                                                         a tether is provided,
                                                                                         it is attached.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) In the case of a built-in child restraint system, neither knee 
pivot point shall, at any time during the dynamic test, pass through a 
vertical transverse plane that is 305 mm forward of the initial pre-test 
position of the respective knee pivot point, measured along a horizontal 
line that passes through the knee pivot point and is parallel to the 
vertical longitudinal plane that passes through the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline.
    S5.1.3.2 Rear-facing child restraint systems. In the case of each 
rear-facing child restraint system, all portions of the test dummy's 
torso shall be retained within the system and neither of the target 
points on either side of the dummy's head and on the transverse axis 
passing through the center of mass of the dummy's head and perpendicular 
to the head's midsagittal plane, shall pass through the transverse 
orthogonal planes whose intersection contains the forward-most and top-
most points on the child restraint system surfaces (illustrated in 
Figure 1C).
    S5.1.3.3 Car beds. In the case of car beds, all portions of the test 
dummy's head and torso shall be retained within the confines of the car 
bed.
    S5.1.4 Back support angle. When a rear-facing child restraint system 
is

[[Page 629]]

tested in accordance with S6.1, the angle between the system's back 
support surface for the child and the vertical shall not exceed 70 
degrees.
    S5.2 Force distribution.
    S5.2.1 Minimum head support surface--child restraints other than car 
beds.
    S5.2.1.1 Except as provided in S5.2.1.2, each child restraint system 
other than a car bed shall provide restraint against rearward movement 
of the head of the child (rearward in relation to the child) by means of 
a continuous seat back which is an integral part of the system and 
which--
    (a) Has a height, measured along the system seat back surface for 
the child in the vertical longitudinal plane passing through the 
longitudinal centerline of the child restraint systems from the lowest 
point on the system seating surface that is contacted by the buttocks of 
the seated dummy, as follows:

                          Table to S5.2.1.1(a)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Height
                          Weight \1\                            \2\(mm)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Not more than 18 kg..........................................        500
More than 18 kg..............................................       560
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ When a child restraint system is recommended under S5.5 for use by
  children of the above weights.
\2\ The height of the portion of the system seat back providing head
  restraint shall not be less than the above.

    (b) Has a width of not less than 8 inches, measured in the 
horizontal plane at the height specified in paragraph (a) of this 
section. Except that a child restraint system with side supports 
extending at least 4 inches forward from the padded surface of the 
portion of the restraint system provided for support of the child's head 
may have a width of not less than 6 inches, measured in the horizontal 
plane at the height specified in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (c) Limits the rearward rotation of the test dummy head so that the 
angle between the head and torso of the dummy specified in S7. when 
tested in accordance with S6.1 is not more than 45 degrees greater than 
the angle between the head and torso after the dummy has been placed in 
the system in accordance with S6.1.2.3 and before the system is tested 
in accordance with S6.1.
    S5.2.1.2 The applicability of the requirements of S5.2.1.1 to a 
front-facing child restraint, and the conformance of any child restraint 
other than a car bed to those requirements, is determined using the 
largest of the test dummies specified in S7 for use in testing that 
restraint, provided that the 6-year-old dummy described in subpart I or 
subpart N of part 572 of this title is not used to determine the 
applicability of or compliance with S5.2.1.1. A front-facing child 
restraint system is not required to comply with S5.2.1.1 if the target 
point on either side of the dummy's head is below a horizontal plane 
tangent to the top of--
    (a) The standard seat assembly, in the case of an add-on child 
restraint system, when the dummy is positioned in the system and the 
system is installed on the assembly in accordance with S6.1.2.
    (b) The vehicle seat, in the case of a built-in child restraint 
system, when the system is activated and the dummy is positioned in the 
system in accordance with S6.1.2.
    S5.2.2 Torso impact protection. Each child restraint system other 
than a car bed shall comply with the applicable requirements of S5.2.2.1 
and S5.2.2.2.
    S5.2.2.1(a) The system surface provided for the support of the 
child's back shall be flat or concave and have a continuous surface area 
of not less than 85 square inches.
    (b) Each system surface provided for support of the side of the 
child's torso shall be flat or concave and have a continuous surface of 
not less than 24 square inches for systems recommended for children 
weighing 20 pounds or more, or 48 square inches for systems recommended 
for children weighing less than 20 pounds.
    (c) Each horizontal cross section of each system surface designed to 
restrain forward movement of the child's torso shall be flat or concave 
and each vertical longitudinal cross section shall be flat or convex 
with a radius of curvature of the underlying structure of not less than 
2 inches.
    S5.2.2.2 Each forward-facing child restraint system shall have no 
fixed or movable surface--
    (a) Directly forward of the dummy and intersected by a horizontal 
line--
    (1) Parallel to the SORL, in the case of the add-on child restraint 
system, or

[[Page 630]]

    (2) Parallel to a vertical plane through the longitudinal center 
line of the vehicle seat, in the case of a built-in child restraint 
system, and,
    (b) Passing through any portion of the dummy, except for surfaces 
which restrain the dummy when the system is tested in accordance with 
S6.1.2(a)(2), so that the child restraint system shall conform to the 
requirements of S5.1.2 and S5.1.3.1.
    S5.2.3 Head impact protection.
    S5.2.3.1 Each child restraint system other than a child harness, 
manufactured before August 1, 2005, that is recommended under S5.5.2 for 
a child whose mass is less than 10 kg and that is not tested with the 
Part 572 Subpart R dummy, shall comply with S5.2.3.
    S5.2.3.2 Each system surface, except for protrusions that comply 
with S5.2.4, which is contactable by the dummy head when the system is 
tested in accordance with S6.1 shall be covered with slow recovery, 
energy absorbing material with the following characteristics:
    (a) A 25 percent compression-deflection resistance of not less than 
0.5 and not more than 10 pounds per square inch when tested in 
accordance with S6.3.
    (b) A thickness of not less than \1/2\ inch for materials having a 
25 percent compression-deflection resistance of not less than 1.8 and 
not more than 10 pounds per square inch when tested in accordance with 
S6.3. Materials having a 25 percent compression-deflection resistance of 
less than 1.8 pounds per square inch shall have a thickness of not less 
than \3/4\ inch.
    S5.2.4 Protrusion limitation. Any portion of a rigid structural 
component within or underlying a contactable surface, or any portion of 
a child restraint system surface that is subject to the requirements of 
S5.2.3 shall, with any padding or other flexible overlay material 
removed, have a height above any immediately adjacent restraint system 
surface of not more than \3/8\ inch and no exposed edge with a radius of 
less than \1/4\ inch.
    S5.3 Installation.
    S5.3.1 Add-on child restraints shall meet either (a) or (b), as 
appropriate.
    (a) Except for components designed to attach to a child restraint 
anchorage system, each add-on child restraint system must not have any 
means designed for attaching the system to a vehicle seat cushion or 
vehicle seat back and any component (except belts) that is designed to 
be inserted between the vehicle seat cushion and vehicle seat back.
    (b) Harnesses manufactured for use on school bus seats must meet 
S5.3.1(a) of this standard, unless a label that conforms in content to 
Figure 12 and to the requirements of S5.3.1(b)(1) through S5.3.1(b)(3) 
of this standard is permanently affixed to the part of the harness that 
attaches the system to a vehicle seat back. Harnesses that are not 
labeled as required by this paragraph must meet S5.3.1(a).
    (1) The label must be plainly visible when installed and easily 
readable.
    (2) The message area must be white with black text. The message area 
must be no less than 20 square centimeters.
    (3) The pictogram shall be gray and black with a red circle and 
slash on a white background. The pictogram shall be no less than 20 mm 
in diameter.
    S5.3.2 Each add-on child restraint system shall be capable of 
meeting the requirements of this standard when installed solely by each 
of the means indicated in the following table for the particular type of 
child restraint system:

                                                Table for S5.3.2
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                      Means of installation
                                               -----------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Type 1 seat      Child
                                                                  belt        restraint
     Type of add-on child restraint system       Type 1 seat    assembly      anchorage   Type II seat    Seat
                                                    belt         plus a        system         belt        back
                                                  assembly       tether      (effective     assembly      mount
                                                               anchorage,   September 1,
                                                                if needed       2002)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Harnesses labeled per S5.3.1(b)(1) through      ............  ............  ............  ............        X
 S5.3.1(b)(3) and Figure 12...................
Other harnesses...............................  ............            X

[[Page 631]]

 
Car beds......................................            X
Rear-facing restraints........................            X   ............            X
Belt-positioning seats........................  ............  ............  ............            X   ........
All other child restraints....................            X             X             X
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S5.3.3 Car beds. Each car bed shall be designed to be installed on a 
vehicle seat so that the car bed's longitudinal axis is perpendicular to 
a vertical longitudinal plane through the longitudinal axis of the 
vehicle.
    S5.4 Belts, belt buckles, and belt webbing.
    S5.4.1 Performance requirements. The webbing of belts provided with 
a child restrain system and used to attach the system to the vehicle or 
to restrain the child within the system shall--
    (a) After being subjected to abrasion as specified in S5.1(d) or 
S5.3(c) of FMVSS 209 (Sec. 571.209), have a breaking strength of not 
less than 75 percent of the strength of the unabraded webbing when 
tested in accordance with S5.1(b) of FMVSS 209.
    (b) Meet the requirements of S4.2 (e) and (f) of FMVSS No. 209 
(Sec. 571.209); and
    (c) If contactable by the test dummy torso when the system is tested 
in accordance with S6.1, have a width of not less than 1\1/2\ inches 
when measured in accordance with S5.4.1.1.
    S5.4.1.1 Width test procedure. Condition the webbing for 24 hours in 
an atmosphere of any relative humidity between 48 and 67 percent, and 
any ambient temperature between 70[deg] and 77 [deg]F. Measure belt 
webbing width under a tension of 5 pounds applied lengthwise.
    S5.4.2 Belt buckles and belt adjustment hardware. Each belt buckle 
and item of belt adjustment hardware used in a child restraint system 
shall conform to the requirements of S4.3(a) and S4.3(b) of FMVSS No. 
209 (Sec. 571.209).
    S5.4.3 Belt Restraint.
    S5.4.3.1 General. Each belt that is part of a child restraint system 
and that is designed to restrain a child using the system shall be 
adjustable to snugly fit any child whose height and weight are within 
the ranges recommended in accordance with S5.5.2(f) and who is 
positioned in the system in accordance with the instructions required by 
S5.6.
    S5.4.3.2 Direct restraint. Except for a child restraint system whose 
mass is less than 4.4 kg, each belt that is part of a child restraint 
system and that is designed to restrain a child using the system and to 
attach the system to the vehicle, and each Type I and lap portion of a 
Type II vehicle belt that is used to attach the system to the vehicle 
shall, when tested in accordance with S6.1, impose no loads on the child 
that result from the mass of the system, or
    (a) In the case of an add-on child restraint system, from the mass 
of the seat back of the standard seat assembly specified in S6.1, or
    (b) In the case of a built-in child restraint system, from the mass 
of any part of the vehicle into which the child restraint system is 
built.
    S5.4.3.3 Seating systems. Except for child restraint systems subject 
to S5.4.3.4, each child restraint system that is designed for use by a 
child in a seated position and that has belts designed to restrain the 
child, shall, with the test dummy specified in S7 positioned in the 
system in accordance with S10 provide:
    (a) Upper torso restraint in the form of:
    (i) Belts passing over each shoulder of the child, or
    (ii) A fixed or movable surface that complies with S5.2.2.1(c), and
    (b) Lower torso restraint in the form of:

[[Page 632]]

    (i) A lap belt assembly making an angle between 45[deg] and 90[deg] 
with the child restraint seating surface at the lap belt attachment 
points, or
    (ii) A fixed or movable surface that complies with S5.2.2.1(c), and
    (c) In the case of each seating system recommended for children 
whose masses are more than 10 kg, crotch restraint in the form of:
    (i) A crotch belt connectable to the lap belt or other device used 
to restrain the lower torso, or
    (ii) A fixed or movable surface that complies with S5.2.2.1(c).
    S5.4.3.4 Harnesses. Each child harness shall:
    (a) Provide upper torso restraint, including belts passing over each 
shoulder of the child;
    (b) Provide lower torso restraint by means of lap and crotch belt; 
and
    (c) Prevent a child of any height for which the restraint is 
recommended for use pursuant to S5.5.2(f) from standing upright on the 
vehicle seat when the child is placed in the device in accordance with 
the instructions required by S5.6.
    S5.4.3.5 Buckle release. Any buckle in a child restraint system belt 
assembly designed to restrain a child using the system shall:
    (a) When tested in accordance with S6.2.1 prior to the dynamic test 
of S6.1, not release when a force of less than 40 newtons (N) is applied 
and shall release when a force of not more than 62 N is applied;
    (b) After the dynamic test of S6.1, when tested in accordance with 
the appropriate sections of S6.2, release when a force of not more than 
71 N is applied, provided, however, that the conformance of any child 
restraint to this requirement is determined using the largest of the 
test dummies specified in S7 for use in testing that restraint when the 
restraint is facing forward, rearward, and/or laterally;
    (c) Meet the requirements of S4.3(d)(2) of FMVSS No. 209 (Sec. 
571.209), except that the minimum surface area for child restraint 
buckles designed for push button application shall be 0.6 square inch;
    (d) Meet the requirements of S4.3(g) of FMVSS No. 209 (Sec. 
571.209) when tested in accordance with S5.2(g) of FMVSS No. 209; and
    (e) Not release during the testing specified in S6.1.
    S5.5 Labeling. Any labels or written instructions provided in 
addition to those required by this section shall not obscure or confuse 
the meaning of the required information or be otherwise misleading to 
the consumer. Any labels or written instructions other than in the 
English language shall be an accurate translation of English labels or 
written instructions.
    S5.5.1 Each add-on child restraint system shall be permanently 
labeled with the information specified in S5.5.2 (a) through (m).
    S5.5.2 The information specified in paragraphs (a) through (m) of 
this section shall be stated in the English language and lettered in 
letters and numbers that are not smaller than 10 point type. Unless 
otherwise specified, the information shall be labeled on a white 
background with black text. Unless written in all capitals, the 
information shall be stated in sentence capitalization.
    (a) The model name or number of the system.
    (b) The manufacturer's name. A distributor's name may be used 
instead if the distributor assumes responsibility for all duties and 
liabilities imposed on the manufacturer with respect to the system by 
the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act, as amended.
    (c) The statement: ``Manufactured in ----,'' inserting the month and 
year of manufacture.
    (d) The place of manufacture (city and State, or foreign country). 
However, if the manufacturer uses the name of the distributor, then it 
shall state the location (city and State, or foreign country) of the 
principal offices of the distributor.
    (e) The statement: ``This child restraint system conforms to all 
applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards.''
    (f) One of the following statements, as appropriate, inserting the 
manufacturer's recommendations for the maximum mass of children who can 
safely occupy the system, except that booster seats shall not be 
recommended for children whose masses are less than

[[Page 633]]

13.6 kg. For seats that can only be used as belt-positioning seats, 
manufacturers must include the maximum and minimum recommended height, 
but may delete the reference to weight:
    (1) Use only with children who weigh ---- pounds (---- kg) or less 
and whose height is (insert values in English and metric units; use of 
word ``mass'' in label is optional) or less; or
    (2) Use only with children who weigh between ---- and ---- pounds 
(insert appropriate English and metric values; use of word ``mass'' is 
optional) and whose height is (insert appropriate values in English and 
metric units) or less and who are capable of sitting upright alone; or
    (3) Use only with children who weigh between ---- and ---- pounds 
(insert appropriate English and metric values; use of word ``mass'' is 
optional) and whose height is (insert appropriate values in English and 
metric units) or less.
    (4) Use only with children who weigh between ---- and ---- pounds 
(insert appropriate English and metric values; use of word ``mass'' is 
optional) and whose height is between ---- and ---- (insert appropriate 
values in English and metric units).
    (g) The statements specified in paragraphs (1) and (2):
    (1) A heading as specified in S5.5.2(k)(3)(i), with the statement 
``WARNING! DEATH or SERIOUS INJURY can occur,'' capitalized as written 
and followed by bulleted statements in the following order:
    (i) As appropriate, the statements required by the following 
sections will be bulleted and placed after the statement required by 
5.5.2(g)(1) in the following order: 5.5.2(k)(1) or 5.5.2(k)(2), 
5.5.2(f), 5.5.2(h), 5.5.2(j), and 5.5.2(i).
    (ii) Secure this child restraint with the vehicle's child restraint 
anchorage system if available or with a vehicle belt. [For car beds, 
harnesses, and belt positioning boosters, the first part of the 
statement regarding attachment by the child restraint anchorage system 
is optional.]
    (iii) Follow all instructions on this child restraint and in the 
written instructions located (insert storage location on the restraint 
for the manufacturer's installation instruction booklet or sheet).
    (iv) Register your child restraint with the manufacturer.
    (2) At the manufacturer's option, the phrase ``DEATH or SERIOUS 
INJURY can occur'' in the heading can be on either a white or yellow 
background.
    (3) More than one label may be used for the required bulleted 
statements. Multiple labels shall be placed one above the other unless 
that arrangement is precluded by insufficient space or shape of the 
child restraint. In that case, multiple labels shall be placed side by 
side. When using multiple labels, the mandated warnings must be in the 
correct order when read from top to bottom. If the labels are side-by-
side, then the mandated warnings must appear top to bottom of the 
leftmost label, then top to bottom of the next label to its right, and 
so on. There shall be no intervening labels and the required heading 
shall only appear on the first label in the sequence.
    (h) In the case of each child restraint system that has belts 
designed to restrain children using them and which do not adjust 
automatically to fit the child: Snugly adjust the belts provided with 
this child restraint around your child.
    (i)(1) For a booster seat that is recommended for use with either a 
vehicle's Type I or Type II seat belt assembly, one of the following 
statements, as appropriate:
    (i) Use only the vehicle's lap and shoulder belt system when 
restraining the child in this booster seat; or,
    (ii) Use only the vehicle's lap belt system, or the lap belt part of 
a lap/shoulder belt system with the shoulder belt placed behind the 
child, when restraining the child in this seat.
    (2)(i) Except as provided in paragraph (i)(2)(ii) of this section, 
for a booster seat which is recommended for use with both a vehicle's 
Type I and Type II seat belt assemblies, the following statement: Use 
only the vehicle's lap belt system, or the lap belt part of a lap/
shoulder belt system with the shoulder belt placed behind the child, 
when restraining the child with the (insert description of the system 
element provided to restrain forward movement of the child's torso when 
used with a lap belt (e.g., shield)), and only the vehicle's lap and 
shoulder belt system when using

[[Page 634]]

the booster without the (insert above description).
    (ii) A booster seat which is recommended for use with both a 
vehicle's Type I and Type II seat belt assemblies is not subject to 
S5.5.2(i)(2)(i) if, when the booster is used with the shield or similar 
component, the booster will cause the shoulder belt to be located in a 
position other than in front of the child when the booster is installed. 
However, such a booster shall be labeled with a warning to use the 
booster with the vehicle's lap and shoulder belt system when using the 
booster without a shield.
    (j) In the case of each child restraint system equipped with a top 
anchorage strap, the statement: Secure the top anchorage strap provided 
with this child restraint.
    (k) (1) In the case of each rear-facing child restraint system that 
is designed for infants only, the statement: Use only in a rear-facing 
position when using it in the vehicle.
    (2) In the case of a child restraint system that is designed to be 
used rearward-facing for infants and forward-facing for older children, 
the statement: Use only in a rear-facing position when using it with an 
infant weighing less than (insert a recommended weight that is not less 
than 20 pounds).
    (3) Except as provided in (k)(4) of this section, each child 
restraint system that can be used in a rear-facing position shall have a 
label that conforms in content to Figure 10 and to the requirements of 
S5.5.2(k)(3)(i) through S5.5.2(k)(3)(iii) of this standard permanently 
affixed to the outer surface of the cushion or padding in or adjacent to 
the area where a child's head would rest, so that the label is plainly 
visible and easily readable.
    (i) The heading area shall be yellow with the word ``warning'' and 
the alert symbol in black.
    (ii) The message area shall be white with black text. The message 
area shall be no less than 30 square cm.
    (iii) The pictogram shall be black with a red circle and slash on a 
white background. The pictogram shall be no less than 30 mm in diameter.
    (4) If a child restraint system is equipped with a device that 
deactivates the passenger-side air bag in a vehicle when and only when 
the child restraint is installed in the vehicle and provides a signal, 
for at least 60 seconds after deactivation, that the air bag is 
deactivated, the label specified in Figure 10 may include the phrase 
``unless air bag is off'' after ``on front seat with air bag.''
    (l) An installation diagram showing the child restraint system 
installed in:
    (1) A seating position equipped with a continuous-loop lap/shoulder 
belt;
    (2) A seating position equipped with only a lap belt, as specified 
in the manufacturer's instructions; and
    (3) A seating position equipped with a child restraint anchorage 
system.
    (m) The following statement, inserting an address and telephone 
number: ``Child restraints could be recalled for safety reasons. You 
must register this restraint to be reached in a recall. Send your name, 
address and the restraint's model number and manufacturing date to 
(insert address) or call (insert telephone number). For recall 
information, call the U.S. Government's Auto Safety Hotline at 1-800-
424-9393 (202-366-0123 in DC area).''
    (n) Child restraint systems, other than belt-positioning seats, 
harnesses and backless child restraint systems, may be certified as 
complying with the provisions of S8. Child restraints that are so 
certified shall be labeled with the statement ``This Restraint is 
Certified for Use in Motor Vehicles and Aircraft.'' Belt-positioning 
seats, harnesses and backless child restraint systems shall be labeled 
with the statement ``This Restraint is Not Certified for Use in 
Aircraft.'' The statement required by this paragraph shall be in red 
lettering and shall be placed after the certification statement required 
by S5.5.2(e).
    S5.5.3 The information specified in S5.5.2(f) through (l) shall be 
located on the add-on child restraint system so that it is visible when 
the system is installed as specified in S5.6.1, except that for child 
restraints with a detachable base, the installation diagrams specified 
in S5.5.2(l) are required to be visible only when the base alone is 
installed.

[[Page 635]]

    S5.5.4 (a) Each built-in child restraint system other than a 
factory-installed built-in restraint shall be permanently labeled with 
the information specified in S5.5.5 (a) through (l). The information 
specified in S5.5.5(a) through (j) and in S5.5.5(l) shall be visible 
when the system is activated for use.
    (b) Each factory-installed built-in child restraint shall be 
permanently labeled with the information specified in S5.5.5(f) through 
(j) and S5.5.5(l), so that the information is visible when the restraint 
is activated for use. The information shall also be included in the 
vehicle owner's manual.
    S5.5.5 The information specified in paragraphs (a) through (l) of 
this section that is required by S5.5.4 shall be in English and lettered 
in letters and numbers using a not smaller than 10 point type. Unless 
specified otherwise, the information shall be labeled on a white 
background with black text. Unless written in all capitals, the 
information shall be stated in sentence capitalization.
    (a) The model name or number of the system.
    (b) The manufacturer's name. A distributor's or dealer's name may be 
used instead if the distributor or dealer assumes responsibility for all 
duties and liabilities imposed on the manufacturer with respect to the 
system by the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act, as amended.
    (c) The statement: ``Manufactured in ------,'' inserting the month 
and year of manufacture.
    (d) The place of manufacture (city and State, or foreign country). 
However, if the manufacturer uses the name of the distributor or dealer, 
then it shall state the location (city and State, or foreign country) of 
the principal offices of the distributor or dealer.
    (e) The statement: ``This child restraint system conforms to all 
applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards.''
    (f) One of the following statements, inserting the manufacturer's 
recommendations for the maximum mass of children who can safely occupy 
the system, except that booster seats shall not be recommended for 
children whose masses are less than 13.6 kg. For seats that can only be 
used as belt-positioning seats, manufacturers must include the maximum 
and minimum recommended height, but may delete the reference to weight:
    (1) Use only with children who weigh ---- pounds (---- kg) or less 
and whose height is (insert values in English and metric units; use of 
word ``mass'' in label is optional) or less; or
    (2) Use only with children who weigh between ---- and ---- pounds 
(---- and ---- kg) and whose height is (insert appropriate values in 
English and metric units; use of word ``mass'' in label is optional) or 
less and who are capable of sitting upright alone; or
    (3) Use only with children who weigh between ---- and ---- pounds ( 
---- and ---- kg) and whose height is (insert appropriate values in 
English and metric units; use of word ``mass'' in label is optional) or 
less.
    (4) Use only with children who weigh between ---- and ---- pounds 
(insert appropriate English and metric values; use of word ``mass'' is 
optional) and whose height is between ---- and ---- (insert appropriate 
values in English and metric units).
    (g) The heading and statement specified in paragraph (1), and if 
appropriate, the statements in paragraph (2) and (3). If used, the 
statements in paragraphs (2) and (3) shall be bulleted and precede the 
bulleted statement required by paragraph (1) after the heading.
    (1) A heading as specified in S5.5.2(k)(3)(i), with the statement 
``WARNING! DEATH or SERIOUS INJURY can occur,'' capitalized as written 
and followed by the bulleted statement: Follow all instructions on the 
child restraint and in the vehicle's owner's manual. At the 
manufacturer's option, the phrase ``DEATH or SERIOUS INJURY can occur'' 
in the heading can be on either a white or yellow background.
    (2) In the case of each built-in child restraint system which is not 
intended for use in motor vehicles in certain adjustment positions or 
under certain circumstances, an appropriate statement of the 
manufacturers restrictions regarding those positions or circumstances.

[[Page 636]]

    (3) As appropriate, the statements required by the following 
sections will be bulleted and placed after the statement required by 
5.5.5(g)(1) in the following order: 5.5.5(g)(2), 5.5.5(f), S5.5.5(h) and 
S5.5.5(i).
    (h) In the case of each built-in child restraint system that has 
belts designed to restrain children using them and which do not adjust 
automatically to fit the child: Snugly adjust the belts provided with 
this child restraint around your child.
    (i) In the case of each built-in child restraint which can be used 
in a rear-facing position, the following statement: Place an infant in a 
rear-facing position in this child restraint.
    (j) A diagram or diagrams showing the fully activated child 
restraint system in infant and/or child configurations.
    (k) The following statement, inserting an address and telephone 
number: ``Child restraints could be recalled for safety reasons. You 
must register this restraint to be reached in a recall. Send your name, 
address and the restraint's model number and manufacturing date to 
(insert address) or call (insert telephone number). For recall 
information, call the U.S. Government's Auto Safety Hotline at 1-800-
424-9393 (202-366-0123 in DC area).''
    (l) In the case of a built-in belt-positioning seat that uses either 
the vehicle's Type I or Type II belt systems or both, a statement 
describing the manufacturer's recommendations for the maximum height and 
weight of children who can safely occupy the system and how the booster 
should be used (e.g., with or without shield) with the different vehicle 
belt systems.
    S5.6 Printed Instructions for Proper Use. Any labels or written 
instructions provided in addition to those required by this section 
shall not obscure or confuse the meaning of the required information or 
be otherwise misleading to the consumer. Any labels or written 
instructions other than in the English language shall be an accurate 
translation of English labels or written instructions. Unless written in 
all capitals, the information required by S5.6.1 through S5.6.3 shall be 
stated in sentence capitalization.
    S5.6.1 Add-on child restraint systems. Each add-on child restraint 
system shall be accompanied by printed installation instructions in 
English that provide a step-by-step procedure, including diagrams, for 
installing the system in motor vehicles, securing the system in the 
vehicles, positioning a child in the system, and adjusting the system to 
fit the child. For each child restraint system that has components for 
attaching to a tether anchorage or a child restraint anchorage system, 
the installation instructions shall include a step-by-step procedure, 
including diagrams, for properly attaching to that anchorage or system.
    S5.6.1.1 In a vehicle with rear designated seating positions, the 
instructions shall alert vehicle owners that, according to accident 
statistics, children are safer when properly restrained in the rear 
seating positions than in the front seating positions.
    S5.6.1.2 The instructions shall specify in general terms the types 
of vehicles, the types of seating positions, and the types of vehicle 
safety belts with which the add-on child restraint system can or cannot 
be used.
    S5.6.1.3 The instructions shall explain the primary consequences of 
not following the warnings required to be labeled on the child restraint 
system in accordance with S5.5.2 (g) through (k).
    S5.6.1.4 The instructions for each car bed shall explain that the 
car bed should position in such a way that the child's head is near the 
center of the vehicle.
    S5.6.1.5 The instructions shall state that add-on child restraint 
systems should be securely belted to the vehicle, even when they are not 
occupied, since in a crash an unsecured child restraint system may 
injure other occupants.
    S5.6.1.6 Each add-on child restraint system shall have a location on 
the restraint for storing the manufacturer's instructions.
    S5.6.1.7 The instructions shall include the following statement, 
inserting an address and telephone number: ``Child restraints could be 
recalled for safety reasons. You must register this restraint to be 
reached in a recall.

[[Page 637]]

Send your name, address and the restraint's model number and 
manufacturing date to (insert address) or call (insert telephone 
number). For recall information, call the U.S. Government's Auto Safety 
Hotline at 1-800-424-9393 (202-366-0123 in DC area).''
    S5.6.1.8 In the case of each child restraint system that can be used 
in a position so that it is facing the rear of the vehicle, the 
instructions shall provide a warning against using rear-facing 
restraints at seating positions equipped with air bags, and shall 
explain the reasons for, and consequences of not following the warning. 
The instructions shall also include a statement that owners of vehicles 
with front passenger side air bags should refer to their vehicle owner's 
manual for child restraint installation instructions.
    S5.6.1.9 In the case of each rear-facing child restraint system that 
has a means for repositioning the seating surface of the system that 
allows the system's occupant to move from a reclined position to an 
upright position during testing, the instructions shall include a 
warning against impeding the ability of the restraint to change 
adjustment position.
    S5.6.1.10(a) For instructions for a booster seat that is recommended 
for use with either a vehicle's Type I or Type II seat belt assembly, 
one of the following statements, as appropriate, and the reasons for the 
statement:
    (1) Warning! Use only the vehicle's lap and shoulder belt system 
when restraining the child in this booster seat; or,
    (2) Warning! Use only the vehicle's lap belt system, or the lap belt 
part of a lap/shoulder belt system with the shoulder belt placed behind 
the child, when restraining the child in this seat.
    (b)(1) Except as provided in S5.6.1.10(b)(2), the instructions for a 
booster seat that is recommended for use with both a vehicle's Type I 
and Type II seat belt assemblies shall include the following statement 
and the reasons therefor: Warning! Use only the vehicle's lap belt 
system, or the lap belt part of a lap/shoulder belt system with the 
shoulder belt placed behind the child, when restraining the child with 
the (insert description of the system element provided to restrain 
forward movement of the child's torso when used with a lap belt (e.g., 
shield)), and only the vehicle's lap and shoulder belt system when using 
this booster without the (insert above description).
    (2) A booster seat which is recommended for use with both a 
vehicle's Type I and Type II seat belt assemblies is not subject to 
S5.6.1.10(b)(1) if, when the booster is used with the shield or similar 
component, the booster will cause the shoulder belt to be located in a 
position other than in front of the child when the booster is installed. 
However, the instructions for such a booster shall include a warning to 
use the booster with the vehicle's lap and shoulder belt system when 
using the booster without a shield.
    (c) The instructions for belt-positioning seats shall include the 
statement, ``This restraint is not certified for aircraft use,'' and the 
reasons for this statement.
    S5.6.1.11 For harnesses that are manufactured for use on school bus 
seats, the instructions must include the following statements:
    ``WARNING! This restraint must only be used on school bus seats. 
Entire seat directly behind must be unoccupied or have restrained 
occupants.'' The labeling requirement refers to a restrained occupant 
as: an occupant restrained by any user appropriate vehicle restraint or 
child restraint system (e.g. lap belt, lap and shoulder belt, booster, 
child seat, harness . . .).
    S5.6.2 Built-in child restraint systems. (a) Each built-in child 
restraint system shall be accompanied by printed instructions in English 
that provide a step-by-step procedure, including diagrams, for 
activating the restraint system, positioning a child in the system, 
adjusting the restraint and, if provided, the restraint harness to fit 
the child. The instructions for each built-in car bed shall explain that 
the child should be positioned in the bed in such a way that the child's 
head is near the center of the vehicle.
    (b) Each motor vehicle equipped with a factory-installed built-in 
child restraint shall have the information specified in paragraph (a) of 
this section included in its vehicle owner's manual.

[[Page 638]]

    S5.6.2.1 The instructions shall explain the primary consequences of 
not following the manufacturer's warnings for proper use of the child 
restraint system in accordance with S5.5.5 (f) through (i).
    S5.6.2.2 The instructions for each built-in child restraint system 
other than a factory-installed restraint, shall include the following 
statement, inserting an address and telephone number: ``Child restraints 
could be recalled for safety reasons. You must register this restraint 
to be reached in a recall. Send your name, address and the restraint's 
model number and manufacturing date to (insert address) or call (insert 
telephone number). For recall information, call the U.S. Government's 
Auto Safety Hotline at 1-800-424-9393 (202-366-0123 in DC area).''
    S5.6.2.3. Each built-in child restraint system other than a factory-
installed built-in restraint, shall have a location on the restraint for 
storing the instructions.
    S5.6.2.4 Each built-in child restraint system, other than a system 
that has been installed in a vehicle or a factory-installed built-in 
system that is designed for a specific vehicle model and seating 
position, shall be accompanied by instructions in English that provide a 
step-by-step procedure for installing the system in a motor vehicle. The 
instructions shall specify the types of vehicles and the seating 
positions into which the restraint can or cannot be installed. The 
instructions for each car bed shall explain that the bed should be 
installed so that the child's head will be near the center of the 
vehicle.
    S5.6.2.5 In the case of a built-in belt-positioning seat that uses 
either the vehicle's Type I or Type II belt systems or both, the 
instructions shall include a statement describing the manufacturer's 
recommendations for the maximum height and weight of children who can 
safely occupy the system and how the booster must be used with the 
vehicle belt systems appropriate for the booster seat. The instructions 
shall explain the consequences of not following the directions. The 
instructions shall specify that, if the booster seat is recommended for 
use with only the lap-belt part of a Type II assembly, the shoulder belt 
portion of the assembly must be placed behind the child.
    S5.6.3 Add-on and built-in child restraint systems. In the case of 
each child restraint system that has belts designed to restrain children 
using them and which do not adjust automatically to fit the child, the 
printed instructions shall include the following statement: A snug strap 
should not allow any slack. It lies in a relatively straight line 
without sagging. It does not press on the child's flesh or push the 
child's body into an unnatural position.
    S5.7 Flammability. Each material used in a child restraint system 
shall conform to the requirements of S4 of FMVSS No. 302 (571.302). In 
the case of a built-in child restraint system, the requirements of S4 of 
FMVSS No. 302 shall be met in both the ``in-use'' and ``stowed'' 
positions.
    S5.8 Information requirements--registration form.
    (a) Each child restraint system, except a factory-installed built-in 
restraint system, shall have a registration form attached to any surface 
of the restraint that contacts the dummy when the dummy is positioned in 
the system in accordance with S6.1.2 of Standard 213.
    (b) Each form shall:
    (1) Consist of a postcard that is attached at a perforation to an 
informational card;
    (2) Conform in size, content and format to Figures 9a and 9b of this 
section; and
    (3) Have a thickness of at least 0.007 inches and not more than 
0.0095 inches.
    (c) Each postcard shall provide the model name or number and date of 
manufacture (month, year) of the child restraint system to which the 
form is attached, shall contain space for the purchaser to record his or 
her name and mailing address, shall be addressed to the manufacturer, 
and shall be postage paid. No other information shall appear on the 
postcard, except identifying information that distinguishes a particular 
child restraint system from other systems of that model name or number 
may be preprinted in the shaded area of the postcard, as shown in figure 
9a.

[[Page 639]]

    S5.9 Attachment to child restraint anchorage system.
    (a) Each add-on child restraint anchorage system manufactured on or 
after September 1, 2002, other than a car bed, harness and belt-
positioning seat, shall have components permanently attached to the 
system that enable the restraint to be securely fastened to the lower 
anchorages of the child restraint anchorage system specified in Standard 
No. 225 (Sec. 571.213) and depicted in Drawing Package SAS-100-1000 
with Addendum A: Seat Base Weldment (consisting of drawings and a bill 
of materials), dated October 23, 1998, or in Drawing Package, ``NHTSA 
Standard Seat Assembly; FMVSS No. 213, No. NHTSA-213-2003,'' (consisting 
of drawings and a bill of materials) dated June 3, 2003 (incorporated by 
reference; see Sec. 571.5). The components must be attached by use of a 
tool, such as a screwdriver. In the case of rear-facing child restraints 
with detachable bases, only the base is required to have the components.
    (b) In the case of each child restraint system that is manufactured 
on or after September 1, 1999 and that has components for attaching the 
system to a tether anchorage, those components shall include a tether 
hook that conforms to the configuration and geometry specified in Figure 
11 of this standard.
    (c) In the case of each child restraint system that is manufactured 
on or after September 1, 1999 and that has components, including belt 
webbing, for attaching the system to a tether anchorage or to a child 
restraint anchorage system, the belt webbing shall be adjustable so that 
the child restraint can be tightly attached to the vehicle.
    (d) Beginning September 1, 1999, each child restraint system with 
components that enable the restraint to be securely fastened to the 
lower anchorages of a child restraint anchorage system, other than a 
system with hooks for attaching to the lower anchorages, shall provide 
either an indication when each attachment to the lower anchorages 
becomes fully latched or attached, or a visual indication that all 
attachments to the lower anchorages are fully latched or attached. 
Visual indications shall be detectable under normal daylight lighting 
conditions.
    S6. Test conditions and procedures.
    S6.1 Dynamic systems test for child restraint systems.
    The test conditions described in S6.1.1 apply to the dynamic systems 
test. The test procedure for the dynamic systems test is specified in 
S6.1.2. The test dummy specified in S7 is placed in the test specimen 
(child restraint), clothed as described in S9 and positioned according 
to S10.
    S6.1.1 Test conditions.
    (a) Test devices.
    (1) Add-on child restraints.
    (i) The test device for add-on restraint systems manufactured before 
August 1, 2005 is a standard seat assembly consisting of a simulated 
vehicle bench seat, with three seating positions, which is described in 
Drawing Package SAS-100-1000 with Addendum A: Seat Base Weldment 
(consisting of drawings and a bill of materials), dated October 23, 1998 
(incorporated by reference in Sec. 571.5). The assembly is mounted on a 
dynamic test platform so that the center SORL of the seat is parallel to 
the direction of the test platform travel and so that movement between 
the base of the assembly and the platform is prevented.
    (ii) The test device for add-on restraint systems manufactured on or 
after August 1, 2005 is a standard seat assembly consisting of a 
simulated vehicle bench seat, with three seating positions, which is 
depicted in Drawing Package, ``NHTSA Standard Seat Assembly; FMVSS No. 
213, No. NHTSA-213-2003,'' (consisting of drawings and a bill of 
materials) dated June 3, 2003 (incorporated by reference; see Sec. 
571.5). The assembly is mounted on a dynamic test platform so that the 
center SORL of the seat is parallel to the direction of the test 
platform travel and so that movement between the base of the assembly 
and the platform is prevented.
    (2) The test device for built-in child restraint systems is either 
the specific vehicle shell or the specific vehicle.
    (i) Specific vehicle shell.

[[Page 640]]

    (A) The specific vehicle shell, if selected for testing, is mounted 
on a dynamic test platform so that the longitudinal center line of the 
shell is parallel to the direction of the test platform travel and so 
that movement between the base of the shell and the platform is 
prevented. Adjustable seats are in the adjustment position midway 
between the forwardmost and rearmost positions, and if separately 
adjustable in a vertical direction, are at the lowest position. If an 
adjustment position does not exist midway between the forwardmost and 
rearmost position, the closest adjustment position to the rear of the 
midpoint is used. Adjustable seat backs are in the manufacturer's 
nominal design riding position. If such a position is not specified, the 
seat back is positioned so that the longitudinal center line of the 
child test dummy's neck is vertical, and if an instrumented test dummy 
is used, the accelerometer surfaces in the dummy's head and thorax, as 
positioned in the vehicle, are horizontal. If the vehicle seat is 
equipped with adjustable head restraints, each is adjusted to its 
highest adjustment position.
    (B) The platform is instrumented with an accelerometer and data 
processing system having a frequency response of 60 Hz channel class as 
specified in Society of Automotive Engineers Recommended Practice J211 
JUN80 ``Instrumentation for Impact Tests.'' The accelerometer sensitive 
axis is parallel to the direction of test platform travel.
    (ii) Specific vehicle. For built-in child restraint systems, an 
alternate test device is the specific vehicle into which the built-in 
system is fabricated. The following test conditions apply to this 
alternate test device.
    (A) The vehicle is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight plus its 
rated cargo and luggage capacity weight, secured in the luggage area, 
plus the appropriate child test dummy and, at the vehicle manufacturer's 
option, an anthropomorphic test dummy which conforms to the requirements 
of subpart B or subpart E of part 572 of this title for a 50th 
percentile adult male dummy placed in the front outboard seating 
position. If the built-in child restraint system is installed at one of 
the seating positions otherwise requiring the placement of a part 572 
test dummy, then in the frontal barrier crash specified in (c), the 
appropriate child test dummy shall be substituted for the part 572 adult 
dummy, but only at that seating position. The fuel tank is filled to any 
level from 90 to 95 percent of capacity.
    (B) Adjustable seats are in the adjustment position midway between 
the forward-most and rearmost positions, and if separately adjustable in 
a vehicle direction, are at the lowest position. If an adjustment 
position does not exist midway between the forward-most and rearmost 
positions, the closest adjustment position to the rear of the midpoint 
is used.
    (C) Adjustable seat backs are in the manufacturer's nominal design 
riding position. If a nominal position is not specified, the seat back 
is positioned so that the longitudinal center line of the child test 
dummy's neck is vertical, and if an anthropomorphic test dummy is used, 
the accelerometer surfaces in the test dummy's head and thorax, as 
positioned in the vehicle, are horizontal. If the vehicle is equipped 
with adjustable head restraints, each is adjusted to its highest 
adjustment position.
    (D) Movable vehicle windows and vents are, at the manufacturer's 
option, placed in the fully closed position.
    (E) Convertibles and open-body type vehicles have the top, if any, 
in place in the closed passenger compartment configuration.
    (F) Doors are fully closed and latched but not locked.
    (G) All instrumentation and data reduction is in conformance with 
SAE J211 JUN80.
    (b) The tests are frontal barrier impact simulations of the test 
platform or frontal barrier crashes of the specific vehicles as 
specified in S5.1 of Sec. 571.208 and for:
    (1) Test Configuration I, are at a velocity change of 48 km/h with 
the acceleration of the test platform entirely within the curve shown in 
Figure 2 (for child restraints manufactured before August 1, 2005) or in 
Figure 2A (for child restraints manufactured on or after August 1, 
2005), or for the specific

[[Page 641]]

vehicle test with the deceleration produced in a 48 km/h frontal barrier 
crash.
    (2) Test Configuration II, are set at a velocity change of 32 km/h 
with the acceleration of the test platform entirely within the curve 
shown in Figure 3, or for the specific vehicle test, with the 
deceleration produced in a 32 km/h frontal barrier crash.
    (c) As illustrated in Figures 1A and 1B of this standard, attached 
to the seat belt anchorage points provided on the standard seat assembly 
are Type 1 seat belt assemblies in the case of add-on child restraint 
systems other than belt-positioning seats, or Type 2 seat belt 
assemblies in the case of belt-positioning seats. These seat belt 
assemblies meet the requirements of Standard No. 209 (Sec. 571.209) and 
have webbing with a width of not more than 2 inches, and are attached to 
the anchorage points without the use of retractors or reels of any kind. 
As illustrated in Figures 1A'' and 1B'' of this standard, attached to 
the standard seat assembly is a child restraint anchorage system 
conforming to the specifications of Standard No. 225 (Sec. 571.225), in 
the case of add-on child restraint systems other than belt-positioning 
booster seats.
    (d)(1) When using the test dummies specified in 49 CFR Part 572, 
subparts C, I, J, or K, performance tests under S6.1 are conducted at 
any ambient temperature from 19[deg] C to 26[deg] C and at any relative 
humidity from 10 percent to 70 percent.
    (2) When using the test dummies specified in 49 CFR Part 572, 
subparts N, P or R, performance tests under S6.1 are conducted at any 
ambient temperature from 20.6[deg] C to 22.2[deg] C and at any relative 
humidity from 10 percent to 70 percent.
    (e) In the case of add-on child restraint systems, the restraint 
shall meet the requirements of S5 at each of its seat back angle 
adjustment positions and restraint belt routing positions, when the 
restraint is oriented in the direction recommended by the manufacturer 
(e.g., forward, rearward or laterally) pursuant to S5.6, and tested with 
the test dummy specified in S7.
    S6.1.2 Dynamic test procedure.
    (a) Activate the built-in child restraint or attach the add-on child 
restraint to the seat assembly as described below:
    (1) Test configuration I.
    (i) Child restraints other than belt-positioning seats. Attach the 
child restraint in any of the following manners specified in 
S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(A) through (D), unless otherwise specified in this 
standard.
    (A) Install the child restraint system at the center seating 
position of the standard seat assembly, in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the system pursuant to S5.6.1, 
except that the standard lap belt is used and, if provided, a tether 
strap may be used. For harnesses that bear the label shown in Figure 12 
and that meet S5.3.1(b)(1) through S5.3.1(b)(3), attach the harness in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions provided with the system 
pursuant to S5.6.1, i.e., the seat back mount is used.
    (B) Except for a child harness, a backless child restraint system 
with a tether strap, and a restraint designed for use by physically 
handicapped children, install the child restraint system at the center 
seating position of the standard seat assembly as in S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(A), 
except that no tether strap (or any other supplemental device) is used.
    (C) Install the child restraint system using the child restraint 
anchorage system at the center seating position of the standard seat 
assembly in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions provided 
with the system pursuant to S5.6.1. The tether strap, if one is 
provided, is attached to the tether anchorage.
    (D) Install the child restraint system using only the lower 
anchorages of the child restraint anchorage system as in 
S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(C). No tether strap (or any other supplemental device) 
is used.
    (ii) Belt-positioning seats. A belt-positioning seat is attached to 
either outboard seating position of the standard seat assembly in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions provided with the system 
pursuant to S5.6.1 using only the standard vehicle lap and shoulder belt 
and no tether (or any other supplemental device).
    (iii) In the case of each built-in child restraint system, activate 
the restraint

[[Page 642]]

in the specific vehicle shell or the specific vehicle, in accordance 
with the manufacturer's instructions provided in accordance with S5.6.2.
    (2) Test configuration II. (i) In the case of each add-on child 
restraint system which is equipped with a fixed or movable surface 
described in S5.2.2.2, or a backless child restraint system with a top 
anchorage strap, install the add-on child restraint system at the center 
seating position of the standard seat assembly using only the standard 
seat lap belt to secure the system to the standard seat.
    (ii) In the case of each built-in child restraint system which is 
equipped with a fixed or movable surface described in S5.2.2.2, or a 
built-in booster seat with a top anchorage strap, activate the system in 
the specific vehicle shell or the specific vehicle in accordance with 
the manufacturer's instructions provided in accordance with S5.6.2.
    (b) Select any dummy specified in S7 for testing systems for use by 
children of the heights and weights for which the system is recommended 
in accordance with S5.5. The dummy is assembled, clothed and prepared as 
specified in S7 and S9 and Part 572 of this chapter, as appropriate.
    (c) Place the dummy in the child restraint. Position it, and attach 
the child restraint belts, if appropriate, as specified in S10.
    (d) Belt adjustment.
    (1) Add-on systems other than belt-positioning seats.
    (i) If appropriate, shoulder and pelvic belts that directly restrain 
the dummy shall be adjusted as follows: Tighten the belts until a 9 N 
force applied (as illustrated in figure 5) to the webbing at the top of 
each dummy shoulder and to the pelvic webbing 50 mm on either side of 
the torso midsagittal plane pulls the webbing 7 mm from the dummy.
    (ii) All Type I belt systems used to attach an add-on child 
restraint system to the standard seat assembly, and any provided 
additional anchorage belt (tether), are tightened to a tension of not 
less than 53.5 N and not more than 67 N, as measured by a load cell used 
on the webbing portion of the belt. All belt systems used to attach a 
harness that bears the label shown in Figure 12 and that meets 
S5.3.1(b)(i) through S5.3.1(b)(iii) are also tightened to a tension of 
not less than 53.5 N and not more than 67 N, by measurement means 
specified in this paragraph.
    (iii) When attaching a child restraint system to the tether 
anchorage and the child restraint anchorage system on the standard seat 
assembly, tighten all belt systems used to attach the restraint to the 
standard seat assembly to a tension of not less than 53.5 N and not more 
than 67 N, as measured by a load cell or other suitable means used on 
the webbing portion of the belt.
    (2) Add-on belt-positioning seats.
    (i) The lap portion of Type II belt systems used to attach the child 
restraint to the standard seat assembly is tightened to a tension of not 
less than 53.5 N and not more than 67 N, as measured by a load cell used 
on the webbing portion of the belt.
    (ii) The shoulder portion of Type II belt systems used to restrain 
the dummy is tightened to a tension of not less than 9 N and not more 
than 18 N, as measured by a load cell used on the webbing portion of the 
belt.
    (3) Built-in child restraint systems.
    (i) The lap portion of Type II belt systems used to secure a dummy 
to the built-in child restraint system is tightened to a tension of not 
less than 53.5 N and not more than 67 N, as measured by a load cell used 
on the webbing portion of the belt.
    (ii) The shoulder portion of Type II belt systems used to secure a 
child is tightened to a tension of not less than 9 N and not more than 
18 N, as measured by a load cell used on the webbing portion of the 
belt.
    (iii) If provided, and if appropriate to attach the child restraint 
belts under S10, shoulder (other than the shoulder portion of a Type II 
vehicle belt system) and pelvic belts that directly restrain the dummy 
shall be adjusted as follows: Tighten the belts until a 9 N force 
applied (as illustrated in figure 5) to the webbing at the top of each 
dummy shoulder and to the pelvic webbing 50 mm on either side of the 
torso midsagittal plane pulls the webbing 7 mm from the dummy.
    (e) Accelerate the test platform to simulate frontal impact in 
accordance

[[Page 643]]

with Test Configuration I or II, as appropriate.
    (f) Determine conformance with the requirements in S5.1.
    S6.2 Buckle release test procedure.
    The belt assembly buckles used in any child restraint system shall 
be tested in accordance with S6.2.1 through S6.2.4 inclusive.
    S6.2.1 Before conducting the testing specified in S6.1, place the 
loaded buckle on a hard, flat, horizontal surface. Each belt end of the 
buckle shall be pre-loaded in the following manner. The anchor end of 
the buckle shall be loaded with a 9 N force in the direction away from 
the buckle. In the case of buckles designed to secure a single latch 
plate, the belt latch plate end of the buckle shall be pre-loaded with a 
9 N force in the direction away from the buckle. In the case of buckles 
designed to secure two or more latch plates, the belt latch plate ends 
of the buckle shall be loaded equally so that the total load is 9 N, in 
the direction away from the buckle. For pushbutton-release buckles, the 
release force shall be applied by a conical surface (cone angle not 
exceeding 90 degrees). For pushbutton-release mechanisms with a fixed 
edge (referred to in Figure 7 as ``hinged button''), the release force 
shall be applied at the centerline of the button, 3 mm away from the 
movable edge directly opposite the fixed edge, and in the direction that 
produces maximum releasing effect. For pushbutton-release mechanisms 
with no fixed edge (referred to in Figure 7 as ``floating button''), the 
release force shall be applied at the center of the release mechanism in 
the direction that produces the maximum releasing effect. For all other 
buckle release mechanisms, the force shall be applied on the centerline 
of the buckle lever or finger tab in the direction that produces the 
maximum releasing effect. Measure the force required to release the 
buckle. Figure 7 illustrates the loading for the different buckles and 
the point where the release force should be applied, and Figure 8 
illustrates the conical surface used to apply the release force to 
pushbutton-release buckles.
    S6.2.2 After completion of the testing specified in S6.1 and before 
the buckle is unlatched, tie a self-adjusting sling to each wrist and 
ankle of the test dummy in the manner illustrated in Figure 4, without 
disturbing the belted dummy and the child restraint system.
    S6.2.3 Pull the sling tied to the dummy restrained in the child 
restraint system and apply the following force: 50 N for a system tested 
with a newborn dummy; 90 N for a system tested with a 9-month-old dummy; 
90 N for a system tested with a 12-month-old dummy; 200 N for a system 
tested with a 3-year-old dummy; or 270 N for a system tested with a 6-
year-old dummy; or 350 N for a system tested with a weighted 6-year-old 
dummy. The force is applied in the manner illustrated in Figure 4 and as 
follows:
    (a) Add-on Child Restraints. For an add-on child restraint other 
than a car bed, apply the specified force by pulling the sling 
horizontally and parallel to the SORL of the standard seat assembly. For 
a car bed, apply the force by pulling the sling vertically.
    (b) Built-in Child Restraints. For a built-in child restraint other 
than a car bed, apply the force by pulling the sling parallel to the 
longitudinal center line of the specific vehicle shell or the specific 
vehicle. In the case of a car bed, apply the force by pulling the sling 
vertically.
    S6.2.4 While applying the force specified in S6.2.3, and using the 
device shown in Figure 8 for pushbutton-release buckles, apply the 
release force in the manner and location specified in S6.2.1, for that 
type of buckle. Measure the force required to release the buckle.
    S6.3 Head impact protection--energy absorbing material test 
procedure.
    S6.3.1 Prepare and test specimens of the energy absorbing material 
used to comply with S5.2.3 in accordance with the applicable 25 percent 
compression-deflection test described in the American Society for 
Testing and Materials (ASTM) Standard D1056-73, ``Standard Specification 
for Flexible Cellular Materials--Sponge or Expanded Rubber,'' or D1564-
71 ``Standard Method of Testing Flexible Cellular Materials--Slab 
Urethane Foam'' or D1565-76 ``Standard Specification for Flexible 
Cellular Materials--Vinyl Chloride Polymer and Copolymer open-cell 
foams.''

[[Page 644]]

    S7 Test dummies. (Subparts referenced in this section are of part 
572 of this chapter.) S7.1 Dummy selection. Select any dummy specified 
in S7.1.1, S7.1.2 or S7.1.3, as appropriate, for testing systems for use 
by children of the height and mass for which the system is recommended 
in accordance with S5.5. A child restraint that meets the criteria in 
two or more of the following paragraphs in S7 may be tested with any of 
the test dummies specified in those paragraphs.
    S7.1.1 Child restraints that are manufactured before August 1, 2005, 
are subject to the following provisions:
    (a) A child restraint that is recommended by its manufacturer in 
accordance with S5.5 for use either by children in a specified mass 
range that includes any children having a mass of not greater than 5 kg, 
or by children in a specified height range that includes any children 
whose height is not greater than 650 mm, is tested with a newborn test 
dummy conforming to part 572 subpart K.
    (b) A child restraint that is recommended by its manufacturer in 
accordance with S5.5 for use either by children in a specified mass 
range that includes any children having a mass greater than 5 but not 
greater than 10 kg, or by children in a specified height range that 
includes any children whose height is greater than 650 mm but not 
greater than 850 mm, is tested with a newborn test dummy conforming to 
part 572 subpart K, and a 9-month-old test dummy conforming to part 572 
subpart J.
    (c) A child restraint that is recommended by its manufacturer in 
accordance with S5.5 for use either by children in a specified mass 
range that includes any children having a mass greater than 10 kg but 
not greater than 18 kg, or by children in a specified height range that 
includes any children whose height is greater than 850 mm but not 
greater than 1100 mm, is tested with a 9-month-old test dummy conforming 
to part 572 subpart J, and a 3-year-old test dummy conforming to part 
572 subpart C and S7.2, provided, however, that the 9-month-old dummy is 
not used to test a booster seat.
    (d) A child restraint that is recommended by its manufacturer in 
accordance with S5.5 for use either by children in a specified mass 
range that includes any children having a mass greater than 18 kg, or by 
children in a specified height range that includes any children whose 
height is greater than 1100 mm, is tested with a 6-year-old child dummy 
conforming to part 572 subpart I.
    S7.1.2 Child restraints that are manufactured on or after August 1, 
2005, are subject to the following provisions.
    (a) A child restraint that is recommended by its manufacturer in 
accordance with S5.5 for use either by children in a specified mass 
range that includes any children having a mass of not greater than 5 kg, 
or by children in a specified height range that includes any children 
whose height is not greater than 650 mm, is tested with a newborn test 
dummy conforming to part 572 subpart K.
    (b) A child restraint that is recommended by its manufacturer in 
accordance with S5.5 for use either by children in a specified mass 
range that includes any children having a mass greater than 5 but not 
greater than 10 kg, or by children in a specified height range that 
includes any children whose height is greater than 650 mm but not 
greater than 850 mm, is tested with a newborn test dummy conforming to 
part 572 subpart K, and a 12-month-old test dummy conforming to part 572 
subpart R.
    (c) A child restraint that is recommended by its manufacturer in 
accordance with S5.5 for use either by children in a specified mass 
range that includes any children having a mass greater than 10 kg but 
not greater than 18 kg, or by children in a specified height range that 
includes any children whose height is greater than 850 mm but not 
greater than 1100 mm, is tested with a 12-month-old test dummy 
conforming to part 572 subpart R, and a 3-year-old test dummy conforming 
to part 572 subpart P and S7.2, provided, however, that the 12-month-old 
dummy is not used to test a booster seat.
    (d) A child restraint that is recommended by its manufacturer in 
accordance with S5.5 for use either by children in a specified mass 
range that includes any children having a mass greater than 18 kg, or by 
children in a

[[Page 645]]

specified height range that includes any children whose height is 
greater than 1100 mm, is tested with a 6-year-old child dummy conforming 
to part 572 subpart N.
    (e) A child restraint that is manufactured on or August 1, 2005, 
that is recommended by its manufacturer in accordance with S5.5 for use 
either by children in a specified mass range that includes any children 
having a mass greater than 22.7 kg or by children in a specified height 
range that includes any children whose height is greater than 1100 mm is 
tested with a part 572 subpart N dummy that is weighted to weigh 28.2 
kg.
    S7.1.3 Voluntary use of alternative dummies. At the manufacturer's 
option (with said option irrevocably selected prior to, or at the time 
of, certification of the restraint), child restraint systems 
manufactured before August 1, 2005 may be tested to the requirements of 
S5 while using the test dummies specified in S7.1.2 according to the 
criteria for selecting test dummies specified in that paragraph. Child 
restraints manufactured on or after August 1, 2005, must be tested using 
the test dummies specified in S7.1.2.
    S8 Requirements, test conditions, and procedures for child restraint 
systems manufactured for use in aircraft. Each child restraint system 
manufactured for use in both motor vehicles and aircraft must comply 
with all of the applicable requirements specified in Section S5 and with 
the additional requirements specified in S8.1 and S8.2.
    S8.1 Installation instructions. Each child restraint system 
manufactured for use in aircraft shall be accompanied by printed 
instructions in English that provide a step-by-step procedure, including 
diagrams, for installing the system in aircraft passenger seats, 
securing a child in the system when it is installed in aircraft, and 
adjusting the system to fit the child.
    S8.2 Inversion test. When tested in accordance with S8.2.1 through 
S8.2.5, each child restraint system manufactured for use in aircraft 
shall meet the requirements of S8.2.1 through S8.2.6. The manufacturer 
may, at its option, use any seat which is a representative aircraft 
passenger seat within the meaning of S4. Each system shall meet the 
requirements at each of the restraint's seat back angle adjustment 
positions and restraint belt routing positions, when the restraint is 
oriented in the direction recommended by the manufacturer (e.g., facing 
forward, rearward or laterally) pursuant to S8.1, and tested with the 
test dummy specified in S7. If the manufacturer recommendations do not 
include instructions for orienting the restraint in aircraft when the 
restraint seat back angle is adjusted to any position, position the 
restraint on the aircraft seat by following the instructions (provided 
in accordance with S5.6) for orienting the restraint in motor vehicles.
    S8.2.1 A standard seat assembly consisting of a representative 
aircraft passenger seat shall be positioned and adjusted so that its 
horizontal and vertical orientation and its seat back angle are the same 
as shown in Figure 6.
    S8.2.2 The child restraint system shall be attached to the 
representative aircraft passenger seat using, at the manufacturer's 
option, any Federal Aviation Administration approved aircraft safety 
belt, according to the restraint manufacturer's instructions for 
attaching the restraint to an aircraft seat. No supplementary anchorage 
belts or tether straps may be attached; however, Federal Aviation 
Administration approved safety belt extensions may be used.
    S8.2.3 In accordance with S10, place in the child restraint any 
dummy specified in S7 for testing systems for use by children of the 
heights and weights for which the system is recommended in accordance 
with S5.5 and S8.1.
    S8.2.4 If provided, shoulder and pelvic belts that directly restrain 
the dummy shall be adjusted in accordance with S6.1.2.
    S8.2.5 The combination of representative aircraft passenger seat, 
child restraint, and test dummy shall be rotated forward around a 
horizontal axis which is contained in the median transverse vertical 
plane of the seating surface portion of the aircraft seat and is located 
25 mm below the bottom of the seat frame, at a speed of 35 to 45 degrees 
per second, to an angle of 180 degrees. The rotation shall be stopped 
when it reaches that angle and the seat

[[Page 646]]

shall be held in this position for three seconds. The child restraint 
shall not fall out of the aircraft safety belt nor shall the test dummy 
fall out of the child restraint at any time during the rotation or the 
three second period. The specified rate of rotation shall be attained in 
not less than one half second and not more than one second, and the 
rotating combination shall be brought to a stop in not less than one 
half second and not more than one second.
    S8.2.6 Repeat the procedures set forth in S8.2.1 through S8.2.4. The 
combination of the representative aircraft passenger seat, child 
restraint, and test dummy shall be rotated sideways around a horizontal 
axis which is contained in the median longitudinal vertical plane of the 
seating surface portion of the aircraft seat and is located 25 mm below 
the bottom of the seat frame, at a speed of 35 to 45 degrees per second, 
to an angle of 180 degrees. The rotation shall be stopped when it 
reaches that angle and the seat shall be held in this position for three 
seconds. The child restraint shall not fall out of the aircraft safety 
belt nor shall the test dummy fall out of the child restraint at any 
time during the rotation or the three second period. The specified rate 
of rotation shall be attained in not less than one half second and not 
more than one second, and the rotating combination shall be brought to a 
stop in not less than one half second and not more than one second.
    S9 Dummy clothing and preparation.
    S9.1 Type of clothing.
    (a) Newborn dummy. When used in testing under this standard, the 
dummy is unclothed.
    (b) Nine-month-old dummy. When used in testing under this standard, 
the dummy is clothed in terry cloth polyester and cotton size 1 long 
sleeve shirt and size 1 long pants, with a total mass of 0.136 kg.
    (c) 12-month-old dummy (49 CFR Part 572, Subpart R). When used in 
testing under this standard, the dummy specified in 49 CFR part 572, 
subparts R, is clothed in a cotton-polyester based tight fitting sweat 
shirt with long sleeves and ankle long pants whose combined weight is 
not more than 0.25 kg.
    (d) Hybrid II three-year-old and Hybrid II six-year-old dummies (49 
CFR part 572, subparts C and I). When used in testing under this 
standard, the dummies specified in 49 CFR part 572, subparts C and I, 
are clothed in thermal knit, waffle-weave polyester and cotton underwear 
or equivalent, a size 4 long-sleeved shirt (3-year-old dummy) or a size 
5 long-sleeved shirt (6-year-old dummy) having a mass of 0.090 kg, a 
size 4 pair of long pants having a mass of 0.090 kg, and cut off just 
far enough above the knee to allow the knee target to be visible, and 
size 7M sneakers (3-year-old dummy) or size 12\1/2\M sneakers (6-year-
old dummy) with rubber toe caps, uppers of dacron and cotton or nylon 
and a total mass of 0.453 kg.
    (e) Hybrid III 3-year-old dummy (49 CFR Part 572, Subpart P). When 
used in testing under this standard, the dummy specified in 49 CFR part 
572, subpart P, is clothed in thermal knit, waffle-weave polyester and 
cotton underwear or equivalent, a size 4 long-sleeved shirt (3-year-old 
dummy) or a size 5 long-sleeved shirt (6-year-old dummy) having a mass 
of 0.090 kg, a size 4 pair of long pants having a mass of 0.090 kg, and 
cut off just far enough above the knee to allow the knee target to be 
visible, and size 7M sneakers with rubber toe caps, uppers of dacron and 
cotton or nylon and a total mass of 0.453 kg.
    (f) Hybrid III 6-year-old dummy (49 CFR Part 572, Subpart N) and 
Hybrid III weighted 6-year-old dummy. When used in testing under this 
standard, the dummy specified in 49 CFR part 572, subpart N, weighted 
and unweighted, is clothed in a light-weight cotton stretch short-sleeve 
shirt and above-the-knee pants, and size 12\1/2\ M sneakers with rubber 
toe caps, uppers of dacron and cotton or nylon and a total mass of 0.453 
kg.
    S9.2 Preparing clothing. Clothing other than the shoes is machined-
washed in 71 [deg]C to 82 [deg]C and machine-dried at 49 [deg]C to 60 
[deg]C for 30 minutes.
    S9.3 Preparing dummies. (Subparts referenced in this section are of 
Part 572 of this chapter.)
    S9.3.1 When using the test dummies conforming to Part 572 Subpart C, 
I, J,

[[Page 647]]

or K, prepare the dummies as specified in this paragraph. Before being 
used in testing under this standard, dummies must be conditioned at any 
ambient temperature from 19 [deg]C to 25.5 [deg]C and at any relative 
humidity from 10 percent to 70 percent, for at least 4 hours.
    S9.3.2 When using the test dummies conforming to Part 572 Subparts N 
(weighted and unweighted), P, or R, prepare the dummies as specified in 
this paragraph. Before being used in testing under this standard, 
dummies must be conditioned at any ambient temperature from 20.6 [deg]C 
to 22.2 [deg]C and at any relative humidity from 10 percent to 70 
percent, for at least 4 hours.
    S10 Positioning the dummy and attaching the system belts.
    S10.1 Car beds. Place the test dummy in the car bed in the supine 
position with its midsagittal plane perpendicular to the center SORL of 
the standard seat assembly, in the case of an add-on car bed, or 
perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the specific vehicle shell or 
the specific vehicle, in the case of a built-in car bed. Position the 
dummy within the car bed in accordance with the instructions for child 
positioning that the bed manufacturer provided with the bed in 
accordance with S5.6.
    S10.2 Restraints other than car beds.
    S10.2.1 Newborn dummy and nine-month-old dummy. Position the test 
dummy according to the instructions for child positioning that the 
manufacturer provided with the system under S5.6.1 or S5.6.2, while 
conforming to the following:
    (a) Prior to placing the 9-month-old test dummy in the child 
restraint system, place the dummy in the supine position on a horizontal 
surface. While placing a hand on the center of the torso to prevent 
movement of the dummy torso, rotate the dummy legs upward by lifting the 
feet 90 degrees. Slowly release the legs but do not return them to the 
flat surface.
    (b)(1) When testing forward-facing child restraint systems, holding 
the 9-month-old test dummy torso upright until it contacts the system's 
design seating surface, place the 9-month-old test dummy in the seated 
position within the system with the mid-sagittal plane of the dummy 
head--
    (i) Coincident with the center SORL of the standard seating 
assembly, in the case of the add-on child restraint system, or
    (ii) Vertical and parallel to the longitudinal center line of the 
specific vehicle shell or the specific vehicle, in the case of a built-
in child restraint system.
    (2) When testing rear-facing child restraint systems, place the 
newborn, 9-month-old or 12-month-old dummy in the child restraint system 
so that the back of the dummy torso contacts the back support surface of 
the system. For a child restraint system which is equipped with a fixed 
or movable surface described in S5.2.2.2 which is being tested under the 
conditions of test configuration II, do not attach any of the child 
restraint belts unless they are an integral part of the fixed or movable 
surface. For all other child restraint systems and for a child restraint 
system with a fixed or movable surface which is being tested under the 
conditions of test configuration I, attach all appropriate child 
restraint belts and tighten them as specified in S6.1.2. Attach all 
appropriate vehicle belts and tighten them as specified in S6.1.2. 
Position each movable surface in accordance with the instructions that 
the manufacturer provided under S5.6.1 or S5.6.2. If the dummy's head 
does not remain in the proper position, tape it against the front of the 
seat back surface of the system by means of a single thickness of 6 mm-
wide paper masking tape placed across the center of the dummy's face.
    (c)(1)(i) When testing forward-facing child restraint systems, 
extend the arms of the 9-month-old or 12-month-old test dummy as far as 
possible in the upward vertical direction. Extend the legs of the 9-
month-old or 12-month-old test dummy as far as possible in the forward 
horizontal direction, with the dummy feet perpendicular to the 
centerline of the lower legs. Using a flat square surface with an area 
of 2,580 square mm, apply a force of 178 N, perpendicular to:
    (A) The plane of the back of the standard seat assembly, in the case 
of an add-on system, or
    (B) The back of the vehicle seat in the specific vehicle shell or 
the specific

[[Page 648]]

vehicle, in the case of a built-in system, first against the dummy 
crotch and then at the dummy thorax in the midsagittal plane of the 
dummy. For a child restraint system with a fixed or movable surface 
described in S5.2.2.2, which is being tested under the conditions of 
test configuration II, do not attach any of the child restraint belts 
unless they are an integral part of the fixed or movable surface. For 
all other child restraint systems and for a child restraint system with 
a fixed or movable surface which is being tested under the conditions of 
test configuration I, attach all appropriate child restraint belts and 
tighten them as specified in S6.1.2. Attach all appropriate vehicle 
belts and tighten them as specified in S6.1.2. Position each movable 
surface in accordance with the instructions that the manufacturer 
provided under S5.6.1 or S5.6.2.
    (ii) After the steps specified in paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this 
section, rotate each dummy limb downwards in the plane parallel to the 
dummy's midsagittal plane until the limb contacts a surface of the child 
restraint system or the standard seat assembly, in the case of an add-on 
system, or the specific vehicle shell or specific vehicle, in the case 
of a built-in system, as appropriate. Position the limbs, if necessary, 
so that limb placement does not inhibit torso or head movement in tests 
conducted under S6.
    (2) When testing rear-facing child restraint systems, extend the 
dummy's arms vertically upwards and then rotate each arm downward toward 
the dummy's lower body until the arm contacts a surface of the child 
restraint system or the standard seat assembly in the case of an add-on 
child restraint system, or the specific vehicle shell or the specific 
vehicle, in the case of a built-in child restraint system. Ensure that 
no arm is restrained from movement in other than the downward direction, 
by any part of the system or the belts used to anchor the system to the 
standard seat assembly, the specific shell, or the specific vehicle.
    S10.2.2 Three-year-old and six-year-old test dummy. Position the 
test dummy according to the instructions for child positioning that the 
restraint manufacturer provided with the system in accordance with 
S5.6.1 or S5.6.2, while conforming to the following:
    (a) Holding the test dummy torso upright until it contacts the 
system's design seating surface, place the test dummy in the seated 
position within the system with the midsagittal plane of the test dummy 
head--
    (1) Coincident with the center SORL of the standard seating 
assembly, in the case of the add-on child restraint system, or
    (2) Vertical and parallel to the longitudinal center line of the 
specific vehicle, in the case of a built-in child restraint system.
    (b) Extend the arms of the test dummy as far as possible in the 
upward vertical direction. Extend the legs of the dummy as far as 
possible in the forward horizontal direction, with the dummy feet 
perpendicular to the center line of the lower legs.
    (c) Using a flat square surface with an area of 2580 square 
millimeters, apply a force of 178 N, perpendicular to:
    (1) The plane of the back of the standard seat assembly, in the case 
of an add-on system, or
    (2) The back of the vehicle seat in the specific vehicle shell or 
the specific vehicle, in the case of a built-in system, first against 
the dummy crotch and then at the dummy thorax in the midsagittal plane 
of the dummy. For a child restraint system with a fixed or movable 
surface described in S5.2.2.2, which is being tested under the 
conditions of test configuration II, do not attach any of the child 
restraint belts unless they are an integral part of the fixed or movable 
surface. For all other child restraint systems and for a child restraint 
system with a fixed or movable surface which is being tested under the 
conditions of test configuration I, attach all appropriate child 
restraint belts and tighten them as specified in S6.1.2. Attach all 
appropriate vehicle belts and tighten them as specified in S6.1.2. 
Position each movable surface in accordance with the instructions that 
the manufacturer provided under S5.6.1 or S5.6.2.
    (d) After the steps specified in paragraph (c) of this section, 
rotate each dummy limb downwards in the plane parallel to the dummy's 
midsagittal plane until the limb contacts a surface

[[Page 649]]

of the child restraint system or the standard seat assembly, in the case 
of an add-on system, or the specific vehicle shell or specific vehicle, 
in the case of a built-in system, as appropriate. Position the limbs, if 
necessary, so that limb placement does not inhibit torso or head 
movement in tests conducted under S6.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18JN03.012


[[Page 650]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR05MR99.001


[[Page 651]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.012


[[Page 652]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.013


[[Page 653]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.100


[[Page 654]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.101


[[Page 655]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18JN03.013


[[Page 656]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.102


[[Page 657]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.103


[[Page 658]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.104


[[Page 659]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.105


[[Page 660]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.106


[[Page 661]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.107


[[Page 662]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.108


[[Page 663]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.109


[[Page 664]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27NO96.014


[[Page 665]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR05MR99.004


[[Page 666]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09MR04.023


[44 FR 72147, Dec. 13, 1979]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.213, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 42601, July 16, 2004, Sec. 571.213 
was amended by revising S5(d), S7.1.2(e), S9.1(f) and S9.3.2, and 
removing S7.1.1(e), effective Jan. 12, 2005. For the convenience of the 
user, the revised text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 571.213  Standard No. 213; Child restraint systems.

                                * * * * *

    S5 * * *
    (d) Each child restraint tested with a Part 572 Subpart S dummy need 
not meet S5.1.2 and S5.1.3.

                                * * * * *

    S7.1.2 * * *
    (e) A child restraint that is manufactured on or after August 1, 
2005, that is recommended by its manufacturer in accordance with S5.5 
for use either by children in a specified mass range that includes any 
children having a mass greater than 22.7 kg or by children in a 
specified height range that includes any children whose erect standing 
height is greater than 1100 mm is tested with a part 572 subpart S 
dummy.

                                * * * * *

    S9.1 * * *
    (f) Hybrid III 6-year-old dummy (49 CFR Part 572, Subpart N) and 
Hybrid III 6-year-old weighted dummy (49 CFR Part 572, Subpart S). When 
used in testing under this standard, the dummies specified in 49 CFR 
Part 572, Subpart N and Subpart S, are clothed in a light-weight cotton 
stretch short-sleeve shirt and above-the-knee pants, and size 12\1/2\ M 
sneakers with rubber toe caps, uppers of dacron and cotton or nylon and 
a total mass of 0.453 kg.

                                * * * * *

    S9.3.2 When using the test dummies conforming to Part 572 Subparts 
N, P, R, or S, prepare the dummies as specified in this paragraph. 
Before being used in testing under this standard, dummies must be 
conditioned at any ambient temperature from 20.6[deg] to 22.2 [deg]C and 
at any relative humidity from 10 percent to 70 percent, for at least 4 
hours.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 571.214  Standard No. 214; Side impact protection.

    S1. Scope and purpose.

[[Page 667]]

    (a) Scope. This standard specifies performance requirements for 
protection of occupants in side impact crashes.
    (b) Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the risk of 
serious and fatal injury to occupants of passenger cars, multipurpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks and buses in side impact crashes by 
specifying vehicle crashworthiness requirements in terms of 
accelerations measured on anthropomorphic dummies in test crashes, by 
specifying strength requirements for side doors, and by other means.
    S2. This standard applies to--
    (a) Passenger cars;
    (b) Effective September 1, 1993, sections S3(a), S3(e), S3.1 through 
S3.2.3, and S4 of the standard apply to multipurpose passenger vehicles, 
trucks, and buses with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less, except for walk-
in vans; and
    (c) Effective September 1, 1998, sections S3(f) and S5 of the 
standard apply to multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with 
a GVWR of 6,000 pounds or less, except for walk-in vans, motor homes, 
tow trucks, dump trucks, ambulances and other emergency rescue/medical 
vehicles (including vehicles with fire-fighting equipment), vehicles 
equipped with wheelchair lifts, and vehicles which have no doors or 
exclusively have doors that are designed to be easily attached or 
removed so the vehicle can be operated without doors.
    S2.1 Definitions.
    Contoured means, with respect to a door, that the lower portion of 
its front or rear edge is curved upward, typically to conform to a wheel 
well.
    Double side doors means a pair of hinged doors with the lock and 
latch mechanisms located where the door lips overlap.
    Walk-in van means a van in which a person can enter the occupant 
compartment in an upright position.
    S3. Requirements. (a)(1) Except as provided in section S3(e), each 
passenger car shall be able to meet the requirements of either, at the 
manufacturer's option, S3.1 or S3.2, when any of its side doors that can 
be used for occupant egress is tested according to S4.
    (2) Except as provided in section S3(e), each multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck and bus manufactured on or after September 1, 1994 shall 
be able to meet the requirements of either, at the manufacturer's 
option, S3.1 or S3.2, when any of its side doors that can be used for 
occupant egress is tested according to S4.
    (b) When tested under the conditions of S6, each passenger car 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1996, shall meet the requirements 
of S5.1, S5.2, and S5.3 in a 53 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1.0 km/h impact 
in which the car is struck on either side by a moving deformable 
barrier. 49 CFR part 572, subpart F test dummies are placed in front and 
rear outboard seating position on the struck side of the car. However, 
the rear seat requirements do not apply to passenger cars with a 
wheelbase greater than 3,300 mm, or to passenger cars that have rear 
seating areas that are so small that 49 CFR part 572, subpart F test 
dummies cannot be accommodated according to the positioning procedure 
specified in S7.
    (c)-(d) [Reserved]
    (e) A vehicle need not meet the requirements of sections S3.1 or 
S3.2 for--
    (1) Any side door located so that no point on a ten-inch horizontal 
longitudinal line passing through and bisected by the H-point of a 
manikin placed in any seat, with the seat adjusted to any position and 
the seat back adjusted as specified in Section S6.4, falls within the 
transverse, horizontal projection of the door's opening,
    (2) Any side door located so that no point on a ten-inch horizontal 
longitudinal line passing through and bisected by the H-point of a 
manikin placed in any seat recommended by the manufacturer for 
installation in a location for which seat anchorage hardware is 
provided, with the seat adjusted to any position and the seat back 
adjusted as specified in section S6.4, falls within the transverse, 
horizontal projection of the door's opening,
    (3) Any side door located so that a portion of a seat, with the seat 
adjusted to any position and the seat back adjusted as specified in 
section S6.4, falls within the transverse, horizontal protection of the 
door's opening, but a longitudinal vertical plane tangent to the 
outboard side of the seat

[[Page 668]]

cushion is more than 10 inches from the innermost point on the inside 
surface of the door at a height between the H-point and shoulder 
reference point (as shown in figure 1 of the Federal Motor Vehicle 
Safety Standard No. 210) and longitudinally between the front edge of 
the cushion with the seat adjusted to its forwardmost position and the 
rear edge of the cushion with the seat adjusted to its rearmost 
position.
    (4) Any side door that is designed to be easily attached to or 
removed (e.g., using simple hand tools such as pliers and/or a screw 
driver) from a motor vehicle manufactured for operation without doors.
    (f) When tested according to the conditions of S6, each multipurpose 
passenger vehicle, truck, and bus manufactured on or after September 1, 
1998, shall meet the requirements of S5.1, S5.2, and S5.3 in a 53 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 1.0 km/h impact in which the vehicle is struck on 
either side by a moving deformable barrier. A 49 CFR part 572, subpart F 
test dummy is placed in the front outboard seating position on the 
struck side of the vehicle, and if the vehicle is equipped with rear 
seats, then another 49 CFR part 572, subpart F test dummy is placed in 
the outboard seating position of the second seat on the struck side of 
the vehicle. However, the second seat requirements do not apply to side-
facing seats or to vehicles that are so small that the 49 CFR part 572, 
subpart F test dummy cannot be accommodated according to the procedure 
specified in S7.
    S3.1 With any seats that may affect load upon or deflection of the 
side of the vehicle removed from the vehicle, each vehicle must be able 
to meet the requirements of S3.1.1 through S3.1.3.
    S3.1.1 Initial crush resistance. The initial crush resistance shall 
not be less than 2,250 pounds.
    S3.1.2 Intermediate crush resistance. The intermediate crush 
resistance shall not be less than 3,500 pounds.
    S3.1.3 Peak crush resistance. The peak crush resistance shall not be 
less than two times the curb weight of the vehicle or 7,000 pounds, 
whichever is less.
    S3.2 With seats installed in the vehicle, and located in any 
horizontal or vertical position to which they can be adjusted and at any 
seat back angle to which they can be adjusted, each vehicle must be able 
to meet the requirements of S3.2.1 through S3.2.3.
    S3.2.1 Initial crush resistance. The initial crush resistance shall 
not be less than 2,250 pounds.
    S3.2.2 Intermediate crush resistance. The intermediate crush 
resistance shall not be less than 4,375 pounds.
    S3.2.3 Peak crush resistance. The peak crush resistance shall not be 
less than three and one half times the curb weight of the vehicle or 
12,000 pounds, whichever is less.
    S4. Test procedures. The following procedures apply to determining 
compliance with paragraph S3:
    (a) Place side windows in their uppermost position and all doors in 
locked position. Place the sill of the side of the vehicle opposite to 
the side being tested against a rigid unyielding vertical surface. Fix 
the vehicle rigidly in position by means of tiedown attachments located 
at or forward of the front wheel centerline and at or rearward of the 
rear wheel centerline.
    (b) Prepare a loading device consisting of a rigid steel cylinder or 
semicylinder 305 mm (12 inches) in diameter with an edge radius of 13 mm 
(\1/2\ inch). The length of the loading device shall be such that--
    (1) For doors with windows, the top surface of the loading device is 
at least 13 mm (\1/2\ inch) above the bottom edge of the door window 
opening but not of a length that will cause contact with any structure 
above the bottom edge of the door window opening during the test.
    (2) For doors without windows, the top surface of the loading device 
is at the same height above the ground as when the loading device is 
positioned in accordance with paragraph (b)(1) of this section for 
purposes of testing a front door with windows on the same vehicle.
    (c) Locate the loading device as shown in Figure 1 (side view) of 
this section so that--
    (1) Its longitudinal axis is vertical.
    (2) Except as provided in paragraphs (c)(2) (i) and (ii) of this 
section, its longitudinal axis is laterally opposite the midpoint of a 
horizontal line drawn

[[Page 669]]

across the outer surface of the door 127 mm (5 inches) above the lowest 
point of the door, exclusive of any decorative or protective molding 
that is not permanently affixed to the door panel.
    (i) For contoured doors on trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger 
vehicles with a GVWR of 4,545 kg (10,000 pounds) or less, if the length 
of the horizontal line specified in (c)(2) is not equal to or greater 
than 559 mm (22 inches), the line is moved vertically up the side of the 
door to the point at which the line is 559 mm (22 inches) long. The 
longitudinal axis of the loading device is then located laterally 
opposite the midpoint of that line.
    (ii) For double side doors on trucks, buses, and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 4,545 kg (10,000 pounds) or less, its 
longitudinal axis is laterally opposite the midpoint of a horizontal 
line drawn across the outer surface of the double door span, 127 mm (5 
inches) above the lowest point on the doors, exclusive of any decorative 
or protective molding that is not permanently affixed to the door panel.
    (3) Except as provided in paragraphs (c)(3) (i) and (ii) of this 
section, its bottom surface is in the same horizontal plane as the 
horizontal line drawn across the outer surface of the door 127 mm (5 
inches) above the lowest point of the door, exclusive of any decorative 
or protective molding that is not permanently affixed to the door panel.
    (i) For contoured doors on trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger 
vehicles with a GVWR of 4,545 kg (10,000 pounds) or less, its bottom 
surface is in the lowest horizontal plane such that every point on the 
lateral projection of the bottom surface of the device on the door is at 
least 127 mm (5 inches), horizontally and vertically, from any edge of 
the door panel, exclusive of any decorative or protective molding that 
is not permanently affixed to the door panel.
    (ii) For double side doors, its bottom surface is in the same 
horizontal plane as a horizontal line drawn across the outer surface of 
the double door span, 127 mm (5 inches) above the lowest point of the 
doors, exclusive of any decorative or protective molding that is not 
permanently affixed to the door panel.
    (d) Using the loading device, apply a load to the outer surface of 
the door in an inboard direction normal to a vertical plane along the 
vehicle's longitudinal centerline. Apply the load continuously such that 
the loading device travel rate does not exceed one-half inch per second 
until the loading device travels 18 inches. Guide the loading device to 
prevent it from being rotated or displaced from its direction of travel. 
The test must be completed within 120 seconds.
    (e) Record applied load versus displacement of the loading device, 
either continuously or in increments of not more than 1 inch or 200 
pounds for the entire crush distance of 18 inches.
    (f) Determine the initial crush resistance, intermediate crush 
resistance, and peak crush resistance as follows:
    (1) From the results recorded in paragraph (e) of this section, plot 
a curve of load versus displacement and obtain the integral of the 
applied load with respect to the crush distances specified in paragraphs 
(f) (2) and (3) of this section. These quantities, expressed in inch-
pounds and divided by the specified crush distances, represent the 
average forces in pounds required to deflect the door those distances.
    (2) The initial crush resistance is the average force required to 
deform the door over the initial 6 inches of crush.
    (3) The intermediate crush resistance is the average force required 
to deform the door over the initial 12 inches of crush.
    (4) The peak crush resistance is the largest force recorded over the 
entire 18-inch crush distance.

[[Page 670]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.110

    S5. Dynamic performance requirements.
    S5.1 Thorax. The Thoracic Trauma Index (TTI(d)) shall not exceed:
    (a) 85 g for a passenger car with four side doors, and for any 
multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, or bus; and,
    (b) 90 g for a passenger car with two side doors, when calculated in 
accordance with the following formula:

TTI(d) = 1/2 (G<INF>R</INF> + G<INF>LS</INF>)


The term ``G<INF>R</INF>'' is the greater of the peak accelerations of 
either the upper or lower rib, expressed in g's and the term 
``G<INF>LS</INF>'' is the lower spine (T12) peak acceleration, expressed 
in g's. The peak acceleration values are obtained in accordance with the 
procedure specified in S6.13.5.
    S5.2 Pelvis. The peak lateral acceleration of the pelvis, as 
measured in accordance with S6.13.5, shall not exceed 130 g's.
    S5.3 Door opening.
    S5.3.1 Any side door, which is struck by the moving deformable 
barrier, shall not separate totally from the car.

[[Page 671]]

    S5.3.2 Any door (including a rear hatchback or tailgate), which is 
not struck by the moving deformable barrier, shall meet the following 
requirements:
    S5.3.2.1 The door shall not disengage from the latched position;
    S5.3.2.2 The latch shall not separate from the striker, and the 
hinge components shall not separate from each other or from their 
attachment to the vehicle.
    S5.3.2.3 Neither the latch nor the hinge systems of the door shall 
pull out of their anchorages.
    S6. Test conditions.
    S6.1 Test weight. Each vehicle is loaded to its unloaded vehicle 
weight, plus 300 pounds or its rated cargo and luggage capacity 
(whichever is less), secured in the luggage or load-carrying area, plus 
the weight of the necessary anthropomorphic test dummies. Any added test 
equipment is located away from impact areas in secure places in the 
vehicle. The vehicle's fuel system is filled in accordance with the 
following procedure. With the test vehicle on a level surface, pump the 
fuel from the vehicle's fuel tank and then operate the engine until it 
stops. Then, add Stoddard solvent to the test vehicle's fuel tank in an 
amount which is equal to not less than 92 percent and not more than 94 
percent of the fuel tank's usable capacity stated by the vehicle's 
manufacturer. In addition, add the amount of Stoddard solvent needed to 
fill the entire fuel system from the fuel tank through the engine's 
induction system.
    S6.2 Vehicle test attitude. Determine the distance between a level 
surface and a standard reference point on the test vehicle's body, 
directly above each wheel opening, when the vehicle is in its ``as 
delivered'' condition. The ``as delivered'' condition is the vehicle as 
received at the test site, filled to 100 percent of all fluid capacities 
and with all tires inflated to the manufacturer's specifications listed 
on the vehicle's tire placard. Determine the distance between the same 
level surface and the same standard reference points in the vehicle's 
``fully loaded condition.'' The ``fully loaded condition'' is the test 
vehicle loaded in accordance with S6.1. The load placed in the cargo 
area is centered over the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle. The 
pretest vehicle attitude is equal to either the as delivered or fully 
loaded attitude or between the as delivered attitude and the fully 
loaded attitude.
    S6.3 Adjustable seats. Adjustable seats are placed in the adjustment 
position midway between the forward most and rearmost positions, and if 
separately adjustable in a vertical direction, are at the lowest 
position. If an adjustment position does not exist midway between the 
forwardmost and rearmost positions, the closest adjustment position to 
the rear of the midpoint is used.
    S6.4 Adjustable seat back placement. Place adjustable seat backs in 
the manufacturer's nominal design riding position in the manner 
specified by the manufacturer. If the position is not specified, set the 
seat back at the first detent rearward of 25[deg] from the vertical. 
Place each adjustable head restraint in its highest adjustment position. 
Position adjustable lumbar supports so that they are set in their 
released, i.e., full back position.
    S6.5 Adjustable steering wheels. Adjustable steering controls are 
adjusted so that the steering wheel hub is at the geometric center of 
the locus it describes when it is moved through its full range of 
driving positions.
    S6.6 Windows. Movable vehicle windows and vents are placed in the 
fully closed position on the struck side of the vehicle.
    S6.7 Convertible tops. Convertibles and open-body type vehicles have 
the top, if any, in place in the closed passenger compartment 
configuration.
    S6.8 Doors. Doors, including any rear hatchback or tailgate, are 
fully closed and latched but not locked.
    S6.9 Transmission and brake engagement. For a vehicle equipped with 
a manual transmission, the transmission is placed in second gear. For a 
vehicle equipped with an automatic transmission, the transmission is 
placed in neutral. For all vehicles, the parking brake is engaged.
    S6.10 Moving deformable barrier. The moving deformable barrier 
conforms to the dimensions shown in Figure 2 and specified in part 587.

[[Page 672]]

    S6.11 Impact reference line. Place a vertical reference line at the 
location described below on the side of the vehicle that will be struck 
by the moving deformable barrier:
    S6.11.1 Passenger cars.
    (a) For vehicles with a wheelbase of 114 inches or less, 37 inches 
forward of the center of the vehicle's wheelbase.
    (b) For vehicles with a wheelbase greater than 114 inches, 20 inches 
rearward of the centerline of the vehicle's front axle.
    S6.11.2 Multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses.
    (a) For vehicles with a wheelbase of 98 inches or less, 12 inches 
rearward of the centerline of the vehicle's front axle, except as 
otherwise specified in paragraph (d) of this section.
    (b) For vehicles with a wheelbase of greater than 98 inches but not 
greater than 114 inches, 37 inches forward of the center of the 
vehicle's wheelbase, except as otherwise specified in paragraph (d) of 
this section.
    (c) For vehicles with a wheelbase greater than 114 inches, 20 inches 
rearward of the centerline of the vehicle's front axle, except as 
otherwise specified in paragraph (d) of this section.
    (d) At the manufacturer's option, for different wheelbase versions 
of the same model vehicle, the impact reference line may be located by 
the following:
    (1) Select the shortest wheelbase vehicle of the different wheelbase 
versions of the same model and locate on it the impact reference line at 
the location described in (a), (b) or (c) of this section, as 
appropriate;
    (2) Measure the distance between the seating reference point (SgRP) 
and the impact reference line;
    (3) Maintain the same distance between the SgRP and the impact 
reference line for the version being tested as that between the SgRP and 
the impact reference line for the shortest wheelbase version of the 
model.
    (e) For the compliance test, the impact reference line will be 
located using the procedure used by the manufacturer as the basis for 
its certification of compliance with the requirements of this standard. 
If the manufacturer did not use any of the procedures in this section, 
or does not specify a procedure when asked by the agency, the agency may 
locate the impact reference line using either procedure.
    S6.12 Impact configuration. The test vehicle (vehicle A in Figure 3) 
is stationary. The line of forward motion of the moving deformable 
barrier (vehicle B in Figure 3) forms an angle of 63 degrees with the 
centerline of the test vehicle. The longitudinal centerline of the 
moving deformable barrier is perpendicular to the longitudinal 
centerline of the test vehicle when the barrier strikes the test 
vehicle. In a test in which the test vehicle is to be struck on its left 
(right) side: All wheels of the moving deformable barrier are positioned 
at an angle of 27 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 degrees to the right (left) of 
the centerline of the moving deformable barrier; and the left (right) 
forward edge of the moving deformable barrier is aligned so that a 
longitudinal plane tangent to that side passes through the impact 
reference line within a tolerance of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 inches when 
the barrier strikes the test vehicle.
    S6.13 Anthropomorphic test dummies.
    S6.13.1 The anthropomorphic test dummies used for evaluation of a 
vehicle's side impact protection conform to the requirements of subpart 
F of part 572 of this chapter. In a test in which the test vehicle is to 
be struck on its left side, each dummy is to be configured and 
instrumented to be struck on its left side, in accordance with subpart F 
of part 572. In a test in which the test vehicle is to be struck on its 
right side, each dummy is to be configured and instrumented to be struck 
on its right side, in accordance with subpart F of part 572.
    S6.13.2 Each part 572, subpart F test dummy specified is clothed in 
formfitting cotton stretch garments with short sleeves and midcalf 
length pants. Each foot of the test dummy is equipped with a size 11EEE 
shoe, which meets the configuration size, sole, and heel thickness 
specifications of MIL-S-13192 (1976) and weighs 1.25 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 pounds.
    S6.13.3 Limb joints are set at between 1 and 2 g's. Leg joints are 
adjusted with the torso in the supine position.
    S6.13.4 The stabilized temperature of the test dummy at the time of 
the

[[Page 673]]

side impact test shall be at any temperature between 66 degrees F. and 
78 degrees F.
    S6.13.5 The acceleration data from the accelerometers mounted on the 
ribs, spine and pelvis of the test dummy are processed with the FIR100 
software specified in 49 CFR 572.44(d). The data are processed in the 
following manner:
    S6.13.5.1 Filter the data with a 300 Hz, SAE Class 180 filter;
    S6.13.5.2 Subsample the data to a 1600 Hz sampling rate;
    S6.13.5.3 Remove the bias from the subsampled data, and
    S6.13.5.4 Filter the data with the FIR100 software specified in 49 
CFR 572.44(d), which has the following characteristics--
    S6.13.5.4.1 Passband frequency 100 Hz.
    S6.13.5.4.2 Stopband frequency 189 Hz.
    S6.13.5.4.3 Stopband gain -50 db.
    S6.13.5.4.4 Passband ripple 0.0225 db.

[[Page 674]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.111


[[Page 675]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.112

    S7. Positioning procedure for the part 572 subpart F test dummy. 
Position a correctly configured test dummy, conforming to subpart F of 
part 572 of this chapter, in the front outboard seating position on the 
side of the test vehicle to be struck by the moving deformable barrier 
and, if the vehicle has a second

[[Page 676]]

seat, position another conforming test dummy in the second seat outboard 
position on the same side of the vehicle, as specified in S7.1 through 
S7.4. Each test dummy is restrained using all available belt systems in 
all seating positions where such belt restraints are provided. In 
addition, any folding armrest is retracted.
    S7.1 Torso. For a test dummy in any seating position, hold the 
dummy's head in place and push laterally on the non-impacted side of the 
upper torso in a single stroke with a force of 15-20 lb. towards the 
impacted side.
    S7.1.1 For a test dummy in the driver position.
    (a) For a bench seat. The upper torso of the test dummy rests 
against the seat back. The midsagittal plane of the test dummy is 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, and 
passes through the center of the steering wheel.
    (b) For a bucket seat. The upper torso of the test dummy rests 
against the seat back. The midsagittal plane of the test dummy is 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, and 
coincides with the longitudinal centerline of the bucket seat.
    S7.1.2 For a test dummy in the front outboard passenger position.
    (a) For a bench seat. The upper torso of the test dummy rests 
against the seat back. The midsagittal plane of the test dummy is 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, and the 
same distance from the vehicle's longitudinal centerline as would be the 
midsagittal plane of a test dummy positioned in the driver position 
under S7.1.1.
    (b) For a bucket seat. The upper torso of the test dummy rests 
against the seat back. The midsagittal plane of the test dummy is 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, and 
coincides with the longitudinal centerline of the bucket seat.
    S7.1.3 For a test dummy in either of the rear outboard passenger 
positions.
    (a) For a bench seat. The upper torso of the test dummy rests 
against the seat back. The midsagittal plane of the test dummy is 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, and, if 
possible, the same distance from the vehicle's longitudinal centerline 
as the midsagittal plane of a test dummy positioned in the driver 
position under S7.1.1. If it is not possible to position the test dummy 
so that its midsagittal plane is parallel to the vehicle longitudinal 
centerline and is at this distance from the vehicle's longitudinal 
centerline, the test dummy is positioned so that some portion of the 
test dummy just touches, at or above the seat level, the side surface of 
the vehicle, such as the upper quarter panel, an armrest, or any 
interior trim (i.e., either the broad trim panel surface or a smaller, 
localized trim feature).
    (b) For a bucket or contoured seat. The upper torso of the test 
dummy rests against the seat back. The midsagittal plane of the test 
dummy is vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, 
and coincides with the longitudinal centerline of the bucket or 
contoured seat.
    S7.2 Pelvis.
    S7.2.1 H-point. The H-points of each test dummy coincide within \1/
2\ inch in the vertical dimension and \1/2\ inch in the horizontal 
dimension of a point \1/4\ inch below the position of the H-point 
determined by using the equipment for the 50th percentile and procedures 
specified in SAE J826 (1980) (incorporated by reference; see Sec. 
571.5), except that Table 1 of SAE J826 is not applicable. The length of 
the lower leg and thigh segments of the H-point machine are adjusted to 
16.3 and 15.8 inches, respectively.
    S7.2.2 Pelvic angle. As determined using the pelvic angle gauge (GM 
drawing 78051-532 incorporated by reference in part 572, subpart E of 
this chapter) which is inserted into the H-point gauging hole of the 
dummy, the angle of the plane of the surface on the lumbar-pelvic 
adaptor on which the lumbar spine attaches is 23 to 25 degrees from the 
horizontal, sloping upward toward the front of the vehicle.
    S7.3 Legs.
    S7.3.1 For a test dummy in the driver position. The upper legs of 
each test dummy rest against the seat cushion to the extent permitted by 
placement of the feet. The left knee of the dummy is positioned such 
that the distance from the outer surface of the knee pivot bolt to the 
dummy's midsagittal

[[Page 677]]

plane is six inches. To the extent practicable, the left leg of the test 
dummy is in a vertical longitudinal plane.
    S7.3.2 For a test dummy in the outboard passenger positions. The 
upper legs of each test dummy rest against the seat cushion to the 
extent permitted by placement of the feet. The initial distance between 
the outboard knee clevis flange surfaces is 11.5 inches. To the extent 
practicable, both legs of the test dummies in outboard passenger 
positions are in vertical longitudinal planes. Final adjustment to 
accommodate placement of feet in accordance with S7.4 for various 
passenger compartment configurations is permitted.
    S7.4 Feet.
    S7.4.1 For a test dummy in the driver position. The right foot of 
the test dummy rests on the undepressed accelerator with the heel 
resting as far forward as possible on the floorpan. The left foot is set 
perpendicular to the lower leg with the heel resting on the floorpan in 
the same lateral line as the right heel.
    S7.4.2 For a test dummy in the front outboard passenger position. 
The feet of the test dummy are placed on the vehicle's toeboard with the 
heels resting on the floorpan as close as possible to the intersection 
of the toeboard and floorpan. If the feet cannot be placed flat on the 
toeboard, they are set perpendicular to the lower legs and placed as far 
forward as possible so that the heels rest on the floorpan.
    S7.4.3 For a test dummy in either of the rear outboard passenger 
positions. The feet of the test dummy are placed flat on the floorpan 
and beneath the front seat as far as possible without front seat 
interference. If necessary, the distance between the knees can be 
changed in order to place the feet beneath the seat.
    S8. Phase-in of dynamic test and performance requirements.
    S8.1-S8.2 [Reserved]
    S8.3 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1995 and 
before September 1, 1996.
    S8.3.1 The number of passenger cars complying with the requirements 
of S3(c) shall be not less than 40 percent of:
    (a) The average annual production of passenger cars manufactured on 
or after September 1, 1992, and before September 1, 1995, by each 
manufacturer, or
    (b) The manufacturer's annual production of passenger cars during 
the period specified in S8.3.
    S8.4 Passenger cars produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S8.4.1 For the purposes of calculating average annual production of 
passenger cars for each manufacturer and the number of passenger cars 
manufactured by each manufacturer under S8.1, S8.2, and S8.3, a 
passenger car produced by more than one manufacturer shall be attributed 
to a single manufacturer as follows, subject to S8.4.2:
    (a) A passenger car which is imported shall be attributed to the 
importer.
    (b) A passenger car manufactured in the United States by more than 
one manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be 
attributed to the manufacturer which markets the vehicle.
    S8.4.2 A passenger car produced by more than one manufacturer shall 
be attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 586, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S8.4.1.

[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, as amended at 45 FR 17018, Mar. 17, 1980; 55 
FR 45752, Oct. 30, 1990; 56 FR 27437, June 14, 1991; 56 FR 47011, Sept. 
17, 1991; 57 FR 21615, May 21, 1992; 57 FR 30921 and 30922, July 13, 
1992; 58 FR 14169, Mar. 16, 1993; 60 FR 38761, July 28, 1995; 60 FR 
57839, Nov. 22, 1995; 63 FR 16140, Apr. 2, 1998; 68 FR 67083, Dec. 1, 
2003]


<R05>
Sec. 571.215  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 571.216  Standard No. 216; Roof crush resistance.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes strength requirements for the 
passenger compartment roof.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries due to the crushing of the roof into the occupant compartment 
in rollover crashes.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses

[[Page 678]]

with a GVWR of 2722 kilograms or less. However, it does not apply to--
    (a) School buses;
    (b) Vehicles that conform to the rollover test requirements (S5.3) 
of Standard No. 208 (Sec. 571.208) by means that require no action by 
vehicle occupants; or
    (c) Convertibles, except for optional compliance with the standard 
as an alternative to the rollover test requirements in S5.3 of Standard 
No. 208.
    S4. Definitions.
    Altered roof means the replacement roof on a motor vehicle whose 
original roof has been removed, in part or in total, and replaced by a 
roof that is higher than the original roof. The replacement roof on a 
motor vehicle whose original roof has been replaced, in whole or in 
part, by a roof that consists of glazing materials, such as those in T-
tops and sunroofs, and is located at the level of the original roof, is 
not considered to be an altered roof.
    Raised roof means, with respect to a roof which includes an area 
that protrudes above the surrounding exterior roof structure, that 
protruding area of the roof.
    Roof over the front seat area means the portion of the roof, 
including windshield trim, forward of a transverse vertical plane 
passing through a point 162 mm rearward of the SgRP of the rearmost 
front outboard seating position.
    Windshield trim means molding of any material between the windshield 
glazing and the exterior roof surface, including material that covers a 
part of either the windshield glazing or exterior roof surface.
    S5. Requirements. Subject to S5.1, when the test device described in 
S6 is used to apply a force to either side of the forward edge of a 
vehicle's roof in accordance with the procedures of S7, the lower 
surface of the test device must not move more than 127 millimeters. The 
applied force in Newtons is equal to 1.5 times the unloaded vehicle 
weight of the vehicle, measured in kilograms and multiplied by 9.8, but 
does not exceed 22,240 Newtons for passenger cars. Both the left and 
right front portions of the vehicle's roof structure must be capable of 
meeting the requirements. A particular vehicle need not meet further 
requirements after being tested at one location.
    S5.1 For multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses that have 
a raised roof or altered roof, manufacturers have the option of using 
the test procedures of S8 instead of the procedures of S7 until October 
25, 2000. The option of using the test procedures of S8 ceases to be 
available on that date.
    S6. Test device. The test device is a rigid unyielding block whose 
lower surface is a flat rectangle measuring 762 millimeters by 1,829 
millimeters.
    S7. Test procedure. Each vehicle must be capable of meeting the 
requirements of S5 when tested in accordance with the procedure in S7.1 
through 7.6.
    S7.1 Place the sills or the chassis frame of the vehicle on a rigid 
horizontal surface, fix the vehicle rigidly in position, close all 
windows, close and lock all doors, and secure any convertible top or 
removable roof structure in place over the occupant compartment. Remove 
roof racks or other non-structural components.
    S7.2 Orient the test device as shown in Figure 1 of this section, so 
that--
    (a) Its longitudinal axis is at a forward angle (in side view) of 5 
degrees below the horizontal, and is parallel to the vertical plane 
through the vehicle's longitudinal centerline;
    (b) Its transverse axis is at an outboard angle, in the front view 
projection, of 25 degrees below the horizontal.
    S7.3 Maintaining the orientation specified in S7.2--
    (a) Lower the test device until it initially makes contact with the 
roof of the vehicle.
    (b) Position the test device so that--
    (1) The longitudinal centerline on its lower surface is on the 
initial point of contact, or on the center of the initial contact area, 
with the roof; and
    (2) Except as specified in S7.4, the midpoint of the forward edge of 
the lower surface of the test device is within 10 mm of the transverse 
vertical plane 254 mm forward of the forwardmost point on the exterior 
surface of the roof, including windshield trim, that lies in the 
longitudinal vertical plane passing through the vehicle's longitudinal 
centerline.
    S7.4 If the vehicle being tested is a multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck,

[[Page 679]]

or bus that has a raised roof or altered roof, and the initial contact 
point of the test device is on the raised roof or altered roof to the 
rear of the roof over the front seat area, the plate is positioned so 
that the midpoint of the rearward edge of the lower surface of the test 
device is within 10 mm of the transverse vertical plane located at the 
rear of the roof over the front seat area.
    S7.5 Apply force so that the test device moves in a downward 
direction perpendicular to the lower surface of the test device at a 
rate of not more than 13 millimeters per second until reaching the force 
level specified in S5. Guide the test device so that throughout the test 
it moves, without rotation, in a straight line with its lower surface 
oriented as specified in S7.2(a) and S7.2(b). Complete the test within 
120 seconds.
    S7.6 Measure the distance that the test device moved, i.e., the 
distance between the original location of the lower surface of the test 
device and its location as the force level specified in S5 is reached.
    S8 Alternate test procedure for multipurpose passenger vehicles, 
trucks and buses that have a raised roof or altered roof manufactured 
until October 25, 2000 (see S5.1). Each vehicle shall be capable of 
meeting the requirements of S5 when tested in accordance with the 
following procedure.
    S8.1 Place the sills or the chassis frame of the vehicle on a rigid 
horizontal surface, fix the vehicle rigidly in position, close all 
windows, close and lock all doors, and secure any convertible top or 
removable roof structure in place over the passenger compartment.
    S8.2 Orient the test device as shown in Figure 2, so that--
    (a) Its longitudinal axis is at a forward angle (side view) of 
5[deg] below the horizontal, and is parallel to the vertical plane 
through the vehicle's longitudinal centerline;
    (b) Its lateral axis is at a lateral outboard angle, in the front 
view projection, of 25[deg] below the horizontal;
    (c) Its lower surface is tangent to the surface of the vehicle; and
    (d) The initial contact point, or center of the initial contact 
area, is on the longitudinal centerline of the lower surface of the test 
device and 254 millimeters from the forwardmost point of that 
centerline.
    S8.3 Apply force in a downward direction perpendicular to the lower 
surface of the test device at a rate of not more than 13 millimeters per 
second until reaching a force in Newtons of 1\1/2\ times the unloaded 
vehicle weight of the tested vehicle, measured in kilograms and 
multiplied by 9.8. Complete the test within 120 seconds. Guide the test 
device so that throughout the test it moves, without rotation, in a 
straight line with its lower surface oriented as specified in S8.2(a) 
through S8.2(d).
    S8.4 Measure the distance that the test device moves, i.e., the 
distance between the original location of the lower surface of the test 
device and its location as the force level specified in S8.3 is reached.

[[Page 680]]

                        Figure 1 to Sec. 571.216
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27AP99.032


[[Page 681]]



                        Figure 2 to Sec. 571.216
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA00.089


[36 FR 23300, Dec. 8, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 21930, Aug. 14, 1973; 56 
FR 15517, Apr. 17, 1991; 58 FR 5633, Jan. 22, 1993; 60 FR 13647, Mar. 
14, 1995; 64 FR 22578, Apr. 27, 1999; 65 FR 4581, Jan. 31, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 571.217  Standard No. 217; Bus emergency exits and window retention 
and release.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes requirements for the retention 
of windows other than windshields in buses, and establishes operating 
forces, opening dimensions, and markings for bus emergency exits.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to minimize the 
likelihood of occupants being thrown from the bus and to provide a means 
of readily accessible emergency egress.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to buses, except buses 
manufactured for the purpose of transporting persons under physical 
restraint.
    S4. Definitions. Adjacent seat means a designated seating position 
located so that some portion of its occupant space is not more than 10 
inches from an emergency exit, for a distance of at least 15 inches 
measured horizontally and parallel to the exit.
    Daylight opening means the maximum unobstructed opening of an 
emergency exit when viewed from a direction perpendicular to the plane 
of the opening.
    Mid-point of the passenger compartment means any point on a vertical 
transverse plane bisecting the vehicle longitudinal centerline that 
extends between the two vertical transverse planes which define the 
foremost and rearmost limits of the passenger compartment.
    Occupant space means the space directly above the seat and footwell, 
bounded vertically by the ceiling and horizontally by the normally 
positioned seat back and the nearest obstruction of occupant motion in 
the direction the seat faces.
    Passenger compartment means space within the school bus interior 
that is between a vertical transverse plane located 76 centimeters in 
front of the forwardmost passenger seating reference point and a 
vertical transverse plane tangent to the rear interior wall of the bus 
at the vehicle centerline.
    Post and roof bow panel space means the area between two adjacent 
post and roof bows.

[[Page 682]]

    Push-out window means a vehicle window designed to open outward to 
provide for emergency egress.
    Sliding window means a bus window designed to open by moving 
vertically or horizontally to provide emergency egress.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 Window retention. Except as provided in S5.1.2, each piece of 
window glazing and each surrounding window frame when tested in 
accordance with the procedure in S5.1.1 under the conditions of S6.1 
through S6.3, shall be retained by its surrounding structure in a manner 
that prevents the formation of any opening large enough to admit the 
passage of a 4-inch diameter sphere under a force, including the weight 
of the sphere, of 5 pounds until any one of the following events occurs:
    (a) A force of 1,200 pounds is reached.
    (b) At least 80 percent of the glazing thickness has developed 
cracks running from the load contact region to the periphery at two or 
more points, or shattering of the glazing occurs.
    (c) The inner surface of the glazing at the center of force 
application has moved relative to the window frame, along a line 
perpendicular to the undisturbed inner surface, a distance equal to one-
half of the square root of the minimum surface dimension measured 
through the center of the area of the entire sheet of window glazing.
    S5.1.1 An increasing force shall be applied to the window glazing 
through the head form specified in Figure 4, outward and perpendicular 
to the undisturbed inside surface at the center of the area of each 
sheet of window glazing, with a head form travel of 2 inches per minute.
    S5.1.2 The requirements of this standard do not apply to a window 
whose minimum surface dimension measured through the center of its area 
is less than 8 inches.
    S5.2 Provision of emergency exits.
    S5.2.1 Buses other than school buses shall meet the requirements of 
either S5.2.2 or S5.2.3. School buses shall meet the requirements of 
S5.2.3.
    S5.2.1.1 A bus with GVWR of more than 10,000 pounds may satisfy the 
unobstructed openings requirement by providing at least one side door 
for each three passenger seating positions in the vehicle.
    S5.2.2 Buses other than school buses.
    S5.2.2.1 Buses other than school buses shall provide unobstructed 
openings for emergency exit which collectively amount, in total square 
centimeters, to at least 432 times the number of designated seating 
positions on the bus. At least 40 percent of the total required area of 
unobstructed openings, computed in the above manner, shall be provided 
on each side of a bus. However, in determining the total unobstructed 
openings provided by a bus, no emergency exit, regardless of its area, 
shall be credited with more than 3,458 square centimeters of the total 
area requirement.
    S5.2.2.2 Buses with GVWR of more than 10,000 pounds. Buses with a 
GVWR of more than 10,000 pounds shall meet the unobstructed openings 
requirements in S5.2.2.1 by providing side exits and at least one rear 
exit that conforms to S5.3 through S5.5. The rear exit shall meet the 
requirements of S5.3 through S5.5 when the bus is upright and when the 
bus is overturned on either side, with the occupant standing facing the 
exit. When the bus configuration precludes installation of an accessible 
rear exit, a roof exit that meets the requirements of S5.3 through S5.5 
when the bus is overturned on either side, with the occupant standing 
facing the exit, shall be provided in the rear half of the bus.
    S5.2.2.3 Buses with GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less. Buses other than 
school buses with GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less may meet the 
unobstructed openings requirement in S5.2.2.1 by providing:
    (a) Devices that meet the requirements of S5.3 through S5.5 without 
using remote controls or central power systems;
    (b) Windows that can be opened manually to a position that provides 
an opening large enough to admit unobstructed passage, keeping a major 
axis horizontal at all times, of an ellipsoid generated by rotating 
about its minor axis an ellipse having a major axis of 50 centimeters 
and a minor axis of 33 centimeters; or
    (c) Doors.

[[Page 683]]

    S5.2.3 School buses. Except as provided in S5.2.3.4, each school bus 
shall comply with S5.2.3.1 through S5.2.3.3.
    S5.2.3.1. Each school bus shall be equipped with the exits specified 
in either S5.2.3.1(a) or S5.2.3.1(b), chosen at the option of the 
manufacturer.
    (a) One rear emergency door that opens outward and is hinged on the 
right side (either side in the case of a bus with a GVWR of 10,000 
pounds or less), and the additional exits, if any, specified by Table 1.
    (b) One emergency door on the vehicle's left side that is hinged on 
its forward side and meets the requirements of S5.2.3.2(a), and a push-
out rear window that provides a minimum opening clearance 41 centimeters 
high and 122 centimeters wide and meets the requirements of S5.2.3.2(c), 
and the additional exits, if any, specified by Table 2.

                                 Table 1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Seating capacity               Additional exits required *
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1-45...................................  None.
46-62..................................  1 left side exit door or 2 exit
                                          windows.
63-70..................................  1 left side exit door or 2 exit
                                          windows, and 1 roof exit.
71 and above...........................  1 left side exit door or 2 exit
                                          windows, and 1 roof exit, and
                                          any combination of door, roof,
                                          or windows such that the total
                                          capacity credit specified in
                                          Table 3 for these exits, plus
                                          70, is greater than the
                                          seating capacity of the bus.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Side emergency exit doors must meet the requirements of S5.2.3.2(a),
  emergency roof exits must meet the requirements of S5.2.3.2(b),
  emergency window exits must meet the requirements of S5.2.3.2(c).


                                 Table 2
------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Seating capacity               Additional exits required *
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1-57...................................  None.
58-74..................................  1 right side exit door or 2
                                          exit windows.
75-82..................................  1 right side exit door or 2
                                          exit windows, and 1 roof exit.
83 and above...........................  1 right side exit door or 2
                                          windows, and 1 roof exit, and
                                          any combination of door, roof,
                                          or windows such that the total
                                          capacity credit specified in
                                          Table 3 for these exits plus
                                          82 is greater than the
                                          capacity of the bus.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Side emergency exit doors must meet the requirements of S5.2.3.2(a),
  emergency roof exits must meet the requirements of S5.2.3.2(b),
  emergency window exits must meet the requirements of S5.2.3.2(c).


                                 Table 3
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Capacity
                           Exit Type                             Credit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Side Door.....................................................        16
Window........................................................         8
Roof Exit.....................................................         8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) The area of an opening equipped with a wheelchair lift may be 
credited toward the required additional exits if it meets the 
requirements of paragraphs (a) or (b) of S5.2.3.1 and if the lift folds 
or stows in such a manner that the area is available for use by persons 
not needing the lift. With the lift in the folded or stowed position, 
such opening is considered a side emergency exit door.
    S5.2.3.2 All emergency exits required by S5.2.3.1(a) and S5.2.3.1(b) 
shall meet the following criteria:
    (a) Side emergency exit doors.
    (1) Each side emergency exit door shall be hinged on its forward 
side.
    (2) The first side emergency exit door installed pursuant to Table 
1, shall be located on the left side of the bus and as near as 
practicable to the mid-point of the passenger compartment. A second side 
emergency exit door installed pursuant to Table 1 shall be located on 
the right side of the bus. In the case of a bus equipped with three side 
emergency door exits pursuant to Table 1, the third shall be located on 
the left side of the bus.
    (3) The first side emergency exit door installed pursuant to Table 2 
shall be located on the right side of the bus. A second side emergency 
door exit installed pursuant to Table 2 shall be located on the left 
side of the bus. In the case of a bus equipped with three side emergency 
door exits pursuant to Table 2, the third shall be located on the right 
side of the bus.
    (4) No two side emergency exit doors shall be located, in whole or 
in part, within the same post and roof bow panel space.
    (b) Emergency roof exit. (1) Each emergency roof exit shall be 
hinged on its forward side, and shall be operable from both inside and 
outside the vehicle.
    (2) In a bus equipped with a single emergency roof exit, the exit 
shall be located as near as practicable to the

[[Page 684]]

midpoint of the passenger compartment.
    (3) In a bus equipped with two emergency roof exits, one shall be 
located as near as practicable to a point equidistant between the 
midpoint of the passenger compartment and the foremost limit of the 
passenger compartment and the other shall be located as near as 
practicable to a point equidistant between the midpoint of the passenger 
compartment and the rearmost point of the passenger compartment.
    (4) In a bus equipped with three or more emergency roof exits, the 
roof exits shall be installed so that, to the extent practicable, the 
longitudinal distance between each pair of adjacent roof exits is the 
same and equal to the distance from the foremost point of the passenger 
compartment to the foremost roof exit and to the distance from the 
rearmost point of that compartment to the rearmost roof exit.
    (5) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(6) of this section, each 
emergency roof exit shall be installed with its longitudinal centerline 
coinciding with a longitudinal vertical plane passing through the 
longitudinal centerline of the school bus.
    (6) In a bus equipped with two or more emergency roof exits, for 
each roof exit offset from the longitudinal vertical plane specified in 
paragraph (b)(5) of this section, there shall be another roof exit 
offset from that plane an equal distance to the other side.
    (c) Emergency exit windows. A bus equipped with emergency exit 
windows shall have an even number of such windows, not counting the 
push-out rear window required by S5.2.3.1(b). Any side emergency exit 
windows shall be evenly divided between the right and left sides of the 
bus. School buses shall not be equipped with horizontally-sliding 
emergency exit windows. Further, except for buses equipped with rear 
push-out emergency exit windows in accordance with S5.2.3.1(b), school 
buses shall not be equipped with both sliding and push-out emergency 
exit windows.
    S5.2.3.3 The engine starting system of a bus shall not operate if 
any emergency exit is locked from either inside or outside the bus. For 
purposes of this requirement, ``locked'' means that the release 
mechanism cannot be activated and the exit opened by a person at the 
exit without a special device such as a key or special information such 
as a combination.
    S5.2.3.4 Each school bus manufactured before September 1, 1994 may, 
at the manufacturer's option, comply with either S5.2.3.4(a) or 
S5.2.3.4(b) instead of S5.2.3.1 through S5.2.3.3.
    (a) Each bus shall be equipped with one rear emergency door that 
opens outward and is hinged on the right side (either side in the case 
of a bus with a GVWR of 4,536 kilograms or less); or
    (b) Each bus shall be equipped with one emergency door on the 
vehicle's left side that is hinged on its forward side and meets the 
requirements of S5.2.3.2(a), and a push-out rear window that provides a 
minimum opening clearance 41 centimeters high and 122 centimeters wide 
and meets the requirements of S5.2.3.2(c).
    S5.3 Emergency exit release.
    S5.3.1 Each emergency exit not required by S5.2.3 shall be 
releasable by operating one or two mechanisms located within the regions 
specified in Figure 1, Figure 2, or Figure 3. The lower edge of the 
region in Figure 1, and Region B in Figure 2, shall be located 13 
centimeters above the adjacent seat, or 5 centimeters above the arm 
rest, if any, whichever is higher.
    S5.3.2 When tested under the conditions of S6., both before and 
after the window retention test required by S5.1, each emergency exit 
not required by S5.2.3 shall allow manual release of the exit by a 
single occupant using force applications each of which conforms, at the 
option of the manufacturer, either to S5.3.2 (a) or (b) of this section. 
Each exit shall have not more than two release mechanisms. In the case 
of exits with one release mechanism, the mechanism shall require two 
force applications to release the exit. In the case of exits with two 
release mechanisms, each mechanism shall require one force application 
to release the exit. At least one of the force applications for each 
exit shall differ from the direction of the initial motion to open the 
exit by not less than 90[deg] and no more than 180[deg].
    (a) Low-force application.

[[Page 685]]

    (1) Location. As shown in Figure 1 or Figure 3.
    (2) Type of motion. Rotary or straight.
    (3) Magnitude. Not more than 20 pounds.
    (b) High force application.
    (1) Location. As shown in Figure 2 or Figure 3.
    (2) Type of motion. Straight, perpendicular to the undisturbed exit 
surface.
    (3) Magnitude. Not more than 60 pounds.
    S5.3.3 School bus emergency exit release.
    S5.3.3.1 When tested under the conditions of S6., both before and 
after the window retention test required by S5.1, each school bus 
emergency exit door shall allow manual release of the door by a single 
person, from both inside and outside the passenger compartment, using a 
force application that conforms to S5.3.3.1 (a) through (c) of this 
section, except a school bus with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less is not 
required to conform to S5.3.3.1 (a). The release mechanism shall operate 
without the use of remote controls or tools, and notwithstanding any 
failure of the vehicle's power system. When the release mechanism is not 
in the position that causes an emergency exit door to be closed and the 
vehicle's ignition is in the ``on'' position, a continuous warning sound 
shall be audible at the driver's seating position and in the vicinity of 
the emergency exit door.
    (a) Location: Within the high force access region shown in Figure 3A 
for a side emergency exit door, and in figure 3D for a rear emergency 
exit door.
    (b) Type of motion: Upward from inside the bus and, at the 
discretion of the manufacturer, from outside the bus. Buses with a GVWR 
of 10,000 pounds or less shall provide interior release mechanisms that 
operate by either an upward or pull-type motion. The pull-type motion 
shall be used only when the release mechanism is recessed in such a 
manner that the handle, level, or other activating device, before being 
activated, does not protrude beyond the rim of the recessed receptacle.
    (c) Magnitude of force: Not more than 178 newtons.
    S5.3.3.2 When tested under the conditions of S6., both before and 
after the window retention test required by S5.1, each school bus 
emergency exit window shall allow manual release of the exit by a single 
person, from inside the passenger compartment, using not more than two 
release mechanisms located in specified low-force or high-force regions 
(at the option of the manufacturer) with force applications and types of 
motions that conform to either S5.3.3.2 (a) or (b) of this section. In 
the case of windows with one release mechanism, the mechanism shall 
require two force applications to release the exit. In the case of 
windows with two release mechanisms, each mechanism shall require one 
application to release the exit. At least one of the force applications 
for each window shall differ from the direction of the initial motion to 
open the exit by no less than 90[deg] and no more than 180[deg]. Each 
release mechanism shall operate without the use of remote controls or 
tools, and notwithstanding any failure of the vehicle's power system. 
When a release mechanism is open and the vehicle's ignition is in the 
``on'' position, a continuous warning shall be audible at the drivers 
seating position and in the vicinity of that emergency exit.
    (a) Emergency exit windows--Low-force application.
    (1) Location: Within the low-force access regions shown in Figures 1 
and 3 for an emergency exit window.
    (2) Type of motion: Rotary or straight.
    (3) Magnitude: Not more than 89 newtons.
    (b) Emergency exit windows--High-force application.
    (1) Location: Within the high-force access regions shown in Figures 
2 and 3 for an emergency exit window.
    (2) Type of motion: Straight and perpendicular to the undisturbed 
exit surface.
    (3) Magnitude: Not more than 178 newtons.
    S5.3.3.3 When tested under the conditions of S6., both before and 
after the window retention test required by S5.1, each school bus 
emergency roof exit shall allow manual release of the exit by a single 
person from both inside and outside the passenger compartment, using not 
more than two release mechanisms located at specified low-force or high-
force regions (at the option of the

[[Page 686]]

manufacturer) with force applications and types of motions that conform 
either to S5.3.3.3 (a) or (b) of this section. In the case of roof exits 
with one release mechanism, the mechanism shall require two force 
applications to release the exit. In the case of roof exits with two 
release mechanisms, each mechanism shall require one application to 
release the exit. At least one of the force applications for each roof 
exit shall differ from the direction of the initial push-out motion of 
the exit by no less than 90[deg] and no more than 180[deg].
    (a) Emergency roof exits--Low-force application.
    (1) Location: Within the low force access regions shown in Figure 
3B, in the case of buses whose roof exits are not offset from the plane 
specified in S5.2.3.2(b)(5). In the case of buses which have roof exits 
offset from the plane specified in S5.2.3.2(b)(5), the amount of offset 
shall be used to recalculate the dimensions in Figure 3B for the offset 
exits.
    (2) Type of motion: Rotary or straight.
    (3) Magnitude: Not more than 89 newtons.
    (b) Emergency roof exits--High-force application.
    (1) Location: Within the high force access regions shown in Figure 
3B, in the case of buses whose roof exits are not offset from the plane 
specified in S5.2.3.2(b)(5). In the case of buses which have roof exits 
offset from the plane specified in S5.2.3.2(b)(5), the amount of offset 
shall be used to recalculate the dimensions in Figure 3B for the offset 
exits.
    (2) Type of motion: Straight and perpendicular to the undisturbed 
exit surface.
    (3) Magnitude: Not more than 178 newtons.
    S5.4 Emergency exit opening.
    S5.4.1 After the release mechanism has been operated, each emergency 
exit not required by S5.2.3 shall, under the conditions of S6., both 
before and after the window retention test required by S5.1, using the 
reach distances and corresponding force levels specified in S5.3.2, 
allow manual opening by a single occupant to a position that provides an 
opening large enough to admit unobstructed passage, keeping a major axis 
horizontal at all times, of an ellipsoid generated by rotating about its 
minor axis an ellipse having a major axis of 50 centimeters and a minor 
axis of 33 centimeters.
    S5.4.2 School bus emergency exit opening.
    S5.4.2.1 School buses with a GVWR of more than 10,000 pounds.
    (a) Emergency exit doors. After the release mechanism has been 
operated, each emergency exit door of a school bus shall, under the 
conditions of S6., before and after the window retention test required 
by S5.1, using the force levels specified in S5.3.3, be manually 
extendable by a single person to a position that permits:
    (1) In the case of a rear emergency exit door, an opening large 
enough to permit unobstructed passage of a rectangular parallelepiped 
114 centimeters high, 61 centimeters wide, and 30 centimeters deep, 
keeping the 114 centimeter dimension vertical, the 61 centimeter 
dimension parallel to the opening, and the lower surface in contact with 
the floor of the bus at all times; and
    (2) In the case of a side emergency exit door, an opening at least 
114 centimeters high and 61 centimeters wide.
    (i) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section, no 
portion of a seat or a restraining barrier shall be installed within the 
area bounded by the opening of a side emergency exit door, a vertical 
transverse plane tangent to the rearward edge of the door opening frame, 
a vertical transverse plane parallel to that plane at a distance of 30 
centimeters forward of that plane, and a longitudinal vertical plane 
passing through the longitudinal centerline of the bus. (See Figure 5A).
    (ii) A seat bottom may be located within the area described in 
paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section if the seat bottom pivots and 
automatically assumes and retains a vertical position when not in use, 
so that no portion of the seat bottom is within the area described in 
paragraph (i) when the seat bottom is vertical. (See Figure 5B).
    (iii) No portion of a seat or restraining barrier located forward of 
the area described in paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section and between 
the door opening and a longitudinal vertical plane passing through the 
longitudinal centerline

[[Page 687]]

of the bus shall extend rearward of a vertical transverse plane tangent 
to the forwardmost portion of a latch mechanism on the door. (See 
Figures 5B and 5C.)
    (3)(i) Each emergency exit door of a school bus shall be equipped 
with a positive door opening device that, after the release mechanism 
has been operated, under the conditions of S6, before and after the 
window retention test required by S5.1--
    (A) Bears the weight of the door;
    (B) Keeps the door from closing past the point at which the door is 
perpendicular to the side of the bus body, regardless of the body's 
orientation; and
    (C) Provides a means for release or override.
    (ii) The positive door opening device shall perform the functions 
specified in paragraph (a)(3)(i) (A) and (B) of this section without the 
need for additional action beyond opening the door past the point at 
which the door is perpendicular to the side of the bus body.
    (b) Emergency roof exits. After the release mechanism has been 
operated, each emergency roof exit of a school bus shall, under the 
conditions of S6, before and after the window retention test required by 
S5.1, using the force levels specified in S5.3.3, be manually extendable 
by a single person to a position that permits an opening at least 41 
centimeters high and 41 centimeters wide.
    (c) Emergency exit windows. After the release mechanism has been 
operated, each emergency exit window of a school bus shall, under the 
conditions of S6., both before and after the window retention test of 
S5.1, using force levels specified in S5.3.3.2, be manually extendable 
by a single occupant to a position that provides an opening large enough 
to admit unobstructed passage, keeping a major axis horizontal at all 
times, of an ellipsoid generated by rotating about its minor axis an 
ellipse having a major axis of 50 centimeters and a minor axis of 33 
centimeters.
    S5.4.2.2 School buses with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less. A school 
bus with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less shall conform to all the 
provisions of S5.4.2, except that the parallelepiped dimension for the 
opening of the rear emergency door or doors shall be 45 inches high, 22 
inches wide, and six inches deep.
    S5.5 Emergency exit identification.
    S5.5.1 In buses other than school buses, and except for windows 
serving as emergency exits in accordance with S5.2.2.3(b) and doors in 
buses with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less, each emergency exit door 
shall have the designation ``Emergency Door'' or ``Emergency Exit,'' and 
every other emergency exit shall have the designation ``Emergency Exit'' 
followed by concise operating instructions describing each motion 
necessary to unlatch and open the exit, located within 16 centimeters of 
the release mechanism.

    Examples:

(1) Lift to Unlatch, Push to Open
(2) Lift Handle and Push out to Open


When a release mechanism is not located within an occupant space of an 
adjacent seat, a label meeting the requirements of S5.5.2 that indicates 
the location of the nearest release mechanism shall be placed within the 
occupant space.

    Example: ``Emergency Exit Instructions Located Next to Seat Ahead''

    S5.5.2 In buses other than school buses. Except as provided in 
S5.5.2.1, each marking shall be legible, when the only source of light 
is the normal nighttime illumination of the bus interior, to occupants 
having corrected visual acuity of 20/40 (Snellen ratio) seated in the 
adjacent seat, seated in the seat directly adjoining the adjacent seat, 
and standing in the aisle location that is closest to that adjacent 
seat. The marking shall be legible from each of these locations when the 
other two corresponding locations are occupied.
    S5.5.2.1 If the exit has no adjacent seat, the marking must meet the 
legibility requirements of S5.5.2 for occupants standing in the aisle 
location nearest to the emergency exit, except for a roof exit, which 
must meet the legibility requirements for occupants positioned with 
their backs against the floor opposite the roof exit.
    S5.5.3 School Bus.
    (a) Each school bus emergency exit provided in accordance with 
S5.2.3.1 shall have the designation ``Emergency

[[Page 688]]

Door'' or ``Emergency Exit,'' as appropriate, in letters at least 5 
centimeters high, of a color that contrasts with its background. For 
emergency exit doors, the designation shall be located at the top of, or 
directly above, the emergency exit door on both the inside and outside 
surfaces of the bus. The designation for roof exits shall be located on 
an inside surface of the exit, or within 30 centimeters of the roof exit 
opening. For emergency window exits, the designation shall be located at 
the top of, or directly above, or at the bottom of the emergency window 
exit on both the inside and outside surfaces of the bus.
    (b) Concise operating instructions describing the motions necessary 
to unlatch and open the emergency exit shall be located within 15 
centimeters of the release mechanism on the inside surface of the bus. 
These instructions shall be in letters at least 1 centimeter high and of 
a color that contrasts with its background.

    Examples:

(1) Lift to Unlatch, Push to Open
(2) Turn Handle, Push Out to Open

    (c) Each opening for a required emergency exit shall be outlined 
around its outside perimeter with a retroreflective tape with a minimum 
width of 2.5 centimeters and either red, white, or yellow in color, that 
when tested under the conditions specified in S6.1 of Standard No. 131 
(49 CFR 571.131), meets the criteria specified in Table 1 of that 
section.
    S6. Test conditions.
    S6.1 The vehicle is on a flat, horizontal surface.
    S6.2 The inside of the vehicle and the outside environment are kept 
at any temperature from 70[deg] to 85 [deg]Fahrenheit for 4 hours 
immediately preceding the tests, and during the tests.
    S6.3 For the window retention test, windows are installed, closed, 
and latched (where latches are provided) in the condition intended for 
normal bus operation.
    S6.4 For the emergency exit release and extension tests, windows are 
installed as in S6.3, seats, armrests, and interior objects near the 
windows are installed as for normal use, and seats are in the upright 
position.

[[Page 689]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.114


[[Page 690]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.115


[[Page 691]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.116


[[Page 692]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.117


[[Page 693]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.118


[[Page 694]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.119


[[Page 695]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.120


[[Page 696]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.121


[[Page 697]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.122


[37 FR 9395, May 10, 1972, as amended at 37 FR 18035, Sept. 6, 1972; 38 
FR 6070, Mar. 6, 1973; 38 FR 7562, Mar. 28, 1973; 39 FR 15274, May 2, 
1974; 40 FR 48512, Oct. 16, 1975; 41 FR 3872, Jan. 27, 1976; 41 FR 
22357, June 3, 1976; 41 FR 24592, June 17, 1976; 41 FR 36027, Aug. 26, 
1976; 47 FR 7256, Feb. 18, 1982; 47 FR 37555, Aug. 26, 1982; 57 FR 
49423, Nov. 2, 1992; 57 FR 57020, Dec. 2, 1992; 59 FR 22999, May 4, 
1994; 60 FR 24570, May 9, 1995]

    Effective Date Note: At 67 FR 19351, Apr. 19, 2002, Sec. 571.217 
was amended by adding in S4, in alphabetical order, the definitions of 
``wheelchair,'' ``wheelchair securement anchorage'', and ``wheelchair 
securement device'', by revising S5.4.2.1(a)(1) by adding S5.4.3 and 
S5.5.3(d) and by adding after Figure 5C, Figure 6A, Figure 6B, Figure 
6C, and Figure 6D, effective Apr. 21, 2003. At 68 FR 19752, Apr. 22, 
2003, the effective date was delayed until Apr. 21, 2004. At 69 FR 
11815, Mar. 12, 2004, the effective date was further delayed until Apr. 
21, 2006. For the convenience of the user, the revised and added text is 
set forth as follows:

Sec. 571.217  Standard No. 217; Bus emergency exits and window 
          retention and release.

                                * * * * *

    S4. * * *
    Wheelchair means a wheeled seat frame for the support and conveyance 
of a physically

[[Page 698]]

disabled person, comprising at least a frame, seat, and wheels.
    Wheelchair securement anchorage means the provision for transferring 
wheelchair securement device loads to the vehicle structure.
    Wheelchair securement device means a strap, webbing or other device 
used for securing a wheelchair to the school bus, including all 
necessary buckles and other fasteners.

                                * * * * *

    S5.4.2.1 * * *
    (a) * * *
    (1) In the case of a rear emergency exit door, an opening large 
enough to permit unobstructed passage into the bus of a rectangular 
parallelepiped 1,145 millimeters (45 inches) high, 610 millimeters (24 
inches) wide, and 305 millimeters (12 inches) deep, keeping the 1,145 
millimeter (45 inch) dimension vertical, the 610 (24 inch) millimeter 
dimension parallel to the opening, and the lower surface in contact with 
the floor of the bus at all times, until the bottom edge of the rearmost 
surface of the parallelepiped is tangent to the plane of the door 
opening; and

                                * * * * *

    S5.4.3 Restriction on wheelchair anchorage location.
    S5.4.3.1 Except as provided in paragraph S5.4.3.2 of this section, 
no portion of a wheelchair securement anchorage shall be located in a 
school bus such that:
    (a) In the case of side emergency exit doors, any portion of the 
wheelchair securement anchorage is within the space bounded by the 
interior side wall and emergency exit door opening, transverse vertical 
planes 305 mm (12 inches) forward and rearward of the center of any side 
emergency exit door restricted area, and a longitudinal vertical plane 
through the longitudinal centerline of the school bus, as shown in 
Figure 6A and Figure 6B.
    (b) In the case of rear emergency exit doors in school buses with a 
gross vehicle weight rating greater than 4,536 kg (10,000 lb), any 
portion of the wheelchair securement anchorage is within the space 
bounded by longitudinal vertical planes tangent to the left and right 
sides of the door opening, a transverse vertical plane 305 mm (12 
inches) forward of the bottom edge of the door opening, and a horizontal 
plane 1,145 mm (45 inches) above the floor of the bus, as shown in 
Figure 6C and Figure 6D.
    (c) In the case of rear emergency exit doors in school buses with a 
gross vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kg (10,000 lb) or less, any portion 
of the wheelchair securement anchorage is within the space bounded by 
longitudinal vertical planes tangent to the left and right sides of the 
door opening, a transverse vertical plane 150 mm (6 inches) forward of 
the bottom edge of the door opening, and a horizontal plane 1,145 mm (45 
inches) above the floor of the bus, as shown in Figure 6C and Figure 6D.
    S5.4.3.2 The restriction in S5.4.3.1(a) of this section does not 
apply to tracks or track-type devices that are used for mounting seats 
and/or for wheelchair securement devices.

                                * * * * *

    S5.5.3 School Bus.

                                * * * * *

    (d) On the inside surface of each school bus, there shall be a label 
directly beneath or above each ``Emergency Door'' or ``Emergency Exit'' 
designation required by paragraph (a) of S5.5.3 of this standard for an 
emergency exit door or window. The label shall state, in letters at 
least 25 mm (one inch) high, the words ``DO NOT BLOCK'' in a color that 
contrasts with the background of the label.

                                * * * * *

[[Page 699]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19AP02.000


[[Page 700]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19AP02.001


[[Page 701]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19AP02.002


[[Page 702]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19AP02.003


<R05>
Sec. 571.218  Standard No. 218; Motorcycle helmets.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes minimum performance 
requirements for helmets designed for use by motorcyclists and other 
motor vehicle users.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries to motorcyclists and other motor vehicle users resulting from 
head impacts.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to all helmets designed for 
use by motorcyclists and other motor vehicle users.
    S4. Definitions.
    Basic plane means a plane through the centers of the right and left 
external ear openings and the lower edge of

[[Page 703]]

the eye sockets (Figure 1) of a reference headform (Figure 2) or test 
headform.
    Helmet positioning index means the distance in inches, as specified 
by the manufacturer, from the lowest point of the brow opening at the 
lateral midpoint of the helmet to the basic plane of a reference 
headform, when the helmet is firmly and properly positioned on the 
reference headform.
    Midsagittal plane means a longitudinal plane through the apex of a 
reference headform or test headform that is perpendicular to the basic 
plane (Figure 3).
    Reference headform means a measuring device contoured to the 
dimensions of one of the three headforms described in Table 2 and 
Figures 5 through 8 with surface markings indicating the locations of 
the basic, mid-sagittal, and reference planes, and the centers of the 
external ear openings.
    Reference plane means a plane above and parallel to the basic plane 
on a reference headform or test headform (Figure 2) at the distance 
indicated in Table 2.
    Retention system means the complete assembly by which the helmet is 
retained in position on the head during use.
    Test headform means a test device contoured to the dimensions of one 
of the three headforms described in Table 2 and Figures 5 through 8 with 
surface markings indicating the locations of the basic, mid-sagittal, 
and reference planes.
    S5. Requirements. Each helmet shall meet the requirements of S5.1, 
S5.2, and S5.3 when subjected to any conditioning procedure specified in 
S6.4, and tested in accordance with S7.1, S7.2, and S7.3.
    S5.1 Impact attenuation. When an impact attenuation test is 
conducted in accordance with S7.1, all of the following requirements 
shall be met:
    (a) Peak accelerations shall not exceed 400g;
    (b) Accelerations in excess of 200g shall not exceed a cumulative 
duration of 2.0 milliseconds; and
    (c) Accelerations in excess of 150g shall not exceed a cumulative 
duration of 4.0 milliseconds.
    S5.2 Penetration. When a penetration test is conducted in accordance 
with S7.2, the striker shall not contact the surface of the test 
headform.
    S5.3 Retention system.
    S5.3.1 When tested in accordance with S7.3:
    (a) The retention system or its components shall attain the loads 
specified without separation; and
    (b) The adjustable portion of the retention system test device shall 
not move more than 1 inch (2.5 cm) measured between preliminary and test 
load positions.
    S5.3.2 Where the retention system consists of components which can 
be independently fastened without securing the complete assembly, each 
such component shall independently meet the requirements of S5.3.1.
    S5.4 Configuration. Each helmet shall have a protective surface of 
continuous contour at all points on or above the test line described in 
S6.2.3. The helmet shall provide peripheral vision clearance of at least 
105[deg] to each side of the mid-sagittal plane, when the helmet is 
adjusted as specified in S6.3. The vertex of these angles, shown in 
Figure 3, shall be at the point on the anterior surface of the reference 
headform at the intersection of the mid-sagittal and basic planes. The 
brow opening of the helmet shall be at least 1 inch (2.5 cm) above all 
points in the basic plane that are within the angles of peripheral 
vision (see Figure 3).
    S5.5 Projections. A helmet shall not have any rigid projections 
inside its shell. Rigid projections outside any helmet's shell shall be 
limited to those required for operation of essential accessories, and 
shall not protrude more than 0.20 inch (5 mm).
    S5.6 Labeling.
    S5.6.1 Each helmet shall be labeled permanently and legibly, in a 
manner such that the label(s) can be read easily without removing 
padding or any other permanent part, with the following:
    (a) Manufacturer's name or identification.
    (b) Precise model designation.
    (c) Size.
    (d) Month and year of manufacture. This may be spelled out (for 
example,

[[Page 704]]

June 1988), or expressed in numerals (for example, 6/88).
    (e) The symbol DOT, constituting the manufacturer's certification 
that the helmet conforms to the applicable Federal motor vehicle safety 
standards. This symbol shall appear on the outer surface, in a color 
that contrasts with the background, in letters at least \3/8\ inch (1 
cm) high, centered laterally with the horizontal centerline of the 
symbol located a minimum of 1\1/8\ inches (2.9 cm) and a maximum of 1\3/
8\ inches (3.5 cm) from the bottom edge of the posterior portion of the 
helmet.
    (f) Instructions to the purchaser as follows:
    (1) ``Shell and liner constructed of (identify type(s) of 
materials).
    (2) ``Helmet can be seriously damaged by some common substances 
without damage being visible to the user. Apply only the following: 
(Recommended cleaning agents, paints, adhesives, etc., as appropriate).
    (3) ``Make no modifications. Fasten helmet securely. If helmet 
experiences a severe blow, return it to the manufacturer for inspection, 
or destroy it and replace it.''
    (4) Any additional relevant safety information should be applied at 
the time of purchase by means of an attached tag, brochure, or other 
suitable means.
    S5.7 Helmet positioning index. Each manufacturer of helmets shall 
establish a positioning index for each helmet he manufactures. This 
index shall be furnished immediately to any person who requests the 
information, with respect to a helmet identified by manufacturer, model 
designation, and size.
    S6. Preliminary test procedures. Before subjecting a helmet to the 
testing sequence specified in S7., prepare it according to the 
procedures in S6.1, S6.2, and S6.3.
    S6.1 Selection of appropriate headform.
    S6.1.1 A helmet with a manufacturer's designated discrete size or 
size range which does not exceed 6\3/4\ (European size: 54) is tested on 
the small headform. A helmet with a manufacturer's designated discrete 
size or size range which exceeds 6\3/4\, but does not exceed 7\1/2\ 
(European size: 60) is tested on the medium headform. A helmet with a 
manufacturer's designated discrete size or size range which exceeds 7\1/
2\ is tested on the large headform.
    S6.1.2 A helmet with a manufacturer's designated size range which 
includes sizes falling into two or all three size ranges described in 
S6.1.1 is tested on each headform specified for each size range.
    S6.2 Reference marking.
    S6.2.1 Use a reference headform that is firmly seated with the basic 
and reference planes horizontal. Place the complete helmet to be tested 
on the appropriate reference headform, as specified in S6.1.1 and 
S6.1.2.
    S6.2.2 Apply a 10-pound (4.5 kg) static vertical load through the 
helmet's apex. Center the helmet laterally and seat it firmly on the 
reference headform according to its helmet positioning index.
    S6.2.3 Maintaining the load and position described in S6.2.2, draw a 
line (hereinafter referred to as ``test line'') on the outer surface of 
the helmet coinciding with portions of the intersection of that service 
with the following planes, as shown in Figure 2:
    (a) A plane 1 inch (2.5 cm) above and parallel to the reference 
plane in the anterior portion of the reference headform;
    (b) A vertical transverse plane 2.5 inches (6.4 cm) behind the point 
on the anterior surface of the reference headform at the intersection of 
the mid-sagittal and reference planes;
    (c) The reference plane of the reference headform;
    (d) A vertical transverse plane 2.5 inches (6.4. cm) behind the 
center of the external ear opening in a side view; and
    (e) A plane 1 inch (2.5 cm) below and parallel to the reference 
plane in the posterior portion of the reference headform.
    S6.3 Helmet positioning.
    S6.3.1 Before each test, fix the helmet on a test headform in the 
position that conforms to its helmet positioning index. Secure the 
helmet so that it does not shift position before impact or before 
application of force during testing.
    S6.3.2 In testing as specified in S7.1 and S7.2, place the retention 
system in

[[Page 705]]

a position such that it does not interfere with free fall, impact or 
penetration.
    S6.4 Conditioning.
    S6.4.1 Immediately before conducting the testing sequence specified 
in S7, condition each test helmet in accordance with any one of the 
following procedures:
    (a) Ambient conditions. Expose to a temperature of 70 [deg]F(21 
[deg]C) and a relative humidity of 50 percent for 12 hours.
    (b) Low temperature. Expose to a temperature of 14 [deg]F(-10 
[deg]C) for 12 hours.
    (c) High temperature. Expose to a temperature of 122 [deg]F(50 
[deg]C) for 12 hours.
    (d) Water immersion. Immerse in water at a temperature of 77 
[deg]F(25 [deg]C) for 12 hours.
    S6.4.2 If during testing, as specified in S7.1.3 and S7.2.3, a 
helmet is returned to the conditioning environment before the time out 
of that environment exceeds 4 minutes, the helmet is kept in the 
environment for a minimum of 3 minutes before resumption of testing with 
that helmet. If the time out of the environment exceeds 4 minutes, the 
helmet is returned to the environment for a minimum of 3 minutes for 
each minute or portion of a minute that the helmet remained out of the 
environment in excess of 4 minutes or for a maximum of 12 hours, 
whichever is less, before the resumption of testing with that helmet.
    S7. Test conditions.
    S7.1 Impact attenuation test.
    S7.1.1 Impact attenuation is measured by determining acceleration 
imparted to an instrumented test headform on which a complete helmet is 
mounted as specified in S6.3, when it is dropped in guided free fall 
upon a fixed hemispherical anvil and a fixed flat steel anvil.
    S7.1.2 Each helmet is impacted at four sites with two successive 
identical impacts at each site. Two of these sites are impacted upon a 
flat steel anvil and two upon a hemispherical steel anvil as specified 
in S7.1.10 and S7.1.11. The impact sites are at any point on the area 
above the test line described in paragraph S6.2.3, and separated by a 
distance not less than one-sixth of the maximum circumference of the 
helmet in the test area.
    S7.1.3 Impact testing at each of the four sites, as specified in 
S7.1.2, shall start at two minutes, and be completed by four minutes, 
after removal of the helmet from the conditioning environment.
    S7.1.4 (a) The guided free fall drop height for the helmet and test 
headform combination onto the hemispherical anvil shall be such that the 
minimum impact speed is 17.1 feet/second (5.2 m/sec). The minimum drop 
height is 54.5 inches (138.4 cm). The drop height is adjusted upward 
from the minimum to the extent necessary to compensate for friction 
losses.
    (b) The guided free fall drop height for the helmet and test 
headform combination onto the flat anvil shall be such that the minimum 
impact speed is 19.7 ft./sec (6.0 m/sec). The minimum drop height is 72 
inches (182.9 cm). The drop height is adjusted upward from the minimum 
to the extent necessary to compensate for friction losses.
    S7.1.5 Test headforms for impact attenuation testing are constructed 
of magnesium alloy (K-1A), and exhibit no resonant frequencies below 
2,000 Hz.
    S7.1.6 The monorail drop test system is used for impact attenuation 
testing.
    S7.1.7 The weight of the drop assembly, as specified in Table 1, is 
the combined weight of the test headform and the supporting assembly for 
the drop test. The weight of the supporting assembly is not less than 
2.0 lbs. and not more than 2.4 lbs. (0.9 to 1.1 kg). The supporting 
assembly weight for the monorail system is the drop assembly weight 
minus the combined weight of the test headform, the headform's clamp 
down ring, and its tie down screws.
    S7.1.8 The center of gravity of the test headform is located at the 
center of the mounting ball on the supporting assembly and lies within a 
cone with its axis vertical and forming a 10[deg] included angle with 
the vertex at the point of impact. The center of gravity of the drop 
assembly lies within the rectangular volume bounded by x = -0.25 inch (-
0.64 cm), x = 0.85 inch (2.16 cm), y = 0.25 inch (0.64 cm), and y = -
0.25 inch (-0.64 cm) with the origin located at the center of gravity of 
the test headform. The rectangular volume has no boundary along the z-
axis. The

[[Page 706]]

x-y-z axes are mutually perpendicular and have positive or negative 
designations in accordance with the right-hand rule (See Figure 5). The 
origin of the coordinate axes also is located at the center of the 
mounting ball on the supporting assembly (See Figures 6, 7, and 8). The 
x-y-z axes of the test headform assembly on a monorail drop test 
equipment are oriented as follows: From the origin, the x-axis is 
horizontal with its positive direction going toward and passing through 
the vertical centerline of the monorail. The positive z-axis is 
downward. The y-axis also is horizontal and its direction can be decided 
by the z- and x-axes, using the right-hand rule.
    S7.1.9 The acceleration transducer is mounted at the center of 
gravity of the test headform with the sensitive axis aligned to within 
5[deg] of vertical when the test headform assembly is in the impact 
position. The acceleration data channel complies with SAE Recommended 
Practice J211 JUN 80, Instrumentation for Impact Tests, requirements for 
channel class 1,000.
    S7.1.10 The flat anvil is constructed of steel with a 5-inch (12.7 
cm) minimum diameter impact face, and the hemispherical anvil is 
constructed of steel with a 1.9 inch (4.8 cm) radius impact face.
    S7.1.11 The rigid mount for both of the anvils consists of a solid 
mass of at least 300 pounds (136.1 kg), the outer surface of which 
consists of a steel plate with minimum thickness of 1 inch (2.5 cm) and 
minimum surface area of 1 ft \2\ (929 cm \2\ ).
    S7.1.12 The drop system restricts side movement during the impact 
attenuation test so that the sum of the areas bounded by the 
acceleration-time response curves for both the x- and y-axes (horizontal 
axes) is less than five percent of the area bounded by the acceleration-
time response curve for the vertical axis.
    S7.2 Penetration test.
    S7.2.1 The penetration test is conducted by dropping the penetration 
test striker in guided free fall, with its axis aligned vertically, onto 
the outer surface of the complete helmet, when mounted as specified in 
S6.3, at any point above the test line, described in S6.2.3, except on a 
fastener or other rigid projection.
    S7.2.2 Two penetration blows are applied at least 3 inches (7.6 cm) 
apart, and at least 3 inches (7.6 cm) from the centers of any impacts 
applied during the impact attenuation test.
    S7.2.3 The application of the two penetration blows, specified in 
S7.2.2, starts at two minutes and is completed by four minutes, after 
removal of the helmet from the conditioning environment.
    S7.2.4 The height of the guided free fall is 118.1 inches (3 m), as 
measured from the striker point to the impact point on the outer surface 
of the test helmet.
    S7.2.5 The contactable surface of the penetration test headform is 
constructed of a metal or metallic alloy having a Brinell hardness 
number no greater than 55, which will permit ready detection should 
contact by the striker occur. The surface is refinished if necessary 
before each penetration test blow to permit detection of contact by the 
striker.
    S7.2.6 The weight of the penetration striker is 6 pounds, 10 ounces 
(3 kg).
    S7.2.7 The point of the striker has an included angle of 60[deg], a 
cone height of 1.5 inches (3.8 cm), a tip radius of 0.02 inch (standard 
0.5 millimeter radius) and a minimum hardness of 60 Rockwell, C-scale.
    S7.2.8 The rigid mount for the penetration test headform is as 
described in S7.1.11.
    S7.3 Retention system test.
    S7.3.1 The retention system test is conducted by applying a static 
tensile load to the retention assembly of a complete helmet, which is 
mounted, as described in S6.3, on a stationary test headform as shown in 
Figure 4, and by measuring the movement of the adjustable portion of the 
retention system test device under tension.
    S7.3.2 The retention system test device consists of both an 
adjustable loading mechanism by which a static tensile load is applied 
to the helmet retention assembly and a means for holding the test 
headform and helmet stationary. The retention assembly is fastened 
around two freely moving rollers, both of which have a 0.5 inch (1.3 cm) 
diameter and a 3-inch (7.6 cm) center-

[[Page 707]]

to-center separation, and which are mounted on the adjustable portion of 
the tensile loading device (Figure 4). The helmet is fixed on the test 
headform as necessary to ensure that it does not move during the 
application of the test loads to the retention assembly.
    S7.3.3 A 50-pound (22.7 kg) preliminary test load is applied to the 
retention assembly, normal to the basic plane of the test headform and 
symmetrical with respect to the center of the retention assembly for 30 
seconds, and the maximum distance from the extremity of the adjustable 
portion of the retention system test device to the apex of the helmet is 
measured.
    S7.3.4 An additional 250-pound (113.4 kg) test load is applied to 
the retention assembly, in the same manner and at the same location as 
described in S7.3.3, for 120 seconds, and the maximum distance from the 
extremity of the adjustable portion of the retention system test device 
to the apex of the helmet is measured.

                        Appendix to Sec. 571.218

       Table 1--Weights for Impact Attenuation Test Drop Assembly
------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Test headform size                   Weight \1\--1b(kg)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Small.....................................  7.8 (3.5 kg).
Medium....................................  11.0 (5.0 kg).
Large.....................................  13.4 (6.1 kg).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Combined weight of instrumented test headform and supporting
  assembly for drop test.

  [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.123
  

[[Page 708]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.124


[[Page 709]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.125


[[Page 710]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.126


[[Page 711]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.127


[[Page 712]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.128


[[Page 713]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.129


[[Page 714]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.130


[[Page 715]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.131


[[Page 716]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.132


[[Page 717]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.133


[[Page 718]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.134


[38 FR 22391, Aug. 20, 1973, as amended at 39 FR 3554, Jan. 28, 1974; 45 
FR 15181, Mar. 10, 1980; 53 FR 11288, Apr. 6, 1988; 53 FR 12529, Apr. 
15, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 571.219  Standard No. 219; Windshield zone intrusion.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies limits for the displacement into 
the windshield area of motor vehicle components during a crash.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce crash 
injuries and fatalities that result from occupants contacting vehicle 
components displaced near or through the windshield.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses of 4,536 kilograms or 
less gross vehicle weight rating. However, it does not apply to forward 
control vehicles,

[[Page 719]]

walk-in van-type vehicles, or to open-body-type vehicles with fold-down 
or removable windshields.
    S4. Definitions. Daylight Opening (DLO) means the maximum 
unobstructed opening through the glazing surface, including reveal or 
garnish moldings adjoining the surface, as measured parallel to the 
outer surface of the glazing material.
    S5. Requirement. When the vehicle travelling longitudinally forward 
at any speed up to and including 48 km/h impacts a fixed collision 
barrier that is perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle, 
under the conditions of S7, no part of the vehicle outside the occupant 
compartment, except windshield molding and other components designed to 
be normally in contact with the windshield, shall penetrate the 
protected zone template, affixed according to S6, to a depth of more 
than 6 mm, and no such part of a vehicle shall penetrate the inner 
surface of that portion of the windshield, within the DLO, below the 
protected zone defined in S6.
    S6. Protected zone template.
    S6.1 The lower edge of the protected zone is determined by the 
following procedure (See Figure 1).
    (a) Place a 165 mm diameter rigid sphere, with a mass of 6.8 kg in a 
position such that it simultaneously contacts the inner surface of the 
windshield glazing and the surface of the instrument panel, including 
padding. If any accessories or equipment such as the steering control 
system obstruct positioning of the sphere, remove them for the purposes 
of this procedure.
    (b) Draw the locus of points on the inner surface of the windshield 
contactable by the sphere across the width of the instrument panel. From 
the outermost contactable points, extend the locus line horizontally to 
the edges of the glazing material.
    (c) Draw a line on the inner surface of the windshield below and 13 
mm distant from the locus line.
    (d) The lower edge of the protected zone is the longitudinal 
projection onto the outer surface of the windshield of the line 
determined in S6.1(c).
    S6.2 The protected zone is the space enclosed by the following 
surfaces, as shown in Figure 1:
    (a) The outer surface of the windshield in its precrash 
configuration.
    (b) The locus of points 76 mm outward along perpendiculars drawn to 
each point on the outer surface of the windshield.
    (c) The locus of lines forming a 45[deg] angle with the outer 
surface of the windshield at each point along the top and side edges of 
the outer surface of the windshield and the lower edge of the protected 
zone determined in S6.1, in the plane perpendicular to the edge at that 
point.
    S6.3 A template is cut or formed from Styrofoam, type DB, cut cell, 
to the dimensions of the zone as determined in S6.2. The template is 
affixed to the windshield so that it delineates the protected zone and 
remains affixed throughout the crash test.
    S7. Test conditions. The requirement of S5. shall be met under the 
following conditions:
    S7.1 The protected zone template is affixed to the windshield in the 
manner described in S6.
    S7.2 The hood, hood latches, and any other hood retention components 
are engaged prior to the barrier crash.
    S7.3 Adjustable cowl tops or other adjustable panels in front of the 
windshield are in the position used under normal operating conditions 
when windshield wiping systems are not in use.
    S7.4 The parking brake is disengaged and the transmission is in 
neutral.
    S7.5 Tires are inflated to the vehicle manufacturer's 
specifications.
    S7.6 The fuel tank is filled to any level from 90 to 95 per cent of 
capacity.
    S7.7 The vehicle, including test devices and instrumentation, is 
loaded as follows:
    (a) Except as specified in S7.6, a passenger car is loaded to its 
unloaded vehicle weight plus its rated cargo and luggage capacity 
weight, secured in the luggage area, plus a 50th-percentile test dummy 
as specified in part 572 of this chapter at each front outboard 
designated seating position and at any other position whose protection 
system is required to be tested by a dummy under the provisions of 
Standard No. 208. Each dummy is restrained only by

[[Page 720]]

means that are installed for protection at its seating position.
    (b) Except as specified in S7.6, a multipurpose passenger vehicle, 
truck or bus is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight, plus 136 kg or 
its rated cargo and luggage capacity, whichever is less, secured to the 
vehicle, plus a 50th-percentile test dummy as specified in part 572 of 
this chapter at each front outboard designated seating postion and at 
any other position whose protection system is required to be tested by a 
dummy under the provisions of Standard No. 208. Each dummy is restrained 
only by means that are installed for protection at its seating position. 
The load is distributed so that the mass on each axle as measured at the 
tire-ground interface is in proportion to its GAWR. If the mass on any 
axle when the vehicle is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight plus 
dummy mass exceeds the axle's proportional share of the test mass, the 
remaining mass is placed so that the mass on that axle remains the same. 
For the purposes of this section, unloaded vehicle weight does not 
include the mass of work-performing accessories. Vehicles are tested to 
a maximum unloaded vehicle weight of 2,495 kg.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.007


[40 FR 25462, June 16, 1975, as amended at 40 FR 53033, Nov. 14, 1975; 
41 FR 54946, Dec. 16, 1976; 45 FR 22046, Apr. 3, 1980; 63 FR 28946, May 
27, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 571.220  Standard No. 220; School bus rollover protection.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes performance requirements for 
school bus rollover protection.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the number of 
deaths and the severity of injuries that result from failure of the 
school bus body structure to withstand forces encountered in rollover 
crashes.

[[Page 721]]

    S3. Applicability. This standard applies to school buses.
    S4. Requirements. When a force in Newtons equal to 1\1/2\ times the 
unloaded vehicle weight in kilograms multiplied by 9.8 m/sec \2\ is 
applied to the roof of the vehicle's body structure through a force 
application plate as specified in S5, Test procedures--
    (a) The downward vertical movement at any point on the application 
plate shall not exceed 130 mm and
    (b) Each emergency exit of the vehicle provided in accordance with 
Standard No. 217 (Sec. 571.217) shall be capable of opening as 
specified in that standard during the full application of the force and 
after release of the force, except that an emergency exit located in the 
roof of the vehicle is not required to be capable of being opened during 
the application of the force. A particular vehicle (i.e., test specimen) 
need not meet the emergency exit opening requirement after release of 
force if it is subjected to the emergency exit opening requirements 
during the full application of the force.
    S5. Test procedures. Each vehicle shall be capable of meeting the 
requirements of S4. when tested in accordance with the procedures set 
forth below.
    S5.1 With any non-rigid chassis-to-body mounts replaced with 
equivalent rigid mounts, place the vehicle on a rigid horizontal surface 
so that the vehicle is entirely supported by means of the vehicle frame. 
If the vehicle is constructed without a frame, place the vehicle on its 
body sills. Remove any components which extend upward from the vehicle 
roof.
    S5.2 Use a flat, rigid, rectangular force application plate that is 
measured with respect to the vehicle roof longitudinal and lateral 
centerlines,
    (a) In the case of a vehicle with a GVWR of more than 4,536 kg, 305 
mm shorter than the vehicle roof and 914 mm wide; and
    (b) In the case of a vehicle with a GVWR of 4,536 kg or less, 127 mm 
longer and 127 mm wider than the vehicle roof. For purposes of these 
measurements, the vehicle roof is that structure, seen in the top 
projected view, that coincides with the passenger and driver compartment 
of the vehicle.
    S5.3 Position the force application plate on the vehicle roof so 
that its rigid surface is perpendicular to a vertical longitudinal plane 
and it contacts the roof at not less than two points, and so that, in 
the top projected view, its longitudinal centerline coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the vehicle, and its front and rear edges are 
an equal distance inside the front and rear edges of the vehicle roof at 
the centerline.
    S5.4 Apply an evenly-distributed vertical force in the downward 
direction to the force application plate at any rate not more than 13 mm 
per second, until a force of 2,224 N has been applied.
    S5.5 Apply additional vertical force in the downward direction to 
the force application plate at a rate of not more than 13 mm per second 
until the force specified in S4. has been applied, and maintain this 
application of force.
    S5.6 Measure the downward movement of any point on the force 
application plate which occurred during the application of force in 
accordance with S5.5.
    S5.7 To test the capability of the vehicle's emergency exits to open 
in accordance with S4.(b)--
    (a) In the case of testing under the full application of force, open 
the emergency exits as specified in S4.(b) while maintaining the force 
applied in accordance with S5.4 and S5.5; and
    (b) In the case of testing after the release of all force, release 
all downward force applied to the force application plate and open the 
emergency exits as specified in S4.(b).
    S6. Test conditions. The following conditions apply to the 
requirements specified in S4.
    S6.1 Temperature. The ambient temperature is any level between 0 
[deg]C and 32 [deg]C.
    S6.2 Windows and doors. Vehicle windows, doors, and emergency exits 
are in the fully-closed position, and latched but not locked.

[41 FR 3875, Jan. 27, 1976, as amended at 41 FR 36026, 36027, Aug. 26, 
1976; 63 FR 28948, May 27, 1998]

[[Page 722]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.221  Standard No. 221; School bus body joint strength.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes requirements for the strength 
of the body panel joints in school bus bodies.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries resulting from the structural collapse of school bus bodies 
during crashes.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to school buses.
    S4. Definitions. Body component means a part of a bus body made from 
a single piece of homogeneous material or from a single piece of 
composite material such as plywood.
    Body panel means a body component used on the exterior or interior 
surface to enclose the bus' occupant space.
    Body panel joint means the area of contact or close proximity 
between the edges of a body panel and another body component, including 
but not limited to floor panels, and body panels made of composite 
materials such as plastic or plywood, excluding trim and decorative 
parts which do not contribute to the strength of the bus body, members 
such as rub rails which are entirely outside of body panels, ventilation 
panels, components provided for functional purposes, and engine access 
covers.
    Bus body means that portion of a bus that encloses the bus occupant 
space, including the floor, but excluding the bumpers and chassis frame 
and any structure forward of the passenger compartment.
    Maintenance access panel means a body panel which must be moved or 
removed to provide access to one or more serviceable component(s).
    Passenger compartment means space within the school bus interior 
that is between a vertical transverse plane located 762 mm in front of 
the forwardmost passenger seating reference point and including a 
vertical transverse plane tangent to the rear interior wall of the bus 
at the vehicle centerline.
    Serviceable component means any part of the bus, of either a 
mechanical or electrical nature, which is explicitly identified by the 
bus chassis and/or body manufacturer in the owner's manual or factory 
service manual as requiring routine maintenance actions at intervals of 
one year or less. Tubing, wires and harnesses are considered to be 
serviceable components only at their attachments.
    S5 Requirements.
    S5.1 Except as provided in S5.2, each body panel joint, including 
small, curved, and complex joints, when tested in accordance with the 
procedure of S6, shall hold the body panel to the member to which it is 
joined when subjected to a force of 60 percent of the tensile strength 
of the weakest joined body panel determined pursuant to S6.2.
    S5.1.1 Body panels attached to each other shall have no unattached 
segment at the joint longer than 203 mm.
    S5.2 Exclusions
    S5.2.1 The requirements of S5.1 do not apply to--
    (a) Any interior maintenance access panel or joint which lies 
forward of the passenger compartment.
    (b) Any interior maintenance access panel within the passenger 
compartment that does not exceed 305 mm when measured across any two 
points diametrically on opposite sides of the opening.
    (c) Trim and decorative parts which do not contribute to the 
strength of the joint, support members such as rub rails which are 
entirely outside of body panels, doors and windows, ventilation panels, 
and engine access covers.
    S6 Procedure
    S6.1 Preparation of the test specimen.
    S6.1.1 If a body panel joint is 203 mm or longer, cut a test 
specimen that consists of any 203 mm segment of the joint, together with 
a portion of the bus body whose dimensions are those specified in Figure 
1, so that the specimen's centerline is perpendicular to the joint at 
the midpoint of the joint segment. Where the body panel joint is not 
fastened continuously, select the segment so that it does not bisect a 
spot weld or a discrete fastener. Support members which contribute to 
the strength of a body panel joint, such as rub rails on the outside of 
body panels or underlying structure attached to joint members, shall 
remain attached to the test specimen, except that material may be 
removed from the support

[[Page 723]]

members as necessary to clear the gripping areas of the joint members 
being tested.
    S6.1.2 If a joint is less than 203 mm long, cut a test specimen with 
enough of the adjacent material to permit it to be held in the tension 
testing machine specified in S6.3.
    S6.1.3 Prepare the test specimen in accordance with the preparation 
procedures specified in the 1989 edition of the Annual Book of American 
Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Standards.
    S6.2 Determination of minimum allowable strength. For purposes of 
determining the minimum allowable joint strength, determine the tensile 
strengths of the joined body components as follows:
    (a) If the mechanical properties of a joint component material are 
specified by the ASTM in the 1989 Annual Book of ASTM Standards, the 
lowest value of that material's thickness and tensile strength per unit 
of area shown in that source shall be used.
    (b) If the mechanical properties of a material are not specified by 
the ASTM in the 1989 Annual Book of ASTM Standards, determine its 
tensile strength by cutting a sheet specimen from outside the joint 
region of the bus body in accordance with Figure 1 of E 8-89 Standard 
Test Methods of Tension Testing of Metallic Materials, in Volume 03.01 
of the 1989 Annual Book of ASTM Standards, and by testing it in 
accordance with S6.3.
    (c) The cross sectional area of material removed to facilitate the 
installation of fasteners shall be subtracted from the cross-sectional 
area of the panel in the determination of the tensile strength of the 
weakest joined body panel.
    S6.3 Strength Test.
    S6.3.1 The joint specimen is gripped on opposite sides of the joint 
in a tension testing machine in accordance with the 1989 Annual Book of 
ASTM Standards.
    S6.3.2 Adjust the testing machine grips so that the applied force on 
the joint is at 90 degrees plus or minus 3 degrees from the joint 
centerline, as shown in Figure 1.
    S6.3.3 A tensile force is applied to the specimen by separating the 
heads of the testing machine at any uniform rate not less than 3 mm and 
not more than 10 mm per minute until the specimen separates.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13DE01.236


[41 FR 3872, Jan. 27, 1976, as amended at 41 FR 36027, Aug. 26, 1976; 67 
FR 64366, 64367, Dec. 13, 2002; 68 FR 6360, Feb. 7, 2003]

[[Page 724]]


    Editorial Note: At 65 FR 11754, Mar. 6, 2000, Sec. 571.221 was 
amended by revising S5.2.1(a), effective Apr. 5, 2000. However, 
paragraph S5.2.1(a) does not exist in the text in effect at that time. 
The revised text reads as follows:

Sec. 571.221  Standard No. 221, School bus body joint strength.

                                * * * * *

    S5.2.1 The requirements of S5.1.1 and S5.1.2 do not apply to--
    (a) Any interior maintenance access panel which lies forward of the 
passenger compartment, or which is less than 305 mm when measured across 
any two points diametrically on opposite sides of the opening.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 571.222  Standard No. 222; School bus passenger seating and crash 
protection.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes occupant protection 
requirements for school bus passenger seating and restraining barriers.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the number of 
deaths and the severity of injuries that result from the impact of 
school bus occupants against structures within the vehicle during 
crashes and sudden driving maneuvers.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to school buses.
    S4. Definitions. Contactable surface means any surface within the 
zone specified in S5.3.1.1 that is contactable from any direction by the 
test device described in S6.6, except any surface on the front of a seat 
back or restraining barrier 76 mm or more below the top of the seat back 
or restraining barrier.
    School bus passenger seat means a seat in a school bus, other than 
the driver's seat.
    Wheelchair means a wheeled seat frame for the support and conveyance 
of a physically disabled person, comprised of at least a frame, seat, 
and wheels.
    Wheelchair occupant restraint anchorage means the provision for 
transferring wheelchair occupant restraint system loads to the vehicle 
structure.
    Wheelchair securement anchorage means the provision for transferring 
wheelchair securement device loads to the vehicle structure.
    Wheelchair securement device means a strap, webbing or other device 
used for securing a wheelchair to the school bus, including allnecessary 
buckles and other fasteners.
    S4.1 The number of seating positions considered to be in a bench 
seat is expressed by the symbol W, and calculated as the bench width in 
millimeters divided by 381 and rounded to the nearest whole number.
    S5. Requirements. (a) Each vehicle with a gross vehicle weight 
rating of more than 4,536 kg shall be capable of meeting any of the 
requirements set forth under this heading when tested under the 
conditions of S6. However, a particular school bus passenger seat (i.e., 
test specimen) in that weight class need not meet further requirements 
after having met S5.1.2 and S5.1.5, or having been subjected to either 
S5.1.3, S5.1.4, or S5.3.
    (b) Each vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kg or 
less shall be capable of meeting the following requirements at all 
seating positions other than the driver's seat:
    (1)(A) In the case of vehicles manufactured before September 1, 
1991, the requirements of Sec. Sec. 571.208, 571.209, and 571.210 as 
they apply to multipurpose passenger vehicles; or
    (B) In the case of vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 
1991, the requirements of S4.4.3.3 of Sec. 571.208 and the requirements 
of Sec. Sec. 571.209 and 571.210 as they apply to school buses with a 
gross vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kg or less; and
    (2) The requirements of S5.1.2, S5.1.3, S5.1.4, S5.1.5, S5.3, and 
S5.4 of this standard. However, the requirements of Sec. Sec. 571.208 
and 571.210 shall be met at W seating positions in a bench seat using a 
body block as specified in Figure 2 of this standard, and a particular 
school bus passenger seat (i.e., a test specimen) in that weight class 
need not meet further requirements after having met S5.1.2 and S5.1.5, 
or after having been subjected to either S5.1.3, S5.1.4, or S5.3 of this 
standard or Sec. 571.210.
    S5.1 Seating requirements. School bus passenger seats shall be 
forward facing.
    S5.1.1 [Reserved]
    S5.1.2 Seat back height and surface area. Each school bus passenger 
seat shall be equipped with a seat back

[[Page 725]]

that, in the front projected view, has a front surface area above the 
horizontal plane that passes through the seating reference point, and 
below the horizontal plane 508 mm above the seating reference point, of 
not less than 90 percent of the seat bench width in millimeters 
multiplied by 508.
    S5.1.3 Seat performance forward. When a school bus passenger seat 
that has another seat behind it is subjected to the application of force 
as specified in S5.1.3.1 and S5.1.3.2, and subsequently, the application 
of additional force to the seat back as specified in S5.1.3.3 and 
S5.1.3.4:
    (a) The seat back force/deflection curve shall fall within the zone 
specified in Figure 1;
    (b) Seat back deflection shall not exceed 356 mm; (for determination 
of (a) and (b) the force/deflection curve describes only the force 
applied through the upper loading bar, and only the forward travel of 
the pivot attachment point of the upper loading bar, measured from the 
point at which the initial application of 44 N of force is attained.)
    (c) The seat shall not deflect by an amount such that any part of 
the seat moves to within 102 mm of any part of another school bus 
passenger seat or restraining barrier in its originally installed 
position;
    (d) The seat shall not separate from the vehicle at any attachment 
point; and
    (e) Seat components shall not separate at any attachment point.
    S5.1.3.1 Position the loading bar specified in S6.5 so that it is 
laterally centered behind the seat back with the bar's longitudinal axis 
in a transverse plane of the vehicle and in any horizontal plane between 
102 mm above and 102 mm below the seating reference point of the school 
bus passenger seat behind the test specimen.
    S5.1.3.2 Apply a force of 3,114W newtons horizontally in the forward 
direction through the loading bar at the pivot attachment point. Reach 
the specified load in not less than 5 nor more than 30 seconds.
    S5.1.3.3 No sooner than 1.0 second after attaining the required 
force, reduce that force to 1,557W newtons and, while maintaining the 
pivot point position of the first loading bar at the position where the 
1,557W newtons is attained, position a second loading bar described in 
S6.5 so that it is laterally centered behind the seat back with the 
bar's longitudinal axis in a transverse plane of the vehicle and in the 
horizontal plane 406 mm above the seating reference point of the school 
bus passenger seat behind the test specimen, and move the bar forward 
against the seat back until a force of 44 N has been applied.
    S5.1.3.4 Apply additional force horizontally in the forward 
direction through the upper bar until 452W joules of energy have been 
absorbed in deflecting the seat back (or restraining barrier). Apply the 
additional load in not less than 5 seconds nor more than 30 seconds. 
Maintain the pivot attachment point in the maximum forward travel 
position for not less than 5 seconds nor more than 10 seconds and 
release the load in not less than 5 nor more than 30 seconds. (For the 
determination of S5.1.3.4 the force/deflection curve describes only the 
force applied through the upper loading bar, and the forward and 
rearward travel distance of the upper loading bar pivot attachment point 
measured from the position at which the initial application of 44 N of 
force is attained.)
    S5.1.4 Seat performance rearward. When a school bus passenger seat 
that has another seat behind it is subjected to the application of force 
as specified in S5.1.4.1 and S5.1.4.2:
    (a) Seat back force shall not exceed 9,786 N;
    (b) Seat back deflection shall not exceed 254 mm; (for determination 
of (a) and (b) the force/deflection curve describes only the force 
applied through the loading bar, and only the rearward travel of the 
pivot attachment point of the loading bar, measured from the point at 
which the initial application of 222 N is attained.
    (c) The seat shall not deflect by an amount such that any part of 
the seat moves to within 102 mm of any part of another passenger seat in 
its originally installed position;
    (d) The seat shall not separate from the vehicle at any attachment 
point; and

[[Page 726]]

    (e) Seat components shall not separate at any attachment point.
    S5.1.4.1 Position the loading bar described in S6.5 so that it is 
laterally centered forward of the seat back with the bar's longitudinal 
axis in a transverse plane of the vehicle and in the horizontal plane 
343 mm above the seating reference point of the test specimen, and move 
the loading bar rearward against the seat back until a force of 222 N 
has been applied.
    S5.1.4.2 Apply additional force horizontally rearward through the 
loading bar until 316W joules (J) of energy has been absorbed in 
deflecting the seat back. Apply the additional load in not less than 5 
seconds nor more than 30 seconds. Maintain the pivot attachment point in 
the maximum rearward travel position for not less than 5 seconds nor 
more than 10 seconds and release the load in not less than 5 seconds nor 
more than 30 seconds. (For determination of S5.1.4.2 the force 
deflection curve describes the force applied through the loading bar and 
the rearward and forward travel distance of the loading bar pivot 
attachment point measured from the position at which the initial 
application of 222 N of force is attained.)
    S5.1.5 Seat cushion retention. In the case of school bus passenger 
seats equipped with seat cushions, with all manual attachment devices 
between the seat and the seat cushion in the manufacturer's designated 
position for attachment, the seat cushion shall not separate from the 
seat at any attachment point when subjected to an upward force in 
newtons of 5 times the mass of the seat cushion in kilograms and 
multiplied by 9.8 m/s <SUP>2</SUP>, applied in any period of not less 
than 1 nor more than 5 seconds, and maintained for 5 seconds.
    S5.2 Restraining barrier requirements. Each vehicle shall be 
equipped with a restraining barrier forward of any designated seating 
position that does not have the rear surface of another school bus 
passenger seat within 610 mm of its seating reference point, measured 
along a horizontal longitudinal line through the seating reference point 
in the forward direction.
    S5.2.1 Barrier-seat separation. The horizontal distance between the 
restraining barrier's rear surface and the seating reference point of 
the seat in front of which the barrier is required shall not be more 
than 610 mm measured along a horizontal longitudinal line through the 
seating reference point in the forward direction.
    S5.2.2 Barrier position and rear surface area. The position and rear 
surface area of the restraining barrier shall be such that, in a front 
projected view of the bus, each point of the barrier's perimeter 
coincides with or lies outside of the perimeter of the seat back of the 
seat for which it is required.
    S5.2.3 Barrier performance forward. When force is applied to the 
restraining barrier in the same manner as specified in S5.1.3.1 through 
S5.1.3.4 for seating performance tests:
    (a) The restraining barrier force/deflection curve shall fall within 
the zone specified in Figure 1;
    (b) Restraining barrier deflection shall not exceed 356 mm; (for 
computation of (a) and (b) the force/deflection curve describes only the 
force applied through the upper loading bar, and only the forward travel 
of the pivot attachment point of the loading bar, measured from the 
point at which the initial application of 44 N of force is attained.)
    (c) Restraining barrier deflection shall not interfere with normal 
door operation;
    (d) The restraining barrier shall not separate from the vehicle at 
any attachment point; and
    (e) Restraining barrier components shall not separate at any 
attachment point.
    S5.3 Impact zone requirements.
    S5.3.1 Head protection zone. Any contactable surface of the vehicle 
within any zone specified in S5.3.1.1 shall meet the requirements of 
S5.3.1.2 and S5.3.1.3. However, a surface area that has been contacted 
pursuant to an impact test need not meet further requirements contained 
in S5.3.
    S5.3.1.1 The head protection zones in each vehicle are the spaces in 
front of each school bus passenger seat which are not occupied by bus 
sidewall, window, or door structure and which, in relation to that seat 
and its seating reference point, are enclosed by the following planes;

[[Page 727]]

    (a) Horizontal planes 305 mm and 1016 mm above the seating reference 
point;
    (b) A vertical longitudinal plane tangent to the inboard (aisle 
side) edge of the seat; and
    (c) A vertical longitudinal plane 83 mm inboard of the outboard edge 
of the seat;
    (d) Vertical transverse planes through and 762 mm forward of the 
reference point.
    S5.3.1.2 Head form impact requirement. When any contactable surface 
of the vehicle within the zones specified in S5.3.1.1 is impacted from 
any direction at 6.7 m/s by the head form described in S6.6, the axial 
acceleration at the center of gravity of the head form shall be such 
that the expression
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.016


shall not exceed 1,000 where ``a'' is the axial acceleration expressed 
as a multiple of ``g'' (the acceleration due to gravity), and 
``t<INF>1</INF>'' and ``t<INF>2</INF>'' are any two points in time 
during the impact.
    S5.3.1.3 Head form force distribution. When any contactable surface 
of the vehicle within the zones specified in S5.3.1.1 is impacted from 
any direction at 6.7 m/s by the head form described in S6.6, the energy 
necessary to deflect the impacted material shall be not less than 4.5 
joules before the force level on the head form exceeds 667 N. When any 
contactable surface within such zones is impacted by the head form from 
any direction at 1.5 m/s the contact area on the head form surface shall 
be not less than 1,935 mm <SUP>2</SUP>.
    S5.3.2 Leg protection zone. Any part of the seat backs or 
restraining barriers in the vehicle within any zone specified in 
S5.3.2.1 shall meet the requirements of S5.3.2.2.
    S5.3.2.1 The leg protection zones of each vehicle are those parts of 
the school bus passenger seat backs and restraining barriers bounded by 
horizontal planes 305 mm above and 102 mm below the seating reference 
point of the school bus passenger seat immediately behind the seat back 
or restraining barrier.
    S5.3.2.2 When any point on the rear surface of that part of a seat 
back or restraining barrier within any zone specified in S5.3.2.1 is 
impacted from any direction at 4.9 m/s by the knee form specified in 
S6.7, the resisting force of the impacted material shall not exceed 
2,669 N and the contact area on the knee form surface shall not be less 
than 1,935 mm <SUP>2</SUP>.
    S5.4 Each school bus having one or more locations designed for 
carrying a person seated in a wheelchair shall comply with S5.4.1 
through S5.4.4 at each such wheelchair location.
    S5.4.1 Wheelchair securement anchorages. Each wheelchair location 
shall have not less than four wheelchair securement anchorages complying 
with S5.4.1.1 through S5.4.1.3.
    S5.4.1.1 Each wheelchair securement anchorage shall have a 
wheelchair securement device complying with S5.4.2 attached to it.
    S5.4.1.2 The wheelchair securement anchorages at each wheelchair 
location shall be situated so that--
    (a) A wheelchair can be secured in a forward-facing position.
    (b) The wheelchair can be secured by wheelchair securement devices 
at two locations in the front and two locations in the rear.
    (c) The front wheel of a three-wheeled wheelchair can be secured.
    S5.4.1.3 Each wheelchair securement anchorage shall be capable of 
withstanding a force of 13,344 Newtons applied as specified in 
paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section. When more than one 
securement device share a common anchorage, the anchorage shall be 
capable of withstanding a force of 13,344 Newtons multiplied by the 
number of securement devices sharing that anchorage.
    (a) The initial application force shall be applied at an angle of 
not less than 30 degrees, but not more than 60 degrees, measured from 
the horizontal. (See Figure 4.)
    (b) The horizontal projection of the force direction shall be within 
a horizontal arc of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>45 degrees relative to a 
longitudinal line which has its origin at the anchorage location and 
projects rearward for an anchorage whose wheelchair securement device is 
intended to secure the front of the wheelchair and forward for an 
anchorage whose wheelchair securement device is

[[Page 728]]

intended to secure the rear of the wheelchair. (See Figure 4.)
    (c) The force shall be applied at the onset rate of not more than 
133,440 Newtons per second.
    (d) The 13,344 Newton force shall be attained in not more than 30 
seconds, and shall be maintained for 10 seconds.
    S5.4.2 Wheelchair securement devices. Each wheelchair securement 
device shall--
    (a) If incorporating webbing or a strap--
    (1) Comply with the requirements for Type 1 safety belt systems in 
S4.2, S4.3, and S4.4(a) of FMVSS No. 209, Seat Belt Assemblies; and
    (2) Provide a means of adjustment to remove slack from the device.
    (b) If not incorporating webbing or a strap, limit movement of the 
wheelchair through either the equipment design or a means of adjustment.
    S5.4.3 Wheelchair occupant restraint anchorages.
    S5.4.3.1 Each wheelchair location shall have:
    (a) Not less than one anchorage for the upper end of the upper torso 
restraint; and
    (b) Not less than two floor anchorages for wheelchair occupant 
pelvic and upper torso restraint.
    S5.4.3.2 Each wheelchair occupant restraint floor anchorage shall be 
capable of withstanding a force of 13,344 Newtons applied as specified 
in paragraphs (a) through (d). When more than one wheelchair occupant 
restraint share a common anchorage, the anchorage shall be capable of 
withstanding a force of 13,344 Newtons multiplied by the number of 
occupant restraints sharing that anchorage.
    (a) The initial application force shall be applied at a angle of not 
less than 45 degrees, but not more than 80 degrees, measured from the 
horizontal. (See Figure 5.)
    (b) The horizontal projection of the force direction shall be within 
a horizontal arc of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>45 degrees relative to a 
longitudinal line which has its origin at the anchorage and projects 
forward. (See Figure 5.)
    (c) The force shall be applied at an onset rate of not more than 
133,440 Newtons per second.
    (d) The 13,344 Newton force shall be attained in not more than 30 
seconds, and shall be maintained for 10 seconds.
    (e) When a wheelchair securement device and an occupant restraint 
share a common anchorage, including occupant restraint designs that 
attach the occupant restraint to the securement device or the 
wheelchair, the loads specified by S5.4.1.3 and S5.4.3.2 shall be 
applied simultaneously, under the conditions specified in S5.4.3.2 (a) 
and (b). (See Figure 6.)
    S5.4.3.3 Each anchorage for a wheelchair occupant upper torso 
restraint shall be capable of withstanding a force of 6,672 Newtons 
applied as specified in paragraphs (a) through (d).
    (a) The initial application force shall be applied at a vertical 
angle of not less than zero degrees, but not more than 40 degrees, below 
a horizontal plane which passes through the anchorage. (See Figure 7.)
    (b) The projection of the force direction onto the horizontal plane 
shall be within zero degrees and 45 degrees as measured from a 
longitudinal line with its origin at the anchorage and projecting 
forward. (See Figure 7.)
    (c) The force shall be applied at the onset rate of not more than 
66,720 Newtons per second.
    (d) The 6,672 Newton force shall be attained in not more than 30 
seconds, and shall be maintained for 10 seconds.
    S5.4.4 Wheelchair occupant restraints.
    (a) Each wheelchair location shall have wheelchair occupant pelvic 
and upper torso restraints attached to the anchorages required by 
S5.4.3.
    (b) Each wheelchair occupant restraint shall comply with the 
requirements for Type 2 safety belt systems in S4.2, S4.3, and S4.4(b) 
of FMVSS No. 209, Seat Belt Assemblies.
    S6. Test conditions. The following conditions apply to the 
requirements specified in S5.
    S6.1 Test surface. The bus is at rest on a level surface.
    S6.2 Tires. Tires are inflated to the pressure specified by the 
manufacturer for the gross vehicle weight rating.
    S6.3 Temperature. The ambient temperature is any level between 0 
degrees C and 32 degrees C.

[[Page 729]]

    S6.4 Seat back position. If adjustable, a seat back is adjusted to 
its most upright position.
    S6.5 Loading bar. The loading bar is a rigid cylinder with an 
outside diameter of 152 mm that has hemispherical ends with radii of 76 
mm and with a surface roughness that does not exceed 1.6 [mu]m, root 
mean square. The length of the loading bar is 102 mm less than the width 
of the seat back in each test. The stroking mechanism applies force 
through a pivot attachment at the center point of the loading bar which 
allows the loading bar to rotate in a horizontal plane 30 degrees in 
either direction from the transverse position.
    S6.5.1 A vertical or lateral force of 17,792 N applied externally 
through the pivot attachment point of the loading bar at any position 
reached during a test specified in this standard shall not deflect that 
point more than 25 mm.
    S6.6 Head form. The head form for the measurement of acceleration is 
a rigid surface comprised of two hemispherical shapes, with total 
equivalent mass of 5.2 kg. The first of the two hemispherical shapes has 
a diameter of 166 mm. The second of the two hemispherical shapes has a 
50 mm diameter and is centered as shown in Figure 3 to protrude from the 
outer surface of the first hemispherical shape. The surface roughness of 
the hemispherical shapes does not exceed 1.6 [mu]m, root mean square.
    S6.6.1 The direction of travel of the head form is coincidental with 
the straight line connecting the centerpoints of the two spherical outer 
surfaces which constitute the head form shape.
    S6.6.2 The head form is instrumented with an acceleration sensing 
device whose output is recorded in a data channel that conforms to the 
requirements for a 1,000 Hz channel class as specified in SAE 
Recommended Practice J211a, December 1971. The head form exhibits no 
resonant frequency below three times the frequency of the channel class. 
The axis of the acceleration sensing device coincides with the straight 
line connecting the centerpoints of the two hemispherical outer surfaces 
which constitute the head form shape.
    S6.6.3 The head form is guided by a stroking device so that the 
direction of travel of the head form is not affected by impact with the 
surface being tested at the levels called for in the standard.
    S6.7 Knee form. The knee form for measurement of force is a rigid 76 
millimeter-diameter cylinder, with an equivalent weight of 44 N that has 
one hemispherical end with a 38 mm radius forming a contact surface of 
the knee form. The hemispherical surface roughness does not exceed 1.6 
[mu]m, root mean square.
    S6.7.1 The direction of travel of the knee form is coincidental with 
the centerline of the rigid cylinder.
    S6.7.2 The knee form is instrumented with an acceleration sensing 
device whose output is recorded in a data channel that conforms to the 
requirements of a 600 Hz channel class as specified in the SAE 
Recommended Practice J211a, December 1971. The knee form exhibits no 
resonant frequency below three times the frequency of the channel class. 
The axis of the acceleration sensing device is aligned to measure 
acceleration along the centerline of the cylindrical knee form.
    S6.7.3 The knee form is guided by a stroking device so that the 
direction of travel of the knee form is not affected by impact with the 
surface being tested at the levels called for in the standard.
    S6.8 The head form, knee form, and contactable surfaces are clean 
and dry during impact testing.

[[Page 730]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.008


[[Page 731]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.009


[[Page 732]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.010


[[Page 733]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.141


[[Page 734]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.142


[[Page 735]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.143


[[Page 736]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.144


[41 FR 4018, Jan. 28, 1976, as amended at 41 FR 28528, July 12, 1976; 41 
FR 36027, Aug. 26, 1976; 41 FR 54945, Dec. 16, 1976; 42 FR 64120, Dec. 
22, 1977; 43 FR 9150, Mar. 6, 1978; 44 FR 18675, Mar. 29, 1979; 48 FR 
12386, Mar. 24, 1983; 54 FR 46268, Nov. 2, 1989; 58 FR 4593, Jan. 15, 
1993; 58 FR 46876, Sept. 3, 1993; 63 FR 28948, 28950, May 27, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 571.223  Standard No. 223; Rear impact guards.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for rear impact 
guards for trailers and semitrailers.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the number of 
deaths and serious injuries that occur when light duty vehicles collide 
with the rear end of trailers and semitrailers.

[[Page 737]]

    S3. Application. This standard applies to rear impact guards for 
trailers and semitrailers subject to Federal Motor Safety Standard No. 
224, Rear Impact Protection (Sec. 571.224).
    S4. Definitions.
    In this standard, directional terms such as bottom, center, height, 
horizontal, longitudinal, transverse, and rear refer to directions 
relative to the vehicle orientation when the guard is oriented as if it 
were installed on a vehicle according to the installation instructions 
in S5.5 of this section.
    Chassis means the load supporting frame structure of a motor 
vehicle.
    Guard width means the maximum horizontal guard dimension that is 
perpendicular to the longitudinal vertical plane passing through the 
longitudinal centerline of the vehicle when the guard is installed on 
the vehicle according to the installation instructions in S5.5 of this 
section.
    Horizontal member means the structural member of the guard that 
meets the configuration requirements of S5.1.1 through 5.1.3 of Sec. 
571.224, Rear Impact Protection, when the guard is installed on a 
vehicle according to the guard manufacturer's installation instructions.
    Hydraulic guard means a guard designed to use fluid properties to 
provide resistance force to deformation.
    Rear impact guard means a device installed on or near the rear of a 
vehicle so that when the vehicle is struck from the rear, the device 
limits the distance that the striking vehicle's front end slides under 
the rear end of the impacted vehicle.
    Rigid test fixture means a supporting structure on which a rear 
impact guard can be mounted in the same manner it is mounted to a 
vehicle. The rigid test fixture is designed to resist the forces applied 
to the rear impact guard without significant deformation, such that a 
performance requirement of this standard must be met no matter how small 
an amount of energy is absorbed by the rigid test fixture.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 Projected Vertical Height. The horizontal member of each guard, 
when viewed from the rear as it would be installed on a trailer pursuant 
to the installation instructions or procedures required by S5.5 of this 
standard, shall have a vertical height of at least 100 mm at each point 
across the guard width, when projected horizontally on a transverse 
vertical plane. Those installation instructions or procedures shall 
specify that the guard is to be mounted so that all portions of the 
horizontal member necessary to achieve a 100 mm high projected vertical 
height are located not more than 305 mm forward of the vehicle's rear 
extremity, as defined in S4 of 49 CFR 571.224, Rear Impact Protection. 
See Figure 1 of this section.
    S5.2 Strength and Energy Absorption. When tested under the 
procedures of S6 of this section, each guard shall comply with the 
strength requirements of S5.2.1 of this section at each test location 
and the energy absorption requirements of S5.2.2 of this section at test 
location P3, as specified in S6.4 of this section. However, a particular 
guard (i.e., test specimen) need not be tested at more than one 
location.
    S5.2.1 Guard Strength. The guard must resist the force levels 
specified in S5.2.1 (a) through (c) of this section without deflecting 
by more than 125 mm.
    (a) A force of 50,000 N at test location P1 on either the left or 
the right side of the guard as defined in S6.4(a) of this section.
    (b) A force of 50,000 N at test location P2 as defined in S6.4(b) of 
this section.
    (c) A force of 100,000 N at test location P3 on either the left or 
the right side of the guard as defined in S6.4(c) of this section.
    S5.2.2 Guard Energy Absorption. A guard, other than a hydraulic 
guard, shall absorb by plastic deformation within the first 125 mm of 
deflection at least 5,650 J of energy at each test location P3. See 
Figure 2 of this section.
    S5.3 Labeling. Each guard shall be permanently labeled with the 
information specified in S5.3 (a) through (c) of this section. The 
information shall be in English and in letters that are at least 2.5 mm 
high. The label shall be placed on the forward-facing surface of the 
horizontal member of the guard, 305 mm inboard of the right end of the 
guard.
    (a) The guard manufacturer's name and address.

[[Page 738]]

    (b) The statement: ``Manufactured in --------'' (inserting the month 
and year of guard manufacture).
    (c) The letters ``DOT'', constituting a certification by the guard 
manufacturer that the guard conforms to all requirements of this 
standard.
    S5.4 Guard Attachment Hardware. Each guard, other than a guard that 
is to be installed on a vehicle manufactured by the manufacturer of the 
guard, shall be accompanied by all attachment hardware necessary for 
installation of the guard on the chassis of the motor vehicle for which 
it is intended.
    S5.5 Installation Instructions. The manufacturer of rear impact 
guards for sale to vehicle manufacturers shall include with each guard 
printed instructions in English for installing the guard, as well as a 
diagram or schematic depicting proper guard installation. The 
manufacturer of a rear impact guard for one of its own vehicles shall 
prepare and keep a copy of installation procedures applicable to each 
vehicle/guard combination for a period of one year from the date of 
vehicle manufacture and provide them to NHTSA on request. The 
instructions or procedures shall specify:
    (a) Vehicles on which the guard can be installed. Vehicles may be 
designated by listing the make and model of the vehicles for which the 
guard is suitable, or by specifying the design elements that would make 
any vehicle an appropriate host for the particular guard (e.g., vehicles 
with frame rails of certain spacing and gauge of steel).
    (b) A description of the chassis surface to which the guard will be 
attached, including frame design types with dimensions, material 
thickness, and tire track width. This description shall be detailed 
enough to permit the agency to locate and duplicate the chassis surface 
during compliance testing.
    (c) An explanation of the method of attaching the guard to the 
chassis of each vehicle make and model listed or to the design elements 
specified in the instructions or procedures. The principal aspects of 
vehicle chassis configuration that are necessary to the proper 
functioning of the guard shall be specified. If the chassis strength is 
inadequate for the guard design, the instructions or procedures shall 
specify methods for adequately reinforcing the vehicle chassis. 
Procedures for properly installing any guard attachment hardware shall 
be provided.
    S6. Guard Test Procedures. The procedures for determining compliance 
with S5.2 of this section are specified in S6.1 through S6.6 of this 
section.
    S6.1 Preparation of Hydraulic Guards. For hydraulic guards, the 
horizontal member of the guard is deflected in a forward direction until 
the hydraulic unit(s) have reached the full extent of their designed 
travel or 610 mm, whichever occurs first. The hydraulic units are 
compressed before the application of force to the guard in accordance 
with S6.6 of this section and maintained in this condition throughout 
the testing under S6.6 of this section.
    S6.2 Guard Installation for Strength and Energy Absorption Tests.
    (a) The rear impact guard is attached to a test device.
    (b) The test device for the compliance test will be whichever of the 
following devices, if either was used, the manufacturer used as a basis 
for its certification of the guard in S5.3(c) of this section. If the 
manufacturer did not use one of these devices or does not specify a 
device when asked by the agency, the agency may choose either of the 
following devices--
    (1) A rigid test fixture. In the case of testing on a rigid test 
fixture NHTSA will consult the installation instructions or procedures 
to determine the surface or structure that the guard is supposed to be 
mounted to and mount it to the rigid test fixture in the same way.
    (2) A complete trailer for which installation of the guard is 
suitable, as provided in the manufacturer's installation instructions or 
procedures required by S5.5 of this section. The trailer chassis is 
secured so that it behaves essentially as a fixed object during the 
test, such that the test must be passed no matter how little it moves 
during the test.
    (c) The guard is attached in accordance with the instructions or 
procedures for guard attachment provided by the guard manufacturer for 
that

[[Page 739]]

guard as required by S5.5 of this section.
    S6.3 Force Application Device. The force application device employed 
in S6.6 of this section consists of a rectangular solid made of rigid 
steel. The steel solid is 203 mm in height, 203 mm in width, and 25 mm 
in thickness. The 203 mm by 203 mm face of the block is used as the 
contact surface for application of the forces specified in S5.2.1 (a) 
through (c) of this section. Each edge of the contact surface of the 
block has a radius of curvature of 5 mm plus or minus 1 mm.
    S6.4 Test Locations. With the guard mounted to the rigid test 
fixture or to a complete trailer, determine the test locations P1, P2, 
and P3 in accordance with the procedure set forth in S6.4 (a) through 
(c) of this section. See Figure 1 of this section.
    (a) Test location P1 is the point on the rearmost surface of the 
horizontal member of the guard that:
    (1) Is located at a distance of \3/8\ of the guard width from the 
vertical longitudinal plane passing through center of the guard;
    (2) Lies on either side of the center of the guard's horizontal 
member; and
    (3) Is 50 mm above the bottom of the guard.
    (b) Test location P2 is the point on the rearmost surface of the 
horizontal member of the guard that:
    (1) Lies in the longitudinal vertical plane passing through the 
center of the guard's horizontal member; and
    (2) Is 50 mm above the bottom of the guard.
    (c) Test location P3 is any point on the rearmost surface of the 
horizontal member of the guard that:
    (1) Is not less than 355 mm and not more than 635 mm from the 
vertical longitudinal plane passing through center of the guard;
    (2) Lies on either the right or left side of the horizontal member 
of the guard; and
    (3) Is 50 mm above the bottom of the guard.
    S6.5 Positioning of Force Application Device. Before applying any 
force to the guard, locate the force application device such that:
    (a) The center point of the contact surface of the force application 
device is aligned with and touching the guard test location, as defined 
by the specifications of S6.4 of this section.
    (b) The longitudinal axis of the force application device passes 
through the test location and is perpendicular to the transverse 
vertical plane that is tangent to the rearmost surface of the guard's 
horizontal member.
    S6.6 Force Application. After the force application device has been 
positioned according to S6.5 of this section, apply the loads specified 
in S5.2.1 of this section. Load application procedures are specified in 
the S6.6 (a) through (d) of this section.
    (a) Using the force application device, apply force to the guard in 
a forward direction such that the displacement rate of the force 
application device is the rate, plus or minus 10 percent, designated by 
the guard manufacturer within the range of 2.0 cm per minute to 9.0 cm 
per minute. If the guard manufacturer does not designate a rate, any 
rate within that range may be chosen.
    (b) If conducting a strength test to satisfy the requirement of 
S5.2.1 of this section, the force is applied until the forces specified 
in S5.2.1 of this section have been exceeded, or until the displacement 
of the force application device has reached at least 125 mm, whichever 
occurs first.
    (c) If conducting a test to be used for the calculation of energy 
absorption levels to satisfy the requirement of S5.2.2 of this section, 
apply the force to the guard until displacement of the force application 
device has reached 125 mm. For calculation of guard energy absorption, 
the value of force is recorded at least ten times per 25 mm of 
displacement of the contact surface of the loading device. Reduce the 
force until the guard no longer offers resistance to the force 
application device. Produce a force vs. deflection diagram of the type 
shown in Figure 2 of this section using this information. Determine the 
energy absorbed by the guard by calculating the shaded area bounded by 
the curve in the force vs. deflection diagram and the abscissa (X-axis).
    (d) During each force application, the force application device is 
guided so that it does not rotate. At all times

[[Page 740]]

during the application of force, the location of the longitudinal axis 
of the force application device remains constant.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.145


[[Page 741]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.146


[61 FR 2030, Jan. 24, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 3662, Jan. 26, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 571.224  Standard No. 224; Rear impact protection.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes requirements for the 
installation of rear impact guards on trailers and semitrailers with a 
gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 4,536 kg or more.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the number of 
deaths and serious injuries occurring when light duty vehicles impact 
the rear of trailers and semitrailers with a GVWR of 4,536 kg or more.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to trailers and semitrailers 
with a GVWR of 4,536 kg or more. The standard does not apply to pole 
trailers, pulpwood trailers, special purpose vehicles, wheels back 
vehicles, or temporary living quarters as defined in 49 CFR 529.2. If a 
cargo tank motor vehicle, as defined in 49 CFR 171.8, is certified to 
carry hazardous materials and has a rear bumper or rear end protection 
device conforming with 49 CFR part 178 located in the area of the 
horizontal member of the rear underride guard required by this standard, 
the guard need not comply with the energy absorption requirement 
(S5.2.2) of 49 CFR 571.223.
    S4. Definitions.
    Chassis means the load supporting frame structure of a motor 
vehicle.
    Horizontal member means the structural member of the guard that 
meets the configuration requirements of S5.1 of this section when the 
guard is installed on the vehicle according to the

[[Page 742]]

installation instructions or procedures required by S5.5 of Sec. 
571.223, Rear Impact Guards.
    Low chassis vehicle means a trailer or semitrailer having a chassis 
that extends behind the rearmost point of the rearmost tires and a lower 
rear surface that meets the configuration requirements of S5.1.1 through 
5.1.3 of this section.
    Outer or Outboard means away from the trailer centerline and toward 
the side extremities of the trailer.
    Pulpwood trailer means a trailer that is designed exclusively for 
harvesting logs or pulpwood and constructed with a skeletal frame with 
no means for attachment of a solid bed, body, or container.
    Rear extremity means the rearmost point on a vehicle that is above a 
horizontal plane located 560 mm above the ground and below a horizontal 
plane located 1,900 mm above the ground when the vehicle is configured 
as specified in S5.1 of this section and when the vehicle's cargo doors, 
tailgate, or other permanent structures are positioned as they normally 
are when the vehicle is in motion. Nonstructural protrusions such as 
taillights, rubber bumpers, hinges and latches are excluded from the 
determination of the rearmost point.
    Rounded corner means a guard's outermost end that curves upward or 
forward toward the front of the vehicle, or both.
    Side extremity means the outermost point on a vehicle's side that is 
located above a horizontal plane 560 mm above the ground, below a 
horizontal plane located 190 cm above the ground, and between a 
transverse vertical plane tangent to the rear extremity of the vehicle 
and a transverse vertical plane located 305 mm forward of that plane 
when the vehicle is configured as specified in S5.1 of this section. 
Non-structural protrusions such as taillights, hinges, rubber bumpers, 
and latches are excluded from the determination of the outermost point.
    Special purpose vehicle means a trailer or semitrailer having work-
performing equipment that, while the vehicle is in transit, resides in 
or moves through the area that could be occupied by the horizontal 
member of the rear underride guard, as defined by S5.1.1 through S5.1.3.
    Wheels back vehicle means a trailer or semitrailer whose rearmost 
axle is permanently fixed and is located such that the rearmost surface 
of tires of the size recommended by the vehicle manufacturer for the 
vehicle on that axle is not more than 305 mm forward of the transverse 
vertical plane tangent to the rear extremity of the vehicle.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 Installation; vehicle configuration. Each vehicle shall be 
equipped with a rear impact guard certified as meeting Federal Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standard No. 223, Rear Impact Guards (Sec. 571.223). 
When the vehicle to which the guard is attached is resting on level 
ground, unloaded, with its full capacity of fuel, and with its tires 
inflated and air suspension, if so equipped, pressurized in accordance 
with the manufacturer's recommendations, the guard shall comply with the 
requirements of S5.1.1 through S5.1.3 of this section. See Figure 1 of 
this section.
    S5.1.1 Guard width. The outermost surfaces of the horizontal member 
of the guard shall extend outboard to within 100 mm of the longitudinal 
vertical planes that are tangent to the side extremities of the vehicle, 
but shall not extend outboard of those planes. See Figure 1 of this 
section.
    S5.1.2 Guard height. The vertical distance between the bottom edge 
of the horizontal member of the guard and the ground shall not exceed 
560 mm at any point across the full width of the member. Notwithstanding 
this requirement, guards with rounded corners may curve upward within 
255 mm of the longitudinal vertical planes that are tangent to the side 
extremities of the vehicle. See Figure 1 of this section.
    S5.1.3 Guard rear surface. At any height 560 mm or more above the 
ground, the rearmost surface of the horizontal member of the guard shall 
be located as close as practical to a transverse vertical plane tangent 
to the rear extremity of the vehicle, but no more than 305 mm forward of 
that plane. Notwithstanding this requirement, the horizontal member may 
extend rearward of the plane, and guards

[[Page 743]]

with rounded corners may curve forward within 255 mm of the longitudinal 
vertical planes that are tangent to the side extremities of the vehicle.
    S5.2 Installation Requirements. Guards shall be attached to the 
vehicle's chassis by the vehicle manufacturer in accordance with the 
installation instructions or procedures provided pursuant to S5.5 of 
Standard No. 223, Rear Impact Guards (Sec. 571.223). The vehicle must 
be of a type identified in the installation instructions as appropriate 
for the guard.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.147


[61 FR 2035, Jan. 24, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 3662, Jan. 26, 1998]

[[Page 744]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.225  Standard No. 225; Child restraint anchorage systems.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard establishes requirements for 
child restraint anchorage systems to ensure their proper location and 
strength for the effective securing of child restraints, to reduce the 
likelihood of the anchorage systems' failure, and to increase the 
likelihood that child restraints are properly secured and thus more 
fully achieve their potential effectiveness in motor vehicles.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars; to trucks 
and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating 
(GVWR) of 3,855 kilograms (8,500 pounds) or less; and to buses 
(including school buses) with a GVWR of 4,536 kg (10,000 lb) or less. 
This standard does not apply to walk-in van-type vehicles, vehicles 
manufactured to be sold exclusively to the U.S. Postal Service, shuttle 
buses, and funeral coaches.
    S3. Definitions.
    Child restraint anchorage means any vehicle component, other than 
Type I or Type II seat belts, that is involved in transferring loads 
generated by a child restraint system to the vehicle structure.
    Child restraint anchorage system means a vehicle system that is 
designed for attaching a child restraint system to a vehicle at a 
particular designated seating position, consisting of:
    (a) Two lower anchorages meeting the requirements of S9; and
    (b) A tether anchorage meeting the requirements of S6.
    Child restraint fixture (CRF) means the fixture depicted in Figures 
1 and 2 of this standard that simulates the dimensions of a child 
restraint system, and that is used to determine the space required by 
the child restraint system and the location and accessibility of the 
lower anchorages.
    Funeral coach means a vehicle that contains only a front row of 
occupant seats, is designed exclusively for transporting a body and 
casket and that is equipped with features to secure a casket in place 
during operation of the vehicle.
    Rear designated seating position means any designated seating 
position (as that term is defined at Sec. 571.3) that is rearward of 
the front seats(s).
    Seat bight means the area close to and including the intersection of 
the surfaces of the vehicle seat cushion and the seat back.
    SFAD 1 means Static Force Application Device 1 shown in Figures 12 
to 16 of this standard.
    SFAD 2 means Static Force Application Device 2 shown in Figures 17 
and 18 of this standard.
    Shuttle bus means a bus with only one row of forward-facing seating 
positions rearward of the driver's seat.
    Tether anchorage means a user-ready, permanently installed vehicle 
system that transfers loads from a tether strap through the tether hook 
to the vehicle structure and that accepts a tether hook.
    Tether strap means a strap that is secured to the rigid structure of 
the seat back of a child restraint system, and is connected to a tether 
hook that transfers the load from that system to the tether anchorage.
    Tether hook means a device, illustrated in Figure 11 of Standard No. 
213 (Sec. 571.213), used to attach a tether strap to a tether 
anchorage.
    S4. General vehicle requirements.
    S4.1 Each tether anchorage and each child restraint anchorage system 
installed, either voluntarily or pursuant to this standard, in any new 
vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 1999, shall comply with 
the configuration, location, marking and strength requirements of this 
standard. The vehicle shall be delivered with written information, in 
English, on how to appropriately use those anchorages and systems.
    S4.2 For passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 
and before September 1, 2000, not less than 80 percent of the 
manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles (not including 
convertibles), as set forth in S13, shall be equipped with a tether 
anchorage as specified in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of S4.2, except as 
provided in S5.
    (a) Each vehicle with three or more forward-facing rear designated 
seating positions shall be equipped with a tether anchorage conforming 
to the requirements of S6 at no fewer than

[[Page 745]]

three forward-facing rear designated seating positions. The tether 
anchorage of a child restraint anchorage system may count towards the 
three required tether anchorages. In each vehicle with a forward-facing 
rear designated seating position other than an outboard designated 
seating position, at least one tether anchorage (with or without the 
lower anchorages of a child restraint anchorage system) shall be at such 
a designated seating position. In a vehicle with three or more rows of 
seating positions, at least one of the tether anchorages (with or 
without the lower anchorages of a child restraint anchorage system) 
shall be installed at a forward-facing seating position in the second 
row if such a forward-facing seating position is available in that row.
    (b) Each vehicle with not more than two forward-facing rear 
designated seating positions shall be equipped with a tether anchorage 
conforming to the requirements of S6 at each forward-facing rear 
designated seating position. The tether anchorage of a child restraint 
anchorage system may count toward the required tether anchorages.
    (c) Each vehicle without any forward-facing rear designated seating 
position shall be equipped with a tether anchorage conforming to the 
requirements of S6 at each front forward-facing passenger seating 
position.
    S4.3 Each vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 2000 and 
before September 1, 2002, shall be equipped as specified in paragraphs 
(a) and (b) of S4.3, except as provided in S5.
    (a) A specified percentage of each manufacturer's yearly production, 
as set forth in S14, shall be equipped as follows:
    (1) Each vehicle with three or more forward-facing rear designated 
seating positions shall be equipped with a child restraint anchorage 
system conforming to the requirements of S9 at not fewer than two 
forward-facing rear designated seating positions. In a vehicle with 
three or more rows of seating positions, at least one of the child 
restraint anchorage systems shall be at a forward-facing seating 
position in the second row if such a forward-facing seating position is 
available in that row.
    (2) Each vehicle with not more than two forward-facing rear 
designated seating positions shall be equipped with a child restraint 
anchorage system conforming to the requirements of S9 at each forward-
facing rear designated seating position.
    (b) Each vehicle, including a vehicle that is counted toward the 
percentage of a manufacturer's yearly production required to be equipped 
with child restraint anchorage systems, shall be equipped as described 
in S4.3(b)(1), (2) or (3), subject to S13.
    (1) Each vehicle with three or more forward-facing rear designated 
seating positions shall be equipped with a tether anchorage conforming 
to the requirements of S6 at no fewer than three forward-facing rear 
designated seating positions. The tether anchorage of a child restraint 
anchorage system may count towards the three required tether anchorages. 
In each vehicle with a forward-facing rear designated seating position 
other than an outboard designated seating position, at least one tether 
anchorage (with or without the lower anchorages of a child restraint 
anchorage system) shall be at such a designated seating position. In a 
vehicle with three or more rows of seating positions, at least one of 
the tether anchorages (with or without the lower anchorages of a child 
restraint anchorage system) shall be installed at a forward-facing 
seating position in the second row if such a forward-facing seating 
position is available in that row.
    (2) Each vehicle with not more than two forward-facing rear 
designated seating positions shall be equipped with a tether anchorage 
conforming to the requirements of S6 at each forward-facing rear 
designated seating position. The tether anchorage of a child restraint 
anchorage system may count toward the required tether anchorages.
    (3) Each vehicle without any forward-facing rear designated seating 
position shall be equipped with a tether anchorage conforming to the 
requirements of S6 at each front passenger seating position.
    S4.4 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2002 shall be 
equipped as specified in paragraphs (a)

[[Page 746]]

through (c) of S4.4, except as provided in S5.
    (a) Each vehicle with three or more forward-facing rear designated 
seating positions shall be equipped as specified in S4.4(a)(1) and (2).
    (1) Each vehicle shall be equipped with a child restraint anchorage 
system conforming to the requirements of S9 at not fewer than two 
forward-facing rear designated seating positions. At least one of the 
child restraint anchorage systems shall be installed at a forward-facing 
seating position in the second row in each vehicle that has three or 
more rows, if such a forward-facing seating position is available in 
that row.
    (2) Each vehicle shall be equipped with a tether anchorage 
conforming to the requirements of S6 at a third forward-facing rear 
designated seating position. The tether anchorage of a child restraint 
anchorage system may count towards the third required tether anchorage. 
In each vehicle with a forward-facing rear designated seating position 
other than an outboard designated seating position, at least one tether 
anchorage (with or without the lower anchorages of a child restraint 
anchorage system) shall be at such a designated seating position.
    (b) Each vehicle with not more than two forward-facing rear 
designated seating positions shall be equipped with a child restraint 
anchorage system conforming to the requirements of S9 at each forward-
facing rear designated seating position.
    (c) Each vehicle without any forward-facing rear designated seating 
position shall be equipped with a tether anchorage conforming to the 
requirements of S6 at each front forward-facing passenger seating 
position.
    S4.5 As an alternative to complying with the requirements of S4.2 
through S4.4 that specify the number of tether anchorages that are 
required in a vehicle and the designated seating positions for which 
tether anchorages must be provided, a vehicle manufactured from 
September 1, 1999 to August 31, 2004 may, at the manufacturer's option 
(with said option irrevocably selected prior to, or at the time of, 
certification of the vehicle), meet the requirements of this S4.5. This 
alternative ceases to be available on and after September 1, 2004. A 
tether anchorage conforming to the requirements of S6 must be 
installed--
    (a) For each designated seating position, other than that of the 
driver, in a vehicle that has only one row of designated seating 
positions;
    (b) For each forward-facing designated seating position in the 
second row of seating positions in a passenger car or truck;
    (c) For each of any two forward-facing designated seating positions 
in the second row of seating positions in a multipurpose passenger 
vehicle that has five or fewer designated seating positions; and,
    (d) For each of any three forward-facing designated seating 
positions that are located to the rear of the first row of designated 
seating positions in a multipurpose passenger vehicle that has six or 
more designated seating positions.
    S4.6 Adjustable seats. (a) A vehicle that is equipped with a 
forward-facing rear designated seating position that can be relocated 
such that it is capable of being used at either an outboard or non-
outboard forward-facing seating position shall be considered as having a 
forward-facing non-outboard seating position. Such an adjustable seat 
must be equipped with a tether anchorage (with or without the lower 
anchorages of a child restraint anchorage system) if the vehicle does 
not have another forward-facing non-outboard seating position that is so 
equipped.
    (b) Tether and lower anchorages shall be available for use at all 
times, except when the seating position for which it is installed is not 
available for use because the vehicle seat has been removed or converted 
to an alternate use such as the carrying of cargo.
    S5. General exceptions.
    (a) Convertibles and school buses are excluded from the requirements 
to be equipped with tether anchorages.
    (b) A vehicle may be equipped with a built-in child restraint system 
conforming to the requirements of Standard No. 213 (49 CFR 571.213) 
instead of one of the required tether anchorages or child restraint 
anchorage systems.
    (c)(1) Each vehicle that--

[[Page 747]]

    (i) Does not have a rear designated seating position and that thus 
meets the conditions in S4.5.4.1(a) of Standard No. 208 (Sec. 571.208); 
and
    (ii) Has an air bag on-off switch meeting the requirements of S4.5.4 
of Standard No. 208 (Sec. 571.208), shall have a child restraint 
anchorage system for a designated passenger seating position in the 
front seat, instead of only a tether anchorage. In the case of 
convertibles, the front designated passenger seating position need have 
only the two lower anchorages meeting the requirements of S9 of this 
standard.
    (iii) For vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2002, each 
vehicle that does not have a rear designated seating position, and does 
not have an air bag installed at front passenger designated seating 
positions pursuant to a temporary exemption granted by NHTSA under 49 
CFR Part 555, must have a child restraint anchorage system installed at 
a front passenger designated seating position. In the case of 
convertibles, the front designated passenger seating position need have 
only the two lower anchorages meeting the requirements of S9 of this 
standard.
    (2) Each vehicle that--
    (i) Has a rear designated seating position and meets the conditions 
in S4.5.4.1(b) of Standard No. 208 (Sec. 571.208); and,
    (ii) Has an air bag on-off switch meeting the requirements of S4.5.4 
of Standard 208 (Sec. 571.208), shall have a child restraint anchorage 
system for a designated passenger seating position in the front seat, 
instead of a child restraint anchorage system that is required for the 
rear seat. In the case of convertibles, the front designated passenger 
seating position need have only the two lower anchorages meeting the 
requirements of S9 of this standard.
    (iii) For vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2002, each 
vehicle that has a rear designated seating position and meets the 
conditions in S4.5.4.1(b) of Standard No. 208 (Sec. 571.208), and does 
not have an air bag installed at front passenger designated seating 
positions pursuant to a temporary exemption granted by NHTSA under 49 
CFR Part 555, must have a child restraint anchorage system installed at 
a front passenger designated seating position in place of one of the 
child restraint anchorage systems that is required for the rear seat. In 
the case of convertibles, the front designated passenger seating 
position need have only the two lower anchorages meeting the 
requirements of S9 of this standard.
    (d) A vehicle that does not have an air bag on-off switch meeting 
the requirements of S4.5.4 of Standard No. 208 (Sec. 571.208), shall 
not have any child restraint anchorage system installed at a front 
designated seating position.
    (e) A vehicle with a rear designated seating position for which 
interference with transmission and/or suspension components prevents the 
location of the lower bars of a child restraint anchorage system 
anywhere within the zone described by S9.2 or S15.1.2.2(b) such that the 
attitude angles of S15.1.2.2(a) could be met, is excluded from the 
requirement to provide a child restraint anchorage system at that 
position. However, except as provided elsewhere in S5 of this standard, 
for vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2001, such a vehicle 
must have a tether anchorage at a front passenger designated seating 
position.
    S6. Requirements for tether anchorages.
    S6.1 Configuration of the tether anchorage. Each tether anchorage 
shall:
    (a) Permit the attachment of a tether hook of a child restraint 
system meeting the configuration and geometry specified in Figure 11 of 
Standard No. 213 (Sec. 571.213);
    (b) Be accessible without the need for any tools other than a 
screwdriver or coin;
    (c) Once accessed, be ready for use without the need for any tools; 
and
    (d) Be sealed to prevent the entry of exhaust fumes into the 
passenger compartment.
    S6.2 Location of the tether anchorage. A vehicle manufactured on or 
after September 1, 1999 and before September 1, 2004 may, at the 
manufacturer's option (with said option irrevocably selected prior to, 
or at the time of, certification of the vehicle), meet the requirements 
of S6.2.1 or S6.2.2. Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 
must meet the requirements of S6.2.1 of this standard.

[[Page 748]]

    S6.2.1 Subject to S6.2.1.1 and S6.2.1.2, the part of each tether 
anchorage that attaches to a tether hook must be located within the 
shaded zone shown in Figures 3 to 7 of this standard of the designated 
seating position for which it is installed. The zone is defined with 
reference to the seating reference point (see Sec. 571.3). (For 
purposes of the figures, ``H Point'' is defined to mean seating 
reference point.) A tether anchorage may be recessed in the seat back, 
provided that it is not in the strap wrap-around area at the top of the 
vehicle seat back. For the area under the vehicle seat, the forwardmost 
edge of the shaded zone is defined by the torso line reference plane.
    S6.2.1.1 In the case of passenger cars and multipurpose passenger 
vehicles manufactured before September 1, 2004, the part of each user-
ready tether anchorage that attaches to a tether hook may, at the 
manufacturer's option (with said option selected prior to, or at the 
time of, certification of the vehicle), instead of complying with 
S6.2.1, be located within the shaded zone shown in Figures 8 to 11 of 
this standard of the designated seating position for which it is 
installed, relative to the shoulder reference point of the three 
dimensional H-point machine described in section 3.1 of SAE Standard 
J826 (June 1992), (incorporation by reference; see Sec. 571.5), such 
that--
    (a) The H-point of the three dimensional H-point machine is 
located--
    (1) At the actual H-point of the seat, as defined in section 
2.2.11.3 of SAE Recommended Practice J1100 (June 1993), (incorporation 
by reference; see Sec. 571.5), at the full rearward and downward 
position of the seat; or
    (2) In the case of a designated seating position that has a child 
restraint anchorage system, midway between vertical longitudinal planes 
passing through the lateral center of the bar in each of the two lower 
anchorages of that system; and
    (b) The back pan of the H-point machine is at the same angle to the 
vertical as the vehicle seat back with the seat adjusted to its full 
rearward and full downward position and the seat back in its most 
upright position.
    S6.2.1.2 In the case of a vehicle that--
    (a) Has a user-ready tether anchorage for which no part of the 
shaded zone shown in Figures 3 to 7 of this standard of the designated 
seating position for which the anchorage is installed is accessible 
without removing a seating component of the vehicle; and
    (b) Has a tether strap routing device that is--
    (1) Not less than 65 mm behind the torso line for that seating 
position, in the case of a flexible routing device or a deployable 
routing device, measured horizontally and in a vertical longitudinal 
plane; or
    (2) Not less than 100 mm behind the torso line for that seating 
position, in the case of a fixed rigid routing device, measured 
horizontally and in a vertical longitudinal plane, the part of that 
anchorage that attaches to a tether hook may, at the manufacturer's 
option (with said option selected prior to, or at the time of, 
certification of the vehicle) be located outside that zone.
    (c) The measurement of the location of the flexible or deployable 
routing device described in S6.2.1.2(b)(1) is made with SFAD 2 properly 
attached to the lower anchorages. A 40 mm wide nylon tether strap is 
routed through the routing device and attached to the tether anchorage 
in accordance with the written instructions required by S12 of this 
standard. The forwardmost contact point between the strap and the 
routing device must be within the stated limit when the tether strap is 
flat against the top surface of the SFAD and tensioned to 55 to 65 N. In 
seating positions without lower anchorages of a child restraint 
anchorage system, the SFAD 2 is held with its central lateral plane in 
the central vertical longitudinal plane of the seating position. The 
adjustable anchor attaching bars of the SFAD 2 are replaced by spacers 
that end flush with the back surface of the SFAD.
    S6.2.2 Subject to S6.2.2.1 and S6.2.2.2, the portion of each user-
ready tether anchorage that is designed to bind with a tether strap hook 
shall be located within the shaded zone shown in Figures 3 to 7 of this 
standard of the designated seating position for which it is installed, 
with reference to the H-

[[Page 749]]

point of a template described in section 3.1 of SAE Standard J826 (June 
1992) (incorporation by reference; see Sec. 571.5), if:
    (a) The H-point of the template is located--
    (1) At the unique Design H-point of the designated seating position, 
as defined in section 2.2.11.1 of SAE Recommended Practice J1100 (June 
1993) (incorporation by reference; see Sec. 571.5), at the full 
downward and full rearward position of the seat, or--
    (2) In the case of a designated seating position that has a means of 
affixing the lower portion of a child restraint system to the vehicle, 
other than a vehicle seat belt, midway between the two lower restraint 
system anchorages;
    (b) The torso line of the template is at the same angle to the 
transverse vertical plane as the vehicle seat back with the seat 
adjusted to its full rearward and full downward position and the seat 
back in its most upright position; and
    (c) The template is positioned in the vertical longitudinal plane 
that contains the H-point of the template.
    S6.2.2.1 In passenger cars and multipurpose passenger vehicles 
manufactured before September 1, 2004, the portion of each user-ready 
tether anchorage to which a tether strap hook attaches may be located 
within the shaded zone shown in Figures 8 to 11 of the designated 
seating position for which it is installed, with reference to the 
shoulder reference point of a template described in section 3.1 of SAE 
Standard J826 (June 1992) (incorporation by reference; see Sec. 571.5), 
if:
    (a) The H-point of the template is located--
    (1) At the unique Design H-point of the designated seating position, 
as defined in section 2.2.11.1 of SAE Recommended Practice J1100 (June 
1993) (incorporation by reference; see Sec. 571.5), at the full 
downward and full rearward position of the seat, or--
    (2) In the case of a designated seating position that has a means of 
affixing the lower portion of a child restraint system to the vehicle, 
other than a vehicle seat belt, midway between the two lower restraint 
system anchorages;
    (b) The torso line of the template is at the same angle to the 
vertical plane as the vehicle seat back with the seat adjusted to its 
full rearward and full downward position and the seat back in its most 
upright position; and
    (c) The template is positioned in the vertical longitudinal plane 
that contains the H-point of the template.
    S6.2.2.2 The portion of a user-ready tether anchorage in a vehicle 
that is designed to bind with the tether strap hook may be located 
outside the shaded zone referred to in S6.2.2, if no part of the shaded 
zone is accessible without removing a seating component of the vehicle 
and the vehicle is equipped with a routing device that--
    (a) Ensures that the tether strap functions as if the portion of the 
anchorage designed to bind with the tether strap hook were located 
within the shaded zone;
    (b) Is at least 65 mm behind the torso line, in the case of a non-
rigid-webbing-type routing device or a deployable routing device, or at 
least 100 mm behind the torso line, in the case of a fixed rigid routing 
device; and
    (c) When tested after being installed as it is intended to be used, 
is of sufficient strength to withstand, with the user-ready tether 
anchorage, the load referred to in S6.3.4 or S6.3.4.1, as applicable.
    S6.3 Strength requirements for tether anchorages. Subject to S6.3.2, 
a vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 1999, and before 
September 1, 2004 may, at the manufacturer's option (with said option 
irrevocably selected prior to, or at the time of, certification of the 
vehicle), meet the requirements of S6.3.1 or S6.3.4. Vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 and before September 1, 2005 
must meet the requirements of S6.3.1 of this standard, except as 
provided in S16 of this standard. Vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2005 must meet the requirements of S6.3.1.
    S6.3.1 Subject to S6.3.2, when tested in accordance with S8, after 
preloading the device with a force of 500 N, the tether anchorage must 
not separate completely from the vehicle seat or seat anchorage or the 
structure of the vehicle.
    S6.3.2 In vehicles manufactured before September 1, 2004, each user-
ready tether anchorage in a row of designated

[[Page 750]]

seating positions in a passenger car may, at the manufacturer's option 
(with said option selected prior to, or at the time of, certification of 
the vehicle), instead of complying with S6.3.1, withstand the 
application of a force of 5,300 N, when tested in accordance with S8.2, 
such that the anchorage does not release the belt strap specified in 
S8.2 or allow any point on the tether anchorage to be displaced more 
than 125 mm.
    S6.3.3 Provisions for simultaneous and sequential testing. (a) In 
the case of vehicle seat assemblies equipped with more than one tether 
anchorage system, the force referred to in S6.3.1 and S6.3.2 may, at the 
agency's option, be applied simultaneously to each of those tether 
anchorages. However, that force may not be applied simultaneously to 
tether anchorages for any two adjacent seating positions whose midpoints 
are less than 400 mm apart, as measured in accordance with S6.3.3(a)(1) 
and (2) and Figure 20.
    (1) The midpoint of the seating position lies in the vertical 
longitudinal plane that is equidistant from vertical longitudinal planes 
through the geometric center of each of the two lower anchorages at the 
seating position. For those seating positions that do not provide lower 
anchorages, the midpoint of the seating position lies in the vertical 
longitudinal plane that passes through the SgRP of the seating position.
    (2) Measure the distance between the vertical longitudinal planes 
passing through the midpoints of the adjacent seating positions, as 
measured along a line perpendicular to the planes.
    (b) A tether anchorage of a particular child restraint anchorage 
system will not be tested with the lower anchorages of that anchorage 
system if one or both of those lower anchorages have been previously 
tested under this standard.
    S6.3.4 Subject to subsections S6.3.4.1 and S6.3.4.2, every user-
ready tether anchorage in a row of designated seating positions shall, 
when tested, withstand the application of a force of 10,000 N--
    (a) Applied by means of one of the following types of test devices, 
installed as a child restraint system would be installed in accordance 
with the manufacturer's installation instructions, namely,
    (1) SFAD 1, to test a tether anchorage at a designated seating 
position that does not have a child restraint anchorage system; or
    (2) SFAD 2, to test a tether anchorage at a designated seating 
position that has a child restraint anchorage system;
    (b) Applied--
    (1) In a forward direction parallel to the vehicle's vertical 
longitudinal plane through the X point on the test device, and,
    (2) Initially, along a horizontal line or along any line below or 
above that line that is at an angle to that line of not more than 5 
degrees;
    (c) Approximately linearly over a time, at the option of the vehicle 
manufacturer, of not more than 30 seconds, at any onset force rate of 
not more than 135 000 N/s; and
    (d) Maintained at a 10,000 N level for one second.
    S6.3.4.1 In a passenger car manufactured before September 1, 2004, 
every user-ready tether anchorage in a row of designated seating 
positions must, when tested, subject to subsection S6.3.4.2, withstand 
the application of a force of 5,300 N, which force must be--
    (a) Applied by means of a belt strap that--
    (1) Extends not less than 250 mm forward from the vertical plane 
touching the rear top edge of the vehicle seat back,
    (2) Is fitted at one end with suitable hardware for applying the 
force and at the other end with a bracket for the attachment of the 
user-ready tether anchorage, and
    (3) Passes over the top of the vehicle seat back as shown in Figure 
19 of this standard;
    (b) Applied--
    (1) In a forward direction parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal 
vertical plane, and
    (2) Initially, along a horizontal line or along any line below that 
line that is at an angle to that line of not more than 20 degrees;
    (c) Attained within 30 seconds, at any onset force rate of not more 
than 135,000 N/s; and

[[Page 751]]

    (d) Maintained at a 5,300 N level for one second.
    S6.3.4.2 If the zones in which tether anchorages are located overlap 
and if, in the overlap area, a user-ready tether anchorage is installed 
that is designed to accept the tether strap hooks of two restraint 
systems simultaneously, both portions of the tether anchorage that are 
designed to bind with a tether strap hook shall withstand the force 
referred to in subsection S6.3.4 or S6.3.4.1, as the case may be, 
applied to both portions simultaneously.
    S6.3.4.3 Provisions for simultaneous and sequential testing. (a) In 
the case of vehicle seat assemblies equipped with more than one tether 
anchorage system, the force referred to in S6.3.4, 6.3.4.1 or S6.3.4.2 
may, at the agency's option, be applied simultaneously to each of those 
tether anchorages. However, that force may not be applied simultaneously 
to tether anchorages for any two adjacent seating positions whose 
midpoints are less than 400 mm apart, as measured in accordance with 
S6.3.4.3(a)(1) and (2) and Figure 20.
    (1) The midpoint of the seating position lies in the vertical 
longitudinal plane that is equidistant from vertical longitudinal planes 
through the geometric center of each of the two lower anchorages at the 
seating position. For those seating positions that do not provide lower 
anchorages, the midpoint of the seating position lies in the vertical 
longitudinal plane that passes through the SgRP of the seating position.
    (2) Measure the distance between the vertical longitudinal planes 
passing through the midpoints of the adjacent seating positions, as 
measured along a line perpendicular to the planes.
    (b) A tether anchorage of a particular child restraint anchorage 
system will not be tested with the lower anchorages of that anchorage 
system if one or both of those lower anchorages have been previously 
tested under this standard.
    S6.3.4.4 The strength requirement tests shall be conducted with the 
vehicle seat adjusted to its full rearward and full downward position 
and the seat back in its most upright position. When SFAD 2 is used in 
testing and cannot be attached to the lower anchorages with the seat 
back in this position, adjust the seat back as recommended by the 
manufacturer in its instructions for attaching child restraints. If no 
instructions are provided, adjust the seat back to the position that 
enables SFAD 2 to attach to the lower anchorages that is the closest to 
the most upright position.
    S7. Test conditions for testing tether anchorages.
    The test conditions described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of S7 apply 
to the test procedures in S8.
    (a) Vehicle seats are adjusted to their full rearward and full 
downward position and the seat back is placed in its most upright 
position. When SFAD 2 is used in testing and cannot be attached to the 
lower anchorages with the seat back in this position, adjust the seat 
back as recommended by the manufacturer in its instructions for 
attaching child restraints. If no instructions are provided, adjust the 
seat back to the position that enables SFAD 2 to attach to the lower 
anchorages that is the closest to the most upright position.
    (b) Head restraints are adjusted in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions, provided pursuant to S12, as to how the 
head restraints should be adjusted when using the child restraint 
anchorage system. If instructions with regard to head restraint 
adjustment are not provided pursuant to S12, the head restraints are 
adjusted to any position.
    S8 Test procedures. Each vehicle shall meet the requirements of 
S6.3.1 and S6.3.3 when tested according to the following procedures. 
Where a range of values is specified, the vehicle shall be able to meet 
the requirements at all points within the range. For the testing 
specified in these procedures, the SFAD used in the test has a tether 
strap consisting of webbing material with an elongation limit of 4 
percent at a tensile load of 65,000 N (14,612 lb). Pretension the tether 
strap with 53.5 N to 67 N of preload prior to the test. The strap is 
fitted at one end with a high strength steel tether hook for attachment 
to the tether anchorage. The tether hook meets the specifications in 
Standard No. 213 (49 CFR Sec. 571.213) as to the configuration and 
geometry of tether hooks required by the standard. A steel cable is 
connected to the X

[[Page 752]]

point through which the test force is applied.
    S8.1 Apply the force specified in S6.3.1 as follows--
    (a) Use the following specified test device, as appropriate:
    (1) SFAD 1, to test a tether anchorage at a designated seating 
position that does not have a child restraint anchorage system; or,
    (2) SFAD 2, to test a tether anchorage at a designated seating 
position that has a child restraint anchorage system.
    (b) Attach the SFAD 1 to the vehicle seat using the vehicle belts or 
the SFAD 2 to the lower anchorages of the child restraint anchorage 
system, as appropriate, and attach the test device to the tether 
anchorage, in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions provided 
pursuant to S12 of this standard. For the testing specified in this 
procedure, if SFAD 1 cannot be attached using the vehicle belts because 
of the location of the vehicle belt buckle, the test device is attached 
by material whose breaking strength is equal to or greater than the 
breaking strength of the webbing for the seat belt assembly installed as 
original equipment at that seating position. The geometry of the 
attachment duplicates the geometry, at the pre-load point, of the 
attachment of the originally installed seat belt assembly. All belt 
systems (including the tether) used to attach the test device are 
tightened to a tension of not less than 53.5 N and not more than 67 N on 
the webbing portion of the belt. For SFAD 1, apply a rearward force of 
135 N <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 15 N, in a horizontal plane through point 
``X'' of SFAD 1. While maintaining the force, tighten the vehicle seat 
belt to a tension of not less than 53.5 N and not more than 67 N 
measured at the lap portion of the seat belt and maintain the tension 
during the preload, lock the seat belt retractor, and tighten the tether 
belt strap to remove all slack. A rearward force of 135 N <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 15 N is applied to the center of the lower front 
crossmember of SFAD 2 to press the device against the seat back as the 
fore-aft position of the rearward extensions of the SFAD is adjusted to 
remove any slack or tension.
    (c) Apply the force--
    (1) Initially, in a forward direction in a vertical longitudinal 
plane and through the Point X on the test device; and
    (2) Initially, along a line through the X point and at an angle of 
10 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees above the horizontal. Apply a preload 
force of 500 N to measure the angle; and then
    (3) Increase the pull force as linearly as practicable to a full 
force application of 15,000 N in not less than 24 seconds and not more 
than 30 seconds, and maintain at a 15,000 N level for 1 second.
    S8.2 Apply the force specified in S6.3.2 as follows:
    (a) Attach a belt strap, and tether hook, to the user-ready tether 
anchorage. The belt strap extends not less than 250 mm forward from the 
vertical transverse plane touching the rear top edge of the vehicle seat 
back, and passes over the top of the vehicle seat back as shown in 
Figure 19 of this standard;
    (b) Apply the force at the end of the belt strap--
    (1) Initially, in a forward direction in a vertical longitudinal 
plane that is parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline;
    (2) Initially, along a horizontal line or along any line below or 
above that line that is at an angle to that line of not more than 20 
degrees;
    (3) So that the force is attained within 30 seconds, at any onset 
rate of not more than 135,000 N/s; and
    (4) Maintained at a 5,300 N level for a minimum of 1 second.
    S9 Requirements for the lower anchorages of the child restraint 
anchorage system. As an alternative to complying with the requirements 
of S9, a vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 and before 
September 1, 2004 may, at the manufacturer's option (with said option 
irrevocably selected prior to, or at the time of, certification of the 
vehicle), meet the requirements in S15 of this standard. Vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 and before September 1, 2005 
must meet all of the requirements of S9 of this standard, except as 
provided in S16 of this standard with regard to S9.4. Vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2005

[[Page 753]]

must meet all the requirements of S9 of this standard.
    S9.1 Configuration of the lower anchorages
    S9.1.1 The lower anchorages shall consist of two bars that--
    (a) Are 6 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>.1 mm in diameter;
    (b) Are straight, horizontal and transverse;
    (c) As shown in Figure 21, are:
    (i) Not less than 25 mm in length, and
    (ii) Are not more than 60 mm in length between the anchor bar 
supports or other structural members of the vehicle that restrict 
lateral movement of the components of a child restraint that are 
designed to attach to the bars, measured in a vertical plane 7 mm 
rearward of the vertical plane that is tangent of the rearward face of 
the anchor bar.
    (d) For bars installed in vehicles manufactured on or after March 1, 
2005, the bars must not be capable of being stowable (foldable or 
otherwise stowable).
    (e) [Reserved]
    (f) Are part of the vehicle, such that they can only be removed by 
use of a tool, such as a screwdriver or wrench; and
    (g) Are rigidly attached to the vehicle such that they will not 
deform more than 5 mm when subjected to a 100 N force in any direction.
    S9.2 Location of the lower anchorages.
    S9.2.1 The anchorage bars are located at the vehicle seating 
position by using the CRF rearward extensions, with the CRF placed 
against or near the vehicle seat back. With the CRF attached to the 
anchorages and resting on the seat cushion, the bottom surface shall 
have attitude angles within the limits in the following table, angles 
measured relative to the vehicle horizontal, longitudinal and transverse 
reference planes.

                             Table to S9.2.1
Pitch........................................................    15[deg]
                                                                  <plus-
                                                               minus<ls-
                                                               t 10[deg]
Roll.........................................................     0[deg]
                                                                  <plus-
                                                               minus<ls-
                                                                t 5[deg]
Yaw..........................................................     0[deg]
                                                                  <plus-
                                                               minus<ls-
                                                               t 10[deg]
 
 
Note: An explanation of the above angles is given in Figure 1.

    S9.2.2 With adjustable seats adjusted as described in S9.2.3, each 
lower anchorage bar shall be located so that a vertical transverse plane 
tangent to the front surface of the bar is:
    (a) Not more than 70 mm behind the corresponding point Z of the CRF, 
measured parallel to the bottom surface of the CRF and in a vertical 
longitudinal plane, while the CRF is pressed against the seat back by 
the rearward application of a horizontal force of 100 N at point A on 
the CRF; and
    (b) Not less than 120 mm behind the vehicle seating reference point, 
measured horizontally and in a vertical longitudinal plane.
    S9.2.3 Adjustable seats are adjusted as follows:
    (a) Place adjustable seat backs in the manufacturer's nominal design 
riding position in the manner specified by the manufacturer; and
    (b) Place adjustable seats in the full rearward and full downward 
position.
    S9.3 Adequate fit of the lower anchorages. Each vehicle and each 
child restraint anchorage system in that vehicle shall be designed such 
that the CRF can be placed inside the vehicle and attached to the lower 
anchorages of each child restraint anchorage system, with adjustable 
seats adjusted as described in S9.3(a) and (b).
    (a) Place adjustable seat backs in the manufacturer's nominal design 
riding position in the manner specified by the manufacturer; and
    (b) Place adjustable seats in the full rearward and full downward 
position.
    (c) To facilitate installation of the CRF in a vehicle seat, the 
side, back and top frames of the CRF may be removed for installation in 
the vehicle, as indicated in Figure 1A of this standard. If necessary, 
the height of the CRF may be 560 mm.
    S9.4 Strength of the lower anchorages.
    S9.4.1 When tested in accordance with S11, the lower anchorages 
shall not allow point X on SFAD 2 to be displaced horizontally more than 
the distances specified below, after preloading the device--
    (a) 175 mm, when a force of 11,000 N is applied in a forward 
direction in a vertical longitudinal plane; and
    (b) 150 mm, for lower anchorages when a force of 5,000 N is applied 
in a lateral direction in a vertical longitudinal plane that is 75 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 degrees to either side of a vertical 
longitudinal plane.

[[Page 754]]

    S9.4.1.1 Forces described in S9.4.1(a), forward direction, shall be 
applied with an initial force application angle of 10 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees above the horizontal. Forces described in 
S9.4.1(b), lateral direction, shall be applied horizontally (0 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees).
    S9.4.1.2 The amount of displacement is measured relative to an 
undisturbed point on the vehicle body.
    S9.4.2 Provisions for simultaneous and sequential testing. (a) In 
the case of vehicle seat assemblies equipped with more than one child 
restraint anchorage system, the lower anchorages may, at the agency's 
option, be tested simultaneously. However, forces may not be applied 
simultaneously for any two adjacent seating positions whose midpoints 
are less than 400 mm apart, as measured in accordance with S9.4.2(a)(1) 
and (2) and Figure 20.
    (1) The midpoint of the seating position lies in the vertical 
longitudinal plane that is equidistant from vertical longitudinal planes 
through the geometric center of each of the two lower anchorages at the 
seating position.
    (2) Measure the distance between the vertical longitudinal planes 
passing through the midpoints of the adjacent seating positions, as 
measured along a line perpendicular to the planes.
    (b) The lower anchorages of a particular child restraint anchorage 
system will not be tested if one or both of the anchorages have been 
previously tested under this standard.
    S9.5 Marking and conspicuity of the lower anchorages. Each vehicle 
shall comply with S9.5(a) or (b).
    (a) Above each bar installed pursuant to S4, the vehicle shall be 
permanently marked with a circle:
    (1) That is not less than 13 mm in diameter;
    (2) That is either solid or open, with or without words, symbols or 
pictograms, provided that if words, symbols or pictograms are used, 
their meaning is explained to the consumer in writing, such as in the 
vehicle's owners manual; and
    (3) That is located such that its center is on each seat back 
between 50 and 100 mm above or on the seat cushion 100 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 25 mm forward of the intersection of the vertical 
transverse and horizontal longitudinal planes intersecting at the 
horizontal centerline of each lower anchorage, as illustrated in Figure 
22. The center of the circle must be in the vertical longitudinal plane 
that passes through the center of the bar (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 mm).
    (4) The circle may be on a tag.
    (b) The vehicle shall be configured such that the following is 
visible: Each of the bars installed pursuant to S4, or a permanently 
attached guide device for each bar. The bar or guide device must be 
visible without the compression of the seat cushion or seat back, when 
the bar or device is viewed, in a vertical longitudinal plane passing 
through the center of the bar or guide device, along a line making an 
upward 30 degree angle with a horizontal plane. Seat backs are in the 
nominal design riding position. The bars may be covered by a removable 
cap or cover, provided that the cap or cover is permanently marked with 
words, symbols or pictograms whose meaning is explained to the consumer 
in written form as part of the owner's manual.
    S10. Test conditions for testing the lower anchorages. The test 
conditions described in this paragraph apply to the test procedures in 
S11.
    (a) Adjust vehicle seats to their full rearward and full downward 
position and place the seat backs in their most upright position. When 
SFAD 2 is used in testing and cannot be attached to the lower anchorages 
with the seat back in this position, adjust the seat back as recommended 
by the manufacturer in its instructions for attaching child restraints. 
If no instructions are provided, adjust the seat back to the position 
closest to the upright position that enables SFAD 2 to attach to the 
lower anchorages.
    (b) Head restraints are adjusted in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions, provided pursuant to S12, as to how the 
head restraints should be adjusted when using the child restraint 
anchorage system. If instructions with regard to head restraint 
adjustment are not provided pursuant to S12, the head restraints are 
adjusted to any position.
    S11. Test procedure. Each vehicle shall meet the requirements of 
S9.4 when tested according to the following procedures. Where a range of 
values is

[[Page 755]]

specified, the vehicle shall be able to meet the requirements at all 
points within the range.
    (a) Forward force direction. Place SFAD 2 in the vehicle seating 
position and attach it to the two lower anchorages of the child 
restraint anchorage system. Do not attach the tether anchorage. A 
rearward force of 135 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 15 N is applied to the 
center of the lower front crossbar of SFAD 2 to press the device against 
the seat back as the fore-aft position of the rearward extensions of the 
SFAD is adjusted to remove any slack or tension. Apply a preload force 
of 500 N at point X of the test device. Increase the pull force as 
linearly as practicable to a full force application of 11,000 N in not 
less than 24 seconds and not more than 30 seconds, and maintain at an 
11,000 N level for 1 second.
    (b) Lateral force direction. Place SFAD 2 in the vehicle seating 
position and attach it to the two lower anchorages of the child 
restraint anchorage system. Do not attach the tether anchorage. A 
rearward force of 135 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 15 N is applied to the 
center of the lower front crossbar of SFAD 2 to press the device against 
the seat back as the fore-aft position of the rearward extensions of the 
SFAD is adjusted to remove any slack or tension. Apply a preload force 
of 500 N at point X of the test device. Increase the pull force as 
linearly as practicable to a full force application of 5,000 N in not 
less than 24 seconds and not more than 30 seconds, and maintain at a 
5,000 N level for 1 second.
    S12. Written instructions. The vehicle must provide written 
instructions, in English, for using the tether anchorages and the child 
restraint anchorage system in the vehicle. If the vehicle has an owner's 
manual, the instructions must be in that manual. The instructions shall:
    (a) Indicate which seating positions in the vehicle are equipped 
with tether anchorages and child restraint anchorage systems;
    (b) In the case of vehicles required to be marked as specified in 
paragraphs S4.1, S9.5(a), or S15.4, explain the meaning of markings 
provided to locate the lower anchorages of child restraint anchorage 
systems; and
    (c) Include instructions that provide a step-by-step procedure, 
including diagrams, for properly attaching a child restraint system's 
tether strap to the tether anchorages.
    S13. Tether anchorage phase-in requirements.
    S13.1 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 and 
before September 1, 2000 shall comply with S13.1.1 through S13.2. At 
anytime during the production year ending August 31, 2000, each 
manufacturer shall, upon request from the Office of Vehicle Safety 
Compliance, provide information identifying the passenger cars (by make, 
model and vehicle identification number) that have been certified as 
complying with the tether anchorage requirements of this standard. The 
manufacturer's designation of a passenger car as a certified vehicle is 
irrevocable.
    S13.1.1 Subject to S13.2, for passenger cars manufactured on or 
after September 1, 1999 and before September 1, 2000, the number of 
vehicles complying with S4.2 shall be not less than 80 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of passenger cars 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1996 and before September 1, 1999; 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production of passenger cars manufactured on 
or after September 1, 1999 and before September 1, 2000.
    S13.1.2 For the purpose of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S13.1.1, a vehicle produced by more than one 
manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer as provided in 
S13.1.2(a) through (c), subject to S13.2.
    (a) A vehicle which is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer which markets the vehicle.
    (c) A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration

[[Page 756]]

under 49 CFR part 596, between the manufacturer so specified and the 
manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be attributed under 
S13.1.2(a) or (b).
    S13.2 For the purposes of calculating average annual production of 
passenger cars for each manufacturer and the number of passenger cars 
manufactured by each manufacturer under S13.1, each passenger car that 
is excluded from the requirement to provide tether anchorages is not 
counted.
    S13.3 Until May 1, 2001, vehicles manufactured by a final-stage 
manufacturer or alterer need not be equipped with the tether anchorages 
required by S4.3 of this standard. Vehicles manufactured by a final-
stage manufacturer or alterer on or after May 1, 2001 must be equipped 
with the tether anchorages specified in S4.3.
    S14. Lower anchorages phase-in requirements for vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2000 and before September 1, 2002.
    S14.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2000 and before 
September 1, 2002 shall comply with S14.1.1 through S14.1.2. At anytime 
during the production years ending August 31, 2001, and August 31, 2002, 
each manufacturer shall, upon request from the Office of Vehicle Safety 
Compliance, provide information identifying the vehicles (by make, model 
and vehicle identification number) that have been certified as complying 
with the child restraint anchorage requirements of this standard. The 
manufacturer's designation of a vehicle as a certified vehicle is 
irrevocable.
    S14.1.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2000 and 
before September 1, 2001. Subject to S14.4, for vehicles manufactured on 
or after September 1, 2000 and before September 1, 2001, the number of 
vehicles complying with S4.3 shall be not less than 20 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1997 and before September 1, 2000; 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2000 and 
before September 1, 2001.
    S14.1.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2001 and 
before September 1, 2002. Subject to S14.4, for vehicles manufactured on 
or after September 1, 2001 and before September 1, 2002, the number of 
vehicles complying with S4.3 shall be not less than 50 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1998 and before September 1, 2001; 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2001 and 
before September 1, 2002.
    S14.2 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S14.2.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S14.1.1 through S14.1.2, a vehicle produced 
by more than one manufacturer shall be attributed to a single 
manufacturer as follows, subject to S14.2.2.
    (a) A vehicle which is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer which markets the vehicle.
    S14.2.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 596, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S14.2.1.
    S14.3 Alternative phase-in schedules. (a) Final-stage manufacturers 
and alterers. A final-stage manufacturer or alterer may, at its option, 
comply with the requirements set forth in S14.3(a)(1) and (2), instead 
of the requirements set forth in S14.1.1 through S14.1.2.
    (1) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2000 and before 
September 1, 2002 are not required to be equipped with the lower 
anchorages specified in this standard.
    (2) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2002 must be 
equipped with the lower anchorages specified in this standard.

[[Page 757]]

    (b) Small volume manufacturers. Vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2000 and before September 1, 2002 that are manufactured by 
a manufacturer that produces fewer than 5,000 vehicles worldwide 
annually are not required to provide the lower anchorages specified in 
this standard.
    S14.4 For the purposes of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S14.1.1 and S14.1.2, each vehicle that is 
excluded from the requirement to provide child restraint anchorage 
systems is not counted.
    S15 Alternative to complying with the requirements of S9. As an 
alternative to complying with the requirements of S9, a vehicle 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 and before September 1, 2004 
may, at the manufacturer's option (with said option irrevocably selected 
prior to, or at the time of, certification of the vehicle), meet the 
requirements in S15 of this standard. Vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2004 must meet the requirements of S9 of this standard.
    S15.1 Dimensions and installation requirements.
    S15.1.1 General. The vehicle anchorages are positioned near the seat 
bight. The location of the anchorages is defined with respect to the 
CRF. If the vehicle seat is adjustable, it is adjusted as recommended by 
the vehicle manufacturer for use with child restraint systems.
    S15.1.2 Anchorage dimensions and location.
    S15.1.2.1 The lower anchorages shall consist of two bars that--
    (a) Are 6 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>.1 mm in diameter;
    (b) Are straight, horizontal and transverse;
    (c) Are not less than 25 mm in length;
    (d)-(e) [Reserved]
    (f) Are permanently attached to the vehicle or vehicle seat such 
that they can only be removed by use of a tool, such as a screwdriver or 
wrench.
    S15.1.2.2 (a) The anchorage bars are located at the vehicle seating 
position with the aid of and with respect to the CRF rearward 
extensions, with the CRF placed against or near the vehicle seat back. 
With the CRF attached to the anchorages and resting on the seat cushion, 
the bottom surface shall have attitude angles within the limits in the 
following table, angles measured relative to the vehicle horizontal, 
longitudinal and transverse reference planes.

                          Table to S15.1.2.2(a)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pitch......................................................      15[deg]
                                                                  <plus-
                                                             minus<ls-th
                                                                 n0[deg]
Roll.......................................................       0[deg]
                                                                  <plus-
                                                             minus<ls-th
                                                                  n[deg]
Yaw........................................................       0[deg]
                                                                  <plus-
                                                             minus<ls-th
                                                                 n0[deg]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: An explanation of the above angles is given in Figure 1.

    (b) With adjustable seats adjusted as described in S15.1.2.2(c), 
each lower anchorage bar shall be located so that a vertical transverse 
plane intersecting the center of the bar is:
    (1) Not more than 70 mm behind point Z of the CRF, measured parallel 
to the bottom surface of the CRF and to the center of the bar, with the 
CRF rear surface against the seat back; and
    (2) Not less than 120 mm behind the vehicle seating reference point, 
measured horizontally and to the center of the bar. (Note: To facilitate 
installation of the CRF in a vehicle seat, the CRF may be constructed of 
smaller separable parts and assembled in the vehicle seat. 
Alternatively, vehicle components may be removed to allow access.)
    (c) Adjustable seats are adjusted as recommended by the vehicle 
manufacturer for use with child restraint systems.
    S15.2 Static Strength Requirements.
    S15.2.1 The strength of the anchorages shall be determined using the 
procedure of S15.3 to apply forces to the SFAD 2, installed in the 
vehicle seating position and engaged with the anchorages. The vehicle 
seat shall be installed in the vehicle, or in sufficient parts of the 
vehicle so as to be representative of the strength and rigidity of the 
vehicle structure. If the seat is adjustable, it shall be placed in the 
position recommended by the vehicle manufacturer for use with child 
restraint systems. If no adjusted position is recommended, the seat 
shall be placed in any position, at the agency's option.
    S15.2.2 Horizontal excursion of point X during application of the 8 
kN and 5 kN forces must be not more than 125

[[Page 758]]

mm, after preloading the device. The amount of displacement is measured 
relative to an undisturbed point on the vehicle body.
    S15.3 Forces and directions.
    S15.3.1 A rearward force of 135 N <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>15 N shall 
be applied to the center of the lower front crossbar of SFAD 2 to press 
the device against the seat back as the fore-aft position of the 
rearward extensions of the SFAD is adjusted to remove any slack or 
tension. Forces shall be applied to SFAD 2 in forward and lateral 
directions according to the following table.

               Table to S15.3.1--Directions of Test Forces
Forward.........................  0[deg] <plus-       8 kN <plus-
                                   minus<ls-thn-eq>5   minus<ls-thn-eq>0
                                   [deg].              .25 kN
Lateral.........................  75[deg] <plus-      5 kN <plus-
                                   minus<ls-thn-eq>5   minus<ls-thn-eq>0
                                   [deg] (to both      .25 kN
                                   sides of straight
                                   forward).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S15.3.2 Forces in the forward direction shall be applied with an 
initial force application angle of 10 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees 
above the horizontal. Lateral forces shall be applied horizontally 
(0[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5[deg]). A pre-load force of 500 N <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>25 N shall be applied at the prescribed loading point 
(point X) in Figure 17. The force shall be increased to 8 kN <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.25 kN for forward tests, or to 5 kN <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.25 kN for lateral tests. Full application of the force 
shall be achieved within a time period of 2 seconds or less. The force 
shall be maintained for a period of 0.25 seconds <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 seconds.
    S15.3.3 Provisions for simultaneous and sequential testing. (a) If 
anchorages for more than one child restraint anchorage system are 
installed in the vehicle seat assembly and not directly into the vehicle 
structure, the forces described in S15.3 may, at the agency's option, be 
applied simultaneously to SFADs engaged with the anchorages. However, 
that force may not be applied simultaneously to SFADs engaged at any two 
adjacent seating positions whose midpoints are less than 400 mm apart, 
as measured in accordance with S15.3.3(a)(1) and (2) and Figure 20.
    (1) The midpoint of the seating position lies in the vertical 
longitudinal plane that is equidistant from vertical longitudinal planes 
through the geometric center of each of the two lower anchorages at the 
seating position.
    (2) Measure the distance between the vertical longitudinal planes 
passing through the midpoints of the adjacent seating positions, as 
measured along a line perpendicular to the planes.
    (b) The lower anchorages of a particular child restraint anchorage 
system will not be tested if one or both of the anchorages have been 
previously tested under this standard.
    S15.4 Marking and conspicuity of the lower anchorages. At least one 
anchorage bar (when deployed for use), one guidance fixture, or one seat 
marking feature shall be readily visible to the person installing the 
CRF. If guidance fixtures are used to meet this requirement, the 
fixture(s) (although removable) must be installed. Storable anchorages 
shall be provided with a tell-tale or label that is visible when the 
anchorage is stored.
    S16. Phase-in of strength requirements for vehicles manufactured on 
or after September 1, 2004 and before September 1, 2005. At anytime 
during the production year ending August 31, 2005, each manufacturer 
shall, upon request from the Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance, 
provide information identifying the vehicles (by make, model and vehicle 
identification number) that have been certified as complying with S6.3.1 
or S6.3.4, and with S9.4 or S15.2 and S15.3. The manufacturer's 
designation of a vehicle as meeting the particular requirement is 
irrevocable.
    S16.1 Tether anchorage phase-in of strength requirements. For 
vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 and before September 
1, 2005, the number of vehicles complying with S6.3.1 shall be not less 
than 90 percent of:
    (a) the manufacturer's average annual production of vehicle 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2001 and before September 1, 2004; 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2004 and 
before September 1, 2005.
    S16.2 Lower anchorages phase-in of strength requirements.
    For vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 and before 
September 1, 2005, the number of vehicles complying with S9.4 shall be 
not less than 90 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicle 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2001 and before September 1, 2004; 
or

[[Page 759]]

    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2003 and 
before September 1, 2004.
    S16.3 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S16.3.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S16.1 and S16.2, a vehicle produced by more 
than one manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer as 
follows, subject to S16.3.2.
    (a) A vehicle which is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S16.3.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR Part 596, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S16.3.1.
    S16.4 Alternative phase-in schedules.
    (a) Final-stage manufacturers and alterers. A final-stage 
manufacturer or alterer may, at its option, comply with the requirements 
set forth in S16.4(a)(1) and (2), instead of the requirements set forth 
in S16.1 through S16.2.
    (1) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 and before 
September 1, 2005 may meet the requirements of S6.3.4 instead of S6.3.1, 
and may meet the requirements of S15.2 and S15.3 instead of S9.4.
    (2) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 must meet 
the requirements of S6.3.4 and S9.4.
    (b) Small volume manufacturers. Vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2004 and before September 1, 2005 that are manufactured by 
a manufacturer that produces fewer than 5,000 vehicles worldwide 
annually may meet the requirements of S6.3.4 instead of S6.3.1, and may 
meet the requirements of S15.2 and S15.3 instead of S9.4. Vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 must meet the requirements of 
S6.3.4 and S9.4.

[[Page 760]]

                        Figures to Sec. 571.225
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.014


[[Page 761]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.015


[[Page 762]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.016


[[Page 763]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.017


[[Page 764]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.018


[[Page 765]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.019


[[Page 766]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.020


[[Page 767]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.021


[[Page 768]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.022


[[Page 769]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.023


[[Page 770]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.024


[[Page 771]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.025


[[Page 772]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR05MR99.016


[[Page 773]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR05MR99.017


[[Page 774]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR05MR99.018


[[Page 775]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.026


[[Page 776]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.027


[[Page 777]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27JN03.000


[[Page 778]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.029


[[Page 779]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11AU04.551


[[Page 780]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11AU04.552

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11AU04.553


[64 FR 10823, Mar. 5, 1999, as amended at 64 FR 47587, Aug. 31, 1999; 65 
FR 46640, July 31, 2000; 68 FR 24667, May 8, 2003; 68 FR 38226, June 27, 
2003; 69 FR 48823, Aug. 11, 2004; 69 FR 60565, Oct. 12, 2004]

[[Page 781]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.301  Standard No. 301; Fuel system integrity.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for the integrity of 
motor vehicle fuel systems.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries occurring from fires that result from fuel spillage during and 
after motor vehicle crashes, and resulting from ingestion of fuels 
during siphoning.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses that have a GVWR of 
4,536 kg or less and use fuel with a boiling point above 0 [deg]C, and 
to school buses that have a GVWR greater than 4,536 kg and use fuel with 
a boiling point above 0 [deg]C.
    S4. Definition. Fuel spillage means the fall, flow, or run of fuel 
from the vehicle but does not include wetness resulting from capillary 
action.
    S5. General requirements.
    S5.1 Passenger cars, and multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, 
and buses with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less. Each passenger car and 
each multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and bus with a GVWR of 
10,000 pounds or less shall meet the requirements of S6.1 through S6.4. 
Each of these types of vehicles that is manufactured to use alcohol 
fuels shall also meet the requirements of S6.6.
    S5.2 [Reserved]
    S5.3 [Reserved]
    S5.4 Schoolbuses with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds. Each 
schoolbus with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds shall meet the 
requirements of S6.5. Each schoolbus with a GVWR greater than 10,000 
pounds that is manufactured to use alcohol fuels shall meet the 
requirements of S6.6.
    S5.5 Fuel spillage; Barrier crash. Fuel spillage in any fixed or 
moving barrier crash test shall not exceed 28 g from impact until motion 
of the vehicle has ceased, and shall not exceed a total of 142 g in the 
5-minute period following cessation of motion. For the subsequent 25-
minute period, fuel spillage during any 1 minute interval shall not 
exceed 28 g.
    S5.6 Fuel spillage; rollover. Fuel spillage in any rollover test, 
from the onset of rotational motion, shall not exceed a total of 142 g 
for the first 5 minutes of testing at each successive 90[deg] increment. 
For the remaining test period, at each increment of 90[deg] fuel 
spillage during any 1 minute interval shall not exceed 28 g.
    S5.7. Alcohol fuel vehicles. Each vehicle manufactured to operate on 
an alcohol fuel (e.g., methanol, ethanol) or a fuel blend containing at 
least 20 percent alcohol fuel shall meet the requirements of S6.6.
    S6. Test requirements. Each vehicle with a GVWR of 4,536 kg or less 
shall be capable of meeting the requirements of any applicable barrier 
crash test followed by a static rollover, without alteration of the 
vehicle during the test sequence. A particular vehicle need not meet 
further requirements after having been subjected to a single barrier 
crash test and a static rollover test. Where manufacturer options are 
specified in this standard, the manufacturer must select an option not 
later than the time it certifies the vehicle and may not thereafter 
select a different option for that vehicle. Each manufacturer must, upon 
request from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, provide 
information regarding which of the compliance options it has selected 
for a particular vehicle or make/model.
    S6.1 Frontal barrier crash. When the vehicle travelling 
longitudinally forward at any speed up to and including 48 km/h impacts 
a fixed collision barrier that is perpendicular to the line of travel of 
the vehicle, or at any angle up to 30[deg] in either direction from the 
perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle, with 50th-percentile 
test dummies as specified in part 572 of this chapter at each front 
outboard designated seating position and at any other position whose 
protection system is required to be tested by a dummy under the 
provisions of Standard No. 208, under the applicable conditions of S7., 
fuel spillage shall not exceed the limits of S5.5.
    S6.2 Rear moving barrier crash. (a) Vehicles manufactured before 
September 1, 2006. When the vehicle is impacted from the rear by the 
barrier specified in S7.3(a) of this standard moving at 48 km/h, with 
50th percentile test dummies as specified in part 572 of this

[[Page 782]]

chapter at each front outboard designated seating position, under the 
applicable conditions of S7, fuel spillage must not exceed the limits of 
S5.5.
    (b) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2006. When the 
vehicle is impacted from the rear by a moving deformable barrier 80 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1.0 km/h with a 70 percent overlap, with 50th 
percentile test dummies as specified in part 572 of this chapter at each 
front outboard designated seating position, under the applicable 
conditions of S7, fuel spillage must not exceed the limits of S5.5.
    (c) Small volume manufacturers. Notwithstanding S6.2(b) of this 
standard, vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 and before 
September 1, 2008 by a manufacturer that produces fewer than 5,000 
vehicles worldwide annually may meet the requirements of S6.2(a). 
Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2008 by small volume 
manufacturers must meet the requirements of S6.2(b).
    S6.3 Side moving barrier crash. (a) Vehicles manufactured before 
September 1, 2004. When the vehicle is impacted laterally on either side 
by a barrier moving at 32 km/h with 50th percentile test dummies as 
specified in part 572 of this chapter at positions required for testing 
to Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208), under the applicable conditions of 
S7, fuel spillage must not exceed the limits of S5.5.
    (b) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2004. When the 
vehicle is impacted laterally on either side by a moving deformable 
barrier at 53 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1.0 km/h with 49 CFR part 572, 
subpart F test dummies at positions required for testing by S3(b) of 
Standard No. 214, under the applicable conditions of S7 of this 
standard, fuel spillage shall not exceed the limits of S5.5 of this 
standard.
    (c) Notwithstanding S6.3(b) of this standard, vehicles having a GVWR 
greater than 6,000 lb (2,722 kg) may meet S6.3(a) of this standard until 
September 1, 2005. Vehicles that have a GVWR greater than 6,000 lb 
(2,722 kg) and that are manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 must 
meet the requirements of S6.3(b).
    (d) Notwithstanding S6.3(b) of this standard, vehicles with a GVWR 
of 6,000 lb (2,722 kg) or less that are manufactured in two or more 
stages or altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having been 
previously certified in accordance with Part 567 of this chapter may 
meet S6.3(a) of this standard until September 1, 2005. Vehicles with a 
GVWR of 6,000 lb (2,722 kg) or less that are manufactured in two or more 
stages or altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having been 
previously certified in accordance with Part 567 of this chapter and 
that are manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 must meet the 
requirements of S6.3(b)
    (e) Notwithstanding S6.3(b) and (c) of this standard, vehicles with 
a GVWR greater than 6,000 lb (2,722 kg) that are manufactured in two or 
more stages or altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having 
been previously certified in accordance with Part 567 of this chapter 
may meet S6.3(a) of this standard until September 1, 2006. Vehicles with 
a GVWR greater than 6,000 lb (2,722 kg) that are manufactured in two or 
more stages or altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having 
been previously certified in accordance with Part 567 of this chapter 
and that are manufactured on or after September 1, 2006 must meet the 
requirements of S6.3(b).
    S6.4 Static rollover. When the vehicle is rotated on its 
longitudinal axis to each successive increment of 90[deg], following an 
impact crash of S6.1, S6.2, or S6.3, fuel spillage shall not exceed the 
limits of S5.6.
    S6.5 Moving contoured barrier crash. When the moving contoured 
barrier assembly traveling longitudinally forward at any speed up to and 
including 48 km/h impacts the test vehicle (school bus with a GVWR 
exceeding 4,536 kg) at any point and angle, under the applicable 
conditions of S7.1 and S7.5, fuel spillage shall not exceed the limits 
of S5.5.
    S6.6 Anti-siphoning test for alcohol fuel vehicles. Each vehicle 
shall have means that prevent any hose made of vinyl plastic or rubber, 
with a length of not less than 1200 millimeters (mm) and an outside 
diameter of not less than 5.2 mm, from contacting the level surface of 
the liquid fuel in the vehicle's fuel tank or fuel system, when the

[[Page 783]]

hose is inserted into the filler neck attached to the fuel tank with the 
fuel tank filled to any level from 90 to 95 percent of capacity.
    S7. Test conditions. The requirements of S5.1 through S5.6 and S6.1 
through S6.5 shall be met under the following conditions. Where a range 
is specified, the vehicle must be capable of meeting the requirements at 
all points within the range.
    S7.1 General test conditions. The following conditions apply to all 
tests.
    S7.1.1 The fuel tank is filled to any level from 90 to 95 percent of 
capacity with Stoddard solvent, having the physical and chemical 
properties of type 1 solvent, Table I ASTM Standard D484-71, ``Standard 
Specifications for Hydrocarbon Dry Cleaning Solvents.''
    S7.1.2 The fuel system other than the fuel tank is filled with 
Stoddard solvent to its normal operating level.
    S7.1.3 In meeting the requirements of S6.1 through S6.3, if the 
vehicle has an electrically driven fuel pump that normally runs when the 
vehicle's electrical system is activated, it is operating at the time of 
the barrier crash.
    S7.1.4 The parking brake is disengaged and the transmission is in 
neutral, except that in meeting the requirements of S6.5 the parking 
brake is set.
    S7.1.5 Tires are inflated to manufacturer's specifications.
    S7.1.6 The vehicle, including test devices and instrumentation, is 
loaded as follows:
    (a) Except as specified in S7.1.1, a passenger car is loaded to its 
unloaded vehicle weight plus its rated cargo and luggage capacity 
weight, secured in the luggage area, plus the necessary test dummies as 
specified in S6., restrained only by means that are installed in the 
vehicle for protection at its seating position.
    (b) Except as specified in S7.1.1, a multipurpose passenger vehicle, 
truck, or bus with a GVWR of 4,536 kg or less is loaded to its unloaded 
vehicle weight, plus the necessary test dummies as specified in S6, plus 
136 kg or its rated cargo and luggage capacity weight, whichever is 
less, secured in the load carrying area and distributed as nearly as 
possible in proportion to its GAWR. For the purpose of this standard, 
unloaded vehicle weight does not include the weight of work-performing 
accessories. Each dummy is restrained only by means that are installed 
in the vehicle for protection at its seating position.
    (c) Except as specified in S7.1.1, a school bus with a GVWR greater 
than 4,536 kg is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight, plus 54 kg of 
unsecured mass at each designated seating position.
    S7.2 Side moving barrier test conditions. (a) Vehicles manufactured 
before September 1, 2004. The side moving barrier crash test conditions 
are those specified in S8.2 of Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208).
    (b) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2004. The side 
moving deformable barrier crash test conditions are those specified in 
S6 and S7 of Standard No. 214 (49 CFR 571.214).
    S7.3 Rear moving barrier test conditions. (a) Vehicles manufactured 
before September 1, 2006. The rear moving barrier test conditions are 
those specified in S8.2 of Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208), except for 
the positioning of the barrier and the vehicle. The barrier and test 
vehicle are positioned so that at impact--
    (1) The vehicle is at rest in its normal attitude;
    (2) The barrier is traveling at 48 km/h with its face perpendicular 
to the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle; and
    (3) A vertical plane through the geometric center of the barrier 
impact surface and perpendicular to that surface coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the vehicle.
    (b) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2006. The rear 
moving deformable barrier is the same as that shown in Figure 2 of 
Standard No. 214 (49 CFR 571.214) and specified in 49 CFR part 587, 
except as otherwise specified in paragraph S7.3 (b). The barrier and 
test vehicle are positioned so that at impact--
    (1) The vehicle is stationary;
    (2) The deformable face of the barrier is mounted on the barrier 50 
mm (2 inches) lower than the height from the ground specified in Figure 
2 of Standard No. 214 (49 CFR 571.214) (All dimensions from the ground 
in Figure 2,

[[Page 784]]

Front View should be reduced by 50 mm (2 inches.));
    (3) The barrier is traveling 80 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1.0 km/h; and
    (4) The barrier impacts the test vehicle with the longitudinal 
centerline of the vehicle parallel to the line of travel and 
perpendicular to the barrier face within a tolerance of <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 degrees. The test vehicle and barrier face are 
aligned so that the barrier strikes the rear of the vehicle with 70 
percent overlap toward either side of the vehicle. So aligned, the 
barrier face fully engages one half of the rear of the vehicle and 
partially engages the other half. At impact, the vehicle's longitudinal 
centerline is located inboard either of the side edges of the barrier by 
a distance equal to 20 percent of the vehicle's width <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 50 mm (see Figure 3). The vehicle's width is the 
maximum dimension measured across the widest part of the vehicle, 
including bumpers and molding, but excluding such components as exterior 
mirrors, flexible mud flaps, marker lamps, and dual rear wheel 
configurations.
    S7.4 Static rollover test conditions. The vehicle is rotated about 
its longitudinal axis, with the axis kept horizontal, to each successive 
increment of 90[deg], 180[deg], and 270[deg] at a uniform rate, with 
90[deg] of rotation taking place in any time interval from 1 to 3 
minutes. After reaching each 90[deg] increment the vehicle is held in 
that position for 5 minutes.
    S7.5 Moving contoured barrier test conditions. The following 
conditions apply to the moving contoured barrier crash test.
    S7.5.1 The moving barrier, which is mounted on a carriage as 
specified in Figure 1, is of rigid construction, symmetrical about a 
vertical longitudinal plane. The contoured impact surface, which is 629 
mm high and 1,981 mm wide, conforms to the dimensions shown in Figure 2, 
and is attached to the carriage as shown in that figure. The ground 
clearance to the lower edge of the impact surface is 133 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>13 mm. The wheelbase is 3,048 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>50 mm.
    S7.5.2 The moving contoured barrier, including the impact surface, 
supporting structure, and carriage, has a mass of 1,814 kg <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 23 kg with the mass distributed so that 408 kg <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 11 kg is at each rear wheel and 499 kg <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 11 kg is at each front wheel. The center of gravity is 
located 1,372 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 38 mm rearward of the front 
wheel axis, in the vertical longitudinal plane of symmetry, 401 mm 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>13 mm above the ground.
    S7.5.3 The moving contoured barrier has a solid nonsteerable front 
axle and fixed rear axle attached directly to the frame rails with no 
spring or other type of suspension system on any wheel. (The moving 
barrier assembly is equipped with a braking device capable of stopping 
its motion.)
    S7.5.4 The concrete surface upon which the vehicle is tested is 
level, rigid, and of uniform construction, with a skid number of 75 when 
measured in accordance with American Society of Testing and Materials 
Method E: 274-65T at 64 km/h, omitting water delivery as specified in 
paragraph 7.1 of that method.
    S7.5.5 The barrier assembly is released from the guidance mechanism 
immediately prior to impact with the vehicle.
    S7.6 The moving barrier assemblies specified in S7.2, S7.3 and S7.5 
are equipped with P205/75R15 pneumatic tires inflated to 200 kPa <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>21 kPa.
    S8 Phase-In schedule.
    S8.1 Rear impact test upgrade. (a) Vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2006 and before September 1, 2007. For vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2006, and before September 1, 
2007, the number of vehicles complying with S6.2(b) of this standard 
must not be less than 40 percent of:
    (1) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2004, and before September 1, 
2007; or
    (2) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2006, and 
before September 1, 2007.
    (b) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2007 and before 
September 1, 2008. For vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 
2007 and before September 1, 2008, the number of vehicles complying with 
S6.2(b) of this standard must not be less than 70 percent of:
    (1) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2005, and before September 1, 
2008; or

[[Page 785]]

    (2) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2007, and 
before September 1, 2008.
    (c) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2008. For 
vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2008, the number of 
vehicles complying with S6.2(b) of this standard must be 100 percent of 
the manufacturer's production during that period.
    S8.2 Vehicles manufactured in two or more stages. A final stage 
manufacturer or alterer may, at its option, comply with the requirements 
set forth in S8.2.1 and S8.2.2.
    S8.2.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2006 and 
before September 1, 2009 are not required to comply with the 
requirements specified in S6.2(b) of this standard.
    S8.2.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2009 must 
comply with the requirements specified in S6.2(b) of this standard.
    S8.3 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S8.3.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S8.1, a vehicle produced by more than one 
manufacturer must be attributed to a single manufacturer as follows, 
subject to S8.3.2:
    (a) A vehicle that is imported must be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, must be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S8.3.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer must be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 586, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S8.3.1.

[[Page 786]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.148


[[Page 787]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR29JY03.002


[[Page 788]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01DE03.015


[40 FR 48353, Oct. 15, 1975. Redesignated and amended at 41 FR 9350, 
Mar. 4, 1976; 41 FR 36026, 36027, Aug. 26, 1976; 53 FR 8204, Mar. 14, 
1988; 53 FR 49990, Dec. 13, 1988; 58 FR 5638, Jan. 22, 1993; 61 FR 
19202, May 1, 1996; 63 FR 28953, May 27, 1998; 68 FR 44471, 44472, July 
29, 2003; 68 FR 67083, Dec. 1, 2003; 69 FR 6583, Feb. 11, 2004; 69 FR 
51398, Aug. 19, 2004]

[[Page 789]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.302  Standard No. 302; Flammability of interior materials.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies burn resistance requirements for 
materials used in the occupant compartments of motor vehicles.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the deaths 
and injuries to motor vehicle occupants caused by vehicle fires, 
especially those originating in the interior of the vehicle from sources 
such as matches or cigarettes.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses.
    S3A. Definitions. Occupant compartment air space means the space 
within the occupant compartment that normally contains refreshable air.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 The portions described in S4.2 of the following components of 
vehicle occupant compartments shall meet the requirements of S4.3: Seat 
cushions, seat backs, seat belts, headlining, convertible tops, arm 
rests, all trim panels including door, front, rear, and side panels, 
compartment shelves, head restraints, floor coverings, sun visors, 
curtains, shades, wheel housing covers, engine compartment covers, 
mattress covers, and any other interior materials, including padding and 
crash-deployed elements, that are designed to absorb energy on contact 
by occupants in the event of a crash.
    S4.1.1 [Reserved]
    S4.2 Any portion of a single or composite material which is within 
13 mm of the occupant compartment air space shall meet the requirements 
of S4.3.
    S4.2.1 Any material that does not adhere to other material(s) at 
every point of contact shall meet the requirements of S4.3 when tested 
separately.
    S4.2.2 Any material that adheres to other materials at every point 
of contact shall meet the requirements of S4.3 when tested as a 
composite with the other material(s).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.011

    Material A has a non-adhering interface with material B and is 
tested separately. Part of material B is within 13 mm of the occupant 
compartment air space, and materials B and C adhere at every point of 
contact; therefore, B and C are tested as a composite. The cut is in 
material C as shown, to make a specimen 13 mm thick.
    S4.3(a) When tested in accordance with S5, material described in 
S4.1 and S4.2 shall not burn, nor transmit a flame front across its 
surface, at a rate of more than 102 mm per minute. The requirement 
concerning transmission

[[Page 790]]

of a flame front shall not apply to a surface created by cutting a test 
specimen for purposes of testing pursuant to S5.
    (b) If a material stops burning before it has burned for 60 seconds 
from the start of timing, and has not burned more than 51 mm from the 
point where the timing was started, it shall be considered to meet the 
burn-rate requirement of S4.3(a).
    S5.1 Conditions.
    S5.1.1 The test is conducted in a metal cabinet for protecting the 
test specimens from drafts. The interior of the cabinet is 381 mm long, 
203 mm deep, and 356 mm high. It has a glass observation window in the 
front, a closable opening to permit insertion of the specimen holder, 
and a hole to accommodate tubing for a gas burner. For ventilation, it 
has a 13 mm clearance space around the top of the cabinet, ten holes in 
the base of the cabinet, each hole 19 mm in diameter and legs to elevate 
the bottom of the cabinet by 10 mm, all located as shown in Figure 1.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR24SE98.036

    S5.1.2 Prior to testing, each specimen is conditioned for 24 hours 
at a temperature of 21 [deg]C, and a relative humidity of 50 percent, 
and the test is conducted under those ambient conditions.
    S5.1.3 The test specimen is inserted between two matching U-shaped 
frames of metal stock 25 mm wide and 10 mm high. The interior dimensions 
of the U-shaped frames are 51 mm wide by 330 mm long. A specimen that 
softens and bends at the flaming end so as to cause

[[Page 791]]

erratic burning is kept horizontal by supports consisting of thin, heat-
resistant wires, spanning the width of the U-shaped frame under the 
specimen at 25 mm intervals. A device that may be used for supporting 
this type of material is an additional U-shaped frame, wider than the U-
shaped frame containing the specimen, spanned by 10-mil wires of heat-
resistant composition at 25 mm intervals, inserted over the bottom U-
shaped frame.
    S5.1.4 A bunsen burner with a tube of 10 mm inside diameter is used. 
The gas adjusting valve is set to provide a flame, with the tube 
vertical, of 38 mm in height. The air inlet to the burner is closed.
    S5.1.5 The gas supplied to the burner has a flame temperature 
equivalent to that of natural gas.
    S5.2 Preparation of specimens.
    S5.2.1 Each specimen of material to be tested shall be a rectangle 
102 mm wide by 356 mm long, wherever possible. The thickness of the 
specimen is that of the single or composite material used in the 
vehicle, except that if the material's thickness exceeds 13 mm, the 
specimen is cut down to that thickness measured from the surface of the 
specimen closest to the occupant compartment air space. Where it is not 
possible to obtain a flat specimen because of surface curvature, the 
specimen is cut to not more than 13 mm in thickness at any point. The 
maximum available length or width of a specimen is used where either 
dimension is less than 356 mm or 102 mm, respectively, unless surrogate 
testing is required under S4.1.1.
    S5.2.2 The specimen is produced by cutting the material in the 
direction that provides the most adverse test results. The specimen is 
oriented so that the surface closest to the occupant compartment air 
space faces downward on the test frame.
    S5.2.3 Material with a napped or tufted surface is placed on a flat 
surface and combed twice against the nap with a comb having seven to 
eight smooth, rounded teeth per 25 mm.
    S5.3 Procedure.
    (a) Mount the specimen so that both sides and one end are held by 
the U-shaped frame, and one end is even with the open end of the frame. 
Where the maximum available width of a specimen is not more than 51 mm, 
so that the sides of the specimen cannot be held in the U-shaped frame, 
place the specimen in position on wire supports as described in S5.1.3, 
with one end held by the closed end of the U-shaped frame.
    (b) Place the mounted specimen in a horizontal position, in the 
center of the cabinet.
    (c) With the flame adjusted according to S5.1.4, position the bunsen 
burner and specimen so that the center of the burner tip is 19 mm below 
the center of the bottom edge of the open end of the specimen.
    (d) Expose the specimen to the flame for 15 seconds.
    (e) Begin timing (without reference to the period of application of 
the burner flame) when the flame from the burning specimen reaches a 
point 38 mm from the open end of the specimen.
    (f) Measure the time that it takes the flame to progress to a point 
38 mm from the clamped end of the specimen. If the flame does not reach 
the specified end point, time its progress to the point where flaming 
stops.
    (g) Calculate the burn rate from the formula:

B = 60 x (D/T)

Where:

B = Burn rate in millimeters per minute
D = Length the flame travels in millimeters, and
T = Time in seconds for the flame to travel D millimeters.

[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, as amended at 40 FR 14319, Mar. 31, 1975; 40 
FR 42747, Sept. 16, 1975; 40 FR 56667, Dec. 4, 1975; 63 FR 28954, 28956, 
May 27, 1998; 63 FR 51003, Sept. 24, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 571.303  Standard No. 303; Fuel system integrity of compressed natural 
gas vehicles.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for the integrity of 
motor vehicle fuel systems using compressed natural gas (CNG), including 
the CNG fuel systems of bi-fuel, dedicated, and dual fuel CNG vehicles.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries occurring from fires that result from fuel leakage during and 
after motor vehicle crashes.

[[Page 792]]

    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses that have a gross 
vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 10,000 pounds or less and use CNG as a 
motor fuel. This standard also applies to school buses regardless of 
weight that use CNG as a motor fuel.
    S4. Definitions.
    Bi-fuel CNG vehicle means a vehicle equipped with two independent 
fuel systems, one of which is designed to supply CNG and the second to 
supply a fuel other than CNG.
    CNG fuel container means a container designed to store CNG as motor 
fuel onboard a motor vehicle.
    CNG fuel system means all components used to store or supply CNG to 
a vehicle's engine.
    Dedicated CNG vehicle means a vehicle equipped with one fuel system 
and designed to operate on CNG.
    Dual-fuel CNG vehicle means a vehicle which is fueled by two fuels 
simultaneously, one of which is CNG and the second is a fuel other than 
CNG.
    High pressure portion of a fuel system means all the components from 
and including each CNG fuel container up to, but not including, the 
first pressure regulator.
    Service pressure means the internal pressure of a CNG fuel container 
when filled to design capacity with CNG at 20 [deg]Celsius (68 
[deg]Fahrenheit).
    S5. General requirements.
    S5.1 Vehicle requirements.
    S5.1.1 Vehicles with GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less. Each passenger 
car, multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and bus with a GVWR of 
10,000 pounds or less that uses CNG as a motor fuel and that is 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1995 shall meet the requirements 
of S6, except S6.4.
    S5.1.2 Schoolbuses with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds. Each 
schoolbus with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds that uses CNG as a 
motor fuel and that is manufactured on or after September 1, 1995 shall 
meet the requirements of S6.4.
    S5.2 Fuel system pressure drop: barrier crash.
    (a) For all vehicles, the pressure drop in the high pressure portion 
of the fuel system, expressed in kiloPascals (kPa), in any fixed or 
moving barrier crash from vehicle impact through the 60 minute period 
following cessation of motion shall not exceed:
    (1) 1062 kPa (154 psi), or
    (2) 895 (T/V<INF>FS</INF>); whichever is higher

where T is the average temperature of the test gas in degrees Kelvin, 
stabilized to ambient temperature before testing, where average 
temperature (T) is calculated by measuring ambient temperature at the 
start of the test time and then every 15 minutes until the test time of 
60 minutes is completed; the sum of the ambient temperatures is then 
divided by five to yield the average temperature (T); and where 
V<INF>FS</INF> is the internal volume in liters of the fuel container 
and the fuel lines up to the first pressure regulator.
    (b) For bi-fuel or dual fuel CNG vehicles, the test requirement in 
S5.2(a) shall apply to the CNG fuel system, and the test requirement of 
Standard No. 301 shall apply to the other fuel system, if that standard 
is applicable.
    S5.3 Each CNG vehicle shall be permanently labeled, near the vehicle 
refueling connection, with the information specified in S5.3.1 and 
S5.3.2 of this section. The information shall be visible to a person 
standing next to the vehicle during refueling, in English, and in 
letters and numbers that are not less than 4.76 mm (3/16 inch) high.
    S5.3.1 The statement: ``Service pressure --------------------------
---- kPa (------------ psig).''
    S5.3.2 The statement ``See instructions on fuel container for 
inspection and service life.''
    S5.4 When a motor vehicle is delivered to the first purchaser for 
purposes other than resale, the manufacturer shall provide the purchaser 
with a written statement of the information in S5.3.1 and S5.3.2 in the 
owner's manual, or, if there is no owner's manual, on a one-page 
document. The information shall be in English and in not less than 10 
point type.
    S6. Test requirements: fuel system integrity. Each vehicle with a 
GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less shall meet the requirements of any 
applicable barrier crash test. A particular vehicle need not meet 
further requirements after having been subjected to a single barrier 
crash test.

[[Page 793]]

    S6.1 Frontal barrier crash. When the vehicle traveling 
longitudinally forward at any speed up to and including 30 mph impacts a 
fixed collision barrier that is perpendicular to the line of travel of 
the vehicle, or at any angle up to 30 degrees in either direction from 
the perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle, with 50th 
percentile test dummies as specified in part 572 of this chapter at each 
front outboard designated seating position and at any other position 
whose protection system is required to be tested by a dummy under the 
provisions of Standard No. 208, under the applicable conditions of S7, 
the fuel pressure drop shall not exceed the limits of S5.2.
    S6.2 Rear moving barrier crash. When the vehicle is impacted from 
the rear by a barrier moving at any speed up to and including 30 mph, 
with test dummies as specified in part 572 of this chapter at each front 
outboard designated seating position, under the applicable conditions of 
S7, the fuel pressure drop shall not exceed the limits of S5.2.
    S6.3 Lateral moving barrier crash. When the vehicle is impacted 
laterally on either side by a barrier moving at any speed up to and 
including 20 mph with 50th percentile test dummies as specified in part 
572 of this chapter at positions required for testing to Standard No. 
208, under the applicable conditions of S7, the fuel pressure drop shall 
not exceed the limits of S5.2.
    S6.4 Moving contoured barrier crash. When the moving contoured 
barrier assembly traveling longitudinally forward at any speed up to and 
including 30 mph impacts the test vehicle (schoolbus with a GVWR 
exceeding 10,000 pounds) at any point and angle, under the applicable 
conditions of S7, the fuel pressure drop shall not exceed the limits of 
S5.2.
    S7. Test conditions. The requirements of S5 and S6 shall be met 
under the following conditions. Where a range of conditions is 
specified, the vehicle must be capable of meeting the requirements at 
all points within the range.
    S7.1 General test conditions. The following conditions apply to all 
tests.
    S7.1.1 Each fuel storage container is filled to 100 percent of 
service pressure with nitrogen, N<INF>2</INF>. The gas pressure shall 
stabilize to ambient temperature before testing may be conducted.
    S7.1.2 After each fuel storage container is filled as specified in 
S7.1.1, the fuel system other than each fuel storage container is filled 
with nitrogen, N<INF>2</INF>, to normal operating pressures. All manual 
shutoff valves are to be in the open position.
    S7.1.3 In meeting the requirements of S6.1 through S6.4, if the 
vehicle has an electrically driven fuel pump that normally runs when the 
vehicle's electrical system is activated, it is operating at the time of 
the barrier crash. If the vehicle has any high pressure electric shutoff 
valve that is normally open when the electrical system is activated, it 
is open at the time of the barrier crash. Furthermore, if any electric 
shutoff valve prevents sensing of system pressure by the pressure 
transducer when closed, it must be open for both the initial pressure 
measurement and the pressure measurement 60 minutes after the vehicle 
ceases motion from impact. Any valve shall be open for a period of one 
minute to equalize the system pressure.
    S7.1.4 The parking brake is disengaged and the transmission is in 
neutral, except that in meeting the requirements of S6.4, the parking 
brake is set.
    S7.1.5 Tires are inflated to manufacturer's specifications.
    S7.1.6 The vehicle, including test devices and instrumentation, is 
loaded as follows:
    (a) A passenger car, with its fuel system filled as specified in 
S7.1.1 and S7.1.2, is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight plus its 
rated cargo and luggage capacity weight, secured in the luggage area, 
plus the necessary test dummies as specified in S6, restrained only by 
means that are installed in the vehicle for protection at its seating 
position.
    (b) A multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, or bus with a GVWR of 
10,000 pounds or less, whose fuel system is filled as specified in 
S7.1.1 and S7.1.2, is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight, plus the 
necessary test dummies as specified in S6, plus 136.1 kilograms (kg.) 
(300 pounds (lb.)), or its rated cargo and luggage capacity weight,

[[Page 794]]

whichever is less, secured to the vehicle and distributed so that the 
weight on each axle as measured at the tire-ground interface is in 
proportion to its GAWR. Each dummy shall be restrained only by means 
that are installed in the vehicle for protection at its seating 
position.
    (c) A schoolbus with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds, whose fuel 
system is filled as specified in S7.1.1 and S7.1.2, is loaded to its 
unloaded vehicle weight, plus 54.4 kg. (120 lb.) of unsecured weight at 
each designated seating position.
    S7.1.7 The ambient temperature is not to vary more than 5.6 [deg]C 
(10 [deg]F) during the course of the test.
    S7.1.8 The pressure drop measurement specified in S5.2 is to be made 
using a location on the high pressure side of the fuel system in 
accordance with the vehicle manufacturer's recommendation.
    S7.2 Lateral moving barrier crash test conditions. The lateral 
moving barrier crash test conditions are those specified in S8.2 of 
Standard No. 208, 49 CFR 571.208.
    S7.3 Rear moving barrier test conditions. The rear moving barrier 
test conditions are those specified in S8.2 of Standard No. 208, 49 CFR 
571.208, except for the positioning of the barrier and the vehicle. The 
barrier and test vehicle are positioned so that at impact--
    (a) The vehicle is at rest in its normal attitude;
    (b) The barrier is traveling at any speed up to and including 30 mph 
with its face perpendicular to the longitudinal centerline of the 
vehicle; and
    (c) A vertical plane through the geometric center of the barrier 
impact surface and perpendicular to that surface coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the vehicle.
    S7.4 Moving contoured barrier test conditions. The moving contoured 
barrier crash test conditions are those specified in S7.5 of Standard 
No. 301, 49 CFR 571.301.

[59 FR 19659, Apr. 25, 1994; as amended at 60 FR 2543, Jan. 10, 1995; 60 
FR 57948, Nov. 24, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 571.304  Standard No. 304; Compressed natural gas fuel container 
integrity.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for the integrity of 
compressed natural gas (CNG), motor vehicle fuel containers.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries occurring from fires that result from fuel leakage during and 
after motor vehicle crashes.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to each passenger car, 
multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and bus that uses CNG as a motor 
fuel and to each container designed to store CNG as motor fuel on-board 
any motor vehicle.
    S4. Definitions.
    Brazing means a group of welding processes wherein coalescence is 
produced by heating to a suitable temperature above 800 [deg]F and by 
using a nonferrous filler metal, having a melting point below that to 
the base metals. The filler metal is distributed between the closely 
fitted surfaces of the joint by capillary attraction.
    Burst pressure means the highest internal pressure reached in a CNG 
fuel container during a burst test at a temperature of 21 [deg]C (70 
[deg]F).
    CNG fuel container means a container designed to store CNG as motor 
fuel on-board a motor vehicle.
    Fill pressure means the internal pressure of a CNG fuel container 
attained at the time of filling. Fill pressure varies according to the 
gas temperature in the container which is dependent on the charging 
parameters and the ambient conditions.
    Full wrapped means applying the reinforcement of a filament or resin 
system over the entire liner, including the domes.
    Hoop wrapped means winding of filament in a substantially 
circumferential pattern over the cylindrical portion of the liner so 
that the filament does not transmit any significant stresses in a 
direction parallel to the cylinder longitudinal axis.
    Hydrostatic pressure means the internal pressure to which a CNG fuel 
container is taken during testing set forth in S5.4.1.

[[Page 795]]

    Liner means the inner gas tight container or gas cylinder to which 
the overwrap is applied.
    Service pressure means the internal settled pressure of a CNG fuel 
container at a uniform gas temperature of 21 [deg]C (70 [deg]F) and full 
gas content. It is the pressure for which the container has been 
constructed under normal conditions.
    S5 Container and material requirements.
    S5.1 Container designations. Container designations are as follows:
    S5.1.1 Type 1--Non-composite metallic container means a metal 
container.
    S5.1.2 Type 2--Composite metallic hoop wrapped container means a 
metal liner reinforced with resin impregnated continuous filament that 
is ``hoop wrapped.''
    S5.1.3 Type 3--Composite metallic full wrapped container means a 
metal liner reinforced with resin impregnated continuous filament that 
is ``full wrapped.''
    S5.1.4 Type 4--Composite non-metallic full wrapped container means 
resin impregnated continuous filament with a non-metallic liner ``full 
wrapped.''
    S6 General requirements.
    S6.1 Each passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and 
bus that uses CNG as a motor fuel shall be equipped with a CNG fuel 
container that meets the requirements of S7 through S7.4.
    S6.2 Each CNG fuel container manufactured on or after March 27, 1995 
shall meet the requirements of S7 through S7.4.
    S7 Test requirements. Each CNG fuel container shall meet the 
applicable requirements of S7 through S7.4.
    S7.1 Pressure cycling test at ambient temperature. Each CNG fuel 
container shall not leak when tested in accordance with S8.1.
    S7.2 Hydrostatic burst test.
    S7.2.1 Each Type 1 CNG fuel container shall not leak when subjected 
to burst pressure and tested in accordance with S8.2. Burst pressure 
shall not be less than 2.25 times the service pressure for non-welded 
containers and shall not be less than 3.5 times the service pressure for 
welded containers.
    S7.2.2 Each Type 2, Type 3, or Type 4 CNG fuel container shall not 
leak when subjected to burst pressure and tested in accordance with 
S8.2. Burst pressure shall be not less than 2.25 times the service 
pressure.
    S7.3 Bonfire test. Each CNG fuel container shall be equipped with a 
pressure relief device. Each CNG fuel container shall completely vent 
its contents through a pressure relief device or shall not burst while 
retaining its entire contents when tested in accordance with S8.3.
    S7.4 Labeling. Each CNG fuel container shall be permanently labeled 
with the information specified in paragraphs (a) through (h) of this 
section. Any label affixed to the container in compliance with this 
section shall remain in place and be legible for the manufacturer's 
recommended service life of the container. The information shall be in 
English and in letters and numbers that are at least 6.35 mm (\1/4\ 
inch) high.
    (a) The statement: ``If there is a question about the proper use, 
installation, or maintenance of this container, contact----------------
----,'' inserting the CNG fuel container manufacturer's name, address, 
and telephone number.
    (b) The statement: ``Manufactured in ------------,'' inserting the 
month and year of manufacture of the CNG fuel container.
    (c) The statement: ``Service pressure ------------ kPa, (----------
-- psig).''
    (d) The symbol DOT, constituting a certification by the CNG 
container manufacturer that the container complies with all requirements 
of this standard.
    (e) The container designation (e.g., Type 1, 2, 3, 4).
    (f) The statement: ``CNG Only.''
    (g) The statement: ``This container should be visually inspected 
after a motor vehicle accident or fire and at least every 36 months or 
36,000 miles, whichever comes first, for damage and deterioration.
    (h) The statement: ``Do Not Use After ------------'' inserting the 
month and year that mark the end of the manufacturer's recommended 
service life for the container.
    S8 Test conditions: fuel container integrity.
    S8.1 Pressure cycling test. The requirements of S7.1 shall be met 
under the conditions of S8.1.1 through S8.1.4.

[[Page 796]]

    S8.1.1 Hydrostatically pressurize the CNG container to the service 
pressure, then to not more than 10 percent of the service pressure, for 
13,000 cycles.
    S8.1.2 After being pressurized as specified in S8.1.1, 
hydrostatically pressurize the CNG container to 125 percent of the 
service pressure, then to not more than 10 percent of the service 
pressure, for 5,000 cycles.
    S8.1.3 The cycling rate for S8.1.1 and S8.1.2 shall be any value up 
to and including 10 cycles per minute.
    S8.1.4 The cycling is conducted at ambient temperature.
    S8.2 Hydrostatic burst test. The requirements of S7.2 shall be met 
under the conditions of S8.2.1 through S8.2.2.
    S8.2.1 Hydrostatically pressurize the CNG fuel container, as 
follows: The pressure is increased up to the minimum prescribed burst 
pressure determined in S7.2.1 or S7.2.2, and held constant at the 
minimum burst pressure for 10 seconds.
    S8.2.2 The pressurization rate throughout the test shall be any 
value up to and including 1,379 kPa (200 psi) per second.
    S8.3 Bonfire test. The requirements of S7.3 shall be met under the 
conditions of S8.3.1 through S8.3.7.
    S8.3.1 Fill the CNG fuel container with compressed natural gas and 
test it at:
    (a) 100 percent of service pressure; and
    (b) 25 percent of service pressure.
    S8.3.2 Container positioning.
    (a) Position the CNG fuel container in accordance with paragraphs 
(b) and (c) of S8.3.2.
    (b) Position the CNG fuel container so that its longitudinal axis is 
horizontal and its bottom is 100 mm (4 inches) above the fire source.
    (c)(1) Position a CNG fuel container that is 1.65 meters (65 inches) 
in length or less and is fitted with one pressure relief device so that 
the center of the container is over the center of the fire source.
    (2) Position a CNG fuel container that is greater than 1.65 meters 
(65 inches) in length and is fitted with one pressure relief device at 
one end of the container so that the center of the fire source is 0.825 
meters (32.5 inches) from the other end of the container, measured 
horizontally along a line parallel to the longitudinal axis of the 
container.
    (3) Position a CNG fuel container that is fitted with pressure 
relief devices at more than one location along its length so that the 
portion of container over the center of the fire source is the portion 
midway between the two pressure relief devices that are separated by the 
greatest distance, measured horizontally along a line parallel to the 
longitudinal axis of the container.
    (4) Test a CNG fuel container that is greater than 1.65 meters (65 
inches) in length, is protected by thermal insulation, and does not have 
pressure relief devices, twice at 100 percent of service pressure. In 
one test, position the center of the container over the center of the 
fire source. In another test, position one end of the container so that 
the fire source is centered 0.825 meters (32.5 inches) from one end of 
the container, measured horizontally along a line parallel to the 
longitudinal axis of the container.
    S8.3.3 Number and placement of thermocouples. To monitor flame 
temperature, place three thermocouples so that they are suspended 25 mm 
(one inch) below the bottom of the CNG fuel container. Position 
thermocouples so that they are equally spaced over the length of the 
fire source or length of the container, whichever is shorter.
    S8.3.4 Shielding.
    (a) Use shielding to prevent the flame from directly contacting the 
CNG fuel container valves, fittings, or pressure relief devices.
    (b) To provide the shielding, use steel with 0.6 mm (.025 in) 
minimum nominal thickness.
    (c) Position the shielding so that it does not directly contact the 
CNG fuel container valves, fittings, or pressure relief devices.
    S8.3.5 Fire source. Use a uniform fire source that is 1.65 meters 
long (65 inches). Beginning five minutes after the fire is ignited, 
maintain an average flame temperature of not less than 430 degrees 
Celsius (800 degrees Fahrenheit) as determined by the average of the two 
thermocouples recording the highest temperatures over a 60 second 
interval:

[[Page 797]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30OC00.009

    If the pressure relief device releases before the end of the fifth 
minute after ignition, then the minimum temperature requirement does not 
apply.
    S8.3.6 Recording data. Record time, temperature, and pressure 
readings at 30 second intervals, beginning when the fire is ignited and 
continuing until the pressure release device releases.
    S8.3.7 Duration of exposure to fire source. The CNG fuel container 
is exposed to the fire source for 20 minutes after ignition or until the 
pressure release device releases, whichever period is shorter.
    S8.3.8 Number of tests per container. A single CNG fuel container is 
not subjected to more than one bonfire test.
    S8.3.9 Wind velocity. The average ambient wind velocity at the CNG 
fuel container during the period specified in S8.3.6 of this standard is 
not to exceed 2.24 meters/second (5 mph).
    S8.3.10 The average wind velocity at the container is any velocity 
up to and including 2.24 meters/second (5 mph).

[59 FR 49021, Sept. 26, 1994; 59 FR 66776, Dec. 28, 1994; 60 FR 37843, 
July 24, 1995; 60 FR 57948, Nov. 24, 1995; 61 FR 19204, May 1, 1996; 61 
FR 47089, Sept. 6, 1996; 63 FR 66765, Dec. 3, 1998; 65 FR 51772, Aug. 
25, 2000; 65 FR 64626, Oct. 30, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 571.305  Standard No. 305; Electric-powered vehicles: electrolyte 
spillage and electrical shock protection.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for limitation of 
electrolyte spillage, retention of propulsion batteries during a crash, 
and electrical isolation of the chassis from the high-voltage system, to 
be met by vehicles that use electricity as propulsion power .
    S2.Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries during a crash which occur because of electrolyte spillage from 
propulsion batteries, intrusion of propulsion battery system components 
into the occupant compartment, and electrical shock.
    S3 Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a GVWR of 4536 kg 
or less, that use more than 48 nominal volts of electricity as 
propulsion power and whose speed attainable in 1.6 km on a paved level 
surface is more than 40 km/h.
    S4. Definition.
    Battery system component means any part of a battery module, 
interconnect, venting system, battery restraint device, and battery box 
or container which holds the individual battery modules.
    Dummy means a 50th percentile male test dummy as specified in 
subpart F of part 572 of this chapter.
    S5. General requirements. Each vehicle to which this standard 
applies, when tested according to S6 under the conditions of S7, must 
meet the requirements of S5.1, S5.2, and S5.3.
    S5.1 Electrolyte spillage from propulsion batteries. Not more than 
5.0 liters of electrolyte from propulsion batteries shall spill outside 
the passenger compartment, and no visible trace of electrolyte shall 
spill into the passenger compartment. Spillage is measured from the time 
the vehicle ceases motion after a barrier impact test until 30 minutes 
thereafter, and throughout any static rollover after a barrier impact 
test.
    S5.2 Battery Retention. Battery modules located inside the passenger 
compartment must remain in the location in which they are installed. No 
part of any battery system component that is located outside the 
passenger compartment shall enter the passenger compartment during the 
test procedures of S6 of this standard, as determined by visual 
inspection.
    S5.3 Electrical isolation. Electrical isolation between the battery 
system and the vehicle electricity-conducting structure after each test 
must be not less than 500 ohms/volt.
    S6. Test requirements. Each vehicle to which this standard applies, 
under the conditions of S7, must be capable of

[[Page 798]]

meeting the requirements of any applicable single barrier crash/static 
rollover test sequence, without alteration of the vehicle during the 
test sequence. A particular vehicle need not meet further test 
requirements after having been subjected to a single barrier crash/
static rollover test sequence.
    S6.1 Frontal barrier crash. The vehicle must meet the requirements 
of S5.1, S5.2 and S5.3 when it is traveling longitudinally forward at 
any speed, up to and including 48 km/h, and impacts a fixed collision 
barrier that is perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle, or 
at any angle up to 30 degrees in either direction from the perpendicular 
to the line of travel of the vehicle.
    S6.2 Rear moving barrier impact. The vehicle must meet the 
requirements of S5.1, S5.2, and S5.3, when:
    (a) it is impacted from the rear by a barrier moving at any speed up 
to and including 48 km/h, with a dummy at each front outboard designated 
seating position, or
    (b) at the manufacturer's option (with said option irrevocably 
selected prior to, or at the time of, certification of the vehicle), it 
is impacted at 80 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1.0 km/h with 50th percentile 
test dummies as specified in part 572 of this chapter at each front 
outboard designated seating position under the conditions specified in 
S7.3(b) of FMVSS No. 301 and S7 of this section as applicable.
    S6.3 Side moving deformable barrier impact. The vehicle must meet 
the requirements of S5.1, S5.2, and S5.3 when it is impacted from the 
side by a barrier that conforms to part 587 of this chapter that is 
moving at any speed up to and including 54 km/h, with dummies positioned 
in accordance with S7 of Sec. 571.214 of this chapter.
    S6.4 Post-impact test static rollover. The vehicle must meet the 
requirements of S5.1, S5.2, and S5.3, after being rotated on its 
longitudinal axis to each successive increment of 90 degrees after each 
impact test specified in S6.1, S6.2, and S6.3.
    S7. Test conditions. When the vehicle is tested according to S6, the 
requirements of S5 must be met under the conditions in S7.1 through 
S7.6.7. Where a range is specified, the vehicle must be capable of 
meeting the requirements at all points within the range.
    S7.1 Battery state of charge. The battery system is at the level 
specified in the following paragraph (a), (b), or (c), as appropriate:
    (a) At the maximum state of charge recommended by the manufacturer, 
as stated in the vehicle operator's manual or on a label that is 
permanently affixed to the vehicle;
    (b) If the manufacturer has made no recommendation, at a state of 
charge of not less than 95 percent of the maximum capacity of the 
battery system; or
    (c) If the batteries are rechargeable only by an energy source on 
the vehicle, at any state of charge within the normal operating voltage, 
as defined by the vehicle manufacturer.
    S7.2 Vehicle conditions. The switch or device that provides power 
from the propulsion batteries to the propulsion motor(s) is in the 
activated position or the ready-to-drive position.
    S7.2.1 The parking brake is disengaged and the transmission, if any, 
is in the neutral position. In a test conducted under S6.3, the parking 
brake is set.
    S7.2.2 Tires are inflated to the manufacturer's specifications.
    S7.2.3 The vehicle, including test devices and instrumentation, is 
loaded as follows:
    (a) A passenger car is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight plus 
its rated cargo and luggage capacity weight, secured in the luggage 
area, plus the necessary test dummies as specified in S6, restrained 
only by means that are installed in the vehicle for protection at its 
seating position.
    (b) A multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, or bus with a GVWR of 
4536 kg or less is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight plus the 
necessary dummies, as specified in S6, plus 136 kg or its rated cargo 
and luggage capacity weight, whichever is less. Each dummy is restrained 
only by means that are installed in the vehicle for protection at its 
seating position.
    S7.3 Static rollover test conditions. In addition to the conditions 
of S7.1 and S7.2, the conditions of S7.4 of Sec.

[[Page 799]]

571.301 of this chapter apply to the conduct of static rollover tests 
specified in S6.4.
    S7.4 Rear moving barrier impact test conditions. In addition to the 
conditions of S7.1 and S7.2, the rear moving barrier test conditions for 
S6.2(a) are those specified in S8.2 of Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 
571.208), except for the positioning of the barrier and the vehicle. The 
rear moving barrier is described in S8.2 of Standard No. 208 of this 
chapter. The barrier and test vehicle are positioned so that at impact--
    (a) The vehicle is at rest in its normal attitude;
    (b) The barrier is traveling at 48 km/h with its face perpendicular 
to the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle; and
    (c) A vertical plane through the geometric center of the barrier 
impact surface and perpendicular to that surface coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the vehicle.
    S7.5 Side moving deformable barrier impact test conditions. In 
addition to the conditions of S7.1 and S7.2, the conditions of S6.10, 
S6.11, and S6.12 of Sec. 571.214 of this chapter apply to the conduct of 
the side moving deformable barrier impact test specified in S6.3.
    S7.6 Electrical isolation test procedure. In addition to the 
conditions of S7.1 and S7.2, the conditions in S7.6.1 through S7.6.7 
apply to the measurement of electrical isolation specified in S5.3.
    S7.6.1 Prior to any barrier impact test, the propulsion battery 
system is connected to the vehicle's propulsion system, and the vehicle 
ignition is in the ``on'' (traction (propulsion) system energized) 
position. If the vehicle utilizes an automatic disconnect between the 
propulsion battery system and the traction system that is physically 
contained within the battery pack system, the electrical isolation 
measurement after the impact is made from the traction side of the 
automatic disconnect to the vehicle chassis. If the vehicle utilizes an 
automatic disconnect that is not physically contained within the battery 
pack system, the electrical isolation measurement after the impact is 
made from the battery side of the automatic disconnect to the vehicle 
chassis.
    S7.6.2 The voltmeter used in this test measures direct current 
values and has an internal resistance of at least 10 M[ohm]
    S7.6.3 The voltage is measured as shown in Figure 1 and the 
propulsion battery voltage (Vb) is recorded. Before any vehicle impact 
test, Vb is equal to or greater than the nominal operating voltage as 
specified by the vehicle manufacturer.
    S7.6.4 The voltage is measured as shown in Figure 2, and the voltage 
(V1) between the negative side of the propulsion battery and the vehicle 
chassis is recorded.
    S7.6.5 The voltage is measured as shown in Figure 3, and the voltage 
(V2) between the positive side of the propulsion battery and the vehicle 
chassis is recorded.
    S7.6.6 If V1 is greater than or equal to V2, insert a known 
resistance (Ro) between the negative side of the propulsion battery and 
the vehicle chassis. With the Ro installed, measure the voltage (V1') as 
shown in Figure 4 between the negative side of the propulsion battery 
and the vehicle chassis. Calculate the electrical isolation (Ri) 
according to the formula shown. This electrical isolation value (in 
ohms) divided by the nominal operating voltage of the propulsion battery 
(in volts) must be equal to or greater than 500.
    S7.6.7 If V2 is greater than V1, insert a known resistance (Ro) 
between the positive side of the propulsion battery and the vehicle 
chassis. With the Ro installed, measure the voltage and record the 
voltage (V2') between the positive side of the propulsion battery and 
the vehicle chassis as shown in Figure 5. Calculate the electrical 
isolation (Ri) according to the formula shown. This electrical isolation 
value (in ohms) divided by the nominal operating voltage of the 
propulsion battery (in volts) must be equal to or greater than 500.

[[Page 800]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27SE00.000

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27SE00.001


[[Page 801]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27SE00.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27SE00.003


[[Page 802]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27SE00.004


[65 FR 57988, Sept. 27, 2000, as amended at 66 FR 60160, Dec. 3, 2001; 
69 FR 51399, Aug. 19, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 571.401  Standard No. 401; Interior trunk release.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard establishes the requirement for 
providing a trunk release mechanism that makes it possible for a person 
trapped inside the trunk compartment of a passenger car to escape from 
the compartment.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars that have a 
trunk compartment. This standard does not apply to passenger cars with a 
back door.
    S3. Definitions.
    Back door means a door or door system on the back end of a passenger 
car through which cargo can be loaded or unloaded. The term includes the 
hinged back door on a hatchback or a station wagon.
    Trunk compartment. (a) Means a space that:
    (1) Is intended to be used for carrying luggage or cargo,
    (2) Is wholly separated from the occupant compartment of a passenger 
car by a permanently attached partition or by a fixed or fold-down seat 
back and/or partition,
    (3) Has a trunk lid, and
    (4) Is large enough so that the three-year-old child dummy described 
in Subpart C of Part 572 can be placed inside the trunk compartment, and 
the trunk lid can be closed and latched with all removable equipment 
furnished by the passenger car manufacturer stowed in accordance with 
label(s) on the passenger car or information in the passenger car 
owner's manual, or, if no information is provided, as located when the 
passenger car is delivered. (Note: For purposes of this standard, the 
Part 572 Subpart C test dummy need not be equipped with the 
accelerometers specified in Sec. 572.21.)

[[Page 803]]

    (b) Does not include a sub-compartment within the trunk compartment.
    Trunk lid means a moveable body panel that is not designed or 
intended as a passenger car entry point for passengers and that provides 
access from outside a passenger car to a trunk compartment. The term 
does not include a back door or the lid of a storage compartment located 
inside the passenger compartment of a passenger car.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 Each passenger car with a trunk compartment must have an 
automatic or manual release mechanism inside the trunk compartment that 
unlatches the trunk lid. Each trunk release shall conform, at the 
manufacturer's option, to either S4.2(a) and S4.3, or S4.2(b) and S4.3. 
The manufacturer shall select the option by the time it certifies the 
vehicle and may not thereafter select a different option for the 
vehicle.
    S4.2(a) Each manual release mechanism installed pursuant to S4.1 of 
this standard must include a feature, like lighting or phosphorescence, 
that allows the release mechanism to be easily seen inside the closed 
trunk compartment.
    (b) Each automatic release mechanism installed pursuant to S4.1 of 
this section must unlatch the trunk lid within 5 minutes of when the 
trunk lid is closed with a person inside the trunk compartment.
    S4.3(a) Except as provided in paragraph S4.3(b), actuation of the 
release mechanism required by S4.1 of this standard must completely 
release the trunk lid from all latching positions of the trunk lid 
latch.
    (b)(1) For passenger cars with a front trunk compartment that has a 
front opening trunk lid required to have a secondary latching position 
or latch system, actuation of the release mechanism required by 
paragraph S4.1 of this standard must result in the following:
    (i) When the passenger car is stationary, the release mechanism must 
release the trunk lid from all latching positions or latch systems;
    (ii) When the passenger car is moving forward at a speed less than 5 
km/h, the release mechanism must release the trunk lid from the primary 
latching position or latch system, and may release the trunk lid from 
all latching positions or latch systems;
    (iii) When the passenger car is moving forward at a speed of 5 km/h 
or greater, the release mechanism must release the trunk lid from the 
primary latching position or latch system, but must not release the 
trunk lid from the secondary latching position or latch system.
    (2) The passenger cars described in paragraph S4.3(b)(1) are 
excluded from the requirements of this standard until September 1, 2002.

[66 FR 43121, Aug. 17, 2001, as amended at 67 FR 19523, Apr. 22, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 571.403  Standard No. 403; Platform lift systems for motor vehicles.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for platform lifts 
used to assist persons with limited mobility in entering or leaving a 
vehicle.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to prevent injuries and 
fatalities to passengers and bystanders during the operation of platform 
lifts installed in motor vehicles.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to platform lifts designed to 
carry passengers into and out of motor vehicles.
    S4. Definitions.
    Bridging device means that portion of a platform lift that provides 
a transitional surface between the platform surface and the surface of 
the vehicle floor within the platform threshold area.
    Cycle means deploying a platform lift from a stowed position, 
lowering the lift to the ground level loading position, raising the lift 
to the vehicle floor loading position, and stowing the lift. The term 
includes operation of any wheelchair retention device, bridging device, 
and inner roll stop.
    Deploy means with respect to a platform lift, its movement from a 
stowed position to one of the two loading positions. With respect to a 
wheelchair retention device or inner roll stop, the term means the 
movement of the device or stop to a fully functional position intended 
to prevent a passenger from disembarking the platform or being pinched 
between the platform and vehicle.

[[Page 804]]

    Floor reference plane means the plane perpendicular to the 
longitudinal vehicle reference plane for platform lifts that deploy from 
the side of the vehicle or perpendicular to the transverse vehicle 
reference plane for platform lifts that deploy from the rear of the 
vehicle, and tangent to the outermost edge of the vehicle floor surface 
adjacent to the lift platform. (See figure 1.)
    Gap means a discontinuity in a plane surface, or between two 
adjacent surfaces.
    Inner roll-stop means a device that is located at the edge of the 
platform that a passenger or mobility aid must traverse when entering 
and exiting the platform from the vehicle floor loading position and 
that is designed to retain mobility aids on the platform surface during 
the range of passenger operation.
    Lift reference plane means the plane that is defined by two 
orthogonal axes passing through the geometric center of the platform 
surface of a platform lift. One axis is perpendicular to the platform 
reference plane and the other is parallel to the direction of wheelchair 
travel during loading of the lift. (See figure 1.)
    Loading position means, with respect to a platform lift, a position 
at which a passenger can either embark or disembark the lift. The two 
loading positions are at vehicle floor and ground level.
    Longitudinal vehicle reference plane means the plane that is 
perpendicular to the floor reference plane and contains the longitudinal 
axis of the vehicle when the vehicle body is level and moves along with 
the vehicle body in response to the loading of the vehicle suspension. 
(See figure 1.)
    Outer barrier is a particular wheelchair retention device that is 
located on the edge of the platform, is traversed during ground level 
loading and unloading, and is designed to retain wheelchairs on the 
platform surface during the range of passenger operation.
    Platform means that portion of a platform lift on which the mobility 
aid or passenger rests while being raised or lowered.
    Platform lift means a level change device, including any integration 
of existing vehicle components, and excluding a ramp, used to assist 
persons with limited mobility in entering or leaving a vehicle.
    Platform reference plane means a plane tangent to the platform 
surface at its geometric center. (See figure 1.)
    Platform surface means the passenger-carrying surface of the lift 
platform.
    Platform threshold area means the rectangular area of the vehicle 
floor defined by moving a line that lies on the portion of the edge of 
the vehicle floor directly adjacent to the platform, through a distance 
of 457 mm (18 inches) across the vehicle floor in a direction 
perpendicular to the edge. Any portion of a bridging device that lies on 
this area must be considered part of that area.
    Private use lift means a platform lift certified to the requirements 
for private use lifts and requirements in this standard for all lifts.
    Public use lift means a platform lift certified to the requirements 
for public use lifts and requirements in this standard for all lifts.
    Range of passenger operation means the portion of the lift cycle 
during which the platform is at or between the vehicle floor and ground 
level loading positions excluding any stow and deploy operations.
    Standard test load means a static load or mass centered on the test 
pallet such that the total combined mass for public-use lifts shall be 
272 kg (600 lb), and the total combined mass for private-use lifts shall 
be the lift manufacturer's stated rated load or 181 kg (400 lb), 
whichever is greater.
    Stow means with respect to a platform, its movement from a position 
within the range of passenger operation to the position maintained 
during normal vehicle travel; and, with respect to a wheelchair 
retention device, bridging device, or inner-roll stop, its movement from 
a fully functional position to a position intended to allow a passenger 
to embark or disembark the platform.
    Test pallet means a platform on which required test loads are placed 
for handling and moving.
    Transverse vehicle reference plane means the plane that is 
perpendicular

[[Page 805]]

to the floor reference plane and contains the transverse axis of the 
vehicle when the vehicle body is level and that moves along with the 
vehicle body in response to the loading of the vehicle suspension. (See 
figure 1.)
    Wheelchair retention device means a device designed to prevent 
wheelchairs from leaving the edge of the platform used for ground level 
loading and unloading during the range of passenger operation.
    S5. Incorporation by reference.
    S5.1 The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Recommended Practice 
J578, revised June 1995, ``Color Specification'' (SAE J578, rev. June 
95) is hereby incorporated into S6.1.4 by reference.
    S5.2 The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Recommended Practice 
J211/1, revised March 1995 ``Instrumentation for Impact Test--Part 1 --
Electronic Instrumentation'' (SAE J211/1, rev. Mar 95) is hereby 
incorporated into S6.2.3 by reference.
    S5.3 The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) 
Recommended Practice B456-95 ``Standard Specification for 
Electrodeposited Coatings of Copper Plus Nickel Plus Chromium and Nickel 
Plus Chromium'' (ASTM B456-95) is hereby incorporated into S6.3.1 by 
reference.
    S5.4 The Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology Society 
of North America (ANSI/RESNA) Standard WC/Vol.1-1998 Section 13, 
``Determination of Coefficient of Friction of Test Surfaces'' (ANSI/
RESNA WC/Vol.1--1998, sec. 13) is hereby incorporated into S7.2.2 by 
reference.
    S5.5 The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) 
Recommended Practice B117-97 ``Standard Practice for Operating Salt 
Spray (Fog) Apparatus'' (ASTM B117-97) is hereby incorporated into 
S7.3.2 by reference.
    S5.6 The Director of the Federal Register approved the materials 
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR 
part 51 (See Sec. 571.5 of this part). Copies of the materials may be 
inspected at NHTSA's Technical Reference Library, 400 Seventh Street 
SW., Room 5109, Washington, DC or at the National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this 
material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/
federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    S5.6.1 The SAE materials referred to in S5.1 and S5.2 are available 
from the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, 
Warrendale, PA. 15096.
    S5.6.2 The ASTM materials referred to in S5.3 and S5.5 are available 
from ASTM International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, PO Box C700, West 
Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959.
    S5.6.3 The ANSI/RESNA materials referred to in S5.4 are available 
from RESNA, 1700 North Moore St., Suite 1540, Arlington, VA 22209-1903.
    S6. Requirements.
    (a) Each platform lift must comply with the requirements for private 
use lifts or public use lifts and with the requirements for all lifts.
    (b) Each public use lift must
    (1) Comply with the requirements for public use lifts and with the 
requirements for all lifts.
    (2) Bear a label with the words ``DOT--Public Use Lift'' as 
certification of compliance with the requirements specified in paragraph 
S6(b)(1).
    (c) Each private use lift must
    (1) Comply with the requirements for private use lifts and with the 
requirements for all lifts.
    (2) Bear a label with the words ``DOT--Private Use Lift'' as 
certification of compliance with the requirements specified in S6(c)(1).
    (d) Platform lifts suitable for installation on buses, school buses, 
and MPVs other than motor homes with a GVWR greater than 4,536 kg 
(10,000 lb.), except motor homes, must be certified by the manufacturer 
as meeting the requirements for public use lifts. For platform lifts 
suitable for installation on all other vehicles, the manufacturer may 
select the option of certifying compliance with either the public use 
lift requirements or the private use lift requirements of this standard 
at the time it certifies the vehicle and may not thereafter select a 
different option for the vehicle.
    (e) For all lifts, where a range of values is specified, the 
equipment must

[[Page 806]]

meet the requirements at all points within the range.
    (f) The test procedures in S7 are used to determine compliance with 
all requirements, except S6.6, S6.7.5, S6.12 and S6.13.
    S6.1 Threshold warning signal.
    S6.1.1 Except when the platform lift is operated manually in backup 
mode as required by S6.9, the lift must meet the requirements of S6.1.2 
and S6.1.3. The lift is tested in accordance with S7.4 to determine 
compliance with this section.
    S6.1.2. Private-use lifts: Except for platform lifts where platform 
loading takes place wholly over the vehicle floor, a visual or audible 
warning must activate if the platform is more than 25 mm (1 inch) below 
the platform threshold area and portions of a passenger's body or 
mobility aid is on the platform threshold area defined in S4 when tested 
in accordance with S7.4.
    S6.1.3 Public-use lifts: A visual and audible warning must activate 
if the platform is more than 25 mm (1 inch) below the platform threshold 
area and portions of a passenger's body or mobility aid is on the 
platform threshold area defined in S4 when tested in accordance with 
S7.4.
    S6.1.4 The visual warning required by S6.1.2 and S6.1.3 must be a 
flashing red beacon as defined in SAE J578, June 95, must have a minimum 
intensity of 20 candela, a frequency from 1 to 2 Hz, and must be 
installed such that it does not require more than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 
15 degrees side-to-side head rotation as viewed by a passenger backing 
onto the platform from the interior of the vehicle. If a lift has only a 
visual alarm and the lift manufacturer specifies that the passenger must 
load onto the platform in a forward direction from the vehicle floor, 
the visual alarm must be located such that it does not require more than 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 15 degrees side-to-side head rotation as viewed 
by a passenger traversing forward onto the platform.
    S6.1.5 The audible warning required by S6.1.2 and S6.1.3 must be a 
minimum of 85 dBA between 500 and 3000 Hz.
    S6.1.6 The intensity of the visual or audible warnings required by 
S6.1.2 and S6.1.3 is measured at the location 914 mm (3 ft) above the 
center of the platform threshold area. (See figure 2.)
    S6.2 Platform lift operational requirements.
    S6.2.1 General. Throughout the range of passenger operation and 
during the lift operations specified in S7.6, the platform lift must 
meet the requirements of S6.2.2 through S6.2.4. These requirements must 
be satisfied both with and without a standard load on the lift platform, 
except for S6.2.2.2, which must be satisfied without any load.
    S6.2.2 Maximum platform velocity.
    S6.2.2.1 Throughout the range of passenger operation specified in 
S7.9.4 through S7.9.7, both the vertical and horizontal velocity of the 
platform must be less than or equal to 152 mm (6 inches) per second when 
measured at the geometric center of the platform when the platform is 
unloaded and at the geometric center of the top, horizontal surface of 
the standard load specified in S7.1.1 when the platform is loaded.
    S6.2.2.2 During the stow and deploy operations specified in S7.9.3 
and S7.9.8, both the vertical and horizontal velocity of any portion of 
the platform must be less than or equal to 305 mm (12 inches) per 
second.
    S6.2.3 Maximum platform acceleration. Throughout the range of 
passenger operation specified in S7.9.4 through S7.9.7, both the 
horizontal and vertical acceleration of the platform must be less than 
or equal to 0.3 g after the accelerometer output is filtered with a 
channel frequency class (CFC) 3 filter. The filter must meet the 
requirements of SAE Recommended Practice J211/1, rev. Mar 95, with 
F<INF>H</INF> = 3 Hz and F<INF>N</INF> = 5 Hz. The accelerometer is 
located at the geometric center of the platform and is mounted directly 
on the platform when it is unloaded and on the geometric center of the 
top, horizontal surface of the standard load specified in S7.1.1 when 
the platform is loaded.
    S6.2.4 Maximum noise level of public use lifts. Except as provided 
in S6.1.5, throughout the range of passenger operation specified in 
S7.9.4 through S7.9.7, the noise level of a public use lift may not 
exceed 80 dBa as measured at any lift operator's position designated by 
the platform lift manufacturer for the intended vehicle and in the area 
on the lift defined in S6.4.2.1

[[Page 807]]

and S6.4.2.2. Lift operator position measurements are taken at the 
vertical centerline of the control panel 30.5 cm (12 in) out from the 
face of the control panel. In the case of a lift with a pendant control, 
measurement is taken at the vertical centerline of the control panel 
30.5 cm (12 in) out from the face of the control panel while the control 
panel is in its stowed or stored position. For the lift operator 
positions outside of the vehicle, measurements are taken at the 
intersection of a horizontal plane 157 cm (62 in) above the ground and 
the vertical centerline of the face of the control panel after it has 
been extended 30.5 cm (12 in) out from the face of the control panel.
    S6.3 Environmental resistance.
    S6.3.1 Internally mounted platform lifts. On platform lifts and 
their components internal to the occupant compartment of the vehicle 
when stowed, attachment hardware must be free of ferrous corrosion on 
significant surfaces except for permissible ferrous corrosion, as 
defined in FMVSS No. 209, at peripheral surface edges or edges of holes 
on under-floor reinforcing plates and washers after being subjected to 
the conditions specified in S7.3. Alternatively, such hardware must be 
protected against corrosion by an electrodeposited coating of nickel, or 
copper and nickel with at least a service condition number of SC2, and 
other attachment hardware must be protected by an electrodeposited 
coating of nickel, or copper and nickel with a service condition number 
of SC1, in accordance with ASTM B456-95, but such hardware may not be 
racked for electroplating in locations subjected to maximum stress. The 
lift must be accompanied by all attachment hardware necessary for its 
installation on a vehicle.
    S6.3.2 Externally mounted platform lifts. On platform lifts and 
their components external to the occupant compartment of the vehicle 
when stowed, the lift and its components must be free of ferrous 
corrosion on significant surfaces except for permissible ferrous 
corrosion, as defined in FMVSS No. 209, at peripheral surface edges and 
edges of holes and continue to function properly after being subjected 
to the conditions specified in S7.3. The lift must be accompanied by all 
attachment hardware necessary for its installation on a vehicle.
    S6.4 Platform requirements.
    S6.4.1 General. Throughout the range of passenger operations and 
during the platform lift operations specified in S7.9.4 through S7.9.7, 
the platform lift must meet the requirements of S6.4.2 through S6.4.12. 
The requirements of S6.4.2 through S6.4.6, S6.4.7.4, S6.4.9.4, S6.4.9.5, 
S6.4.9.6, and S6.4.9.8 must be satisfied both with and without a 
standard load on the lift platform
    S6.4.2 Unobstructed platform operating volume.
    S6.4.2.1 Public use lifts. For public use lifts, the minimum 
platform operating volume is the sum of an upper part and a lower part 
(see Figure 3). The lower part is a rectangular solid whose base is 725 
mm (28.5 in) wide by the length of the platform surface, whose height is 
50 mm (2 in), and which is resting on the platform surface with each 
side of the base parallel with the nearest side of the platform surface. 
The width is perpendicular to the lift reference plane and the length is 
parallel to the lift reference plane (See Figure 1). The upper part is a 
rectangular solid whose base is 760 mm (30 in) by 1,220 mm (48 in) long, 
whose height is 711 mm (28 in), and whose base is tangent to the top 
surface of the lower rectangular solid (see Figure 3). The centroids of 
both the upper and lower parts coincide with the vertical centroidal 
axis of the platform reference plane (see Figure 1).
    S6.4.2.2 Private use lifts. For private use lifts, the platform 
operating volume is as specified by the lift manufacturer and identified 
in the lift insert to the vehicle owner's manual.
    S6.4.3 Platform surface protrusions.
    S6.4.3.1 Public use lifts. For public use lifts, except as required 
for deployment of the wheelchair retention device and inner roll stop, 
throughout the range of passenger operation, the platform surface may 
not have protrusions which rise more than 6.5 mm (0.25 in) above the 
platform surface, measured perpendicular to the platform surface by a 
device with its base centered between 50-100 mm (2-4 in) from the

[[Page 808]]

protrusion. Any cross-sectional dimension of the base of the protrusion 
measurement device must be greater than or equal to 25mm (1 in) and less 
than or equal to 50 mm (2 in).
    S6.4.3.2 Private use lifts. For private use lifts, except as 
required for deployment of the wheelchair retention device and inner 
roll stop, the platform surface may not have protrusions which rise more 
than 13 mm (0.5 in) above the platform surface, measured perpendicular 
to the platform surface by a device with its base centered between 50-
100 mm (2-4 in) from the protrusion. All portions of the sides of a 
protrusion that are between 6.5 mm (0.25 in) and 13 mm (0.5 in) above 
the platform must have a slope not greater than 1:2, measured with 
respect to the platform surface at the location of the protrusion. Any 
cross-sectional dimension of the base of the protrusion measurement 
device must be greater than or equal to 25mm (1 in) and less than or 
equal to 50 mm (2 in).
    S6.4.4 Gaps, transitions and openings.
    S6.4.4.1 When the platform lift is at the ground level loading 
position, any vertical surface transition measured perpendicular to the 
ground over which a passenger may traverse to enter or exit the 
platform, may not be greater than 6.5 mm (0.25 in). When the lift is at 
the vehicle level loading position, any vertical surface transition 
measured perpendicular to the platform threshold area over which a 
passenger may traverse to enter or exit the platform, may not be greater 
than 6.5 mm (0.25 in).
    S6.4.4.2 When the platform lift is at the ground or vehicle level 
loading position, the slope of any surface over which a passenger may 
traverse to enter or exit the platform must have a rise to run not 
greater than 1:2 on the portion of the rise between 6.5 mm (0.25 in) and 
13 mm (0.5 in), and 1:8 on the portion of the rise between 13 mm (0.5 
in) and 75 mm (3 in). The rise of any sloped surface may not be greater 
than 75 mm (3 inches). When the lift is at the ground level loading 
position, measurements are made perpendicular to the ground. When the 
lift is at the vehicle level loading position, measurements are made 
perpendicular to the platform threshold area.
    S6.4.4.3 When the inner roll stop or any outer barrier is deployed, 
any gap between the inner roll stop and lift platform and any gap 
between the outer barrier and lift platform must prevent passage of the 
clearance test block specified in S7.1.3 when its long axis is held 
perpendicular to the platform reference plane.
    S6.4.4.4 When the platform is at the vehicle floor or ground level 
loading position, any horizontal gap over which a passenger may traverse 
to enter or exit the platform must prevent passage of a 13 mm (0.5 inch) 
diameter sphere.
    S6.4.4.5 Any opening in that portion of the platform surface that 
coincides with the unobstructed platform operating volume described in 
S6.4.2 must prevent passage of a 19 mm (0.75 inch) diameter sphere.
    S6.4.4.6 Any gap between the platform sides and edge guards which 
move with the platform must prevent passage of a 13 mm (0.5 inch) 
diameter sphere. Where structures fixed to the vehicle are used as edge 
guards, the horizontal gap between the platform side and vehicle 
structure must prevent passage of a 6.5 mm (0.25 inch) diameter sphere.
    S6.4.5 Platform deflection. The angle of the platform, when 
stationary, relative to the vehicle floor reference plane may not be 
more than 1.8 degrees with no load on the platform. The angle of the 
platform loaded with a standard load, when stationary, may not deflect 
more than 3 degrees from its unloaded position. The angles are measured 
between axes perpendicular to the vehicle floor and platform reference 
planes.
    S6.4.6 Edge guards.
    S6.4.6.1 The platform lift must have edge guards that extend 
continuously along each side of the lift platform to within 75 mm (3 
inches) of the edge of the platform that is traversed while entering and 
exiting the platform from the ground level loading position. The edge 
guards must be parallel to the direction of wheelchair movement during 
loading and unloading.
    S6.4.6.2 Edge guards that move with the platform must have vertical 
sides facing the platform surface and a minimum height of 38 mm (1.5 
inches),

[[Page 809]]

measured vertically from the platform surface.
    S6.4.6.3 Except whenever any part of the platform surface is below a 
horizontal plane 75 mm (3 inches) above the ground, edge guards must be 
deployed throughout the range of passenger operation.
    S6.4.7 Wheelchair retention.
    S6.4.7.1 Impact I. Except for platform lifts designed so that 
platform loading takes place wholly over the vehicle floor, the lift 
must have a means of retaining the test device specified in S7.1.2. 
After impact, the test device must remain upright with all of its wheels 
on the platform surface throughout its range of passenger operation, 
except as provided in S6.4.7.4. The lift is tested in accordance with 
S7.7 to determine compliance with this section.
    S6.4.7.2 Impact II. For platform lifts designed so that platform 
loading takes place wholly over the vehicle floor, the lift must have a 
means of retaining the test device specified in S7.1.2. After impact, 
the test device must remain upright with all of its wheels on the 
platform surface, throughout the range of passenger operation, except as 
provided in S6.4.7.4. The lift is tested in accordance with S7.7 to 
determine compliance with this section.
    S6.4.7.3 Overload. The deployed wheelchair retention device(s) must 
be capable of sustaining 7,117 N (1,600 lb force) when tested in 
accordance with S7.13. No separation, fracture, or breakage of the 
wheelchair retention device may occur as a result of conducting the test 
in S7.13.
    S6.4.7.4 Deployment. Except whenever any part of the platform 
surface is below a horizontal plane 75 mm (3 in) above the ground, the 
wheelchair retention device(s) must be deployed throughout the range of 
passenger operation.
    S6.4.8 Inner roll stop.
    S6.4.8.1 Public use lifts. Public use lifts must have an inner roll 
stop that meets the requirements of S6.4.8.3.
    S6.4.8.2 Private use lifts. Private use lifts must:
    (a) Have an inner roll stop that meets the requirements of S6.4.8.3; 
or
    (b) Have operating instructions near the lift controls and in the 
vehicle owner's manual, as specified in S6.7.8 and S6.12.4.3, that 
contain a warning that wheelchairs should back onto the platform when 
entering from the ground.
    S6.4.8.3 Requirements. When tested in accordance with S7.8, platform 
lifts must have an inner roll stop that provides a means that prevents:
    (a) The front wheels of the test device specified in S7.1.2 from 
passing over the edge of the platform where the roll stop is located, 
when the lift is at the ground level loading position; and
    (b) Any portion of the test device specified in S7.1.2 from being 
contacted simultaneously with a portion of the lift platform and any 
other structure, throughout the lift's range of passenger operation.
    S6.4.9 Handrails.
    S6.4.9.1 Public use lifts: Public use lifts must have a handrail 
located on each side of the lift that meets the requirements of S6.4.9.3 
through S6.4.9.9.
    S6.4.9.2 Private use lifts: Private use lifts are not required to be 
equipped with handrails. Private use lifts that are equipped with 
handrails must meet the requirement of S6.4.9.3 through S6.4.9.9.
    S6.4.9.3 The graspable portion of each handrail may not be less than 
762 mm (30 inches) and more than 965 mm (38 inches) above the platform 
surface, measured vertically.
    S6.4.9.4 The cross section of the graspable portion of each handrail 
may not be less than 31.5 mm (1.25 inches) and more than 38 mm (1.5 
inches) in diameter or width, and may not have less than a 3.2 mm (0.125 
inch) radii on any corner.
    S6.4.9.5 The vertical projection of the graspable portion of each 
handrail must intersect two planes that are perpendicular to the 
platform reference plane and to the direction of travel of a wheelchair 
on the lift when entering or exiting the platform, and are 203 mm (8 
inches) apart.
    S6.4.9.6 The handrails must move such that the position of the 
handrails relative to the platform surface does not change.

[[Page 810]]

    S6.4.9.7 When tested in accordance with S7.12.1, each handrail must 
withstand 445 N (100 pounds force) applied at any point and in any 
direction on the handrail without more than 25 mm (1 inch) of 
displacement relative to the platform surface. After removal of the 
load, the handrail must exhibit no permanent deformation.
    S6.4.9.8 When tested in accordance with S7.12.1, there must be at 
least 38 mm (1.5 inches) of clearance between each handrail and any 
portion of the vehicle, throughout the range of passenger operation.
    S6.4.9.9 When tested in accordance with S7.12.2, each handrail must 
withstand 1,112 N (250 lb/f) applied at any point and in any direction 
on the handrail without sustaining any failure, such as cracking, 
separation, fracture, or more than 102 mm (4 inches) of displacement of 
any point on the handrails relative to the platform surface.
    S6.4.10 Platform markings on public use lifts. Throughout the range 
of passenger operation, all edges of the platform surface, the visible 
edge of the vehicle floor or bridging device adjacent to the platform 
lift, and any designated standing area on a public use lift must be 
outlined. The outlines must be at least 25 mm (1 in) wide and of a color 
that contrasts with its background by 60 percent, determined according 
to the following equation:

Contrast = 100 x [(L1-L2)/L1]

Where:

L1 = luminance of the lighter color or shade, and
L2 = luminance of the darker color or shade.
L1 and L2 are measured perpendicular to the platform surface with 
illumination provided by a diffuse light and a resulting luminance of 
the platform surface of 323 lm/m<SUP>2</SUP> (30 lumen/sqft).

    S6.4.11 Platform lighting on public use lifts. Public use lifts must 
have a light or a set of lights that provide at least 54 lm/
m<SUP>2</SUP> (5 lm/sqft) of luminance on all portions of the surface of 
the platform, throughout the range of passenger operation. The luminance 
measured on all portions of the surface of the passenger unloading ramp 
at ground level must be at least 11 lm/m<SUP>2</SUP> (1 lm/sqft).
    S6.4.12 Platform slip resistance. When tested in accordance with 
S7.2, the coefficient of friction, in any direction, of any part of a 
wet platform surface may not be less than 0.65.
    S6.5 Structural integrity.
    S6.5.1 Fatigue endurance.
    S6.5.1.1 Public use lifts. Public use lifts must remain operable 
when operated through a total of 15,600 cycles: 7,800 unloaded Raise/
Lower and Stow/Deploy operations and 7,800 loaded Raise/Lower operations 
as specified in S7.10. No separation, fracture, or breakage of any 
vehicle or lift component may occur as a result of conducting the 
fatigue test in S7.10.
    S6.5.1.2 Private use lifts. Private use lifts must remain operable 
when operated through a total of 4,400 cycles: 2,200 unloaded Raise/
Lower and Stow/Deploy operations and 2,200 loaded Raise/Lower operations 
as specified in S7.10. No separation, fracture, or breakage of any 
vehicle or lift component may occur as a result of conducting the 
fatigue test in S7.10.
    S6.5.2 Proof load. The platform lift must be capable of holding 
three times the standard load, as specified in S7.11, without 
separation, fracture, or breakage of any vehicle or lift component. 
After the test, the lift must pass Static Load Test I as specified in 
S7.9.
    S6.5.3 Ultimate load. The platform lift must be capable of holding 
four times the standard load, as specified in S7.14, without separation, 
fracture, or breakage of the platform, supporting structure, or lifting 
mechanism.
    S6.6 Platform free fall limits. In the event of any single-point 
failure of systems for raising, lowering or supporting the platform, any 
portion of the platform, loaded as specified in S7.1.1, may not fall 
vertically faster than 305 mm (12 in) per second or change angular 
orientation more than 2 degrees from the orientation prior to the 
failure. This requirement applies whenever the lift is under primary 
power source operation or manual backup operation.
    S6.7 Control systems.
    S6.7.1 The platform lift must meet the requirements of S6.7.2 
through S6.7.8 and, when operated by means of the control system 
specified in S6.7.2, must perform the lift operations specified in S7.9.

[[Page 811]]

    S6.7.2 The platform lift system must have a control system that 
performs not less than the following functions:
    S6.7.2.1 Enables and disables the lift control system. This function 
must be identified as ``Power'' if located on the control. The Power 
function must have two states: ``On'' and ``Off''. The ``On'' state must 
allow platform lift operation. When the Power function is in the ``On'' 
state, an indicator light on the controls must illuminate. The ``Off'' 
state must prevent lift operation and must turn off the indicator light. 
Verification with this requirement is made throughout the lift 
operations specified in S7.9.3 through S7.9.8.
    S6.7.2.2 Moves the lift from a stowed position to one of the two 
loading positions. This function must be identified as ``Deploy'' or 
``Unfold'' on the control.
    S6.7.2.3 Lowers the lift platform. This function must be identified 
as ``Down'' or ``Lower'' on the control.
    S6.7.2.4 Raises the lift platform. This function must be identified 
as ``Up'' or ``Raise'' on the control.
    S6.7.2.5 Moves the lift from a position within the range of 
passenger operation to a stowed position. This function must be 
identified as ``Stow'' or ``Fold'' on the control.
    S6.7.3 Except for the Power function described in S6.7.2.1, the 
functions specified in S6.7.2 must activate in a momentary fashion, by 
one switch or by a combination of switches. Verification with this 
requirement is made throughout the lift operations specified in S7.9.3 
through S7.9.8.
    S6.7.4 Except for the Power function described in S6.7.2.1, the 
control system specified in S6.7.2 must prevent the simultaneous 
performance of more than one function. Verification with this 
requirement is made throughout the lift operations specified in S7.9.3 
through S7.9.8.
    S6.7.5 Any single-point failure in the control system may not 
prevent the operation of any of the interlocks as specified in S6.10
    S6.7.6 Identification of operating functions.
    S6.7.6.1 Each operating function of each platform lift control must 
be identified with characters that are at least 2.5 mm (0.1 in) in 
height.
    S6.7.6.2 Public use lifts: Public use lifts must have characters 
that are illuminated in accordance with S5.3 of Standard No. 101, when 
the vehicle's headlights are illuminated.
    S6.7.7 Control location for public use lifts: In public use lifts, 
except for the backup operation specified in S6.9, all controls must be 
positioned together and in a location such that a person facing the 
controls has a direct, unobstructed view of the platform lift passenger 
and the passenger's mobility aid, if applicable. Verification with this 
requirement is made throughout the lift operations specified in S7.9.3 
through S7.9.8. Additional controls may be positioned in other 
locations.
    S6.7.8 Operating instructions: Simple instructions regarding the 
platform lift operating procedures, including backup operations as 
specified by S6.9, must:
    S6.7.8.1 Be located near the controls.
    S6.7.8.2 Have characters with a minimum height of 2.5 mm (0.1 in) 
and written in English.
    S6.7.8.3  Public use lifts: Include the statement ``DOT--Public Use 
Lift''.
    S6.7.8.4 Private use lifts: Include the statement ``DOT--Private Use 
Lift'', the manufacturer's rated load for the lift, and, if applicable, 
instructions indicating that the wheelchair occupant must back onto the 
lift when loading from the ground.
    S6.8 Jacking prevention.
    S6.8.1 Except when the platform lift is operated in backup mode as 
required by S6.9, throughout the lift operations specified in S7.9.4 and 
S7.9.7, the lift system must meet the requirements of S6.8.2, both with 
and without a standard load on the lift.
    S6.8.2 The control system or platform lift design must prevent the 
raising of any portion of the vehicle by the lift system when lowering 
the lift is attempted while the lift is at the ground level loading 
position.
    S6.9 Backup operation.
    S6.9.1 The platform lift must be equipped with a manual backup 
operating mode that can, in the event there is a loss of the primary 
power source for lift operation or a lift malfunction, deploy the lift, 
lower the loaded platform to the ground level loading position, raise 
the unloaded platform to

[[Page 812]]

the vehicle floor loading position, and stow the lift. During backup 
operation of the lift, the wheelchair retention device and inner roll 
stop must be manually deployable and stowable. The operating 
instructions near the lift controls and in the vehicle owner's manual 
insert, as specified in S6.7.8 and S6.12.2, must contain information on 
manual backup operation which must include manual operation of the 
wheelchair retention device and inner roll stop during backup operation 
of the lift.
    S6.10 Interlocks.
    S6.10.1 Except when the platform lift is operated in backup mode as 
required by S6.9, the requirements of S6.10.2 must be met, both with and 
without a standard load on the lift.
    S6.10.2 The platform lift system must have interlocks or operate in 
such a way as to prevent:
    S6.10.2.1 Forward or rearward mobility of the vehicle unless the 
platform lift is stowed. The design of this system must be such that it 
discourages accidental release and does not affect vehicle movement when 
the lift is stowed until the vehicle is stopped and the lift deployed. 
Verification with this requirement is made throughout the lift 
operations specified in S7.9.2 and S7.9.3.
    S6.10.2.2 Operation of the platform lift from the stowed position 
until forward and rearward mobility of the vehicle is inhibited, by 
means of placing the transmission in park or placing the transmission in 
neutral and actuating the parking brake or the vehicle service brakes by 
means other than the operator depressing the vehicle's service brake 
pedal. Verification with this requirement is made throughout the lift 
operations specified in S7.9.2 and S7.9.3.
    S6.10.2.3 Except for platform lifts designed to be occupied while 
stowed, stowing of the platform lift when occupied by portions of a 
passenger's body, and/or a mobility aid. Verification with this 
requirement is made throughout the lift operations specified in S7.9.7 
and S7.9.8, and using the test device specified in S7.1.4 when the 
device is placed on its narrowest side on any portion of and within the 
boundaries of the area of the platform that coincides with the 
unobstructed platform operating volume described in S6.4.2.
    S6.10.2.4 Movement of the platform up or down unless the inner roll 
stop required to comply with S6.4.8 is deployed. When the platform 
reaches a level where the inner roll stop is designed to deploy, the 
platform must stop unless the inner roll stop has deployed. Verification 
with this requirement is made by performing the test procedure specified 
in S7.6.
    S6.10.2.5 Movement of the platform up or down, throughout the range 
of passenger operation, when the platform surface is above a horizontal 
plane 75 mm (3 in) above the ground level loading position, unless the 
wheelchair retention device required to comply with S6.4.7 is deployed 
throughout the range of passenger operations. Verification of compliance 
is made using the test procedure specified in S 7.5.
    S6.10.2.6 In the case of a platform lift that is equipped with an 
outer barrier, deployment of the outer barrier, when it is occupied by 
portions of a passenger's body or mobility aid throughout the lift 
operations. Verification of compliance is made using the test procedure 
specified in S 7.5.
    S6.10.2.7 Deployment of any inner roll stop required to comply with 
S6.4.8, when the inner roll stop is occupied by portions of a 
passenger's body or mobility aid throughout the lift operations. 
Verification of compliance with this requirement uses the test procedure 
specified in S7.6.
    S6.11 Operations counter. The platform lift must have an operation 
or cycle counter that records each complete Up/Down (Raise/Lower) 
operation throughout the range of passenger operation. Determination of 
compliance with this requirement is made during the lift operations 
specified in S7.9.4 and S7.9.5.
    S6.12 Vehicle owner's manual insert. The lift manufacturer must 
provide with the lift, inserts for the vehicle owner's manual that 
provide specific information about the platform lift. The vehicle 
owner's manual insert must be written in English and must include:
    S6.12.1 A maintenance schedule that includes maintenance 
requirements

[[Page 813]]

that have, at a minimum, some dependency on the number of cycles on the 
operations counter specified in S6.11.
    S6.12.2 Instructions regarding the platform lift operating 
procedures, including backup operations, as specified by S6.9.
    S6.12.3 Public use lifts: In addition to meeting the requirements of 
S6.12.1 and S6.12.2, the owner's manual insert for public use lifts must 
also include:
    S6.12.3.1 The statement ``DOT--Public Use Lift'' on the front cover 
of the vehicle owner's manual insert; and
    S6.12.3.2 The statement ``DOT--Public Use Lift'' verifies that this 
platform lift meets the ``public use lift '' requirements of FMVSS No. 
403. This lift may be installed on all vehicles appropriate for the size 
and weight of the lift, but must be installed on buses, school buses, 
and multi-purpose passenger vehicles other than motor homes with a gross 
vehicle weight rating (GVWR) that exceeds 4,536 kg (10,000 lb).''
    S6.12.4 Private use lifts: In addition to meeting the requirements 
of S6.12.1 and S6.12.2, the owner's manual insert for private use lifts 
must also include:
    S6.12.4.1 The dimensions that constitute the unobstructed platform 
operating volume;
    S6.12.4.2 The manufacturer's rated load for the lift;
    S6.12.4.3 Information on whether a wheelchair user must back onto 
the platform from the ground level loading position due to the absence 
of an inner roll stop;
    S6.12.4.4 The statement ``DOT-Private Use Lift'' on the front cover 
of the vehicle owner's manual insert; and
    S6.12.4.5 The statement ``DOT-Private Use Lift verifies that this 
platform lift meets only the ``private use lift'' requirements of FMVSS 
No. 403. This lift may be installed on all vehicles appropriate for the 
size and weight of the lift, except for buses, school buses, and multi-
purpose passenger vehicles other than motor homes with a gross vehicle 
weight rating (GVWR) that exceeds (4,536 kg) 10,000 lb.''
    S6.13 Installation instructions. The manufacturer of a platform lift 
must include installation instructions with each lift. Information must 
be included in the installation instructions that identifies:
    S6.13.1 The vehicles on which the lift is designed to be installed. 
Vehicles may be identified by listing the make, model, and year of the 
vehicles for which the lift is suitable, or by specifying the design 
elements that would make a vehicle an appropriate host for the 
particular lift, and for which the platform lift manufacturer has 
certified compliance.
    S6.13.2 Procedures for operational checks that the vehicle 
manufacturer must perform to verify that the lift is fully operational. 
Such checks include, but are not limited to, platform lighting, the 
threshold-warning signal, and interlocks, including those that interface 
with vehicle systems.
    S6.13.3 Any informational material or labels that must be placed on 
or in the vehicle in order to comply with the requirements of this 
standard. Labels must be of a permanent nature that can withstand the 
elements of the outside environment.
    S6.13.4 Public use lifts: In addition to meeting the requirements of 
S6.13.1 through S6.13.3, the installation instructions for public use 
lifts must also include, on the front cover of the instructions, the 
statement ``DOT-Public Use Lift''.
    S6.13.5 Private use lifts: In addition to meeting the requirements 
of S6.13.1 through S6.13.3, the installation instructions for private 
use lifts must also include, on the front cover of the instructions, the 
manufacturer's rated load for the lift and the statement ``DOT-Private 
Use Lift''.
    S7. Test conditions and procedures. Each platform lift must be 
capable of meeting all of the tests specified in this standard, both 
separately, and in the sequence specified in this section. The tests 
specified in S7.8 through S7.11 are performed on a single lift and 
vehicle combination. The tests specified in S7.2 through S7.7, and S7.12 
through S7.14 may be performed with the same lift installed on a test 
jig rather than on a vehicle. Certification tests of requirements in 
S6.1 through S6.11 may be performed on a single lift and vehicle 
combination, except for the requirements of S6.5.3. Attachment hardware 
may be replaced if damaged by removal and reinstallation of the lift 
between a test jig and vehicle.

[[Page 814]]

    S7.1 Test devices.
    S7.1.1 Test pallet and load. The surface of the test pallet that 
rests on the platform used for the tests specified in S7.6 through S7.8 
and S7.11 has sides that measure between 660 mm (26 in) and 686 mm (27 
in). For the tests specified in S7.6 and S7.7, the test pallet is made 
of a rectangular steel plate of uniform thickness and the load that 
rests on the test pallet is made of rectangular steel plate(s) of 
uniform thickness and sides that measure between 533 mm (21 in) and 686 
mm (27 in). The standard test load that rests on the pallet is defined 
in S4.
    S7.1.2 Wheelchair test device. The test device is an unloaded power 
wheelchair whose size is appropriate for a 95th percentile male and that 
has the dimensions, configuration and components described in S7.1.2.1 
through S7.1.2.10. If the dimension in S7.1.2.9 is measured for a 
particular wheelchair by determining its tipping angle, the batteries 
are prevented from moving from their original position.
    S7.1.2.1 a cross-braced steel frame;
    S7.1.2.2 a sling seat integrated in the frame;
    S7.1.2.3 a belt drive;
    S7.1.2.4 detachable footrests, with the lowest point of the footrest 
adjustable in a range not less than 25 mm (1 in) to 123 mm (5 in) from 
the ground;
    S7.1.2.5 two pneumatic rear wheels with a diameter not less than 495 
mm (19.5 in) and not more than 521 mm (20.5 in);
    S7.1.2.6 two pneumatic front wheels with a diameter not less than 
190 mm (7.5 in) and not more than 216 mm (8.5 in);
    S7.1.2.7 a distance between front and rear axles not less than 457 
mm (18 in) and not more than 533 mm (21 in);
    S7.1.2.8 a horizontal distance between rear axle and center of 
gravity not less than 114 mm (4.5 in) and not more than 152 mm (6.0 in);
    S7.1.2.9 a vertical distance between ground and center of gravity 
not less than 260 mm (10.25 in) and not more than 298 mm (11.75 in);
    S7.1.2.10 a mass of not less than 72.5 kg (160 lb) and not more than 
86.0 kg (190 lb).
    S7.1.3 Clearance test block for gaps, transitions, and openings. The 
clearance test block is made of a rigid material and is 16 x 16 x 100 mm 
(0.625 x 0.625 x 4.0 in) with all corners having a 1.6 mm (0.0625 inch) 
radius.
    S7.1.4 Test Device for detecting platform occupancy. Occupancy of 
the platform is detected using a 152 x 152 x 305 mm (6 x 6 x 12 inches) 
rigid box having a total weight of 22.7 kg (50 lb).
    S7.2 Slip resistance test.
    S7.2.1 To determine compliance with S6.4.12, clean any 450mm x 100mm 
(17.5 in x 3.94 in) section of the platform with household glass cleaner 
(ammonia hydroxide solution). Wet the cleaned section of the platform by 
evenly spraying 3 ml (0.10 oz) of distilled water per 100 cm\2\ (15.5 
in\2\) of surface area. Begin the test specified in S7.2.2 within 30 
seconds of completion of the wetting process.
    S7.2.2 Use the test procedure defined in ANSI/RESNA WC/Vol. 1-1998, 
sec.13, except for clauses 5.3, Force Gage and 6, Test Procedure, on the 
wet section of platform. In lieu of clauses 5.3 and 6, implement the 
requirements of S7.2.2.1 and S7.2.2.2.
    S7.2.2.1 Force gage. The pulling force is measured, at a frequency 
of at least 10 Hz, by a force gauge that has been calibrated to an 
accuracy of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2 percent of the reading in the range 
of 25N to 100N.
    S7.2.2.2 Test procedure. Before the test, prepare the surface of the 
test rubber by lightly abrading with waterproof silicon carbide paper, 
grade P120, weight D (120 wet and dry). Then wipe the surface clean with 
a dry cloth or brush. No solvents or other cleaning materials are used. 
To determine the coefficient of friction for the wet platform section 
pull the test block, with the test rubber attached, by machine at a rate 
of 20 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2mm/s. The machine and test block are 
rigidly linked by a device that exhibits a stiffness greater than or 
equal to 1x10\5\ N/m. Pull the test block for a minimum of 13 seconds. 
Record the pulling force over the final 10 seconds of the test at a 
minimum frequency of 10 Hz. Repeat the test at least 5 times on any one 
area of the platform surface, in a single direction. Calculate the 
average pulling force for each trial, F<INF>1</INF> through 
F<INF>n</INF>, where n is the number of trials. Measure the weight of 
the test block with the force

[[Page 815]]

gauge and call it F<INF>b</INF>. Calculate the coefficient of friction, 
[mu]<INF>p</INF>, from the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27DE02.000

    S7.3 Environmental resistance test.
    S7.3.1 Perform the procedures specified in S7.3.2 through S7.3.5 to 
determine compliance with S6.3.
    S7.3.2 Attachment hardware, as specified in S6.3.1, and externally 
mounted platform lifts or components, as specified in S6.3.2, are tested 
in accordance with ASTM B117-97. Any surface coating or material not 
intended for permanent retention on the metal parts during service life 
are removed prior to testing. Except as specified in S7.3.3, the period 
of the test is 50 hours, consisting of two periods of 24 hours exposure 
to salt spray followed by one hour drying.
    S7.3.3 For attachment hardware located within the occupant 
compartment of the motor vehicle and not at or near the floor, the 
period of the test is 25 hours, consisting of one period of 24 hours 
exposure to salt spray followed by one hour drying.
    S7.3.4 For performance of this test, externally mounted platform 
lifts or components may be installed on test jigs rather than on the 
vehicle. The lift is in a stowed position. The configuration of the test 
setup is such that areas of the lift that would be exposed to the 
outside environment during actual use are not protected from the salt 
spray by the test jig.
    S7.3.5 At the end of the test, any surface exposed to the salt spray 
is washed thoroughly with water to remove the salt. After drying for at 
least 24 hours under laboratory conditions, the platform lift and 
components are examined for ferrous corrosion on significant surfaces, 
i.e., all surfaces that can be contacted by a sphere 2 cm (0.79 in) in 
diameter.
    S7.4 Threshold warning signal test.
    S7.4.1 Determine compliance with S6.1.2 and S6.1.3 using the test 
procedure specified in S7.4.2.
    S7.4.2 Maneuver the lift platform to the vehicle floor level loading 
position. Using the wheelchair test device specified in S7.1.2, place 
one front wheel of the unloaded wheelchair test device on any portion of 
the threshold area defined in S4. Move the platform down until the alarm 
is actuated. Remove the test wheelchair wheel from the threshold area to 
deactivate the alarm. Measure the vertical distance between the platform 
and the threshold area and determine whether that distance is greater 
than 25 mm (1 in).
    S7.5 Test to determine occupancy of outer barrier and interlock 
function.
    S7.5.1 Determine compliance with S6.10.2.5 and S6.10.2.6 using the 
test procedure in S7.5.2 and S7.5.3.
    S7.5.2 Maneuver the platform to the ground level loading position. 
Locate the wheelchair test device specified in S7.1.2 on the platform. 
Using the lift control, move the lift up until the outer barrier starts 
to deploy. Stop the platform and measure the distance between the ground 
and the upper platform surface and determine whether the distance is 
greater than 75 mm (3 in).
    S7.5.3 Place one front wheel of the wheelchair test device on any 
portion of the outer barrier. If the platform is too small to maneuver 
one front wheel on the outer barrier, two front wheels may be placed on 
the barrier. Using the lift control, attempt to move the platform up. If 
further upward movement occurs, move the platform up until it stops and 
determine whether the outer barrier has deployed and caused upward 
movement of the wheelchair wheel(s) of more than 13 mm (0.5 in).
    S7.6 Test to determine occupancy of inner roll stop and interlock 
function.
    S7.6.1 Determine compliance with S6.10.2.4 and S6.10.2.7 using the 
test procedure in S7.6.2 and S7.6.3.
    S7.6.2 Maneuver the platform to the vehicle floor level loading 
position, and position the wheelchair test device specified in S7.1.2 on 
the platform with the rear wheels facing away from the vehicle. Using 
the lift control, move the platform down until the inner roll stop 
starts to deploy. Stop the lift and note that location.
    S7.6.3 Reposition the platform at the vehicle floor level loading 
position. Place one front wheel of the wheelchair test device on the 
inner roll stop, or

[[Page 816]]

along the innermost edge of the platform if the inner roll stop is not 
accessible. If the platform is too small to maneuver one front wheel on 
the inner roll stop, two front wheels may be placed on the inner roll 
stop. Using the lift control, move the platform down until the inner 
roll stop starts to deploy. Determine whether the platform has stopped 
and whether the inner roll stop has deployed, causing upward movement of 
the wheelchair wheel(s) of more than 13 mm (0.5 in).
    S7.7 Wheelchair retention device impact test.
    S7.7.1 Determine compliance with S6.4.7.1 and S6.4.7.2 using the 
test device specified in S7.1.2, under the procedures specified in 
S7.7.2 and S7.7.3.
    S7.7.2 Conduct the test in accordance with the procedures in 
S7.7.2.1 through S7.7.2.5 to determine compliance with S6.4.7.1. In the 
case of private use lifts, perform both S7.7.2.5(a) and (b), unless the 
operating directions specify a required direction of wheelchair movement 
onto the platform. When a direction is indicated in the operating 
instructions, perform the procedure specified in S7.7.2.5(a) or (b) with 
the test device oriented as required by the operating instructions.
    S7.7.2.1 Place the lift platform at the vehicle floor loading 
position.
    S7.7.2.2 If the wheelchair retention device is an outer barrier, the 
footrests are adjusted such that at their lowest point they have a 
height 25 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2 mm (1 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 
0.08 in) less than the outer barrier. If the wheelchair retention device 
is not an outer barrier, the footrests are adjusted such that at their 
lowest point they have a height 501 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2 mm (2 in 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.08 in) above the platform.
    S7.7.2.3 Position the test device with its plane of symmetry 
coincident with the lift reference plane and at a distance from the 
platform sufficient to achieve the impact velocities required by 
S7.7.2.5.
    S7.7.2.4 Accelerate the test device onto the platform under its own 
power such that the test device impacts the wheelchair retention device 
at each speed, direction, and load condition combination specified in 
S7.7.2.5. Maintain power to the drive motors until all wheelchair motion 
has ceased except rotation of the drive wheels. Cut power to the drive 
motors. Note the position of the wheelchair after its motion has ceased 
following each impact to determine compliance with S6.4.7. If necessary, 
after each impact, adjust or replace the footrests to restore them to 
their original condition.
    S7.7.2.5 The test device is operated at the following speeds, in the 
following directions--
    (a) At a speed of not less than 2.0 m/s (4.4 mph) and not more than 
2.1 m/s (4.7 mph), forward, with a load of 0 kg (0 lbs).
    (b) At a speed of not less than 1.75 m/s (3.9 mph) and not more than 
1.85 m/s (4.1 mph), rearward, with a load of 0 kg (0 lbs).
    S7.7.3 Rotary platform lifts: For rotary platform lifts, conduct the 
test under the procedures in S7.7.3.3 through S7.7.3.7 to determine 
compliance with S6.4.7.2.
    S7.7.3.1 Public use lifts: For public use lifts, perform the test in 
both possible test device orientations.
    S7.7.3.2 Private use lifts: For private use lifts, perform the test 
in both possible test device orientations unless a required direction of 
wheelchair movement onto the platform is indicated in the operating 
instructions. If a required direction is indicated in the operating 
instructions, perform the test with the test device oriented as required 
by the operating instructions.
    S7.7.3.3 Adjust the footrests of the test device to the shortest 
length. Place the test device on the platform with its plane of symmetry 
coincident with the lift reference plane.
    S7.7.3.4 Position the platform surface 90 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 
10 mm (3.5 inches <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4 inches) above the ground 
level position.
    S7.7.3.5 Slowly move the test device in the forward direction until 
it contacts a wheelchair retention device. Activate the controller of 
the test device such that, if the test device were unloaded and 
unrestrained on a flat, level surface, it would achieve a maximum 
forward velocity of not less than 2.0 m/s (4.4 mph) and not more than 
2.1 m/s (4.7 mph).
    S7.7.3.6 Realign the test device on the platform so that its plane 
of symmetry is coincident with the lift reference plane. Slowly move the 
test device in the rearward direction until it

[[Page 817]]

contacts a wheelchair retention device. Activate the controller of the 
test device such that, if the test device were unloaded and unrestrained 
on a flat, level surface, it would achieve a maximum rearward velocity 
of not less than 1.75 m/s (3.9 mph) and not more than 1.85 m/s (4.1 
mph).
    S7.7.3.7 During the impacts specified in S7.7.3.5 and S7.7.3.6, 
maintain power to the drive motors until all test device motion has 
ceased except rotation of the drive wheels. Note the position of the 
test device after its motion has ceased following each impact to 
determine compliance with S6.4.7.2.
    S7.8 Inner roll stop test. Determine compliance with S6.4.8 using 
the test device specified in S7.1.2 in accordance with the procedures 
specified in S7.8.1 through S7.8.6.
    S7.8.1 Place the platform at the ground level loading position, such 
that the platform is level.
    S7.8.2 Adjust the footrests of the test device to the shortest 
length. Position the test device on the ground at a distance from the 
platform sufficient to achieve the impact velocity required by S7.8.3. 
The plane of symmetry of the test device is coincident with the lift 
reference plane and the forward direction of travel is onto the 
platform.
    S7.8.3 Accelerate the test device onto the platform such that it 
impacts the inner roll stop at a speed of not less than 1.5 m/s (3.4 
mph) and not more than 1.6 m/s (3.6 mph). Determine compliance with 
S6.4.8.3(a).
    S7.8.4 If necessary, adjust or replace the footrests to restore them 
to the condition they were in prior to the impact. Reposition the test 
device on the platform with its plane of symmetry coincident with the 
lift reference plane. Slowly move the test device in the forward 
direction until it contacts the inner roll stop.
    S7.8.5 Apply a static load to the inner roll stop by activating the 
controller of the test device such that, with the test device were 
unrestrained on a flat and level surface, it achieves a maximum forward 
velocity of not less than 2.0 m/s and not more than 2.1 m/s.
    S7.8.6 Maintain control activation and raise the platform to the 
vehicle loading position. Determine compliance with S6.4.8.3(b).
    S7.9 Static load test I--working load.
    S7.9.1 By use of the lift controls specified in S6.7.2, perform the 
operations specified in S7.9.2 through S7.9.8 in the order they are 
specified.
    S7.9.2 Place the platform in the stowed position.
    S7.9.3 Deploy the platform to the vehicle floor loading position. 
Center a standard load, including the test pallet, on the platform 
surface.
    S7.9.4 Lower the lift platform from the vehicle floor loading 
position to the ground level loading position, stopping once between the 
two positions. Remove the test pallet from the lift platform.
    S7.9.5 Raise the lift platform from the ground level loading 
position to the vehicle floor level loading position, stopping once 
between the two positions.
    S7.9.6 Lower the lift platform from the vehicle floor level loading 
position to the ground level loading position, stopping once between the 
two positions.
    S7.9.7 Center the loaded test pallet on the platform surface. Raise 
the lift platform from the ground level loading position to the vehicle 
floor loading position, stopping once between the two positions.
    S7.9.8 Remove the pallet from the lift platform. Stow the lift.
    S7.9.9 Turn power off to the lift and repeat S7.9.3 through S7.9.5 
and stow the lift using the backup operating mode as specified by S6.9 
in accordance with the manufacturer's backup operating instructions.
    S7.10 Fatigue endurance test.
    S7.10.1 Perform the test procedure specified in S7.10.2 through 
S7.10.6 and determine compliance with S6.5.1.
    S7.10.2 Put the unloaded lift platform at the ground level loading 
position. Center a standard load, including the test pallet, on the 
platform surface.
    S7.10.3 Each sequence of lift operations specified in S7.10.5.1, 
S7.10.5.2, S7.10.6.1 and S7.10.6.2 are done in blocks of 10 cycles with 
a 1 minute maximum rest period between each cycle in any block. The 
minimum rest period between each block of 10 cycles is such

[[Page 818]]

that the temperature of the lift components is maintained below the 
values specified by the manufacturer or that degrade the lift function.
    S7.10.4 During the test sequence specified in S7.10.2 through 
S7.10.6, perform any lift maintenance as specified in the vehicle 
owner's manual.
    S7.10.5 Public use lifts: Using the lift controls specified in 
S6.7.2, perform the operations specified in S7.10.5.1 through S7.10.5.3 
in the order they are given.
    S7.10.5.1 Raise and lower the platform through the range of 
passenger operation 3,900 times.
    S7.10.5.2 Remove the test pallet from the platform. Raise the 
platform to the vehicle floor loading position, stow the lift, deploy 
the lift and lower the platform to the ground level loading position 
3,900 times.
    S7.10.5.3 Perform the test sequence specified in S7.10.5.1 and 
S7.10.5.2 two times.
    S7.10.6 Private use lifts: Using the lift controls specified in 
S6.7.2, perform the operation specified in S7.10.6.1 through S7.10.6.3 
in the order they are given.
    S7.10.6.1 Raise and lower the platform through the range of 
passenger operation 1,100 times.
    S7.10.6.2 Remove the test pallet from the platform. Raise the 
platform to the vehicle floor loading position, stow the lift, deploy 
the lift and lower the platform to the ground level loading position 
1,100 times.
    S7.10.6.3 Perform the test sequence specified in S7.10.6.1 and 
S7.10.6.2 two times.
    S7.11 Static load test II--proof load.
    S7.11.1 Perform the test procedures specified in S7.11.2 through 
S7.11.5 and determine compliance with S6.5.2.
    S7.11.2 Place the platform at the vehicle floor level loading 
position, center three times the standard load, including the test 
pallet, on the platform surface. Fully place the pallet on the platform 
within 1 minute of beginning to place it.
    S7.11.3 Two minutes after fully placing the loaded test pallet on 
the platform surface, remove the loaded test pallet and examine the 
platform lift and vehicle for separation, fracture or breakage.
    S7.11.4 After completing the static load test specified in S7.11.2 
through S7.11.4, repeat Static Load Test I specified in S7.9.
    S7.12 Handrail test.
    S7.12.1 To determine compliance with S6.4.9.7, apply 4.4 N (1 lbf) 
through an area of 1290 mm <SUP>2</SUP> (2 in<SUP>2</SUP>) in any 
direction at any point on the handrail in order to remove any looseness 
or slack from the handrail structure. Use this position of the handrail 
relative to the platform as the reference point for the measurement of 
handrail displacement. Apply 445 N (100 lbf) through an area of 1290 
mm<SUP>2</SUP> (2 in<SUP>2</SUP>) in a direction and location opposite 
to that of the 4.4 N (1 lbf). Attain the force within 1 minute after 
beginning to apply it. Five seconds after attaining the force, measure 
the amount of displacement of the handrail relative to the reference 
point, and measure the distance between the outside of the handrail and 
the nearest portion of the vehicle. Release the 445 N (100 lbf) and 
reapply the 4.4 N (1 lbf) in the direction and location that it was 
first applied. Five seconds after attaining the force, measure the 
position of the handrail with respect to the reference point to 
determine if there is any permanent deformation of the handrail relative 
to the platform.
    S7.12.2 To determine compliance with S6.4.9.8, apply 4.4 N (1 lbf) 
through an area of 1,290 mm<SUP>2</SUP> (2 in<SUP>2</SUP>) in any 
direction at any point on the handrail in order to remove any looseness 
or slack from the handrail structure. Use this position of the handrail 
relative to the platform as the reference point for the measurement of 
handrail displacement. Apply 1,112 N (250 lbf) through an area of 1,290 
mm<SUP>2</SUP> (2 in<SUP>2</SUP>) in a direction and location opposite 
to that of the 1 4.4 N (1 lbf). Attain the force within 1 minute after 
beginning to apply it. Five seconds after attaining the force, measure 
the amount of displacement of the handrail relative to the reference 
point. Maintain the force for two minutes. Release the force and inspect 
the handrail for cracking, separations or fractures.
    S7.13 Wheelchair retention device overload test.
    S7.13.1 Perform the test procedures as specified in S7.13.2 through 
S7.13.5 to determine compliance with S6.4.7.3.

[[Page 819]]

    S7.13.2 Position the platform surface 89 mm (3.5 in) above the 
ground level loading position. Apply 7,117 N (1,600 lbf) to the 
wheelchair retention device in a direction parallel to both the platform 
lift and platform reference planes. Attain the force within 1 minute 
after beginning to apply it.
    S7.13.3 For a wheelchair retention device that is in the form of an 
outer barrier, apply the force through a rectangular area with a height 
of 25 mm (1 in) and a width spanning the entire barrier. Distribute the 
force evenly about an axis 64 mm (2.5 in) above the platform reference 
plane. If the bottom edge of the outer barrier falls 50 mm (2 in) or 
more above the platform reference plane, distribute the force about an 
axis 13 mm (0.5 in) above the bottom edge of the barrier.
    S7.13.4 For a wheelchair retention device other than an outer 
barrier, place the test device specified in S7.1.2 on the lift platform 
with its plane of symmetry coincident with the lift reference plane and 
directed such that forward motion is impeded by the wheelchair retention 
device. Move the test device forward until it contacts the wheelchair 
retention device. Remove the test device from the platform. Apply the 
force specified in S7.13.2 distributed evenly at all areas of the 
wheelchair retention device that made contact with the test device when 
it was moved forward. Attain the force within 1 minute after beginning 
to apply it.
    S7.13.5 After maintaining the force for two minutes, remove it and 
examine the wheelchair retention device for separation, fracture or 
breakage.
    S7.14 Static load test III--ultimate load.
    S7.14.1 Perform the test procedures as specified in S7.14.2 through 
S7.14.5 to determine compliance with S6.5.3.
    S7.14.2 Reinforce the vehicle structure where the lift is attached 
such that it is rigid and will not deform, break or separate during 
application of the load specified in S7.14.3 or remove the platform lift 
from the vehicle and install it on a test jig that is rigid and will not 
deform, break or separate during application of the load specified in 
S7.14.3.
    S7.14.3 When the platform is at the vehicle floor loading position, 
center four times the standard load, including the test pallet, on the 
platform surface. Fully place the pallet on the platform within 1 minute 
of beginning to place it.
    S7.14.4 Two minutes after fully placing the loaded test pallet on 
the platform surface, remove the loaded test pallet and examine the 
platform lift for separation, fracture or breakage.

[[Page 820]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27DE02.001


[[Page 821]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27DE02.002


[[Page 822]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27DE02.003


[67 FR 79439, Dec. 27, 2002]

    Effective Date Notes: 1. At 67 FR 79439, Dec. 27, 2002, Sec. 
571.403 was added, effective Dec. 27, 2004.
    2. At 69 FR 58852, Oct. 1, 2004, Sec. 571.403 was amended by 
revising S3, the definitions of ``deploy'' and ``stow'' in S4, S6.2.1, 
S6.2.2.2, S6.2.4, S6.3.1, S6.3.2, S6.4.5, S6.4.6.1, S6.4.9.3, S6.4.9.9, 
S6.4.11, S6.5.1.1, S6.5.1.2, S6.7 through S6.7.2.2, S6.7.4, S6.7.5, 
S6.7.7, S6.10.2, S6.10.2.3, S7, S7.1.1, S7.1.2, S7.1.2.5, S7.1.2.6, 
S7.3.3, S7.7, S7.7.2.2, S7.10.5, S7.10.6, S7.13.2 and S7.14.1; by adding 
S6.13.4.1, S7.1.2.11, S7.7.4 through S7.7.4.6; and by removing S6.4.12, 
effective Dec. 27, 2004. For the convenience of the user, the revised 
and added text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 571.403  Standard No. 403; Platform lift systems for motor 
          vehicles.

                                * * * * *

    S3. Application. This standard applies to platform lifts designed to 
carry standing passengers, who may be aided by canes or walkers, as well 
as, persons seated in wheelchairs, scooters and other mobility aids, 
into and out of motor vehicles.
    S4. Definitions.

                                * * * * *

    Deploy means with respect to a platform, its movement from a stowed 
position to an extended position or, one of the two loading positions. 
With respect to a wheelchair retention device or inner roll stop, the 
term means the movement of the device or stop to a fully functional 
position intended to prevent a passenger from disembarking the platform 
or being pinched between the platform and vehicle.

                                * * * * *

    Stow means with respect to a platform, its movement from a position 
within the range of passenger operation to the position maintained 
during normal vehicle travel; and, with respect to a wheelchair 
retention device, bridging device, or inner-roll stop, its movement from 
a fully functional position to a position maintained during normal 
vehicle travel.

                                * * * * *

[[Page 823]]

    S6.2.1 General. Throughout the range of passenger operation and 
during the lift operations specified in S7.9.3 through S7.9.8, the 
platform lift must meet the requirements of S6.2.2 through S6.2.4. These 
requirements must be satisfied both with and without a standard load on 
the lift platform, except for S6.2.2.2, which must be satisfied without 
any load.

                                * * * * *

    S6.2.2.2 Except for platform lifts that manually stow (fold) and 
deploy (unfold), during the stow and deploy operations specified in 
S7.9.3 through S7.9.8, both the vertical and horizontal velocity of any 
portion of the platform must be less than or equal to 305 mm (12 inches) 
per second.

                                * * * * *

    S6.2.4 Maximum noise level of public use lifts. Except as provided 
in S6.1.5, throughout the range of passenger operation specified in 
S7.9.4 through S7.9.7, the noise level of a public use lift may not 
exceed 80 dBa as measured at any lift operator's position designated by 
the platform lift manufacturer for the intended vehicle and in the area 
on the lift defined in S6.4.2.1. Lift operator position measurements are 
taken at the vertical centerline of the control panel 30.5 cm (12 in) 
out from the face of the control panel. In the case of a lift with a 
pendant control (i.e., a control tethered to the vehicle by connective 
wiring), measurement is taken at the vertical centerline of the control 
panel 30.5 cm (12 in) out from the face of the control panel while the 
control panel is in its stowed or stored position. For the lift operator 
positions outside of the vehicle, measurements are taken at the 
intersection of a horizontal plane 157 cm (62 in) above the ground and 
the vertical centerline of the face of the control panel after it has 
been extended 30.5 cm (12 in) out from the face of the control panel.

                                * * * * *

    S6.3.1 Internally mounted platform lifts. On platform lifts and 
their components internal to the occupant compartment of the vehicle or 
internal to other compartments that provide protection from the elements 
when stowed, attachment hardware must be free of ferrous corrosion on 
significant surfaces except for permissible ferrous corrosion, as 
defined in FMVSS No. 209, at peripheral surface edges or edges of holes 
on under-floor reinforcing plates and washers after being subjected to 
the conditions specified in S7.3. Alternatively, such hardware must be 
made from corrosion-resistant steel containing at least 11.5 percent 
chromium per FMVSS 571.209, S5.2(a) or must be protected against 
corrosion by an electrodeposited coating of nickel, or copper and nickel 
with at least a service condition number of SC2, and other attachment 
hardware must be protected by an electrodeposited coating of nickel, or 
copper and nickel with a service condition number of SC1, in accordance 
with ASTM B456-95, but such hardware may not be racked for 
electroplating in locations subjected to maximum stress. The 
manufacturer shall select the option by the time it certifies the lift 
and may not thereafter select a different option for the lift. The lift 
must be accompanied by all attachment hardware necessary for its 
installation on a vehicle.
    S6.3.2 Externally mounted platform lifts. On platform lifts and 
their components external to the occupant compartment of the vehicle and 
external to other compartments that provide protection from the elements 
when stowed, the lift and its components must be free of ferrous 
corrosion on significant surfaces except for permissible ferrous 
corrosion, as defined in FMVSS No. 209, at peripheral surface edges and 
edges of holes and continue to function properly after being subjected 
to the conditions specified in S7.3. Alternatively, such lifts and all 
associated hardware and components must be completely made from 
corrosion-resistant steel containing at least 11.5 percent chromium per 
FMVSS 571.209, S5.2(a). The manufacturer shall select the option by the 
time it certifies the lift and may not thereafter select a different 
option for the lift. The lift must be accompanied by all attachment 
hardware necessary for its installation on a vehicle.

                                * * * * *

    S6.4.5 Platform deflection. The angle of the deployed platform, when 
stationary, and loaded with a standard load, must not exceed 4.8 degrees 
with respect to the vehicle floor and must not exceed 3 degrees with 
respect to the platform's unloaded position. The angles are measured 
between a vertical axis from the vehicle floor and an axis normal to the 
platform center as shown in Figure 1.

                                * * * * *

    S6.4.6.1 The platform lift must have edge guards that extend 
continuously along each side of the lift platform to within 75 mm (3 
inches) of the edges of the platform that are traversed while entering 
and exiting the platform at both the ground and vehicle floor level 
loading positions. The edge guards must be parallel to the direction of 
wheelchair movement during loading and unloading. Alternatively, when 
tested in accordance with S7.7.4, all portions of the wheels of the 
wheelchair test device must remain above the platform surface and after 
the control is released to Neutral, at the end of each

[[Page 824]]

attempt to steer the test device off the platform, all wheels of the 
wheelchair test device must be in contact with the platform surface. The 
manufacturer shall select the option by the time it certifies the lift 
and may not thereafter select a different option for the lift.

                                * * * * *

    S6.4.9.3 The graspable portion of each handrail may not be less than 
760 mm (30 inches) and more than 965 mm (38 inches) above the platform 
surface, measured vertically.

                                * * * * *

    S6.4.9.9 When tested in accordance with S7.12.2, each handrail must 
withstand 1,112 N (250 lb/f) applied at any point and in any direction 
on the handrail without sustaining any failure, such as cracking, 
separation, fracture, or more than 100 mm (4 inches) of displacement of 
any point on the handrails relative to the platform surface.

                                * * * * *

    S6.4.11 Platform slip resistance. When tested in accordance with 
S7.2, the coefficient of friction, in any direction, of any part of a 
wet platform surface may not be less than 0.65.

                                * * * * *

    S6.5.1.1 Public use lifts. Except for lifts that manually stow 
(fold) and deploy (unfold), public use lifts must remain operable when 
operated through a total of 15,600 cycles: 7,800 unloaded Raise/Lower 
and Stow/Deploy operations and 7,800 loaded Raise/Lower operations as 
specified in S7.10. Public use lifts that manually stow (fold) and 
deploy (unfold) must remain operable when operated through a total of 
15,600 cycles: 7,800 unloaded Raise/Lower operations and 7,800 loaded 
Raise/Lower operations. No separation, fracture, or breakage of any 
vehicle or lift component may occur as a result of conducting the 
fatigue test in S7.10.
    S6.5.1.2 Private use lifts. Except for lifts that manually stow 
(fold) and deploy (unfold), private use lifts must remain operable when 
operated through a total of 4,400 cycles: 2,200 unloaded Raise/Lower and 
Stow/Deploy operations and 2,200 loaded Raise/Lower operations as 
specified in S7.10. Private use lifts that manually stow (fold) and 
deploy (unfold) must remain operable when operated through a total of 
4,400 cycles: 2,200 unloaded Raise/Lower operations and 2,200 loaded 
Raise/Lower operations. No separation, fracture, or breakage of any 
vehicle or lift component may occur as a result of conducting the 
fatigue test in S7.10.

                                * * * * *

    S6.7 Control panel switches.
    S6.7.1 The platform lift must meet the requirements of S6.7.2 
through S6.7.8 and, when operated by means of the control panel switches 
specified in S6.7.2, must perform the lift operations specified in S7.9.
    S6.7.2 The platform lift system must have control panel switches 
that perform not less than the following functions: (platform lifts that 
manually stow (fold) and deploy (unfold) are exempt from S6.7.2.2 and 
S6.7.2.5).
    S6.7.2.1 Enables and disables the lift control panel switches. This 
function must be identified as ``POWER'' if located on the control. The 
POWER function must have two states: ``ON'' and ``OFF''. The ``ON'' 
state must allow platform lift operation. When the POWER function is in 
the ``ON'' state, an indicator light on the controls must illuminate. 
The ``OFF'' state must prevent lift operation and must turn off the 
indicator light. Verification with this requirement is made throughout 
the lift operations specified in S7.9.3 through S7.9.8.
    S6.7.2.2 Moves the lift from a stowed position to an extended 
position or, to one of the two loading positions. This function must be 
identified as ``DEPLOY'' or ``UNFOLD'' on the control.

                                * * * * *

    S6.7.4 Except for the POWER function described in S6.7.2.1, the 
control panel switches specified in S6.7.2 must prevent the simultaneous 
performance of more than one function. Verification with this 
requirement is made throughout the lift operations specified in S7.9.3 
through S7.9.8.
    S6.7.5 Any single-point failure in the control panel switches may 
not prevent the operation of any of the interlocks as specified in 
S6.10.

                                * * * * *

    S6.7.7 Control location for public use lifts: In public use lifts, 
except for the backup operation specified in S6.9, all control panel 
switches must be positioned together and in a location such that the 
lift operator has a direct, unobstructed view of the platform lift 
passenger and the passenger's mobility aid, if applicable. Verification 
with this requirement is made throughout the lift operations specified 
in S7.9.3 through S7.9.8. Additional controls may be positioned in other 
locations.

                                * * * * *

[[Page 825]]

    S6.10.2 The platform lift system must have interlocks or operate in 
such a manner when installed according to the installation instructions, 
as to prevent:

                                * * * * *

    S6.10.2.3 Stowing of the platform lift when occupied by portions of 
a passenger's body, and/or a mobility aid. Platform lifts designed to be 
occupied while stowed and platform lifts that manually stow (fold) are 
excluded from this requirement. Verification with this requirement is 
made using the test device specified in S7.1.4. Move the deployed 
platform lift to a position within the range of passenger operation 
where it will stow if the control specified in S6.7.2.5 is actuated. 
Place the test device specified in S7.1.4 on its narrowest side on any 
portion of the platform surface that coincides with the unobstructed 
platform operating volume described in S6.4.2. Using the operator 
control specified in S7.7.2.5, attempt to stow the lift. The interlock 
must prevent the lift from stowing.

                                * * * * *

    S6.13.4.1 Installation instructions for public use lifts must 
contain the statement ``Public use vehicle manufacturers are responsible 
for complying with the lift lighting requirements in Federal Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standard No. 404, Platform Lift Installations in Motor 
Vehicles (49 CFR 571.404).''

                                * * * * *

    S7. Test conditions and procedures. Each platform lift must be 
capable of meeting all of the tests specified in this standard, both 
separately, and in the sequence specified in this section. The tests 
specified in S7.4, S7.7.4 and S7.8 through S7.11 are performed on a 
single lift and vehicle combination. The tests specified in S7.2, S7.3, 
S7.5, S7.6, S7.7.1 and S7.12 through S7.14 may be performed with the 
lift installed on a test jig rather than on a vehicle. Tests of 
requirements in S6.1 through S6.11 may be performed on a single lift and 
vehicle combination, except for the requirements of S6.5.3. Attachment 
hardware may be replaced if damaged by removal and reinstallation of the 
lift between a test jig and vehicle.

                                * * * * *

    S7.1.1 Test pallet and load. The surface of the test pallet that 
rests on the platform used for the tests specified in S7.9 through S7.11 
and S7.14 has sides that measure between 660 mm (26 in) and 686 mm (27 
in). For the tests specified in S7.9 and S7.10, the test pallet is made 
of a rectangular steel plate of uniform thickness and the load that 
rests on the test pallet is made of rectangular steel plate(s) of 
uniform thickness and sides that measure between 533 mm (21 in) and 686 
mm (27 in). The standard test load that rests on the pallet is defined 
in S4.
    S7.1.2 Wheelchair test device. The test device is an unloaded power 
wheelchair whose size is appropriate for a 95th percentile male and that 
has the dimensions, configuration and components described in S7.1.2.1 
through S7.1.2.11. If the dimension in S7.1.2.9 is measured for a 
particular wheelchair by determining its tipping angle, the batteries 
are prevented from moving from their original position.

                                * * * * *

    S7.1.2.5 Two pneumatic rear tires with a diameter not less than 495 
mm (19.5 in) and not more than 521 mm (20.5 in) inflated to the 
wheelchair manufacturer's recommended pressure or if no recommendation 
exists, to the maximum pressure that appears on the sidewall of the 
tire;
    S7.1.2.6 Two pneumatic front tires with a diameter not less than 190 
mm (7.5 in) and not more than 216 mm (8.5 in) inflated to the wheelchair 
manufacturer's recommended pressure or if no recommendation exists, to 
the maximum pressure that appears on the sidewall of the tire;

                                * * * * *

    S7.1.2.11 Batteries with a charge not less than 75 percent of their 
rated nominal capacity (for tests that require use of the wheelchair's 
propulsion system).

                                * * * * *

    S7.3.3 For attachment hardware located within the occupant 
compartment of the motor vehicle or internal to other compartments that 
provide protection from the elements and not at or near the floor of the 
compartment, the period of the test is 25 hours, consisting of one 
period of 24 hours exposure to salt spray followed by one hour drying.

                                * * * * *

    S7.7 Wheelchair retention device impact test and edge guard test.

                                * * * * *

    S7.7.2.2 If the wheelchair retention device is an outer barrier, the 
footrests are adjusted such that at their lowest point they have a 
height 25 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2 mm (1 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 
0.08 in) less than the outer barrier. If the wheelchair retention device 
is not an outer barrier, the footrests are adjusted such that at their 
lowest point

[[Page 826]]

they have a height 50 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2 mm (2 in <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.08 in) above the platform.

                                * * * * *

    S7.7.4 Edge Guard Test. Determine compliance with S6.4.6 using the 
test device specified in S7.1.2 by performing the test procedure 
specified in S7.7.4.1 through S7.7.4.6. During the edge guard tests, 
remove the footrests from the wheelchair test device.
    S7.7.4.1 Position the platform surface 90 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 
10 mm (3.5 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4 in) above the ground level 
loading position.
    S7.7.4.2 Place the test device on the platform surface with its 
plane of symmetry coincident with the lift reference plane within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4 in), its forward 
direction of travel inboard toward the vehicle, and its position on the 
platform as far rearward as the wheelchair retention device or outer 
barrier will allow it to be placed.
    S7.7.4.3 Adjust the control of the test device to a setting that 
provides maximum acceleration and steer the test device from side-to-
side and corner-to-corner of the lift platform, attempting to steer the 
test device off the platform. After each attempt, when the wheelchair 
test device stalls due to contact with a barrier, release the control to 
Neutral and realign the test device to the starting position. Repeat 
this sequence at any level that is greater than 90 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 mm (3.5 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4 in) above the 
ground level loading position and less than 38 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 
10 mm (1.5 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4 in) below the vehicle floor 
level loading position. Repeat this sequence at 38 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 mm (1.5 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4 in) below the 
vehicle floor level loading position.
    S7.7.4.4 Next position the platform surface 38 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 mm (1.5 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4 in) below the 
vehicle floor level loading position.
    S7.7.4.5 Reposition the test device on the platform surface with its 
plane of symmetry coincident with the lift reference plane within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4 in), its forward 
direction of travel outboard away from the vehicle, and its position on 
the platform as far rearward as the wheelchair inner roll-stop or 
vehicle body will allow it to be placed.
    S7.7.4.6 Adjust the control of the test device to a setting that 
provides maximum acceleration and steer the test device from side-to-
side and corner-to-corner of the lift platform, attempting to steer the 
test device off the platform. After each attempt, when the wheelchair 
test device stalls due to contact with a barrier, release the control to 
Neutral and realign the test device to the starting position. Repeat 
this sequence at any level that is greater than 90 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 mm (3.5 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4 in) above the 
ground level loading position and less than 38 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 
10 mm (1.5 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4 in) below the vehicle floor 
level loading position. Repeat this sequence at 38 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 mm (1.5 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4 in) below the 
vehicle floor level loading position.

                                * * * * *

    S7.10.5 Public use lifts: Using the lift controls specified in 
S6.7.2, perform the operations specified in S7.10.5.1 through S7.10.5.3 
in the order they are given. Public use lifts that manually stow (fold) 
and deploy (unfold) are not required to perform the stow and deploy 
portions of the tests.

                                * * * * *

    S7.10.6 Private use lifts: Using the lift controls specified in 
S6.7.2, perform the operation specified in S7.10.6.1 through S7.10.6.3 
in the order they are given. Private use lifts that manually stow (fold) 
and deploy (unfold) are not required to perform the stow and deploy 
portions of the tests.

                                * * * * *

    S7.13.2 Position the platform surface 90 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 
10 mm (3.5 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4 in) above the ground level 
loading position. Apply 7,117 N (1,600 lbf) to the wheelchair retention 
device in a direction parallel to both the platform lift and platform 
reference planes. Attain the force within 1 minute after beginning to 
apply it.

                                * * * * *

    S7.14.1 Perform the test procedures as specified in S7.14.2 through 
S7.14.4 to determine compliance with S6.5.3.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 571.404  Standard No. 404; Platform lift installations in motor 
vehicles.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for vehicles 
equipped with platform lifts used to assist persons with limited 
mobility in entering or leaving a vehicle.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to prevent injuries and 
fatalities to passengers and bystanders during the operation of platform 
lifts installed in motor vehicles.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to motor vehicles equipped 
with a platform lift to carry passengers into and out of the vehicle.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 Installation requirements.
    S4.1.1 Lift-equipped buses, school buses, and MPVs other than motor 
homes with a GVWR greater than 4,536 kg (10,000 lb) must be equipped 
with a public use lift certified as meeting Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standard

[[Page 827]]

No. 403, Lift Systems for Motor Vehicles (49 CFR 571.403).
    S4.1.2 Lift-equipped motor vehicles, other than ones subject to 
paragraph S4.1.1, must be equipped with a platform lift certified as 
meeting either the public use lift or private use lift requirements of 
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 403, Lift Systems for Motor 
Vehicles (49 CFR 571.403).
    S4.1.3 Platform lifts must be installed in the vehicle in accordance 
with the installation instructions or procedures provided pursuant to 
S6.13 of Standard 403. The vehicle must be of a type identified in the 
installation instructions as appropriate for the platform lift as 
certified by the platform lift manufacturer.
    S4.1.4 The platform lift, as installed, must continue to comply with 
all the applicable requirements of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 
No. 403, Lift Systems for Motor Vehicles (49 CFR 571.403).
    S4.2 Vehicle owner's manual insert requirements. If the vehicle is 
equipped with an owner's manual, the owner's manual must contain the 
inserts provided by the lift manufacturer pursuant to S6.12 of 49 CFR 
571.403.
    S4.3 Control system.
    S4.3.1 Instructions regarding the platform lift operating 
procedures, including backup operations, as specified by S6.7.8 of 49 
CFR 571.403, must be permanently affixed to a location adjacent to the 
controls.
    S4.3.2 Public use lift: In addition to meeting the requirements of 
S4.3.1, for vehicles equipped with public use lifts, as defined in 49 
CFR 571.403, any and all controls provided for the lift by the platform 
lift manufacturer other than those provided for back-up operation of the 
platform lift specified in S5.9 of 49 CFR 571.403, must be located 
together and in a position such that the control operator has a direct, 
unobstructed view of the platform lift passenger and/or their mobility 
aid throughout the lift's range of passenger operation. Additional power 
controls and controls for back-up operation of the lift may be located 
in other positions.

[67 FR 79451, Dec. 27, 2002]

    Effective Date Notes: 1. At 67 FR 79451, Dec. 27, 2002, Sec. 
571.404 was added, effective Dec. 27, 2004.
    2. At 69 FR 58855, Oct. 1, 2004, Sec. 571.404 was amended by 
revising S3 and S4.3 and adding S4.1.5, effective Dec. 27, 2004. For the 
convenience of the user the revised and added text is set forth as 
follows:

Sec. 571.404  Standard No. 404; Platform lift installations in motor 
          vehicles.

                                * * * * *

    S3. Application. This standard applies to motor vehicles equipped 
with a platform lift designed to carry standing passengers who may be 
aided by canes or walkers, as well as, persons seated in wheelchairs, 
scooters and other mobility aids, into and out of the vehicle.

                                * * * * *

    S4.1.5 Platform lighting on public use lifts. Public use lifts must 
have a light or a set of lights that provide at least 54 lm/m\2\ (5 lm/
sqft) of luminance on all portions of the surface of the platform, 
throughout the range of passenger operation. The luminance on all 
portions of the surface of the passenger-unloading ramp at ground level 
must be at least 11 lm/m\2\ (1 lm/sqft).

                                * * * * *

    S4.3 Control panel switches.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 571.500  Standard No. 500; Low-speed vehicles.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for low-speed 
vehicles.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to ensure that low-
speed vehicles operated on the public streets, roads, and highways are 
equipped with the minimum motor vehicle equipment appropriate for motor 
vehicle safety.
    S3. Applicability. This standard applies to low-speed vehicles.
    S4. [Reserved]
    S5. Requirements.
    (a) When tested in accordance with test conditions in S6 and test 
procedures in S7, the maximum speed attainable in 1.6 km (1 mile) by 
each low-speed vehicle shall not more than 40 kilometers per hour (25 
miles per hour).
    (b) Each low-speed vehicle shall be equipped with:
    (1) Headlamps,
    (2) Front and rear turn signal lamps,
    (3) Taillamps,
    (4) Stop lamps,

[[Page 828]]

    (5) Reflex reflectors: one red on each side as far to the rear as 
practicable, and one red on the rear,
    (6) An exterior mirror mounted on the driver's side of the vehicle 
and either an exterior mirror mounted on the passenger's side of the 
vehicle or an interior mirror,
    (7) A parking brake,
    (8) A windshield that conforms to the Federal motor vehicle safety 
standard on glazing materials (49 CFR 571.205).
    (9) A VIN that conforms to the requirements of part 565 Vehicle 
Identification Number of this chapter, and
    (10) A Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly conforming to Sec. 
571.209 of this part, Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 209, 
Seat belt assemblies, installed at each designated seating position.
    S6. General test conditions. Each vehicle must meet the performance 
limit specified in S5(a) under the following test conditions.
    S6.1. Ambient conditions.
    S6.1.1. Ambient temperature. The ambient temperature is any 
temperature between 0 [deg]C (32 [deg]F) and 40 [deg]C (104 [deg]F).
    S6.1.2. Wind speed. The wind speed is not greater than 5 m/s (11.2 
mph).
    S6.2. Road test surface.
    S6.2.1. Pavement friction. Unless otherwise specified, the road test 
surface produces a peak friction coefficient (PFC) of 0.9 when measured 
using a standard reference test tire that meets the specifications of 
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) E1136, ``Standard 
Specification for A Radial Standard Reference Test Tire,'' in accordance 
with ASTM Method E 1337-90, ``Standard Test Method for Determining 
Longitudinal Peak Braking Coefficient of Paved Surfaces Using a Standard 
Reference Test Tire,'' at a speed of 64.4 km/h (40.0 mph), without water 
delivery (incorporated by reference; see 49 CFR 571.5).
    S6.2.2. Gradient. The test surface has not more than a 1 percent 
gradient in the direction of testing and not more than a 2 percent 
gradient perpendicular to the direction of testing.
    S6.2.3. Lane width. The lane width is not less than 3.5 m (11.5 ft).
    S6.3. Vehicle conditions.
    S6.3.1. The test weight for maximum speed is unloaded vehicle weight 
plus a mass of 78 kg (170 pounds), including driver and instrumentation.
    S6.3.2. No adjustment, repair or replacement of any component is 
allowed after the start of the first performance test.
    S6.3.3. Tire inflation pressure. Cold inflation pressure is not more 
than the maximum permissible pressure molded on the tire sidewall.
    S6.3.4. Break-in. The vehicle completes the manufacturer's 
recommended break-in agenda as a minimum condition prior to beginning 
the performance tests.
    S6.3.5. Vehicle openings. All vehicle openings (doors, windows, 
hood, trunk, convertible top, cargo doors, etc.) are closed except as 
required for instrumentation purposes.
    S6.3.6. Battery powered vehicles. Prior to beginning the performance 
tests, propulsion batteries are at the state of charge recommended by 
the manufacturer or, if the manufacturer has made no recommendation, at 
a state of charge of not less than 95 percent. No further charging of 
any propulsion battery is permissible.
    S7. Test procedure. Each vehicle must meet the performance limit 
specified in S5(a) under the following test procedure. The maximum speed 
performance is determined by measuring the maximum attainable vehicle 
speed at any point in a distance of 1.6 km (1.0 mile) from a standing 
start and repeated in the opposite direction within 30 minutes.

[63 FR 33216, June 17, 1998, as amended at 68 FR 43972, July 25, 2003]


<R03>
PART 572_ANTHROPOMORPHIC TEST DEVICES--Table of Contents




                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
572.1 Scope.
572.2 Purpose.
572.3 Application.
572.4 Terminology.

                     Subpart B_50th Percentile Male

572.5 General description.
572.6 Head.
572.7 Neck.
572.8 Thorax.
572.9 Lumbar spine, abdomen, and pelvis.
572.10 Limbs.

[[Page 829]]

572.11 Test conditions and instrumentation.

                       Subpart C_3-Year-Old Child

572.15 General description.
572.16 Head.
572.17 Neck.
572.18 Thorax.
572.19 Lumbar spine, abdomen and pelvis.
572.20 Limbs.
572.21 Test conditions and instrumentation.

                      Subpart D_6-Month-Old Infant

572.25 General description.

                     Subpart E_Hybrid III Test Dummy

572.30 Incorporated materials.
572.31 General description.
572.32 Head.
572.33 Neck.
572.34 Thorax.
572.35 Limbs.
572.36 Test conditions and instrumentation.

            Subpart F_Side Impact Dummy 50th Percentile Male

572.40 Incorporated materials.
572.41 General description.
572.42 Thorax.
572.43 Lumbar spine and pelvis.
572.44 Instrumentation and test conditions.

Appendix A to Subpart F

Subparts G-H [Reserved]

                       Subpart I_6-Year-Old Child

572.70 Incorporation by reference.
572.71 General description.
572.72 Head assembly and test procedure.
572.73 Neck assembly and test procedure.
572.74 Thorax assembly and test procedure.
572.75 Lumbar spine, abdomen, and pelvis assembly and test procedure.
572.76 Limbs assembly and test procedure.
572.77 Instrumentation.
572.78 Performance test conditions.

Figures to subpart I

                       Subpart J_9-Month Old Child

572.80 Incorporated materials.
572.81 General description.
572.82 Head.
572.83 Head-neck.
572.84 Thorax.
572.85 Lumbar spine flexure.
572.86 Test conditions and dummy adjustment.

                        Subpart K_Newborn Infant

572.90 Incorporation by reference.
572.91 General description.

                     Subpart L_Free Motion Headform

572.100 Incorporation by reference.
572.101 General description.
572.102 Drop test.
572.103 Test conditions and instrumentation.

        Subpart M_Side Impact Hybrid Dummy 50th Percentile Male.

572.110 Materials incorporated by reference.
572.111 General description.
572.112 Head assembly.
572.113 Neck assembly.
572.114 Thorax.
572.115 Lumbar spine and pelvis.
572.116 Instrumentation and test conditions.

          Subpart N_Six-year-old Child Test Dummy, Beta Version

572.120 Incorporation by reference.
572.121 General description.
572.122 Head assembly and test procedure.
572.123 Neck assembly and test procedure.
572.124 Thorax assembly and test procedure.
572.125 Upper and lower torso assemblies and torso flexion test 
          procedure.
572.126 Knees and knee impact test procedure.
572.127 Test conditions and instrumentation.

Figures to Subpart N

  Subpart O_Hybrid III 5th Percentile Female Test Dummy, Alpha Version

572.130 Incorporation by reference.
572.131 General description.
572.132 Head assembly and test procedure.
572.133 Neck assembly and test procedure.
572.134 Thorax assembly and test procedure.
572.135 Upper and lower torso assemblies and torso flexion test 
          procedure.
572.136 Knees and knee impact test procedure.
572.137 Test conditions and instrumentation.

Figures to Subpart O

  Subpart P_Hybrid III 3-Year-Old Child Crash Test Dummy, Alpha Version

572.140 Incorporation by reference.
572.141 General description.
572.142 Head assembly and test procedure.
572.143 Neck-headform assembly and test procedure.
572.144 Thorax assembly and test procedure.
572.145 Upper and lower torso assemblies and torso flexion test 
          procedure.
572.146 Test condition and instrumentation.

Figures to Subpart P

[[Page 830]]

   Subpart R_CRABI 12-Month-Old Infant Crash Test Dummy, Alpha Version

572.150 Incorporation by reference.
572.151 General description.
572.152 Head assembly and test procedure.
572.153 Neck-headform assembly and test procedure.
572.154 Thorax assembly and test procedure.
572.155 Test condition and instrumentation.

Figures to Subpart R

       Subpart S_Hybrid III Six-Year-Old Weighted Child Test Dummy

572.160 Incorporation by reference.
572.161 General description.
572.162 Head assembly and test procedure.
572.163 Neck assembly and test procedure.
572.164 Thorax assembly and test procedure.
572.165 Upper and lower torso assemblies and torso flexion test 
          procedure.
572.166 Knees and knee impact test procedure.
572.167 Test conditions and instrumentation.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30117 and 30166; delegation 
of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Editorial Notes: 1. For compliance provisions relating to a 
vehicle's conformance with the performance requirements of Standard No. 
208 (Sec. 571.208) relating to the part 572 test dummy, see the 
``Effective Date Note'' at subpart E of this part.

    2. Nomenclature changes to part 572 appear at 69 FR 18803, Apr. 9, 
2004.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 572.1  Scope.

    This part describes the anthropomorphic test devices that are to be 
used for compliance testing of motor vehicles and motor vehicle 
equipment with motor vehicle safety standards.

[60 FR 43058, Aug. 18, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 572.2  Purpose.

    The design and performance criteria specified in this part are 
intended to describe measuring tools with sufficient precision to give 
repetitive and correlative results under similar test conditions and to 
reflect adequately the protective performance of a vehicle or item of 
motor vehicle equipment with respect to human occupants.

[38 FR 20451, Aug. 1, 1973, as amended at 42 FR 7151, Feb. 7, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 572.3  Application.

    This part does not in itself impose duties or liabilities on any 
person. It is a description of tools that measure the performance of 
occupant protection systems required by the safety standards that 
incorporate it. It is designed to be referenced by, and become a part 
of, the test procedures specified in motor vehicle safety standards such 
as Standard No. 208, Occupant Crash Protection.

[38 FR 20451, Aug. 1, 1973, as amended at 42 FR 7152, Feb. 7, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 572.4  Terminology.

    (a) The term dummy, when used in this subpart A, refers to any test 
device described by this part. The term dummy, when used in any other 
subpart of this part, refers to the particular dummy described in that 
part.
    (b) Terms describing parts of the dummy, such as head, are the same 
as names for corresponding parts of the human body.
    (c) The term unimodal, when used in subparts C and I, refers to an 
acceleration-time curve which has only one prominent peak.

[38 FR 20451, Aug. 1, 1973, as amended at 42 FR 7152, Feb. 7, 1977; 44 
FR 76530, Dec. 27, 1979; 56 FR 57836, Nov. 14, 1991]


<R04>
                     Subpart B_50th Percentile Male


<R05>
Sec. 572.5  General description.

    (a) The dummy consists of the component assemblies specified in 
Figure 1, which are described in their entirety by means of 
approximately 250 drawings and specifications that are grouped by 
component assemblies under the following nine headings:

SA 150 M070--Right arm assembly
SA 150 M071--Left arm assembly
SA 150 M050--Lumbar spine assembly
SA 150 M060--Pelvis and abdomen assembly
SA 150 M080--Right leg assembly
SA 150 M081--Left leg assembly
SA 150 M010--Head assembly
SA 150 M020--Neck assembly
SA 150 M030--Shoulder-thorax assembly.

    (b) The drawings and specifications referred to in this regulation 
that are not set forth in full are hereby incorporated in this part by 
reference. These materials are thereby made part of this

[[Page 831]]

regulation. The Director of the Federal Register has approved the 
materials incorporated by reference. For materials subject to change, 
only the specific version approved by the Director of the Federal 
Register and specified in the regulation are incorporated. A notice of 
any change will be published in the Federal Register. As a convenience 
to the reader, the materials incorporated by reference are listed in the 
Finding Aid Table found at the end of this volume of the Code of Federal 
Regulations.
    (c) The materials incorporated by reference are available for 
examination in Docket 73-08, Docket Section, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, Room 5109, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, 
DC, 20590. Copies may be obtained from Rowley-Scher Reprographics, Inc., 
1216 K Street NW., Washington, DC 20005 ((202) 628-6667). The drawings 
and specifications are also on file in the reference library of the 
Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records 
Administration, Washington, DC.
    (d) Adjacent segments are joined in a manner such that throughout 
the range of motion and also under crash impact conditions there is no 
contact between metallic elements except for contacts that exist under 
static conditions.
    (e) The structural properties of the dummy are such that the dummy 
conforms to this part in every respect both before and after being used 
in vehicle tests specified in Standard No. 208 of this chapter 
(571.208).
    (f) A specimen of the dummy is available for surface measurements 
and access can be arranged by contacting: Office of Vehicle Safety 
Standards, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh 
Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590.

[50 FR 25423, June 19, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 572.6  Head.

    (a) The head consists of the assembly shown as number SA 150 M010 in 
Figure 1 and conforms to each of the drawings subtended by number SA 150 
M010.
    (b) When the head is dropped from a height of 10 inches in 
accordance with paragraph (c) of this section, the peak resultant 
accelerations at the location of the accelerometers mounted in the head 
form in accordance with Sec. 572.11(b) shall be not less than 210g, and 
not more than 260g. The acceleration/time curve for the test shall be 
unimodal and shall lie at or above the 100g level for an interval not 
less than 0.9 milliseconds and not more than 1.5 milliseconds. The 
lateral acceleration vector shall not exceed 10g.
    (c) Test procedure:
    (1) Suspend the head as shown in Figure 2, so that the lowest point 
on the forehead is 0.5 inches below the lowest point on the dummy's nose 
when the midsagittal plane is vertical.
    (2) Drop the head from the specified height by means that ensures 
instant release onto a rigidly supported flat horizontal steel plate, 2 
inches thick and 2 feet square, which has a clean, dry surface and any 
microfinish of not less than 8 microinches (rms) and not more than 80 
microinches (rms).
    (3) Allow a time period of at least 2 hours between successive tests 
on the same head.

[38 FR 20451, Aug. 1, 1973, as amended at 42 FR 7152, Feb. 7, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 572.7  Neck.

    (a) The neck consists of the assembly shown as number SA 150 M020 in 
Figure 1 and conforms to each of the drawings subtended by number SA 150 
M020.
    (b) When the neck is tested with the head in accordance with 
paragraph (c) of this section, the head shall rotate in reference to the 
pendulum's longitudinal centerline a total of 68[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5[deg] about its center of gravity, rotating to the 
extent specified in the following table at each indicated point in time, 
measured from impact, with a chordal displacement measured at its center 
of gravity that is within the limits specified. The chordal displacement 
at time T is defined as the straight line distance between (1) the 
position relative to the pendulum arm of the head center of gravity at 
time zero, and (2) the position relative to the pendulum arm of the head 
center of gravity at time T as illustrated by Figure 3. The peak 
resultant acceleration recorded at the location of the accelerometers 
mounted in the head form in accordance with

[[Page 832]]

Sec. 572.11(b) shall not exceed 26g. The pendulum shall not reverse 
direction until the head's center of gravity returns to the original 
zero time position relative to the pendulum arm.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                            Chordal Displacement
                       Rotation (degrees)                         Time (ms) <plus-minus<ls-    (inches <plus-
                                                                       thn-eq>(2+.08T)      minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0...............................................................                   0                     0.0
30..............................................................                  30                     2.6
60..............................................................                  46                     4.8
Maximum.........................................................                  60                     5.5
60..............................................................                  75                     4.8
30..............................................................                  95                     2.6
0...............................................................                 112                     0.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Test procedure: (1) Mount the head and neck on a rigid pendulum 
as specified in Figure 4, so that the head's midsagittal plane is 
vertical and coincides with the plane of motion of the pendulum's 
longitudinal centerline. Mount the neck directly to the pendulum as 
shown in Figure 4.
    (2) Release the pendulum and allow it to fall freely from a height 
such that the velocity at impact is 23.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.0 feet 
per second (fps), measured at the center of the accelerometer specified 
in Figure 4.
    (3) Decelerate the pendulum to a stop with an acceleration-time 
pulse described as follows:
    (i) Establish 5g and 20g levels on the a-t curve.
    (ii) Establish t<INF>1</INF> at the point where the rising a-t curve 
first crosses the 5g level, t<INF>2</INF> at the point where the rising 
a-t curve first crosses the 20g level, t<INF>2</INF> at the point where 
the decaying a-t curve last crosses the 20g level, and t<INF>4</INF> at 
the point where the decaying a-t curve first crosses the 5g level.
    (iii) t<INF>2</INF>-t<INF>1</INF> shall be not more than 3 
milliseconds.
    (iv) t<INF>3</INF>-t<INF>2</INF> shall be not less than 25 
milliseconds and not more than 30 milliseconds.
    (v) t<INF>4</INF>-t<INF>3</INF> shall be not more than 10 
milliseconds.
    (vi) The average deceleration between t<INF>2</INF> and 
t<INF>3</INF> shall be not less than 20g and not more than 24g.
    (4) Allow the neck to flex without impact of the head or neck with 
any object other than the pendulum arm.

[38 FR 20451, Aug. 1, 1973, as amended at 42 FR 7152, Feb. 7, 1977; 42 
FR 12176, Mar. 3, 1977; 45 FR 40596, June 16, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 572.8  Thorax.

    (a) The thorax consists of the assembly shown as number SA 150 M030 
in Figure 1, and conforms to each of the drawings subtended by number SA 
150 M030.
    (b) The thorax contains enough unobstructed interior space behind 
the rib cage to permit the midpoint of the sternum to be depressed 2 
inches without contact between the rib cage and other parts of the dummy 
or its instrumentation, except for instruments specified in paragraph 
(d)(7) of this section.
    (c) When impacted by a test probe conforming to Sec. 572.11(a) at 
14 fps and at 22 fps in accordance with paragraph (d) of this section, 
the thorax shall resist with forces measured by the test probe of not 
more than 1450 pounds and 2250 pounds, respectively, and shall deflect 
by amounts not greater than 1.1 inches and 1.7 inches, respectively. The 
internal hysteresis in each impact shall not be less than 50 percent and 
not more than 70 percent.
    (d) Test procedure: (1) With the dummy seated without back support 
on a surface as specified in Sec. 572.11(i) and in the orientation 
specified in Sec. 572.11(i), adjust the dummy arms and legs until they 
are extended horizontally forward parallel to the midsagittal plane.
    (2) Place the longitudinal center line of the test probe so that it 
is 17.7 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 inches above the seating surface at 
impact.
    (3) Align the test probe specified in Sec. 572.11(a) so that at 
impact its longitudinal centerline coincides within 2 degrees of a 
horizontal line in the dummy's midsagittal plane.
    (4) Adjust the dummy so that the surface area on the thorax 
immediately adjacent to the projected longitudinal center line of the 
test probe is vertical. Limb support, as needed to achieve and maintain 
this orientation, may be provided by placement of a steel rod of any 
diameter not less than one-quarter of an inch and not more than three-
eighths of an inch, with hemispherical ends, vertically under the limb 
at its projected geometric center.

[[Page 833]]

    (5) Impact the thorax with the test probe so that its longitudinal 
centerline falls within 2 degrees of a horizontal line in the dummy's 
midsagittal plane at the moment of impact.
    (6) Guide the probe during impact so that it moves with no 
significant lateral, vertical, or rotational movement.
    (7) Measure the horizontal deflection of the sternum relative to the 
thoracic spine along the line established by the longitudinal centerline 
of the probe at the moment of impact, using a potentiometer mounted 
inside the sternum.
    (8) Measure hysteresis by determining the ratio of the area between 
the loading and unloading portions of the force deflection curve to the 
area under the loading portion of the curve.

[38 FR 20451, Aug. 1, 1973, as amended at 42 FR 7152, Feb. 7, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 572.9  Lumbar spine, abdomen, and pelvis.

    (a) The lumbar spine, abdomen, and pelvis consist of the assemblies 
designated as numbers SA 150 M050 and SA 150 M060 in Figure 1 and 
conform to the drawings subtended by these numbers.
    (b) When subjected to continuously applied force in accordance with 
paragraph (c) of this section, the lumbar spine assembly shall flex by 
an amount that permits the rigid thoracic spine to rotate from its 
initial position in accordance with Figure 11 by the number of degrees 
shown below at each specified force level, and straighten upon removal 
of the force to within 12 degrees of its initial position in accordance 
with Figure 11.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Force ( <plus-
                  Flexion (degrees)                    minus<ls-thn-eq>6
                                                            pounds)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0....................................................               0
20...................................................              28
30...................................................              40
40...................................................              52
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Test procedure: (1) Assemble the thorax, lumbar spine, pelvic, 
and upper leg assemblies (above the femur force transducers), ensuring 
that all component surfaces are clean, dry, and untreated unless 
otherwise specified, and attach them to the horizontal fixture shown in 
Figure 5 at the two link rod pins and with the mounting brackets for the 
lumbar test fixtures illustrated in Figures 6 to 9.
    (2) Attach the rear mounting of the pelvis to the pelvic instrument 
cavity rear face at the four \1/4\<gr-thn-eq> cap screw holes and attach 
the front mounting at the femur axial rotation joint. Tighten the 
mountings so that the pelvic-lumbar adapter is horizontal and adjust the 
femur friction plungers at each hip socket joint to 240 inch-pounds 
torque.
    (3) Flex the thorax forward 50[deg] and then rearward as necessary 
to return it to its initial position in accordance with Figure 11 
unsupported by external means.
    (4) Apply a forward force perpendicular to the thorax instrument 
cavity rear face in the midsagittal plane 15 inches above the top 
surface of the pelvic-lumbar adapter. Apply the force at any torso 
deflection rate between .5 and 1.5 degrees per second up to 40[deg] of 
flexion but no further, continue to apply for 10 seconds that force 
necessary to maintain 40[deg] of flexion, and record the force with an 
instrument mounted to the thorax as shown in Figure 5. Release all force 
as rapidly as possible and measure the return angle 3 minutes after the 
release.
    (d) When the abdomen is subjected to continuously applied force in 
accordance with paragraph (e) of this section, the abdominal force-
deflection curve shall be within the two curves plotted in Figure 10.
    (e) Test procedure: (1) Place the assembled thorax, lumbar spine and 
pelvic assemblies in a supine position on a flat, rigid, smooth, dry, 
clean horizontal surface, ensuring that all component surfaces are 
clean, dry, and untreated unless otherwise specified.
    (2) Place a rigid cylinder 6 inches in diameter and 18 inches long 
transversely across the abdomen, so that the cylinder is symmetrical 
about the midsagittal plane, with its longitudinal centerline horizontal 
and perpendicular to the midsagittal plane at a point 9.2 inches above 
the bottom line of the buttocks, measured with the dummy positioned in 
accordance with Figure 11.
    (3) Establish the zero deflection point as the point at which a 
force of 10 pounds has been reached.
    (4) Apply a vertical downward force through the cylinder at any rate 
between 0.25 and 0.35 inches per second.

[[Page 834]]

    (5) Guide the cylinder so that it moves without significant lateral 
or rotational movement.

[42 FR 7152, Feb. 7, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 572.10  Limbs.

    (a) The limbs consist of the assemblies shown as numbers SA 150 
M070, SA 150 M071, SA 150 M080, and SA 150 M081 in Figure 1 and conform 
to the drawings subtended by these numbers.
    (b) When each knee is impacted at 6.9 ft/sec. in accordance with 
paragraph (c) of this section, the maximum force on the femur shall be 
not more than 2500 pounds and not less than 1850 pounds, with a duration 
above 1000 pounds of not less than 1.7 milliseconds.
    (c) Test procedure: (1) Seat the dummy without back support on a 
surface as specified in Sec. 572.11(i) that is 17.3 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 inches above a horizontal surface, oriented as 
specified in Sec. 572.11(i), and with the hip joint adjustment at any 
setting between 1g and 2g. Place the dummy legs in planes parallel to 
its midsagittal plane (knee pivot centerline perpendicular to the 
midsagittal plane) and with the feet flat on the horizontal surface. 
Adjust the feet and lower legs until the lines between the midpoints of 
the knee pivots and the ankle pivots are at any angle not less than 2 
degrees and not more than 4 degrees rear of the vertical, measured at 
the centerline of the knee pivots.
    (2) Reposition the dummy if necessary so that the rearmost point of 
the lower legs at the level one inch below the seating surface remains 
at any distance not less than 5 inches and not more than 6 inches 
forward of the forward edge of the seat.
    (3) Align the test probe specified in Sec. 572.11(a) so that at 
impact its longitudinal centerline coincides within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2[deg] with the longitudinal centerline of the femur.
    (4) Impact the knee with the test probe moving horizontally and 
parallel to the midsagittal plane at the specified velocity.
    (5) Guide the probe during impact so that it moves with no 
significant lateral, vertical, or rotational movement.

[38 FR 20451, Aug. 1, 1973, as amended at 42 FR 7153, Feb. 7, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 572.11  Test conditions and instrumentation.

    (a) The test probe used for thoracic and knee impact tests is a 
cylinder 6 inches in diameter that weighs 51.5 pounds including 
instrumentation. Its impacting end has a flat right face that is rigid 
and that has an edge radius of 0.5 inches.
    (b) Accelerometers are mounted in the head on the horizontal 
transverse bulkhead shown in the drawings sub referenced under assembly 
No. SA 150 M010 in Figure 1, so that their sensitive axes intersect at a 
point in the midsagittal plane 0.5 inches above the horizontal bulkhead 
and 1.9 inches ventral of the vertical mating surface of the skull with 
the skull cover. One accelerometer is aligned with its sensitive axis 
perpendicular to the horizontal bulkhead in the midsagittal plane and 
with its seismic mass center at any distance up to 0.3 inches superior 
to the axial intersection point. Another accelerometer is aligned with 
its sensitive axis parallel to the horizontal bulkhead and perpendicular 
to the midsagittal plane, and with its seismic mass center at any 
distance up to 1.3 inches to the left of the axial intersection point 
(left side of dummy is the same as that of man). A third accelerometer 
is aligned with its sensitive axis parallel to the horizontal bulkhead 
in the midsagittal plane, and with its seismic mass center at any 
distance up to 1.3 inches dorsal to the axial intersection point.
    (c) Accelerometers are mounted in the thorax by means of a bracket 
attached to the rear vertical surface (hereafter ``attachment surface'') 
of the thoracic spine so that their sensitive axes intersect at a point 
in the midsagittal plane 0.8 inches below the upper surface of the plate 
to which the neck mounting bracket is attached and 3.2 inches 
perpendicularly forward of the surface to which the accelerometer 
bracket is attached. One accelerometer has its sensitive axis oriented 
parallel to the attachment surface in the midsagittal plane, with its 
seismic mass center at any distance up to 1.3 inches inferior to the 
intersection of the sensitive axes specified above. Another 
accelerometer has its sensitive

[[Page 835]]

axis oriented parallel to the attachment surface and perpendicular to 
the midsagittal plane, with its seismic mass center at any distance up 
to 0.2 inches to the right of the intersection of the sensitive axes 
specified above. A third accelerometer has its sensitive axis oriented 
perpendicular to the attachment surface in the midsagittal plane, with 
its seismic mass center at any distance up to 1.3 inches dorsal to the 
intersection of the sensitive axes specified above. Accelerometers are 
oriented with the dummy in the position specified in Sec. 572.11(i).
    (d) A force-sensing device is mounted axially in each femur shaft so 
that the transverse centerline of the sensing element is 4.25 inches 
from the knee's center of rotation.
    (e) The outputs of acceleration and force-sensing devices installed 
in the dummy and in the test apparatus specified by this part are 
recorded in individual data channels that conform to the requirements of 
SAE Recommended Practice J211a, December 1971, with channel classes as 
follows:
    (1) Head acceleration--Class 1000.
    (2) Pendulum acceleration--Class 60.
    (3) Thorax acceleration--Class 180.
    (4) Thorax compression--Class 180.
    (5) Femur force--Class 600.
    (f) The mountings for sensing devices have no resonance frequency 
within a range of 3 times the frequency range of the applicable channel 
class.
    (g) Limb joints are set at 1g, barely restraining the weight of the 
limb when it is extended horizontally. The force required to move a limb 
segment does not exceed 2g throughout the range of limb motion.
    (h) Performance tests are conducted at any temperature from 66 
[deg]F to 78 [deg]F and at any relative humidity from 10 percent to 70 
percent after exposure of the dummy to these conditions for a period of 
not less than 4 hours.
    (i) For the performance tests specified in Sec. Sec. 572.8, 572.9, 
and 572.10, the dummy is positioned in accordance with Figure 11 as 
follows:
    (1) The dummy is placed on a flat, rigid, smooth, clean, dry, 
horizontal, steel test surface whose length and width dimensions are not 
less than 16 inches, so that the dummy's midsagittal plane is vertical 
and centered on the test surface and the rearmost points on its lower 
legs at the level of the test surface are at any distance not less than 
5 inches and not more than 6 inches forward of the forward edge of the 
test surface.
    (2) The pelvis is adjusted so that the upper surface of the lumbar-
pelvic adapter is horizontal.
    (3) The shoulder yokes are adjusted so that they are at the midpoint 
of their anterior-posterior travel with their upper surfaces horizontal.
    (4) The dummy is adjusted so that the rear surfaces of the shoulders 
and buttocks are tangent to a transverse vertical plane.
    (5) The upper legs are positioned symmetrically about the 
midsagittal plane so that the distance between the knee pivot bolt heads 
is 11.6 inches.
    (6) The lower legs are positioned in planes parallel to the 
midsagittal plane so that the lines between the midpoint of the knee 
pivots and the ankle pivots are vertical.
    (j) The dummy's dimensions, as specified in drawing number SA 150 
M002, are determined as follows:
    (1) With the dummy seated as specified in paragraph (i) of this 
section, the head is adjusted and secured so that its occiput is 1.7 
inches forward of the transverse vertical plane with the vertical mating 
surface of the skull with its cover parallel to the transverse vertical 
plane.
    (2) The thorax is adjusted and secured so that the rear surface of 
the chest accelerometer mounting cavity is inclined 3[deg] forward of 
vertical.
    (3) Chest and waist circumference and chest depth measurements are 
taken with the dummy positioned in accordance with paragraphs (j) (1) 
and (2) of this section.
    (4) The chest skin and abdominal sac are removed and all following 
measurements are made without them.
    (5) Seated height is measured from the seating surface to the 
uppermost point on the head-skin surface.
    (6) Shoulder pivot height is measured from the seating surface to 
the center of the arm elevation pivot.
    (7) H-point locations are measured from the seating surface to the 
center of the holes in the pelvis flesh covering in line with the hip 
motion ball.

[[Page 836]]

    (8) Knee pivot distance from the backline is measured to the center 
of the knee pivot bolt head.
    (9) Knee pivot distance from floor is measured from the center of 
the knee pivot bolt head to the bottom of the heel when the foot is 
horizontal and pointing forward.
    (10) Shoulder width measurement is taken at arm elevation pivot 
center height with the centerlines between the elbow pivots and the 
shoulder pivots vertical.
    (11) Hip width measurement is taken at widest point of pelvic 
section.
    (k) Performance tests of the same component, segment, assembly, or 
fully assembled dummy are separated in time by a period of not less than 
30 minutes unless otherwise noted.
    (l) Surfaces of dummy components are not painted except as specified 
in this part or in drawings subtended by this part.

[[Page 837]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.152


[[Page 838]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.153


[[Page 839]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.154


[[Page 840]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.155


[[Page 841]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.156


[[Page 842]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.157


[38 FR 20451, Aug. 1, 1973, as amended at 42 FR 7153, Feb. 7, 1977]


<R04>
                       Subpart C_3-Year-Old Child

    Source: 44 FR 76530, Dec. 27, 1979, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 572.15  General description.

    (a) The dummy consists of the component assemblies specified in 
drawing SA 103C 001, which are described in their entirety by means of 
approximately 122 drawings and specifications

[[Page 843]]

and an Operation and Maintenance Manual, dated May 28, 1976. The 
drawings and specifications are grouped by component assemblies under 
the following thirteen headings:

SA 103C 010 Head Assembly
SA 103C 020 Neck Assembly
SA 103C 030 Torso Assembly
SA 103C 041 Upper Arm Assembly Left
SA 103C 042 Upper Arm Assembly Right
SA 103C 051 Forearm Hand Assembly Left
SA 103C 052 Forearm Hand Assembly Right
SA 103C 061Upper Leg Assembly Left
SA 103C 062 Upper Leg Assembly Right
SA 103C 071 Lower Leg Assembly Left
SA 103C 072 Lower Leg Assembly Right
SA 103C 081 Foot Assembly left
SA 103C 082 Foot Assembly Right.

    (b) The drawings, specifications, and operation and maintenance 
manual referred to in this regulation that are not set forth in full are 
hereby incorporated in this part by reference. These materials are 
thereby made part of this regulation. The Director of the Federal 
Register has approved the materials incorporated by reference. For 
materials subject to change, only the specific version approved by the 
Director of the Federal Register and specified in the regulation are 
incorporated. A notice of any change will be published in the Federal 
Register. As a convenience to the reader, the materials incorporated by 
reference are listed in the Finding Aid Table found at the end of this 
volume of the Code of Federal Regulations.
    (c) The materials incorporated by reference are available for 
examination in Docket 78-09, Room 5109, Docket Section, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 
20590. Copies may be obtained from Rowley-Scher Reprographics, Inc., 
1216 K Street NW., Washington, DC 20005 ((202) 628-6667). The materials 
are also on file in the reference library of the Office of the Federal 
Register, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC.
    (d) Adjacent segments are joined in a manner such that throughout 
the range of motion and also under simulated crash-impact conditions 
there is no contact between metallic elements except for contacts that 
exist under static conditions.
    (e) The structural properties of the dummy are such that the dummy 
conforms to this part in every respect both before and after being used 
in vehicle tests specified in Standard No. 213 of this chapter (Sec. 
571.213).
    (f) The patterns of all cast and molded parts for reproduction of 
the molds needed in manufacturing of the dummies can be obtained on a 
loan basis by manufacturers of the testes dummies, or others if need is 
shown, from: Office of Vehicle Safety Standards, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 
20590.

[50 FR 25423, June 19, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 572.16  Head.

    (a) The head consists of the assembly designated as SA 103C 010 on 
drawing No. SA 103C 001, and conforms to either--
    (1) Each item specified on drawing SA 103C 002(B), sheet 8; or
    (2) Each item specified on drawing SA 103C 002, sheet 8.
    (b) When the head is impacted by a test probe specified in Sec. 
572.21(a)(1) at 7 fps, then the peak resultant acceleration measured at 
the location of the accelerometer mounted in the headform according to 
Sec. 572.21(b) is not less than 95g and not more than 118g.
    (1) The recorded acceleration-time curve for this test is unimodal 
at or above the 50g level, and lies at or above that level for 
intervals:
    (i) In the case of the head assembly specified in paragraph (a)(1) 
of this section, not less than 1.3 milliseconds and not more than 2.0 
milliseconds;
    (ii) In the case of the head assembly specified in paragraph (a)(2) 
of this section, not less than 2.0 milliseconds and not more than 3.0 
milliseconds.
    (2) The lateral acceleration vector does not exceed 7g.
    (c) Test procedure. (1) Seat the dummy on a seating surface having a 
back support as specified in Sec. 572.21(h) and orient the dummy in 
accordance with Sec. 572.21(h) and adjust the joints of the limbs at 
any setting between 1g and 2g, which just supports the limbs' weight 
when the limbs are extended horizontally forward.

[[Page 844]]

    (2) Adjust the test probe so that its longitudinal centerline is at 
the forehead at the point of orthogonal intersection of the head 
midsagittal plane and the transverse plane which is perpendicular to the 
``Z'' axis of the head (longitudinal centerline of the skull anchor) and 
is located 0.6 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 inches above the centers of the 
head center of gravity reference pins and coincides within 2 degrees 
with the line made by the intersection of horizontal and midsagittal 
planes passing through this point.
    (3) Adjust the dummy so that the surface area on the forehead 
immediately adjacent to the projected longitudinal centerline of the 
test probe is vertical.
    (4) Impact the head with the test probe so that at the moment of 
impact the probe's longitudinal centerline falls within 2 degrees of a 
horizontal line in the dummy's midsagittal plane.
    (5) Guide the probe during impact so that it moves with no 
significant lateral, vertical, or rotational movement.
    (6) Allow a time period of at least 20 minutes between successive 
tests of the head.

[44 FR 76530, Dec. 27, 1979; 45 FR 43353, June 26, 1980, as amended at 
45 FR 82267, Dec. 15, 1980; 55 FR 30468, July 26, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 572.17  Neck.

    (a)(1) The neck for use with the head assembly described in Sec. 
572.16(a)(1) consists of the assembly designated as SA 103C 020 on 
drawing No. SA 103C 001, conforms to each item specified on drawing No. 
SA 103C 002(B), sheet 9.
    (2) The neck for use with the head assembly described in Sec. 
572.16(a)(2) consists of the assembly designated as SA 103C 020 on 
drawing No. SA 103C 001, and conforms to each item specified on drawing 
No. SA 103C 002, sheet 9.
    (b) When the head-neck assembly is tested in accordance with 
paragraph (c) of this section, the head shall rotate in reference to the 
pendulum's longitudinal centerline a total of 84 degrees <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 8 degrees about its center of gravity, rotating to the 
extent specified in the following table at each indicated point in time, 
measured from impact, with the chordal displacement measured at its 
center of gravity. The chordal displacement at time T is defined as the 
straight line distance between (1) the position relative to the pendulum 
arm of the head center of gravity at time zero, and (2) the position 
relative to the pendulum arm of the head center of gravity at time T as 
illustrated by figure 3. The peak resultant acceleration recorded at the 
location of the accelerometers mounted in the headform in accordance 
with Sec. 572.21(b) shall not exceed 30g. The pendulum shall not 
reverse direction until the head's center of gravity returns to the 
original zero time position relative to the pendulum arm.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                            Chordal displacement
                       Rotation (degrees)                         Time (ms) <plus-minus<ls-    (inches <plus-
                                                                       thn-eq>(2+.08T)      minus<ls-thn-eq>0.8)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0...............................................................                  0                       0
30..............................................................                 21                     2.2
60..............................................................                 36                     4.3
Maximum.........................................................                 62                     5.8
60..............................................................                 91                     4.3
30..............................................................                108                     2.2
0...............................................................                123                       0
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Test procedure. (1) Mount the head and neck on a rigid pendulum 
as specified in Figure 4, so that the head's midsagittal plane is 
vertical and coincides with the plane of motion of the pendulum's 
longitudinal centerline. Mount the neck directly to the pendulum as 
shown in Figure 15.
    (2) Release the pendulum and allow it to fall freely from a height 
such that the velocity at impact is 17.00 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.0 feet 
per second (fps), measured at the center of the accelerometer specified 
in figure 4.
    (3) Decelerate the pendulum to a stop with an acceleration-time 
pulse described as follows:
    (i) Establish 5g and 20g levels on the a-t curve.
    (ii) Establish t<INF>1</INF> at the point where the a-t curve first 
crosses the 5g level, t<INF>2</INF> at the point where the rising a-t 
curve first crosses the 20g level, t<INF>3</INF> at the point where the 
decaying a-t curve last crosses the 20g level, and t<INF>4</INF> at the 
point where the decaying a-t curve first crosses the 5g level.
    (iii) t<INF>2</INF>-t<INF>1</INF>, shall be not more than 4 
milliseconds.
    (iv) t<INF>3</INF>-t<INF>2</INF>, shall be not less than 18 and not 
more than 21 milliseconds.
    (v) t<INF>4</INF>-t<INF>3</INF>, shall be not more than 5 
milliseconds.

[[Page 845]]

    (vi) The average deceleration between t<INF>2</INF> and 
t<INF>3</INF> shall be not less than 20g and not more then 34g.
    (4) Allow the neck to flex without contact of the head or neck with 
any object other than the pendulum arm.
    (5) Allow a time period of at least 1 hour between successive tests 
of the head and neck.

[44 FR 76530, Dec. 27, 1979; 45 FR 43353, June 26, 1980, as amended at 
55 FR 30468, July 26, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 572.18  Thorax.

    (a) The thorax consists of the part of the torso shown in assembly 
drawing SA 103C 001 by number SA 103C 030 and conforms to each of the 
applicable drawings listed under this number on drawing SA 103C 002, 
sheets 10 and 11.
    (b) When impacted by a test probe conforming to Sec. 572.21(a) at 
13 fps in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section, the peak 
resultant accelerations at the location of the accelerometers mounted in 
the chest cavity in accordance with Sec. 572.21(c) shall be not less 
than 50g and not more than 70g. The acceleration-time curve for the test 
shall be unimodal at or above the 30g level and shall lie at or above 
the 30g level for an interval not less than 2.5 milliseconds and not 
more than 4.0 milliseconds. The lateral acceleration shall not exceed 
5g.
    (c) Test procedure. (1) With the dummy seated without back support 
on a surface as specified in Sec. 572.21(h) and oriented as specified 
in Sec. 572.21(h), adjust the dummy arms and legs until they are 
extended horizontally forward parallel to the midsagittal plane. The 
joints of the limbs are adjusted at any setting between 1g and 2g, which 
just supports the limbs' weight when the limbs are extended horizontally 
forward.
    (2) Establish the impact point at the chest midsagittal plane so 
that it is 1.5 inches below the longitudinal centerline of the bolt that 
attaches the top of the ribcage sternum to the thoracic spine box.
    (3) Adjust the dummy so that the tangent plane at the surface on the 
thorax immediately adjacent to the designated impact point is vertical 
and parallel to the face of the test probe.
    (4) Place the longitudinal centerline of the test probe to coincide 
with the designated impact point and align the test probe so that at 
impact its longitudinal centerline coincides within 2 degrees with the 
line formed by intersection of the horizontal and midsagittal planes 
passing through the designated impact point.
    (5) Impact the thorax with the test probe so that at the moment of 
impact the probe's longitudinal centerline falls within 2 degrees of a 
horizontal line in the dummy midsagittal plane.
    (6) Guide the probe during impact so that it moves with no 
significant lateral, vertical or rotational movement.
    (7) Allow a time period of at least 20 minutes between successive 
tests of the chest.


<R05>
Sec. 572.19  Lumbar spine, abdomen and pelvis.

    (a) The lumbar spine, abdomen, and pelvis consist of the part of the 
torso assembly shown by number SA 103C 030 on drawing SA 103C 001 and 
conform to each of the applicable drawings listed under this number on 
drawing SA 103C 002, sheets 10 and 11.
    (b) When subjected to continuously applied force in accordance with 
paragraph (c) of this section, the lumbar spine assembly shall flex by 
an amount that permits the rigid thoracic spine to rotate from its 
initial position in accordance with Figure 18 of this subpart by 40 
degrees at a force level of not less than 34 pounds and not more than 47 
pounds, and straighten upon removal of the force to within 5 degrees of 
its initial position.
    (c) Test procedure. (1) The dummy with lower legs removed is 
positioned in an upright seated position on a seat as indicated in 
Figure 18, ensuring that all dummy component surfaces are clean, dry and 
untreated unless otherwise specified.
    (2) Attach the pelvis to the seating surface by a bolt C/328, 
modified as shown in Figure 18, and the upper legs at the knee axial 
rotation joints by the attachments shown in Figure 18. Tighten the 
mountings so that the pelvis-lumbar joining surface is horizontal and 
adjust the femur ball-flange screws at each hip socket joint to 50 inch 
pounds torque. Remove the head and

[[Page 846]]

the neck and install a cylindrical aluminum adapter 2.0 inches in 
diameter and 2.80 inches long in place of the neck.
    (3) Flex the thorax forward 50 degrees and then rearward as 
necessary to return to its initial position in accordance with Figure 18 
unsupported by external means.
    (4) Apply a forward pull force in the midsagittal plane at the top 
of the neck adapter, so that at 40 degrees of the lumbar spine flexion 
the applied force is perpendicular to the thoracic spine box. Apply the 
force at any torso deflection rate between 0.5 and 1.5 degrees per 
second up to 40 degrees of flexion but no further; continue to apply for 
10 seconds the force necessary to maintain 40 degrees of flexion, and 
record the highest applied force at that time. Release all force as 
rapidly as possible and measure the return angle 3 minutes after the 
release.


<R05>
Sec. 572.20  Limbs.

    The limbs consist of the assemblies shown on drawing SA 103C 001 as 
Nos. SA 103C 041, SA 103C 042, SA 103C 051, SA 103C 052, SA 103C 061, SA 
103C 062, SA 103C 071, SA 103C 072, SA 103C 081, SA 103C 082, and 
conform to each of the applicable drawings listed under their respective 
numbers of the drawing SA 103C 002, sheets 12 through 21.


<R05>
Sec. 572.21  Test conditions and instrumentation.

    (a)(1) The test probe used for head and thoracic impact tests is a 
cylinder 3 inches in diameter, 13.8 inches long, and weighing 10 lbs., 6 
ozs. Its impacting end has a flat right face that is rigid and that has 
an edge radius of 0.5 inches.
    (2) The head and thorax assembly may be instrumented with a Type A 
or Type C accelerometer.
    (i) Type A accelerometer is defined in drawing SA-572 S1.
    (ii) Type C accelerometer is defined in drawing SA-572 S2.
    (b) Head accelerometers. Install one of the triaxial accelerometers 
specified in Sec. 572.21(a)(2) on a mounting block located on the 
horizontal transverse bulkhead as shown in the drawings subreferenced 
under assembly SA 103C 010 so that the seismic mass centers of each 
sensing element are positioned as specified in this paragraph, relative 
to the head accelerometer reference point located at the intersection of 
a line connecting the longitudinal centerlines of the transfer pins in 
the side of the dummy head with the midsagittal plane of the dummy head.
    (1) The sensing elements of the Type C triaxial accelerometer are 
aligned as follows:
    (i) Align one sensitive axis parallel to the vertical bulkhead and 
coincident with the midsagittal plane, with the seismic mass center 
located 0.2 inches dorsal to, and 0.1 inches inferior to the head 
accelerometer reference point.
    (ii) Align the second sensitive axis with the horizontal plane, 
perpendicular to the midsagittal plane, with the seismic mass center 
located 0.1 inches inferior, 0.4 inches to the right of, and 0.9 inches 
dorsal to the head accelerometer reference point.
    (iii) Align the third sensitive axis so that it is parallel to the 
midsagittal and horizontal planes, with the seismic mass center located 
0.1 inches inferior to, 0.6 inches dorsal to, and 0.4 inches to the 
right of the head accelerometer reference point.
    (iv) All seismic mass centers are positioned with <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 inches of the specified locations.
    (2) The sensing elements of the Type A triaxial accelerometer are 
aligned as follows:
    (i) Align one sensitive axis parallel to the vertical bulkhead and 
coincident with midsagittal planes, with the seismic mass center located 
from 0.2 to 0.47 inches dorsal to, from 0.01 inches inferior to 0.21 
inches superior, and from 0.0 to 0.17 inches left of the head 
accelerometer reference point.
    (ii) Align the second sensitive axis with the horizontal plane, 
perpendicular to the midsagittal plane, with the seismic mass center 
located 0.1 to 0.13 inches inferior to, 0.17 to 0.4 inches to the right 
of, and 0.47 to 0.9 inches dorsal of the head accelerometer reference 
point.
    (iii) Align the third sensitive axis so that it is parallel to the 
midsagittal and horizontal planes, with the seismic mass center located 
0.1 to 0.13 inches inferior to, 0.6 to 0.81 inches dorsal to, and from 
0.17 inches left to 0.4 inches

[[Page 847]]

right of the head accelerometer reference point.
    (c) Thorax accelerometers. Install one of the triaxial 
accelerometers specified in Sec. 572.21(a)(2) on a mounting plate 
attached to the vertical transverse bulkhead shown in the drawing 
subreferenced under assembly No. SA 103C 030 in drawing SA 103C 001, so 
that the seismic mass centers of each sensing element are positioned as 
specified in this paragraph, relative to the thorax accelerometer 
reference point located in the midsagital plane 3 inches above the top 
surface of the lumbar spine, and 0.3 inches dorsal to the accelerometer 
mounting plate surface.
    (1) The sensing elements of the Type C triaxial accelerometer are 
aligned as follows:
    (i) Align one sensitive axis parallel to the vertical bulkhead and 
midsagittal planes, with the seismic mass center located 0.2 inches to 
the left of, 0.1 inches inferior to, and 0.2 inches ventral to the 
thorax accelerometer reference point.
    (ii) Align the second sensitive axis so that it is in the horizontal 
transverse plane, and perpendicular to the midsagittal plane, with the 
seismic mass center located 0.2 inches to the right of, 0.1 inches 
inferior to, and 0.2 inches ventral to the thorax accelerometer 
reference point.
    (iii) Align the third sensitive axis so that it is parallel to the 
midsagittal and horizontal planes, with the seismic mass center located 
0.2 inches superior to, 0.5 inches to the right of, and 0.1 inches 
ventral to the thorax accelerometer reference points.
    (iv) All seismic mass centers shall be positioned within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 inches of the specified locations.
    (2) The sensing elements of the Type A triaxial accelerometer are 
aligned as follows:
    (i) Align one sensitive axis parallel to the vertical bulkhead and 
midsagittal planes, with the seismic mass center located from 0.2 inches 
left to 0.28 inches right, from 0.5 to 0.15 inches inferior to, and from 
0.15 to 0.25 inches ventral of the thorax accelerometer reference point.
    (ii) Align the second sensitive axis so that it is in the horizontal 
transverse plane and perpendicular to the midsagital plane, with the 
seismic mass center located from 0.06 inches left to 0.2 inches right 
of, from 0.1 inches inferior to 0.24 inches superior, and 0.15 to 0.25 
inches ventral to the thorax accelerometer reference point.
    (iii) Align the third sensitive axis so that it is parallel to the 
midsagital and horizontal planes, with the seismic mass center located 
0.15 to 0.25 inches superior to, 0.28 to 0.5 inches to the right of, and 
from 0.1 inches ventral to 0.19 inches dorsal to the thorax 
accelerometer reference point.
    (d) The outputs of accelerometers installed in the dummy, and of 
test apparatus specified by this part, are recorded in individual data 
channels that conform to the requirements of SAE Recommended Practice 
J211a, December 1971, with channel classes as follows:
    (1) Head acceleration--Class 1000.
    (2) Pendulum acceleration--Class 60.
    (3) Thorax acceleration--Class 180.
    (e) The mountings for accelerometers have no resonance frequency 
less than cut-off 3 times the cut-off frequency of the applicable 
channel class.
    (f) Limb joints are set at the force between 1-2g, which just 
supports the limbs' weight when the limbs are extended horizontally 
forward. The force required to move a limb segment does not exceed 2g 
throughout the range of limb motion.
    (g) Performance tests are conducted at any temperature from 66 
[deg]F to 78 [deg]F and at any relative humidity from 10 percent to 70 
percent after exposure of the dummy to these conditions for a period of 
not less than 4 hours.
    (h) For the performance tests specified in Sec. Sec. 572.16, 
572.18, and 572.19, the dummy is positioned in accordance with Figures 
16, 17, and 18 as follows:
    (1) The dummy is placed on a flat, rigid, clean, dry, horizontal 
surface of teflon sheeting with a smoothness of 40 microinches and whose 
length and width dimensions are not less than 16 inches, so that the 
dummy's midsagittal plane is vertical and centered on the test surface. 
For head tests, the seat has a vertical back support whose top is 12.4 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 inches above the seating surface. The rear 
surfaces of the dummy's shoulders and buttocks are touching the back 
support as

[[Page 848]]

shown in Figure 16. For thorax and lumbar spine tests, the seating 
surface is without the back support as shown in Figures 17 and 18, 
respectively.
    (2) The shoulder yokes are adjusted so that they are at the midpoint 
of their anterior-posterior travel with their upper surfaces horizontal.
    (3) The dummy is adjusted for head impact and lumbar flexion tests 
so that the rear surfaces of the shoulders and buttocks are tangent to a 
transverse vertical plane.
    (4) The arms and legs are positioned so that their centerlines are 
in planes parallel to the midsagittal plane.
    (i) The dummy's dimensions are specified in drawings No. SA 103C 
002, sheets 22 through 26.
    (j) Performance tests of the same component, segment, assembly or 
fully assembled dummy are separated in time by a period of not less than 
20 minutes unless otherwise specified.
    (k) Surfaces of the dummy components are not painted except as 
specified in this part or in drawings subtended by this part.

[[Page 849]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.158


[[Page 850]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.159


[[Page 851]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.160


[[Page 852]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.161


[44 FR 76530, Dec. 27, 1979, as amended at 45 FR 82267, Dec. 15, 1980; 
55 FR 30468, July 26, 1990]


<R04>
                      Subpart D_6-Month-Old Infant


<R05>
Sec. 572.25  General description.

    (a) The infant dummy is specified in its entirety by means of 5 
drawings (No. SA 1001) and a construction manual, dated July 2, 1974, 
which describe in detail the materials and the procedures involved in 
the manufacturing of this dummy.
    (b) The drawings, specifications, and construction manual referred 
to in this regulation that are not set forth in full are hereby 
incorporated in this part by reference. These materials are thereby

[[Page 853]]

made part of this regulation. The Director of the Federal Register has 
approved the materials incorporated by reference. For materials subject 
to change, only the specific version approved by the Director of the 
Federal Register and specified in the regulation are incorporated. A 
notice of any change will be published in the Federal Register. As a 
convenience to the reader, the materials incorporated by reference are 
listed in the Finding Aid Table found at the end of this volume of the 
Code of Federal Regulations.
    (c) The materials incorporated by reference are available for 
examination in Docket 78-09, Room 5109, Docket Section, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC, 
20590. Copies may be obtained from Rowley-Scher Reprographics, Inc., 
1216 K Street NW., Washington, DC 20005 ((202) 628-6667). The materials 
are also on file in the reference library of the Office of the Federal 
Register, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC.
    (d) The structural properties of the dummy are such that the dummy 
conforms to this part in every respect both before and after being used 
in vehicle tests specified in Standard No. 213 of this chapter (Sec. 
571.213).

[50 FR 25424, June 19, 1985]


<R04>
                     Subpart E_Hybrid III Test Dummy

    Source: 51 FR 26701, July 25, 1986, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 572.30  Incorporated materials.

    (a) The drawings and specifications referred to in this regulation 
that are not set forth in full are hereby incorporated in this part by 
reference. The Director of the Federal Register has approved the 
materials incorporated by reference. For materials subject to change, 
only the specific version approved by the Director of the Federal 
Register and specified in the regulation are incorporated. A notice of 
any change will be published in the Federal Register. As a convenience 
to the reader, the materials incorporated by reference are listed in the 
Finding Aid Table found at the end of this volume of the Code of Federal 
Regulations.
    (b) The materials incorporated by reference are available for 
examination in the general reference section of docket 74-14, Docket 
Section, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Room 5109, 400 
Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. Copies may be obtained from 
Reprographic Technologies, 9000 Virginia Manor Road, Beltsville, MD 
20705, Telephone (301) 210-5600, Facsimile (301) 419-5069, Attn. Mr. Jay 
Wall. Drawings and specifications are also on file at the National 
Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For information on the 
availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: 
http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--federal--
regulations/ibr--locations.html.

[51 FR 26701, July 25, 1986, as amended at 61 FR 67955, Dec. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 572.31  General description.

    (a) The Hybrid III 50th percentile size dummy consists of components 
and assemblies specified in the Anthropomorphic Test Dummy drawing and 
specifications package which consists of the following six items:
    (1) The Anthropomorphic Test Dummy Parts List, dated June 26, 1998, 
and containing 16 pages, and a Parts List Index, dated June 26, 1998, 
containing 8 pages.
    (2) A listing of Hybrid III Dummy Transducers-reference document 
AGARD-AR-330, ``Anthropomorphic Dummies for Crash and Escape System 
Testing'', Chapter 6, Table 6-2, North Atlantic Treaty Organization, 
July, 1996.
    (3) A General Motors Drawing Package identified by GM Drawing No. 
78051-218, revision U, titled ``Hybrid III Anthropomorphic Test Dummy,'' 
dated August 30, 1998, the following component assemblies, and 
subordinate drawings:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Drawing No.                           Revision
------------------------------------------------------------------------
78051-61X head assembly-complete, (May 20, 1978)..............       (T)
78051-90 neck assembly-complete, dated May 20, 1978...........       (A)

[[Page 854]]

 
78051-89 upper torso assembly-complete, dated May 20, 1978....       (K)
78051-70 lower torso assembly-complete, dated June 30, 1998,         (F)
 except for drawing No. 78051-55, ``Instrumentation Assembly-
 Pelvic Accelerometer,'' dated August 2, 1979.................
86-5001-001 leg assembly-complete (LH), dated March 26, 1996..       (A)
86-5001-002 leg assembly-complete (RH), dated March 26, 1996..       (A)
78051-123 arm assembly-complete (LH), dated May 20, 1996......       (D)
78051-124 arm assembly-complete (RH), dated May 20, 1978......       (D)
78051-59 pelvic assembly-complete, dated June 30, 1998........       (G)
78051-60 pelvic structure-molded, dated June 30, 1998.........       (E)
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (4) Disassembly, Inspection, Assembly and Limbs Adjustment 
Procedures for the Hybrid III dummy, dated June 1998.
    (5) Sign Convention for signal outputs--reference document SAE J1733 
Information Report, titled ``Sign Convention for Vehicle Crash 
Testing'', dated 1994-12.
    (6) Exterior dimensions of the Hybrid III dummy, dated July 15, 
1986.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) Adjacent segments are joined in a manner such that throughout 
the range of motion and also under crash-impact conditions, there is no 
contact between metallic elements except for contacts that exist under 
static conditions.
    (d) The weights, inertial properties and centers of gravity location 
of component assemblies shall conform to those listed in drawing 78051-
338, revision S, titled ``Segment Weights, Inertial Properties, Center 
of Gravity Location--Hybrid III,'' dated May 20, 1978 of drawing No. 
78051-218.
    (e) The structural properties of the dummy are such that the dummy 
conforms to this part in every respect both before and after being used 
in vehicle test specified in Standard No. 208 of this chapter (Sec. 
571.208).

[51 FR 26701, July 25, 1986, as amended at 53 FR 8764, Mar. 17, 1988; 57 
FR 47010, Oct. 14, 1992; 61 FR 67955, Dec. 26, 1996; 62 FR 27514, May 
20, 1997; 63 FR 5747, Feb. 4, 1998; 63 FR 53851, Oct. 7, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 572.32  Head.

    (a) The head consists of the assembly shown in drawing 78051-61X, 
revision C, and conforms to each of the drawings subtended therein.
    (b) When the head (Drawing number 78051-61X, titled ``head 
assembly--complete,'' dated March 28, 1997 (Revision C) with six axis 
neck transducer structural replacement (Drawing number 78051-383X, 
Revision P, titled ``Neck Transducer Structural Replacement,'' dated 
November 1, 1995) is dropped from a height of 14.8 inches in accordance 
with paragraph (c) of this section, the peak resultant accelerations at 
the location of the accelerometers mounted in the head in accordance 
with Sec. 572.36(c) shall not be less than 225g, and not more than 
275g. The acceleration/time curve for the test shall be unimodal to the 
extent that oscillations occurring after the main acceleration pulse are 
less than ten percent (zero to peak) of the main pulse. The lateral 
acceleration vector shall not exceed 15g (zero to peak).
    (c) Test procedure. (1) Soak the head assembly in a test environment 
at any temperature between 66 degrees F to 78 degrees F and at a 
relative humidity from 10% to 70% for a period of at least four hours 
prior to its application in a test.
    (2) Clean the head's skin surface and the surface of the impact 
plate with 1,1,1 Trichlorethane or equivalent.
    (3) Suspend the head, as shown in Figure 19, so that the lowest 
point on the forehead is 0.5 inches below the lowest point on the 
dummy's nose when the midsagittal plane is vertical.

[[Page 855]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.162

    (4) Drop the head from the specified height by means that ensure 
instant release into a rigidly supported flat horizontal steel plate, 
which is 2 inches thick and 2 feet square. The plate shall have a clean, 
dry surface and any microfinish of not less than 8 microinches (rms) and 
not more than 80 microinches (rms).
    (5) Allow at least 3 hours between successive tests on the same 
head.

[51 FR 26701, July 25, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 27514, May 20, 1997]

[[Page 856]]


<R05>
Sec. 572.33  Neck.

    (a) The neck consists of the assembly shown in drawing 78051-90, 
revision A and conforms to each of the drawings subtended therein.
    (b) When the head and neck assembly (consisting of the parts 78051-
61X, revision C; -90, revision A; -84; -94; -98; -104, revision F; -303, 
revision E; -305; -306; -307, revision X) which has a six axis neck 
transducer (Drawing number C-1709, Revision D, titled ``Neck 
transducer,'' dated February 1, 1993.) installed in conformance with 
Sec. 572.36(d), is tested in accordance with paragraph (c) of this 
section, it shall have the following characteristics:
    (1) Flexion. (i) Plane D, referenced in Figure 20, shall rotate 
between 64 degrees and 78 degrees, which shall occur between 57 
milliseconds (ms) and 64 ms from time zero. In first rebound, the 
rotation of Plane D shall cross 0 degrees between 113 ms and 128 ms.
    (ii) The moment measured by the six axis neck transducer (drawing C-
1709, revision D) about the occipital condyles, referenced in Figure 20, 
shall be calculated by the following formula: Moment (lbs-ft) = My-0.058 
x Fx, where My is the moment measured in lbs-ft by the ``Y'' axis moment 
sensor of the six axis neck transducer and Fx is the force measured in 
lbs by the ``X'' axis force sensor (Channel Class 600) of the six axis 
neck transducer. The moment shall have a maximum value between 65 lbs-ft 
and 80 lbs-ft occurring between 47ms and 58 ms, and the positive moment 
shall decay for the first time to 0 lb-ft between 97 ms and 107 ms.
    (2) Extension. (i) Plane D, referenced in Figure 21, shall rotate 
between 81 degrees and 106 degrees, which shall occur between 72 ms and 
82 ms from time zero. In first rebound, rotation of Plane D shall cross 
0 degrees between 147 ms and 174 ms.
    (ii) The moment measured by the six axis neck transducer (drawing C-
1709, revision D) about the occipital condyles, referenced in Figure 21, 
shall be calculated by the following formula: Moment (lbs-ft) = My-0.058 
x Fx, where My is the moment measured in lbs-ft by the ``Y'' axis moment 
sensor of the six axis neck transducer and Fx is the force measured in 
lbs by the ``X'' axis force sensor (Channel Class 600) of the six axis 
neck transducer. The moment shall have a maximum value between--39 lbs-
ft and -59 lbs-ft, occurring between 65 ms and 79 ms, and the negative 
moment shall decay for the first time to 0 lb-ft between 120 ms and 148 
ms.

[[Page 857]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY97.000


[[Page 858]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY97.001

    (c) Test procedure. (1) Soak the test material in a test environment 
at any temperature between 69 degrees F to 72 degrees F and at a 
relative humidity from 10% to 70% for a period of at least four hours 
prior to its application in a test.
    (2) Torque the jamnut (78051-64) on the neck cable (78051-301, 
revision E) to 1.0 lbs-ft <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>.2 lbs-ft.
    (3) Mount the head-neck assembly, defined in paragraph (b) of this 
section, on a rigid pendulum as shown in Figure 22 so that the head's 
midsagittal plane is vertical and coincides with the plane of motion of 
the pendulum's longitudinal axis.

[[Page 859]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.165

    (4) Release the pendulum and allow it to fall freely from a height 
such that the tangential velocity at the pendulum accelerometer 
centerline at the instance of contact with the honeycomb is 23.0 ft/sec 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 ft/sec. for flexion testing and 19.9 ft/sec. 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 ft/sec. for extension testing. The pendulum 
deceleration vs. time pulse for flexion testing shall conform to the 
characteristics shown in Table A and the decaying deceleration-time 
curve shall first cross 5<INF>g</INF> between 34 ms and 42 ms. The 
pendulum deceleration vs. time pulse for extension testing shall conform 
to the characteristics shown in Table B and the decaying deceleration-
time curve shall cross 5g between 38 ms and 46 ms.

[[Page 860]]



          Table A--Flexion Pendulum Deceleration vs. Time Pulse
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Flexion
                         Time (ms)                          deceleration
                                                              level (g)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10........................................................   22.50-27.50
20........................................................   17.60-22.60
30........................................................   12.50-18.50
Any other time above 30 ms................................   29 maximum.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


         Table B--Extension Pendulum Deceleration vs. Time Pulse
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Extension
                         Time (ms)                          deceleration
                                                              level (g)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10........................................................   17.20-21.20
20........................................................   14.00-19.00
30........................................................   11.00-16.00
Any other time above 30 ms................................   22 maximum.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (5) Allow the neck to flex without impact of the head or neck with 
any object during the test.

[51 FR 26701, July 25, 1986, as amended at 53 FR 8765, Mar. 17, 1988; 62 
FR 27514, May 20, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 572.34  Thorax.

    (a) The thorax consists of the upper torso assembly in drawing 
78051-89, revision K and shall conform to each of the drawings subtended 
therein.
    (b) When impacted by a test probe conforming to Sec. 572.36(a) at 
22 fps <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.40 fps in accordance with paragraph (c) 
of this section, the thorax of a complete dummy assembly (78051-218, 
revision U, without shoes, shall resist with a force of 1242.5 pounds 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>82.5 pounds measured by the test probe and shall 
have a sternum displacement measured relative to spine of 2.68 inches 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.18 inches. The internal hysteresis in each 
impact shall be more than 69% but less than 85%. The force measured is 
the product of pendulum mass and deceleration.
    (c) Test procedure. (1) Soak the test dummy in an environment with a 
relative humidity from 10% to 70% until the temperature of the ribs of 
the test dummy have stabilized at a temperature between 69 degrees F and 
72 degrees F.
    (2) Seat the dummy without back and arm supports on a surface as 
shown in Figure 23, and set the angle of the pelvic bone at 13 degrees 
plus or minus 2 degrees, using the procedure described in S11.4.3.2 of 
Standard No. 208 (Sec. 571.208 of this chapter).

[[Page 861]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.166

    (3) Place the longitudinal centerline of the test probe so that it 
is .5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>.04 in. below the horizontal centerline of 
the No. 3 Rib (reference drawing number 79051-64, revision A-M) as shown 
in Figure 23.

[[Page 862]]

    (4) Align the test probe specified in Sec. 572.36(a) so that at 
impact its longitudinal centerline coincides within .5 degree of a 
horizontal line in the dummy's midsagittal plane.
    (5) Impact the thorax with the test probe so that the longitudinal 
centerline of the test probe falls within 2 degrees of a horizontal line 
in the dummy midsagittal plane at the moment of impact.
    (6) Guide the probe during impact so that it moves with no 
significant lateral, vertical, or rotational movement.
    (7) Measure the horizontal deflection of the sternum relative to the 
thoracic spine along the line established by the longitudinal centerline 
of the probe at the moment of impact, using a potentiometer (ref. 
drawing 78051-317, revision A) mounted inside the sternum as shown in 
drawing 78051-89, revision I.
    (8) Measure hysteresis by determining the ratio of the area between 
the loading and unloading portions of the force deflection curve to the 
area under the loading portion of the curve.

[51 FR 26701, July 25, 1986, as amended at 53 FR 8765, Mar. 17, 1988; 62 
FR 27518, May 20, 1997; 63 FR 53851, Oct. 7, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 572.35  Limbs.

    (a) The limbs consist of the following assemblies: leg assemblies 
86-5001-001, revision A and -002, revision A, and arm assemblies 78051-
123, revision D and -124, revision D, and shall conform to the drawings 
subtended therein.
    (b) Femur impact response. (1) When each knee of the leg assemblies 
is impacted in accordance with paragraph (b)(2) of this section, at 6.9 
ft/sec <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.10 ft/sec by the pendulum defined in 
Sec. 572.36(b), the peak knee impact force, which is a product of 
pendulum mass and acceleration, shall have a minimum value of not less 
than 1060 pounds and a maximum value of not more than 1300 pounds.
    (2) Test procedure. (i) The test material consists of leg assemblies 
(86-5001-001, revision A) left and (-002, revision A) right with upper 
leg assemblies (78051-46) left and (78051-47) right removed. The load 
cell simulator (78051-319, revision A) is used to secure the knee cap 
assemblies (79051-16, revision B) as shown in Figure 24.
    (ii) Soak the test material in a test environment at any temperature 
between 66 degrees F to 78 degrees F and at a relative humidity from 10% 
to 70% for a period of at least four hours prior to its application in a 
test.
    (iii) Mount the test material with the leg assembly secured through 
the load cell simulator to a rigid surface as shown in Figure 24. No 
contact is permitted between the foot and any other exterior surfaces.
    (iv) Place the longitudinal centerline of the test probe so that at 
contact with the knee it is collinear within 2 degrees with the 
longitudinal centerline of the femur load cell simulator.
    (v) Guide the pendulum so that there is no significant lateral, 
vertical or rotational movement at time zero.
    (vi) Impact the knee with the test probe so that the longitudinal 
centerline of the test probe at the instant of impact falls within .5 
degrees of a horizontal line parallel to the femur load cell simulator 
at time zero.
    (vii) Time zero is defined as the time of contact between the test 
probe and the knee.
    (c) Hip joint-femur flexion. (1) When each femur is rotated in the 
flexion direction in accordance with paragraph (c)(2) of this section, 
the femur torque at 30 deg. rotation from its initial horizontal 
orientation will not be more than 70 ft-lbf, and at 150 ft-lbf of torque 
will not be less than 40 deg. or more than 50 deg.
    (2) Test procedure. (i) The test material consists of the assembled 
dummy, part No. 78051-218 (revision S) except that (1) leg assemblies 
(86-5001-001 and 002) are separated from the dummy by removing the 3/8-
16 Socket Head Cap Screw (SHCS) (78051-99) but retaining the structural 
assembly of the upper legs (78051-43 and -44), (2) the abdominal insert 
(78051-52) is removed and (3) the instrument cover plate (78051-13) in 
the pelvic bone is replaced by a rigid pelvic bone stabilizer insert 
(Figure 25a) and firmly secured.
    (ii) Seat the dummy on a rigid seat fixture (Figure 25) and firmly 
secure it to the seat back by bolting the stabilizer insert and the 
rigid support device (Figure 25b) to the seat back of the test fixture 
(Figures 26 and 27) while

[[Page 863]]

maintaining the pelvis (78051-58) ``B'' plane horizontal.
    (iii) Insert a lever arm into the femur shaft opening of the upper 
leg structure assembly (78051-43/44) and firmly secure it using the 3/8-
16 socket head cap screws.
    (iv) Lift the lever arm parallel to the midsagittal plane at a 
rotation rate of 5 to 10 deg. per second while maintaining the 1/2 in. 
shoulder bolt longitudinal centerline horizontal throughout the range of 
motion until the 150 ft-lbf torque level is reached. Record the torque 
and angle of rotation of the femur.
    (v) Operating environment and temperature are the same as specified 
in paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.167


[[Page 864]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26DE96.004


[[Page 865]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26DE96.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26DE96.006


[[Page 866]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26DE96.007


[[Page 867]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26DE96.008


[51 FR 26701, July 25, 1986, as amended at 53 FR 8765, Mar. 17, 1988; 61 
FR 67955, Dec. 26, 1997; 63 FR 5748, Feb. 4, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 572.36  Test conditions and instrumentation.

    (a) The test probe used for thoracic impact tests is a 6 inch 
diameter cylinder that weighs 51.5 pounds including instrumentation. Its 
impacting end has a flat right angle face that is rigid and has an edge 
radius of 0.5 inches. The test probe has an accelerometer mounted on the 
end opposite from impact with its sensitive axis colinear to the 
longitudinal centerline of the cylinder.
    (b) Test probe used for the knee impact tests is a 3 inch diameter 
cylinder that weights 11 pounds including instrumentation. Its impacting 
end has a flat right angle face that is rigid and has an edge radius of 
0.02 inches. The test probe has an accelerometer mounted on the end 
opposite from impact with its sensitive axis colinear to

[[Page 868]]

the longitudinal centerline of the cylinder.
    (c) Head accelerometers shall have dimensions and response 
characteristics specified in drawing 78051-136, revision A, or its 
equivalent, and the location of their seismic mass as mounted in the 
skull are shown in drawing C-1709, revision D.
    (d) The six axis neck transducer shall have the dimensions, response 
characteristics, and sensitive axis locations specified in drawing C-
1709, revision D and be mounted for testing as shown in Figures 20 and 
21 of Sec. 572.33, and in the assembly drawing 78051-218, revision T.
    (e) The chest accelerometers shall have the dimensions, response 
characteristics, and sensitive mass locations specified in drawing 
78051-136, revision A or its equivalent and be mounted as shown with 
adaptor assembly 78051-116, revision D for assembly into 78051-218, 
revision T.
    (f) The chest deflection transducer shall have the dimensions and 
response characteristics specified in drawing 78051-342, revision A or 
its equivalent and be mounted in the chest deflection transducer 
assembly 78051-317, revision A for assembly into 78051-218, revision T.
    (g) The thorax and knee impactor accelerometers shall have the 
dimensions and characteristics of Endevco Model 7231c or equivalent. 
Each accelerometer shall be mounted with its sensitive axis colinear 
with the pendulum's longitudinal centerline.
    (h) The femur load cell shall have the dimensions, response 
characteristics, and sensitive axis locations specified in drawing 
78051-265 or its equivalent and be mounted in assemblies 78051-46 and -
47 for assembly into 78051-218, revision T.
    (i) The outputs of acceleration and force-sensing devices installed 
in the dummy and in the test apparatus specified by this part are 
recorded in individual data channels that conform to requirements of 
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Recommended Practice J211 Mar95, 
Instrumentation for Impact Tests, Parts 1 and 2. SAE J211 Mar95 sets 
forth the following channel classes:
    (1) Head acceleration--Class 1000
    (2) Neck forces--Class 1000
    (3) Neck moments--Class 600
    (4) Neck pendulum acceleration--Class 60
    (5) Thorax and thorax pendulum acceleration--Class 180
    (6) Thorax deflection--Class 180
    (7) Knee pendulum acceleration--Class 600
    (8) Femur force--Class 600
    (j) Coordinate signs for instrumentation polarity conform to the 
sign convention shown in the document incorporated by Sec. 
572.31(a)(5).
    (k) The mountings for sensing devices shall have no resonance 
frequency within range of 3 times the frequency range of the applicable 
channel class.
    (l) Limb joints are set at lg, barely restraining the weight of the 
limb when it is extended horizontally. The force required to move a limb 
segment shall not exceed 2g throughout the range of limb motion.
    (m) Performance tests of the same component, segment, assembly, or 
fully assembled dummy are separated in time by period of not less than 
30 minutes unless otherwise noted.
    (n) Surfaces of dummy components are not painted except as specified 
in this part or in drawings subtended by this part.

[51 FR 26701, July 25, 1986, as amended at 53 FR 8765, Mar. 17, 1988; 62 
FR 27518, May 20, 1997; 63 FR 45965, Aug. 28, 1998]


<R04>
            Subpart F_Side Impact Dummy 50th Percentile Male

    Source: 55 FR 45766, Oct. 30, 1990, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 572.40  Incorporated materials.

    (a) The drawings, specifications, manual, and computer program 
referred to in this regulation that are not set forth in full are hereby 
incorporated in this part by reference. These materials are thereby made 
part of this regulation. The Director of the Federal Register has 
approved the materials incorporated by reference. For materials subject 
to change, only the specific version approved by the Director of the 
Federal Register and specified in the regulation are incorporated. A 
notice of any change will be published in the Federal Register. As a 
convenience

[[Page 869]]

to the reader, the materials incorporated by reference are listed in the 
Finding Aids Table found at the end of this volume of the Code of 
Federal Regulations.
    (b) The materials incorporated in this part by reference are 
available for examination in the general reference section of Docket 79-
04, Docket Section, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, room 
5109, 400 Seventh St., S.W., Washington, D.C., 20590, telephone (202) 
366-4949. Copies may be obtained from Reprographic Technologies, 9000 
Virginia Manor Rd., Suite 210, Beltsville, MD, 20705, Telephone (301) 
419-5070, Fax (301) 419-5069.

[55 FR 45766, Oct. 30, 1990, as amended at 63 FR 16140, Apr. 2, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 572.41  General description.

    (a) The dummy consists of component parts and component assemblies 
(SA-SID-M001, revision C, dated September 12, 1996, and SA-SID-M001A, 
revision B, dated September 12, 1996), which are described in 
approximately 250 drawings and specifications that are set forth in 
Sec. 572.5(a) of this chapter with the following changes and additions 
which are described in approximately 85 drawings and specifications 
(incorporated by reference; see Sec. 572.40):
    (1) The head assembly consists of the assembly specified in subpart 
B (Sec. 572.6(a)) and conforms to each of the drawings subtended under 
drawing SA 150 M010 and drawings specified in SA-SID-M010, dated August 
13, 1987.
    (2) The neck assembly consists of the assembly specified in subpart 
B (Sec. 572.7(a)) and conforms to each of the drawings subtended under 
drawing SA 150 M020 and drawings shown in SA-SID-M010, dated August 13, 
1987.
    (3) The thorax assembly consists of the assembly shown as number 
SID-053 and conforms to each applicable drawing subtended by number SA-
SID-M030 revision A, dated May 18, 1994.
    (4) The lumbar spine consists of the assembly specified in subpart B 
(Sec. 572.9(a)) and conforms to drawing SA 150 M050 and drawings 
subtended by SA-SID-M050 revision B, dated September 12, 1996, including 
the addition of Lumbar Spacers-Lower SID-SM-001 and Lumbar Spacers-Upper 
SID-SM-002 (both dated May 12, 1994), and Washer 78051-243.
    (5) The abdomen and pelvis consist of the assembly specified in 
subpart B of this part (Sec. 572.9) and conform to the drawings 
subtended by SA 150 M060, the drawings subtended by SA-SID-M060 revision 
A, dated May 18, 1994, and the drawings subtended by SA-SID-087 sheet 1 
revision H, dated May 18, 1994, and SA-SID-087 sheet 2 revision H.
    (6) The lower limbs consist of the assemblies specified in subpart B 
(Sec. 572.10) shown as SA 150 M080 and SA 150 M081 in Figure 1 and SA-
SID-M080 and SA-SID-M081, both dated August 13, 1987, and conform to the 
drawings subtended by those numbers.
    (b) The structural properties of the dummy are such that the dummy 
conforms to the requirements of this subpart in every respect both 
before and after being used in vehicle tests specified in Standard No 
214 Sec. 571.214 of this chapter.
    (c) Disassembly, inspection, and assembly procedures; external 
dimensions and weight; and a dummy drawing list are set forth in the 
Side Impact Dummy (SID) User's Manual, dated May 1994 except for pages 
7, 20 and 23, and Appendix A (consisting of replacement pages 7, 20 and 
23) dated January 20, 1998 (incorporated by reference; see Sec. 
572.40).

[55 FR 45766, Oct. 30, 1990, as amended at 59 FR 52091, Oct. 14, 1994; 
63 FR 16140, Apr. 2, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 572.42  Thorax.

    (a) When the thorax of a completely assembled dummy (SA-SID-M001A 
revision A, dated May 18, 1994, incorporated by reference; see Sec. 
572.40), appropriately assembled for right or left side impact, is 
impacted by a test probe conforming to Sec. 572.44(a) at 14 fps in 
accordance with paragraph (b) of this section, the peak accelerations at 
the location of the accelerometers mounted on the thorax in accordance 
with Sec. 572.44(b) shall be:
    (1) For the accelerometer at the top of the Rib Bar on the struck 
side (LUR or RUR) not less than 37 g's and not more than 46 g's.
    (2) For the accelerometer at the bottom of the Rib Bar on the struck 
side

[[Page 870]]

(LLR or RLR) not less than 37 g's and not more than 46 g's.
    (3) For the lower thoracic spine (T12) not less than 15 g's and not 
more than 22 g's.
    (b) Test Procedure. (1) Adjust the dummy legs as specified in Sec. 
572.44(f). Seat the dummy on a seating surface as specified in Sec. 
572.44(h) with the limbs extended horizontally forward.
    (2) Place the longitudinal centerline of the test probe at the 
lateral side of the chest at the intersection of the centerlines of the 
third rib and the Rib Bar on the desired side of impact. This is the 
left side if the dummy is to be used on the driver's side of the vehicle 
and the right side if the dummy is to be used on the passenger side of 
the vehicle. The probe's centerline is perpendicular to thorax's 
midsagittal plane.
    (3) Align the test probe so that its longitudinal centerline 
coincides with the line formed by the intersection of the transverse and 
frontal planes perpendicular to the chest's midsagittal plane passing 
through the designated impact point.
    (4) Position the dummy as specified in Sec. 572.44(h), so that the 
thorax's midsagittal plane and tangential plane to the Hinge Mounting 
Block (Drawing SID-034) are vertical.
    (5) Impact the thorax with the test probe so that at the moment of 
impact at the designated impact point, the probe's longitudinal 
centerline falls within 2 degrees of a horizontal line perpendicular to 
the dummy's midsagittal plane and passing through the designated impact 
point.
    (6) Guide the probe during impact so that it moves with no 
significant lateral, vertical or rotational movement.
    (7) Allow a time period of at least 20 minutes between successive 
tests of the chest.

[59 FR 52091, Oct. 14, 1994, as amended at 59 FR 52091, Oct. 14, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 572.43  Lumbar spine and pelvis.

    (a) When the pelvis of a fully assembled dummy (SA-SID-M001A 
revision B, dated September 12, 1996, (incorporated by reference; see 
Sec. 572.40) is impacted laterally by a test probe conforming to Sec. 
572.44(a) at 14 fps in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section, 
the peak acceleration at the location of the accelerometer mounted in 
the pelvis cavity in accordance with Sec. 572.44(c) shall be not less 
than 40g and not more than 60g. The acceleration-time curve for the test 
shall be unimodal and shall lie at or above the +20g level for an 
interval not less than 3 milliseconds and not more than 7 milliseconds.
    (b) Test Procedure. (1) Adjust the dummy legs as specified in Sec. 
572.44(f). Seat the dummy on a seating surface as specified in Sec. 
572.44(h) with the limbs extended horizontally forward.
    (2) Place the longitudinal centerline of the test probe at the 
lateral side of the pelvis at a point 3.9 inches vertical from the 
seating surface and 4.8 inches ventral to a transverse vertical plane 
which is tangent to the back of the dummy's buttocks.
    (3) Align the test probe so that at impact its longitudinal 
centerline coincides with the line formed by intersection of the 
horizontal and vertical planes perpendicular to the midsagittal plane 
passing through the designated impact point.
    (4) Adjust the dummy so that its midsagittal plane is vertical and 
the rear surfaces of the thorax and buttocks are tangent to a transverse 
vertical plane.
    (5) Impact the pelvis with the test probe so that at the moment of 
impact the probe's longitudinal centerline falls within 2 degrees of the 
line specified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
    (6) Guide the test probe during impact so that it moves with no 
significant lateral, vertical or rotational movement.
    (7) Allow a time period of at least 2 hours between successive tests 
of the pelvis.

[55 FR 45766, Oct. 30, 1990, as amended at 59 FR 52091, Oct. 14, 1994; 
63 FR 16140, Apr. 2, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 572.44  Instrumentation and test conditions.

    (a) The test probe used for lateral thoracic and pelvis impact tests 
is a 6 inch diameter cylinder that weighs 51.5 pounds including 
instrumentation. Its impacting end has a flat right angle face that is 
rigid and has an edge radius of 0.5 inches.

[[Page 871]]

    (b) Three accelerometers are mounted in the thorax for measurement 
of lateral accelerations with each accelerometer's sensitive axis 
aligned to be closely perpendicular to the thorax's midsagittal plane. 
The accelerometers are mounted in the following locations:
    (1) One accelerometer is mounted on the thorax to lumbar adaptor 
(SID-005 revision F, dated May 18, 1994, incorporated by reference; see 
Sec. 572.40) with seismic mass center located 0.5 inches toward the 
impact side, 0.1 inches upward and 1.86 inches rearward from the 
reference point shown in Figure 30 in appendix A to subpart F of part 
572. Maximum permissible variation of the seismic location must not 
exceed 0.2 inches spherical radius.
    (2) Two accelerometers are mounted, one on the top and the other at 
the bottom part of the Rib Bar (SID-024) on the struck side. Their 
seismic mass centers are at any distance up to .4 inches from a point on 
the Rib Bar surface located on its longitudinal center line .75 inches 
from the top for the top accelerometer and .75 inches from the bottom, 
for the bottom accelerometer.
    (c) One accelerometer is mounted in the pelvis for measurement of 
the lateral acceleration with its sensitive axis perpendicular to the 
pelvic midsagittal plane. The accelerometer is mounted on the rear wall 
of the instrumentation cavity of the pelvis (SID-087 revision H, dated 
May 18, 1994, incorporated by reference; see Sec. 572.40). The ac cel e 
rom e ter's seismic mass with respect to the mounting bolt center line 
is 0.9 inches up, 0.7 inches to the left for left side impact and 0.03 
inches to the left for right side impact, and 0.5 inches rearward from 
the rear wall mounting surface as shown in Figure 31 in appendix A to 
subpart F of part 572. Maximum permissible variation of the seismic 
location must not exceed 0.2 inches spherical radius.
    (d) Instrumentation and sensors used must conform to the SAE J-211 
(1980) recommended practice requirements (incorporated by reference; see 
Sec. 572.40). The outputs of the accelerometers installed in the dummy 
are then processed with the software for the Finite Impulse Response 
(FIR) filter (FIR 100 software). The FORTRAN program for this FIR 100 
software (FIR100 Filter Program, Version 1.0, July 16, 1990) is 
incorporated by reference in this part (see Sec. 572.40). The data are 
processed in the following manner:
    (1) Analog data recorded in accordance with SAE J-211 (1980) 
recommended practice channel class 1000 specification.
    (2) Filter the data with a 300 Hz, SAE Class 180 filter;
    (3) Subsample the data to a 1600 Hz sampling rate;
    (4) Remove the bias from the subsampled data, and
    (5) Filter the data with the FIR100 Filter Program (Version 1.0, 
July 16, 1990), which has the following characteristics--
    (i) Passband frequency, 100 Hz.
    (ii) Stopband frequency, 189 Hz.
    (iii) Stopband gain, -50 db.
    (iv) Passband ripple, 0.0225 db.
    (e) The mountings for the spine, rib and pelvis accelerometers shall 
have no resonance frequency within a range of 3 times the frequency 
range of the applicable channel class.
    (f) Limb joints of the test dummy are set at the force between 1-2 
g's, which just supports the limbs' weight when the limbs are extended 
horizontally forward. The force required to move a limb segment does not 
exceed 2 g's throughout the range of limb motion.
    (g) Performance tests are conducted at any temperature from 66 
[deg]F to 78 [deg]F and at any relative humidity from 10 percent to 70 
percent after exposure of the dummy to these conditions for a period of 
not less than 4 hours.
    (h) For the performance of tests specified in Sec. Sec. 572.42 and 
572.43, the dummy is positioned as follows:
    (1) The dummy is placed on a flat, rigid, clean, dry, horizontal 
smooth aluminum surface whose length and width dimensions are not less 
than 16 inches, so that the dummy's midsagittal plane is vertical and 
centered on the test surface. The dummy's torso is positioned to meet 
the requirements of Sec. 572.42 and Sec. 572.43. The seating surface 
is without the back support and the test dummy is positioned so that the 
dummy's midsagittal plane is vertical and centered on the seat surface.

[[Page 872]]

    (2) The legs are positioned so that their centerlines are in planes 
parallel to the midsagittal plane.
    (3) Performance pre-tests of the assembled dummy are separated in 
time by a period of not less than 20 minutes unless otherwise specified.
    (4) Surfaces of the dummy components are not painted except as 
specified in this part or in drawings subtended by this part.

[55 FR 45766, Oct. 30, 1990, as amended at 56 FR 47011, Sept. 17, 1991; 
59 FR 52091, Oct. 14, 1994]

[[Page 873]]

              Appendix A to Subpart F of Part 572--Figures
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.168


[[Page 874]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14OC94.001


[59 FR 52092, Oct. 14, 1994]

[[Page 875]]

Subparts G-H [Reserved]


<R04>
                       Subpart I_6-Year-Old Child

    Source: 56 FR 57836, Nov. 14, 1991, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 572.70  Incorporation by reference.

    (a) The drawings and specifications referred to in Sec. Sec. 
572.71(a) and 572.71(b) are hereby incorporated in subpart I by 
reference. These materials are thereby made part of this regulation. The 
Director of the Federal Register approved the materials incorporated by 
reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. Copies 
of the materials may be inspected at NHTSA's Docket Section, 400 Seventh 
Street, SW., room 5109, Washington, DC, or at the National Archives and 
Records Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of 
this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://
www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--
locations.html.
    (b) The incorporated material is available as follows:
    (1) Drawing number SA 106 C001 sheets 1 through 18, and the drawings 
listed in the parts lists described on sheets 8 through 17, are 
available from Reprographic Technologies, 9000 Virginia Manor Rd., 
Beltsville, MD 20705, Telephone (301) 210-5600, Fax (301) 210-5607.
    (2) A User's Manual entitled, ``Six-Year-Old Size Child Test Dummy 
SA106C,'' October 28, 1991, is available from Reprographic Technologies 
at the address in paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
    (3) SAE Recommended Practice J211, Instrumentation for Impact Test, 
June 1988, is available from the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., 
400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096-0001.

[56 FR 57836, Nov. 14, 1991, as amended at 62 FR 44226, Aug. 20, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 572.71  General description.

    (a) The representative 6-year-old dummy consists of a drawings and 
specifications package that contains the following materials:
    (1) Technical drawings, specifications, and the parts list package 
shown in SA 106C 001, sheets 1 through 18, rereleased July 11, 1997;
    (2) A user's manual entitled, ``Six-Year-Old Size Child Test Dummy 
SA106C,'' October 28, 1991.
    (b) The dummy is made up of the component assemblies set out in 
Table A:

                                                     Table A
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Assembly drawing No.              Drawing title       Listed on drawing No.            Revision
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SA 106C 010........................  Head Assembly.........  SA 106C 001, sheet 8..  A
SA 106C 020........................  Neck Assembly.........  SA 106C 001, sheet 9..  A
SA 106C 030........................  Thorax Assembly.......  SA 106C 001, sheet 10.  C
SA 106C 030........................  Thorax Assembly.......  SA 106C 001, sheet 11.  D
SA 106C 041........................  Arm Assembly (right)..  SA 106C 001, sheet 14.  A
SA 106C 042........................  Arm Assembly (left)...  SA 106C 001, sheet 15.  A
SA 106C 050........................  Lumbar Spine Assembly.  SA 106C 001, sheet 12.  A
SA 106C 060........................  Pelvis Assembly.......  SA 106C 001, sheet 13.  A
SA 106C 071........................  Leg Assembly (right)..  SA 106C 001, sheet 16.  A
SA 106C 072........................  Leg Assembly (left)...  SA 106C 001, sheet 17.  A
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Adjacent segments are joined in a manner such that except for 
contacts existing under static conditions, there is no contact between 
metallic elements throughout the range of motion or under simulated 
crash-impact conditions.
    (d) The structural properties of the dummy are such that the dummy 
conforms to this part in every respect both before and after its use in 
any test similar to those specified in Standard 213, Child Restraint 
Systems.

[56 FR 57836, Nov. 14, 1991, as amended at 62 FR 44226, Aug. 20, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 572.72  Head assembly and test procedure.

    (a) Head assembly. The head consists of the assembly designated as 
SA 106

[[Page 876]]

010 on drawing No. SA 106C 001, sheet 2, and conforms to each drawing 
listed on SA 106C 001, sheet 8.
    (b) Head assembly impact response requirements. When the head is 
impacted by a test probe conforming to Sec. 572.77(a)(1) at 7 feet per 
second (fps) according to the test procedure in paragraph (c) of this 
section, then the resultant head acceleration measured at the location 
of the accelerometer installed in the headform according to Sec. 
577.77(b) is not less than 130g and not more than 160g.
    (1) The recorded acceleration-time curve for this test is unimodal 
at or above the 50g level, and lies at or above that level for an 
interval not less than 1.0 and not more than 2.0 milliseconds.
    (2) The lateral acceleration vector does not exceed 5g.
    (c) Head test procedure. The test procedure for the head is as 
follows:
    (1) Seat and orient the dummy on a seating surface having a back 
support as specified in Sec. 572.78(c), and adjust the joints of the 
limbs at any setting (between 1g and 2g) which just supports the limbs' 
weight when the limbs are extended horizontally and forward.
    (2) Adjust the test probe so that its longitudinal center line is--
    (i) At the forehead at the point of orthogonal intersection of the 
head midsagittal plane and the transverse plane which is perpendicular 
to the Z axis of the head as shown in Figure 40;
    (ii) Located 2.7 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 inches below the top of 
the head measured along the Z axis, and;
    (iii) Coincides within 2 degrees with the line made by the 
intersection of the horizontal and midsagittal planes passing through 
this point.
    (3) Impact the head with the test probe so that at the moment of 
contact the probe's longitudinal center line falls within 2 degrees of a 
horizontal line in the dummy's midsagittal plane.
    (4) Guide the test probe during impact so that there is no 
significant lateral, vertical, or rotational movement.
    (5) Allow at least 60 minutes between successive head tests.


<R05>
Sec. 572.73  Neck assembly and test procedure.

    (a) Neck assembly. The neck consists of the assembly designated as 
SA 106C 020 on drawing SA 106C 001, sheet 2, and conforms to each 
drawing listed on SA 106C 001, sheet 9.
    (b) Neck assembly impact response requirements. When the head-neck 
assembly (SA 106C 010 and SA 106C 020) is tested according to the test 
procedure in Sec. 572.73(c), the head:
    (1) Shall rotate, while translating in the direction of the pendulum 
preimpact flight, in reference to the pendulum's longitudinal center 
line a total of 78 degrees <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>6 degrees about the 
head's center of gravity; and
    (2) Shall rotate to the extent specified in Table B at each 
indicated point in time, measured from time of impact, with the chordal 
displacement measured at the head's center of gravity.
    (i) Chordal displacement at time ``T'' is defined as the straight 
line distance between the position relative to the pendulum arm of the 
head's center of gravity at time ``zero;'' and the position relative to 
the pendulum arm of the head's center of gravity at time T as 
illustrated by Figure 3 in Sec. 572.11.
    (ii) The peak resultant acceleration recorded at the location of the 
accelerometers mounted in the headform according to Sec. 572.77(b) 
shall not exceed 30g.

                                                     Table B
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                   Chordal
                                                                   Time (ms) <plus-minus<ls-     displacement
                        Rotation (degrees)                              thn-eq>(2+.08T)        (inches) <plus-
                                                                                             minus<ls-thn-eq>0.8
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0................................................................                    0                       0
30...............................................................                   26                     2.7
60...............................................................                   44                     4.3
Maximum..........................................................                   68                     5.8
60...............................................................                  101                     4.4
30...............................................................                  121                     2.4
0................................................................                  140                       0
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (3) The pendulum shall not reverse direction until the head's center 
of gravity returns to the original ``zero'' time position relative to 
the pendulum arm.
    (c) Neck test procedure. The test procedure for the neck is as 
follows:
    (1) Mount the head and neck assembly on a rigid pendulum as 
specified in Sec. 572.21, Figure 15, so that the head's midsagittal 
plane is vertical and coincides with the plane of motion of the 
pendulum's longitudinal center line. Attach the neck directly to the 
pendulum as shown in Sec. 572.21, Figure 15.

[[Page 877]]

    (2) Release the pendulum and allow it to fall freely from a height 
such that the velocity at impact is 17.00 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.0 fps, 
measured at the center of the accelerometer specified in Sec. 572.21, 
Figure 15.
    (3) Decelerate the pendulum to a stop with an acceleration-time 
pulse described as follows:
    (i) Establish 5g and 20g levels on the a-t curve.
    (ii) Establish t<INF>1</INF> at the point where the rising a-t curve 
first crosses the 5g level; t<INF>2</INF> at the point where the rising 
a-t curve first crosses the 20g level; t<INF>3</INF> at the point where 
the decaying a-t curve last crosses the 20g level; and t<INF>4</INF> at 
the point where the decaying a-t curve first crosses the 5g level.
    (iii) t<INF>2</INF>-t<INF>1</INF> shall not be more than 3 
milliseconds.
    (iv) t<INF>3</INF>-t<INF>2</INF> shall not be more than 22 
milliseconds, and not less than 19 milliseconds.
    (v) t<INF>4</INF>-t<INF>3</INF> shall not be more than 6 
milliseconds.
    (vi) The average deceleration between t<INF>2</INF> and 
t<INF>3</INF> shall not be more than 26g, or less than 22g.
    (4) Allow the neck to flex without the head or neck contacting any 
object other than the pendulum arm.
    (5) Allow at least 60 minutes between successive tests.

[56 FR 57836, Nov. 14, 1991, as amended at 57 FR 4086, Feb. 3, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 572.74  Thorax assembly and test procedure.

    (a) Thorax assembly. The thorax consists of the part of the torso 
assembly designated as SA 106C 030 on drawing SA 106C 001, sheet 2, 
Revision A, and conforms to each applicable drawing on SA 106C 001 sheet 
10, Revision C (including Drawing number 6C-1610-1 thru -4, Revision A, 
titled ``Screw Button Head Socket'', dated September 30, 1996, and 
Drawing number 6C-1021, Revision B, titled ``Ballast, 6 Yr. Thoraxc (for 
7267A)'', dated September 24, 1996), and sheet 11, Revision D (including 
Drawing number SA 6C-909, Revision A, titled ``Cover-chest 
Accelerometer'', dated September 21, 1996, and Drawing number 6C-1000-1, 
Revision C, titled ``Sternum Thoracic Weld Ass'y.'', dated September 24, 
1996).
    (b) Thorax assembly requirements. When the thorax is impacted by a 
test probe conforming to Sec. 572.77(a) to 20 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.3 
fps according to the test procedure in paragraph (c) of this section, 
the peak resultant accelerations at the accelerometers mounted in the 
chest cavity according to Sec. 572.77(c) shall not be less than 43g and 
not more than 53g.
    (1) The recorded acceleration-time curve for this test shall be 
unimodal at or above the 30g level, and shall lie at or above that level 
for an interval not less than 4 milliseconds and not more than 6 
milliseconds.
    (2) The lateral accelerations shall not exceed 5g.
    (c) Thorax test procedure. The test procedure for the thorax is as 
follows:
    (1) Seat and orient the dummy on a seating surface without back 
support as specified in Sec. 572.78(c), and adjust the joints of the 
limbs at any setting (between 1g and 2g) which just supports the limbs' 
weight when the limbs are extended horizontally and forward, parallel to 
the midsagittal plane.
    (2) Establish the impact point at the chest midsagittal plane so 
that the impact point is 2.25 inches below the longitudinal center of 
the clavicle retainer screw, and adjust the dummy so that the plane that 
bisects the No. 3 rib into upper and lower halves is horizontal <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1 degree.
    (3) Place the longitudinal center line of the test probe so that it 
coincides with the designated impact point, and align the test probe so 
that at impact, the probe's longitudinal center line coincides (within 2 
degrees) with the line formed at the intersection of the horizontal and 
midsagittal planes and passing through the designated impact point.
    (4) Impact the thorax with the test probe so that at the moment of 
contact the probe's longitudinal center line falls within 2 degrees of a 
horizontal line in the dummy's midsagittal plane.
    (5) Guide the test probe during impact so that there is no 
significant lateral, vertical, or rotational movement.
    (6) Allow at least 30 minutes between successive tests.

[56 FR 57836, Nov. 14, 1991, as amended at 60 FR 2897, Jan. 12, 1995; 62 
FR 44227, Aug. 20, 1997]

[[Page 878]]


<R05>
Sec. 572.75  Lumbar spine, abdomen, and pelvis assembly and test procedure.

    (a) Lumbar spine, abdomen, and pelvis assembly. The lumbar spine, 
abdomen, and pelvis consist of the part of the torso assembly designated 
as SA 106C 50 and 60 on drawing SA 106C 001, sheet 2, and conform to 
each applicable drawing listed on SA 106C 001, sheets 12 and 13.
    (b) Lumbar spine, abdomen, and pelvis assembly response 
requirements. When the lumbar spine is subjected to a force continuously 
applied according to the test procedure set out in paragraph (c) of this 
section, the lumbar spine assembly shall--
    (1) Flex by an amount that permits the rigid thoracic spine to 
rotate from the torso's initial position, as defined in (c)(3), by 40 
degrees at a force level of not less that 46 pounds and not more than 52 
pounds, and
    (2) Straighten upon removal of the force to within 5 degrees of its 
initial position when the force is removed.
    (c) Lumbar spine, abdomen, and pelvis test procedure. The test 
procedure for the lumbar spine, abdomen, and pelvis is as follows:
    (1) Remove the dummy's head-neck assembly, arms, and lower legs, 
clean and dry all component surfaces, and seat the dummy upright on a 
seat as specified in Figure 42.
    (2) Adjust the dummy by--
    (i) Tightening the femur ballflange screws at each hip socket joint 
to 50 inch-pounds torque;
    (ii) Attaching the pelvis to the seating surface by a bolt D/605 as 
shown in Figure 42.
    (iii) Attaching the upper legs at the knee joints by the attachments 
shown in drawing Figure 42.
    (iv) Tightening the mountings so that the pelvis-lumbar joining 
surface is horizontal; and
    (v) Removing the head and neck, and installing a cylindrical 
aluminum adapter (neck adapter) of 2.0 inches diameter and 2.60 inches 
length as shown in Figure 42.
    (3) The initial position of the dummy's torso is defined by the 
plane formed by the rear surfaces of the shoulders and buttocks which is 
three to seven degrees forward of the transverse vertical plane.
    (4) Flex the thorax forward 50 degrees and then rearward as 
necessary to return the dummy to its initial torso position, unsupported 
by external means.
    (5) Apply a forward pull force in the midsagittal plane at the top 
of the neck adapter so that when the lumbar spine flexion is 40 degrees, 
the applied force is perpendicular to the thoracic spine box.
    (i) Apply the force at any torso deflection rate between 0.5 and 1.5 
degrees per second, up to 40 degrees of flexion.
    (ii) For 10 seconds, continue to apply a force sufficient to 
maintain 40 degrees of flexion, and record the highest applied force 
during the 10 second period.
    (iii) Release all force as rapidly as possible, and measure the 
return angle 3 minutes after the release.


<R05>
Sec. 572.76  Limbs assembly and test procedure.

    (a) Limbs assembly. The limbs consist of the assemblies designated 
as SA 106C 041, SA 106C 042, SA 106C 071, and SA 106C 072, on drawing 
No. SA 106C 001, sheet 2, and conform to each applicable drawing listed 
on SA 106C 001, sheets 14 through 17.
    (b) Limbs assembly impact response requirement. When each knee is 
impacted at 7.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 fps, according to paragraph 
(c) of this section, the maximum force on the femur shall not be more 
than 1060 pounds and not less than 780 pounds, with a duration above 400 
pounds of not less than 0.8 milliseconds.
    (c) Limbs test procedure. The test procedure for the limbs is as 
follows:
    (1) Seat and orient the dummy without back support on a seating 
surface that is 11 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 inches above a horizontal 
(floor) surface as specified in Sec. 572.78(c).
    (i) Orient the dummy as specified in Figure 43 with the hip joint 
adjustment at any setting between 1g and 2g.
    (ii) Place the dummy legs in a plane parallel to the dummy's 
midsagittal plane with the knee pivot center line perpendicular to the 
dummy's midsagittal plane, and with the feet flat on the horizontal 
(floor) surface.
    (iii) Adjust the feet and lower legs until the line between the 
midpoint of

[[Page 879]]

each knee pivot and each ankle pivot is within 2 degrees of the 
vertical.
    (2) If necessary, reposition the dummy so that at the level one inch 
below the seating surface, the rearmost point of the dummy's lower legs 
remains not less than 3 inches and not more than 6 inches forward of the 
forward edge of the seat.
    (3) Align the test probe specified in Sec. 572.77(a) with the 
longitudinal center line of the femur force gauge, so that at impact, 
the probe's longitudinal center line coincides with the sensor's 
longitudinal center line within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 degrees.
    (4) Impact the knee with the test probe moving horizontally and 
parallel to the midsagittal plane at the specified velocity.
    (5) Guide the test probe during impact so that there is no 
significant lateral, vertical, or rotational movement.


<R05>
Sec. 572.77  Instrumentation.

    (a)(1) Test probe. For the head, thorax, and knee impact test, use a 
test probe that is rigid, of uniform density and weighs 10 pounds and 6 
ounces, with a diameter of 3 inches; a length of 13.8 inches; and an 
impacting end that has a rigid flat right face and edge radius of 0.5 
inches.
    (2) The head and thorax assembly may be instrumented either with a 
Type A or Type B accelerometer.
    (i) Type A accelerometer is defined in drawing SA 572 S1.
    (ii) Type B accelerometer is defined in drawing SA 572 S2.
    (b) Head accelerometers. (1) Install accelerometers in the head as 
shown in drawing SA 106C 001 sheet 1 using suitable spacers or adaptors 
as needed to affix them to the horizontal transverse bulkhead so that 
the sensitive axes of the three accelerometers intersect at the point in 
the midsagittal plane located 0.4 inches below the intersection of a 
line connecting the longitudinal center lines of the roll pins in either 
side of the dummy's head with the head's midsagittal plane.
    (2) The head has three orthogonally mounted accelerometers aligned 
as follows:
    (i) Align one accelerometer so that its sensitive axis is 
perpendicular to the horizontal bulkhead in the midsagittal plane.
    (ii) Align the second accelerometer so that its sensitive axis is 
parallel to the horizontal bulkhead, and perpendicular to the 
midsagittal plane.
    (iii) Align the third accelerometer so that its sensitive axis is 
parallel to the horizontal bulkhead in the midsagittal plane.
    (iv) The seismic mass center for any of these accelerometers may be 
at any distance up to 0.4 inches from the axial intersection point.
    (c) Thoracic accelerometers. (1) Install accelerometers in the 
thoracic assembly as shown in drawing SA 106C 001, sheet 1, using 
suitable spacers and adaptors to affix them to the frontal surface of 
the spine assembly so that the sensitive axes of the three 
accelerometers intersect at a point in the midsagittal plane located 
0.95 inches posterior of the spine mounting surface, and 0.55 inches 
below the horizontal centerline of the two upper accelerometer mount 
attachment hole centers.
    (2) The sternum-thoracic assembly has three orthogonally mounted 
accelerometers aligned as follows:
    (i) Align one accelerometer so that its sensitive axis is parallel 
to the attachment surface in the midsagittal plane.
    (ii) Align the second accelerometer so that its sensitive axis is 
parallel to the attachment surface, and perpendicular to the midsagittal 
plane.
    (iii) Align the third accelerometer so that its sensitive axis is 
perpendicular to the attachment surface in the midsagittal plane.
    (iv) The seismic mass center for any of these accelerometers may be 
at any distance up to 0.4 inches of the axial intersection point.
    (d) Femur-sensing device. Install a force-sensing device SA 572-S10 
axially in each femur shaft as shown in drawing SA 106C 072 and secure 
it to the femur assembly so that the distance measured between the 
center lines of two attachment bolts is 3.00 inches.
    (e) Limb joints. Set the limb joints at lg, barely restraining the 
limb's weight when the limb is extended horizontally, and ensure that 
the force required to move the limb segment does not exceed 2g 
throughout the limb's range of motion.

[[Page 880]]

    (f) Recording outputs. Record the outputs of acceleration and force-
sensing devices installed in the dummy and in the test apparatus 
specified in this part, in individual channels that conform to the 
requirements of SAE Recommended Practice J211, October 1988, with 
channel classes as set out in the following table C.

                                 Table C
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Device                               Channel
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Head acceleration.........................  Class 1000
Pendulum acceleration.....................  Class 60
Thorax acceleration.......................  Class 180
Femur-force...............................  Class 600
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The mountings for sensing devices shall have no resonance frequency 
within a range of 3 times the frequency range of the applicable channel 
class.


<R05>
Sec. 572.78  Performance test conditions.

    (a) Conduct performance tests at any temperature from 66 [deg]F to 
78 [deg]F, and at any relative humidity from 10 percent to 70 percent, 
but only after having first exposed the dummy to these conditions for a 
period of not less than 4 hours.
    (b) For the performance tests specified in Sec. 572.72 (head), 
Sec. 572.74 (thorax), Sec. 572.75 (lumbar spine, abdomen, and pelvis), 
and Sec. 572.76 (limbs), position the dummy as set out in paragraph (c) 
of this section.
    (c) Place the dummy on a horizontal seating surface covered by 
teflon sheeting so that the dummy's midsagittal plane is vertical and 
centered on the test surface.
    (1) The seating surface is flat, rigid, clean, and dry, with a 
smoothness not exceeding 40 microinches, a length of at least 16 inches, 
and a width of at least 16 inches.
    (2) For head impact tests, the seating surface has a vertical back 
support whose top is 12.4 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 inches above the 
horizontal surface, and the rear surfaces of the dummy's back and 
buttocks touch the back support as shown in Figure 40.
    (3) For the thorax, lumbar spine, and knee tests, the horizontal 
surface is without a back support as shown in Figure 41 (for the 
thorax); Figure 42 (for the lumbar spine); and Figure 43 (for the knee).
    (4) Position the dummy's arms and legs so that their center lines 
are in planes parallel to the midsagittal plane.
    (5) Adjust each shoulder yoke so that with its upper surface 
horizontal, a yoke is at the midpoint of its anterior-posterior travel.
    (6) Adjust the dummy for head and knee impact tests so that the rear 
surfaces of the shoulders and buttocks are tangent to a transverse 
vertical plane.
    (d) The dummy's dimensions are specified in drawings SA 106C 001, 
sheet 3, Revision A, July 11, 1997, and sheets 4 through 6.
    (e) Unless otherwise specified in this regulation, performance tests 
of the same component, segment, assembly or fully assembled dummy are 
separated in time by a period of not less than 20 minutes.
    (f) Unless otherwise specified in this regulation, the surfaces of 
the dummy components are not painted.

[56 FR 57836, Nov. 14, 1991, as amended at 62 FR 44227, Aug. 20, 1997]

                    Figures to Subpart I of Part 572

[[Page 881]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.169


[[Page 882]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.170


[60 FR 2898, Jan. 12, 1995]

[[Page 883]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.171


[[Page 884]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.172


<R04>
                       Subpart J_9-Month Old Child

    Source: 56 FR 41080, Aug. 19, 1991, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 572.80  Incorporated materials.

    The drawings and specifications referred to in Sec. 572.81(a) that 
are not set forth in full are hereby incorporated in

[[Page 885]]

this part by reference. These materials are thereby made part of this 
regulation. The Director of the Federal Register approved the materials 
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR 
part 51. Copies of the materials may be obtained from Rowley-Scher 
Reprographics, Inc., 1216 K Street, NW., Washington, DC 20002, telephone 
(202) 628-6667. Copies are available for inspection in the general 
reference section of Docket 89-11, Docket Section, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, room 5109, 400 Seventh Street, SW., 
Washington, DC, or at the National Archives and Records Administration 
(NARA). For information on the availability of this material at NARA, 
call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/
code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.


<R05>
Sec. 572.81  General description.

    (a) The dummy consists of: (1) The assembly specified in drawing LP 
1049/A, March 1979, which is described in its entirety by means of 
approximately 54 separate drawings and specifications, 1049/1 through 
1049/54; and (2) a parts list LP 1049/0 (5 sheets); and (3) a report 
entitled, ``The TNO P3/4 Child Dummy Users Manual,'' January 1979, 
published by Instituut voor Wegtransportmiddelen TNO.
    (b) Adjacent dummy segments are joined in a manner such that 
throughout the range of motion and also under simulated crash-impact 
conditions there is no contact between metallic elements except for 
contacts that exist under static conditions.
    (c) The structural properties of the dummy are such that the dummy 
conforms to this part in every respect both before and after being used 
in dynamic tests such as that specified in Standard No. 213 of this 
chapter (Sec. 571.213).


<R05>
Sec. 572.82  Head.

    The head consists of the assembly shown in drawing LP 1049/A and 
conforms to each of the applicable drawings listed under LP 1049/0 
through 54.


<R05>
Sec. 572.83  Head-neck.

    The head-neck assembly shown in drawing 1049/A consists of parts 
specified as items 1 through 16 and in item 56.


<R05>
Sec. 572.84  Thorax.

    The thorax consists of the part of the torso shown in assembly 
drawing LP 1049/A and conforms to each of the applicable drawings listed 
under LP 1049/0 through 54.


<R05>
Sec. 572.85  Lumbar spine flexure.

    (a) When subjected to continuously applied force in accordance with 
paragraph (b) of this section, the lumbar spine assembly shall flex by 
an amount that permits the thoracic spine to rotate from its initial 
position in accordance with Figure No. 18 of Sec. 572.21 (49 CFR part 
572) by 40 degrees at a force level of not less than 18 pounds and not 
more than 22 pounds, and straighten upon removal of the force to within 
5 degrees of its initial position.
    (b) Test procedure. (1) The lumbar spine flexure test is conducted 
on a dummy assembly as shown in drawing LP 1049/A, but with the arms 
(which consist of parts identified as items 17 through 30) and all head-
neck parts (identified as items 1 through 13 and 59 through 63), 
removed.
    (2) With the torso assembled in an upright position, adjust the 
lumbar cable by tightening the adjustment nut for the lumbar vertebrae 
until the spring is compressed to \2/3\ of its unloaded length.
    (3) Position the dummy in an upright seated position on a seat as 
indicated in Figure No. 18 of Sec. 572.21 (lower legs do not need to be 
removed, but must be clamped firmly to the seating surface), ensuring 
that all dummy component surfaces are clean, dry and untreated unless 
otherwise specified.
    (4) Firmly affix the dummy to the seating surface through the pelvis 
at the hip joints by suitable clamps that also prevent any relative 
motion with respect to the upper legs during the test in Sec. 
572.65(c)(3) of this part. Install a pull attachment at the neck to 
torso juncture as shown in Figure 18 of Sec. 572.21.
    (5) Flex the thorax forward 50 degrees and then rearward as 
necessary to return it to its initial position.
    (6) Apply a forward pull force in the midsagittal plane at the top 
of the

[[Page 886]]

neck adapter so that at 40 degrees of the lumbar spine flexion the 
applied force is perpendicular to the thoracic spine box. Apply the 
force at any torso deflection rate between 0.5 and 1.5 degrees per 
second up to 40 degrees of flexion but no further; maintain 40 degrees 
of flexion for 10 seconds, and record the highest applied force during 
that time. Release all force as rapidly as possible and measure the 
return angle three minutes after release.


<R05>
Sec. 572.86  Test conditions and dummy adjustment.

    (a) With the complete torso on its back lying on a horizontal 
surface and the neck assembly mounted and shoulders on the edge of the 
surface, adjust the neck such that the head bolt is lowered 0.40 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 inches (10 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 mm) after a 
vertically applied load of 11.25 pounds (50 N) applied to the head bolt 
is released.
    (b) With the complete torso on its back with the adjusted neck 
assembly as specified in Sec. 572.66(a), and lying on a horizontal 
surface with the shoulders on the edge of the surface, mount the head 
and tighten the head bolt and nut firmly, with the head in horizontal 
position. Adjust the head joint at the force between 1-2g, which just 
supports the head's weight.
    (c) Using the procedures described below, limb joints are set at the 
force between 1-2g, which just supports the limbs' weight when the limbs 
are extended horizontally forward:
    (1) With the complete torso lying with its front down on a 
horizontal surface, with the hip joint just over the edge of the 
surface, mount the upper leg and tighten hip joint nut firmly. Adjust 
the hip joint by releasing the hip joint nut until the upper leg just 
starts moving.
    (2) With the complete torso and upper leg lying with its front up on 
a horizontal surface, with the knee joint just over the edge of the 
surface, mount the lower leg and tighten knee joint firmly. Adjust the 
knee joint by releasing the knee joint nut until the lower leg just 
starts moving.
    (3) With the torso in an upright position, mount the upper arm and 
tighten firmly the adjustment bolts for the shoulder joint with the 
upper arm placed in a horizontal position. Adjust the shoulder joint by 
releasing the shoulder joint nut until the upper arm just starts moving.
    (4) With the complete torso in an upright position and upper arm in 
a vertical position, mount the forearm in a horizontal position and 
tighten the elbow hinge bolt and nut firmly. Adjust the elbow joint nut 
until the forearm just starts moving.
    (d) With the torso assembled in an upright position, the adjustment 
nut for the lumbar vertebrae is tightened until the spring is compressed 
to \2/3\ of its unloaded length.
    (e) Performance tests are conducted at any temperature from 66 to 78 
degrees F and at any relative humidity from 10 percent to 70 percent 
after exposure of the dummy to these conditions for a period of not less 
than four hours.
    (f) Performance tests of the same component, segment, assembly or 
fully assembled dummy are separated in time by a period of not less than 
20 minutes unless otherwise specified.
    (g) Surfaces of the dummy components are not painted except as 
specified in the part or in drawings incorporated by this part.


<R04>
                        Subpart K_Newborn Infant

    Source: 58 FR 3232, Jan. 8, 1993, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 572.90  Incorporation by reference.

    (a) The drawings and specifications referred to in Sec. 572.91(a) 
are hereby incorporated in subpart K by reference. These materials are 
thereby made part of this regulation. The Director of the Federal 
Register approved that materials incorporated by reference in accordance 
with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. Copies of the materials may be 
inspected at NHTSA's Docket Section, 400 Seventh Street, SW., room 5109, 
Washington, DC, or at the National Archives and Records Administration 
(NARA). For information on the availability of this material at NARA, 
call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/
code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.

[[Page 887]]

    (b) The incorporated material is available as follows:
    (1) Drawing numbers 126-0000 through 126-0015 (sheets 1 through 3), 
126-0017 through 126-0027, and a parts list entitled ``Parts List for 
CAMI Newborn Dummy,'' are available from Reprographic Technologies, 1111 
14th Street, NW., Washington, DC 20005. (202) 628-6667.
    (2) A construction manual entitled, ``Construction of the Newborn 
Infant Dummy'' (July 1992) is available from Reprographic Technologies 
at the address in paragraph (b)(1) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 572.91  General description.

    (a) The representative newborn infant dummy consists of a drawings 
and specifications package that contains the following materials:
    (1) Drawing numbers 126-0000 through 126-0015 (sheets 1 through 3), 
126-0017 through 126-0027, and a parts list entitled ``Parts List for 
CAMI Newborn Dummy''; and,
    (2) A construction manual entitled, ``Construction of the Newborn 
Infant Dummy'' (July 1992).
    (b) The structural properties of the dummy are such that the dummy 
conforms to this part in every respect both before and after being used 
in dynamic tests specified in Standard No. 213 of this chapter (Sec. 
571.213).


<R04>
                     Subpart L_Free Motion Headform

    Source: 60 FR 43058, Aug. 18, 1995, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 572.100  Incorporation by Reference.

    (a) The drawings and specifications referred to in Sec. 572.101 are 
hereby incorporated in subpart L by reference. These materials are 
thereby made part of this regulation. The Director of the Federal 
Register approved the materials incorporated by reference in accordance 
with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. Copies of the materials may be 
inspected at NHTSA's Docket Section, 400 Seventh Street, S.W., room 
5109, Washington, DC, or at the National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this 
material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/
federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    (b) The incorporated material is available as follows:
    (1) Drawing number 92041-001, ``Head Form Assembly,'' (November 30, 
1992); drawing number 92041-002, ``Skull Assembly,'' (November 30, 
1992); drawing number 92041-003, ``Skull Cap Plate Assembly,'' (November 
30, 1992); drawing number 92041-004, ``Skull Cap Plate,'' (November 30, 
1992); drawing number 92041-005, ``Threaded Pin,'' (November 30, 1992); 
drawing number 92041-006, ``Hex Nut,'' (November 30, 1992); drawing 
number 92041-008, ``Head Skin without Nose,'' (November 30, 1992, as 
amended March 6, 1995); drawing number 92041-009, ``Six-Axis Load Cell 
Simulator Assembly,'' (November 30, 1992); drawing number 92041-011, 
``Head Ballast Weight,'' (November 30, 1992); drawing number 92041-018, 
``Head Form Bill of Materials,'' (November 30, 1992); drawing number 
78051-148, ``Skull-Head (cast) Hybrid III,'' (May 20, 1978, as amended 
August 17, 1978); drawing number 78051-228/78051-229, ``Skin- Hybrid 
III,'' (May 20, 1978, as amended through September 24, 1979); drawing 
number 78051-339, ``Pivot Pin-Neck Transducer,'' (May 20, 1978, as 
amended May 14, 1986); drawing number 78051-372, ``Vinyl Skin 
Formulation Hybrid III,'' (May 20, 1978); and drawing number C-1797, 
``Neck Blank, (August 1, 1989); drawing number SA572-S4, ``Accelerometer 
Specification,'' (November 30, 1992), are available from Reprographic 
Technologies, 1111 14th Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20005.
    (2) A user's manual entitled ``Free-Motion Headform User's Manual,'' 
version 2, March 1995, is available from NHTSA's Docket Section at the 
address in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (3) SAE Recommended Practice J211, OCT 1988, ``Instrumentation for 
Impact Tests,'' Class 1000, is available from The Society of Automotive 
Engineers, Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096.


<R05>
Sec. 572.101  General description.

    (a) The free motion headform consists of the component assembly 
which is shown in drawings 92041-001 (incorporated by reference; see 
Sec. 572.100), 92041-002 (incorporated by reference;

[[Page 888]]

see Sec. 572.100), 92041-003 (incorporated by reference; see Sec. 
572.100), 92041-004 (incorporated by reference; see Sec. 572.100), 
92041-005 (incorporated by reference; see Sec. 572.100), 92041-006 
(incorporated by reference; see Sec. 572.100), 92041-008 (incorporated 
by reference; see Sec. 572.100), 92041-009 (incorporated by reference; 
see Sec. 572.100), 92041-011 (incorporated by reference; see Sec. 
572.100), 78051-148 (incorporated by reference; see Sec. 572.100), 
78051-228/78051-229 (incorporated by reference; see Sec. 572.100), 
78051-339 (incorporated by reference; see Sec. 572.100), 78051-372 
(incorporated by reference; see Sec. 572.100), C-1797 (incorporated by 
reference; see Sec. 572.100), and SA572-S4 (incorporated by reference; 
see Sec. 572.100).
    (b) Disassembly, inspection, and assembly procedures, and sign 
convention for the signal outputs of the free motion headform 
accelerometers, are set forth in the Free-Motion Headform User's Manual 
(incorporated by reference; see Sec. 572.100).
    (c) The structural properties of the headform are such that it 
conforms to this part in every respect both before and after being used 
in the test specified in Standard No. 201 of this chapter (Sec. 
571.201).
    (d) The outputs of accelerometers installed in the headform are 
recorded in individual data channels that conform to the requirements of 
SAE Recommended Practice J211, OCT 1988, ``Instrumentation for Impact 
Tests,'' Class 1000 (incorporated by reference; see Sec. 572.100).


<R05>
Sec. 572.102  Drop test.

    (a) When the headform is dropped from a height of 14.8 inches in 
accordance with paragraph (b) of this section, the peak resultant 
accelerations at the location of the accelerometers mounted in the 
headform as shown in drawing 92041-001 (incorporated by reference; see 
Sec. 572.100) shall not be less than 225g, and not more than 275g. The 
acceleration/time curve for the test shall be unimodal to the extent 
that oscillations occurring after the main acceleration pulse are less 
than ten percent (zero to peak) of the main pulse. The lateral 
acceleration vector shall not exceed 15g (zero to peak).
    (b) Test procedure. (1) Soak the headform in a test environment at 
any temperature between 19 degrees C. to 26 degrees C. and at a relative 
humidity from 10 percent to 70 percent for a period of at least four 
hours prior to its use in a test.
    (2) Clean the headform's skin surface and the surface of the impact 
plate with 1,1,1 Trichloroethane or equivalent.
    (3) Suspend the headform, as shown in Figure 50. Position the 
forehead below the chin such that the skull cap plate is at an angle of 
28.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees with the impact surface when the 
midsagittal plane is vertical.
    (4) Drop the headform from the specified height by means that ensure 
instant release onto a rigidly supported flat horizontal steel plate, 
which is 2 inches thick and 2 feet square. The plate shall have a clean, 
dry surface and any microfinish of not less than 8 microinches 
203.2x10<SUP>-6</SUP> mm (rms) and not more than 80 microinches 
2032x10<SUP>-6</SUP> mm (rms).
    (5) Allow at least 3 hours between successive tests on the same 
headform.


<R05>
Sec. 572.103  Test conditions and instrumentation.

    (a) Headform accelerometers shall have dimensions, response 
characteristics, and sensitive mass locations specified in drawing 
SA572-S4 (incorporated by reference; see Sec. 572.100) and be mounted 
in the headform as shown in drawing 92041-001 (incorporated by 
reference; see Sec. 572.100).
    (b) The outputs of accelerometers installed in the headform are 
recorded in individual data channels that conform to the requirements of 
SAE Recommended Practice J211, OCT 1988, ``Instrumentation for Impact 
Tests,'' Class 1000 (incorporated by reference; see Sec. 572.100).
    (c) Coordinate signs for instrumentation polarity conform to the 
sign convention shown in the Free-Motion Headform User's Manual 
(incorporated by reference; see Sec. 572.100).
    (d) The mountings for accelerometers shall have no resonant 
frequency within a range of 3 times the frequency range of the 
applicable channel class.

[[Page 889]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.173

[60 FR 43060, Aug. 18, 1995]

[[Page 890]]


<R04>
         Subpart M_Side Impact Hybrid Dummy 50th Percentile Male

    Source: 63 FR 41470, Aug. 4, 1998, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 572.110  Materials incorporated by reference.

    (a) The following materials are hereby incorporated by reference in 
Subpart M:
    (1) The Anthropomorphic Test Dummy Parts List, SID/Hybrid III part 
572, subpart M, dated May 10, 1997.
    (2) The SID/Hybrid III Part 572 Subpart M User's Manual, dated May 
1997.
    (3) Drawing number 96-SIDH3-001, titled, ``Head-Neck Bracket,'' 
dated August 30, 1996.
    (4) Drawing number 96-SIDH3-006, titled, ``Upper and Middle Shoulder 
Foam,'' dated May 10, 1997.
    (5) Drawing number SA-SIDH3-M001, titled, ``Complete Assembly 
SIDH3,'' dated April 19, 1997.
    (6) Drawing number 78051-61X, Revision C, titled ``Head Assembly--
complete,'' dated March 28, 1997
    (7) Drawing number 78051-90, Revision A, titled ``Neck Assembly--
complete,'' dated May 20, 1978.
    (8) Dummy assembly drawing number SA-SID-M030, Revision A, titled 
``Thorax Assembly--complete,'' dated May 18, 1994.
    (9) Dummy assembly drawing SA-SID-M050, revision A, titled ``Lumbar 
Spine Assembly,'' dated May 18, 1994.
    (10) Dummy assembly drawing SA-150 M060, revision A, titled ``Pelvis 
and Abdomen Assembly,'' dated May 18, 1994.
    (11) Dummy assembly drawing SA-SID-053, revision A, titled ``Lumbar 
Spine Assembly,'' dated May 18, 1994.
    (12) Dummy assembly drawing SA-SID-M080, titled ``Leg Assembly, 
Right,'' dated August 13, 1987.
    (13) Dummy assembly drawing SA-SID-M081, titled ``Leg Assembly, 
Left,'' dated August 13, 1987.
    (14) Drawing number 78051-383X, Revision P, titled ``Neck Transducer 
Structural Replacement,'' dated November 1, 1995.
    (15) The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) J1733 Information 
Report, titled ``Sign Convention for Vehicle Crash Testing,'' dated 
December 1994.
    (16) SAE Recommended Practice J211, ``Instrumentation for Impact 
Tests,'' Parts 1 and 2, dated March 1995.
    (b) The incorporated materials are available as follows:
    (1) The Director of the Federal Register approved those materials 
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR 
part 51. Copies of the materials may be inspected at NHTSA's Docket 
Section, 400 Seventh Street S.W., room 5109, Washington, DC, or at the 
National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For information on 
the availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: 
http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--federal--
regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    (2) The parts lists, user's manual and drawings referred to in 
paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(14) of this section are available from 
Reprographic Technologies, 9000 Virginia Manor Road, Beltsville, MD 
20705 (301) 419-5070.
    (3) The SAE materials referred to in paragraphs (a)(15) and (a)(16) 
of this section are available from the Society of Automotive Engineers, 
Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096.


<R05>
Sec. 572.111  General description.

    (a) The dummy consists of component parts and component assemblies 
defined in drawing SA-SIDH3-M001, dated April 19, 1997, which are 
described in approximately 200 drawings and specifications that are set 
forth in Sec. Sec. 572.32, 572.33 and 572.41(a)(3),(4),(5) and (6) of 
this part, and in the drawing of the Adaptor Bracket 96-SIDH3-001.
    (1) The head assembly consists of the assembly specified in subpart 
E (Sec. 572.32) and conforms to each of the drawings subtended under 
drawing 78051-61X rev. C.
    (2) The neck assembly consists of the assembly specified in subpart 
E (Sec. 572.33) and conforms to each of the drawings subtended under 
drawing 78051-90 rev. A.
    (3) The thorax assembly consists of the assembly shown as number SID 
053 and conforms to each applicable drawing subtended by number SA-SID 
M030 rev. A.

[[Page 891]]

    (4) The lumbar spine consists of the assembly specified in subpart B 
(Sec. 572.9(a)) and conforms to drawing SA 150 M050 and drawings 
subtended by SA-SID M050 rev. A.
    (5) The abdomen and pelvis consist of the assembly and conform to 
the drawings subtended by SA 150 M060, the drawings subtended by SA 150 
M060 rev. A and the drawings subtended by SA-SID-087 sheet 1 rev. H, and 
SA-SID-87 sheet 2 rev. H.
    (6) The lower limbs consist of the assemblies specified in Subpart B 
(Sec. 572.10) shown as SA 150 M080 and SA 150 M081 in Figure 1 and SA-
SID-M080 and SA-SID-M081 and conform to the drawings subtended by those 
numbers.
    (7) The neck mounting adaptor bracket conforms to drawing 96-SIDH3-
001.
    (8) Upper and middle shoulder foams conform to drawing 96-SIDH3-006.
    (b) The structural properties of the dummy are such that the dummy 
conforms to the specifications of this subpart in every respect before 
being used in vehicle tests specified in Standard 201.
    (c) Disassembly, inspection and assembly procedures, external 
dimensions, weight and drawing list are set forth in the SIDH3 User's 
Manual, dated May 1997.
    (d) Sign convention for signal outputs is given in the reference 
document SAE J1733 of 1994-12, ``Sign Convention for Vehicle Crash 
Testing.''


<R05>
Sec. 572.112  Head assembly.

    The head assembly consists of the head (drawing 78051-61X, rev. C) 
with the neck transducer structural replacement (drawing 78051-383X, 
rev. P) and three (3) accelerometers that are mounted in conformance to 
Sec. 572.36 (c).
    (a) Test procedure. (1) Soak the head assembly in a test environment 
at any temperature between 18.9 and 25.6 degrees C. (66 to 78 degrees 
F.) and at a relative humidity between 10 percent and 70 percent for a 
period of at least four (4) hours prior to its application in a test.
    (2) Clean the impact surface of the head skin and impact plate 
surface, described in paragraph (a)(4) of this section, with 1,1,1 
trichloroethane or equivalent prior to the test.
    (3) Suspend the head, as shown in Figure 51, so that the midsagittal 
plane makes an angle of 35 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 degrees with the 
impact surface and its anterior-posterior axis is horizontal <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1 degree.
    (4) Drop the head from a height of 200 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.25 mm 
(7.87 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.01 inches), measured from the lowest point 
on the head, by a means that ensures a smooth, clean release into a 
rigidly supported flat horizontal steel plate, which is 51 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 mm (2.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.01 in.) thick and 610 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (24.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in) square. 
The plate shall have a dry surface and shall have a microfinish of 0.2 
microns (8 microinches) to 2.0 microns (80 microinches).
    (5) Allow at least two (2) hours between successive tests on the 
same head.
    (b) Performance criteria. (1) When the head assembly is dropped in 
accordance with Sec. 572.112(a), the measured peak resultant 
acceleration shall be between 120 and 150 G's.
    (2) The resultant acceleration-time curve shall be unimodal to the 
extent that oscillations occurring after the main acceleration pulse 
shall not exceed 15 percent (zero to peak) of the main pulse. The 
longitudinal acceleration vector shall not exceed 15 G's.

[[Page 892]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04AU98.003


<R05>
Sec. 572.113  Neck assembly.

    The head/neck assembly consists of the parts 78051-61X, rev. C; -84; 
-90, rev. A; -94; -98; -104, revision F; -303, rev. E;--305; -306; -307, 
rev. X and has a six axis neck transducer (drawing C-1709, revision D) 
installed in conformance with Sec. 572.36(d).

[[Page 893]]

    (a) Test procedure. (1) Soak the head and neck assembly in a test 
environment at any temperature between 20.6 and 22.2 degrees C. (69 to 
72 degrees F.) and at any relative humidity between 10 percent and 70 
percent for a period of at least four (4) hours prior to its application 
in a test.
    (2) Torque the jamnut (78051-64) on the neck cable (78051-301, rev. 
E) to 1.35 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.27 Nm (1.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 
ft-lb) before each test.
    (3) Using neck brackets 78051-303 and -307, mount the head/neck 
assembly to the part 572 pendulum test fixture (see Sec. 572.33, Figure 
22,) so that the midsagittal plane of the head is vertical and 
perpendicular to the plane of motion of the pendulum's longitudinal 
centerline (see Sec. 572.33, Figure 20, except that the direction of 
the head/neck assembly is rotated around the superior-inferior axis by 
an angle of 90 degrees). Install suitable transducers or other devices 
necessary for measuring the ``D'' plane (horizontal surface at the base 
of the skull) rotation with respect to the pendulum's longitudinal 
centerline. The rotation can be measured by placing a transducer at the 
occipital condyles and another at the intersection of the centerline of 
the neck and the line extending from the base of the neck as shown in 
figure 52.
    (4) Release the pendulum and allow it to fall freely from a height 
to achieve an impact velocity of 6.89 to 7.13 m/s (22.6 to 23.4 ft/sec) 
measured at the center of the pendulum accelerometer.
    (5) Allow the neck to flex without the head or neck contacting any 
object during the test.
    (6) Time zero is defined as the time of initial contact between the 
striker plate and the pendulum deceleration medium.
    (7) Allow a period of at least thirty (30) minutes between 
successive tests on the same neck assembly.
    (b) Performance criteria. (1) The pendulum deceleration pulse is to 
be characterized in terms of decrease in velocity as obtained by 
integrating the pendulum acceleration output.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Time (ms)                      Pendulum Delta-V (m/s)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10.....................................  1.96 to 2.55.
20.....................................  4.12 to 5.10.
30.....................................  5.73 to 7.01.
40 to 70...............................  6.27 to 7.64.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) The maximum rotation of the midsagittal plane of the head shall 
be 66 to 82 degrees with respect to the pendulum's longitudinal 
centerline. The decaying head rotation vs. time curve shall cross the 
zero angle between 58 to 67 ms after reaching its peak value.
    (3) The moment about the x-axis which coincides with the midsagittal 
plane of the head at the level of the occipital condyles shall have a 
maximum value between 73 and 88 Nm. The decaying moment vs. time curve 
shall first cross zero moment between 49 and 64 ms after reaching its 
peak value. The following formula is to be used to calculate the moment 
about the occipital condyles when using the six-axis neck transducer:

M = Mx + 0.01778 Fy

Where Mx and Fy are the moment and force measured by the transducer and 
expressed in terms of Nm and N, respectively.

    (4) The maximum rotation of the head with respect to the pendulum's 
longitudinal centerline shall occur between 2 and 16 ms after peak 
moment.

[63 FR 41470, Aug. 4, 1998, as amended at 66 FR 51882, Oct. 11, 2001]


<R05>
Sec. 572.114  Thorax.

    The specifications and test procedure for the thorax for the SID/
HIII dummy are identical to those applicable to the SID dummy as set 
forth in Sec. 572.42 except that the reference to the SID device found 
in Sec. 572.42(a), (SA-SID-M001A revision A, dated May 18, 1994) does 
not apply and the reference to the SID/HIII (SA-SIDH3-M001, dated April 
19, 1997) is applied in its place.

[[Page 894]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04AU98.004


<R05>
Sec. 572.115  Lumbar spine and pelvis.

    The specifications and test procedure for the lumbar spine and 
pelvis are identical to those for the SID dummy as set forth in Sec. 
572.42 except that the reference to the SID device found in Sec. 
572.42(a), (SA-SID-M001A revision A, dated May 18, 1994) does not apply 
and the reference to the SID/HIII (SA-SIDH3-M001, dated April 19, 1997) 
is applied in its place.


<R05>
Sec. 572.116  Instrumentation and test conditions.

    (a) The test probe for lateral thoracic and pelvis impact tests are 
the same as those specified in Sec. 572.44(a).

[[Page 895]]

    (b) Accelerometer mounting in the thorax is the same as specified in 
Sec. 572.44(b).
    (c) Accelerometer mounting in the pelvis is the same as specified in 
Sec. 572.44(c).
    (d) Head accelerometer mounting is the same as specified in Sec. 
572.36(c).
    (e) Neck transducer mounting is the same as specified in Sec. 
572.36(d).
    (f) Instrumentation and sensors used must conform to SAE Recommended 
Practice J211, March 1995, ``Instrumentation for Impact Tests.''
    (g) The mountings for the spine, rib and pelvis accelerometers shall 
have no resonance frequency within a range of 3 times the frequency 
range of the applicable channel class.
    (h) Limb joints of the test dummy shall be set at the force between 
1 to 2 g's, which just supports the limb's weight when the limbs are 
extended horizontally forward. The force required to move a limb segment 
does not exceed 2 g's throughout the range of the limb motion.
    (i) Performance tests must be conducted at a temperature between 
20.6 and 22.2 degrees C. (69 to 72 degrees F.) and at a relative 
humidity between 10 percent and 70 percent after exposure of the dummy 
to those conditions for a period of at least four (4) hours.
    (j) For the performance of tests specified in Sec. 572.114 and 
Sec. 572.115, the dummy is positioned the same as specified in Sec. 
572.44(h).


<R04>
          Subpart N_Six-year-old Child Test Dummy, Beta Version

    Source: 65 FR 2065, Jan. 13, 2000, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 572.120  Incorporation by reference.

    (a) The following materials are hereby incorporated into this 
subpart by reference:
    (1) A drawings and inspection package entitled ``Parts List and 
Drawings, Hybrid III Six-year-old Child Test Dummy (H-III6C, Beta 
Version) (June 2002)'', consisting of:
    (i) Drawing No. 127-1000, 6-year H3 Head Complete,
    (ii) Drawing No. 127-1015, Neck Assembly,
    (iii) Drawing No. 127-2000, Upper Torso Assembly,
    (iv) Drawing No. 127-3000, Lower Torso Assembly,
    (v) Drawing No. 127-4000-1 and 4000-2, Leg Assembly,
    (vi) Drawing No. 127-5000-1 and 5000-2, Arm Assembly, and
    (vii) The Hybrid III Six-year-old Child Parts/Drawing List.
    (2) A procedures manual entitled ``Procedures for Assembly, 
Disassembly, and Inspection (PADI) of the Hybrid III 6-year-old Child 
Crash Test Dummy (H-III6C), Beta Version, June 2002'';
    (3) SAE Recommended Practice J211-1995 Instrumentation for Impact 
Tests--Parts 1 and 2, dated March, 1995'';
    (4) SAE J1733 Information Report, titled ``Sign Convention for 
Vehicle Crash Testing'', dated December 1994.
    (b) The Director of the Federal Register approved those materials 
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR 
part 51. Copies of the materials may be inspected at NHTSA's Technical 
Reference Library, 400 Seventh Street SW., room 5109, Washington, DC, or 
at the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For 
information on the availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-
6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--
federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    (c) The incorporated materials are available as follows:
    (1) The drawings and specifications package and the PADI document 
referred to in subparagraph (a) are accessible for viewing and copying 
at the Department of Transportation Docket's public area, Plaza 401, 400 
Seventh St., SW., Washington, DC 20590, and may be downloaded from 
dms.dot.gov. They are also available from Reprographic Technologies, 
9107 Gaither Rd, Gaithersburg, MD 200877, (301) 419-5070.
    (2) The SAE materials referred to in paragraphs (a)(3) and (a)(4) of 
this section are available from the Society of

[[Page 896]]

Automotive Engineers, Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 
15096.

[65 FR 2065, Jan. 13, 2000, as amended at 67 FR 47327, July 18, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 572.121  General description.

    (a) The Hybrid III type 6-year-old dummy is defined by drawings and 
specifications containing the following materials:
    (1) Technical drawings and specifications package P/N 127-0000, the 
titles of which are listed in Table A;
    (2) Procedures for Assembly, Disassembly, and Inspection (PADI) of 
the Hybrid III 6-year-old test dummy, Alpha version (August 1999).

                                 Table A
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Drawing
                     Component assembly                         number
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Head assembly...............................................    127-1000
Neck assembly...............................................    127-1015
Upper torso assembly........................................    127-2000
Lower torso assembly........................................    127-3000
Leg assembly................................................    127-4000
Arm assembly................................................    127-5000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Adjacent segments are joined in a manner such that except for 
contacts existing under static conditions, there is no contact between 
metallic elements throughout the range of motion or under simulated 
crash impact conditions.
    (c) The structural properties of the dummy are such that the dummy 
must conform to this Subpart in every respect before use in any test 
similar to those specified in Standard 208, ``Occupant Crash 
Protection'', and Standard 213, ``Child Restraint Systems''.


<R05>
Sec. 572.122  Head assembly and test procedure.

    (a) The head assembly for this test consists of the complete head 
(drawing 127-1000), a six-axis neck transducer (drawing SA572-S11) or 
its structural replacement (drawing 78051-383X), a head to neck-to-pivot 
pin (drawing 78051-339), and 3 accelerometers (drawing SA572-S4).
    (b) When the head assembly in paragraph (a) of this section is 
dropped from a height of 376.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.0 mm (14.8 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.04 in) in accordance with paragraph (c) of this 
section, the peak resultant acceleration at the location of the 
accelerometers at the head CG may not be less than 245 G or more than 
300 G. The resultant acceleration vs. time history curve shall be 
unimodal; oscillations occurring after the main pulse must be less than 
10 percent of the peak resultant acceleration. The lateral acceleration 
shall not exceed 15 g's (zero to peak).
    (c) Head test procedure. The test procedure for the head is as 
follows:
    (1) Soak the head assembly in a controlled environment at any 
temperature between 18.9 and 25.6 [deg]C (66 and 78 [deg]F) and a 
relative humidity from 10 to 70 percent for at least four hours prior to 
a test.
    (2) Prior to the test, clean the impact surface of the skin and the 
impact plate surface with isopropyl alcohol, trichloroethane, or an 
equivalent. The skin of the head must be clean and dry for testing.
    (3) Suspend the head assembly as shown in Figure N1. The lowest 
point on the forehead must be 376.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.0 mm (14.8 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.04 in) from the impact surface and the head must 
be oriented to an incline of 62 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 deg. between the 
``D'' plane as shown in Figure N1 and the plane of the impact surface. 
The 1.57 mm (0.062 in) diameter holes located on either side of the 
dummy's head shall be used to ensure that the head is level with respect 
to the impact surface.
    (4) Drop the head assembly from the specified height by means that 
ensure a smooth, instant release onto a rigidly supported flat 
horizontal steel plate which is 50.8 mm (2 in) thick and 610 mm (24 in) 
square. The impact surface shall be clean, dry and have a micro finish 
of not less than 203.2. x 10<SUP>-6</SUP> mm (8 micro inches) (RMS) and 
not more than 2032.0 x 10<SUP>-6</SUP> mm (80 micro inches) (RMS).
    (5) Allow at least 2 hours between successive tests on the same 
head.


<R05>
Sec. 572.123  Neck assembly and test procedure.

    (a) The neck assembly for the purposes of this test consists of the 
assembly of components shown in drawing 127-1015.
    (b) When the head-neck assembly consisting of the head (drawing 127-
1000), neck (drawing 127-1015), pivot pin (drawing 78051-339), bib 
simulator

[[Page 897]]

(drawing TE127-1025, neck bracket assembly (drawing 127-8221), six-axis 
neck transducer (drawing SA572-S11), neck mounting adaptor (drawing TE-
2208-001), and three accelerometers (drawing SA572-S4) installed in the 
head assembly as specified in Sec. 572.122, is tested according to the 
test procedure in paragraph (c) of this section, it shall have the 
following characteristics:
    (1) Flexion. (i) Plane D, referenced in Figure N2, shall rotate in 
the direction of preimpact flight with respect to the pendulum's 
longitudinal centerline between 74 degrees and 92 degrees. Within this 
specified rotation corridor, the peak moment about the occipital 
condyles shall be not less than 27 N-m (19.9 ft-lbf) and not more than 
33 N-m (24.3 ft-lbf).
    (ii) The positive moment shall decay for the first time to 5 N-m 
(3.7 ft-lbf) between 103 ms and 123 ms.
    (iii) The moment shall be calculated by the following formula: 
Moment (N-m) = M<INF>y</INF>-(0.01778m) x (F<INF>X</INF>).
    (iv) M<INF>y</INF> is the moment about the y-axis and F<INF>X</INF> 
is the shear force measured by the neck transducer (drawing SA572-S11) 
and 0.01778m is the distance from force to occipital condyle.
    (2) Extension. (i) Plane D, referenced in Figure N3, shall rotate in 
the direction of preimpact flight with respect to the pendulum's 
longitudinal centerline between 85 degrees and 103 degrees. Within this 
specified rotation corridor, the peak moment about the occipital 
condyles shall be not more than -19 N-m (-14 ft-lbf) and not less than -
24 N-m (-17.7ft-lbf).
    (ii) The negative moment shall decay for the first time to -5 N-m (-
3.7 ft-lbf) between 123 ms and 147 ms.
    (iii) The moment shall be calculated by the following formula: 
Moment (N-m)=M<INF>y</INF>-(0.01778m)x(F<INF>X</INF>).
    (iv) M<INF>y</INF> is the moment about the y-axis and F<INF>X</INF> 
is the shear force measured by the neck transducer (drawing SA572-S11) 
and 0.017778m is the distance from force to occipital condyle.
    (3) Time-zero is defined as the time of initial contact between the 
pendulum striker plate and the honeycomb material.
    (c) Test procedure. The test procedure for the neck assembly is as 
follows:
    (1) Soak the neck assembly in a controlled environment at any 
temperature between 20.6 and 22.2 [deg]C (69 and 72 [deg]F) and a 
relative humidity between 10 and 70 percent for at least four hours 
prior to a test.
    (2) Torque the jam nut (drawing 9000341) on the neck cable (drawing 
127-1016) to 0.23 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.02 N-m (2.0 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 in-lbs).
    (3) Mount the head-neck assembly, defined in paragraph (b) of this 
section, on the pendulum so the midsagittal plane of the head is 
vertical and coincides with the plane of motion of the pendulum as shown 
in Figure N2 for flexion tests and Figure N3 for extension tests.
    (4) Release the pendulum and allow it to fall freely from a height 
to achieve an impact velocity of 4.95 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.12 m/s 
(16.2 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 ft/s) for flexion tests and 4.3 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.12 m/s (14.10 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.40 ft/s) for 
extension tests, measured by an accelerometer mounted on the pendulum as 
shown in Figure 22 of 49 CFR 572 at the instant of contact with the 
honey comb.
    (i) Time-zero is defined as the time of initial contact between the 
pendulum striker plate and the honeycomb material. All data channels 
should be at the zero level at this time.
    (ii) Stop the pendulum from the initial velocity with an 
acceleration vs. time pulse which meets the velocity change as specified 
below. Integrate the pendulum acceleration data channel to obtain the 
velocity vs. time curve:

                                                     Table B
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                            Time                                                Pendulum pulse
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                       Flexion                  Extension
                             ms                              ---------------------------------------------------
                                                                  m/s          ft/s         m/s          ft/s
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10..........................................................      1.2-1.6      3.9-5.3      1.0-1.4      3.3-4.6
20..........................................................      2.4-3.4     7.9-11.2      2.2-3.0      7.2-9.8
30..........................................................      3.8-5.0    12.5-16.4      3.2-4.2    10.5-13.8
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 898]]


<R05>
Sec. 572.124  Thorax assembly and test procedure.

    (a) Thorax (upper torso) assembly. The thorax consists of the part 
of the torso assembly shown in drawing 127-2000.
    (b) When the anterior surface of the thorax of a completely 
assembled dummy (drawing 127-0000) is impacted by a test probe 
conforming to section 572.127(a) at 6.71 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.12 m/s 
(22.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 ft/s) according to the test procedure in 
paragraph (c) of this section:
    (1) The maximum sternum displacement (compression) relative to the 
spine, measured with chest deflection transducer (drawing SA572-S50), 
must be not less than 38.0 mm (1.50 in) and not more than 46.0 mm (1.80 
in). Within this specified compression corridor, the peak force, 
measured by the probe in accordance with section 572.127, shall not be 
less than 1150 N (259 lbf) and not more than 1380 N (310 lbf). The peak 
force after 12.5 mm (0.5 in) of sternum displacement but before reaching 
the minimum required 38.0 mm (1.5 in) sternum displacement limit shall 
not exceed 1500 N (337.2 lbf).
    (2) The internal hysteresis of the ribcage in each impact as 
determined by the plot of force vs. deflection in paragraph (b)(1) of 
this section shall be not less than 65 percent but not more than 85 
percent.
    (c) Test procedure. The test procedure for the thorax assembly is as 
follows:
    (1) Soak the dummy in a controlled environment at any temperature 
between 20.6[deg] and 22.2 [deg]C (69[deg] and 72 [deg]F) and a relative 
humidity between 10 and 70 percent for at least four hours prior to a 
test.
    (2) Seat and orient the dummy, wearing tight-fitting underwear or 
equivalent consisting of a size 5 short-sleeved shirt having a weight 
less than 0.090 kg (0.2 lb) and an opening at the top just large enough 
to permit the passage of the head with a tight fit, and a size 4 pair of 
long pants having a weight of less than 0.090 kg (0.2 lb) with the legs 
cut off sufficiently above the knee to allow the knee target to be 
visible, on a seating surface without back support as shown in Figure 
N4, with the limbs extended horizontally and forward, parallel to the 
midsagittal plane, the midsagittal plane vertical within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1 degree and the ribs level in the anterior-posterior 
and lateral directions within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees.
    (3) Establish the impact point at the chest midsagittal plane so 
that the impact point of the longitudinal centerline of the probe 
coincides with the midsagittal plane of the dummy within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 mm (0.1 in) and is 12.7 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.1 mm 
(0.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.04 in) below the horizontal-peripheral 
centerline of the No. 3 rib and is within 0.5 degrees of a horizontal 
line in the dummy's midsagittal plane.
    (4) Impact the thorax with the test probe so that at the moment of 
contact the probe's longitudinal center line falls within 2 degrees of a 
horizontal line in the dummy's midsagittal plane.
    (5) Guide the test probe during impact so that there is no 
significant lateral, vertical or rotational movement.
    (6) No suspension hardware, suspension cables, or any other 
attachments to the probe, including the velocity vane, shall make 
contact with the dummy during the test.

[65 FR 2065, Jan. 13, 2000, as amended at 67 FR 47327, July 18, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 572.125  Upper and lower torso assemblies and torso flexion test 
procedure.

    (a) Upper/lower torso assembly. The test objective is to determine 
the stiffness effects of the lumbar spine (drawing 127-3002), including 
cable (drawing 127-8095), mounting plate insert (drawing 910420-048), 
nylon shoulder bushing (drawing 9001373), nut (drawing 9001336), and 
abdominal insert (drawing 127-8210), on resistance to articulation 
between upper torso assembly (drawing 127-2000) and lower torso assembly 
(drawing 127-3000).
    (b)(1) When the upper torso assembly of a seated dummy is subjected 
to a force continuously applied at the head to neck pivot pin level 
through a rigidly attached adaptor bracket as shown in Figure N5 
according to the test procedure set out in paragraph (c) of this 
section, the lumbar spine-abdomen assembly shall flex by an amount that 
permits the upper torso assembly to translate in angular motion until 
the machined rear surface of the instrument cavity at the back of the 
thoracic spine box is at 45 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees relative 
to the vertical transverse plane, at which time the force applied as 
shown

[[Page 899]]

in Figure N5 must be not less than 147 N (33 lbf) and not more than 200 
N (45 lbf), and
    (2) Upon removal of the force, the torso assembly must return to 
within 8 degrees of its initial position.
    (c) Test procedure. The test procedure for the torso assemblies is 
as follows:
    (1) Soak the dummy in a controlled environment at any temperature 
between 18.9 and 25.6 [deg]C (66 and 78 [deg]F) and a relative humidity 
between 10 and 70 percent for at least four hours prior to a test.
    (2) Attach the dummy (with or without the legs below the femurs) to 
the fixture in a seated posture as shown in Figure N5.
    (3) Secure the pelvis at the pelvis instrument cavity rear face by 
threading four \1/4\ in cap screws into the available threaded 
attachment holes. Tighten the mountings so that the test material is 
rigidly affixed to the test fixture and the pelvic-lumbar joining 
surface is horizontal.
    (4) Flex the thorax forward three times between vertical and until 
the torso reference plane, as shown in figure N5, reaches 30 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 degrees from vertical. Bring the torso to vertical 
orientation, remove all externally applied flexion forces, and wait 30 
minutes before conducting the test. During the 30-minute waiting period, 
the dummy's upper torso shall be externally supported at or near its 
vertical orientation to prevent sagging.
    (5) Remove the external support and wait two minutes. Measure the 
initial orientation of the torso reference plane of the seated, 
unsupported dummy as shown in Figure N5. This initial torso orientation 
angle may not exceed 22 degrees.
    (6) Attach the loading adapter bracket to the spine of the dummy, 
the pull cable, and the load cell as shown in Figure N5.
    (7) Apply a tension force in the midsagittal plane to the pull cable 
as shown in Figure N5 at any upper torso deflection rate between 0.5 and 
1.5 degrees per second, until the torso reference plane is at 45 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees of flexion relative to the vertical 
transverse plane as shown in Figure N5.
    (8) Continue to apply a force sufficient to maintain 45 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees of flexion for 10 seconds, and record the 
highest applied force during the 10-second period.
    (9) Release all force as rapidly as possible, and measure the return 
angle at 3 minutes or any time thereafter after the release.


<R05>
Sec. 572.126  Knees and knee impact test procedure.

    (a) Knee assembly. The knee assembly is part of the leg assembly 
(drawing 127-4000-1 and -2).
    (b) When the knee assembly, consisting of knee machined (drawing 
127-4013), knee flesh (drawing 127-4011), lower leg (drawing 127-4014), 
the foot assembly (drawing 127-4030-1(left) and -2 (right)) and femur 
load transducer (drawing SA572-S10) or its structural replacement 
(drawing 127-4007) is tested according to the test procedure in section 
572.127(c), the peak resistance force as measured with the test probe 
mounted accelerometer must be not less than 2.0 kN (450 lbf) and not 
more than 3.0 kN (674 lbf).
    (c) Test procedure. The test procedure for the knee assembly is as 
follows:
    (1) Soak the knee assembly in a controlled environment at any 
temperature between 18.9 and 25.6 [deg]C (66 and 78 [deg]F) and a 
relative humidity from 10 to 70 percent for at least four hours prior to 
a test.
    (2) Mount the test material and secure it to a rigid test fixture as 
shown in Figure N6. No contact is permitted between any part of the foot 
or tibia and any exterior surface.
    (3) Align the test probe so that throughout its stroke and at 
contact with the knee it is within 2 degrees of horizontal and collinear 
with the longitudinal centerline of the femur.
    (4) Guide the pendulum so that there is no significant lateral 
vertical or rotational movement at time-zero.
    (5) The test probe velocity at the time of contact shall be 2.1 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.03 m/s (6.9 <greek-i> 0.1 ft/s).
    (6) No suspension hardware, suspension cables, or any other 
attachments to the probe, including the velocity vane, shall make 
contact with the dummy during testing.

[65 FR 2065, Jan. 13, 2000, as amended at 67 FR 47328, July 18, 2002]

[[Page 900]]


<R05>
Sec. 572.127  Test conditions and instrumentation.

    (a) The test probe for thoracic impacts, except for attachments, 
shall be of rigid metal or metal alloy construction and concentric about 
its longitudinal axis. Any attachments to the impactor, such as 
suspension hardware, velocity vanes, etc., must meet the requirements of 
Sec. 572.124(c)(6). The impactor shall have a mass of 2.86 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.02 kg (6.3 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 lb) and a 
minimum mass moment of inertia of 160 kg-c\2\ (0.141 lb-in-sec\2\) in 
yaw and pitch about the CG of the probe. One third of the weight of 
suspension cables and any attachments to the impact probe must be 
included in the calculation of mass, and such components may not exceed 
five percent of the total weight of the probe. The impacting end of the 
probe, has a flat, continuous, and non-deformable 101.6 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.25 mm (4.00 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.01 in) diameter 
face with an edge radius of 7.6/12.7 mm (0.3/0.5 in). The impactor shall 
have a 101-103 mm (4.0-4.1 in) diameter cylindrical surface extending 
for a minimum of 12.5 mm (0.5 in) to the rear from the impact face. The 
probe's end opposite to the impact face has provisions for mounting an 
accelerometer with its sensitive axis collinear with the longitudinal 
axis of the probe. The impact probe shall have a free air resonant 
frequency of not less than 1000 Hz limited to the direction of the 
longitudinal axis of the impactor.
    (b) The test probe for knee impacts, except for attachments, shall 
be of rigid metal or alloy construction and concentric about its 
longitudinal axis. Any attachments to the impactor, such as suspension 
hardware, velocity vanes, etc., must meet the requirements of Sec. 
572.126(c)(6). The impactor shall have a mass of 0.82 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.02 kg (1.8 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 lb) and a 
minimum mass moment of inertia of 34 kg-cm2 (0.03 lb-in-sec2) in yaw and 
pitch about the CG of the probe. One third of the weight of suspension 
cables and any attachments to the impact probe must be included in the 
calculation of mass, and such components may not exceed five percent of 
the total weight of the probe. The impacting end of the probe, has a 
flat, continuous, and non-deformable 76.2 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 mm 
(3.00 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.01 in) diameter face with an edge radius 
of 7.6/12.7 mm (0.3/0.5 in). The impactor shall have a 76-77 mm (3.0-3.1 
in) diameter cylindrical surface extending for a minimum of 12.5 mm (0.5 
in) to the rear from the impact face. The probe's end opposite to the 
impact face has provisions for mounting an accelerometer with its 
sensitive axis collinear with the longitudinal axis of the probe. The 
impact probe shall have a free air resonant frequency of not less than 
1000 Hz limited to the direction of the longitudinal axis of the 
impactor.
    (c) Head accelerometers shall have dimensions, response 
characteristics, and sensitive mass locations specified in drawing 
SA572-S4 and be mounted in the head as shown in drawing 127-0000 sheet 
3.
    (d) Neck force/moment transducer. (1) The upper neck force/moment 
transducer shall have the dimensions, response characteristics, and 
sensitive axis locations specified in drawing SA572-S11 and be mounted 
in the head-neck assembly as shown in drawing 127-0000 sheet 3.
    (2) The optional lower neck force/moment transducer shall have the 
dimensions, response characteristics, and sensitive axis locations 
specified in drawing SA572-S26 and be mounted as shown in drawing 127-
0000 sheet 3.
    (e) The thorax accelerometers shall have the dimensions, response 
characteristics, and sensitive mass locations specified in drawing 
SA572-S4 and be mounted in the torso assembly in triaxial configuration 
at T4, and as optional instrumentation in uniaxial for- and-aft oriented 
configuration on the most anterior ends of ribs <greek-i>1 and 
<greek-i>6 and at the spine box at the levels of <greek-i>1 and 
<greek-i>6 ribs as shown in 127-0000 sheet 3.
    (f) The chest deflection transducer shall have the dimensions and 
response characteristics specified in drawing SA572-S50 and be mounted 
in the upper torso assembly as shown in 127-0000 sheet 3.
    (g) The optional lumbar spine force-moment transducer shall have the 
dimensions, response characteristics, and sensitive axis locations 
specified in drawing SA572-S12 and be mounted in the lower torso 
assembly as shown in drawing 127-0000 sheet 3 as a replacement for 
lumbar adaptor 127-3005.

[[Page 901]]

    (h) The optional iliac spine force transducers shall have the 
dimensions and response characteristics specified in drawing SA572-S13 
and be mounted in the torso assembly as shown in drawing 127-0000 sheet 
3 as a replacement for ASIS load cell 127-3015-1 (left) and -2 (right).
    (i) The optional pelvis accelerometers shall have the dimensions, 
response characteristics, and sensitive mass locations specified in 
drawing SA572-S4 and be mounted in the torso assembly in triaxial 
configuration in the pelvis bone as shown in drawing 127-0000 sheet 3.
    (j) The femur force transducer shall have the dimensions and 
response characteristics specified in drawing SA72-S10 and be mounted in 
the leg assembly as shown in drawing 127-0000 sheet 3.
    (k) The outputs of acceleration and force-sensing devices installed 
in the dummy and in the test apparatus specified by this part must be 
recorded in individual data channels that conform to SAE Recommended 
Practice J211, Rev. Mar95 ``Instrumentation for lmpact Tests,'' except 
that the lumbar measurements are based on CFC 600, with channel classes 
as follows:
    (1) Head acceleration--Class 1000.
    (2) Neck:
    (i) Forces--Class 1000;
    (ii) Moments--Class 600;
    (iii) Pendulum acceleration--Class 180;
    (iv) Rotation--Class 60 (if used).
    (3) Thorax:
    (i) Rib acceleration--Class 1000;
    (ii) Spine and pendulum accelerations--Class 180;
    (iii) Sternum deflection --Class 600.
    (4) Lumbar:
    (i) Forces--Class 1000;
    (ii) Moments --Class 600;
    (iii) Flexion --Class 60 if data channel is used.
    (5) Pelvis accelerations --Class 1000.
    (6) Femur forces--Class 600.
    (l) Coordinate signs for instrumentation polarity shall conform to 
the Sign Convention For Vehicle Crash Testing, Surface Vehicle 
Information Report, SAE J1733, 1994-12.
    (m) The mountings for sensing devices shall have no resonance 
frequency less than 3 times the frequency range of the applicable 
channel class.
    (n) Limb joints must be set at one G, barely restraining the weight 
of the limb when it is extended horizontally. The force needed to move a 
limb segment shall not exceed 2G throughout the range of limb motion.
    (o) Performance tests of the same component, segment, assembly, or 
fully assembled dummy shall be separated in time by period of not less 
than 30 minutes unless otherwise noted.
    (p) Surfaces of dummy components may not be painted except as 
specified in this subpart or in drawings subtended by this subpart.

[65 FR 2065, Jan. 13, 2000, as amended at 67 FR 47328, July 18, 2002]

[[Page 902]]

                    Figures to Subpart N of Part 572
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18JY02.000


[[Page 903]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18JY02.001


[[Page 904]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18JY02.002


[[Page 905]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13JA00.005


[[Page 906]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19SE02.000


[[Page 907]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18JY02.003


[65 FR 2065, Jan. 13, 2000, as amended at 67 FR 47329, July 18, 2002; 67 
FR 59023, Sept. 19, 2002]

[[Page 908]]


<R04>
  Subpart O_Hybrid III 5th Percentile Female Test Dummy, Alpha Version

    Source: 65 FR 10968, Mar. 1, 2000, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 572.130  Incorporation by reference.

    (a) The following materials are hereby incorporated into this 
Subpart by reference:
    (1) A drawings and specification package entitled ``Parts List and 
Drawings, Part 572 Subpart O Hybrid III Fifth Percentile Small Adult 
Female Crash Test Dummy (HIII-5F, Alpha Version)'' (June 2002), 
incorporated by reference in ``572.131, and consisting of:
    (i) Drawing No. 880105-100X, Head Assembly, incorporated by 
reference in Sec. Sec. 572.131, 572.132, 572.133, 572.134, 572.135, and 
572.137;
    (ii) Drawing No. 880105-250, Neck Assembly, incorporated by 
reference in Sec. Sec. 572.131, 572.133, 572.134, 572.135, and 572.137;
    (iii) Drawing No. 880105-300, Upper Torso Assembly, incorporated by 
reference in Sec. Sec. 572.131, 572.134, 572.135, and 572.137;
    (iv) Drawing No. 880105-450, Lower Torso Assembly, incorporated by 
reference in Sec. Sec. 572.131, 572.134, 572.135, and 572.137;
    (v) Drawing No. 880105-560-1, Complete Leg Assembly--left, 
incorporated by reference in Sec. Sec. 572.131, 572.135, 572.136, and 
572.137;
    (vi) Drawing No. 880105-560-2, Complete Leg Assembly--right 
incorporated by reference in Sec. Sec. 572.131, 572.135, 572.136, and 
572.137;
    (vii) Drawing No. 880105-728-1, Complete Arm Assembly--left, 
incorporated by reference in Sec. Sec. 572.131, 572.134, and 572.135 as 
part of the complete dummy assembly;
    (viii) Drawing No. 880105-728-2, Complete Arm Assembly--right, 
incorporated by reference in Sec. Sec. 572.131, 572.134, and 572.135 as 
part of the complete dummy assembly;
    (ix) The Hybrid III 5th percentile small adult female crash test 
dummy parts list, incorporated by reference in Sec. 572.131;
    (2) A procedures manual entitled ``Procedures for Assembly, 
Disassembly, and Inspection (PADI) Subpart O Hybrid III Fifth Percentile 
Adult Female Crash Test Dummy (HIII-5F), Alpha Version'' (February 
2002), incorporated by reference in Sec. 572.132.
    (3) SAE Recommended Practice J211/1, Rev. Mar 95 ``Instrumentation 
for Impact Tests--Part 1--Electronic Instrumentation'', incorporated by 
reference in Sec. 572.137;
    (4) SAE Recommended Practice J211/2, Rev. Mar 95 ``Instrumentation 
for Impact Tests--Part 2--Photographic Instrumentation'' incorporated by 
reference in Sec. 572.137; and
    (5) SAE J1733 of 1994-12 ``Sign Convention for Vehicle Crash 
Testing'', incorporated by reference in Sec. 572.137.
    (b) The Director of the Federal Register approved the materials 
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR 
part 51. Copies of the materials may be inspected at NHTSA's Technical 
Reference Library, 400 Seventh Street SW., room 5109, Washington, DC, or 
at the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For 
information on the availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-
6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--
federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    (c) The incorporated materials are available as follows:
    (1) The Parts List and Drawings, Part 572 Subpart O Hybrid III Fifth 
Percentile Small Adult Female Crash Test Dummy, (HIII-5F, Alpha Version) 
(June 2002), referred to in paragraph (a)(1) of this section and the 
Procedures for Assembly, Disassembly, and Inspection (PADI) of the 
Hybrid III 5th Percentile Small Adult Female Crash Test Dummy, Alpha 
Version, referred to in paragraph (a)(2) of this section are available 
from Reprographic Technologies, 9107 Gaither Road, Gaithersburg, MD 
20877, (301) 419-5070. These documents are also accessible for reading 
and copying through the DOT Docket Management System.
    (2) The SAE materials referred to in paragraphs (a)(3) and (a)(4) of 
this section are available from the Society of

[[Page 909]]

Automotive Engineers, Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, Pa. 
15096.

[65 FR 10968, Mar. 1, 2000, as amended at 67 FR 46413, July 15, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 572.131  General description.

    (a) The Hybrid III fifth percentile adult female crash test dummy is 
defined by drawings and specifications containing the following 
materials:
    (1) Technical drawings and specifications package P/N 880105-000 
(refer to Sec. 572.130(a)(1)), the titles of which are listed in Table 
A;
    (2) Parts List and Drawings, Part 572 Subpart O Hybrid III Fifth 
Percentile Small Adult Female Crash Test Dummy (HIII-5F, Alpha Version) 
(June 2002) (refer to Sec. 572.130(a)(1)(ix)).

                                 Table A
------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Component assembly                      Drawing No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Head Assembly............................  880105-100X
Neck Assembly............................  880105-250
Upper Torso Assembly.....................  880105-300
Lower Torso Assembly.....................  880105-450
Complete Leg Assembly--left..............  880105-560-1
Complete Leg Assembly--right.............  880105-560-2
Complete Arm Assembly--left..............  880105-728-1
Complete Arm Assembly--right.............  880105-728-2
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Adjacent segments are joined in a manner such that, except for 
contacts existing under static conditions, there is no contact between 
metallic elements throughout the range of motion or under simulated 
crash impact conditions.
    (c) The structural properties of the dummy are such that the dummy 
conforms to this Subpart in every respect before use in any test similar 
to those specified in Standard 208, Occupant Crash Protection.

[65 FR 10968, Mar. 1, 2000, as amended at 67 FR 46414, July 15, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 572.132  Head assembly and test procedure.

    (a) The head assembly (refer to Sec. 572.130(a)(1)(i)) for this 
test consists of the complete head (drawing 880105-100X), a six-axis 
neck transducer (drawing SA572-S11) or its structural replacement 
(drawing 78051-383X), and 3 accelerometers (drawing SA572-S4).
    (b) When the head assembly is dropped from a height of 376.0 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1.0 mm (14.8 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.04 in) in 
accordance with subsection (c) of this section, the peak resultant 
acceleration at the location of the accelerometers at the head CG may 
not be less than 250 G or more than 300 G. The resultant acceleration 
vs. time history curve shall be unimodal; oscillations occurring after 
the main pulse must be less than 10 percent of the peak resultant 
acceleration. The lateral acceleration shall not exceed 15 G (zero to 
peak).
    (c) Head test procedure. The test procedure for the head is as 
follows:
    (1) Soak the head assembly in a controlled environment at any 
temperature between 18.9 and 25.6 [deg]C (66 and 78 [deg]F) and a 
relative humidity from 10 to 70 percent for at least four hours prior to 
a test.
    (2) Prior to the test, clean the impact surface of the skin and the 
impact plate surface with isopropyl alcohol, trichloroethane, or an 
equivalent. The skin of the head must be clean and dry for testing.
    (3) Suspend and orient the head assembly as shown in Figure 19 of 49 
CFR 572. The lowest point on the forehead must be 376.0 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1.0 mm (14.8 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.04 in) from the 
impact surface. The 1.57 mm (0.062 in) diameter holes located on either 
side of the dummy's head shall be used to ensure that the head is level 
with respect to the impact surface.
    (4) Drop the head assembly from the specified height by means that 
ensure a smooth, instant release onto a rigidly supported flat 
horizontal steel plate which is 50.8 mm (2.0 in) thick and 610 mm (24.0 
in) square. The impact surface shall be clean, dry and have a micro 
finish of not less than 203.2.x10<SUP>-6</SUP> mm (8 micro inches) (RMS) 
and not more than 2032.0x10<SUP>-6</SUP> mm (80 micro inches) (RMS).
    (5) Allow at least 2 hours between successive tests on the same 
head.


<R05>
Sec. 572.133  Neck assembly and test procedure.

    (a) The neck assembly (refer to Sec. 572.130(a)(1)(ii)) for the 
purposes of this test consists of the assembly of components shown in 
drawing 880105-250.
    (b) When the head-neck assembly consisting of the head (drawing 
880105-100X), neck (drawing 880105-250), bib

[[Page 910]]

simulator (drawing 880105-371), upper neck adjusting bracket (drawing 
880105-207), lower neck adjusting bracket (drawing 880105-208), six-axis 
neck transducer (drawing SA572-S11), and either three accelerometers 
(drawing SA572-S4) or their mass equivalent installed in the head 
assembly as specified in drawing 880105-100X, is tested according to the 
test procedure in subsection (c) of this section, it shall have the 
following characteristics:
    (1) Flexion. (i) Plane D, referenced in Figure O1, shall rotate in 
the direction of preimpact flight with respect to the pendulum's 
longitudinal centerline between 77 degrees and 91 degrees. During the 
time interval while the rotation is within the specified corridor, the 
peak moment, measured by the neck transducer (drawing SA5572-311), about 
the occipital condyles may not be less than 69 N-m (51 ft-lbf) and not 
more than 83 N-m (61 ft-lbf). The positive moment shall decay for the 
first time to 10 N-m (7.4 ft-lbf ) between 80 ms and 100 ms after time 
zero.
    (ii) The moment shall be calculated by the following formula: Moment 
(N-m)= M<INF>y</INF>-(0.01778m)x(F<INF>x</INF>).
    (iii) M<INF>y</INF> is the moment about the y-axis, F<INF>x</INF> is 
the shear force measured by the neck transducer (drawing SA572-S11), and 
0.01778m is the distance from force to occipital condyle.
    (2) Extension. (i) Plane D, referenced in Figure O2, shall rotate in 
the direction of preimpact flight with respect to the pendulum's 
longitudinal centerline between 99 degrees and 114 degrees. During the 
time interval while the rotation is within the specified corridor, the 
peak moment, measured by the neck transducer (drawing SA5572-S11), about 
the occipital condyles shall be not more than -53 N-m (-39 ft-lbf) and 
not less than -65 N-m (-48 ft-lbf). The negative moment shall decay for 
the first time to -10 N-m (-7.4 ft-lbf) between 94 ms and 114 ms after 
time zero.
    (ii) The moment shall be calculated by the following formula: Moment 
(N-m) = M<INF>y</INF> - (0.01778m)x(F<INF>x</INF>).
    (iii) M<INF>y</INF> is the moment about the y-axis, F<INF>x</INF> is 
the shear force measured by the neck transducer (drawing SA572-S11), and 
0.01778 m is the distance from force to occipital condyle.
    (3) Time-zero is defined as the time of initial contact between the 
pendulum striker plate and the honeycomb material. All data channels 
shall be at the zero level at this time.
    (c) Test Procedure. The test procedure for the neck assembly is as 
follows:
    (1) Soak the neck assembly in a controlled environment at any 
temperature between 20.6 and 22.2 [deg]C (69 and 72 [deg]F) and a 
relative humidity between 10 and 70 percent for at least four hours 
prior to a test.
    (2) Torque the jam nut (drawing 9000018) on the neck cable (drawing 
880105-206) to 1.4 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 N-m (12.0 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2.0 in-lb).
    (3) Mount the head-neck assembly, defined in subsection (b) of this 
section, on the pendulum described in Figure 22 of 49 CFR 572 so that 
the midsagittal plane of the head is vertical and coincides with the 
plane of motion of the pendulum as shown in Figure O1 for flexion tests 
and Figure O2 for extension tests.
    (4)(i) Release the pendulum and allow it to fall freely from a 
height to achieve an impact velocity of 7.01 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.12 
m/s (23.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 ft/s) for flexion tests and 6.07 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.12 m/s (19.9 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.40 ft/s) 
for extension tests, measured by an accelerometer mounted on the 
pendulum as shown in Figure 22 of 49 CFR 572 at the instant of contact 
with the honey comb.
    (ii) Stop the pendulum from the initial velocity with an 
acceleration vs. time pulse which meets the velocity change as specified 
below. Integrate the pendulum acceleration data channel to obtain the 
velocity vs. time curve:

                                             Table B--Pendulum Pulse
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Flexion                        Extension
                     Time ms                     ---------------------------------------------------------------
                                                        m/s            ft/s             m/s            ft/s
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10..............................................         2.1-2.5         6.9-8.2         1.5-1.9         4.9-6.2
20..............................................         4.0-5.0       13.1-16.4         3.1-3.9       10.2-12.8
30..............................................         5.8-7.0       19.5-23.0         4.6-5.6       15.1-18.4
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 911]]


[65 FR 10968, Mar. 1, 2000, as amended at 67 FR 46414, July 15, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 572.134  Thorax assembly and test procedure.

    (a) Thorax (Upper Torso) Assembly (refer to Sec. 
572.130(a)(1)(iii)). The thorax consists of the part of the torso 
assembly shown in drawing 880105-300.
    (b) When the anterior surface of the thorax of a completely 
assembled dummy (drawing 880105-000) is impacted by a test probe 
conforming to section 572.137(a) at 6.71 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.12 m/s 
(22.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 ft/s) according to the test procedure in 
subsection (c) of this section:
    (1) Maximum sternum displacement (compression) relative to the 
spine, measured with chest deflection transducer (drawing SA572-S5), 
must be not less than 50.0 mm (1.97 in) and not more than 58.0 mm (2.30 
in). Within this specified compression corridor, the peak force, 
measured by the impact probe as defined in section 572.137 and 
calculated in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section, shall 
not be less than 3900 N (876 lbf) and not more than 4400 N (989 lbf). 
The peak force after 18.0 mm (0.71 in) of sternum displacement but 
before reaching the minimum required 50.0 mm (1.97 in) sternum 
displacement limit shall not exceed 4600 N.
    (2) The internal hysteresis of the ribcage in each impact as 
determined by the plot of force vs. deflection in paragraph (1) of this 
section shall be not less than 69 percent but not more than 85 percent. 
The hysteresis shall be calculated by determining the ratio of the area 
between the loading and unloading portions of the force deflection curve 
to the area under the loading portion of the curve.
    (3) The force shall be calculated by the product of the impactor 
mass and its deceleration.
    (c) Test procedure. The test procedure for the thorax assembly is as 
follows:
    (1) The dummy is clothed in a form fitting cotton stretch above-the-
elbow sleeved shirt and above-the-knee pants. The weight of the shirt 
and pants shall not exceed 0.14 kg (0.30 lb) each.
    (2) Soak the dummy in a controlled environment at any temperature 
between 20.6 and 22.2 [deg]C (69 and 72 [deg]F) and a relative humidity 
between 10 and 70 percent for at least four hours prior to a test.
    (3) Seat and orient the dummy on a seating surface without back 
support as shown in Figure O3, with the limbs extended horizontally and 
forward, parallel to the midsagittal plane, the midsagittal plane 
vertical within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 degree and the ribs level in the 
anterior-posterior and lateral directions within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees.
    (4) Establish the impact point at the chest midsagittal plane so 
that the impact point of the longitudinal centerline of the probe 
coincides with the midsagittal plane of the dummy within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 mm (0.1 in) and is 12.7 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.1 mm 
(0.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.04 in) below the horizontal-peripheral 
centerline of the No. 3 rib and is within 0.5 degrees of a horizontal 
line in the dummy's midsagittal plane.
    (5) Impact the thorax with the test probe so that at the moment of 
contact the probe's longitudinal center line falls within 2 degrees of a 
horizontal line in the dummy's midsagittal plane.
    (6) Guide the test probe during impact so that there is no 
significant lateral, vertical or rotational movement.
    (7) No suspension hardware, suspension cables, or any other 
attachments to the probe, including the velocity vane, shall make 
contact with the dummy during the test.

[65 FR 10968, Mar. 1, 2000, as amended at 67 FR 46415, July 15, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 572.135  Upper and lower torso assemblies and torso flexion test 
procedure.

    (a) Upper/lower torso assembly. The test objective is to determine 
the stiffness effects of the lumbar spine (drawing 880105-1096), and 
abdominal insert (drawing 880105-434), on resistance to articulation 
between the upper torso assembly (drawing 880105-300) and the lower 
torso assembly (drawing 880105-450) (refer to Sec. 572.130(a)(1)(iv)).
    (b)(1) When the upper torso assembly of a seated dummy is subjected 
to a force continuously applied at the head to neck pivot pin level 
through a rigidly attached adaptor bracket as shown in Figure O4 
according to the test procedure set out in subsection (c) of this 
section, the lumbar spine-abdomen assembly shall flex by an amount that 
permits the upper torso assembly to

[[Page 912]]

translate in angular motion relative to the vertical transverse plane 45 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees at which time the force applied must 
be not less than 320 N (71.5 lbf) and not more than 390 N (87.4 lbf), 
and
    (2) Upon removal of the force, the torso assembly must return to 
within 8 degrees of its initial position.
    (c) Test procedure. The test procedure for the upper/lower torso 
assembly is as follows:
    (1) Soak the dummy in a controlled environment at any temperature 
between 18.9 and 25.6 [deg]C (66 and 78 [deg]F) and a relative humidity 
between 10 and 70 percent for at least four hours prior to a test.
    (2) Assemble the complete dummy (with or without the legs below the 
femurs) and attach to the fixture in a seated posture as shown in Figure 
O4.
    (3) Secure the pelvis to the fixture at the pelvis instrument cavity 
rear face by threading four \1/4\ inch cap screws into the available 
threaded attachment holes. Tighten the mountings so that the test 
material is rigidly affixed to the test fixture and the pelvic-lumbar 
joining surface is horizontal.
    (4) Attach the loading adapter bracket to the spine of the dummy as 
shown in Figure O4.
    (5) Inspect and adjust, if necessary, the seating of the abdominal 
insert within the pelvis cavity and with respect to the torso flesh, 
assuring that the torso flesh provides uniform fit and overlap with 
respect to the outside surface of the pelvis flesh.
    (6) Flex the dummy's upper torso three times between the vertical 
and until the torso reference plane, as shown in Figure O4, reaches 30 
degrees from the vertical transverse plane. Bring the torso to vertical 
orientation and wait for 30 minutes before conducting the test. During 
the 30 minute waiting period, the dummy's upper torso shall be 
externally supported at or near its vertical orientation to prevent it 
from drooping.
    (7) Remove all external support and wait two minutes. Measure the 
initial orientation angle of the torso reference plane of the seated, 
unsupported dummy as shown in Figure O4. The initial orientation angle 
may not exceed 20 degrees.
    (8) Attach the pull cable and the load cell as shown in Figure O4.
    (9) Apply a tension force in the midsagittal plane to the pull cable 
as shown in Figure O4 at any upper torso deflection rate between 0.5 and 
1.5 degrees per second, until the angle reference plane is at 45 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees of flexion relative to the vertical 
transverse plane.
    (9) Continue to apply a force sufficient to maintain 45 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees of flexion for 10 seconds, and record the 
highest applied force during the 10-second period.
    (10) Release all force at the attachment bracket as rapidly as 
possible, and measure the return angle with respect to the initial angle 
reference plane as defined in paragraph (6) 3 minutes after the release.


<R05>
Sec. 572.136  Knees and knee impact test procedure.

    (a) Knee assembly. The knee assembly (refer to Sec. Sec. 
572.130(a)(1)(v) and (vi)) for the purpose of this test is the part of 
the leg assembly shown in drawing 880105-560.
    (b)(1) When the knee assembly, consisting of sliding knee assembly 
(drawing 880105-528R or -528L), lower leg structural replacement 
(drawing 880105-603), lower leg flesh (drawing 880105-601), ankle 
assembly (drawing 880105-660), foot assembly (drawing 880105-651 or 
650), and femur load transducer (drawing SA572-S14) or its structural 
replacement (drawing 78051-319) is tested according to the test 
procedure in subsection (c), the peak resistance force as measured with 
the test probe-mounted accelerometer must be not less than 3450 N (776 
lbf) and not more than 4060 N (913 lbf).
    (2) The force shall be calculated by the product of the impactor 
mass and its deceleration.
    (c) Test procedure. The test procedure for the knee assembly is as 
follows:
    (1) Soak the knee assembly in a controlled environment at any 
temperature between 18.9 and 25.6 [deg]C (66 and 78 [deg]F) and a 
relative humidity from 10 to 70 percent for at least four hours prior to 
a test.
    (2) Mount the test material and secure it to a rigid test fixture as 
shown

[[Page 913]]

in Figure O5. No part of the foot or tibia may contact any exterior 
surface.
    (3) Align the test probe so that throughout its stroke and at 
contact with the knee it is within 2 degrees of horizontal and collinear 
with the longitudinal centerline of the femur.
    (4) Guide the pendulum so that there is no significant lateral 
vertical or rotational movement at the time of initial contact between 
the impactor and the knee.
    (5) The test probe velocity at the time of contact shall be 2.1 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.03 m/s (6.9 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 ft/s).
    (6) No suspension hardware, suspension cables, or any other 
attachments to the probe, including the velocity vane, shall make 
contact with the dummy during the test.

[65 FR 10968, Mar. 1, 2000, as amended at 67 FR 46415, July 15, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 572.137  Test conditions and instrumentation.

    (a) The test probe for thoracic impacts, except for attachments, 
shall be of rigid metallic construction and concentric about its 
longitudinal axis. Any attachments to the impactor, such as suspension 
hardware, impact vanes, etc., must meet the requirements of Sec. 
572.134(c)(7). The impactor shall have a mass of 13.97 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.23 kg (30.8 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 lbs) and a 
minimum mass moment of inertia of 3646 kg-cm <SUP>2</SUP> (3.22 lbs-in-
sec <SUP>2</SUP>) in yaw and pitch about the CG of the probe. One-third 
(1/3) of the weight of suspension cables and any attachments to the 
impact probe must be included in the calculation of mass, and such 
components may not exceed five percent of the total weight of the test 
probe. The impacting end of the probe, perpendicular to and concentric 
with the longitudinal axis of the probe, has a flat, continuous, and 
non-deformable 152.4 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.25 mm (6.00 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.01 in) diameter face with a minimum/maximum edge 
radius of 7.6/12.7 mm (0.3/0.5 in). The impactor shall have a 152.4-
152.6 mm (6.0-6.1 in) diameter cylindrical surface extending for a 
minimum of 25 mm (1.0 in) to the rear from the impact face. The probe's 
end opposite to the impact face has provisions for mounting of an 
accelerometer with its sensitive axis collinear with the longitudinal 
axis of the probe. The impact probe has a free air resonant frequency of 
not less than 1000 Hz, which may be determined using the procedure 
listed in Docket No. NHTSA-6714-14.
    (b) The test probe for knee impacts, except for attachments, shall 
be of rigid metallic construction and concentric about its longitudinal 
axis. Any attachments to the impactor, such as suspension hardware, 
impact vanes, etc., must meet the requirements of Sec. 572.136(c)(6). 
The impactor shall have a mass of 2.99 0.23 kg (6.6 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 lbs) and a minimum mass moment of inertia of 209 
kg-cm <SUP>2</SUP> (0.177 lb-in-sec <SUP>2</SUP>) in yaw and pitch about 
the CG of the probe. One-third (1/3) of the weight of suspension cables 
and any attachments to the impact probe may be included in the 
calculation of mass, and such components may not exceed five percent of 
the total weight of the test probe. The impacting end of the probe, 
perpendicular to and concentric with the longitudinal axis of the probe, 
has a flat, continuous, and non-deformable 76.2 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 mm (3.00 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.01 in) diameter 
face with a minimum/maximum edge radius of 7.6/12.7 mm (0.3/0.5 in). The 
impactor shall have a 76.2-76.4 mm (3.0-3.1 in) diameter cylindrical 
surface extending for a minimum of 12.5 mm (0.5 in) to the rear from the 
impact face. The probe's end opposite to the impact face has provisions 
for mounting an accelerometer with its sensitive axis collinear with the 
longitudinal axis of the probe. The impact probe has a free air resonant 
frequency of not less than 1000 Hz, which may be determined using the 
procedure listed in Docket No. NHTSA-6714-14.
    (c) Head accelerometers shall have dimensions, response 
characteristics, and sensitive mass locations specified in drawing 
SA572-S4 and be mounted in the head as shown in drawing 880105-000 sheet 
3 of 6.
    (d) The upper neck force/moment transducer shall have the 
dimensions, response characteristics, and sensitive axis locations 
specified in drawing SA572-S11 and be mounted in the head neck assembly 
as shown in drawing 880105-000, sheet 3 of 6.
    (e) The thorax accelerometers shall have the dimensions, response 
characteristics, and sensitive mass locations specified in drawing 
SA572-S4 and be

[[Page 914]]

mounted in the torso assembly in triaxial configuration within the spine 
box instrumentation cavity and as optional instrumentation in uniaxial 
for-and-aft oriented configuration arranged as corresponding pairs in 
three locations on the sternum on and at the spine box of the upper 
torso assembly as shown in drawing 880105-000 sheet 3 of 6.
    (f) The optional lumbar spine force-moment transducer shall have the 
dimensions, response characteristics, and sensitive axis locations 
specified in drawing SA572-S15 and be mounted in the lower torso 
assembly as shown in drawing 880105-450.
    (g) The optional iliac spine force transducers shall have the 
dimensions and response characteristics specified in drawing SA572-S16 
and be mounted in the torso assembly as shown in drawing 880105-450.
    (h) The pelvis accelerometers shall have the dimensions, response 
characteristics, and sensitive mass locations specified in drawing 
SA572-S4 and be mounted in the torso assembly in triaxial configuration 
in the pelvis bone as shown in drawing 880105-000 sheet 3.
    (i) The single axis femur force transducer (SA572-S14) or the 
optional multiple axis femur force/moment transducer (SA572-S29) shall 
have the dimensions, response characteristics, and sensitive axis 
locations specified in the appropriate drawing and be mounted in the 
femur assembly as shown in drawing 880105-500 sheet 3 of 6.
    (j) The chest deflection transducer shall have the dimensions and 
response characteristics specified in drawing SA572-S51 and be mounted 
to the upper torso assembly as shown in drawings 880105-300 and 880105-
000 sheet 3 of 6.
    (k) The optional lower neck force/moment transducer shall have the 
dimensions, response characteristics, and sensitive axis locations 
specified in drawing SA572-S27 and be mounted to the upper torso 
assembly as shown in drawing 880105-000 sheet 3 of 6.
    (l) The optional thoracic spine force/moment transducer shall have 
the dimensions, response characteristics, and sensitive axis locations 
specified in drawing SA572-S28 and be mounted in the upper torso 
assembly as shown in drawing 880105-000 sheet 3 of 6.
    (m) The outputs of acceleration and force-sensing devices installed 
in the dummy and in the test apparatus specified by this part shall be 
recorded in individual data channels that conform to SAE Recommended 
Practice J211/10, Rev. Mar95 ``Instrumentation for Impact Impact 
Tests;--Part 1--Electronic Instrumentation,'' and SAE Recommended 
Practice J211/2, Rev Mar95 ``Instrumentation for Impact Tests--Part 2--
Photographic Instrumentation'', (refer to Sec. Sec. 572.130(a)(3) and 
(4) respectively) except as noted, with channel classes as follows:
    (1) Head acceleration--Class 1000
    (2) Neck:
    (i) Forces--Class 1000
    (ii) Moments--Class 600
    (iii) Pendulum acceleration--Class 180
    (iv) Rotation potentiometer--Class 60 (optional)
    (3) Thorax:
    (i) Rib acceleration--Class 1000
    (ii) Spine and pendulum accelerations--Class 180
    (iii) Sternum deflection--Class 600
    (iv) Forces--Class 1000
    (v) Moments--Class 600
    (4) Lumbar:
    (i) Forces--Class 1000
    (ii) Moments--Class 600
    (iii) Torso flexion pulling force--Class 60 if data channel is used
    (5) Pelvis:
    (i) Accelerations--Class 1000
    (ii) Iliac wing forces--Class 180
    (6) Femur forces and knee pendulum--Class 600
    (n) Coordinate signs for instrumentation polarity shall conform to 
the Sign Convention For Vehicle Crash Testing, Surface Vehicle 
Information Report, SAE J1733, 1994-12 (refer to section 572.130(a)(4)).
    (o) The mountings for sensing devices shall have no resonance 
frequency less than 3 times the frequency range of the applicable 
channel class.
    (p) Limb joints must be set at one G, barely restraining the weight 
of the limb when it is extended horizontally. The force needed to move a 
limb segment shall not exceed 2G throughout the range of limb motion.
    (q) Performance tests of the same component, segment, assembly, or

[[Page 915]]

fully assembled dummy shall be separated in time by not less than 30 
minutes unless otherwise noted.
    (r) Surfaces of dummy components may not be painted except as 
specified in this subpart or in drawings subtended by this subpart.

[65 FR 10968, Mar. 1, 2000, as amended at 67 FR 46415, July 15, 2002]

[[Page 916]]

                    Figures to Subpart O of Part 572
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15JY02.000


[[Page 917]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15JY02.001


[[Page 918]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15JY02.002


[[Page 919]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15JY02.003


[[Page 920]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15JY02.004


[65 FR 10968, Mar. 1, 2000, as amended at 67 FR 46415, July 15, 2002]

[[Page 921]]


<R04>
       Subpart P_3-year-Old Child Crash Test Dummy, Alpha Version

    Source: 65 FR 15262, Mar. 22, 2000, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 572.140  Incorporation by reference.

    (a) The following materials are hereby incorporated in this subpart 
P by reference:
    (1) A drawings and specifications package entitled, ``Parts List and 
Drawings, Subpart P Hybrid III 3-year-old child crash test dummy, (H-
III3C, Alpha version) September 2001,'' incorporated by reference in 
Sec. 572.141 and consisting of:
    (i) Drawing No. 210-1000, Head Assembly, incorporated by reference 
in Sec. Sec. 572.141, 572.142, 572.144, 572.145, and 572.146;
    (ii) Drawing No. 210-2001, Neck Assembly, incorporated by reference 
in Sec. Sec. 572.141, 572.143, 572.144, 572.145, and 572.146;
    (iii) Drawing No. TE-208-000, Headform, incorporated by reference in 
Sec. Sec. 572.141, and 572.143;
    (iv) Drawing No. 210-3000, Upper/Lower Torso Assembly, incorporated 
by reference in Sec. Sec. 572.141, 572.144, 572.145, and 572.146;
    (v) Drawing No. 210-5000-1(L), -2(R), Leg Assembly, incorporated by 
reference in Sec. Sec. 572.141, 572.144, 572.145 as part of a complete 
dummy assembly;
    (vi) Drawing No. 210-6000-1(L), -2(R), Arm Assembly, incorporated by 
reference in Sec. Sec. 572.141, 572.144, and 572.145 as part of the 
complete dummy assembly;
    (2) A procedures manual entitled ``Procedures for Assembly, 
Disassembly and Inspection (PADI), Subpart P, Hybird III 3-year-old 
Child Crash Test Dummy, (H-III3C, Alpha Version) September 2001,'' 
incorporated by reference in Sec. 572.141;
    (3) SAE Recommended Practice J211/1, Rev. Mar 95 ``Instrumentation 
for Impact Tests--Part 1-Electronic Instrumentation'', incorporated by 
reference in Sec. 572.146;
    (4) SAE J1733 1994-12 ``Sign Convention for Vehicle Crash Testing'' 
incorporated by reference in Sec. 572.146.
    (5) The Director of the Federal Register approved those materials 
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR 
Part 51. Copies of the materials may be inspected at NHTSA's Docket 
Section, 400 Seventh Street SW, room 5109, Washington, DC, or at the 
National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For information on 
the availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: 
http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--federal--
regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    (b) The incorporated materials are available as follows:
    (1) The drawings and specifications package referred to in paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section and the PADI document referred to in paragraph 
(a)(2) of this section are accessible for viewing and copying at the 
Department of Transportation's Docket public area, Plaza 401, 400 
Seventh St., SW., Washington, DC 20590, and downloadable at dms.dot.gov. 
They are also available from Reprographic Technologies, 9107 Gaither 
Rd., Gaithersburg, MD 20877, (301) 419-5070.
    (2) The SAE materials referred to in paragraphs (a)(3) and (a)(4) of 
this section are available from the Society of Automotive Engineers, 
Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096.

[65 FR 15262, Mar. 22, 2000, as amended at 66 FR 64376, Dec. 13, 2001]


<R05>
Sec. 572.141  General description.

    (a) The Hybrid III 3-year-old child dummy is described by the 
following materials:
    (1) Technical drawings and specifications package 210-0000 (refer to 
Sec. 572.140(a)(1)), the titles of which are listed in Table A of this 
section;
    (2) Procedures for Assembly, Disassembly and Inspection document 
(PADI) (refer to Sec. 572.140(a)(2)).
    (b) The dummy is made up of the component assemblies set out in the 
following Table A of this section:

                                 Table A
------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Component assembly                      Drawing No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Head Assembly............................  210-1000
Neck Assembly (complete).................  210-2001
Upper/Lower Torso Assembly...............  210-3000
Leg Assembly.............................  210-5000-1(L), -2(R)

[[Page 922]]

 
Arm Assembly.............................  210-6000-1(L), -2(R)
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Adjacent segments are joined in a manner such that except for 
contacts existing under static conditions, there is no contact between 
metallic elements throughout the range of motion or under simulated 
crash impact conditions.
    (d) The structural properties of the dummy are such that the dummy 
conforms to this part in every respect only before use in any test 
similar to those specified in Standard 208, Occupant Crash Protection, 
and Standard 213, Child Restraint Systems.


<R05>
Sec. 572.142  Head assembly and test procedure.

    (a) The head assembly (refer to Sec. 572.140(a)(1)(i)) for this 
test consists of the head (drawing 210-1000), adapter plate (drawing ATD 
6259), accelerometer mounting block (drawing SA 572-S80), structural 
replacement of \1/2\ mass of the neck load transducer (drawing TE-107-
001), head mounting washer (drawing ATD 6262), one \1/2\-20x1<gr-thn-eq> 
flat head cap screw (FHCS) (drawing 9000150), and 3 accelerometers 
(drawing SA-572-S4).
    (b) When the head assembly in paragraph (a) of this section is 
dropped from a height of 376.0<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.0 mm (14.8<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.04 in) in accordance with paragraph (c) of this 
section, the peak resultant acceleration at the location of the 
accelerometers at the head CG shall not be less than 250 g or more than 
280 g. The resultant acceleration versus time history curve shall be 
unimodal, and the oscillations occurring after the main pulse shall be 
less than 10 percent of the peak resultant acceleration. The lateral 
acceleration shall not exceed <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>15 G (zero to peak).
    (c) Head test procedure. The test procedure for the head is as 
follows:
    (1) Soak the head assembly in a controlled environment at any 
temperature between 18.9 and 25.6 [deg]C (66 and 78 [deg]F) and at any 
relative humidity between 10 and 70 percent for at least four hours 
prior to a test.
    (2) Prior to the test, clean the impact surface of the head skin and 
the steel impact plate surface with isopropyl alcohol, trichlorethane, 
or an equivalent. Both impact surfaces must be clean and dry for 
testing.
    (3) Suspend the head assembly with its midsagittal plane in vertical 
orientation as shown in Figure P1 of this subpart. The lowest point on 
the forehead is 376.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.0 mm (14.76 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.04 in) from the steel impact surface. The 3.3 mm (0.13 
in) diameter holes, located on either side of the dummy's head in 
transverse alignment with the CG, shall be used to ensure that the head 
transverse plane is level with respect to the impact surface.
    (4) Drop the head assembly from the specified height by a means that 
ensures a smooth, instant release onto a rigidly supported flat 
horizontal steel plate which is 50.8 mm (2 in) thick and 610 mm (24 in) 
square. The impact surface shall be clean, dry and have a finish of not 
less than 203.2x10<SUP>-6</SUP> mm (8 micro inches) (RMS) and not more 
than 2032.0x10<SUP>-6</SUP> mm (80 micro inches) (RMS).
    (5) Allow at least 2 hours between successive tests on the same 
head.


<R05>
Sec. 572.143  Neck-headform assembly and test procedure.

    (a) The neck and headform assembly (refer to Sec. Sec. 
572.140(a)(1)(ii) and 572.140(a)(1)(iii)) for the purposes of this test, 
as shown in Figures P2 and P3 of this subpart, consists of the neck 
molded assembly (drawing 210-2015), neck cable (drawing 210-2040), nylon 
shoulder bushing (drawing 9001373), upper mount plate insert (drawing 
910420-048), bib simulator (drawing TE-208-050), urethane washer 
(drawing 210-2050), neck mounting plate (drawing TE-250-021), two jam 
nuts (drawing 9001336), load-moment transducer (drawing SA 572-S19), and 
headform (drawing TE-208-000).
    (b) When the neck and headform assembly, as defined in Sec. 
572.143(a), is tested according to the test procedure in paragraph (c) 
of this section, it shall have the following characteristics:
    (1) Flexion.

[[Page 923]]

    (i) Plane D, referenced in Figure P2 of this subpart, shall rotate 
in the direction of preimpact flight with respect to the pendulum's 
longitudinal centerline between 70 degrees and 82 degrees. Within this 
specified rotation corridor, the peak moment about the occipital condyle 
may not be less than 42 N-m and not more than 53 N-m.
    (ii) The positive moment shall decay for the first time to 10 N-m 
between 60 ms and 80 ms after time zero.
    (iii) The moment and rotation data channels are defined to be zero 
when the longitudinal centerline of the neck and pendulum are parallel.
    (2) Extension.
    (i) Plane D referenced in Figure P3 of this subpart shall rotate in 
the direction of preimpact flight with respect to the pendulum's 
longitudinal centerline between 83 degrees and 93 degrees. Within this 
specified rotation corridor, the peak moment about the occipital condyle 
may be not more than -43.7 N-m and not less than -53.3 N-m.
    (ii) The negative moment shall decay for the first time to -10 N-m 
between 60 and 80 ms after time zero.
    (iii) The moment and rotation data channels are defined to be zero 
when the longitudinal centerline of the neck and pendulum are parallel.
    (c) Test procedure. (1) Soak the neck assembly in a controlled 
environment at any temperature between 20.6 and 22.2 [deg]C (69 and 72 
F) and a relative humidity between 10 and 70 percent for at least four 
hours prior to a test.
    (2) Torque the jam nut (drawing 9001336) on the neck cable (drawing 
210-2040) between 0.2 N-m and 0.3 N-m.
    (3) Mount the neck-headform assembly, defined in paragraph (a) of 
this section, on the pendulum so the midsagittal plane of the headform 
is vertical and coincides with the plane of motion of the pendulum as 
shown in Figure P2 of this subpart for flexion and Figure P3 of this 
subpart for extension tests.
    (4) Release the pendulum and allow it to fall freely to achieve an 
impact velocity of 5.50 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.10 m/s (18.05 + 0.40 ft/
s) for flexion and 3.65 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 m/s (11.98 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.40 ft/s) for extension tests, measured by an 
accelerometer mounted on the pendulum as shown in Figure 22 of this part 
572 at time zero.
    (i) The test shall be conducted without inducing any torsion 
twisting of the neck.
    (ii) Stop the pendulum from the initial velocity with an 
acceleration vs. time pulse which meets the velocity change as specified 
in Table B of this section. Integrate the pendulum acceleration data 
channel to obtain the velocity vs. time curve as indicated in Table B of 
this section.
    (iii) Time-zero is defined as the time of initial contact between 
the pendulum striker plate and the honeycomb material. The pendulum data 
channel shall be zero at this time.

                                             Table B--Pendulum Pulse
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      Time                                Flexion              Time             Extension
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                       ms                            m/s          ft/s          ms          m/s          ft/s
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10.............................................      2.0-2.7      6.6-8.9            6      1.0-1.4      3.3-4.6
15.............................................      3.0-4.0     9.8-13.1           10      1.9-2.5      6.2-8.2
20.............................................      4.0-5.1    13.1-16.7           14      2.8-3.5     9.2-11.5
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
Sec. 572.144  Thorax assembly and test procedure.

    (a) Thorax (upper torso) assembly (refer to Sec. 
572.140(a)(1)(iv)). The thorax consists of the upper part of the torso 
assembly shown in drawing 210-3000.
    (b) When the anterior surface of the thorax of a completely 
assembled dummy (drawing 210-0000) is impacted by a test probe 
conforming to Sec. 572.146(a) at 6.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 m/s 
(19.7 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.3 ft/s) according to the test procedure in 
paragraph (c) of this section.
    (1) Maximum sternum displacement (compression) relative to the 
spine, measured with the chest deflection transducer (SA-572-S50), must 
not be less than 32mm (1.3 in) and not more than 38mm (1.5 in). Within 
this specified compression corridor, the peak force, measured by the 
probe-mounted

[[Page 924]]

accelerometer as defined in Sec. 572.146(a) and calculated in 
accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section, shall be not less than 
680 N and not more than 810 N. The peak force after 12.5 mm of sternum 
compression but before reaching the minimum required 32.0 mm sternum 
compression shall not exceed 910 N.
    (2) The internal hysteresis of the ribcage in each impact, as 
determined from the force vs. deflection curve, shall be not less than 
65 percent and not more than 85 percent. The hysteresis shall be 
calculated by determining the ratio of the area between the loading and 
unloading portions of the force deflection curve to the area under the 
loading portion of the curve.
    (3) The force shall be calculated by the product of the impactor 
mass and its deceleration.
    (c) Test procedure. The test procedure for the thorax assembly is as 
follows:
    (1) The test dummy is clothed in cotton-polyester-based tight-
fitting shirt with long sleeves and ankle-length pants whose combined 
weight is not more than 0.25 kg (0.55 lbs).
    (2) Soak the dummy in a controlled environment at any temperature 
between 20.6 and 22.2 [deg]C (69 and 72 [deg]F) and at any relative 
humidity between 10 and 70 percent for at least four hours prior to a 
test.
    (3) Seat and orient the dummy on a seating surface without back 
support as shown in Figure P4, with the lower limbs extended 
horizontally and forward, the upper arms parallel to the torso and the 
lower arms extended horizontally and forward, parallel to the 
midsagittal plane, the midsagittal plane being vertical within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1 degree and the ribs level in the anterior-posterior 
and lateral directions within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees.
    (4) Establish the impact point at the chest midsagittal plane so 
that the impact point of the longitudinal centerline of the probe 
coincides with the dummy's mid-sagittal plane and is centered on the 
center of No. 2 rib within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 mm (0.1 in.) and 
0.5 degrees of a horizontal plane.
    (5) Impact the thorax with the test probe so that at the moment of 
contact the probe's longitudinal center line is within 2 degrees of a 
horizontal line in the dummy's midsagittal plane.
    (6) Guide the test probe during impact so that there is no 
significant lateral, vertical or rotational movement.
    (7) No suspension hardware, suspension cables, or any other 
attachments to the probe, including the velocity vane, shall make 
contact with the dummy during the test.

[65 FR 15262, Mar. 22, 2000, as amended at 66 FR 64376, Dec. 13, 2001]


<R05>
Sec. 572.145  Upper and lower torso assemblies and torso flexion test procedure.

    (a) The test objective is to determine the resistance of the lumbar 
spine and abdomen of a fully assembled dummy (drawing 210-0000) to 
flexion articulation between upper and lower halves of the torso 
assembly (refer to Sec. 572.140(a)(1)(iv)).
    (b)(1) When the upper half of the torso assembly of a seated dummy 
is subjected to a force continuously applied at the occipital condyle 
level through the rigidly attached adaptor bracket in accordance with 
the test procedure set out in paragraph (c) of this section, the lumbar 
spine-abdomen assembly shall flex by an amount that permits the upper 
half of the torso, as measured at the posterior surface of the torso 
reference plane shown in Figure P5 of this subpart, to translate in 
angular motion in the midsagittal plane 45 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 
degrees relative to the vertical transverse plane, at which time the 
pulling force applied must not be less than 130 N (28.8 lbf) and not 
more than 180 N (41.2 lbf), and
    (2) Upon removal of the force, the upper torso assembly returns to 
within 10 degrees of its initial position.
    (c) Test procedure. The test procedure is as follows:
    (1) Soak the dummy in a controlled environment at any temperature 
between 18.9[deg] and 25.6 [deg]C (66 and 78 [deg]F) and at any relative 
humidity between 10 and 70 percent for at least 4 hours prior to a test.
    (2) Assemble the complete dummy (with or without the lower legs) and 
seat it on a rigid flat-surface table, as shown in Figure P5 of this 
subpart.
    (i) Unzip the torso jacket and remove the four \1/4\-20x\3/
4\<gr-thn-eq> bolts which attach

[[Page 925]]

the lumbar load transducer or its structural replacement to the pelvis 
weldment (drawing 210-4510) as shown in Figure P5 of this subpart.
    (ii) Position the matching end of the rigid pelvis attachment 
fixture around the lumbar spine and align it over the four bolt holes.
    (iii) Secure the fixture to the dummy with the four \1/4\-20x\3/
4\<gr-thn-eq> bolts and attach the fixture to the table. Tighten the 
mountings so that the pelvis-lumbar joining surface is horizontal within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 deg and the buttocks and upper legs of the 
seated dummy are in contact with the test surface.
    (iv) Attach the loading adapter bracket to the upper part of the 
torso as shown in Figure P5 of this subpart and zip up the torso jacket.
    (v) Point the upper arms vertically downward and the lower arms 
forward.
    (3)(i) Flex the thorax forward three times from vertical until the 
torso reference plane reaches 30 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 degrees from 
vertical. The torso reference plane, as shown in figure P5 of this 
subpart, is defined by the transverse plane tangent to the posterior 
surface of the upper backplate of the spine box weldment (drawing 210-
8020).
    (ii) Remove all externally applied flexion forces and support the 
upper torso half in a vertical orientation for 30 minutes to prevent it 
from drooping.
    (4) Remove the external support and after two minutes measure the 
initial orientation angle of the upper torso reference plane of the 
seated, unsupported dummy as shown in Figure P5 of this subpart. The 
initial orientation of the torso reference plane may not exceed 15 
degrees.
    (5) Attach the pull cable at the point of load application on the 
adaptor bracket while maintaining the initial torso orientation. Apply a 
pulling force in the midsagittal plane, as shown in Figure P5 of this 
subpart, at any upper torso flexion rate between 0.5 and 1.5 degrees per 
second, until the torso reference plane reaches 45 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees of flexion relative to the vertical 
transverse plane.
    (6) Continue to apply a force sufficient to maintain 45 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees of flexion for 10 seconds, and record the 
highest applied force during the 10-second period.
    (7) [Reserved]
    (8) Release all force at the loading adaptor bracket as rapidly as 
possible and measure the return angle with respect to the initial angle 
reference plane as defined in paragraph (c)(4) of this section 3 to 4 
minutes after the release.


<R05>
Sec. 572.146  Test conditions and instrumentation.

    (a) The test probe for thoracic impacts, except for attachments, 
shall be of rigid metallic construction and concentric about its 
longitudinal axis. Any attachments to the impactor such as suspension 
hardware, and impact vanes, must meet the requirements of Sec. 
572.144(c)(7) of this part. The impactor shall have a mass of 1.70 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.02 kg (3.75 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 lb) and a 
minimum mass moment of inertia 164 kg-cm\2\ (0.145 lb-in-sec\2\) in yaw 
and pitch about the CG of the probe. One-third (\1/3\) of the weight of 
suspension cables and any attachments to the impact probe must be 
included in the calculation of mass, and such components may not exceed 
five percent of the total weight of the test probe. The impacting end of 
the probe, perpendicular to and concentric with the longitudinal axis of 
the probe, has a flat, continuous, and non-deformable 50.8 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.25 mm (2.00 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.01 inch) diameter 
face with an edge radius of 7.6/12.7 mm (0.3/0.5 in). The impactor shall 
have a 53.3 mm (2.1 in) dia. cylindrical surface extending for a minimum 
of 25.4 mm (1.0 in) to the rear from the impact face. The probe's end 
opposite to the impact face has provisions for mounting an accelerometer 
with its sensitive axis collinear with the longitudinal axis of the 
probe. The impact probe has a free air resonant frequency not less than 
1000 Hz limited to the direction of the longitudinal axis of the 
impactor.
    (b) Head accelerometers shall have the dimensions, response 
characteristics, and sensitive mass locations specified in drawing SA 
572-S4 and be mounted in the head as shown in drawing 210-0000.
    (c) The neck force-moment transducer shall have the dimensions, 
response characteristics, and sensitive axis locations specified in 
drawing SA 572-S19 and be mounted at the upper neck transducer location 
as shown in

[[Page 926]]

drawing 210-0000. A lower neck transducer as specified in drawing SA 
572-S19 is allowed to be mounted as optional instrumentation in place of 
part No. ATD6204, as shown in drawing 210-0000.
    (d) The shoulder force transducers shall have the dimensions and 
response characteristics specified in drawing SA 572-S21 and be allowed 
to be mounted as optional instrumentation in place of part No. 210-3800 
in the torso assembly as shown in drawing 210-0000.
    (e) The thorax accelerometers shall have the dimensions, response 
characteristics, and sensitive mass locations specified in drawing SA 
572-S4 and be mounted in the torso assembly in triaxial configuration at 
the T4 location, as shown in drawing 210-0000. Triaxial accelerometers 
may be mounted as optional instrumentation at T1, and T12, and in 
uniaxial configuration on the sternum at the midpoint level of ribs No. 
1 and No. 3 and on the spine coinciding with the midpoint level of No. 3 
rib, as shown in drawing 210-0000. If used, the accelerometers must 
conform to SA-572-S4.
    (f) The chest deflection potentiometer shall have the dimensions and 
response characteristics specified in drawing SA-572-S50 and be mounted 
in the torso assembly as shown drawing 210-0000.
    (g) The lumbar spine force/moment transducer may be mounted in the 
torso assembly as shown in drawing 210-0000 as optional instrumentation 
in place of part No. 210-4150. If used, the transducer shall have the 
dimensions and response characteristics specified in drawing SA-572-S20.
    (h) The pubic force transducer may be mounted in the torso assembly 
as shown in drawing 210-0000 as optional instrumentation in place of 
part No. 921-0022-036. If used, the transducer shall have the dimensions 
and response characteristics specified in drawing SA-572-S18.
    (i) The acetabulum force transducers may be mounted in the torso 
assembly as shown in drawing 210-0000 as optional instrumentation in 
place of part No. 210-4522. If used, the transducer shall have the 
dimensions and response characteristics specified in drawing SA-572-S22.
    (j) The anterior-superior iliac spine transducers may be mounted in 
the torso assembly as shown in drawing 210-0000 as optional 
instrumentation in place of part No. 210-4540-1, -2. If used, the 
transducers shall have the dimensions and response characteristics 
specified in drawing SA-572-S17.
    (k) The pelvis accelerometers may be mounted in the pelvis in 
triaxial configuration as shown in drawing 210-0000 as optional 
instrumentation. If used, the accelerometers shall have the dimensions 
and response characteristics specified in drawing SA-572-S4.
    (l) The outputs of acceleration and force-sensing devices installed 
in the dummy and in the test apparatus specified by this part shall be 
recorded in individual data channels that conform to the requirements of 
SAE Recommended Practice J211/1, Rev. Mar 95 ``Instrumentation for 
Impact Tests--Part 1-Electronic Instrumentation'' (refer to Sec. 
572.140(a)(3)), with channel classes as follows:
    (1) Head acceleration--Class 1000
    (2) Neck
    (i) Force--Class 1000
    (ii) Moments--Class 600
    (iii) Pendulum acceleration--Class 180
    (iv) Rotation potentiometer response (if used)--CFC 60.
    (3) Thorax:
    (i) Rib/sternum acceleration--Class 1000
    (ii) Spine and pendulum accelerations--Class 180
    (iii) Sternum deflection--Class 600
    (iv) Shoulder force--Class 180
    (4) Lumbar:
    (i) Forces--Class 1000
    (ii) Moments--Class 600
    (iii) Torso flexion pulling force--Class 60 if data channel is used
    (5) Pelvis
    (i) Accelerations--Class 1000
    (ii) Acetabulum, pubic symphysis--Class 1000,
    (iii) Iliac wing forces--Class 180
    (m) Coordinate signs for instrumentation polarity shall conform to 
the Sign Convention For Vehicle Crash Testing, Surface Vehicle 
Information Report, SAE J1733, 1994-12 (refer to Sec. 572.140(a)(4)).
    (n) The mountings for sensing devices shall have no resonance 
frequency less

[[Page 927]]

than 3 times the frequency range of the applicable channel class.
    (o) Limb joints shall be set at lG, barely restraining the weight of 
the limbs when they are extended horizontally. The force required to 
move a limb segment shall not exceed 2G throughout the range of limb 
motion.
    (p) Performance tests of the same component, segment, assembly, or 
fully assembled dummy shall be separated in time by a period of not less 
than 30 minutes unless otherwise noted.
    (q) Surfaces of dummy components are not painted except as specified 
in this part or in drawings subtended by this part.

[[Page 928]]

                    Figures to Subpart P of Part 572
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22MR00.000


[[Page 929]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22MR00.001


[[Page 930]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22MR00.002


[[Page 931]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13DE01.237


[[Page 932]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22MR00.004


[65 FR 15262, Mar. 22, 2000, as amended at 66 FR 64376, Dec. 13, 2001]

[[Page 933]]


<R04>
           Subpart R_CRABI 12-Month-Old Infant, Alpha Version

    Source: 65 FR 17188, Mar. 31, 2000, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 572.150  Incorporation by reference.

    (a) The following materials are incorporated by reference in this 
subpart R.
    (1) A drawings and specifications package entitled ``Parts List and 
Drawings, Subpart R, CRABI 12-Month-Old Infant Crash Test Dummy (CRABI-
12, Alpha version) August 2001'' and consisting of:
    (i) Drawing No. 921022-001, Head Assembly, incorporated by reference 
in Sec. Sec. 572.151, 572.152, 572.154, and 572.155;
    (ii) Drawing No. 921022-041, Neck Assembly, incorporated by 
reference in Sec. Sec. 572.151, 572.153, 572.154, and 572.155;
    (iii) Drawing No. TE-3200-160, Headform, incorporated by reference 
in Sec. Sec. 572.151 and 572.153;
    (iv) Drawing No. 921022-060, Torso Assembly, incorporated by 
reference in Sec. Sec. 572.151, 572.154, and 572.155;
    (v) Drawing No. 921022-055, Leg Assembly, incorporated by reference 
in Sec. Sec. 572.151, and 572.155 as part of a complete dummy assembly;
    (vi) Drawing No. 921022-054, Arm Assembly, incorporated by reference 
in Sec. Sec. 572.151, and 572.155 as part of the complete dummy 
assembly;
    (2) A procedures manual entitled ``Procedures for Assembly, 
Disassembly and Inspection (PADI) Subpart R, CRABI 12-Month-Old Infant 
Crash Test Dummy (CRABI-12, Alpha version) August 2001'' incorporated by 
reference in Sec. 572.155;
    (3) SAE Recommended Practice J211/1, Rev. Mar95 ``Instrumentation 
for Impact Tests--Part 1--Electronic Instrumentation'', incorporated by 
reference in Sec. 572.155;
    (4) SAE J1733 1994-12 ``Sign Convention for Vehicle Crash Testing'', 
incorporated by reference in Sec. 572.155.
    (b) The Director of the Federal Register approved those materials 
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR 
Part 51. Copies of the materials may be inspected at NHTSA's Docket 
Section, 400 Seventh Street S.W., room 5109, Washington, DC, or at the 
National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For information on 
the availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: 
http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--federal--
regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    (c) The incorporated materials are available as follows:
    (1) The drawings and specifications package referred to in paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section and the procedures manual referred to in 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section are available from Reprographic 
Technologies, 9000 Virginia Manor Road, Beltsville, MD 20705 (301) 419-
5070.
    (2) The SAE materials referred to paragraphs (a)(3) and (a)(4) of 
this section are available from the Society of Automotive Engineers, 
Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096.

[65 FR 17188, Mar. 31, 2000, as amended at 66 FR 45784, Aug. 30, 2001]


<R05>
Sec. 572.151  General description.

    (a) The 12-month-old-infant crash test dummy is described by 
drawings and specifications containing the following materials:
    (1) Technical drawings and specifications package 921022-000 (refer 
to Sec. 572.150(a)(1)), the titles of which are listed in Table A of 
this section;
    (2) Procedures for Assembly, Disassembly and Inspection document 
(PADI) (refer to Sec. 572.150(a)(2)).
    (b) The dummy consists of the component assemblies set out in the 
following Table A:

                                 Table A
------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Component assembly                     Drawing number
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Head Assembly.............................  921022-001.
Neck Assembly (complete)..................  921022-041.
Torso Assembly............................  921022-060.
Leg Assembly..............................  921022-055 R&L.
Arm Assembly..............................  921022-054 R&L.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Adjacent segments of the dummy are joined in a manner such that, 
except for contacts existing under static conditions, there is no 
contact between metallic elements throughout the range of motion or 
under simulated crash impact conditions.
    (d) The structural properties of the dummy are such that the dummy 
shall

[[Page 934]]

conform to this Subpart in every respect before its use in any test 
under this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 572.152  Head assembly and test procedure.

    (a) The head assembly (refer to Sec. 572.150(a)(1)(i)) for this 
test consists of the assembly (drawing 921022-001), triaxial mount block 
(SA572-80), and 3 accelerometers (drawing SA572-S4).
    (b) Frontal and rear impact. (1) Frontal impact. When the head 
assembly in paragraph (a) of this section is dropped from a height of 
376.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.0 mm (14.8 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.04 in) 
in accordance with paragraph (c)(3)(i) of this section, the peak 
resultant acceleration measured at the head CG shall not be less than 
100 g or more than 120 g. The resultant acceleration vs. time history 
curve shall be unimodal, and the oscillations occurring after the main 
pulse shall be less than 17 percent of the peak resultant acceleration. 
The lateral acceleration shall not exceed <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>15 g's.
    (2) Rear impact. When the head assembly in paragraph (a) of this 
section is dropped from a height of 376.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.0 mm 
(14.8 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.04 in) in accordance with paragraph 
(c)(3)(ii) of this section, the peak resultant acceleration measured at 
the head CG shall be not less than 55 g and not more than 71 g. The 
resultant acceleration vs. time history curve shall be unimodal, and the 
oscillations occurring after the main pulse shall be less than 17 
percent of the peak resultant acceleration. The lateral acceleration 
shall not exceed <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>15 g's.
    (c) Head test procedure. The test procedure for the head is as 
follows:
    (1) Soak the head assembly in a controlled environment at any 
temperature between 18.9 and 25.6 [deg]C (66 and 78 [deg]F) and at any 
relative humidity between 10 and 70 percent for at least four hours 
prior to a test. These temperature and humidity levels shall be 
maintained throughout the entire testing period specified in this 
section.
    (2) Before the test, clean the impact surface of the head skin and 
the steel impact plate surface with isopropyl alcohol, trichlorethane, 
or an equivalent. Both impact surfaces shall be clean and dry for 
testing.
    (3)(i) For a frontal impact test, suspend the head assembly with its 
midsagittal plane in vertical orientation as shown in Figure R1 of this 
subpart. The lowest point on the forehead is 376.0 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1.0 mm (14.8 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.04 in) from the 
impact surface. The 3.30 mm (0.13 in) diameter holes located on either 
side of the dummy's head are used to ensure that the head is level with 
respect to the impact surface. The angle between the lower surface plane 
of the neck transducer mass simulator (drawing 910420-003) and the plane 
of the impact surface is 45 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 degrees.
    (ii) For a rear impact test, suspend the head assembly with its 
midsagittal plane in vertical orientation as shown in Figure R2 of this 
subpart. The lowest point on the back of the head is 376.0 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1.0 mm (14.8 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.04 in) from the 
impact surface. The 3.30 mm (0.13 in) diameter holes located on either 
side of the dummy's head are used to ensure that the head is level with 
respect to the impact surface. The angle between the lower surface plane 
of the neck transducer structural replacement (drawing 910420-003) and 
the impact surface is 90 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 degrees.
    (4) Drop the head assembly from the specified height by a means that 
ensures a smooth, instant release onto a rigidly supported flat 
horizontal steel plate which is 50.8 mm (2 in) thick and 610 mm (24 in) 
square. The impact surface shall be clean, dry and have a micro finish 
of not less than 203.2 x 10<SUP>-6</SUP> mm (8 micro inches) (RMS) and 
not more than 2032.0 x 10<SUP>-6</SUP> mm (80 micro inches) (RMS).
    (5) Allow at least 2 hours between successive tests of the head 
assembly at the same impact point. For head impacts on the opposite side 
of the head, the 30-minute waiting period specified in Sec. 572.155(m) 
does not apply.


<R05>
Sec. 572.153  Neck-headform assembly and test procedure.

    (a) The neck and headform assembly (refer to Sec. Sec. 
572.150(a)(1)(ii) and 572.150(a)(1)(iii)) for the purposes of this test 
consists of parts shown in CRABI neck test assembly (drawing TE-3200-
100);
    (b) When the neck and headform assembly, as defined in Sec. 
572.153(a), is tested according to the test procedure in Sec. 
572.153(c), it shall have the following characteristics:

[[Page 935]]

    (1) Flexion. (i) Plane D referenced in Figure R3 of this subpart 
shall rotate in the direction of pre-impact flight with respect to the 
pendulum's longitudinal centerline not less than 75 degrees and not more 
than 86 degrees. Within this specified rotation corridor, the peak 
positive moment about the occipital condyles shall be not less than 36 
N-m (26.6 ft-lbf) and not more than 45 N-m (33.2 ft-lbf).
    (ii) The positive moment about the occipital condyles shall decay 
for the first time to 5 N-m (3.7 ft-lbf) between 60 ms and 80 ms after 
time zero.
    (iii) The moment about the occipital condyles shall be calculated by 
the following formula: Moment (N-m) = My - (0.005842m) x (Fx), where My 
is the moment about the y-axis, Fx is the shear force measured by the 
neck transducer (drawing SA572 -S23) and 0.005842m is the distance from 
the point at which the load cell measures the force to the occipital 
condyle.
    (2) Extension. (i) Plane D referenced in Figure R4 of this subpart 
shall rotate in the direction of preimpact flight with respect to the 
pendulum's longitudinal centerline not less than 80 degrees and not more 
than 92 degrees. Within the specified rotation corridor, the peak 
negative moment about the occipital condyles shall be not more than -12 
Nm (-8.9 ft-lbf) and not less than -23 N-m (-17.0 ft-lbf) within the 
minimum and maximum rotation interval.
    (ii) The negative moment about the occipital condyles shall decay 
for the first time to -5 Nm (-3.7 lbf-ft) between 76 ms and 90 ms after 
time zero.
    (iii) The moment about the occipital condyles shall be calculated by 
the following formula: Moment (N-m) = My - (0.005842m) x (Fx), where My 
is the moment about the y-axis, Fx is the shear force measured by the 
neck transducer (drawing SA572 -S23) and 0.005842m is the distance from 
the point at which the load cell measures the force to the occipital 
condyle.
    (c) Test procedure. (1) Soak the neck assembly in a controlled 
environment at any temperature between 20.6 and 22.2 [deg]C (69 and 72 
[deg]F) and at any relative humidity between 10 and 70 percent for at 
least four hours prior to a test. These temperature and humidity levels 
shall be maintained throughout the testing period specified in this 
section.
    (2) Torque the jam nut (drawing 9001336) on the neck cable (drawing 
ATD-6206) to 0.2 to 0.3 Nm (2-3 in-lbf).
    (3) Mount the neck-headform assembly, defined in paragraph (b) of 
this section, on the pendulum so the midsagittal plane of the headform 
is vertical and coincides with the plane of motion of the pendulum as 
shown in Figure R3 for flexion and Figure R4 for extension tests.
    (i) The moment and rotation data channels are defined to be zero 
when the longitudinal centerline of the neck and pendulum are parallel.
    (ii) The test shall be conducted without inducing any torsion of the 
neck.
    (4) Release the pendulum and allow it to fall freely to achieve an 
impact velocity of 5.2 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 m/s (17.1 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.3 ft/s) for flexion and 2.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 
m/s (8.2 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.3 ft/s) for extension measured at the 
center of the pendulum accelerometer at the instant of contact with the 
honeycomb.
    (i) Time-zero is defined as the time of initial contact between the 
pendulum striker plate and the honeycomb material. The pendulum data 
channel shall be defined to be zero at this time.
    (ii) Stop the pendulum from the initial velocity with an 
acceleration vs. time pulse which meets the velocity change as specified 
in the following table. Integrate the pendulum acceleration data channel 
to obtain the velocity vs. time curve as indicated in Table B:

                                             Table B--Pendulum Pulse
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                Time                         Flexion                   Time                    Extension
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 m/s                       m/s        ft/s              ms                 m/s          ft/s
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10..................................  1.6-2.3       5.2-7.5  6......................  0.8-1.2       2.6-3.9
20..................................  3.4-4.2       11.2-13  10.....................  1.5-2.1       4.9-6.9
                                                        .8
25..................................  4.3-5.2       14.1-17  14.....................  2.2-2.9       7.2-9.5
                                                        .1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 936]]


<R05>
Sec. 572.154  Thorax assembly and test procedure.

    (a) Thorax Assembly (refer to Sec. 572.150(a)(1)(iv)) . The thorax 
consists of the part of the torso assembly shown in drawing 921022-060.
    (b) When the thorax of a completely assembled dummy (drawing 921022-
000) is impacted by a test probe conforming to Sec. 572.155(a) at 5.0 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1m/s (16.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.3 ft/s) 
according to the test procedure in paragraph (c) of this section, the 
peak force, measured by the impact probe in accordance with paragraph 
Sec. 572.155(a), shall be not less than 1514 N (340.7 lbf) and not more 
than 1796 N (404.1 lbf).
    (c) Test procedure. (1) Soak the dummy in a controlled environment 
at any temperature between 20.6 and 22.2 [deg]C (69 and 72 [deg]F) and 
at any relative humidity between 10 and 70 percent for at least four 
hours prior to a test. These temperature and humidity levels shall be 
maintained throughout the entire testing period specified in this 
section.
    (2) The test dummy is clothed in a cotton-polyester based tight 
fitting sweat shirt with long sleeves and ankle long pants whose 
combined weight is not more than 0.25 kg (.55 lbs).
    (3) Seat and orient the dummy on a level seating surface without 
back support as shown in Figure R5 of this subpart, with the lower limbs 
extended forward, parallel to the midsagittal plane and the arms 0 to 5 
degrees forward of vertical. The dummy's midsagittal plane is vertical 
within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>/1 degree and the posterior surface of the 
upper spine box is aligned at 90 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>/1 degrees from 
the horizontal. (Shim material may be used under the upper legs to 
maintain the dummy's specified spine box surface alignment).
    (4) Establish the impact point at the chest midsagittal plane so 
that the impact point of the longitudinal centerline of the probe 
coincides with the dummy's midsagittal plane, is centered on the torso 
196 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>/2.5 mm (7.7 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>/0.1 in) 
vertically from the plane of the seating surface, and is within 0.5 
degrees of a horizontal plane.
    (5) Impact the thorax with the test probe so that at the moment of 
contact the probe's longitudinal center line falls within 2 degrees of a 
horizontal line in the dummy's midsagittal plane.
    (6) Guide the test probe during impact so that there is no 
significant lateral, vertical or rotational movement.
    (7) No suspension hardware, suspension cables, or any other 
attachments to the probe, including the velocity vane, shall make 
contact with the dummy during the test.

[65 FR 17188, Mar. 31, 2000, as amended at 66 FR 45784, Aug. 30, 2001]


<R05>
Sec. 572.155  Test conditions and instrumentation.

    (a) The test probe for thoracic impacts, except for attachments, 
shall be of rigid metallic construction and concentric about its 
longitudinal axis. Any attachments to the impactor, such as suspension 
hardware, impact vanes, etc., must meet the requirements of Sec. 
572.154(c)(7). The impactor shall have a mass of 2.86 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.02 kg (6.3 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 lbs) and a 
minimum mass moment of inertia of 164 kg-cm\2\ (0.145 lb-in-sec\2\) in 
yaw and pitch about the CG of the probe. One-third of the weight of 
suspension cables and any attachments to the impact probe must be 
included in the calculation of mass, and such components may not exceed 
five percent of the total weight of the test probe. The impacting end of 
the probe, perpendicular to and concentric with the longitudinal axis of 
the probe, has a flat, continuous, and non-deformable 101.6 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.25 mm (4.00 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.01 in) diameter 
face with an edge radius of 7.6/12.7 mm (0.3/0.5 in). The impactor shall 
have a 101-103 mm (4-4.1 in) diameter cylindrical surface extending for 
a minimum of 12.5 mm (0.5 in) to the rear from the impact face. The 
probe's end opposite to the impact face has provisions for mounting an 
accelerometer with its sensitive axis collinear with the longitudinal 
axis of the probe. The impact probe shall have a free air resonant 
frequency of not less than 1000 Hz measured in line with the 
longitudinal axis of the impactor, using the test method shown in the 
Procedures for Assembly, Disassembly and Inspection (PADI) document 
referenced in Sec. 572.151.
    (b) Head accelerometers shall have the dimensions, response 
characteristics, and sensitive mass locations specified in drawing 
SA572-S4 and be mounted in the head as shown in drawing 921022-000.

[[Page 937]]

    (c) The neck force-moment transducer shall have the dimensions, 
response characteristics, and sensitive axis locations specified in 
drawing SA572-S23 and shall be mounted for testing as shown in drawing 
921022-000 and in figures R3 and R4 of this subpart.
    (d) The shoulder force transducers shall have the dimensions and 
response characteristics specified in drawing SA572-S25 and are allowed 
to be mounted as optional instrumentation in place of part No. 921022-
022 in the torso assembly as shown in drawing 921022-000.
    (e) The thorax accelerometers shall have the dimensions, response 
characteristics, and sensitive mass locations specified in drawing 
SA572-S4 and be mounted in the torso assembly in triaxial configuration 
as shown in drawing 921022-000.
    (f) The lumbar spine and lower neck force/moment transducer shall 
have the dimensions and response characteristics specified in drawing 
SA572-S23 and are allowed to be mounted as optional instrumentation in 
the torso assembly in place of part No. 910420-003 as shown in drawing 
921022-000.
    (g) The pelvis accelerometers shall have the dimensions, response 
characteristics, and sensitive mass locations specified in drawing 
SA572-S4 and are allowed to be mounted as optional instrumentation in 
the pelvis in triaxial configuration as shown in drawing 921022-000.
    (h) The pubic force transducer shall have the dimensions and 
response characteristics specified in drawing SA572-S24 and is allowed 
to be mounted as optional instrumentation in place of part No. 921022-
050 in the torso assembly as shown in drawing 921022-000.
    (i) The outputs of acceleration and force-sensing devices installed 
in the dummy and in the test apparatus specified by this part are 
recorded in individual data channels that conform to the requirements of 
SAE Recommended Practice J211/1, Rev. Mar95 ``Instrumentation for Impact 
Tests--Part 1--Electronic Instrumentation'' (refer to Sec. 
572.150(a)(3)), with channel classes as follows:
    (1) Head and headform acceleration--Class 1000.
    (2) Neck :
    (i) Forces--Class 1000;
    (ii) Moments--Class 600;
    (iii) Pendulum acceleration--Class 180;
    (iv) Rotation potentiometer response (if used)--CFC 60.
    (3) Thorax:
    (i) Spine and pendulum accelerations--Class 180;
    (ii) Shoulder forces--Class 600;
    (4) Lumbar:
    (i) Forces--Class 1000;
    (ii) Moments --Class 600;
    (5) Pelvis:
    (i) Accelerations--Class 1000;
    (ii) Pubic--Class 1000.
    (j) Coordinate signs for instrumentation polarity shall conform to 
SAE J1733, 1994-12, ``Sign Convention For Vehicle Crash Testing, Surface 
Vehicle Information Report,'' (refer to Sec. 572.150(a)(4)).
    (k) The mountings for sensing devices shall have no resonance 
frequency within a range of 3 times the frequency range of the 
applicable channel class.
    (l) Limb joints shall be set at l g, barely restraining the weight 
of the limb when it is extended horizontally. The force required to move 
a limb segment shall not exceed 2 g throughout the range of limb motion.
    (m) Performance tests of the same component, segment, assembly, or 
fully assembled dummy shall be separated in time by period of not less 
than 30 minutes unless otherwise noted.
    (n) Surfaces of dummy components may not be painted except as 
specified in this subpart or in drawings referenced in Sec. 572.150.

[65 FR 17188, Mar. 31, 2000, as amended at 66 FR 45784, Aug. 30, 2001]

                     Figures to Subpart R of Part 572

[[Page 938]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31MR00.008


[[Page 939]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31MR00.009


[[Page 940]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31MR00.010


[[Page 941]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31MR00.011


[[Page 942]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31MR00.012


[[Page 943]]




<R04>
       Subpart S_Hybrid III Six-Year-Old Weighted Child Test Dummy

    Source: 69 FR 42602, July 16, 2004, unless otherwise noted.

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 42602, July 16, 2004, subpart S, 
consisting of Sec. Sec. 572.160-572.167 was added, effective Jan. 12, 
2005.


<R05>
Sec. 572.160  Incorporation by reference.

    (a) The following materials are hereby incorporated into this 
subpart S by reference:
    (1) A drawings and specifications package entitled ``Parts List and 
Drawings, Part 572 Subpart S, Hybrid III Weighted Six-Year Old Child 
Test Dummy (H-III6CW, Alpha Version) April 13, 2004'', incorporated by 
reference in Sec. 572.161 and consisting of:
    (i) Drawing No. 167-0000, Complete Assembly, incorporated by 
reference in Sec. 572.161;
    (ii) Drawing No. 167-2000, Upper Torso Assembly, incorporated by 
reference in Sec. Sec. 572.161, 572.164, and 572.165 as part of a 
complete dummy assembly;
    (iii) Drawing No. 167-2020, Spine Box Weight, incorporated by 
reference in Sec. Sec. 572.161 and 572.165 as part of a complete dummy 
assembly;
    (iv) Drawing No. 167-3000, Lower Torso Assembly, incorporated by 
reference in Sec. Sec. 572.161, and 572.165 as part of a complete dummy 
assembly;
    (v) Drawing No. 167-3010, Lumbar Weight Base, incorporated by 
reference in Sec. Sec. 572.161 and 572.165 as part of a complete dummy 
assembly; and
    (vi) The Hybrid III Weighted Six-Year-Old Child Parts/Drawing List, 
incorporated by reference in Sec. 572.161.
    (2) A procedures manual entitled ``Procedures for Assembly, 
Disassembly, and Inspection (PADI) of the Hybrid III Six-Year-Old 
Weighted Child Test Dummy (H-III6CW), April 2004,'' incorporated by 
reference in Sec. 572.161;
    (3) The Director of the Federal Register approved those materials 
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR 
part 51. Copies of the materials may be inspected at NHTSA's Technical 
Reference Library, 400 Seventh Street, SW., room 5109, Washington, DC, 
or at the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For 
information on the availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-
6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--
federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    (b) The incorporated materials are available as follows:
    (1) The Drawings and Specifications for the Hybrid III Six-Year-Old 
Weighted Child Test Dummy referred to in paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section are available in electronic format through the NHTSA docket 
center and in paper format from Leet-Melbrook, Division of New RT, 18810 
Woodfield Road, Gaithersburg, MD 20879, (301) 670-0090.
    (2) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 572.161  General description.

    (a) The Hybrid III Six-Year-Old Weighted Child Test Dummy is defined 
by drawings and specifications containing the following materials:
    (1) ``Parts List and Drawings, Part 572 Subpart S, Hybrid III 
Weighted Six-Year Old Child Test Dummy (H-III6CW, Alpha Version) April 
13, 2004'' (incorporated by reference, see Sec. 572.160),
    (2) The head, neck, arm, and leg assemblies specified in 49 CFR 572 
subpart N; and
    (3) ``Procedures for Assembly, Disassembly, and Inspection (PADI) of 
the Hybrid III Six-Year-Old Weighted Child Test Dummy, April 2004'' 
(incorporated by reference, see Sec. 572.160).

                                 Table A
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                   Component assembly \1\                    Drawing No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Complete assembly..........................................     167-0000
Upper torso assembly.......................................     167-2000
Spine box weight...........................................     167-2020
Lower torso assembly.......................................     167-3000
Lumbar weight base.........................................    167-3010
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Head, neck, arm, and leg assemblies are as specified in 49 CFR 572
  subpart N.

    (b) Adjacent segments are joined in a manner such that except for 
contacts existing under static conditions, there is no contact between 
metallic elements throughout the range of motion or under simulated 
crash impact conditions.
    (c) The structural properties of the dummy are such that the dummy 
must conform to Subpart S in every respect and Subpart N as applicable, 
before use in any test similar to those specified in Standard 208, 
``Occupant Crash Protection'' (49 CFR 571.208), and Standard 213,

[[Page 944]]

 ``Child Restraint Systems'' (49 CFR 571.213).


<R05>
Sec. 572.162  Head assembly and test procedure.

    The head assembly is assembled and tested as specified in 49 CFR 
572.122 (Subpart N).


<R05>
Sec. 572.163  Neck assembly and test procedure.

    The neck assembly is assembled and tested as specified in 49 CFR 
572.123 (Subpart N).


<R05>
Sec. 572.164  Thorax assembly and test procedure.

    (a) Thorax (upper torso) assembly. The thorax consists of the part 
of the torso assembly shown in drawing 167-2000 (incorporated by 
reference, see Sec. 572.160).
    (b) When the anterior surface of the thorax of a completely 
assembled dummy (drawing 167-2000) that is seated as shown in Figure S1 
is impacted by a test probe conforming to 49 CFR 572.127(a) at 6.71 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.12 m/s (22.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4 ft/s) 
according to the test procedure specified in 49 CFR 572.124(c):
    (1) The maximum sternum displacement relative to the spine, measured 
with chest deflection transducer (specified in 49 CFR 572.124(b)(1)), 
must be not less than 38.0 mm (1.50 in) and not more than 46.0 mm (1.80 
in). Within this specified compression corridor, the peak force, 
measured by the probe in accordance with 49 CFR 572.127, must be not 
less than 1205 N (270.9 lbf) and not more than 1435 N (322.6 lbf). The 
peak force after 12.5 mm (0.5 in) of sternum displacement, but before 
reaching the minimum required 38.0 mm (1.46 in) sternum displacement 
limit, must not exceed an upper limit of 1500 N.
    (2) The internal hysteresis of the ribcage in each impact as 
determined by the plot of force vs. deflection in paragraph (b)(1) of 
this section must be not less than 65 percent but not more than 85 
percent.
    (c) Test procedure. The thorax assembly is tested as specified in 49 
CFR 572.124(c).


<R05>
Sec. 572.165  Upper and lower torso assemblies and torso flexion test 
procedure.

    (a) Upper/lower torso assembly. The test objective is to determine 
the stiffness effects of the lumbar spine (specified in 49 CFR 
572.125(a)), including cable (specified in 49 CFR 572.125(a)), mounting 
plate insert (specified in 49 CFR 572.125(a)), nylon shoulder bushing 
(specified in 49 CFR 572.125(a)), nut (specified in 49 CFR 572.125(a)), 
spine box weighting plates (drawing 167-2020), lumbar base weight 
(drawing 167-3010), and abdominal insert (specified in 49 CFR 
572.125(a)), on resistance to articulation between the upper torso 
assembly (drawing 167-2000) and the lower torso assembly (drawing 167-
3000). Drawing Nos. 167-2000, 167-2020, 167-3000 and 167-3010 are 
incorporated by reference, see Sec. 572.160.
    (b)(1) When the upper torso assembly of a seated dummy is subjected 
to a force continuously applied at the head to neck pivot pin level 
through a rigidly attached adaptor bracket as shown in Figure S2 
according to the test procedure set out in 49 CFR 572.125(c), the lumbar 
spine-abdomen assembly must flex by an amount that permits the upper 
torso assembly to translate in angular motion until the machined surface 
of the instrument cavity at the back of the thoracic spine box is at 45 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees relative to the transverse plane, at 
which time the force applied as shown in Figure S2 must be within 88.6 N 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 20 N (20.0 N <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 4.5 N), and
    (2) Upon removal of the force, the torso assembly must return to 
within 9 degrees of its initial position.
    (c) Test procedure. The upper and lower torso assemblies are tested 
as specified in 49 CFR 572.125(c), except that in paragraph (c)(5) of 
that section, the initial torso orientation angle may not exceed 32 
degrees.


<R05>
Sec. 572.166  Knees and knee impact test procedure.

    The knee assembly is assembled and tested as specified in 49 CFR 
572.126 (Subpart N).

[[Page 945]]


<R05>
Sec. 572.167  Test conditions and instrumentation.

    The test conditions and instrumentation are as specified in 49 CFR 
572.127 (Subpart N).

                          Figures to Subpart S

[[Page 946]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR16JY04.005


[[Page 947]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR16JY04.006


[[Page 948]]




<R03>
PART 573_DEFECT AND NONCOMPLIANCE RESPONSIBILITY AND REPORTS--Table of 
Contents




Sec.
573.1 Scope.
573.2 Purpose.
573.3 Application.
573.4 Definitions.
573.5 Defect and noncompliance responsibility.
573.6 Defect and noncompliance information report.
573.7 Quarterly reports.
573.8 Lists of purchasers, owners, lessors and lessees.
573.9 Address for submitting required reports and other information.
573.10 Reporting the sale or lease of defective or noncompliant tires.
573.11 Prohibition on sale or lease of new defective and noncompliant 
          motor vehicles and items of replacement equipment.
573.12 Prohibition on sale or lease of new and used defective and 
          noncompliant motor vehicle equipment.
573.13 Reimbursement for prenotification remedies.
573.14 Accelerated remedy program.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 30102-103, 30112, 30117-121, 30166-167; 
delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 34959, June 23, 2004, the authority 
citation for part 573 was revised, effective Oct. 21, 2004. For the 
convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:
    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 30102, 30103, 30116-30121, 30166; delegation of 
authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 43 FR 60169, Dec. 26, 1978, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 573.1  Scope.

    This part:
    (a) Sets forth the responsibilities under 49 U.S.C. 30117-30120 of 
manufacturers of motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment with respect 
to safety-related defects and noncompliances with Federal motor vehicle 
safety standards in motor vehicles and items of motor vehicle equipment; 
and
    (b) Specifies requirements for--
    (1) Manufacturers to maintain lists of purchasers and owners 
notified of defective and noncomplying motor vehicles and motor vehicle 
original and replacement equipment,
    (2) Reporting to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
(NHTSA) defects in motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment and 
noncompliances with motor vehicle safety standards prescribed under part 
571 of this chapter, and
    (3) Providing quarterly reports on defect and noncompliance 
notification campaigns.

[67 FR 45872, July 10, 2002]

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 34959, June 23, 2004, Sec. 573.1 was 
revised, effective Oct. 21, 2004. For the convenience of the user, the 
revised text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 573.1  Scope.

    This part:
    (a) Sets forth the responsibilities under 49 U.S.C. 30116-30121 of 
manufacturers of motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment with respect 
to safety-related defects and noncompliances with Federal motor vehicle 
safety standards in motor vehicles and items of motor vehicle equipment; 
and
    (b) Specifies requirements for--
    (1) Manufacturers to maintain lists of owners, purchasers, dealers, 
and distributors notified of defective and noncomplying motor vehicles 
and motor vehicle original and replacement equipment,
    (2) Reporting to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
(NHTSA) defects in motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment and 
noncompliances with motor vehicle safety standards prescribed under part 
571 of this chapter, and
    (3) Providing quarterly reports on defect and noncompliance 
notification campaigns.


<R05>
Sec. 573.2  Purposes.

    The purposes of this part are:
    (a) To facilitate the notification of owners of defective and 
noncomplying motor vehicles and items of motor vehicle equipment, and 
the remedy of such defects and noncompliances, by equitably apportioning 
the responsibility for safety-related defects and noncompliances with 
Federal motor vehicle safety standards among manufacturers of motor 
vehicles and motor vehicle equipment; and
    (b) To inform NHTSA of defective and noncomplying motor vehicles and 
items of motor vehicle equipment, and to obtain information for NHTSA on 
the adequacy of manufacturers' defect and noncompliance notification 
campaigns, on corrective action, on owner

[[Page 949]]

response, and to compare the defect incidence rate among different 
groups of vehicles.

[67 FR 45872, July 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 573.3  Application.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraphs (g), (h), and (i) of this 
section, this part applies to manufacturers of complete motor vehicles, 
incomplete motor vehicles, and motor vehicle original and replacement 
equipment, with respect to all vehicles and equipment that have been 
transported beyond the direct control of the manufacturer.
    (b) In the case of a defect or noncompliance decided to exist in a 
motor vehicle or equipment item imported into the United States, 
compliance with Sec. Sec. 573.6 and 573.7 by either the fabricating 
manufacturer or the importer of the vehicle or equipment item shall be 
considered compliance by both.
    (c) In the case of a defect or noncompliance decided to exist in a 
vehicle manufactured in two or more stages, compliance with Sec. Sec. 
573.6 and 573.7 by either the manufacturer of the incomplete vehicle or 
any subsequent manufacturer of the vehicle shall be considered 
compliance by all manufacturers.
    (d) In the case of a defect or noncompliance decided to exist in an 
item of replacement equipment (except tires) compliance with Sec. Sec. 
573.6 and 573.7 by the brand name or trademark owner shall be considered 
compliance by the manufacturer. Tire brand name owners are considered 
manufacturers (49 U.S.C. 10102(b)(1)(E)) and have the same reporting 
requirements as manufacturers.
    (e) In the case of a defect or noncompliance decided to exist in an 
item of original equipment used in the vehicles of only one vehicle 
manufacturer, compliance with Sec. Sec. 573.6 and 573.7 by either the 
vehicle or equipment manufacturer shall be considered compliance by 
both.
    (f) In the case of a defect or noncompliance decided to exist in 
original equipment installed in the vehicles of more than one 
manufacturer, compliance with Sec. 573.6 is required of the equipment 
manufacturer as to the equipment item, and of each vehicle manufacturer 
as to the vehicles in which the equipment has been installed. Compliance 
with Sec. 573.7 is required of the manufacturer who is conducting the 
recall campaign.
    (g) The provisions of Sec. 573.10 apply to all persons.
    (h) The provisions of Sec. 573.11 apply to dealers, including 
retailers of motor vehicle equipment.
    (i) The provisions of Sec. 573.12 apply to all persons.

[43 FR 60169, Dec. 26, 1978, as amended at 60 FR 17268, Apr. 5, 1995; 66 
FR 38162, July 23, 2001; 67 FR 19697, Apr. 23, 2002; 68 FR 18142, Apr. 
15, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 573.4  Definitions.

    For purposes of this part:
    Act means 49 U.S.C. Chapter 301.
    Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration or his delegate.
    First purchaser means first purchaser for purposes other than 
resale.
    Leased motor vehicle means any motor vehicle that is leased to a 
person for a term of at least four months by a lessor who has leased 
five or more vehicles in the twelve months preceding the date of 
notification by the vehicle manufacturer of the existence of a safety-
related defect or noncompliance with a Federal motor vehicle safety 
standard in the motor vehicle.
    Lessee means a person who is the lessee of a leased motor vehicle as 
defined in this section.
    Lessor means a person or entity that is the owner, as reflected on 
the vehicle's title, of any five or more leased vehicles (as defined in 
this section), as of the date of notification by the manufacturer of the 
existence of a safety-related defect or noncompliance with a Federal 
motor vehicle safety standard in one or more of the leased motor 
vehicles.
    Original equipment means an item of motor vehicle equipment (other 
than a tire) that was installed in or on a motor vehicle at the time of 
its delivery to the first purchaser if the item of equipment was 
installed on or in the motor vehicle at the time of its delivery to a 
dealer or distributor for distribution, or was installed by the dealer 
or distributor with the express authorizations of the motor vehicle 
manufacturer.

[[Page 950]]

    Readable form means a form readable by the unassisted eye or 
readable by machine. If readable by machine, the submitting party must 
obtain written confirmation from the Office of Defects Investigation 
immediately prior to submission that the machine is readily available to 
NHTSA. For all similar information responses, once a manufacturer has 
obtained approval for the original response in that form, it will not 
have to obtain approval for future submissions in the same form. In 
addition, all coded information must be accompanied by an explanation of 
the codes used.
    Replacement equipment means motor vehicle equipment other than 
original equipment as defined in this section, and tires.

[43 FR 60169, Dec. 26, 1978, as amended at 60 FR 17268, Apr. 5, 1995; 67 
FR 45872, July 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 573.5  Defect and noncompliance responsibility.

    (a) Each manufacturer of a motor vehicle shall be responsible for 
any safety-related defect or any noncompliance determined to exist in 
the vehicle or in any item of original equipment.
    (b) Each manufacturer of an item of replacement equipment shall be 
responsible for any safety-related defect or any noncompliance 
determined to exist in the equipment.

[67 FR 45872, July 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 573.6  Defect and noncompliance information report.

    (a) Each manufacturer shall furnish a report to the NHTSA for each 
defect in his vehicles or in his items of original or replacement 
equipment that he or the Administrator determines to be related to motor 
vehicle safety, and for each noncompliance with a motor vehicle safety 
standard in such vehicles or items of equipment which either he or the 
Administrator determines to exist.
    (b) Each report shall be submitted not more than 5 working days 
after a defect in a vehicle or item of equipment has been determined to 
be safety related, or a noncompliance with a motor vehicle safety 
standard has been determined to exist. Information required by paragraph 
(c) of this section that is not available within that period shall be 
submitted as it becomes available. Each manufacturer submitting new 
information relative to a previously submitted report shall refer to the 
notification campaign number when a number has been assigned by the 
NHTSA.
    (c) Each manufacturer shall include in each report the information 
specified below.
    (1) The manufacturer's name: The full corporate or individual name 
of the fabricating manufacturer and any brand name or trademark owner of 
the vehicle or item of equipment shall be spelled out, except that such 
abbreviations as ``Co.'' or ``Inc.'', and their foreign equivalents, and 
the first and middle initials of individuals, may be used. In the case 
of a defect or noncompliance decided to exist in an imported vehicle or 
item of equipment, the agency designated by the fabricating manufacturer 
pursuant to 49 U.S.C. section 30164(a) shall be also stated. If the 
fabricating manufacturer is a corporation that is controlled by another 
corporation that assumes responsibility for compliance with all 
requirements of this part the name of the controlling corporation may be 
used.
    (2) Identification of the vehicles or items of motor vehicle 
equipment potentially containing the defect or noncompliance, including 
a description of the manufacturer's basis for its determination of the 
recall population and a description of how the vehicles or items of 
equipment to be recalled differ from similar vehicles or items of 
equipment that the manufacturer has not included in the recall.
    (i) In the case of passenger cars, the identification shall be by 
the make, line, model year, the inclusive dates (month and year) of 
manufacture, and any other information necessary to describe the 
vehicles.
    (ii) In the case of vehicles other than passenger cars, the 
identification shall be by body style or type, inclusive dates (month 
and year) of manufacture and any other information necessary to describe 
the vehicles, such as GVWR or class for trucks, displacement (cc) for 
motorcycles, and number of passengers for buses.
    (iii) In the case of items of motor vehicle equipment, the 
identification

[[Page 951]]

shall be by the generic name of the component (tires, child seating 
systems, axles, etc.), part number, size and function if applicable, the 
inclusive dates (month and year) of manufacture if available and any 
other information necessary to describe the items.
    (iv) In the case of motor vehicles or items of motor vehicle 
equipment in which the component that contains the defect or 
noncompliance was manufactured by a different manufacturer from the 
reporting manufacturer, the reporting manufacturer shall identify the 
component and the manufacturer of the component by name, business 
address, and business telephone number. If the reporting manufacturer 
does not know the identity of the manufacturer of the component, it 
shall identify the entity from which it was obtained.
    (v) In the case of items of motor vehicle equipment, the 
manufacturer of the equipment shall identify by name, business address, 
and business telephone number every manufacturer that purchases the 
defective or noncomplying component for use or installation in new motor 
vehicles or new items of motor vehicle equipment.
    (3) The total number of vehicles or items of equipment potentially 
containing the defect or noncompliance, and where available the number 
of vehicles or items of equipment in each group identified pursuant to 
paragraph (c)(2) of this section.
    (4) The percentage of vehicles or items of equipment specified 
pursuant to paragraph (c)(2) of this section estimated to actually 
contain the defect or noncompliance.
    (5) A description of the defect or noncompliance, including both a 
brief summary and a detailed description, with graphic aids as 
necessary, of the nature and physical location (if applicable) of the 
defect or noncompliance.
    (6) In the case of a defect, a chronology of all principal events 
that were the basis for the determination that the defect related to 
motor vehicle safety, including a summary of all warranty claims, field 
or service reports, and other information, with their dates of receipt.
    (7) In the case of a noncompliance, the test results and other 
information that the manufacturer considered in determining the 
existence of the noncompliance. The manufacturer shall identify the date 
of each test and observation that indicated that a noncompliance might 
or did exist.
    (8)(i) A description of the manufacturer's program for remedying the 
defect or noncompliance. This program shall include a plan for 
reimbursing an owner or purchaser who incurred costs to obtain a remedy 
for the problem addressed by the recall within a reasonable time in 
advance of the manufacturer's notification of owners, purchasers and 
dealers, in accordance with Sec. 573.13 of this part. A manufacturer's 
plan may incorporate by reference a general reimbursement plan it 
previously submitted to NHTSA, together with information specific to the 
individual recall. Information required by Sec. 573.13 that is not in a 
general reimbursement plan shall be submitted in the manufacturer's 
report to NHTSA under this section. If a manufacturer submits one or 
more general reimbursement plans, the manufacturer shall update each 
plan every two years, in accordance with Sec. 573.13. The 
manufacturer's remedy program and reimbursement plans will be available 
for inspection by the public at NHTSA headquarters.
    (ii) The estimated date on which it will begin sending notifications 
to owners that there is a safety-related defect or noncompliance and 
that a remedy without charge will be available, and the estimated date 
on which it will have completed such notification. If a manufacturer 
subsequently becomes aware that either the beginning or the completion 
date reported to the agency will be delayed by more than two weeks, it 
shall promptly advise the agency of the delay and the reasons therefor, 
and furnish a revised estimate.
    (iii) If a manufacturer intends to file a petition for an exemption 
from the recall requirements of the Act on the basis that a defect or 
noncompliance is inconsequential as it relates to motor vehicle safety, 
it shall notify NHTSA of that intention in its report to NHTSA of the 
defect or noncompliance under this section. If such a petition is

[[Page 952]]

filed and subsequently denied, the manufacturer shall provide the 
information required by paragraph (c)(8)(ii) of this section within five 
Federal government business days from the date the petition denial is 
published in the Federal Register.
    (iv) If a manufacturer advises NHTSA that it intends to file such a 
petition for exemption from the notification and remedy requirements on 
the grounds that the defect or noncompliance is inconsequential as it 
relates to motor vehicle safety, and does not do so within the 30-day 
period established by 49 CFR 556.4(c), the manufacturer must submit the 
information required by paragraph (c)(8)(ii) of this section no later 
than the end of that 30-day period.
    (9) A representative copy of all notices, bulletins, and other 
communications that relate directly to the defect or noncompliance and 
are sent to more than one manufacturer, distributor, dealer, or 
purchaser. These copies shall be submitted to the NHTSA not later than 5 
days after they are initially sent to manufacturers, distributors, 
dealers, or purchasers. In the case of any notification sent by the 
manufacturer pursuant to part 577 of this chapter, the copy of the 
notification shall be submitted by certified mail.
    (10) Except as authorized by the Administrator, the manufacturer 
shall submit a copy of its proposed owner notification letter, including 
any provisions and attachments related to reimbursement, to the Office 
of Defects Investigation (``ODI'') no fewer than five Federal Government 
business days before it intends to begin mailing it to owners. 
Submission shall be made by any means which permits the manufacturer to 
verify promptly that the copy of the proposed letter was in fact 
received by ODI and the date it was received by ODI.
    (11) The manufacturer's campaign number, if it is not identical to 
the identification number assigned by NHTSA.

[43 FR 60169, Dec. 26, 1978, as amended at 44 FR 20437, Apr. 5, 1979; 48 
FR 44081, Sept. 27, 1983; 60 FR 17268, Apr. 5, 1995; 61 FR 278, Jan. 4, 
1996. Redesignated at 67 FR 45872, July 10, 2002, as amended at 67 FR 
64063, Oct. 17, 2002]

    Effective Date Note: 1. At 69 FR 34959, June 23, 2004, Sec. 573.6 
was amended by revising paragraph (c)(8)(ii), effective Oct. 21, 2004. 
For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as 
follows:

Sec. 573.6  Defect and noncompliance information report.

                                * * * * *

    (c) * * *
    (8) * * *
    (ii) The estimated date(s) on which it will begin sending 
notifications to owners, and to dealers and distributors, that there is 
a safety-related defect or noncompliance and that a remedy without 
charge will be available to owners, and the estimated date(s) on which 
it will complete such notifications (if different from the beginning 
date). If a manufacturer subsequently becomes aware that either the 
beginning or the completion dates reported to the agency for any of the 
notifications will be delayed by more than two weeks, it shall promptly 
advise the agency of the delay and the reasons therefore, and furnish a 
revised estimate.

                                * * * * *

    2. At 69 FR 50084, Aug. 13, 2004, Sec. 573.6 was amended by 
redesignating paragraphs (c)(9) through (c)(11) as paragraphs (c)(10) 
through (c)(12) respectively and by adding a new paragraph (c)(9), 
effective Nov. 12, 2004. For the convenience of the user, the added text 
is set forth as follows:

Sec. 573.6  Defect and noncompliance information report.

                                * * * * *

    (c) * * *
    (9) In the case of a remedy program involving the replacement of 
tires, the manufacturer's program for remedying the defect or 
noncompliance shall:
    (i) Address how the manufacturer will assure that the entities 
replacing the tires are aware of the legal requirements related to 
recalls of tires established by 49 U.S.C. Chapter 301 and regulations 
thereunder. At a minimum, the manufacturer shall notify its owned stores 
and/or distributors, as well as all independent outlets that are 
authorized to replace the tires that are the subject of the recall, 
annually or for each individual recall that the manufacturer conducts, 
about the ban on the sale of new defective or noncompliant tires (49 CFR 
573.11); the prohibition on the sale of new and used defective and 
noncompliant tires (49 CFR 573.12); and the duty to notify NHTSA of any 
sale of a new or used recalled tire for use on a motor vehicle (49 CFR 
573.10). For tire outlets that are manufacturer-owned or otherwise 
subject

[[Page 953]]

to the control of the manufacturer, the manufacturer shall also provide 
directions to comply with these statutory provisions and the regulations 
thereunder.
    (ii) Address how the manufacturer will prevent, to the extent 
reasonably within its control, the recalled tires from being resold for 
installation on a motor vehicle. At a minimum, the manufacturer shall 
include the following information, to be furnished to each tire outlet 
that it owns, or that is authorized to replace tires that are recalled, 
either annually or for each individual recall the manufacturer conducts:
    (A) Written directions to manufacturer-owned and other manufacturer-
controlled outlets to alter the recalled tires permanently so that they 
cannot be used on vehicles. These shall include instructions on the 
means to render recalled tires unsuitable for resale for installation on 
motor vehicles and instructions to perform the incapacitation of each 
recalled tire, with the exception of any tires that are returned to the 
manufacturer pursuant to a testing program, within 24 hours of receipt 
of the recalled tire at the outlet. If the manufacturer has a testing 
program for recalled tires, these directions shall also include criteria 
for selecting recalled tires for testing and instructions for labeling 
those tires and returning them promptly to the manufacturer for testing.
    (B) Written guidance to all other outlets which are authorized to 
replace the recalled tires on how to alter the recalled tires promptly 
and permanently so that they cannot be used on vehicles.
    (C) A requirement that manufacturer-owned and other manufacturer-
controlled outlets report to the manufacturer, either on a monthly basis 
or within 30 days of the deviation, the number of recalled tires removed 
from vehicles by the outlet that have not been rendered unsuitable for 
resale for installation on a motor vehicle within the specified time 
frame (other than those returned for testing) and describe any such 
failure to act in accordance with the manufacturer's plan;
    (iii) Address how the manufacturer will limit, to the extent 
reasonably within its control, the disposal of the recalled tires in 
landfills and, instead, channel them into a category of positive reuse 
(shredding, crumbling, recycling, and recovery) or another alternative 
beneficial non-vehicular use. At a minimum, the manufacturer shall 
include the following information, to be furnished to each tire outlet 
that it owns or that is authorized to replace tires that are recalled, 
either annually or for each individual recall that the manufacturer 
conducts:
    (A)(1) Written directions that require manufacturer-owned and other 
manufacturer-controlled outlets either:
    (i) To ship recalled tires to one or more locations designated by 
the manufacturer as part of the program or allow the manufacturer to 
collect and dispose of the recalled tires; or
    (ii) To ship recalled tires to a location of their own choosing, 
provided that they comply with applicable state and local laws and 
regulations regarding disposal of tires.
    (2) Under option (c)(9)(iii)(A)(1)(ii) of this section, the 
directions must also include further direction and guidance on how to 
limit the disposal of recalled tires in landfills and, instead, channel 
them into a category of positive reuse (shredding, crumbling, recycling, 
and recovery) or another alternative beneficial non-vehicular use.
    (B)(1) Written guidance that authorizes all other outlets that are 
authorized to replace the recalled tires either:
    (i) To ship recalled tires to one or more locations designated by 
the manufacturer or allow the manufacturer to collect and dispose of the 
recalled tires; or
    (ii) To ship recalled tires to a location of their own choosing, 
provided that they comply with applicable state and local laws and 
regulations regarding disposal of tires.
    (2) Under option (c)(9)(iii)(B)(1)(ii) of this section, the 
manufacturer must also include further guidance on how to limit the 
disposal of recalled tires in landfills and, instead, channel them into 
a category of positive reuse (shredding, crumbling, recycling, and 
recovery) or another alternative beneficial non-vehicular use.
    (C) A requirement that manufacturer-owned and other manufacturer-
controlled outlets report to the manufacturer, on a monthly basis or 
within 30 days of the deviation, the number of recalled tires disposed 
of in violation of applicable state and local laws and regulations, and 
describe any such failure to act in accordance with the manufacturer's 
plan; and
    (D) A description of the manufacturer's program for disposing of the 
recalled tires that are returned to the manufacturer or collected by the 
manufacturer from the retail outlets, including, at a minimum, 
statements that the returned tires will be disposed of in compliance 
with applicable state and local laws and regulations regarding disposal 
of tires, and will be channeled, insofar as possible, into a category of 
positive reuse (shredding, crumbling, recycling and recovery) or another 
alternative beneficial non-vehicular use, instead of being disposed of 
in landfills.
    (iv) To the extent that the manufacturer wishes to limit the 
frequency of shipments of recalled tires, it must specify both a minimum 
time period and a minimum weight for the shipments and provide that 
shipments may be made at whichever minimum occurs first.
    (v) Written directions required under this paragraph to be furnished 
to a manufacturer-owned or controlled outlet shall be sent to

[[Page 954]]

the person in charge of each outlet by first-class mail or by electronic 
means, such as FAX transmissions or e-mail, with further instructions to 
notify all employees of the outlet who are involved with removal, 
rendering unsuitable for use, or disposition of recalled tires of the 
applicable requirements and procedures.
    (vi) Manufacturers must implement the plans for disposition of 
recalled tires that they file with NHTSA pursuant to this paragraph. The 
failure of a manufacturer to implement its plan in accordance with its 
terms constitutes a violation of the Safety Act.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 573.7  Quarterly reports.

    (a) Each manufacturer who is conducting a defect or noncompliance 
notification campaign to manufacturers, distributors, dealers, or owners 
shall submit to NHTSA a report in accordance with paragraphs (b), (c), 
and (d) of this section. Unless otherwise directed by the NHTSA, the 
information specified in paragraphs (b)(1) through (5) of this section 
shall be included in the quarterly report, with respect to each 
notification campaign, for each of six consecutive quarters beginning 
with the quarter in which the campaign was initiated (i.e., the date of 
initial mailing of the defect or noncompliance notification to owners) 
or corrective action has been completed on all defective or noncomplying 
vehicles or items of replacement equipment involved in the campaign, 
whichever occurs first.
    (b) Each report shall include the following information identified 
by and in the order of the subparagraph headings of this paragraph.
    (1) The notification campaign number assigned by NHTSA.
    (2) The date notification began and the date completed.
    (3) The number of vehicles or items of equipment involved in the 
notification campaign.
    (4) The number of vehicles and equipment items which have been 
inspected and repaired and the number of vehicles and equipment items 
inspected and determined not to need repair.
    (5) The number of vehicles or items of equipment determined to be 
unreachable for inspection due to export, theft, scrapping, failure to 
receive notification, or other reasons (specify). The number of vehicles 
or items or equipment in each category shall be specified.
    (6) In reports by equipment manufacturers, the number of items of 
equipment repaired and/or returned by dealers, other retailers, and 
distributors to the manufacturer prior to their first sale to the 
public.
    (c) Information supplied in response to the paragraphs (b)(4) and 
(5) of this section shall be cumulative totals.
    (d) The reports required by this section shall be submitted in 
accordance with the following schedule, except that if the due date 
specified below falls on a Saturday, Sunday or Federal holiday, the 
report shall be submitted on the next day that is a business day for the 
Federal government:
    (1) For the first calendar quarter (January 1 through March 31), on 
or before April 30;
    (2) For the second calendar quarter (April 1 through June 30), on or 
before July 30;
    (3) For the third calendar quarter (July 1 through September 30), on 
or before October 30; and
    (4) For the fourth calendar quarter (October 1 through December 31), 
on or before January 30.

[51 FR 398, Jan. 6, 1986, as amended at 60 FR 17269, Apr. 5, 1995. 
Redesignated at 67 FR 45872, July 10, 2002]

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 50085. Aug. 13, 2004, Sec. 573.7 was 
amended by adding paragraph (b)(7), effective Nov. 12, 2004. For the 
convenience of the user, the added text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 573.7  Quarterly reports.

                                * * * * *

    (b) * * *
    (7) For all recalls that involve the replacement of tires, the 
manufacturer shall provide:
    (i) The aggregate number of recalled tires that the manufacturer 
becomes aware have not been rendered unsuitable for resale for 
installation on a motor vehicle in accordance with the manufacturer's 
plan provided to NHTSA pursuant to Sec. 573.6(c)(9);
    (ii) The aggregate number of recalled tires that the manufacturer 
becomes aware have been disposed of in violation of applicable state and 
local laws and regulations; and

[[Page 955]]

    (iii) A description of any failure of a tire outlet to act in 
accordance with the directions in the manufacturer's plan, including an 
identification of the outlet(s) in question.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 573.8  Lists of purchasers, owners, lessors and lessees.

    (a) Each manufacturer of motor vehicles shall maintain, in a form 
suitable for inspection such as computer information storage devices or 
card files, a list of the names and addresses of the registered owners, 
as determined through State motor vehicle registration records or other 
sources, or the most recent purchasers where the registered owners are 
unknown, for all vehicles involved in a defect or noncompliance 
notification campaign initiated after the effective date of this part. 
The list shall include the vehicle identification number for each 
vehicle and the status of remedy with respect to each vehicle, updated 
as of the end of each quarterly reporting period specified in Sec. 
573.6. Each list shall be retained, beginning with the date on which the 
defect or noncompliance information report required by Sec. 573.5 is 
initially submitted to the NHTSA, for 5 years.
    (b) Each manufacturer (including brand name owners) of tires shall 
maintain, in a form suitable for inspection such as computer information 
storage devices or card files, a list of the names and addresses of the 
first purchasers of his tires for all tires involved in a defect or 
noncompliance notification campaign initiated after the effective date 
of this part. The list shall include the tire identification number of 
all tires and shall show the status of remedy with respect to each owner 
involved in each notification campaign, updated as of the end of each 
quarterly reporting period specified in Sec. 573.6. Each list shall be 
retained, beginning with the date on which the defect information report 
is initially submitted to the NHTSA, for 3 years.
    (c) For each item of equipment involved in a defect or noncompliance 
notification campaign initiated after the effective date of this part, 
each manufacturer of motor vehicle equipment other than tires shall 
maintain, in a form suitable for inspection, such as computer 
information storage devices or card files, a list of the names and 
addresses of each distributor and dealer of such manufacturer, each 
motor vehicle or motor vehicle equipment manufacturer and most recent 
purchaser known to the manufacturer to whom a potentially defective or 
noncomplying item of equipment has been sold and to whom notification is 
sent, the number of such items sold to each, and the date of shipment. 
The list shall show as far as is practicable the number of items 
remedied or returned to the manufacturer and the dates of such remedy or 
return. Each list shall be retained, beginning with the date on which 
the defect report required by Sec. 573.5 is initially submitted to the 
NHTSA, for 5 years.
    (d) Each lessor of leased motor vehicles that receives a 
notification from the manufacturer of such vehicles that the vehicle 
contains a safety-related defect or fails to comply with a Federal motor 
vehicle safety standard shall maintain, in a form suitable for 
inspection, such as computer information storage devices or card files, 
a list of the names and addresses of all lessees to which the lessor has 
provided notification of a defect or noncompliance pursuant to 49 CFR 
577.5(h). The list shall also include the make, model, model year, and 
vehicle identification number of each such leased vehicle, and the date 
on which the lessor mailed notification of the defect or noncompliance 
to the lessee. The information required by this paragraph must be 
retained by the lessor for one calendar year from the date the vehicle 
lease expires.

[43 FR 60169, Dec. 26, 1978, as amended at 44 FR 20437, Apr. 5, 1979; 60 
FR 17269, Apr. 5, 1995; 61 FR 278, Jan. 4, 1996. Redesignated at 67 FR 
45872, July 10, 2002]

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 34959, June 23, 2004, Sec. 573.8 was 
amended by revising the title of the section and by revising paragaph 
(a), effective Oct. 21, 2004. For the convenience of the user, the 
revised text is set forth as follows:

[[Page 956]]

Sec. 573.8  Lists of purchasers, owners, dealers, distributors, 
          lessors, and lessees.

    (a) Each manufacturer of motor vehicles shall maintain, in a form 
suitable for inspection such as computer information storage devices or 
card files, a list of the names and addresses of registered owners, as 
determined through State motor vehicle registration records or other 
sources or the most recent purchasers where the registered owners are 
unknown, for all vehicles involved in a defect or noncompliance 
notification campaign initiated after the effective date of this part. 
The list shall include the vehicle identification number for each 
vehicle and the status of remedy with respect to each vehicle, updated 
as of the end of each quarterly reporting period specified in Sec. 
573.7. Each vehicle manufacturer shall also maintain such a list of the 
names and addresses of all dealers and distributors to which a defect or 
noncompliance notification was sent. Each list shall be retained for 5 
years, beginning with the date on which the defect or noncompliance 
information report required by Sec. 573.6 is initially submitted to 
NHTSA.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 573.9  Address for submitting required reports and other information.

    All required reports and other information, except as otherwise 
required by this part, shall be submitted to the Associate Administrator 
for Enforcement, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
Washington, DC 20590.


<R05>
Sec. 573.10  Reporting the sale or lease of defective or noncompliant tires.

    (a) Reporting requirement. Subject to paragraph (b) of this section, 
any person who knowingly and willfully sells or leases for use on a 
motor vehicle a defective tire or a tire which is not compliant with an 
applicable tire safety standard with actual knowledge that the 
manufacturer of such tire has notified its dealers of such defect or 
noncompliance as required under 49 U.S.C. 30118(c) or as required by an 
order under 49 U.S.C. 30118(b) must report that sale or lease to the 
Associate Administrator for Safety Assurance, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 7th Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590.
    (b) Exclusions from reporting requirement. Paragraph (a) of this 
section is not applicable where, before delivery under a sale or lease 
of a tire:
    (1) The defect or noncompliance of the tire is remedied as required 
under 49 U.S.C. 30120; or
    (2) Notification of the defect or noncompliance is required by an 
order under 49 U.S.C. 30118(b), but enforcement of the order is 
restrained or the order is set aside in a civil action to which 49 
U.S.C. 30121(d) applies.
    (c) Contents of report; requirement of signature. (1) A report 
submitted pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section must contain the 
following information, where that information is available to the person 
selling or leasing the defective or noncompliant tire:
    (i) A statement that the report is being submitted pursuant to 49 
CFR 573.10(a) (sale or lease of defective or noncompliant tires);
    (ii) The name, address and phone number of the person who purchased 
or leased the tire;
    (iii) The name of the manufacturer of the tire;
    (iv) The tire's brand name, model name, and size;
    (v) The tire's DOT identification number;
    (vi) The date of the sale or lease; and
    (vii) The name, address, and telephone number of the seller or 
lessor.
    (2) Each report must be dated and signed, with the name of the 
person signing the report legibly printed or typed below the signature.
    (d) Reports required to be submitted pursuant to this section must 
be submitted no more than that five working days after a person to whom 
a tire covered by this section has been sold or leased has taken 
possession of that tire. Submissions must be made by any means which 
permits the sender to verify promptly that the report was in fact 
received by NHTSA and the day it was received by NHTSA.

[65 FR 81413, Dec. 26, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 573.11  Prohibition on sale or lease of new defective and noncompliant 
motor vehicles and items of replacement equipment.

    (a) If notification is required by an order under 49 U.S.C. 30118(b) 
or is required under 49 U.S.C. 30118(c) and the manufacturer has 
provided to a dealer (including retailers of motor vehicle equipment) 
notification about a new

[[Page 957]]

motor vehicle or new item of replacement equipment in the dealer's 
possession, including actual and constructive possession, at the time of 
notification that contains a defect related to motor vehicle safety or 
does not comply with an applicable motor vehicle safety standard issued 
under 49 CFR part 571, the dealer may sell or lease the motor vehicle or 
item of replacement equipment only if:
    (1) The defect or noncompliance is remedied as required by 49 U.S.C. 
30120 before delivery under the sale or lease; or
    (2) When the notification is required by an order under 49 U.S.C. 
30118(b), enforcement of the order is restrained or the order is set 
aside in a civil action to which 49 U.S.C. 30121(d) applies.
    (b) Paragraph (a) of this section does not prohibit a dealer from 
offering the vehicle or equipment for sale or lease, provided that the 
dealer does not sell or lease it.

[67 FR 19697, Apr. 23, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 573.12  Prohibition on sale or lease of new and used defective and 
noncompliant motor vehicle equipment.

    (a) Subject to Sec. 573.12(b), no person may sell or lease any new 
or used item of motor vehicle equipment (including a tire) as defined by 
49 U.S.C. 30102(a)(7), for installation on a motor vehicle, that is the 
subject of a decision under 49 U.S.C. 30118(b) or a notice required 
under 49 U.S.C. 30118(c), in a condition that it may be reasonably used 
for its original purpose.
    (b) Paragraph (a) of this section is not applicable where:
    (1) The defect or noncompliance is remedied as required under 49 
U.S.C. 30120 before delivery under the sale or lease;
    (2) Notification of the defect or noncompliance is required by an 
order under 49 U.S.C. 30118(b), but enforcement of the order is 
restrained or the order is set aside in a civil action to which 49 
U.S.C. 30121(d) applies.

[67 FR 19698, Apr. 23, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 573.13  Reimbursement for pre-notification remedies.

    (a) Pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 30120(d) and Sec. 573.6(c)(8)(i) of this 
part, this section specifies requirements for a manufacturer's plan 
(including general reimbursement plans submitted pursuant to Sec. 
573.6(c)(8)(i)) to reimburse owners and purchasers for costs incurred 
for remedies in advance of the manufacturer's notification of safety-
related defects and noncompliance with Federal motor vehicle safety 
standards under subsection (b) or (c) of 49 U.S.C. 30118.
    (b) Definitions. The following definitions apply to this section:
    (1) Booster seat means either a backless child restraint system or a 
belt-positioning seat.
    (2) Claimant means a person who seeks reimbursement for the costs of 
a pre-notification remedy for which he or she paid.
    (3) Pre-notification remedy means a remedy that is performed on a 
motor vehicle or item of replacement equipment for a problem 
subsequently addressed by a notification under subsection (b) or (c) of 
49 U.S.C. 30118 and that is obtained during the period for reimbursement 
specified in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (4) Other child restraint system means all child restraint systems 
as defined in 49 CFR 571.213 S4 not included within the categories of 
rear-facing infant seat or booster seat.
    (5) Rear-facing infant seat means a child restraint system that is 
designed to position a child to face only in the direction opposite to 
the normal direction of travel of the motor vehicle.
    (6) Warranty means a warranty as defined in Sec. 579.4(c) of this 
chapter.
    (c) The manufacturer's plan shall specify a period for 
reimbursement, as follows:
    (1) The beginning date shall be no later than a date based on the 
underlying basis for the recall determined as follows:
    (i) For a noncompliance with a Federal motor vehicle safety 
standard, the date shall be the date of the first test or observation by 
either NHTSA or the manufacturer indicating that a noncompliance may 
exist.
    (ii) For a safety-related defect that is determined to exist 
following the opening of an Engineering Analysis (EA) by NHTSA's Office 
of Defects Investigation (ODI), the date shall be the date the EA was 
opened, or one year before

[[Page 958]]

the date of the manufacturer's notification to NHTSA pursuant to Sec. 
573.6 of this part, whichever is earlier.
    (iii) For a safety-related defect that is determined to exist in the 
absence of the opening of an EA, the date shall be one year before the 
date of the manufacturer's notification to NHTSA pursuant to Sec. 573.6 
of this part.
    (2) The ending date shall be no earlier than:
    (i) For motor vehicles, 10 calendar days after the date on which the 
manufacturer mailed the last of its notifications to owners pursuant to 
part 577 of this chapter.
    (ii) For replacement equipment, 10 calendar days after the date on 
which the manufacturer mailed the last of its notifications to owners 
pursuant to part 577 of this chapter (where applicable) or 30 days after 
the conclusion of the manufacturer's initial efforts to provide public 
notice of the existence of the defect or noncompliance pursuant to Sec. 
577.7, whichever is later.
    (d) The manufacturer's plan shall provide for reimbursement of costs 
for pre-notification remedies, subject to the conditions established in 
the plan. The following conditions and no others may be established in 
the plan.
    (1) The plan may exclude reimbursement for costs incurred within the 
period during which the manufacturer's original or extended warranty 
would have provided for a free repair of the problem addressed by the 
recall, without any payment by the consumer unless a franchised dealer 
or authorized representative of the manufacturer denied warranty 
coverage or the repair made under warranty did not remedy the problem 
addressed by the recall. The exclusion based on an extended warranty may 
be applied only when the manufacturer provided written notice of the 
terms of the extended warranty to owners.
    (2)(i) For a motor vehicle, the plan may exclude reimbursement:
    (A) If the pre-notification remedy was not of the same type (repair, 
replacement, or refund of purchase price) as the recall remedy;
    (B) If the pre-notification remedy did not address the defect or 
noncompliance that led to the recall or a manifestation of the defect or 
noncompliance; or
    (C) If the pre-notification remedy was not reasonably necessary to 
correct the defect or noncompliance that led to the recall or a 
manifestation of the defect or noncompliance.
    (ii) However, the plan may not require that the pre-notification 
remedy be identical to the remedy elected by the manufacturer pursuant 
to 49 U.S.C. 30120(a)(1)(A).
    (3)(i) For replacement equipment, the plan may exclude 
reimbursement:
    (A) If the pre-notification remedy did not address the defect or 
noncompliance that led to the recall or a manifestation of the defect or 
noncompliance;
    (B) If the pre-notification remedy was not reasonably necessary to 
correct the defect or noncompliance that led to the recall or a 
manifestation of the defect and noncompliance; or
    (C) In the case of a child restraint system that was replaced, if 
the replacement child restraint is not the same type (i.e., rear-facing 
infant seat, booster seat, or other child restraint system) as the 
restraint that was the subject of the recall.
    (ii) However, the plan may not require that the pre-notification 
remedy be identical to the remedy elected by the manufacturer pursuant 
to 49 U.S.C. 30120(a)(1)(B).
    (4) The plan may exclude reimbursement if the claimant did not 
submit adequate documentation to the manufacturer at an address or 
location designated pursuant to Sec. 573.13(f). The plan may require, 
at most, that the following documentation be submitted:
    (i) Name and mailing address of the claimant;
    (ii) Identification of the product that was recalled:
    (A) For motor vehicles, the vehicle make, model, model year, and 
vehicle identification number of the vehicle;
    (B) For replacement equipment other than child restraint systems and 
tires, a description of the equipment, including model and size as 
appropriate;
    (C) For child restraint systems, a description of the restraint, 
including the type (rear-facing infant seat, booster seat, or other 
child restraint system) and the model; or

[[Page 959]]

    (D) For tires, the model and size;
    (iii) Identification of the recall (either the NHTSA recall number 
or the manufacturer's recall number);
    (iv) Identification of the owner or purchaser of the recalled motor 
vehicle or replacement equipment at the time that the pre-notification 
remedy was obtained;
    (v) A receipt for the pre-notification remedy, which may be an 
original or copy:
    (A) If the reimbursement sought is for a repair, the manufacturer 
may require that the receipt indicate that the repair addressed the 
defect or noncompliance that led to the recall or a manifestation of the 
defect or noncompliance, and state the total amount paid for the repair 
of that problem. Itemization of a receipt of the amount for parts, 
labor, other costs and taxes, may not be required unless it is unclear 
on the face of the receipt that the repair for which reimbursement is 
sought addressed only the pre-notification remedy relating to the 
pertinent defect or noncompliance or manifestation thereof.
    (B) If the reimbursement sought is for the replacement of a vehicle 
part or an item of replacement equipment, the manufacturer may require 
that the receipt identify the item and state the total amount paid for 
the item that replaced the defective or noncompliant item;
    (vi) In the case of items of replacement equipment that were 
replaced, documentation that the claimant or a relative thereof (with 
relationship stated) owned the recalled item. Such documentation could 
consist of:
    (A) An invoice or receipt showing purchase of the recalled item of 
replacement equipment;
    (B) If the claimant sent a registration card for a recalled child 
restraint system or tire to the manufacturer, a statement to that 
effect;
    (C) A copy of the registration card for the recalled child restraint 
system or tire; or
    (D) Documentation demonstrating that the claimant had replaced a 
recalled tire that was on a vehicle that he, she, or a relative owned; 
and
    (vii) If the pre-notification remedy was obtained at a time when the 
vehicle or equipment could have been repaired or replaced at no charge 
under a manufacturer's original or extended warranty program, 
documentation indicating that the manufacturer's dealer or authorized 
facility either refused to remedy the problem addressed by the recall 
under the warranty or that the warranty repair did not correct the 
problem addressed by the recall.
    (e) The manufacturer's plan shall specify the amount of costs to be 
reimbursed for a pre-notification remedy.
    (1) For motor vehicles:
    (i) The amount of reimbursement shall not be less than the lesser 
of:
    (A) The amount paid by the owner for the remedy, or
    (B) The cost of parts for the remedy, plus associated labor at local 
labor rates, miscellaneous fees such as disposal of waste, and taxes. 
Costs for parts may be limited to the manufacturer's list retail price 
for authorized parts.
    (ii) Any associated costs, including, but not limited to, taxes or 
disposal of wastes, may not be limited.
    (2) For replacement equipment:
    (i) The amount of reimbursement ordinarily would be the amount paid 
by the owner for the replacement item.
    (ii) In cases in which the owner purchased a brand or model 
different from the item of motor vehicle equipment that was the subject 
of the recall, the manufacturer may limit the amount of reimbursement to 
the retail list price of the defective or noncompliant item that was 
replaced, plus taxes.
    (iii) If the item of motor vehicle equipment was repaired, the 
provisions of paragraph (e)(1) of this section apply.
    (f) The manufacturer's plan shall identify an address to which 
claimants may mail reimbursement clams and may identify franchised 
dealer(s) and authorized facilities to which claims for reimbursement 
may be submitted directly.
    (g) The manufacturer (either directly or through its designated 
dealer or facility) shall act upon requests for reimbursement as 
follows:
    (1) The manufacturer shall act upon a claim for reimbursement within 
60 days of its receipt. If the manufacturer denies the claim, the 
manufacturer

[[Page 960]]

must send a notice to the claimant within 60 days of receipt of the 
claim that includes a clear, concise statement of the reasons for the 
denial.
    (2) If a claim for reimbursement is incomplete when originally 
submitted, the manufacturer shall advise the claimant within 60 days of 
receipt of the claim of the documentation that is needed and offer an 
opportunity to resubmit the claim with complete documentation.
    (h) Reimbursement shall be in the form of a check or cash from the 
manufacturer or a designated dealer or facility.
    (i) The manufacturer shall make its reimbursement plan available to 
the public upon request.
    (j) Any disputes over the denial in whole or in part of a claim for 
reimbursement shall be resolved between the claimant and the 
manufacturer. NHTSA will not mediate or resolve any disputes regarding 
eligibility for, or the amount of, reimbursement.
    (k) Each manufacturer shall implement each plan for reimbursement in 
accordance with this section and the terms of the plan.
    (l) Nothing in this section requires that a manufacturer provide 
reimbursement in connection with a fraudulent claim for reimbursement.
    (m) A manufacturer's plan may provide that it will not apply to 
recalls based solely on noncompliant or defective labels.
    (n) The requirement that reimbursement for a pre-notification remedy 
be provided to an owner does not apply if, in the case of a motor 
vehicle or replacement equipment other than a tire, it was bought by the 
first purchaser more than 10 calendar years before notice is given under 
49 U.S.C. 30118(c) or an order is issued under section 49 U.S.C. 
30118(b). In the case of a tire, this period shall be 5 calendar years.

[67 FR 64063, Oct. 17, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 573.14  Accelerated remedy program.

    (a) An accelerated remedy program is one in which the manufacturer 
expands the sources of replacement parts needed to remedy the defect or 
noncompliance, or expands the number of authorized repair facilities 
beyond those facilities that usually and customarily provide remedy work 
for the manufacturer, or both.
    (b) The Administrator may require a manufacturer to accelerate its 
remedy program if:
    (1) The Administrator finds that there is a risk of serious injury 
or death if the remedy program is not accelerated;
    (2) The Administrator finds that acceleration of the remedy program 
can be reasonably achieved by expanding the sources of replacement 
parts, expanding the number of authorized repair facilities, or both; 
and
    (3) The Administrator determines that the manufacturer's remedy 
program is not likely to be capable of completion within a reasonable 
time.
    (c) The Administrator, in deciding whether to require the 
manufacturer to accelerate a remedy program and what to require the 
manufacturer to do, will consult with the manufacturer and may consider 
a wide range of information, including, but not limited to, the 
following: the manufacturer's initial or revised report submitted under 
Sec. 573.6(c), information from the manufacturer, information from 
other manufacturers and suppliers, information from any source related 
to the availability and implementation of the remedy, and the 
seriousness of the risk of injury or death associated with the defect or 
noncompliance.
    (d) As required by the Administrator, an accelerated remedy program 
shall include the manner of acceleration (expansion of the sources of 
replacement parts, expansion of the number of authorized repair 
facilities, or both), may require submission of a plan, may identify the 
parts to be provided and/or the sources of those parts, may require the 
manufacturer to notify the agency and owners about any differences among 
different sources or brands of parts, may require the manufacturer to 
identify additional authorized repair facilities, and may specify 
additional owner notifications related to the program. The Administrator 
may also require the manufacturer to include a program to provide 
reimbursement to owners who incur costs to obtain the accelerated 
remedy.
    (e) Under an accelerated remedy program, the remedy that is provided 
shall

[[Page 961]]

be equivalent to the remedy that would have been provided if the 
manufacturer's remedy program had not been accelerated. The replacement 
parts used to remedy the defect or noncompliance shall be reasonably 
equivalent to those that would have been used if the remedy program were 
not accelerated. The service procedures shall be reasonably equivalent. 
In the case of tires, all replacement tires shall be the same size and 
type as the defective or noncompliant tire, shall be suitable for use on 
the owner's vehicle, shall have the same or higher load index and speed 
rating, and, for passenger car tires, shall have the same or better 
rating in each of the three categories enumerated in the Uniform Tire 
Quality Grading System. See 49 CFR 575.104. In the case of child 
restraints systems, all replacements shall be of the same type (e.g., 
rear-facing infant seats with a base, rear-facing infant seats without a 
base, convertible seats (designed for use in both rear- and forward-
facing modes), forward-facing only seats, high back booster seats with a 
five-point harness, and belt positioning booster seats) and the same 
overall quality.
    (f) In those instances where the accelerated remedy program provides 
that an owner may obtain the remedy from a source other than the 
manufacturer or its dealers or authorized facilities by paying for the 
remedy and/or its installation, the manufacturer shall reimburse the 
owner for the cost of obtaining the remedy as specified on paragraphs 
(f)(1) through (f)(3) of this section. Under these circumstances, the 
accelerated remedy program shall include, to the extent required by the 
Administrator:
    (1) A description of the remedy and costs that are eligible for 
reimbursement, including identification of the equipment and/or parts 
and labor for which reimbursement is available;
    (2) Identification, with specificity or as a class, of the 
alternative repair facilities at which reimbursable repairs may be 
performed, including an explanation of how to arrange for service at 
those facilities; and
    (3) Other provisions assuring appropriate reimbursement that are 
consistent with those set forth in Sec. 573.13, including, but not 
limited to, provisions regarding the procedures and needed documentation 
for making a claim for reimbursement, the amount of costs to be 
reimbursed, the office to which claims for reimbursement shall be 
submitted, the requirements on manufacturers for acting on claims for 
reimbursement, and the methods by which owners can obtain information 
about the program.
    (g) In response to a manufacturer's request, the Administrator may 
authorize a manufacturer to terminate its accelerated remedy program if 
the Administrator concludes that the manufacturer can meet all future 
demands for the remedy through its own sources in a prompt manner. If 
required by the Administrator, the manufacturer shall provide notice of 
the termination of the program to all owners of unremedied vehicles and 
equipment at least 30 days in advance of the termination date, in a form 
approved by the Administrator.
    (h) Each manufacturer shall implement any accelerated remedy program 
required by the Administrator according to the terms of that program.

[67 FR 72392, Dec. 5, 2002]


<R03>
PART 574_TIRE IDENTIFICATION AND RECORDKEEPING--Table of Contents




Sec.
574.1 Scope.
574.2 Purpose.
574.3 Definitions.
574.4 Applicability.
574.5 Tire identification requirements.
574.6 Identification mark.
574.7 Information requirements--new tire manufacturers, new tire brand 
          name owners.
574.8 Information requirements--tire distributors and dealers.
574.9 Requirements for motor vehicle dealers.
574.10 Requirements for motor vehicle manufacturers.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30117, and 30166; delegation 
of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Editorial Note: An interpretation of manufacturer's designee issued 
by NHTSA and published at 36 FR 9780, May 28, 1971, provides as follows:


    ``A request for an interpretation has been received from the Rubber 
Manufacturers Association asking that it be made clear that,

[[Page 962]]

under the Tire Identification and Recordkeeping Regulation (part 574), 
particularly Sec. Sec. 574.7 and 574.8, only the tire manufacturer, 
brand name owner, or retreader may designate a third party to provide 
the necessary recording forms or to maintain the records required by the 
regulation.

    ``Another person has requested an interpretation concerning the 
questions whether: (1) A tire manufacturer, brand name owner or 
retreader may designate one or more persons to be its designee for the 
purpose of maintaining the information, (2) an independent distributor 
or dealer may select a designee for the retention of the manufacturer's 
records, provided the manufacturer approves the designation, and (3) the 
independent distributor or dealer may seek administrative relief in the 
event he believes the information retained by the manufacturer is being 
used to his detriment.

    ``Under section 113(f) of the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle 
Safety Act (15 U.S.C. 1402(f) and part 574, it is the tire manufacturer 
who has the ultimate responsibility for maintaining the records of first 
purchasers. Therefore, it is the tire manufacturer or his designee who 
must maintain these records. The term designee, as used in the 
regulation, was not intended to preclude multiple designees; if the tire 
manufacturer desires, he may designate more than one person to maintain 
the required information. Furthermore, neither the Act nor the 
regulation prohibits the distributor or dealer from being the 
manufacturer's designee nor do they prohibit a distributor or dealer 
from selecting someone to be the manufacturer's designee provided the 
manufacturer approves of the selection.

    ``With respect to the possibility of manufacturers using the 
maintained information to the detriment of a distributor or dealer, the 
NHTSA will of course investigate claims by distributors or dealers of 
alleged misconduct and, if the maintained information is being misused, 
take appropriate action.

    ``Issued under the authority of sections 103, 113, and 119 of the 
National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act, 15 U.S.C. 1392, 1402, and 
1407, and the delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.51.''


<R05>
Sec. 574.1  Scope.

    This part sets forth the method by which new tire manufacturers and 
new tire brand name owners shall identify tires for use on motor 
vehicles and maintain records of tire purchasers, and the methods by 
which retreaders and retreaded tire brand name owners shall identify 
tires for use on motor vehicles. This part also sets forth the methods 
by which independent tire dealers and distributors shall record, on 
registration forms, their names and addresses and the identification 
number of the tires sold to tire purchasers and provide the forms to the 
purchasers, so that the purchasers may report their names to the new 
tire manufacturers and new tire brand name owners, and by which other 
tire dealers and distributors shall record and report the names of tire 
purchasers to the new tire manufacturers and new tire brand name owners.

(Authority: Secs. 108, 119, and 201, Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 (15 
U.S.C. 1392, 1407, and 1421); sec. 4, Pub. L. 97-311, 96 Stat. 1619 (15 
U.S.C. 1418); and delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50)

[49 FR 4760, Feb. 8, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 574.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to facilitate notification to purchasers 
of defective or nonconforming tires, pursuant to Sections 30118 and 
30119 of Title 49, United States Code, so that they may take appropriate 
action in the interest of motor vehicle safety.

[61 FR 29495, June 11, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 574.3  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory definitions. All terms in this part that are defined 
in Section 30102 of Title 49, United States Code, are used as defined 
therein.
    (b) Motor vehicle safety standard definitions. Unless otherwise 
indicated, all terms used in this part that are defined in the Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standards, part 571 of this subchapter (hereinafter the 
Standards), are used as defined therein.
    (c)(1) Independent means, with respect to a tire distributor or 
dealer, one whose business is not owned or controlled by a tire 
manufacturer or brand name owner.
    (2) Mileage contract purchaser means a person who purchases or 
leases tire use on a mileage basis.
    (3) New tire brand name owner means a person, other than a new tire 
manufacturer, who owns or has the right to control the brand name of a 
new tire or a person who licenses another to purchase new tires from a 
new tire manufacturer bearing the licensor's brand name.

[[Page 963]]

    (4) Retreaded tire brand name owner means a person, other than a 
retreader, who owns or has the right to control the brand name of a 
retreaded tire or a person who licenses another to purchase retreaded 
tires from a retreader bearing the licensor's brand name.
    (5) Tire purchaser means a person who buys or leases a new tire, or 
who buys or leases for 60 days or more a motor vehicle containing a new 
tire for purposes other than resale.

(Authority: Secs. 103, 108, 112, 119, 201, Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 
(15 U.S.C. 1392, 1397, 1401, 1407, 1421); secs. 102, 103, 104, Pub. L. 
93-492, 88 Stat. 1470 (15 U.S.C. 1411-1420); 92 Stat. 2689 (15 U.S.C. 
1418); delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.51)

[36 FR 1197, Jan. 26, 1971, as amended at 44 FR 7964, Feb. 8, 1979; 49 
FR 38612, Oct. 1, 1984; 61 FR 29495, June 11, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 574.4  Applicability.

    This part applies to manufacturers, brand name owners, retreaders, 
distributors, and dealers of new and retreaded tires, and new non-
pneumatic tires and non-pneumatic tire assemblies for use on motor 
vehicles manufactured after 1948 and to manufacturers and dealers of 
motor vehicles manufactured after 1948. However, it does not apply to 
persons who retread tires solely for their own use.

[36 FR 5422, Mar. 23, 1971, as amended at 55 FR 29596, July 20, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 574.5  Tire identification requirements.

    Each tire manufacturer shall conspicuously label on one sidewall of 
each tire it manufactures, except tires manufactured exclusively for 
mileage-contract purchasers, or non-pneumatic tires or non-pneumatic 
tire assemblies, by permanently molding into or onto the sidewall, in 
the manner and location specified in Figure 1, a tire identification 
number containing the information set forth in paragraphs (a) through 
(d) of this section. Each tire retreader, except tire retreaders who 
retread tires solely for their own use, shall conspicuously label one 
sidewall of each tire it retreads by permanently molding or branding 
into or onto the sidewall, in the manner and location specified in 
Figure 2, a tire identification number containing the information set 
forth in paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section. In addition, the 
DOT symbol required by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards shall be 
located as shown in Figures 1 and 2. The DOT symbol shall not appear on 
tires to which no Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard is applicable, 
except that the DOT symbol on tires for use on motor vehicles other than 
passenger cars may, prior to retreading, be removed from the sidewall or 
allowed to remain on the sidewall, at the retreader's option. The 
symbols to be used in the tire identification number for tire 
manufacturers and retreaders are: ``A, B, C, D, E, F, H, J, K, L, M, N, 
P, R, T, U, V, W, X, Y, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0''. Tires 
manufactured or retreaded exclusively for mileage-contract purchasers 
are not required to contain a tire identification number if the tire 
contains the phrase ``for mileage contract use only'' permanently molded 
into or onto the tire sidewall in lettering at least one-quarter inch 
high. Each manufacturer of a non-pneumatic tire or a non-pneumatic tire 
assembly shall permanently mold, stamp or otherwise permanently mark 
into or onto one side of the non-pneumatic tire or non-pneumatic tire 
assembly a tire identification number containing the information set 
forth in paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section. In addition, the 
DOT symbol required by the Federal motor vehicle safety standards shall 
be positioned relative to the tire identification number as shown in 
Figure 1, and the symbols to be used for the other information are those 
listed above. The labeling for a non-pneumatic tire or a non-pneumatic 
tire assembly shall be in the manner specified in Figure 1 and 
positioned on the non-pneumatic tire or non-pneumatic tire assembly such 
that it is not placed on the tread or the outermost edge of the tire and 
is not obstructed by any portion of the non-pneumatic rim or wheel 
center member designated for use with that non-pneumatic tire in S4.4 of 
Standard No. 129 (49 CFR 571.129).
    (a) First grouping. The first group, of two or three symbols, 
depending on whether the tire is new or retreaded, shall represent the 
manufacturer's assigned identification mark (see Sec. 574.6).

[[Page 964]]

    (b) Second grouping. For new tires, the second group, of no more 
than two symbols, shall be used to identify the tire size. For a new 
non-pneumatic tire or a non-pneumatic tire assembly, the second group, 
of not more than two symbols, shall be used to identify the non-
pneumatic tire identification code. For retreaded tires, the second 
group, of no more than two symbols, shall identify the retread matrix in 
which the tire was processed or a tire size code if a matrix was not 
used to process the retreaded tire. Each new-tire manufacturer and 
retreader shall maintain a record of each symbol used, with the 
corresponding matrix or tire size and shall provide such record to the 
NHTSA upon written request.
    (c) Third grouping. The third group, consisting of no more than four 
symbols, may be used at the option of the manufacturer or retreader as a 
descriptive code for the purpose of identifying significant 
characteristics of the tire. However, if the tire is manufactured for a 
brand name owner, one of the functions of the third grouping shall be to 
identify the brand name owner. Each manufacturer or retreader who uses 
the third grouping shall maintain a detailed record of any descriptive 
or brand name owner code used, which shall be provided to the Bureau 
upon written request.
    (d) Fourth grouping. For tires produced or retreaded on and after 
July 2, 2000, the fourth grouping, consisting of four numerical symbols, 
must identify the week and year of manufacture. The first two symbols 
must identify the week of the year by using ``01'' for the first full 
calendar week in each year, ``02'' for the second full calendar week, 
and so on. The final week of each year may include not more than 6 days 
of the following year. The third and fourth symbols must identify the 
year. Example: 3197 means the 31st week of 1997, or the week of August 3 
through 9, 1997; 0198 means the first full calendar week of 1998, or the 
week of January 4 through 10, 1998. The symbols signifying the date of 
manufacture must be not less than 4 mm (5/32 inch) in height and shall 
immediately follow the optional descriptive code (paragraph (c) of this 
section). If no optional descriptive code is used, the symbols 
signifying the date of manufacture must be placed in the area shown in 
Figures 1 and 2 for the optional descriptive code.

[[Page 965]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08JY99.007


[[Page 966]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08JY99.008


[36 FR 1197, Jan. 26, 1971, as amended at 36 FR 9870, May 23, 1971; 37 
FR 23727, Nov. 8, 1972; 37 FR 25521, Dec. 1, 1972; 39 FR 5192, Feb. 11, 
1974; 39 FR 12105, Apr. 3, 1974; 50 FR 2288, Jan. 16, 1985; 55 FR 29596, 
July 20, 1990; 64 FR 36812, July 8, 1999]

    Effective Date Notes: 1. At 67 FR 69628, Nov. 18, 2002, Sec. 574.5 
was amended by revising paragraph (d), and Figures 1 and 2, effective 
Sept. 1, 2003. At 68 FR 33655, June 5, 2003, the effective date was 
delayed until Sept. 1, 2004. At 69 FR 31306, June 3, 2004, the effective

[[Page 967]]

date was further delayed until Sept. 1, 2005. For the convenience of the 
user, the revised text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 574.5  Tire identification requirements.

                                * * * * *

    (d) Fourth grouping. For tires produced or retreaded according to 
the phase-in schedules specified in S7 of Sec. Sec. 571.117, 571.129, 
571.139 of this chapter, the fourth grouping, consisting of four 
numerical symbols, must identify the week and year of manufacture. The 
first two symbols must identify the week of the year by using ``01'' for 
the first full calendar week in each year, ``02'' for the second full 
calendar week, and so on. The calendar week runs from Sunday through the 
following Saturday. The final week of each year may include not more 
than 6 days of the following year. The third and fourth symbols must 
identify the year. Example: 0101 means the 1st week of 2001, or the week 
beginning Sunday, January 7, 2001, and ending Saturday, January 13, 
2001. The symbols signifying the date of manufacture shall immediately 
follow the optional descriptive code (paragraph (c) of this section). If 
no optional descriptive code is used, the symbols signifying the date of 
manufacture must be placed in the area shown in Figures 1 and 2 of this 
section for the optional descriptive code.

[[Page 968]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18NO02.004


[[Page 969]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18NO02.005

                                * * * * *

    2. At 69 FR 31320, June 3, 2004, Sec. 574.5 was amended by revising 
paragraph (d), effective Sept. 1, 2005. At 69 FR 51400, Aug. 19, 2004, 
the amendatory instruction for paragraph 7 was corrected to read ``7. 
Section 574.5 is amended by removing the first two sentences of the 
introductory text and adding four sentences in their place, and by 
revising paragraph (d) to read as follows:'', effective Sept. 1, 2005.

[[Page 970]]

For the convenience of the user, the correctly revised and added text is 
set forth as follows:

Sec. 574.5  Tire identification requirements.

    Each tire manufacturer shall conspicuously label on one sidewall of 
each tire it manufactures, except tires manufactured exclusively for 
mileage-contract purchasers, or non-pneumatic tires or non-pneumatic 
tire assemblies, by permanently molding into or onto the sidewall, in 
the manner and location specified in Figure 1, a tire identification 
number containing the information set forth in paragraphs (a) through 
(d) of this section. However, at the option of the manufacturer, the 
information contained in paragraph (d) of this section may, instead of 
being permanently molded, be laser etched into or onto the sidewall in 
the location specified in Figure 1, during the manufacturing process of 
the tire and not later than 24 hours after the tire is removed from the 
mold. Each tire retreader, except tire retreaders who retread tires 
solely for their own use, shall conspicuously label one sidewall of each 
tire it retreads by permanently molding or branding into or onto the 
sidewall, in the manner and location specified in Figure 2, a tire 
identification number containing the information set forth in paragraphs 
(a) through (d) of this section. However, at the option of the 
retreader, the information set forth in paragraph (d) of this section 
may, instead of being permanently molded or branded, be laser etched 
into or onto the sidewall in the location specified in Figure 2, during 
the retreading of the tire and not later than 24 hours after the 
application of the new tread. * * *

                                * * * * *

    (d) Fourth grouping. The fourth grouping, consisting of four 
numerical symbols, must identify the week and year of manufacture. The 
first two symbols must identify the week of the year by using ``01'' for 
the first full calendar week in each year, ``02'' for the second full 
calendar week, and so on. The calendar week runs from Sunday through the 
following Saturday. The final week of each year may include not more 
than 6 days of the following year. The third and fourth symbols must 
identify the year. Example: 0101 means the 1st week of 2001, or the week 
beginning Sunday, January 7, 2001, and ending Saturday, January 13, 
2001. The symbols signifying the date of manufacture shall immediately 
follow the optional descriptive code (paragraph (c) of this section). If 
no optional descriptive code is used, the symbols signifying the date of 
manufacture must be placed in the area shown in Figures 1 and 2 of this 
section for the optional descriptive code.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 574.6  Identification mark.

    To obtain the identification mark required by 574.5(a), each 
manufacturer of new or retreaded pneumatic tires, non-pneumatic tires or 
non-pneumatic tire assemblies shall apply in writing to the Office of 
Vehicle Safety Compliance, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20590, identify 
itself as a tire manufacturer or retreader and furnish the following 
information:
    (a) The name, or other designation identifying the applicant, and 
its main office address.
    (b) The name, or other identifying designation, of each individual 
plant operated by the manufacturer and the address of each plant, if 
applicable.
    (c) The type of tires manufactured at each plant, e.g., pneumatic 
tires for passenger cars, buses, trucks or motorcycles; pneumatic 
retreaded tires; or non-pneumatic tires or non-pneumatic tire 
assemblies.

[55 FR 29596, July 20, 1990, as amended at 61 FR 29495, June 11, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 574.7  Information requirements--new tire manufacturers, new tire 
brand name owners.

    (a)(1) Each new tire manufacturer and each new tire brand name owner 
(hereinafter referred to in this section and Sec. 574.8 as ``tire 
manufacturer'') or its designee, shall provide tire registration forms 
to every distributor and dealer of its tires which offers new tires for 
sale or lease to tire purchasers.
    (2) Each tire registration form provided to independent distributors 
and dealers pursuant to paragraph (a)(1) of this section shall contain 
space for recording the information specified in paragraphs (a)(4)(i) 
through (a)(4)(iii) of this section and shall conform in content and 
format to Figures 3a and 3b. Each form shall be:
    (i) Rectangular;
    (ii) Not less than 0.007 inches thick;
    (iii) Greater than 3\1/2\ inches, but not greater than 4\1/4\ inches 
wide; and

[[Page 971]]

    (iv) Greater than 5 inches, but not greater than 6 inches long.
    (3) Each tire registration form provided to distributors and dealers 
that are not independent distributors or dealers pursuant to paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section shall be similar in format and size to Figure 4 
and shall contain space for recording the information specified in 
paragraphs (a)(4)(i) through (a)(4)(iii) of this section.
    (4)(i) Name and address of the tire purchaser.
    (ii) Tire identification number.
    (iii) Name and address of the tire seller or other means by which 
the tire manufacturer can identify the tire seller.
    (b) Each tire manufacturer shall record and maintain, or have 
recorded and maintained for it by a designee, the information from 
registration forms which are submitted to it or its designee. No tire 
manufacturer shall use the information on the registration forms for any 
commercial purpose detrimental to tire distributors and dealers. Any 
tire manufacturer to which registration forms are mistakenly sent shall 
forward those registration forms to the proper tire manufacturer within 
90 days of the receipt of the forms.
    (c) Each tire manufacturer shall maintain, or have maintained for it 
by a designee, a record of each tire distributor and dealer that 
purchases tires directly from the manufacturer and sells them to tire 
purchasers, the number of tires purchased by each such distributor or 
dealer, the number of tires for which reports have been received from 
each such distributor or dealer other than an independent distributor or 
dealer, the number of tires for which reports have been received from 
each such independent distributor or dealer, the total number of tires 
for which registration forms have been submitted to the manufacturer or 
its designee, and the total number of tires sold by the manufacturer.
    (d) The information that is specified in paragraph (a)(4) of this 
section and recorded on registration forms submitted to a tire 
manufacturer or its designee shall be maintained for a period of not 
less than five years from the date on which the information is recorded 
by the manufacturer or its designee.

[[Page 972]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08JY99.009


[[Page 973]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08JY99.010


(Authority: Secs. 108, 119, and 201, Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 (15 
U.S.C. 1392, 1407, and 1421); sec. 4, Pub. L. 97-311, 96 Stat. 1619 (15 
U.S.C. 1418); and delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50)

[49 FR 4760, Feb. 8, 1984; 49 FR 5621, Feb. 14, 1984, as amended at 56 
FR 49427, Sept. 30, 1991; 64 FR 36815, July 8, 1999; 67 FR 45872, July 
10, 2002]

[[Page 974]]


<R05>
Sec. 574.8  Information requirements--tire distributors and dealers.

    (a) Independent distributors and dealers. (1) Each independent 
distributor and each independent dealer selling or leasing new tires to 
tire purchasers or lessors (hereinafter referred to in this section as 
``tire purchasers'') shall provide each tire purchaser at the time of 
sale or lease of the tire(s) with a tire registration form.
    (2) The distributor or dealer may use either the registration forms 
provided by the tire manufacturers pursuant to Sec. 574.7(a) or 
registration forms obtained from another source. Forms obtained from 
other sources shall comply with the requirements specified in Sec. 
574.7(a) for forms provided by tire manufacturers to independent 
distributors and dealers.
    (3) Before giving the registration form to the tire purchaser, the 
distributor or dealer shall record in the appropriate spaces provided on 
that form:
    (i) The entire tire identification number of the tire(s) sold or 
leased to the tire purchaser, and
    (ii) The distributor's or dealer's name and address or other means 
of identification known to the tire manufacturer.
    (4) Multiple tire purchases or leases by the same tire purchaser may 
be recorded on a single registration form.
    (b) Other distributors and dealers. (1) Each distributor and each 
dealer, other than an independent distributor or dealer, selling new 
tires to tire purchasers shall submit the information specified in Sec. 
574.4(a)(4) to the manufacturer of the tires sold, or to its designee.
    (2) Each tire distributor and each dealer, other than an independent 
distributor or dealer, shall submit registration forms containing the 
information specified in Sec. 574.7(a)(4) to the tire manufacturer, or 
person maintaining the information, not less often than every 30 days. 
However, a distributor or dealer which sells less than 40 tires, of all 
makes, types and sizes during a 30-day period may wait until he or she 
sells a total of 40 new tires, but in no event longer than six months, 
before forwarding the tire information to the respective tire 
manufacturers or their designees.
    (c) Each distributor and each dealer selling new tires to other tire 
distributors or dealers shall supply to the distributor or dealer a 
means to record the information specified in Sec. 574.7(a)(4), unless 
such a means has been provided to that distributor or dealer by another 
person or by a manufacturer.
    (d) Each distributor and each dealer shall immediately stop selling 
any group of tires when so directed by a notification issued pursuant to 
sections 151 and 152 of the Act (15 U.S.C. 1411 and 1412).

(Authority: Secs. 108, 119, and 201, Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 (15 
U.S.C. 1392, 1407, and 1421); sec. 4, Pub. L. 97-311, 96 Stat. 1619 (15 
U.S.C. 1418); and delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50)

[49 FR 4761, Feb. 8, 1984, as amended at 56 FR 49427, Sept. 30, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 574.9  Requirements for motor vehicle dealers.

    (a) Each motor vehicle dealer who sells a used motor vehicle for 
purposes other than resale, who leases a motor vehicle for more than 60 
days, that is equipped with new tires is considered, for purposes of 
this part, to be a tire dealer and shall meet the requirements specified 
in Sec. 574.8.
    (b) Each person selling a motor vehicle to first purchasers for 
purposes other than resale, that is equipped with new tires that were 
not on the motor vehicle when shipped by the vehicle manufacturer is 
considered a tire dealer for purposes of this part and shall meet the 
requirements specified in Sec. 574.8.

(Authority: Secs. 103, 108, 112, 119, 201, Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 
(15 U.S.C. 1392, 1397, 1401, 1407, 1421); secs. 102, 103, 104, Pub. L. 
93-492, 88 Stat. 1470 (15 U.S.C. 1411-1420); 92 Stat. 2689 (15 U.S.C. 
1418); delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.51)

[44 FR 7964, Feb. 8, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 574.10  Requirements for motor vehicle manufacturers.

    Each motor vehicle manufacturer, or his designee, shall maintain a 
record of the new tires on or in each vehicle shipped by him or a motor 
vehicle distributor or dealer, and shall maintain a

[[Page 975]]

record of the name and address of the first purchaser for purposes other 
than resale of each vehicle equipped with such tires. These records 
shall be maintained for a period of not less than 5 years from the date 
of sale of the vehicle to the first purchaser for purposes other than 
resale.

(Authority: Secs. 103, 108, 112, 119, 201, Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 
(15 U.S.C. 1392, 1397, 1401, 1407, 1421); secs. 102, 103, 104, Pub. L. 
93-492, 88 Stat. 1470 (15 U.S.C. 1411-1420); 92 Stat. 2689 (15 U.S.C. 
1418); delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.51)

[44 FR 7964, Feb. 8, 1979, as amended at 67 FR 45872, July 10, 2002]


<R03>
PART 575_CONSUMER INFORMATION--Table of Contents




                     Subpart A_Regulations; General

Sec.
575.1 Scope.
575.2 Definitions.
575.3 Matter incorporated by reference.
575.4 Application.
575.5 Separability.
575.6 Requirements.
575.7 Special vehicles.

            Subpart B_Regulations; Consumer Information Items

575.101-575.102 [Reserved]
575.103 Truck-camper loading.
575.104 Uniform tire quality grading standards.
575.105 Vehicle rollover.

    Subpart C_Transportation Recall Enhancement, Accountability, and 
                 Documentation Act; Consumer Information

575.201 Child restraint performance.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 32302, 30111, 30115, 30117, 30166, and 30168, 
and Pub. L. 106-414, 114 Stat. 1800; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 
1.50.


<R04>
                     Subpart A_Regulations; General

    Source: 35 FR 6867, Apr. 30, 1970, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 575.1  Scope.

    This part contains Federal Motor Vehicle Consumer Information 
Regulations established under section 112(d) of the National Traffic and 
Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 (15 U.S.C. 1401(d)) (hereinafter ``the 
Act'').


<R05>
Sec. 575.2  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory definitions. All terms used in this part that are 
defined in section 102 of the Act are used as defined in the Act.
    (b) Motor Vehicle Safety Standard definitions. Unless otherwise 
indicated, all terms used in this part that are defined in the Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standards, part 571 of this subchapter (hereinafter ``the 
Standards''), are used as defined in the Standards without regard to the 
applicability of a standard in which a definition is contained.
    (c) Definitions used in this part.
    Owner's manual means the document which contains the manufacturer's 
comprehensive vehicle operating and maintenance instructions, and which 
is intended to remain with the vehicle for the life of the vehicle.
    Skid number means the frictional resistance measured in accordance 
with American Society for Testing and Materials Method E-274 at 40 miles 
per hour, omitting water delivery as specified in paragraph 7.1 of that 
Method.

[35 FR 6867, Apr. 30, 1970, as amended at 38 FR 5339, Feb. 28, 1973; 48 
FR 44081, Sept. 27, 1983; 54 FR 48749, Nov. 27, 1989; 64 FR 27924, May 
24, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 575.3  Matter incorporated by reference.

    The incorporation by reference provisions of Sec. 571.5 of this 
subchapter apply to this part.


<R05>
Sec. 575.4  Application.

    (a) General. Except as provided in paragraphs (b) through (d) of 
this section, each section set forth in subpart B of this part applies 
according to its terms to motor vehicles and tires manufactured after 
the effective date indicated.
    (b) Military vehicles. This part does not apply to motor vehicles or 
tires sold directly to the Armed Forces of the the United States in 
conformity with contractual specifications.
    (c) Export. This part does not apply to motor vehicles or tires 
intended solely for export and so labeled or tagged.

[[Page 976]]

    (d) Import. This part does not apply to motor vehicles or tires 
imported for purposes other than resale.

[39 FR 1039, Jan. 4, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 575.5  Separability.

    If any section established in this part or its application to any 
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the part and 
the application of that section to other persons or circumstances is not 
affected thereby.


<R05>
Sec. 575.6  Requirements.

    (a)(1) At the time a motor vehicle is delivered to the first 
purchaser for purposes other than resale, the manufacturer of that 
vehicle shall provide the Uniform Tire Quality Grading information 
required by Sec. 575.104(d)(1)(iii) in the owner's manual of each 
vehicle it produces. The vehicle manufacturer shall also provide to the 
purchaser, in writing and in the English language, the information 
specified in Sec. 575.103 of this part that is applicable to that 
vehicle. The information provided with a vehicle may contain more than 
one table, but the document must either:
    (i) Clearly and unconditionally indicate which of the tables apply 
to the vehicle with which it is provided, or
    (ii) Contain a statement on its cover referring the reader to the 
vehicle certification label for specific information concerning which of 
the tables apply to that vehicle. If the manufacturer chooses option in 
paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section, the vehicle certification label 
shall include such specific information.

    Example 1. Manufacturer X furnishes a document containing several 
tables that apply to various groups of vehicles that it produces. The 
document contains the following notation on its front page: ``The 
information that applies to this vehicle is contained in Table 5.'' That 
notation satisfies the requirement.
    Example 2. Manufacturer Y furnishes a document containing several 
tables as in Example 1, with the following notation on its front page:

    ``Information applies as follows:
Model P. Regular cab, 135 in. (3,430 mm) wheel base--Table 1.
Model P. Club cab, 142 in. (3,607 mm) wheel base--Table 2.
Model Q--Table 3.''

    This notation does not satisfy the requirement, since it is 
conditioned on the model or the equipment of the vehicle with which the 
document is furnished, and therefore additional information is required 
to select the proper table.

    (2)(i) At the time a motor vehicle manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1990 is delivered to the first purchaser for purposes other 
than resale, the manufacturer shall provide to the purchaser, in writing 
in the English language and not less than 10 point type, the following 
statement in the owner's manual, or, if there is no owner's manual, on a 
one-page document:

    If you believe that your vehicle has a defect which could cause a 
crash or could cause injury or death, you should immediately inform the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) in addition to 
notifying [INSERT NAME OF MANUFACTURER].
    If NHTSA receives similar complaints, it may open an investigation, 
and if it finds that a safety defect exists in a group of vehicles, it 
may order a recall and remedy campaign. However, NHTSA cannot become 
involved in individual problems between you, your dealer, or [INSERT 
NAME OF MANUFACTURER].
    To contact NHTSA, you may either call the Auto Safety Hotline toll-
free at 1-800-424-9393 (or 366-0123 in Washington, DC area) or write to: 
NHTSA, U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, DC 20590. You can 
also obtain other information about motor vehicle safety from the 
Hotline.

    (ii) The manufacturer shall specify in the table of contents of the 
owner's manual the location of the statement in 575.6(a)(2)(i). The 
heading in the table of contents shall state ``Reporting Safety 
Defects.''
    (3) For vehicles manufactured prior to September 1, 2000, at the 
time a motor vehicle is delivered to the first purchaser for purposes 
other than resale, the manufacturer of that vehicle shall provide the 
purchaser, in writing and in the English language, the information 
specified in Sec. Sec. 575.103 and 575.104 of this part that is 
applicable to that vehicle and its tires. The document provided with a 
vehicle may contain more than one table, but the document must either 
clearly and unconditionally indicate which of the tables apply to the 
vehicle with which it is provided, or contain a statement on its

[[Page 977]]

cover referring the reader to the vehicle certification label for 
specific information concerning which of the tables apply to that 
vehicle. If the manufacturer chooses option (a)(2) of this section, the 
vehicle certification label shall include such specific information.

    Example 1. Manufacturer X furnishes a document containing several 
tables, which apply to various groups of vehicles that it produces. The 
document contains the following notation on its front page: ``The 
information that applies to this vehicle is contained in Table 5.'' The 
notation satisfies the requirement.
    Example 2. Manufacturer Y furnishes a document containing several 
tables as in Example 1, with the following notation on its front page: 
Information applies as follows:
    Model P, 6-cylinder engine--Table 1.
    Model P, 8-cylinder engine--Table 2.
    Model Q--Table 3.
    This notation does not satisfy the requirement, since it is 
conditioned on the model or the equipment of the vehicle with which the 
document is furnished, and therefore additional information is required 
to select the proper table.

    (b) At the time a motor vehicle tire is delivered to the first 
purchaser for a purpose other than resale, the manufacturer of that 
tire, or in the case of a tire marketed under a brand name, the brand 
name owner, shall provide to that purchaser the information specified in 
subpart B of this part that is applicable to that tire.
    (c) Each manufacturer of motor vehicles, each brand name owner of 
tires, and each manufacturer of tires for which there is no brand name 
owner shall provide for examination by prospective purchasers, at each 
location where its vehicles or tires are offered for sale by a person 
with whom the manufacturer or brand name owner has a contractual, 
proprietary, or other legal relationship, or by a person who has such a 
relationship with a distributor of the manufacturer or brand name owner 
concerning the vehicle or tire in question, the information specified in 
subpart B of this part that is applicable to each of the vehicles or 
tires offered for sale at that location. The information shall be 
provided without charge and in sufficient quantity to be available for 
retention by prospective purchasers or sent by mail to a prospective 
purchaser upon his request. With respect to newly introduced vehicles or 
tires, the information shall be provided for examination by prospective 
purchasers not later than the day on which the manufacturer or brand 
name owner first authorizes those vehicles or tires to be put on general 
public display and sold to consumers.
    (d)(1)(i) Except as provided in paragraph (d)(1)(ii) of this 
section, in the case of all sections of subpart B other than Sec. 
575.104, as they apply to information submitted prior to new model 
introduction, each manufacturer of motor vehicles shall submit to the 
Administrator 2 copies of the information specified in subpart B of this 
part that is applicable to the vehicles offered for sale, at least 90 
days before information on such vehicles is first provided for 
examination by prospective purchasers pursuant to paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (ii) Where an unforeseen preintroduction modification in vehicle 
design or equipment results in a change in vehicle performance for a 
characteristic included in subpart B of this part, a manufacturer of 
motor vehicles may revise information previously furnished under 
paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this section by submission to the Administrator 
of 2 copies of the revised information reflecting the performance 
changes, at least 30 days before information on such vehicles is first 
provided to prospective purchasers pursuant to paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (2)(i) In the case of Sec. 575.104, each brand name owner of tires, 
and each manufacturer of tires for which there is no brand name owner 
shall submit to the Administrator 2 copies of the information specified 
in Subpart B of this part that is applicable to the tires offered for 
sale, at least 30 days before it is first provided for examination by 
prospective purchasers pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section.
    (ii) In the case of all other sections of Subpart B of this Part as 
they apply to post-introduction changes in information submitted for the 
current model year, each manufacturer of motor vehicles, each brand name 
owner of tires, and each manufacturer of tires for which there is no 
brand name owner shall submit to the Administrator 2 copies of the 
information specified in

[[Page 978]]

Subpart B of this part that is applicable to the vehicles or tires 
offered for sale, at least 30 days before it is first provided for 
examination by prospective purchasers pursuant to paragraph (c) of this 
section.

[39 FR 1039, Jan. 4, 1974, as amended at 41 FR 13923, Apr. 1, 1976; 45 
FR 47153, July 14, 1980; 47 FR 7258, Feb. 18, 1982; 52 FR 27810, July 
24, 1987; 54 FR 48749, Nov. 27, 1989; 64 FR 27924, May 24, 1999]

    Effective Date Notes: 1. At 67 FR 69631, Nov. 18, 2002, Sec. 575.6 
was amended by adding paragraphs (a)(4) and (a)(5), effective Sept. 1, 
2003. At 68 FR 33655, June 5, 2003, the effective date was delayed until 
Sept. 1, 2004. At 69 FR 31306, June 3, 2004, the effective date was 
further delayed until Sept. 1, 2005. For the convenience of the user, 
the added text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 575.6  Requirements.

                                * * * * *

    (a) * * *
    (4) When a motor vehicle that has a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less, 
except a motorcycle or low speed vehicle, and that is manufactured on or 
after September 1, 2003, is delivered to the first purchaser for 
purposes other than resale, the manufacturer shall provide to the 
purchaser, in writing in the English language and not less than 10 point 
type, a discussion of the items specified in paragraphs (a)(4) (i) 
through (v) of this section in the owner's manual, or, if there is no 
owner's manual, in a document.
    (i) Tire labeling, including a description and explanation of each 
marking on the tires provided with the vehicle, and information about 
the location of the Tire Identification Number (TIN);
    (ii) Recommended tire inflation pressure, including a description 
and explanation of:
    (A) Recommended cold tire inflation pressure,
    (B) The vehicle placard and tire inflation pressure label specified 
in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 110 and their location in 
the vehicle,
    (C) Adverse safety consequences of underinflation (including tire 
failure), and
    (D) Measuring and adjusting air pressure to achieve proper 
inflation;
    (iii) Glossary of tire terminology, including ``cold tire 
pressure,'' ``maximum inflation pressure,'' and ``recommended inflation 
pressure,'' and all non-technical terms defined in S3 of FMVSS Nos. 110 
& 139;
    (iv) Tire care, including maintenance and safety practices;
    (v) Vehicle load limits, including a description and explanation of:
    (A) Locating and understanding load limit information, total load 
capacity, seating capacity, towing capacity, and cargo capacity,
    (B) Calculating total and cargo load capacities with varying seating 
configurations including quantitative examples showing/illustrating how 
the vehicle's cargo and luggage capacity decreases as the combined 
number and size of occupants increases,
    (C) Determining compatibility of tire and vehicle load capabilities,
    (D) Adverse safety consequences of overloading on handling and 
stopping and on tires.
    (5) When a motor vehicle that has a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less, 
except a motorcycle or low speed vehicle, and that is manufactured on or 
after September 1, 2003, is delivered to the first purchaser for 
purposes other than resale, the manufacturer shall provide to the 
purchaser, in writing in the English language and not less than 10 point 
type, the following verbatim statement in the owner's manual, or, if 
there is no owner's manual, in a document:

    Steps for Determining Correct Load Limit--
    (1) Locate the statement ``The combined weight of occupants and 
cargo should never exceed XXX pounds'' on your vehicle's placard.
    (2) Determine the combined weight of the driver and passengers that 
will be riding in your vehicle.
    (3) Subtract the combined weight of the driver and passengers from 
XXX kilograms or XXX pounds.
    (4) The resulting figure equals the available amount of cargo and 
luggage load capacity. For example, if the ``XXX'' amount equals 1400 
lbs. and there will be five 150 lb. passengers in your vehicle, the 
amount of available cargo and luggage load capacity is 650 lbs. (1400-
750 (5 x 150) = 650 lbs.)
    (5) Determine the combined weight of luggage and cargo being loaded 
on the vehicle. That weight may not safely exceed the available cargo 
and luggage load capacity calculated in Step 4.
    (6) If your vehicle will be towing a trailer, load from your trailer 
will be transferred to your vehicle. Consult this manual to determine 
how this reduces the available cargo and luggage load capacity of your 
vehicle.

    2. At 69 FR 31320, June 3, 2004, Sec. 575.6 was amended by revising 
paragraphs (a)(4) introductory text and (a)(5), effective Sept. 1, 2005. 
For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as 
follows:

Sec. 575.6  Requirements.

                                * * * * *

    (a) * * *

[[Page 979]]

    (4) When a motor vehicle that has a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less, 
except a motorcycle or low speed vehicle, and that is manufactured on or 
after September 1, 2005, is delivered to the first purchaser for 
purposes other than resale, the manufacturer shall provide to the 
purchaser, in writing in the English language and not less than 10 point 
type, a discussion of the items specified in paragraphs (a)(4)(i) 
through (v) of this section in the owner's manual, or, if there is no 
owner's manual, in a document:

                                * * * * *

    (5) When a motor vehicle that has a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less, 
except a motorcycle or low speed vehicle, and that is manufactured on or 
after September 1, 2005, is delivered to the first purchaser for 
purposes other than resale, the manufacturer shall provide to the 
purchaser, in writing in the English language and not less than 10 point 
type, the following verbatim statement, as applicable, in the owner's 
manual, or, if there is no owner's manual, in a document:
    (i) For vehicles except trailers: ``Steps for Determining Correct 
Load Limit--
    (1) Locate the statement ``The combined weight of occupants and 
cargo should never exceed XXX kg or XXX lbs.'' on your vehicle's 
placard.
    (2) Determine the combined weight of the driver and passengers that 
will be riding in your vehicle.
    (3) Subtract the combined weight of the driver and passengers from 
XXX kg or XXX lbs.
    (4) The resulting figure equals the available amount of cargo and 
luggage load capacity. For example, if the ``XXX'' amount equals 1400 
lbs. and there will be five 150 lb passengers in your vehicle, the 
amount of available cargo and luggage load capacity is 650 lbs. (1400-
750 (5 x 150) = 650 lbs.)
    (5) Determine the combined weight of luggage and cargo being loaded 
on the vehicle. That weight may not safely exceed the available cargo 
and luggage load capacity calculated in Step 4.
    (6) If your vehicle will be towing a trailer, load from your trailer 
will be transferred to your vehicle. Consult this manual to determine 
how this reduces the available cargo and luggage load capacity of your 
vehicle.''
    (ii) For trailers: ``Steps for Determining Correct Load Limit--
    (1) Locate the statement ``The weight of cargo should never exceed 
XXX kg or XXX lbs.'' on your vehicle's placard.
    (2) This figure equals the available amount of cargo and luggage 
load capacity.''
    (3) Determine the combined weight of luggage and cargo being loaded 
on the vehicle. That weight may not safely exceed the available cargo 
and luggage load capacity.


<R05>
Sec. 575.7  Special vehicles.

    A manufacturer who produces vehicles having a configuration not 
available for purchase by the general public need not make available to 
ineligible purchasers, pursuant to Sec. 575.6(c), the information for 
those vehicles specified in subpart B of this part, and shall identify 
those vehicles when furnishing the information required by Sec. 
575.6(d).

[40 FR 11727, Mar. 13, 1975]


<R04>
            Subpart B_Regulations; Consumer Information Items


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 575.101-575.102  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 575.103  Truck-camper loading.

    (a) Scope. This section requires manufacturers of slide-in campers 
to affix to each camper a label that contains information relating to 
identification and proper loading of the camper and to provide more 
detailed loading information in the owner's manual. This section also 
requires manufacturers of trucks that would accommodate slide-in campers 
to specify the cargo weight ratings and the longitudinal limits within 
which the center of gravity for the cargo weight rating should be 
located.
    (b) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide information 
that can be used to reduce overloading and improper load placement in 
truck-camper combinations and unsafe truck- camper matching in order to 
prevent accidents resulting from the adverse effects of these conditions 
on vehicle steering and braking.
    (c) Application. This section applies to slide-in campers and to 
trucks that are capable of accommodating slide- in campers.
    (d) Definitions.
    Camper means a structure designed to be mounted in the cargo area of 
a truck, or attached to an incomplete vehicle with motive power, for the 
purpose of providing shelter for persons.
    Cargo Weight Rating means the value specified by the manufacturer as 
the cargo-carrying capacity, in pounds or kilograms, of a vehicle, 
exclusive of the weight of occupants in designated

[[Page 980]]

seating positions, computed as 68 kilograms or 150 pounds times the 
number of designated seating positions.
    Slide-in Camper means a camper having a roof, floor, and sides, 
designed to be mounted on and removable from the cargo area of a truck 
by the user.
    (e) Requirements--(1) Slide-in Camper--(i) Labels. Each slide-in 
camper shall have permanently affixed to it, in such a manner that it 
cannot be removed without defacing or destroying it, and in a plainly 
visible location on an exterior rear surface other than the roof, steps, 
or bumper extension, a label containing the following information in the 
English language lettered in block capitals and numerals not less than 
2.4 millimeters (three thirty-seconds of an inch) high, of a color 
contrasting with the background, in the order shown below and in the 
form illustrated in Figure 1.
    (A) Name of camper manufacturer. The full corporate or individual 
name of the actual assembler of the camper shall be spelled out, except 
that such abbreviations as ``Co.'' or ``Inc.'' and their foreign 
equivalents, and the first and middle initials of individuals may be 
used. The name of the manufacturer shall be preceded by the words 
``Manufactured by'' or ``Mfd by.''
    (B) Month and year of manufacture. It may be spelled out, such as 
``June 1995'' or expressed in numerals, such as ``695.''
    (C) The following statement completed as appropriate:
    ``Camper weight is ------------ kg. (------------ lbs.) maximum when 
it contains standard equipment, ------------ liters (------------ gal.) 
of water, ------------ kg. (------------ lbs.) of bottled gas, and ----
-------- cubic meters (------------ cubic ft.) refrigerator (or icebox 
with ------------ kg. (------------ lbs.) of ice, as applicable). 
Consult owner's manual (or data sheet, as applicable) for weights of 
additional or optional equipment.''
    (D) ``Liters (or gal.) of water'' refers to the volume of water 
necessary to fill the camper's fresh water tanks to capacity. ``Kg. (or 
lbs.) of bottled gas'' refers to the amount of gas necessary to fill the 
camper's bottled gas tanks to capacity. The statement regarding a 
``refrigerator'' or ``icebox'' refers to the capacity of the 
refrigerator with which the vehicle is equipped or the weight of the ice 
with which the icebox may be filled. Any of these items may be omitted 
from the statement if the corresponding accessories are not included 
with the camper, provided that the omission is noted in the camper 
owner's manual as required in paragraph (e)(1)(ii) of this section.
    (ii) Owner's manual. Each slide-in camper manufacturer shall provide 
with each camper a manual or other document containing the information 
specified in paragraph (e)(1)(ii) (A) through (F) of this section.
    (A) The statement and information provided on the label as specified 
in paragraph (e)(1)(i) of this section. Instead of the information 
required by paragraphs (e)(1)(i)(B) of this section, a manufacturer may 
use the statements ``See camper identification label located (as 
applicable) for month and year of manufacture.'' If water, bottled gas, 
or refrigerator (icebox) has been omitted from this statement, the 
manufacturer's information shall note such omission and advise that the 
weight of any such item when added to the camper should be added to the 
maximum camper weight figure used in selecting an appropriate truck.
    (B) A list of other additional or optional equipment that the camper 
is designed to carry, and the maximum weight of each if its weight is 
more than 9 kg. (20 lbs) when installed.
    (C) The statement: ``To estimate the total cargo load that will be 
placed on a truck, add the weight of all passengers in the camper, the 
weight of supplies, tools, and all other cargo, the weight of installed 
additional or optional camper equipment, and the manufacturer's camper 
weight figure. Select a truck that has a cargo weight rating that is 
equal to or greater than the total cargo load of the camper and whose 
manufacturer recommends a cargo center of gravity zone that will contain 
the camper's center of gravity when it is installed.''
    (D) The statements: ``When loading this camper, store heavy gear 
first, keeping it on or close to the camper floor. Place heavy things 
far enough forward to keep the loaded camper's center of gravity within 
the zone recommended by the truck manufacturer.

[[Page 981]]

Store only light objects on high shelves. Distribute weight to obtain 
even side-to-side balance of the loaded vehicle. Secure loose items to 
prevent weight shifts that could affect the balance of your vehicle. 
When the truck-camper is loaded, drive to a scale and weigh on the front 
and on the rear wheels separately to determine axle loads. The load on 
an axle should not exceed its gross axle weight rating (GAWR). The total 
of the axle loads should not exceed the gross vehicle weight rating 
(GVWR). These weight ratings are given on the vehicle certification 
label that is located on the left side of the vehicle, normally on the 
dash panel, hinge pillar, door latch post, or door edge next to the 
driver on trucks manufactured on or after January 1, 1972. If weight 
ratings are exceeded, move or remove items to bring all weights below 
the ratings.''
    (E) A picture showing the location of the longitudinal center of 
gravity of the camper within an accuracy of 5 centimeters (2 inches) 
under the loaded condition specified in paragraph (e)(1)(i)(D) of this 
section in the manner illustrated in Figure 2.
    (F) A picture showing the proper match of a truck and slide-in 
camper in the form illustrated in Figure 3.
    (2) Trucks. (i) Except as provided in paragraph (e)(2)(ii) of this 
section, each manufacturer of a truck that is capable of accommodating a 
slide-in camper shall provide to the purchaser in the owner's manual or 
other document delivered with the truck, in writing and in the English 
language, the information specified in paragraphs (e)(2)(i) (A) through 
(E) of this section.
    (A) A picture showing the manufacturer's recommended longitudinal 
center of gravity zone for the cargo weight rating in the form 
illustrated in Figure 4. The boundaries of the zone shall be such that 
when a slide-in camper equal in weight to the truck's cargo weight 
rating is installed, no GAWR of the truck is exceeded.
    (B) The truck's cargo weight rating.
    (C) The statements: ``When the truck is used to carry a slide-in 
camper, the total cargo load of the truck consists of the manufacturer's 
camper weight figure, the weight of installed additional camper 
equipment not included in the manufacturer's camper weight figure, the 
weight of camper cargo, and the weight of passengers in the camper. The 
total cargo load should not exceed the truck's cargo weight rating and 
the camper's center of gravity should fall within the truck's 
recommended center of gravity zone when installed.''
    (D) A picture showing the proper match of a truck and slide-in 
camper in the form illustrated in Figure 3.
    (E) The statements: ``Secure loose items to prevent weight shifts 
that could affect the balance of your vehicle. When the truck camper is 
loaded, drive to a scale and weigh on the front and on the rear wheels 
separately to determine axle loads. Individual axle loads should not 
exceed either of the gross axle weight ratings (GAWR). The total of the 
axle loads should not exceed the gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR). 
These ratings are given on the vehicle certification label that is 
located on the left side of the vehicle, normally the dash, hinge 
pillar, door latch post, or door edge next to the driver. If weight 
ratings are exceeded, move or remove items to bring all weights below 
the ratings.''
    (ii) If a truck would accommodate a slide-in camper but the 
manufacturer of the truck recommends that the truck not be used for that 
purpose, the information specified in paragraph (e)(2)(i)(E) of this 
section shall not be provided but instead the manufacturer shall provide 
a statement that the truck should not be used to carry a slide-in 
camper.

                  MFD. BY: (CAMPER MANUFACTURER'S NAME)

(MONTH AND YEAR OF MANUFACTURE)
    CAMPER WEIGHT IS ------------ KG (------------ LB) MAXIMUM WHEN IT 
CONTAINS STANDARD EQUIPMENT, ------------ LITERS (------------ GAL) OF 
WATER, ------------ KG (------------ LB) OF BOTTLED GAS, AND ----------
-- CUBIC METERS (------------ CUBIC FT) REFRIGERATOR (OR ICEBOX WITH --
---------- KG (------------ LB) OF ICE, AS APPLICABLE). CONSULT OWNER'S 
MANUAL (OR DATA SHEET AS APPLICABLE) FOR WEIGHTS OF ADDITIONAL OR 
OPTIONAL EQUIPMENT.

[[Page 982]]

                       Figure 1. Label for Camper
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.181


[[Page 983]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.182


[[Page 984]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.183


[61 FR 36657, July 12, 1996]

[[Page 985]]


<R05>
Sec. 575.104  Uniform tire quality grading standards.

    (a) Scope. This section requires motor vehicle and tire 
manufacturers and tire brand name owners to provide information 
indicating the relative performance of passenger car tires in the areas 
of treadwear, traction, and temperature resistance.
    (b) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to aid the consumer in 
making an informed choice in the purchase of passenger car tires.
    (c) Application. (1) This section applies to new pneumatic tires for 
use on passenger cars. However, this section does not apply to deep 
tread, winter-type snow tires, space-saver or temporary use spare tires, 
tires with nominal rim diameters of 12 inches or less, or to limited 
production tires as defined in paragraph (c)(2) of this section.
    (2) ``Limited production tire'' means a tire meeting all of the 
following criteria, as applicable:
    (i) The annual domestic production or importation into the United 
States by the tire's manufacturer of tires of the same design and size 
as the tire does not exceed 15,000 tires;
    (ii) In the case of a tire marketed under a brand name, the annual 
domestic purchase or importation into the United States by a brand name 
owner of tires of the same design and size as the tire does not exceed 
15,000 tires;
    (iii) The tire's size was not listed as a vehicle manufacturer's 
recommended tire size designation for a new motor vehicle produced in or 
imported into the United States in quantities greater than 10,000 during 
the calendar year preceeding the year of the tire's manufacture; and
    (iv) The total annual domestic production or importation into the 
United States by the tire's manufacturer, and in the case of a tire 
marketed under a brand name, the total annual domestic purchase or 
purchase for importation into the United States by the tire's brand name 
owner, of tires meeting the criteria of paragraphs (c)(2) (i), (ii), and 
(iii) of this section, does not exceed 35,000 tires.

Tire design is the combination of general structural characteristics, 
materials, and tread pattern, but does include cosmetic, identifying or 
other minor variations among tires.
    (d) Requirements--(1) Information. (i) Each manufacturer of tires, 
or in the case of tires marketed under a brand name, each brand name 
owner, shall provide grading information for each tire of which he is 
the manufacturer or brand name owner in the manner set forth in 
paragraphs (d)(1)(i) (A) and (B) of this section. The grades for each 
tire shall be only those specified in paragraph (d)(2) of this section. 
Each tire shall be able to achieve the level of performance represented 
by each grade with which it is labeled. An individual tire need not, 
however, meet further requirements after having been subjected to the 
test for any one grade.
    (A) Except for a tire of a new tire line, manufactured within the 
first six months of production of the tire line, each tire shall be 
graded with the words, letters, symbols, and figures specified in 
paragraph (d)(2) of this section, permanently molded into or onto the 
tire sidewall between the tire's maximum section width and shoulder in 
accordance with one of the methods described in Figure 1. For purposes 
of this paragraph, new tire line shall mean a group of tires differing 
substantially in construction, materials, or design from those 
previously sold by the manufacturer or brand name owner of the tires. As 
used in this paragraph, the term ``construction'' refers to the internal 
structure of the tire (e.g., cord angles, number and placement of 
breakers), ``materials'' refers to the substances used in manufacture of 
the tire (e.g., belt fiber, rubber compound), and ``design'' refers to 
properties or conditions imposed by the tire mold (e.g., aspect ratio, 
tread pattern).
    (B) Each tire manufactured on and after the effective date of these 
amendments, other than a tire sold as original equipment on a new 
vehicle, shall have affixed to its tread surface so as not to be easily 
removable a label or labels containing its grades and other information 
in the form illustrated in Figure 2, Parts I and II. The treadwear grade 
attributed to the tire shall be either imprinted or indelibly stamped on 
the label containing the material in Part I of Figure 2, directly to the 
right of or below the word ``TREADWEAR.''

[[Page 986]]

The traction grade attributed to the tire shall be indelibly circled in 
an array of the potential grade letters AA, A, B, or C, directly to the 
right of or below the word ``TRACTION'' in Part I of Figure 2. The 
temperature resistance grade attributed to the tire shall be indelibly 
circled in an array of the potential grade letters A, B, or C, directly 
to the right of or below the word ``TEMPERATURE'' in Part I of Figure 2. 
The words ``TREADWEAR,'' ``TRACTION,'' AND ``TEMPERATURE,'' in that 
order, may be laid out vertically or horizontally. The text of Part II 
of Figure 2 may be printed in capital letters. The text of Part I and 
the text of Part II of Figure 2 need not appear on the same label, but 
the edges of the two texts must be positioned on the tire tread so as to 
be separated by a distance of no more than one inch. If the text of Part 
I and the text of Part II of Figure 2 are placed on separate labels, the 
notation ``See EXPLANATION OF DOT QUALITY GRADES'' shall be added to the 
bottom of the Part I text, and the words ``EXPLANATION OF DOT QUALITY 
GRADES'' shall appear at the top of the Part II text. The text of Figure 
2 shall be oriented on the tire tread surface with lines of type running 
perpendicular to the tread circumference. If a label bearing a tire size 
designation is attached to the tire tread surface and the tire size 
designation is oriented with lines type running perpendicular to the 
tread circumference, the text of Figure 2 shall read in the same 
direction as the tire size designation.
    (ii) In the case of the information required by Sec. 575.6(c) to be 
furnished to prospective purchasers of tires, each tire manufacturer or 
brand name owner shall, as part of that information, list all possible 
grades for traction and temperature resistance, and restate verbatim the 
explanation for each performance area specified in Figure 2. The 
information need not be in the same format as in Figure 2. The 
information must indicate clearly and unambiguously the grade in each 
performance area for each tire of that manufacturer or brand name owner 
offered for sale at the particular location.
    (iii) Each manufacturer of motor vehicles equipped with passenger 
car tires shall include in the owner's manual of each such vehicle a 
list of all possible grades for traction and temperature resistance and 
restate verbatim the explanation for each performance area specified in 
Figure 2, Part II. The information need not be in the exact format of 
Figure 2, Part II, but it must contain a statement referring the reader 
to the tire sidewall for the specific tire grades for the tires with 
which the vehicle is equipped, as follows:

                      Uniform Tire Quality Grading

    Quality grades can be found where applicable on the tire sidewall 
between tread shoulder and maximum section width. For example:

                 Treadwear 200 Traction AA Temperature A

    (iv) In the case of information required in accordance with Sec. 
575.6(a) to be furnished to the first purchaser of a new motor vehicle, 
each manufacturer of motor vehicles shall, as part of the required 
information, list all possible grades for traction and temperature 
resistance and restate verbatim the explanation for each performance 
area specified in Figure 2 to this section. The information need not be 
in the format of Figure 2 to this section, but it must contain a 
statement referring the reader to the tire sidewall for the specific 
tire grades for the tires with which the vehicle is equipped.
    (2) Performance--(i) Treadwear. Each tire shall be graded for 
treadwear performance with the word ``TREADWEAR'' followed by a number 
of two or three digits representing the tire's grade for treadwear, 
expressed as a percentage of the NHTSA nominal treadwear value, when 
tested in accordance with the conditions and procedures specified in 
paragraph (e) of this section. Treadwear grades shall be expressed in 
multiples of 20 (for example, 80, 120, 160).
    (ii) Traction. Each tire shall be graded for traction performance 
with the word ``TRACTION,'' followed by the symbols AA, A, B, or C, when 
the tire is tested in accordance with the conditions and procedures 
specified in paragraph (f) of this section.

[[Page 987]]

    (A) The tire shall be graded C when the adjusted traction 
coefficient is either:
    (1) 0.38 or less when tested in accordance with paragraph (f)(2) of 
this section on the asphalt surface specified in paragraph (f)(1)(i) of 
this section, or
    (2) 0.26 or less when tested in accordance with paragraph (f)(2) of 
this section on the concrete surface specified in paragraph (f)(1)(i) of 
this section.
    (B) The tire may be graded B only when its adjusted traction 
coefficient is both:
    (1) More than 0.38 when tested in accordance with paragraph (f)(2) 
of this section on the asphalt surface specified in paragraph (f)(1)(i) 
of this section, and
    (2) More than 0.26 when tested in accordance with paragraph (f)(2) 
of this section on the concrete surface specified in paragraph (f)(1)(i) 
of this section.
    (C) The tire may be graded A only when its adjusted traction 
coefficient is both:
    (1) More than 0.47 when tested in accordance with paragraph (f)(2) 
of this section on the asphalt surface specified in paragraph (f)(1)(i) 
of this section, and
    (2) More than 0.35 when tested in accordance with paragraph (f)(2) 
of this section on the concrete surface specified in paragraph (f)(1)(i) 
of this section.
    (D) The tire may be graded AA only when its adjusted traction 
coefficient is both:
    (1) More than 0.54[mu] when tested in accordance with paragraph 
(f)(2) of this section on the asphalt surface specified in paragraph 
(f)(1)(i) of this section; and
    (2) More than 0.38[mu] when tested in accordance with paragraph 
(f)(2) of this section on the concrete surface specified in paragraph 
(f)(1)(i) of this section.
    (iii) Temperature resistance. Each tire shall be graded for 
temperature resistance performance with the word ``TEMPERATURE'' 
followed by the letter A, B, or C, based on its performance when the 
tire is tested in accordance with the procedures specified in paragraph 
(g) of this section. A tire shall be considered to have successfully 
completed a test stage in accordance with this paragraph if, at the end 
of the test stage, it exhibits no visual evidence of tread, sidewall, 
ply, cord, innerliner, or bead separation, chunking, broken cords, 
cracking or open splices as defined in Sec. 571.109 of this chapter, 
and the tire pressure is not less than the pressure specified in 
paragraph (g)(1) of this section.
    (A) The tire shall be graded C if it fails to complete the 500 rpm 
test stage specified in paragraph (g)(9) of this section.
    (B) The tire may be graded B only if it successfully completes the 
500 rpm test stage specified in paragraph (g)(9) of this section.
    (C) The tire may be graded A only if it successfully completes the 
575 rpm test stage specified in paragraph (g)(9) of this section.
    (e) Treadwear grading conditions and procedures--(1) Conditions. (i) 
Tire treadwear performance is evaluated on a specific roadway course 
approximately 400 miles in length, which is established by the NHTSA 
both for its own compliance testing and for that of regulated persons. 
The course is designed to produce treadwear rates that are generally 
representative of those encountered by tires in public use. The course 
and driving procedures are described in appendix A of this section.
    (ii) Treadwear grades are evaluated by first measuring the 
performance of a candidate tire on the government test course, and then 
correcting the projected mileages obtained to account for environmental 
variations on the basis of the performance of the course monitoring 
tires run in the same convoy.
    (iii) In convoy tests, each vehicle in the same convoy, except for 
the lead vehicle, is throughout the test within human eye range of the 
vehicle immediately ahead of it.
    (iv) A test convoy consists of two or four passenger cars, light 
trucks, or MPVs, each with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less.
    (v) On each convoy vehicle, all tires are mounted on identical rims 
of design or measuring rim width specified for tires of that size in 
accordance with 49 CFR 571.109, S4.4.1 (a) or (b), or a rim

[[Page 988]]

having a width within -0 to +0.50 inches of the width listed.
    (2) Treadwear grading procedure. (i) Equip a convoy as follows: 
Place four course monitoring tires on one vehicle. Place four candidate 
tires with identical size designations on each other vehicle in the 
convoy. On each axle, place tires that are identical with respect to 
manufacturer and line.
    (ii) Inflate each candidate and each course monitoring tire to the 
applicable pressure specified in Table 1 of this section.
    (iii) Load each vehicle so that the load on each course monitoring 
and candidate tire is 85 percent of the test load specified in Sec. 
575.104(h).
    (iv) Adjust wheel alignment to the midpoint of the vehicle 
manufacturer's specifications, unless adjustment to the midpoint is not 
recommended by the manufacturer; in that case, adjust the alignment to 
the manufacturer's recommended setting. In all cases, the setting is 
within the tolerance specified by the manufacturer of the alignment 
machine.
    (v) Subject candidate and course monitoring tires to ``break-in'' by 
running the tires in the convoy for two circuits of the test roadway 
(800 miles). At the end of the first circuit, rotate each vehicle's 
tires by moving each front tire to the same side of the rear axle and 
each rear tire to the opposite side of the front axle. Visually inspect 
each tire for any indication of abnormal wear, tread separation, bulging 
of the sidewall, or any sign of tire failure. Void the grading results 
from any tire with any of these anomalies, and replace the tire.
    (vi) After break-in, allow the air pressure in the tires to fall to 
the applicable pressure specified in Table 1 of this section or for 2 
hours, whichever occurs first. Measure, to the nearest 0.001 inch, the 
tread depth of each candidate and each course monitoring tire, avoiding 
treadwear indicators, at six equally spaced points in each groove. For 
each tire compute the average of the measurements. Do not measure those 
shoulder grooves which are not provided with treadwear indicators.
    (vii) Adjust wheel alignment to the midpoint of the manufacturer's 
specifications, unless adjustment to the midpoint is not recommended by 
the manufacturer; in that case, adjust the alignment according to the 
manufacturer's recommended setting. In all cases, the setting is within 
the tolerance specified by the manufacturer of the alignment machine.
    (viii) Drive the convoy on the test roadway for 6,400 miles.
    (A) After each 400 miles, rotate each vehicle's tires by moving each 
front tire to the same side of the rear axle and each rear tire to the 
opposite side of the front axle. Visually inspect each tire for 
treadwear anomalies.
    (B) After each 800 miles, rotate the vehicles in the convoy by 
moving the last vehicle to the lead position. Do not rotate driver 
positions within the convoy. In four-car convoys, vehicle one shall 
become vehicle two, vehicle two shall become vehicle three, vehicle 
three shall become vehicle four, and vehicle four shall become vehicle 
one.
    (C) After each 800 miles, if necessary, adjust wheel alignment to 
the midpoint of the vehicle manufacturer's specification, unless 
adjustment to the midpoint is not recommended by the manufacturer; in 
that case, adjust the alignment to the manufacturer's recommended 
setting. In all cases, the setting is within the tolerance specified by 
the manufacturer of the alignment machine.
    (D) After each 800 miles, if determining the projected mileage by 
the 9-point method set forth in (e)(2)(ix)(A)(1), measure the average 
tread depth of each tire following the procedure set forth in paragraph 
(e)(2)(vi) of this section.
    (E) After each 1,600 miles, move the complete set of four tires to 
the following vehicle. Move the tires on the last vehicle to the lead 
vehicle. In moving the tires, rotate them as set forth in 
(e)(2)(viii)(A) of this section.
    (F) At the end of the test, measure the tread depth of each tire 
pursuant to the procedure set forth in paragraph (e)(2)(vi) of this 
section.
    (ix)(A) Determine the projected mileage for each candidate tire 
either by the nine-point method of least squares set forth in paragraph 
(e)(2)(ix)(A)(1) of this section and appendix C to this section, or by 
the two-point arithmetical method set forth in paragraph

[[Page 989]]

(e)(2)(ix)(A)(2) of this section. Notify NHTSA about which of the 
alternative grading methods is being used.
    (1) Nine-Point Method of Least Squares. For each course monitoring 
and candidate tire in the convoy, using the average tread depth 
measurements obtained in accordance with paragraphs (e)(2)(vi) and 
(e)(2)(viii)(D) of this section and the corresponding mileages as data 
points, apply the method of least squares as described in appendix C to 
this section to determine the estimated regression line of y on x given 
by the following formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.184

Where:

y = average tread depth in mils
x = miles after break-in,
a = y intercept of regression line (reference tread depth) in mils, 
calculated using the method of least squares; and
b = the slope of the regression line in mils of tread depth per 1,000 
miles, calculated using the method of least squares. This slope will be 
negative in value. The tire's wear rate is defined as the absolute value 
of the slope of the regression line.

    (2) Two-Point Arithmetical Method. For each course monitoring and 
candidate tire in the convoy, using the average tread depth measurements 
obtained in accordance with paragraph (e)(2)(vi) and (e)(2)(viii)(F) of 
this section and the corresponding mileages as data points, determine 
the slope (m) of the tire's wear in mils of tread depth per 1,000 miles 
by the following formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.185

Where:

Yo = average tread depth after break-in, mils
Y1 = average tread depth at 6,400 miles, mils
Xo = 0 miles (after break-in).
X1 = 6,400 miles of travel

This slope (m) will be negative in value. The tire's wear rate is 
defined as the slope (m) expressed in mils per 1,000 miles.

    (B) Average the wear rates of the four course monitoring tires as 
determined in accordance with paragraph (e)(2)(ix)(A) of this section.
    (C) Determine the course severity adjustment factor by dividing the 
base course wear rate for the course monitoring tires (see Note to this 
paragraph) by the average wear rate for the four course monitoring 
tires.

    Note to paragraph (e)(2)(ix)(C):
    The base wear rate for the course monitoring tires will be obtained 
by the government by running ASTM E-1136 course monitoring tires for 
6,400 miles over the San Angelo, Texas, UTQGS test route 4 times per 
year, then using the average wear rate from the last 4 quarterly CMT 
tests for the base course wear rate calculation. Each new base course 
wear rate will be filed in the DOT Docket Management section. This value 
will be furnished to the tester by the government at the time of the 
test. The course monitoring tires used in a test convoy must be no more 
than one year old at the commencement of the test and must be used 
within two months after removal from storage.

    (D) Determine the adjusted wear rate for each candidate tire by 
multiplying its wear rate determined in accordance with paragraph 
(e)(2)(ix)(A) of this section by the course severity adjustment factor 
determined in accordance with paragraph (e)(2)(ix)(C) of this section.
    (E) Determine the projected mileage for each candidate tire by 
applying the appropriate formula set forth below:
    (1) If the projected mileage is calculated pursuant to paragraph 
(e)(2)(ix)(A)(1) of this section, then:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.186

Where:

a = y intercept of regression line (reference tread depth) for the 
candidate tire as determined in accordance with paragraph 
(e)(2)(ix)(A)(1) of this section.
b\1\ = the adjusted wear rate for the candidate tire as determined in 
accordance with paragraph (e)(2)(ix)(D) of this section.

    (2) If the projected mileage is calculated pursuant to 
(e)(2)(ix)(a)(2) of this section, then:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07SE99.000

Where:

Yo = average tread depth after break-in, mils
mc = the adjusted wear rate for the candidate tires as determined in 
accordance with paragraph (e)(2)(ix)(D) of this section.

    (F) Compute the grade (P) of the NHTSA nominal treadwear value for 
each candidate tire by using the following formula:


[[Page 990]]


P = Projected mileage x base course wear rate<INF>n</INF>/402

    Where base course wear rate<INF>n</INF> = new base course wear rate, 
i.e., average treadwear of the last 4 quarterly course monitoring tire 
tests conducted by NHTSA.

    Round off the percentage to the nearest lower 20-point increment.
    (f) Traction grading conditions and procedures--(1) Conditions. (i) 
Tire traction performance is evaluated on skid pads that are 
established, and whose severity is monitored, by the NHTSA both for its 
compliance testing and for that of regulated persons. The test pavements 
are asphalt and concrete surfaces constructed in accordance with the 
specifications for pads ``C'' and ``A'' in the ``Manual for the 
Construction and Maintenance of Skid Surfaces,'' National Technical 
Information Service No. DOT-HS-800-814. The surfaces have locked wheel 
traction coefficients when evaluated in accordance with paragraphs 
(f)(2)(i) through (f)(2)(vii) of this section of 0.50 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.10 for the asphalt and 0.35 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.10 
for the concrete. The location of the skid pads is described in appendix 
B to this section.
    (ii) The standard tire is the American Society for Testing and 
Materials (ASTM) E 501 ``Standard Tire for Pavement Skid Resistance 
Tests.''
    (iii) The pavement surface is wetted in accordance with paragraph 
3.5, ``Pavement Wetting System,'' of ASTM Method E 274-79, ``Skid 
Resistance of Paved Surfaces Using a Full-Scale Tire.''
    (iv) The test apparatus is a test trailer built in conformity with 
the specifications in paragraph 3, ``Apparatus,'' of ASTM Method E 274-
79, and instrumented in accordance with paragraph 3.3.2 of that method, 
except that ``wheel load'' in paragraph 3.2.2 and tire and rim 
specifications in paragraph 3.2.3 of that method are as specified in the 
procedures in paragraph (f)(2) of this section for standard and 
candidate tires.
    (v) The test apparatus is calibrated in accordance with ASTM Method 
F 377-74, ``Standard Method for Calibration of Braking Force for Testing 
of Pneumatic Tires'' with the trailer's tires inflated to 24 psi and 
loaded to 1,085 pounds.
    (vi) Consecutive tests on the same surface are conducted not less 
than 30 seconds apart.
    (vii) A standard tire is discarded in accordance with ASTM Method E 
501.
    (2) Procedure. (i) Prepare two standard tires as follows:
    (A) Condition the tires by running them for 200 miles on a pavement 
surface.
    (B) Mount each tire on a rim of design or measuring rim width 
specified for tires of its size in accordance with 49 CFR 571.109, 
S4.4.1 (a) or (b), or a rim having a width within -0 to +0.50 inches of 
the width listed. Then inflate the tire to 24 psi, or, in the case of a 
tire with inflation pressure measured in kilopascals, to 180 kPa.
    (C) Statically balance each tire-rim combination.
    (D) Allow each tire to cool to ambient temperature and readjust its 
inflation pressure to 24 psi, or, in the case of a tire with inflation 
pressure measured in kilopascals, to 180 kPa.
    (ii) Mount the tires on the test apparatus described in paragraph 
(f)(1)(iv) of this section and load each tire to 1,085 pounds.
    (iii) Tow the trailer on the asphalt test surface specified in 
paragraph (f)(1)(i) of this section at a speed of 40 mph, lock one 
trailer wheel, and record the locked-wheel traction coefficient on the 
tire associated with that wheel between 0.5 and 1.5 seconds after 
lockup.
    (iv) Repeat the test on the concrete surface, locking the same 
wheel.
    (v) Repeat the tests specified in paragraphs (f)(2) (iii) and (iv) 
of this section for a total of 10 measurements on each test surface.
    (vi) Repeat the procedures specified in paragraphs (f)(2) (iii) 
through (v) of this section, locking the wheel associated with the other 
tire.
    (vii) Average the 20 measurements taken on the asphalt surface to 
find the standard tire traction coefficient for the asphalt surface. 
Average the 20 measurements taken on the concrete surface to find the 
standard tire traction coefficient for the concrete surface. The 
standard tire traction coefficient so determined may be used in the

[[Page 991]]

computation of adjusted traction coefficients for more than one 
candidate tire.
    (viii) Prepare two candidate tires of the same construction type, 
manufacturer, line, and size designation in accordance with paragraph 
(f)(2)(i) of this section, mount them on the test apparatus, and test 
one of them according to the procedures of paragraph (f)(2)(ii) through 
(v) of this section, except load each tire to 85% of the test load 
specified in Sec. 575.104(h). For CT tires, the test inflation of 
candidate tires shall be 230 kPa. Candidate tire measurements may be 
taken either before or after the standard tire measurements used to 
compute the standard tire traction coefficient. Take all standard tire 
and candidate tire measurements used in computation of a candidate 
tire's adjusted traction coefficient within a single three hour period. 
Average the 10 measurements taken on the asphalt surface to find the 
candidate tire traction coefficient for the asphalt surface. Average the 
10 measurements taken on the concrete surface to find the candidate tire 
traction coefficient for the concrete surface.
    (ix) Compute a candidate tire's adjusted traction coefficient for 
asphalt ([mu]a) by the following formula:

([mu]a) = Measured candidate tire coefficient for asphalt + 0.50 -
    Measured standard tire coefficient for asphalt

    (x) Compute a candidate tire's adjusted traction coefficient for 
concrete ([mu]<INF>c</INF>) by the following formula:

[mu]<INF>c</INF>=Measured candidate tire coefficient for concrete +0.35 
    [mu]Measured standard tire coefficient for concrete

    (g) Temperature resistance grading. (1) Mount the tire on a rim of 
design or measuring rim width specified for tires of its size in 
accordance with Sec. 571.109, paragraph S4.4.1 (a) or (b) and inflate 
it to the applicable pressure specified in Table 1 of this section.
    (2) Condition the tire-rim assembly to a temperature of 95 [deg]F 
for at least 3 hours.
    (3) Adjust the pressure again to the applicable pressure specified 
in Table 1 of this section.
    (4) Mount the tire-rim assembly on an axle, and press the tire tread 
against the surface of a flat-faced steel test wheel that is 67.23 
inches in diameter and at least as wide as the section width of the 
tire.
    (5) During the test, including the pressure measurements specified 
in paragraphs (g) (1) and (3) of this section, maintain the temperature 
of the ambient air, as measured 12 inches from the edge of the rim 
flange at any point on the circumference on either side of the tire at 
95 [deg]F. Locate the temperature sensor so that its readings are not 
affected by heat radiation, drafts, variations in the temperature of the 
surrounding air, or guards or other devices.
    (6) Press the tire against the test wheel with a load of 88 percent 
of the tire's maximum load rating as marked on the tire sidewall.
    (7) Rotate the test wheel at 250 rpm for 2 hours.
    (8) Remove the load, allow the tire to cool to 95 [deg]F or for 2 
hours, whichever occurs last, and readjust the inflation pressure to the 
applicable pressure specified in Table 1 of this section.
    (9) Reapply the load and without interruption or readjustment of 
inflation pressure, rotate the test wheel at 375 rpm for 30 minutes, and 
then at successively higher rates in 25 rpm increments, each for 30 
minutes, until the tire has run at 575 rpm for 30 minutes, or to 
failure, whichever occurs first.

                                                            Table I--Test Inflation Pressures
                                             [Maximum permissible inflation pressure for the following test]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                 Tires other than CT tires                             CT tires
                                                              ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Test type                                        psi                            kPa                             kPa
                                                              ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 32     36     40     60    240    280    300    340    350    290    330    350    390
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Treadwear test...............................................     24     28     32     52    180    220    180    220    180    230    270    230    270
Temperature resistant test...................................     30     34     38     58    220    260    220    260    220    270    310    270    310
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 992]]

    (h) Determination of test load. (1) To determine test loads for 
purposes of paragraphs (e)(2)(iii) and (f)(2)(viii), follow the 
procedure set forth in paragraphs (h) (2) through (5) of this section.
    (2) Determine the tire's maximum inflation pressure and maximum load 
rating both as specified on the tire's sidewall.
    (3) Determine the appropriate multiplier corresponding to the tire's 
maximum inflation pressure, as set forth in Table 2.
    (4) Multiply the tire's maximum load rating by the multiplier 
determined in paragraph (h)(3). This is the tire's calculated load.
    (5) Round the product determined in paragraph (h)(4) (the calculated 
load) to the nearest multiple of ten pounds or, if metric units are 
used, 5 kilograms. For example, 903 pounds would be rounded to 900 and 
533 kilograms would be rounded to 535. This figure is the test load.

                                 Table 2
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Multiplier  Multiplier
                                                  to be used  to be used
           Maximum inflation pressure                 for         for
                                                   treadwear   traction
                                                    testing     testing
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Tires other than CT tires
------------------------------------------------------------------------
32 psi..........................................        .851        .851
36 psi..........................................        .870        .797
40 psi..........................................        .883        .753
240 kPa.........................................        .866        .866
280 kPa.........................................        .887        .804
300 kPa.........................................        .866        .866
340 kPa.........................................        .887        .804
350 kPa.........................................        .866        .866
-------------------------------------------------
                                CT tires
------------------------------------------------------------------------
290 kPa.........................................        .866        .866
330 kPa.........................................        .887        .804
305 kPa.........................................        .866        .866
390 kPa.........................................        .887        .804
------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                                    Table 2A
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       Temp resistance                         Treadwear
                                                 ---------------------------          --------------------------
              Tire size designation                      Max pressure        Traction         Max pressure
                                                 ---------------------------          --------------------------
                                                     32       36       40                 32       36       40
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
145/70 R13......................................      615      650      685       523      523      553      582
155/70 R13......................................      705      740      780       599      599      629      663
165/70 R13......................................      795      835      880       676      676      710      748
175/70 R13......................................      890      935      980       757      757      795      833
185/70 R13......................................      990     1040     1090       842      842      884      926
195/70 R13......................................     1100     1155     1210       935      935      982     1029
155/70 R14......................................      740      780      815       629      629      663      693
175/70 R14......................................      925      975     1025       786      786      829      871
185/70 R14......................................     1045     1100     1155       888      888      935      982
195/70 R14......................................     1155     1220     1280       982      982     1037     1088
155/70 R15......................................      770      810      850       655      655      689      723
175/70 R15......................................      990     1040     1090       842      842      884      927
185/70 R15......................................     1100     1155     1210       935      935      982     1029
5.60-13.........................................      725      810      880       616      616      689      748
5.20-14.........................................      695      785      855       591      591      667      727
165-15..........................................      915    1,015    1,105       779      779      863      939
185/60 R 13.....................................      845      915      980       719      719      778      833
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (i)-(l) [Reserved]

[[Page 993]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.196

                 Figure 2--[Part I]--DOT QUALITY GRADES

TREADWEAR

TRACTION AA A B C

TEMPERATURE A B C


[[Page 994]]


    (Part II) All Passenger Car Tires Must Conform to Federal Safety 
Requirements In Addition To These Grades

                                Treadwear

    The treadwear grade is a comparative rating based on the wear rate 
of the tire when tested under controlled conditions on a specified 
government test course. For example, a tire graded 150 would wear one 
and one-half (1\1/2\) times as well on the government course as a tire 
graded 100. The relative performance of tires depends upon the actual 
conditions of their use, however, and may depart significantly from the 
norm due to variations in driving habits, service practices and 
differences in road characteristics and climate.

                                Traction

    The traction grades, from highest to lowest, are AA, A, B, and C. 
Those grades represent the tire's ability to stop on wet pavement as 
measured under controlled conditions on specified government test 
surfaces of asphalt and concrete. A tire marked C may have poor traction 
performance. Warning: The traction grade assigned to this tire is based 
on straight-ahead braking traction tests, and does not include 
acceleration, cornering, hydroplaning, or peak traction characteristics.

                               Temperature

    The temperature grades are A (the highest), B, and C, representing 
the tire's resistance to the generation of heat and its ability to 
dissipate heat when tested under controlled conditions on a specified 
indoor laboratory test wheel. Sustained high temperature can cause the 
material of the tire to degenerate and reduce tire life, and excessive 
temperature can lead to sudden tire failure. The grade C corresponds to 
a level of performance which all passenger car tires must meet under the 
Federal Motor Safety Standard No. 109. Grades B and A represent higher 
levels of performance on the laboratory test wheel than the minimum 
required by law. Warning: The temperature grade for this tire is 
established for a tire that is properly inflated and not overloaded. 
Excessive speed, underinflation, or excessive loading, either separately 
or in combination, can cause heat buildup and possible tire failure.

        Appendix A--Treadwear Test Course and Driving Procedures

    Introduction. The test course consists of three loops of a total of 
400 miles in the geographical vicinity of Goodfellow AFB, San Angelo, 
Tex.
    The first loop runs south 143 miles through the cities of Eldorado, 
Sonora, and Juno, Tex. to the Camp Hudson Historical Marker, and returns 
by the same route.
    The second loop runs east over Farm and Ranch Roads (FM) and returns 
to its starting point.
    The third loop runs northwest to Water Valley, northeast toward 
Robert Lee and returns via Texas 208 to the vicinity of Goodfellow AFB.
    Route. The route is shown in Figure 3. The table identifies key 
points by number. These numbers are encircled in Figure 3 and in 
parentheses in the descriptive material that follows.
    Southern Loop. The course begins at the intersection (1) of Ft. 
McKavitt Road and Paint Rock Road (FM388) at the northwest corner of 
Goodfellow AFB.
    Drive east via FM 388 to junction with Loop Road 306 (2). Turn right 
onto Loop Road 306 and proceed south to junction with US277 (3). Turn 
onto US277 and proceed south through Eldorado and Sonora (4), continuing 
on US277 to junction with FM189 (5). Turn right onto FM189 and proceed 
to junction with Texas 163 (6). Turn left onto Texas 163, proceed south 
to Camp Hudson Historical Marker and onto the paved shoulder (7). 
Reverse route to junction of Loop Road 306 and FM 388 (2).
    Eastern Loop. From junction of Loop Road 306 and FM388 (2), make 
right turn onto FM388 and drive east to junction with FM2334 (13). Turn 
right onto FM2334 and proceed south across FM765 (14) to junction of 
FM2334 and US87 (15). For convoys that originate at Goodfellow AFB, make 
U-turn and return to junction of FM388 and Loop Road 306 (2) by the same 
route. For convoys that do not originate at Goodfellow AFB, upon 
reaching junction of FM2334 and US87 (15), make U-Turn and continue 
north on FM2334 past the intersection with FM388 to Veribest Cotton Gin, 
a distance of 1.8 miles beyond the intersection. Make U-turn and return 
to junction of FM2334 and FM388. Turn right onto FM388, proceed west to 
junction FM388 and Loop Road 306.
    Northwestern Loop. From junction of Loop Road 306 and FM388 (2), 
make right turn onto Loop Road 306. Proceed onto US277, to junction with 
FM2105 (8). Turn left onto FM2105 and proceed west to junction with US87 
(10). Turn right on US87 and proceed northwest to the junction with 
FM2034 near the town of Water Valley (11). Turn right onto FM2034 and 
proceed north to Texas 208 (12). Turn right onto Texas 208 and proceed 
south to junction with FM2105 (9). Turn left onto FM2105 and proceed 
east to junction with US277 (8). Turn right onto US277 and proceed south 
onto Loop Road 306 to junction with FM388 (2). For convoys that 
originate at Goodfellow AFB, turn right onto FM388 and proceed to 
starting point at junction of Ft. McKavitt Road and FM388 (1). For 
convoys that do not originate at Goodfellow AFB, do not turn right onto 
FM388 but continue south on Loop Road 306.

[[Page 995]]

    Driving instructions. The drivers shall run at posted speed limits 
throughout the course unless an unsafe condition arises. If such 
condition arises, the speed should be reduced to the maximum safe 
operating speed.
    Braking Procedures at STOP signs. There are a number of 
intersections at which stops are required. At each of these 
intersections a series of signs is placed in a fixed order at follows:

                               Sign Legend

Highway Intersection 1000 (or 2000) Feet
STOP AHEAD
Junction XXX
Direction Sign (Mereta[rarr])
STOP or YIELD
    Procedures. 1. Approach each intersection at posted speed limit.
    2. When abreast of the STOP AHEAD sign, apply the brakes so that the 
vehicle decelerates smoothly to 20 mph when abreast of the direction 
sign.
    3. Come to a complete stop at the STOP sign or behind any vehicle 
already stopped.

[[Page 996]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.190


[[Page 997]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.191

                     Appendix B--Traction Skid Pads

    Two skid pads have been laid on an unused runway and taxi strip on 
Goodfellow AFB. Their location is shown in Figure 4.
    The asphalt skid pad is 600 ft.x60 ft. and is shown in black on the 
runway in Figure 4. The pad is approached from either end by a

[[Page 998]]

75 ft. ramp followed by 100 ft. of level pavement. This arrangement 
permits the skid trailers to stabilize before reaching the test area. 
The approaches are shown on the figure by the hash-marked area.
    The concrete pad is 600 ft.x48 ft. and is on the taxi strip. The 
approaches to the concrete pad are of the same design as those for the 
asphalt pads.
    A two lane asphalt road has been built to connect the runway and 
taxi strip. The road is parallel to the northeast-southwest runway at a 
distance of 100 ft. The curves have super-elevation to permit safe exit 
from the runway at operating speeds.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.192

                   Appendix C--Method of Least Squares

    The method of least squares is a method of calculation by which it 
is possible to obtain a reliable estimate of a true physical 
relationship from a set of data which involve random error. The method 
may be used to establish a regression line that minimizes the sum of the 
squares of the deviations of the measured data points from the line. The 
regression line is consequently described as the line of ``best fit'' to 
the data points. It is described in terms of its slope and its ``y'' 
intercept.
    The graph in Figure 5 depicts a regression line calculated using the 
least squares method from data collected from a hypothetical treadwear 
test of 6,400 miles, with tread depth measurements made at every 500 
miles.

[[Page 999]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.193

    In this graph, x<INF>j</INF>,y<INF>j (j=0, 1, . . ;. 8)</INF> are 
the individual data points representing the tread depth measurements 
(the overall average for the tire with 6 measurements in each tire 
groove) at the beginning of the test (after break-in) and at the end of 
each 800-mile segment of the test.
    The absolute value of the slope of the regression line is an 
expression of the mils of tread worn per 1,000 miles, and is calculated 
by the following formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.194

    The ``y'' intercept of the regression line (a) in mils is calculated 
by the following formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.195

                          Appendix D--User Fees

    1. Course Monitoring Tires: A fee of $333.00 will be assessed for 
each course monitoring tire purchased from NHTSA at Goodfellow Air Force 
Base, San Angelo, Texas. This fee is based upon the direct and indirect 
costs attributable to: (a) the purchase of course monitoring tires by 
NHTSA, (b) a pro rata allocation of salaries and general facility costs 
associated with maintenance of the tires, and (c) warehouse storage fees 
for the tires.
    2. Use of Government Traction Skid Pads: A fee of $34.00 will be 
assessed for each hour, or fraction thereof, that the traction skid pads 
at Goodfellow Air Force Base, San Angelo, Texas are used. This fee is 
based upon the direct and indirect costs attributable to: (a) 
depreciation on facilities and equipment comprising or used in 
conjunction with the traction skid pads (i.e., skid system, water truck, 
air compressor, skid track, tractor sweeper, equipment, buildings), (b) 
the calibration of the traction skid pads, and (c) a pro rata allocation 
of salaries and general facility costs associated with maintenance of 
the traction skid pads.
    3. Fee payments shall be by check, draft, money order, or Electronic 
Funds Transfer

[[Page 1000]]

System made payable to the Treasurer of the United States.
    4. The fees set forth in this appendix continue in effect until 
adjusted by the Administrator of NHTSA. The Administrator reviews the 
fees set forth in this appendix and, if appropriate, adjusts them by 
rule at least every 2 years.

[43 FR 30549, July 17, 1978]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
575.104, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 575.105  Vehicle rollover.

    (a) Purpose and scope. This section requires manufacturers of 
utility vehicles to alert the drivers of those vehicles that they have a 
higher possibility of rollover than other vehicle types and to advise 
them of steps that can be taken to reduce the possibility of rollover 
and/or to reduce the likelihood of injury in a rollover.
    (b) Application. This section applies to utility vehicles.
    (c) Definitions.
    Utility vehicles means multipurpose passenger vehicles (other than 
those which are passenger car derivatives) which have a wheelbase of 110 
inches or less and special features for occasional off-road operation.
    (d) Required information. (1) Rollover Warning Label. (i) Except as 
provided in paragraph (d)(2) of this section, each vehicle must have a 
label permanently affixed to either side of the sun visor, at the 
manufacturer's option, at the driver's seating position. The label must 
conform in content, form and sequence to the label shown in Figure 1 of 
this section, and must comply with the following requirements:
    (A) The heading area must be yellow, with the text and the alert 
symbol in black.
    (B) The message area must be white with black text.
    (C) The pictograms must be black with a white background.
    (D) The label must be appropriately sized so that it is legible, 
visible and prominent to the driver.
    (ii) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 and before 
September 1, 2000. When the rollover warning label required by paragraph 
(d)(1)(i) of this section and the air bag warning label required by 
paragraph S4.5.1(b) of 49 CFR 571.208 are affixed to the same side of 
the driver side sun visor, either:
    (A) The rollover warning label must be affixed to the right (as 
viewed from the driver's seat) of the air bag warning label and the 
labels may not be contiguous; or
    (B) The pictogram of the air bag warning label must be separated 
from the pictograms of the rollover warning label by text, and
    (1 ) The labels must be located such that the shortest distance from 
any of the lettering or graphics on the rollover warning label to any of 
the lettering or graphics on the air bag warning label is not less than 
3 cm, or
    (2 ) If the rollover warning and air bag warning labels are each 
completely surrounded by a continuous solid-lined border, the shortest 
distance from the border of the rollover warning label to the border of 
the air bag warning label is not less than 1 cm.
    (iii) The manufacturer must select the option to which a vehicle is 
certified by the time the manufacturer certifies the vehicle and may not 
thereafter select a different option for that vehicle. If a manufacturer 
chooses to certify compliance with more than one compliance option, the 
vehicle must satisfy the requirements applicable to each of the options 
selected.
    (iv) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2000. When the 
rollover warning label required by paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this section 
and the air bag warning label required by paragraph S4.5.1(b) of 49 CFR 
571.208 are affixed to the same side of the driver side sun visor the 
pictogram of the air bag warning label must be separated from the 
pictograms of the rollover warning label by text and:
    (A) The labels must be located such that the shortest distance from 
any of the lettering or graphics on the rollover warning label to any of 
the lettering or graphics on the air bag warning label is not less than 
3 cm, or
    (B) If the rollover warning and air bag warning labels are each 
completely surrounded by a continuous solid-lined border, the shortest 
distance from the border of the rollover warning label to the border of 
the air bag warning label must be not less than 1 cm.

[[Page 1001]]

    (2) Alternate location for warning label. As an alternative to 
affixing the warning label required by paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this 
section to the driver's sun visor, a manufacturer may permanently affix 
the label to the lower rear corner of the forwardmost driver's side 
window. The label must be legible, visible and prominent to a person 
next to the exterior of the driver's door.
    (3) Rollover Alert Label. If the label required by paragraph (d)(1) 
of this section and affixed to the driver side sun visor is not visible 
when the sun visor is in the stowed position, an alert label must be 
permanently affixed to that visor so that the label is visible when the 
visor is in that position. The alert label must comply with the 
following requirements:
    (i) The label must read:

                            ROLLOVER WARNING

                             Flip Visor Over

    (ii) The label must be black with yellow text.
    (iii) The label must be no less than 20 square cm.
    (4) Owner's Manual. The owner's manual must include the following 
statements and discussions:
    (i) The statement ``Utility vehicles have a significantly higher 
rollover rate than other types of vehicles.''
    (ii) A discussion of the vehicle design features which cause this 
type of vehicles to be more likely to rollover (e.g., higher center of 
gravity);
    (iii) A discussion of the driving practices that can reduce the risk 
of a rollover (e.g., avoiding sharp turns at excessive speed); and
    (iv) The statement: ``In a rollover crash, an unbelted person is 
significantly more likely to die than a person wearing a seat belt.''
    (5) Combined Rollover and Air Bag Alert Warning. If the warnings 
required by paragraph (d)(1) of this section and paragraph S4.5.1(b) of 
49 CFR 571.208 to be affixed to the driver side sun visor are not 
visible when the sun visor is in the stowed position, a combined 
rollover and air bag alert label may be permanently affixed to that 
visor in lieu of the alert labels required by paragraph (d)(3) of this 
section and paragraph S4.5.1(c)(2) of 49 CFR 571.208. The combined 
rollover and air bag alert label must be visible when the visor is in 
the stowed position. The combined rollover and air bag alert warning 
must conform in content to the label shown in Figure 2 of this section, 
and must comply with the following requirements:
    (i) The label must read:

AIR BAG AND ROLLOVER WARNINGS
Flip Visor Over

    (ii) The message area must be black with yellow text. The message 
area must be no less than 20 square cm.
    (iii) The pictogram shall be black with a red circle and slash on a 
white background. The pictogram must be not less than 20 mm in diameter.
    (6) At the option of the manufacturer, the requirements in paragraph 
(d)(1)(i) for labels that are permanently affixed to specified parts of 
the vehicle may instead be met by permanent marking and molding of the 
required information.

[[Page 1002]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09MR99.056


[[Page 1003]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30AU99.020


[64 FR 11733, Mar. 9, 1999, as amended at 64 FR 47123, Aug. 30, 1999]


<R04>
    Subpart C_Transportation Recall Enhancement, Accountability, and 
                 Documentation Act; Consumer Information


<R05>
Sec. 575.201  Child restraint performance.

    The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration has established a 
program for rating the performance of child restraints. The agency makes 
the information developed under this rating program available through a 
variety of means, including postings on its Web site, http://
www.nhtsa.dot.gov.

[67 FR 67494, Nov. 5, 2002]


<R03>
PART 576_RECORD RETENTION--Table of Contents




Sec.
576.1 Scope.
576.2 Purpose.
576.3 Application.
576.4 Definitions.
576.5 Basic requirements.
576.6 Records.
576.7 Retention.
576.8 Malfunctions covered.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322(a), 30117, 30120(g), 30141-30147; 
delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 39 FR 30045, Aug. 20, 1974, unless otherwise noted.

    Editorial Note: For an interpretation document regarding part 576, 
see 40 FR 3296, Jan. 21, 1975.


<R05>
Sec. 576.1  Scope.

    This part establishes requirements for the retention by 
manufacturers of motor vehicles and of motor vehicle

[[Page 1004]]

equipment, of claims, complaints, reports, and other records concerning 
alleged and proven motor vehicle or motor vehicle equipment defects and 
malfunctions that may be related to motor vehicle safety.

[67 FR 45872, July 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 576.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to preserve records that are needed for 
the proper investigation, and adjudication or other disposition, of 
possible defects related to motor vehicle safety and instances of 
nonconformity to the motor vehicle safety standards and associated 
regulations.


<R05>
Sec. 576.3  Application.

    This part applies to all manufacturers of motor vehicles, with 
respect to all records generated or acquired on or after August 16, 
1969, and to all manufacturers of motor vehicle equipment, with respect 
to all records in their possession, generated or acquired on or after 
August 9, 2002.

[67 FR 45873, July 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 576.4  Definitions.

    All terms in this part that are defined in 49 U.S.C. 30102 and part 
579 of this chapter are used as defined therein.

[67 FR 45873, July 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 576.5  Basic requirements.

    (a) Each manufacturer of motor vehicles, child restraint systems, 
and tires shall retain, as specified in Sec. 576.7 of this part, all 
records described in Sec. 576.6 of this part for a period of five 
calendar years from the date on which they were generated or acquired by 
the manufacturer.
    (b) Each manufacturer of motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment 
shall retain, as specified in Sec. 576.7 of this part, all the 
underlying records on which the information reported under part 579 of 
this chapter is based, for a period of five calendar years from the date 
on which they were generated or acquired by the manufacturer, except as 
provided in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (c) Manufacturers need not retain copies of documents transmitted to 
NHTSA pursuant to parts 573, 577, and 579 of this chapter.

[67 FR 45873, July 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 576.6  Records.

    Records to be maintained by manufacturers under this part include 
all documentary materials, films, tapes, and other information-storing 
media that contain information concerning malfunctions that may be 
related to motor vehicle safety. Such records include, but are not 
limited to, reports and other documents, including material generated or 
communicated by computer, telefax or other electronic means, that are 
related to work performed under warranties; and any lists, compilations, 
analyses, or discussions of such malfunctions contained in internal or 
external correspondence of the manufacturer, including communications 
transmitted electronically.

[67 FR 45873, July 10, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 576.7  Retention.

    Duplicate copies need not be retained. Information may be reproduced 
or transferred from one storage medium to another (e.g., from paper 
files to microfilm) as long as no information is lost in the 
reproduction or transfer, and when so reproduced or transferred the 
original form may be treated as a duplicate.


<R05>
Sec. 576.8  Malfunctions covered.

    For purposes of this part, ``malfunctions that may be related to 
motor vehicle safety'' shall include, with respect to a motor vehicle or 
item of motor vehicle equipment, any failure or malfunction beyond 
normal deterioration in use, or any failure of performance, or any flaw 
or unintended deviation from design specifications, that could in any 
reasonably foreseeable manner be a causative factor in, or aggravate, an 
accident or an injury to a person.


<R03>
PART 577_DEFECT AND NONCOMPLIANCE NOTIFICATION--Table of Contents




Sec.
577.1 Scope.
577.2 Purpose.

[[Page 1005]]

577.3 Application.
577.4 Definitions.
577.5 Notification pursuant to a manufacturer's decision.
577.6 Notification pursuant to Administrator's decision.
577.7 Time and manner of notification.
577.8 Disclaimers.
577.9 Conformity to statutory requirements.
577.10 Follow-up notification.
577.11 Reimbursement notification.
577.12 Notification pursuant to an accelerated remedy program.
577.13 Notification to dealers and distributors.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 30102-103, 30112, 30115, 30117-121, 30166-167; 
delegations of authority at 49 CFR 1.50 and 49 CFR 501.8.

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 34959, June 23, 2004, the authority 
citation for part 577 was revised, effective Oct. 21, 2004. For the 
convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:
    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 30102, 30103, 30116-30121, 30166; delegations 
of authority at 49 CFR 1.50 and 49 CFR 501.8.

    Source: 41 FR 56816, Dec. 30, 1976, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 577.1  Scope.

    This part sets forth requirements for notification to owners of 
motor vehicles and replacement equipment about the possibility of a 
defect which relates to motor vehicle safety or a noncompliance with a 
Federal motor vehicle safety standard.

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 34959, June 23, 2004, Sec. 577.1 was 
revised, effective Oct. 21, 2004. For the convenience of the user, the 
revised text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 577.1  Scope.

    This part sets forth requirements for manufacturer notification to 
owners, dealers, and distributors of motor vehicles and items of 
replacement equipment about a defect that relates to motor vehicle 
safety or a noncompliance with a Federal motor vehicle safety standard.


<R05>
Sec. 577.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to ensure that notifications of defects 
or noncompliances adequately inform and effectively motivate owners of 
potentially defective or noncomplying motor vehicles or items of 
replacement equipment to have such vehicles or equipment inspected and, 
where necessary, remedied as quickly as possible.

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 34959, June 23, 2004, Sec. 577.2 was 
amended by adding a new sentence at the end of the section, effective 
Oct. 21, 2004. For the convenience of the user, the added text is set 
forth as follows:

Sec. 577.2  Purpose.

    * * * It is also to ensure that dealers and distributors of motor 
vehicles and items of replacement equipment are made aware of the 
existence of defects and noncompliances and of their rights and 
responsibilities with regard thereto.


<R05>
Sec. 577.3  Application.

    This part applies to manufacturers of complete motor vehicles, 
incomplete motor vehicles, and replacement equipment. In the case of 
vehicles manufactured in two or more stages, compliance by either the 
manufacturer of the incomplete vehicle, any subsequent manufacturer, or 
the manufacturer of affected replacement equipment, shall be considered 
compliance by each of those manufacturers.


<R05>
Sec. 577.4  Definitions.

    For the purposes of this part:
    Act means 49 U.S.C. Chapter 30101-30169.
    Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration or his delegate.
    First purchaser means the first purchaser in good faith for a 
purpose other than resale.
    Leased motor vehicle means any motor vehicle that is leased to a 
person for a term of at least four months by a lessor who has leased 
five or more vehicles in the twelve months preceding the date of 
notification by the vehicle manufacturer of the existence of a safety-
related defect or noncompliance with a Federal motor vehicle safety 
standard in the motor vehicle.
    Lessee means a person who is the lessee of a leased motor vehicle as 
defined in this section.
    Lessor means a person or entity that is the owner, as reflected on 
the vehicle's title, of any five or more leased vehicles (as defined in 
this section), as of the date of notification by the manufacturer of the 
existence of a safety-related defect or noncompliance with a Federal 
motor vehicle safety standard in one or more of the leased motor 
vehicles.

[[Page 1006]]

    Owners includes purchaser.

[41 FR 56816, Dec. 30, 1976, as amended at 60 FR 17270, Apr. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 577.5  Notification pursuant to a manufacturer's decision.

    (a) When a manufacturer of motor vehicles or replacement equipment 
determines that any motor vehicle or item of replacement equipment 
produced by him contains a defect which relates to motor vehicle safety, 
or fails to conform to an applicable Federal motor vehicle safety 
standard, he shall provide notification in accordance with paragraph (a) 
of Sec. 577.7, unless the manufacturer is exempted by the Administrator 
(pursuant to section 157 of the Act) from giving such notification. The 
notification shall contain the information specified in this section. 
The information required by paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section shall 
be presented in the form and order specified. The information required 
by paragraphs (d) through (h) of this section may be presented in any 
order. The manufacturer shall mark the outside of each envelope in which 
it sends an owner notification letter with a notation that includes the 
words ``SAFETY,'' RECALL,'' and ``NOTICE,'' all in capital letters and 
in type that is larger than that used in the address section, and is 
also distinguishable from the other type in a manner other than size. 
Except where the format of the envelope has been previously approved by 
NHTSA, each manufacturer must submit the envelope format it intends to 
use to NHTSA at least 5 Federal government business days before mailing 
to owners, in the same manner as is required by Sec. 573.6(c)(9) for 
owner notification letters. Notification sent to an owner whose address 
is in either the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or the Canal Zone shall be 
written in both English and Spanish.
    (b) An opening statement: ``This notice is sent to you in accordance 
with the requirements of the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety 
Act.''
    (c) Whichever of the following statements is appropriate:
    (1) ``(Manufacturer's name or division) has decided that a defect 
which relates to motor vehicle safety exists in (identified motor 
vehicles, in the case of notification sent by a motor vehicle 
manufacturer; identified replacement equipment, in the case of 
notification sent by a replacement equipment manufacturer);'' or
    (2) ``(Manufacturer's name or division) has decided that (identified 
motor vehicles, in the case of notification sent by a motor vehicle 
manufacturer; identified replacement equipment, in the case of 
notification sent by a replacement equipment manufacturer) fail to 
conform to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. (number and title 
of standard).''
    (d) When the manufacturer determines that the defect or 
noncompliance may not exist in each such vehicle or item of replacement 
equipment, he may include an additional statement to that effect.
    (e) A clear description of the defect or noncompliance, which shall 
include--
    (1) An identification of the vehicle system or particular item(s) of 
motor vehicle equipment affected.
    (2) A description of the malfunction that may occur as a result of 
the defect or noncompliance. The description of a noncompliance with an 
applicable standard shall include, in general terms, the difference 
between the performance of the noncomplying vehicle or item of 
replacement equipment and the performance specified by the standard;
    (3) A statement of any operating or other conditions that may cause 
the malfunction to occur; and
    (4) A statement of the precautions, if any, that the owners should 
take to reduce the chance that the malfunction will occur before the 
defect or noncompliance is remedied.
    (f) An evaluation of the risk to motor vehicle safety reasonably 
related to the defect or noncompliance.
    (1) When vehicle crash is a potential occurrence, the evaluation 
shall include whichever of the following is appropriate:
    (i) A statement that the defect or noncompliance can cause vehicle 
crash without prior warning; or
    (ii) A description of whatever prior warning may occur, and a 
statement that if this warning is not heeded, vehicle crash can occur.

[[Page 1007]]

    (2) When vehicle crash is not the potential occurrence, the 
evaluation must include a statement indicating the general type of 
injury to occupants of the vehicle, or to persons outside the vehicle, 
that can result from the defect or noncompliance, and a description of 
whatever prior warning may occur.
    (g) A statement of measures to be taken to remedy the defect or 
noncompliance, in accordance with paragraph (g)(1) or (g)(2) of this 
section, whichever is appropriate.
    (1) When the manufacturer is required by the Act to remedy the 
defect or noncompliance without charge, or when he will voluntarily so 
remedy in full conformity with the Act, he shall include--
    (i) A statement that he will cause such defect or noncompliance to 
be remedied without charge, and whether such remedy will be by repair, 
replacement, or (except in the case of replacement equipment) refund, 
less depreciation, of the purchase price.
    (ii) The earliest date on which the defect or noncompliance will be 
remedied without charge. In the case of remedy by repair, this date 
shall be the earliest date on which the manufacturer reasonably expects 
that dealers or other service facilities will receive necessary parts 
and instructions. The manufacturer shall specify the last date, if any, 
on which he will remedy tires without charge.
    (iii) In the case of remedy by repair through the manufacturer's 
dealers or other service facilities:
    (A) A general description of the work involved in repairing the 
defect or noncompliance; and
    (B) The manufacturer's estimate of the time reasonably necessary to 
perform the labor required to correct the defect or noncompliance.
    (iv) In the case of remedy by repair through service facilities 
other than those of the manufacturer or its dealers:
    (A) The name and part number of each part must be added, replaced, 
or modified;
    (B) A description of any modifications that must be made to existing 
parts, which shall also be identified by name and part number;
    (C) Information as to where needed parts will be available;
    (D) A detailed description (including appropriate illustrations) of 
each step required to correct the defect or noncompliance;
    (E) The manufacturer's estimate of the time reasonably necessary to 
perform the labor required to correct the defect or noncompliance; and
    (F) The manufacturer's recommendations of service facilities where 
the owner should have the repairs performed.
    (v) In the case of remedy by replacement, a description of the motor 
vehicle or item of replacement equipment that the manufacturer will 
provide as a replacement for the defective or noncomplying vehicle or 
equipment.
    (vi) In the case of remedy by refund of purchase price, the method 
or basis for the manufacturer's assessment of depreciation.
    (vii) A statement informing the owner that he or she may submit a 
complaint to the Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590 or call 
the toll free Auto Safety Hotline at 800-424-9393 (Washington, DC area 
residents may call 202-366-0123), if the owner believes that:
    (A) The manufacturer, distributor, or dealer has failed or is unable 
to remedy the defect or noncompliance without charge.
    (B) The manufacturer has failed or is unable to remedy the defect or 
noncompliance without charge--
    (1) (In the case of motor vehicles or items of replacement 
equipment, other than tires) within a reasonable time, which is not 
longer than 60 days in the case of repair after the owner's first tender 
to obtain repair following the earliest repair date specified in the 
notification, unless the period is extended by Administrator.
    (2) (In the case of tires) after the date specified in the 
notification on which replacement tires will be available.
    (2) When the manufacturer is not required to remedy the defect or 
noncompliance without charge and he will not voluntarily so remedy, the 
statement shall include--

[[Page 1008]]

    (i) A statement that the manufacturer is not required by the Act to 
remedy without charge.
    (ii) A statement of the extent to which the manufacturer will 
voluntarily remedy, including the method of remedy and any limitations 
and conditions imposed by the manufacturer on such remedy.
    (iii) The manufacturer's opinion whether the defect or noncompliance 
can be remedied by repair. If the manufacturer believes that repair is 
possible, the statement shall include the information specified in 
paragraph (g)(1)(iv) of this section, except that;
    (A) The statement required by paragraph (g)(1)(iv)(A) of this 
section shall also indicate the suggested list price of each part.
    (B) The statement required by paragraph (g)(1)(iv)(C) of this 
section shall also indicate the manufacturer's estimate of the date on 
which the parts will be generally available.
    (h) Any lessor who receives a notification of a determination of a 
safety-related defect or noncompliance pertaining to any leased motor 
vehicle shall send a copy of such notice to the lessee as prescribed by 
Sec. 577.7(a)(2)(iv). This requirement applies to both initial and 
follow-up notifications, but does not apply where the manufacturer has 
notified a lessor's lessees directly.

(Authority: Secs. 108, 112, and 119, Pub. L. 89-563; 80 Stat. 718; secs. 
102, 103, and 104, Pub. L. 93-492, 88 Stat. 1470 (15 U.S.C. 1397, 1401, 
1408, and 1411-1420); delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50)

[41 FR 56816, Dec. 30, 1976, as amended at 46 FR 6971, Jan. 22, 1981; 46 
FR 28657, May 28, 1981; 60 FR 17270, Apr. 5, 1995; 61 FR 279, Jan. 4, 
1996; 68 FR 18142, Apr. 15, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 577.6  Notification pursuant to Administrator's decision.

    (a) Agency-ordered notification. When a manufacturer is ordered 
pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 30118(b) to provide notification of a defect or 
noncompliance, he shall provide such notification in accordance with 
Sec. Sec. 577.5 and 577.7, except that the statement required by 
paragraph (c) of Sec. 577.5 shall indicate that the decision has been 
made by the Administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration.
    (b) Provisional notification. When a manufacturer does not provide 
notification as required by paragraph (a) of this section, and an action 
concerning the Administrator's order to provide such notification has 
been filed in a United States District Court, the manufacturer shall, 
upon the Administrator's further order, provide in accordance with 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 577.7 a provisional notification containing the 
information specified in this paragraph, in the order and, where 
specified, the form of paragraphs (b)(1) through (b)(12) of this 
section.
    (1) An opening statement: ``This notice is sent to you in accordance 
with the requirements of the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety 
Act.''
    (2) Whichever of the following statements is appropriate:
    (i) ``The Administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration has decided that a defect which relates to motor vehicle 
safety exists in (identified motor vehicles, in the case of notification 
sent by a manufacturer of motor vehicles; identified replacement 
equipment, in the case of notification sent by a manufacturer of 
replacement equipment);'' or
    (ii) ``The Administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration has decided that (identified motor vehicles in the case 
of notification sent by a motor vehicle manufacturer; identified 
replacement equipment, in the case of notification sent by a 
manufacturer of replacement equipment) fail to conform to federal Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standard No. (number and title of standard).''
    (3) When the Administrator decides that the defect or noncompliance 
may not exist in each such vehicle or item of replacement equipment, the 
manufacturer may include an additional statement to that effect.
    (4) The statement: ``(Manufacturer's name or division) is contesting 
this determination in a proceeding in the Federal courts and has been 
required to issue this notice pending the outcome of the court 
proceeding.''
    (5) A clear description of the Administrator's stated basis for his 
decision, as provided in his order, including a

[[Page 1009]]

brief summary of the evidence and reasoning that the Administrator 
relied upon in making his decision.
    (6) A clear description of the Administrator' stated evaluation as 
provided in his order of the risk to motor vehicle safety reasonably 
related to the defect or noncompliance.
    (7) Any measures that the Administrator has stated in his order 
should be taken by the owner to avoid an unreasonable hazard resulting 
from the defect or noncompliance.
    (8) A brief summary of the evidence and reasoning upon which the 
manufacturer relies in contesting the Administrator's determination.
    (9) A statement regarding the availability of remedy and 
reimbursement in accordance with paragraph (b)(9)(i) or (9)(ii) of this 
section, whichever is appropriate.
    (i) When the purchase date of the vehicle or item of equipment is 
such that the manufacturer is required by the Act to remedy without 
charge or to reimburse the owner for reasonable and necessary repair 
expenses, he shall include--
    (A) A statement that the remedy will be provided without charge to 
the owner if the Court upholds the Administrator's decision;
    (B) A statement of the method of remedy. If the manufacturer has not 
yet determined the method of remedy, he shall indicate that he will 
select either repair, replacement with an equivalent vehicle or item of 
replacement equipment, or (except in the case of replacement equipment) 
refund, less depreciation, of the purchase price; and
    (C) A statement that, if the Court upholds the Administrator's 
decision, he will reimburse the owner for any reasonable and necessary 
expenses that the owner incurs (not in excess of any amount specified by 
the Administrator) in repairing the defect or noncompliance following a 
date, specified by the manufacturer, which shall not be later than the 
date of the Administrator's order to issue this notification.
    (ii) When the manufacturer is not required either to remedy without 
charge or to reimburse, he shall include--
    (A) A statement that he is not required to remedy or reimburse, or
    (B) A statement of the extent to which he will voluntarily remedy or 
reimburse, including the method of remedy, if then known, and any 
limitations and conditions on such remedy or reimbursement.
    (10) A statement indicating whether, in the manufacturer's opinion, 
the defect or noncompliance can be remedied by repair. When the 
manufacturer believes that such remedy is feasible, the statement shall 
include:
    (i) A general description of the work and the manufacturer's 
estimate of the costs involved in repairing the defect or noncompliance;
    (ii) Information on where needed parts and instructions for 
repairing the defect or noncompliance will be available, including the 
manufacturer's estimate of the day on which they will be generally 
available;
    (iii) The manufacturer's estimate of the time reasonably necessary 
to perform the labor required to correct the defect or noncompliance; 
and
    (iv) The manufacturer's recommendations of service facilities where 
the owner could have the repairs performed, including (in the case of a 
manufacturer required to reimburse if the Administrator's decision is 
upheld in the court proceeding) at least one service facility for whose 
charges the owner will be fully reimbursed if the Administrator's 
decision is upheld.
    (11) A statement that further notice will be mailed by the 
manufacturer to the owner if the Administrator's decision is upheld in 
the court proceeding.
    (12) An address of the manufacturer where the owner may write to 
obtain additional information regarding the notification and remedy.
    (c) Post-litigation notification. When a manufacturer does not 
provide notification as required in paragraph (a) of this section and 
the Administrator prevails in an action commenced with respect to such 
notification, the manufacturer shall, upon the Administrator's further 
order, provide notification in accordance with paragraph (b) of Sec. 
577.7 containing the information specified in paragraph (a) of this 
section, except that--
    (1) The statement required by paragraph (c) of Sec. 577.5 shall 
indicate that

[[Page 1010]]

the decision has been made by the Administrator and that his decision 
has been upheld in a proceeding in the Federal courts; and
    (2) When a provisional notification was issued regarding the defect 
or noncompliance and the manufacturer is required under the Act to 
reimburse--
    (i) The manufacturer shall state that he will reimburse the owner 
for any reasonable and necessary expenses that the owner incurred (not 
in excess of any amount specified by the Administrator) for repair of 
the defect or noncompliance of the vehicle or item of equipment on or 
after the date on which provisional notification was ordered to be 
issued and on or before a date not sooner than the date on which this 
notification is received by the owner. The manufacturer shall determine 
and specify both dates.
    (ii) The statement required by paragraph (g)(1)(vii) of Sec. 577.5 
shall also inform the owner that he may submit a complaint to the 
Administrator if the owner believes that the manufacturer has failed to 
reimburse adequately.
    (3) If the manufacturer is not required under the Act to reimburse, 
he shall include--
    (i) A statement that he is not required to reimburse, or
    (ii) When he will voluntarily reimburse, a statement of the extent 
to which he will do so, including any limitations and conditions on such 
reimbursement.

[41 FR 56816, Dec. 30, 1976, as amended at 60 FR 17271, Apr. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 577.7  Time and manner of notification.

    (a) The notification required by Sec. 577.5 shall--
    (1) Be furnished within a reasonable time after the manufacturer 
first decides that either a defect that relates to motor vehicle safety 
or a noncompliance exists. The Administrator may order a manufacturer to 
send the notification to owners on a specific date where the 
Administrator finds, after consideration of available information and 
the views of the manufacturer, that such notification is in the public 
interest. The factors that the Administrator may consider include, but 
are not limited to, the severity of the safety risk; the likelihood of 
occurrence of the defect or noncompliance; whether there is something 
that an owner can do to reduce either the likelihood of occurrence of 
the defect or noncompliance or the severity of the consequences; whether 
there will be a delay in the availability of the remedy from the 
manufacturer; and the anticipated length of any such delay.
    (2) Be accomplished--
    (i) In the case of a notification required to be sent by a motor 
vehicle manufacturer, by first class mail to each person who is 
registered under State law as the owner of the vehicle and whose name 
and address are reasonably ascertainable by the manufacturer through 
State records or other sources available to him. If the owner cannot be 
reasonably ascertained, the manufacturer shall notify the most recent 
purchaser known to the manufacturer. The manufacturer shall also provide 
notification to each lessee of a leased motor vehicle that is covered by 
an agreement between the manufacturer and a lessor under which the 
manufacturer is to notify lessees directly of safety-related defects and 
noncompliances.
    (ii) In the case of a notification required to be sent by a 
replacement equipment manufacturer--
    (A) By first class mail to the most recent purchaser known to the 
manufacturer, and
    (B) (Except in the case of a tire) if decided by the Administrator 
to be required for motor vehicle safety, by public notice in such manner 
as the Administrator may require after consultation with the 
manufacturer.
    (iii) In the case of a manufacturer required to provide notification 
concerning any defective or noncomplying tire, by first class or 
certified mail.
    (iv) In the case of a notification to be sent by a lessor to a 
lessee of a leased motor vehicle, by first-class mail to the most recent 
lessee known to the lessor. Such notification shall be mailed within ten 
days of the lessor's receipt of the notification from the vehicle 
manufacturer.
    (b) The notification required by any paragraph of Sec. 577.6 shall 
be provided:
    (1) Within 60 days after the manufacturer's receipt of the 
Administrator's

[[Page 1011]]

order to provide the notification, except that the notification shall be 
furnished within a shorter or longer period if the Administrator 
incorporates in his order a finding that such period is in the public 
interest; and
    (2) In the manner and to the recipient specified in paragraph (a) of 
this section.

[41 FR 56816, Dec. 30, 1976, as amended at 60 FR 17271, Apr. 5, 1995]

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 34959, June 23, 2004, Sec. 577.7 was 
amended by adding paragraphs (c) and (d), effective Oct. 21, 2004. For 
the convenience of the user, the added text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 577.7  Time and manner of notification.

                                * * * * *

    (c) The notification required by Sec. 577.13 shall--
    (1) Be furnished within a reasonable time after the manufacturer 
decides that a defect that relates to motor vehicle safety or a 
noncompliance exists. The notification shall be provided in accordance 
with the schedule submitted to the agency pursuant to 49 CFR 
573.6(c)(8)(ii), unless that schedule is modified by the Administrator. 
The Administrator may direct a manufacturer to send the notification to 
dealers on a specific date if the Administrator finds, after 
consideration of available information and the views of the 
manufacturer, that such notification is in the public interest. The 
factors that the Administrator may consider include, but are not limited 
to, the severity of the safety risk; the likelihood of occurrence of the 
defect or noncompliance; the time frame in which the defect or 
noncompliance may manifest itself; availability of an interim remedial 
action by the owner; whether a dealer inspection would identify vehicles 
or items of equipment that contain the defect or noncompliance; and the 
time frame in which the manufacturer plans to provide the notification 
and the remedy to its dealers.
    (2) Be accomplished--
    (i) In the case of a notification required to be sent by a motor 
vehicle manufacturer, by certified mail, verifiable electronic means 
such as receipts or logs from electronic mail or satellite distribution 
system, or other more expeditious and verifiable means to all dealers 
and distributors of the vehicles that contain the defect or 
noncompliance.
    (ii) In the case of a notification required to be sent by a 
manufacturer of replacement equipment or tires, by certified mail, 
verifiable electronic means such as receipts or logs from electronic 
mail or satellite distribution system, or other more expeditious and 
verifiable means to all dealers and distributors of the product that are 
known to the manufacturer.
    (iii) In those cases where a manufacturer of motor vehicles or items 
of motor vehicle equipment provided the recalled product(s) to a group 
of dealers or distributors through a central office, notification to 
that central office will be deemed to be notice to all dealers and 
distributors within that group.
    (iv) In those cases in which a manufacturer of motor vehicles or 
items of motor vehicle equipment has provided the recalled product to 
independent dealers through independent distributors, the manufacturer 
may satisfy its notification responsibilities by providing the 
information required under this section to its distributors. In such 
cases, the manufacturer must also instruct those distributors to 
transmit a copy of the manufacturer's notification to known distributors 
and retail outlets along the distribution chain within five working days 
from its receipt.
    (d) Notwithstanding paragraph (c)(1) of this section, where the 
recall is being conducted pursuant to an order issued by the 
Administrator under 49 U.S.C. 30118(b), notification required by 
Sec. 577.13 shall be given on or before the date prescribed in the 
Administrator's order.


<R05>
Sec. 577.8  Disclaimers.

    (a) A notification sent pursuant to Sec. Sec. 577.5, 577.6, 577.9 
or 577.10 regarding a defect which relates to motor vehicle safety shall 
not, except as specifically provided in this part, contain any statement 
or implication that there is no defect, that the defect does not relate 
to motor vehicle safety, or that the defect is not present in the 
owner's or lessee's vehicle or item of replacement equipment. This 
section also applies to any notification sent to a lessor or directly to 
a lessee by a manufacturer.
    (b) A notification sent pursuant to Sec. Sec. 577.5, 577.6, 577.9 
or 577.10 regarding a noncompliance with an applicable motor vehicle 
safety standard shall not, except as specifically provided in this part, 
contain any statement or implication that there is not a noncompliance, 
or that the noncompliance is not present in the owner's or lessee's 
vehicle or item of replacement equipment. This section also applies to 
any notification sent to a lessor or directly to a lessee by a 
manufacturer.

[60 FR 17272, Apr. 5, 1995]

[[Page 1012]]


<R05>
Sec. 577.9  Conformity to statutory requirements.

    A notification that does not conform to the requirements of this 
part is a violation of the Act.


<R05>
Sec. 577.10  Follow-up notification.

    (a) If, based on quarterly reports submitted pursuant to Sec. 573.7 
of this part or other available information, the Administrator decides 
that a notification of a safety-related defect of a noncompliance with a 
Federal motor vehicle safety standard sent by a manufacturer has not 
resulted in an adequate number of vehicles or items of equipment being 
returned for remedy, the Administrator may direct the manufacturer to 
send a follow-up notification in accordance with this section. The 
scope, timing, form, and content of such follow-up notification will be 
established by the Administrator, in consultation with the manufacturer, 
to maximize the number of owners, purchasers, and lessees who will 
present their vehicles or items of equipment for remedy.
    (b) The Administrator may consider the following factors in deciding 
whether or not to require a manufacturer to undertake a follow-up 
notification campaign:
    (1) The percentage of covered vehicles or items of equipment that 
have been presented for the remedy;
    (2) The amount of time that has elapsed since the prior 
notification(s);
    (3) The likelihood that a follow-up notification will increase the 
number of vehicles or items of equipment receiving the remedy;
    (4) The seriousness of the safety risk from the defect or 
noncompliance;
    (5) Whether the prior notification(s) undertaken by the manufacturer 
complied with the requirements of the statute and regulations; and
    (6) Such other factors as are consistent with the purpose of the 
statute.
    (c) A manufacturer shall be required to provide a follow-up 
notification under this section only with respect to vehicles or items 
of equipment that have not been returned for remedy pursuant to the 
prior notification(s).
    (d) Except where the Administrator determines otherwise, the follow-
up notification shall be sent to the same categories of recipients that 
received the prior notification(s).
    (e) A follow-up notification must include:
    (1) A statement that identifies it as a follow-up to an earlier 
communication;
    (2) A statement urging the recipient to present the vehicle or item 
of equipment for remedy; and
    (3) Except as determined by the Administrator, the information 
required to be included in the initial notification.
    (f) The manufacturer shall mark the outside of each envelope in 
which it sends a follow-up notification in a manner which meets the 
requirements of Sec. 577.5(a) of this part.
    (g) Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, the 
Administrator may authorize the use of other media besides first-class 
mail for a follow-up notification.

[60 FR 17272, Apr. 5, 1995, as amended at 68 FR 18142, Apr. 15, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 577.11  Reimbursement notification.

    (a) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (e) of this section, 
when a manufacturer of motor vehicles or replacement equipment is 
required to provide notice in accordance with Sec. Sec. 577.5 or 577.6, 
in addition to complying with other sections of this part, the 
manufacturer shall notify owners that they may be eligible to receive 
reimbursement for the cost of obtaining a pre-notification remedy of a 
problem associated with a defect or noncompliance consistent with the 
manufacturer's reimbursement plan submitted to NHTSA pursuant to 
Sec. Sec. 573.6(c)(8)(i) and 573.13 of this chapter.
    (b) The manufacturer's notification shall include a statement, 
following the items required by Sec. 577.5 or Sec. 577.6, that
    (1) Refers to the possible eligibility for reimbursement for the 
cost of repair or replacement; and
    (2) Describes how a consumer may obtain information about 
reimbursement from the manufacturer;
    (c) The information referred to in Sec. 577.11(b)(2) of this part 
shall be provided in one of the following ways:
    (1) In an enclosure to the notification under Sec. 577.5 or Sec. 
577.6 that provides the information described in Sec. 577.11(d),

[[Page 1013]]

consistent with the manufacturer's reimbursement plan; or
    (2) Through a toll-free telephone number (with TTY capability) 
identified in the notification that provides the information described 
in Sec. 577.11(d), consistent with the manufacturer's reimbursement 
plan.
    (3) For notifications of defects or noncompliances in item of motor 
vehicle equipment that are in a form other than a letter to a specific 
owner or purchaser, if the manufacturer does not otherwise maintain a 
toll-free telephone number for the use of consumers, the manufacturer 
may refer claimants to a non-toll-free telephone number (with TTY 
capability) if it also specifies a mailing address at which owners can 
obtain the relevant information regarding the manufacturer's 
reimbursement plan.
    (d) The information to be provided under paragraph (c) of this 
section must:
    (1) Identify the vehicle and/or equipment that is the subject of the 
recall and the underlying problem;
    (2) State that the manufacturer has a program for reimbursing pre-
notification remedies and identify the type of remedy eligible for 
reimbursement;
    (3) Identify any limits on the time period in which the repair or 
replacement of the recalled vehicle or equipment must have occurred;
    (4) Identify any restrictions on eligibility for reimbursement that 
the manufacturer is imposing (as limited by Sec. 573.13 (d) of this 
chapter);
    (5) Specify all necessary documentation that must be submitted to 
obtain reimbursement;
    (6) Explain how to submit a claim for reimbursement of a pre-
notification remedy; and
    (7) Identify the office and address of the manufacturer where a 
claim can be submitted by mail and any authorized dealers or facilities 
where a claimant may submit a claim for reimbursement.
    (e) The manufacturer is not required to provide notification 
regarding reimbursement under this section if NHTSA finds, based upon a 
written request by a manufacturer accompanied by supporting information, 
views, and arguments, that all covered vehicles are under warranty or 
that no person would be eligible for reimbursement under Sec. 573.13 of 
this chapter.

[67 FR 64065, Oct. 17, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 577.12  Notification pursuant to an accelerated remedy program.

    (a) When the Administrator requires a manufacturer to accelerate its 
remedy program under Sec. 573.14 of this chapter, or when a 
manufacturer agrees with a request from the Administrator that it 
accelerate its remedy program in advance of being required to do so, in 
addition to complying with other sections of this part, the manufacturer 
shall provide notification in accordance with this section.
    (b) Except as provided elsewhere in this section or when the 
Administrator determines otherwise, the notification under this section 
shall be sent to the same recipients as provided by Sec. 577.7. If no 
notification has been provided to owners pursuant to this part, the 
provisions required by this section may be combined with the 
notification under Sec. Sec. 577.5 or 577.6. A manufacturer need only 
provide a notification under this section to owners of vehicles or items 
of equipment for which the defect or noncompliance has not been 
remedied.
    (c) The manufacturer's notification shall include the following:
    (1) If there was a prior notification, a statement that identifies 
that notification and states that this notification supplements it;
    (2) When the accelerated remedy program has been required by the 
Administrator, a statement that the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration has required the manufacturer to accelerate its remedy 
program;
    (3) A statement of how the program has been accelerated (e.g., by 
expanding the sources of replacement parts and/or expanding the number 
of authorized repair facilities);
    (4) Where applicable, a statement that the owner may elect to obtain 
the recall remedy using designated service facilities other than those 
that are owned or franchised by the manufacturer or are the 
manufacturer's authorized dealers, and an explanation of how the owner 
may arrange for service at those other facilities;

[[Page 1014]]

    (5) Where applicable, a statement that the owner may elect to obtain 
the recall remedy using specified replacement parts or equipment from 
sources other than the manufacturer;
    (6) Where applicable, a statement indicating whether the owner will 
be required to pay an alternative facility and/or parts supplier, 
subject to reimbursement by the manufacturer; and
    (7) If an owner will be required to pay an alternative facility and/
or parts supplier, a statement that the owner will be eligible to have 
those expenditures reimbursed by the manufacturer, and a description of 
how a consumer may obtain information about reimbursement from the 
manufacturer consistent with Sec. 577.11(b)(2), (c) and (d).

[67 FR 72393, Dec. 5, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 577.13  Notification to dealers and distributors.

    (a) The notification to dealers and distributors of a safety-related 
defect or a noncompliance with a Federal motor vehicle safety standard 
shall contain a clear statement that identifies the notification as 
being a safety recall notice, an identification of the motor vehicles or 
items of motor vehicle equipment covered by the recall, a description of 
the defect or noncompliance, and a brief evaluation of the risk to motor 
vehicle safety related to the defect or noncompliance. The notification 
shall also include a complete description of the recall remedy, and the 
estimated date on which the remedy will be available. Information 
required by this paragraph that is not available at the time of the 
original notification shall be provided as it becomes available.
    (b) The notification shall also include an advisory stating that it 
is a violation of Federal law for a dealer to deliver a new motor 
vehicle or any new or used item of motor vehicle equipment (including a 
tire) covered by the notification under a sale or lease until the defect 
or noncompliance is remedied.
    (c) For notifications of defects or noncompliances in items of motor 
vehicle equipment (including tires), the notification shall contain the 
manufacturer's offer to repurchase the items that remain in dealer or 
distributor inventory at the price paid by the dealer or distributor, 
plus transportation charges and reasonable reimbursement of at least one 
per cent a month, prorated from the date of notification to the date of 
repurchase, or as otherwise agreed to between the manufacturer and the 
dealer or distributor.
    (d) The manufacturer shall, upon request of the Administrator, 
demonstrate that it sent the required notification to each of its known 
dealers and distributors and the date of such notification.

[69 FR 34960, June 23, 2004]

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 34960, June 23, 2004, Sec. 577.13 was 
added, effective Oct. 21, 2004.


<R03>
PART 578_CIVIL AND CRIMINAL PENALTIES--Table of Contents




Sec.
578.1 Scope.
578.2 Purpose.
578.3 Applicability.
578.4 Definitions.
578.5 Inflationary adjustment of civil penalties.
578.6 Civil penalties for violations of specified provisions of Title 49 
          of the United States Code.
578.7 Criminal safe harbor provision.

    Authority: Pub. L. 101-410, Pub. L. 104-134, Pub. L. 106-414, 49 
U.S.C. 30165, 49 U.S.C. 30170, 30505, 32308, 32309, 32507, 32709, 32710, 
32912, and 33115; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 62 FR 5169, Feb. 4, 1997, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 578.1  Scope.

    This part specifies the civil penalties for violations of statutes 
administered by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, as 
adjusted for inflation. This part also sets forth the requirements 
regarding the reasonable time and the manner of correction for a person 
seeking safe harbor protection from criminal liability under 49 U.S.C. 
30170(a).

[65 FR 81418, Dec. 26, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 578.2  Purpose.

    One purpose of this part is to preserve the remedial impact of civil 
penalties and to foster compliance with

[[Page 1015]]

the law by specifying the civil penalties for statutory violations, as 
adjusted for inflation. The other purpose of this part is to set forth 
the requirements regarding the reasonable time and the manner of 
correction for a person seeking safe harbor protection from criminal 
liability under 49 U.S.C. 30170(a).

[65 FR 81418, Dec. 26, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 578.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to civil penalties for violations of Chapters 301, 
305, 323, 325, 327, 329, and 331 of Title 49 of the United States Code. 
This part also applies to the criminal penalty safe harbor provision of 
section 30170 of Title 49 of the United States Code.

[65 FR 81419, Dec. 26, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 578.4  Definitions.

    All terms used in this part that are defined in sections 30102, 
30501, 32101, 32702, 32901, and 33101 of Title 49 of the United States 
Code are used as defined in the appropriate statute.
    Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration.
    Civil penalty means any non-criminal penalty, fine, or other 
sanction that:
    (1) Is for a specific monetary amount as provided by Federal law, or 
has a maximum amount provided for by Federal law; and
    (2) Is assessed, compromised, collected, or enforced by NHTSA 
pursuant to Federal law.
    NHTSA means the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.

[62 FR 5169, Feb. 4, 1997, as amended at 65 FR 81419, Dec. 26, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 578.5  Inflationary adjustment of civil penalties.

    The civil penalties set forth in this part continue in effect until 
adjusted by the Administrator. At least once every four years, the 
Administrator shall review the amount of these civil penalties and will, 
if appropriate, adjust them by rule.


<R05>
Sec. 578.6  Civil penalties for violations of specified provisions of 
Title 49 of the United States Code.

    (a)(1) Motor vehicle safety. A person who violates any of sections 
30112, 30115, 30117 through 30122, 30123(d), 30125(c), 30127, or 30141 
through 30147 of Title 49 of the United States Code or a regulation 
prescribed under any of those sections is liable to the United States 
Government for a civil penalty of not more than $5,000 for each 
violation. A separate violation occurs for each motor vehicle or item of 
motor vehicle equipment and for each failure or refusal to allow or 
perform an act required by any of those sections. The maximum civil 
penalty under this paragraph for a related series of violations is 
$15,000,000.
    (2) Section 30166. A person who violates section 30166 of Title 49 
of the United States Code or a regulation prescribed under that section 
is liable to the United States Government for a civil penalty for 
failing or refusing to allow or perform an act required under that 
section or regulation. The maximum penalty under this paragraph is 
$5,000 per violation per day. The maximum penalty under this paragraph 
for a related series of daily violations is $15,000,000.
    (b) National Automobile Title Information System. An individual or 
entity violating 49 U.S.C. Chapter 305 is liable to the United States 
Government for a civil penalty of not more than $1,100 for each 
violation.
    (c) Bumper standards. (1) A person that violates 49 U.S.C. Sec. 
32506(a) is liable to the United States Government for a civil penalty 
of not more than $1,100 for each violation. A separate violation occurs 
for each passenger motor vehicle or item of passenger motor vehicle 
equipment involved in a violation of 49 U.S.C. 32506(a)(1) or (4)--
    (i) That does not comply with a standard prescribed under 49 U.S.C. 
32502, or
    (ii) For which a certificate is not provided, or for which a false 
or misleading certificate is provided, under 49 U.S.C. 32504.
    (2) The maximum civil penalty under this paragraph (c) for a related 
series of violations is $925,000.

[[Page 1016]]

    (d) Consumer information regarding crashworthiness and damage 
susceptibility. A person that violates 49 U.S.C. 32308(a) is liable to 
the United States Government for a civil penalty of not more than $1,100 
for each violation. Each failure to provide information or comply with a 
regulation in violation of 49 U.S.C. 32308(a) is a separate violation. 
The maximum penalty under this paragraph for a related series of 
violations is $450,000.
    (e) Country of origin content labeling. A manufacturer of a 
passenger motor vehicle distributed in commerce for sale in the United 
States that willfully fails to attach the label required under 49 U.S.C. 
32304 to a new passenger motor vehicle that the manufacturer 
manufactures or imports, or a dealer that fails to maintain that label 
as required under 49 U.S.C. 32304, is liable to the United States 
Government for a civil penalty of not more than $1,100 for each 
violation. Each failure to attach or maintain that label for each 
vehicle is a separate violation.
    (f) Odometer tampering and disclosure. (1) A person that violates 49 
U.S.C. Chapter 327 or a regulation prescribed or order issued thereunder 
is liable to the United States Government for a civil penalty of not 
more than $2,200 for each violation. A separate violation occurs for 
each motor vehicle or device involved in the violation. The maximum 
civil penalty under this paragraph for a related series of violations is 
$120,000.
    (2) A person that violates 49 U.S.C. Chapter 327 or a regulation 
prescribed or order issued thereunder, with intent to defraud, is liable 
for three times the actual damages or $2,000, whichever is greater.
    (g) Vehicle theft protection. (1) A person that violates 49 U.S.C. 
33114(a)(1)-(4) is liable to the United States Government for a civil 
penalty of not more than $1,100 for each violation. The failure of more 
than one part of a single motor vehicle to conform to an applicable 
standard under 49 U.S.C. 33102 or 33103 is only a single violation. The 
maximum penalty under this paragraph for a related series of violations 
is $300,000.
    (2) A person that violates 49 U.S.C. 33114(a)(5) is liable to the 
United States government for a civil penalty of not more than $120,000 a 
day for each violation.
    (h) Automobile fuel economy. (1) A person that violates 49 U.S.C. 
32911(a) is liable to the United States Government for a civil penalty 
of not more than $11,000 for each violation. A separate violation occurs 
for each day the violation continues.
    (2) Except as provided in 49 U.S.C. 32912(c), a manufacturer that 
violates a standard prescribed for a model year under 49 U.S.C. 32902 is 
liable to the United States Government for a civil penalty of $5.50 
multiplied by each .1 of a mile a gallon by which the applicable average 
fuel economy standard under that section exceeds the average fuel 
economy--
    (i) Calculated under 49 U.S.C. 32904(a)(1)(A) or (B) for automobiles 
to which the standard applies manufactured by the manufacturer during 
the model year;
    (ii) Multiplied by the number of those automobiles; and
    (iii) Reduced by the credits available to the manufacturer under 49 
U.S.C. 32903 for the model year.

[62 FR 5169, Feb. 4, 1997, as amended at 64 FR 37878, July 14, 1999; 65 
FR 68110, Nov. 14, 2000; 66 FR 41151, Aug. 7, 2001]

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 57866, Sept. 28, 2004, Sec. 578.6 was 
amended by revising paragraphs (a)(1), (a)(2), (c)(2), and (d), 
effective Oct. 28, 2004. For the convenience of the user, the revised 
text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 578.6  Civil penalties for violations of specified provisions of 
          Title 49 of the United States Code.

    (a)(1) Motor vehicle safety. A person who violates any of sections 
30112, 30115, 30117 through 30122, 30123(d), 30125(c), 30127, or 30141 
through 30147 of Title 49 of the United States Code or a regulation 
prescribed under any of those sections is liable to the United States 
Government for a civil penalty of not more than $5,000 for each 
violation. A separate violation occurs for each motor vehicle or item of 
motor vehicle equipment and for each failure or refusal to allow or 
perform an act required by any of those sections. The maximum civil 
penalty under this paragraph for a related series of violations is 
$16,050,000.
    (2) Section 30166. A person who violates section 30166 of Title 49 
of the United States Code or a regulation prescribed under that section 
is liable to the United States Government for a civil penalty for 
failing or refusing to allow or perform an act required under

[[Page 1017]]

that section or regulation. The maximum penalty under this paragraph is 
$5,000 per violation per day. The maximum penalty under this paragraph 
for a related series of violations is $16,050,000.

                                * * * * *

    (c) Bumper standards. (1) * * *
    (2) The maximum civil penalty under this paragraph (c) for a related 
series of violations is $1,025,000.
    (d) Consumer information regarding crashworthiness and damage 
susceptibility. A person that violates 49 U.S.C. 32308(a) is liable to 
the United States Government for a civil penalty of not more than $1,100 
for each violation. Each failure to provide information or comply with a 
regulation in violation of 49 U.S.C. 32308(a) is a separate violation. 
The maximum penalty under this paragraph for a related series of 
violations is $500,000.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 578.7  Criminal safe harbor provision.

    (a) Scope. This section sets forth the requirements regarding the 
reasonable time and the manner of correction for a person seeking safe 
harbor protection from criminal liability under 49 U.S.C. 30170(a)(2), 
which provides that a person described in 49 U.S.C. 30170(a)(1) is not 
subject to criminal penalties thereunder if:
    (1) At the time of the violation, such person does not know that the 
violation would result in an accident causing death or serious bodily 
injury; and
    (2) The person corrects any improper reports or failure to report, 
with respect to reporting requirements of 49 U.S.C. 30166, within a 
reasonable time.
    (b) Reasonable time. A correction is considered to have been 
performed within a reasonable time if the person seeking protection from 
criminal liability makes the correction to any improper (i.e., 
incorrect, incomplete, or misleading) report not more than thirty (30) 
calendar days after the date of the report to the agency and corrects 
any failure to report not more than thirty (30) calendar days after the 
report was due to be sent to or received by the agency, as the case may 
be, pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 30166, including a regulation, requirement, 
request or order issued thereunder. In order to meet these reasonable 
time requirements, all submissions required by this section must be 
received by NHTSA within the time period specified in this paragraph, 
and not merely mailed or otherwise sent within that time period.
    (c) Sufficient manner of correction. Each person seeking safe harbor 
protection from criminal penalties under 49 U.S.C. 30170(a)(2) must 
comply with the following with respect to each improper report and 
failure to report for which safe harbor protection is sought:
    (1) Sign and submit to NHTSA a dated document identifying:
    (i) Each previous improper report (e.g., informational statement and 
document submission), and each failure to report as required under 49 
U.S.C. 30166, including a regulation, requirement, request or order 
issued thereunder, for which protection is sought, and
    (ii) The specific predicate under which the improper or omitted 
report should have been provided (e.g., the report was required by a 
specified regulation, NHTSA Information Request, or NHTSA Special 
Order).
    (2) Submit the complete and correct information that was required to 
be submitted but was improperly submitted or was not previously 
submitted, including relevant documents that were not previously 
submitted, or, if the person cannot do so, provide a detailed 
description of that information and/or the content of those documents 
and the reason why the individual cannot provide them to NHTSA (e.g., 
the information or documents are not in the individual's possession or 
control).
    (3) For a corporation, the submission must be signed by an 
authorized person (ordinarily, the individual officer or employee who 
submitted the improper report or who should have provided the report 
that the corporation failed to submit on behalf of the company, or 
someone in the company with authority to make such a submission).
    (4) Submissions must be made by a means which permits the sender to 
verify promptly that the report was in fact received by NHTSA and the 
day it was received by NHTSA.
    (5) Submit the report to Chief Counsel (NCC-10), National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, Room 5219, 400

[[Page 1018]]

Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590.

[65 FR 81419, Dec. 26, 2000, as amended at 66 FR 38384, July 24, 2001]


<R03>
PART 579_REPORTING OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS ABOUT POTENTIAL 
DEFECTS--Table of Contents




                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
579.1 Scope.
579.2 Purpose.
579.3 Application.
579.4 Terminology.
579.5 Notices, bulletins, customer satisfaction campaigns, consumer 
          advisories, and other communications.
579.6 Address for submitting reports and other information.
579.7-579.10 [Reserved]

  Subpart B_Reporting of Safety Recalls and Other Safety Campaigns in 
                            Foreign Countries

579.11 Reporting responsibilities.
579.12 Contents of reports.
579.13-579.20 [Reserved]

            Subpart C_Reporting of Early Warning Information

579.21 Reporting requirements for manufacturers of 500 or more light 
          vehicles annually.
579.22 Reporting requirements for manufacturers of 500 or more medium-
          heavy vehicles and buses annually.
579.23 Reporting requirements for manufacturers of 500 or more 
          motorcycles annually.
579.24 Reporting requirements for manufacturers of 500 or more trailers 
          annually.
579.25 Reporting requirements for manufacturers of child restraint 
          systems.
579.26 Reporting requirements for manufacturers of tires.
579.27 Reporting requirements for manufacturers of fewer than 500 
          vehicles annually, for manufacturers of original equipment, 
          and for manufacturers of replacement equipment other than 
          child restraint systems and tires.
579.28 Due date of reports and other miscellaneous provisions.
579.29 Manner of reporting.

    Authority: Sec. 3, Pub. L. 106-414, 114 Stat. 1800 (49 U.S.C. 30102-
103, 30112, 30117-121, 30166-167); delegation of authority at 49 CFR 
1.50.

    Source: 67 FR 45873, July 10, 2002, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 579.1  Scope.

    This part sets forth requirements for reporting information and 
submitting documents that may help identify defects related to motor 
vehicle safety and noncompliances with Federal motor vehicle safety 
standards, including reports of foreign safety recalls and other safety-
related campaigns conducted outside the United States under 49 U.S.C. 
30166(l), early warning information under 49 U.S.C. 30166(m), and copies 
of communications about defects and noncompliances under 49 U.S.C. 
30166(f).


<R05>
Sec. 579.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to enhance motor vehicle safety by 
specifying information and documents that manufacturers of motor 
vehicles and motor vehicle equipment must provide to NHTSA with respect 
to possible safety-related defects and noncompliances in their products, 
including the reporting of safety recalls and other safety campaigns 
that the manufacturer conducts outside the United States.

[67 FR 63310, Oct. 11, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 579.3  Application.

    (a) This part applies to all manufacturers of motor vehicles and 
motor vehicle equipment with respect to all motor vehicles and motor 
vehicle equipment that have been offered for sale, sold, or leased in 
the United States by the manufacturer, including any parent corporation, 
any subsidiary or affiliate of the manufacturer, or any subsidiary or 
affiliate of any parent corporation, and with respect to all motor 
vehicles and motor vehicle equipment that have been offered for sale, 
sold, or leased in a foreign country by the manufacturer, including any 
parent corporation, any subsidiary or affiliate of the manufacturer, or 
any subsidiary or affiliate of any parent corporation, and are identical 
or substantially similar to any motor vehicles or motor vehicle 
equipment that

[[Page 1019]]

have been offered for sale, sold, or leased in the United States.
    (b) In the case of any report required under subpart B of this part, 
compliance by the fabricating manufacturer, the importer, the brand name 
owner, or a parent or subsidiary of such fabricator, importer, or brand 
name owner of the motor vehicle or motor vehicle equipment that is 
identical or substantially similar to that covered by the foreign recall 
or other safety campaign, shall be considered compliance by all persons.
    (c) In the case of any report required under subpart C of this part, 
compliance by the fabricating manufacturer, the importer, the brand name 
owner, or a parent or United States subsidiary of such fabricator, 
importer, or brand name owner of the motor vehicle or motor vehicle 
equipment, shall be considered compliance by all persons.
    (d) With regard to any information required to be reported under 
subpart C of this part, an entity covered under paragraph (a) of this 
section need only review information and systems where information 
responsive to subpart C of this part is kept in the usual course of 
business.

[43 FR 38833, Aug. 31, 1978, as amended at 67 FR 63310, Oct. 11, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 579.4  Terminology.

    (a) Statutory terms. The terms dealer, defect, distributor, motor 
vehicle, motor vehicle equipment, and State are used as defined in 49 
U.S.C. 30102.
    (b) Regulatory terms. The term Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) 
is used as defined in Sec. 565.3(o) of this chapter. The terms bus, 
Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR), motorcycle, multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, passenger car, trailer, and truck are used as defined in Sec. 
571.3(b) of this chapter. The term Booster seat is used as defined in S4 
of Sec. 571.213 of this chapter. The term Tire Identification Number 
(TIN) is the ``tire identification number'' described in Sec. 574.5 of 
this chapter. The term Limited production tire is used as defined in 
Sec. 575.104(c)(2) of this chapter.
    (c) Other terms. The following terms apply to this part:
    Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), or the Administrator's delegate.
    Affiliate means, in the context of an affiliate of or person 
affiliated with a specified person, a person that directly, or 
indirectly through one or more intermediates, controls or is controlled 
by, or is under common control with, the person specified. The term 
person usually is a corporation.
    Air bag means an air bag or other automatic occupant restraint 
device (other than a ``seat belt'' as defined in this subpart) installed 
in a motor vehicle that restrains an occupant in the event of a vehicle 
crash without requiring any action on the part of the occupant to obtain 
the benefit of the restraint. This term includes inflatable restraints 
(front and side air bags), knee bolsters, and any other automatic 
restraining device that may be developed that does not include a 
restraining belt or harness. This term also includes all air bag-related 
components, such as the inflator assembly, air bag module, control 
module, crash sensors and all hardware and software associated with the 
air bag. This term includes all associated switches, control units, 
connective elements (such as wiring harnesses, hoses, piping, etc.), and 
mounting elements (such as brackets, fasteners, etc.).
    Base means the detachable bottom portion of a child restraint system 
that may remain in the vehicle to provide a base for securing the system 
to a seat in a motor vehicle.
    Bead means all the materials in a tire below the sidewalls in the 
rim contact area, including bead rubber components, the bead bundle and 
rubber coating if present, the body ply and its turn-up including the 
rubber coating, rubber, fabric, or metallic reinforcing materials, and 
the inner-liner rubber under the bead area.
    Brand name owner means a person that markets a motor vehicle or 
motor vehicle equipment under its own trade name whether or not it is 
the fabricator or importer of the vehicle or equipment.
    Buckle and restraint harness means the components of a child 
restraint system that are intended to restrain a child seated in such a 
system, including the belt webbing, buckles, buckle

[[Page 1020]]

release mechanism, belt adjusters, belt positioning devices, and 
shields.
    Child restraint system means any system that meets, or is offered 
for sale in the United States as meeting, any definition in S4 of Sec. 
571.213 of this chapter, or that is offered for sale as a child 
restraint system in a foreign country.
    Claim means a written request or written demand for relief, 
including money or other compensation, assumption of expenditures, or 
equitable relief, related to a motor vehicle crash, accident, the 
failure of a component or system of a vehicle or an item of motor 
vehicle equipment, or a fire originating in or from a motor vehicle or a 
substance that leaked from a motor vehicle. Claim includes, but is not 
limited to, a demand in the absence of a lawsuit, a complaint initiating 
a lawsuit, an assertion or notice of litigation, a settlement, covenant 
not to sue or release of liability in the absence of a written demand, 
and a subrogation request. A claim exists regardless of any denial or 
refusal to pay it, and regardless of whether it has been settled or 
resolved in the manufacturer's favor. The existence of a claim may not 
be conditioned on the receipt of anything beyond the document(s) stating 
a claim. Claim does not include demands related to asbestos exposure, to 
emissions of volatile organic compounds from vehicle interiors, or to 
end-of-life disposal of vehicles, parts or components of vehicles, 
equipment, or parts or components of equipment.
    Common green tires means tires that are produced to the same 
internal specifications but that have, or may have, different external 
characteristics and may be sold under different tire line names.
    Consumer complaint means a communication of any kind made by a 
consumer (or other person) to or with a manufacturer addressed to the 
company, an officer thereof or an entity thereof that handles consumer 
matters, a manufacturer website that receives consumer complaints, a 
manufacturer electronic mail system that receives such information at 
the corporate level, or that are otherwise received by a unit within the 
manufacturer that receives consumer inquiries or complaints, including 
telephonic complaints, expressing dissatisfaction with a product, or 
relating the unsatisfactory performance of a product, or any actual or 
potential defect in a product, or any event that allegedly was caused by 
any actual or potential defect in a product, but not including a claim 
of any kind or a notice involving a fatality or injury.
    Control (including the terms controlling, controlled by, and under 
common control with) means the possession, direct or indirect, of the 
power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of 
a person, whether through the ownership of voting securities, by 
contract, or otherwise.
    Customer satisfaction campaign, consumer advisory, recall, or other 
activity involving the repair or replacement of motor vehicles or motor 
vehicle equipment means any communication by a manufacturer to, or made 
available to, more than one dealer, distributor, lessor, lessee, other 
manufacturer, or owner, whether in writing or by electronic means, 
relating to repair, replacement, or modification of a vehicle, component 
of a vehicle, item of equipment, or a component thereof, the manner in 
which a vehicle or child restraint system is to be maintained or 
operated (excluding promotional and marketing materials, customer 
satisfaction surveys, and operating instructions or owner's manuals that 
accompany the vehicle or child restraint system at the time of first 
sale); or advice or direction to a dealer or distributor to cease the 
delivery or sale of specified models of vehicles or equipment.
    Dealer field report means a field report from a dealer or authorized 
service facility of a manufacturer of motor vehicles or motor vehicle 
equipment.
    Electrical system means any electrical or electronic component of a 
motor vehicle that is not included in one of the other reporting 
categories enumerated in subpart C of this part, and specifically 
includes the battery, battery cables, alternator, fuses, and main body 
wiring harnesses of the motor vehicle and the ignition system, including 
the ignition switch and starter motor. The term also includes all 
associated switches, control units, connective elements (such as wiring 
harnesses, hoses,

[[Page 1021]]

piping, etc.), and mounting elements (such as brackets, fasteners, 
etc.).
    Engine and engine cooling means the component (e.g., motor) of a 
motor vehicle providing motive power to the vehicle, and includes the 
exhaust system (including the exhaust emission system), the engine 
control unit, engine lubrication system, and the underhood cooling 
system for that engine. This term also includes all associated switches, 
control units, connective elements (such as wiring harnesses, hoses, 
piping, etc.), and mounting elements (such as brackets, fasteners, 
etc.).
    Equipment comprises original and replacement equipment: (1) Original 
equipment means an item of motor vehicle equipment (other than a tire) 
that was installed in or on a motor vehicle at the time of its delivery 
to the first purchaser if the item of equipment was installed on or in 
the motor vehicle at the time of its delivery to a dealer or distributor 
for distribution; or the item of equipment was installed by the dealer 
or distributor with the express authorization of the motor vehicle 
manufacturer.
    (2) Replacement equipment means motor vehicle equipment other than 
original equipment, and tires.
    Exterior lighting mean all the exterior lamps (including any 
interior-mounted center highmounted stop lamp if mounted in the interior 
of a vehicle), lenses, reflectors, and associated equipment of a motor 
vehicle, including all associated switches, control units, connective 
elements (such as wiring harnesses, piping, etc.), and mounting elements 
(such as brackets, fasteners, etc.).
    Field report means a communication in writing, including 
communications in electronic form, from an employee or representative of 
a manufacturer of motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment, a dealer or 
authorized service facility of such manufacturer, or an entity known to 
the manufacturer as owning or operating a fleet, to the manufacturer 
regarding the failure, malfunction, lack of durability, or other 
performance problem of a motor vehicle or motor vehicle equipment, or 
any part thereof, produced for sale by that manufacturer and transported 
beyond the direct control of the manufacturer, regardless of whether 
verified or assessed to be lacking in merit, but does not include any 
document covered by the attorney-client privilege or the work product 
exclusion.
    Fire means combustion or burning of material in or from a vehicle as 
evidence by flame. The term also includes, but is not limited to, 
thermal events and fire-related phenomena such as smoke, sparks, or 
smoldering, but does not include events and phenomena associated with a 
normally functioning vehicle, such as combustion of fuel within an 
engine or exhaust from an engine.
    Fleet means more than ten motor vehicles of the same make, model, 
and model year.
    Foreign country means a country other than the United States.
    Foreign government means the central government of a foreign country 
as well as any political subdivision of that country.
    Fuel system means all components of a motor vehicle used to receive 
and store fuel, and to transfer fuel between the vehicle's fuel storage, 
engine, or fuel emission systems. This term includes, but is not limited 
to, the fuel tank and filler cap, neck, and pipe, along with associated 
piping, hoses, and clamps, the fuel pump, fuel lines, connectors from 
the fuel tank to the engine, the fuel injection/carburetion system 
(including fuel injector rails and injectors), and the fuel vapor 
recovery system(s), canister(s), and vent lines. The term also includes 
all associated switches, control units, connective elements (such as 
wiring harnesses, hoses, piping, etc.), and mounting elements (such as 
brackets, fasteners, etc.).
    Good will means the repair or replacement of a motor vehicle or item 
of motor vehicle equipment, including labor, paid for by the 
manufacturer, at least in part, when the repair or replacement is not 
covered under warranty, or under a safety recall reported to NHTSA under 
part 573 of this chapter.
    Handle means any element of a child restraint system that is 
designed to facilitate carrying the restraint outside a motor vehicle, 
other than an element of the seat shell.

[[Page 1022]]

    Incomplete light vehicle means an incomplete vehicle as defined in 
Sec. 568.3 of this chapter which, when completed, will be a light 
vehicle.
    Integrated child restraint system means a factory-installed built-in 
child restraint system as defined in S4 of Sec. 571.213 of this chapter 
and includes any factory-authorized built-in child restraint system.
    Latch means a latching, locking, or linking system of a motor 
vehicle and all its components fitted to a vehicle's exterior doors, 
rear hatch, liftgate, tailgate, trunk, or hood. This term also includes, 
but is not limited to, devices for the remote operation of a latching 
device such as remote release cables (and associated components), 
electric release devices, or wireless control release devices, and 
includes all components covered in FMVSS No. 206. This term also 
includes all associated switches, control units, connective elements 
(such as wiring harnesses, hoses, piping, etc.), and mounting elements 
(such as brackets, fasteners, etc.).
    Light vehicle means any motor vehicle, except a bus, motorcycle, or 
trailer, with a GVWR of 10,000 lbs or less.
    Make means a name that a manufacturer applies to a group of 
vehicles.
    Manufacturer means a person manufacturing or assembling motor 
vehicles or motor vehicle equipment, or importing motor vehicles or 
motor vehicle equipment for resale. This term includes any parent 
corporation, any subsidiary or affiliate, and any subsidiary or 
affiliate of a parent corporation of such a person.
    Medium-heavy vehicle means any motor vehicle, except a trailer, with 
a GVWR greater than 10,000 lbs.
    Minimal specificity means:
    (1) For a vehicle, the make, model, and model year,
    (2) For a child restraint system, the manufacturer and the model 
(either the model name or model number),
    (3) For a tire, the manufacturer, tire line, and tire size, and
    (4) For other motor vehicle equipment, the manufacturer and, if 
there is a model or family of models identified on the item of 
equipment, the model name or model number.
    Model means a name that a manufacturer of motor vehicles applies to 
a family of vehicles within a make which have a degree of commonality in 
construction, such as body, chassis or cab type. For equipment other 
than child restraint systems, it means the name that the manufacturer 
uses to designate it. For child restraint systems, it means the name 
that the manufacturer uses to identify child restraint systems with the 
same seat shell, buckle, base (if so equipped) and restraint system.
    Model year means the year that a manufacturer uses to designate a 
discrete model of vehicle, irrespective of the calendar year in which 
the vehicle was manufactured. If the manufacturer has not assigned a 
model year, it means the calendar year in which the vehicle was 
manufactured.
    Notice means a document, other than a media article, that does not 
include a demand for relief, and that a manufacturer receives from a 
person other than NHTSA.
    Other safety campaign means an action in which a manufacturer 
communicates with owners and/or dealers in a foreign country with 
respect to conditions under which motor vehicles or equipment should be 
operated, repaired, or replaced that relate to safety (excluding 
promotional and marketing materials, customer satisfaction surveys, and 
operating instructions or owner's manuals that accompany the vehicle or 
child restraint system at the time of first sale; or advice or direction 
to a dealer or distributor to cease the delivery or sale of specified 
models of vehicles or equipment).
    Parking brake means a mechanism installed in a motor vehicle which 
is designed to prevent the movement of a stationary motor vehicle, 
including all associated switches, control units, connective elements 
(such as wiring harnesses, hoses, piping, etc.), and mounting elements 
(such as brackets, fasteners, etc.).
    Platform means the basic structure of a vehicle including, but not 
limited to, the majority of the floorpan or undercarriage, and elements 
of the engine compartment. The term includes a structure that a 
manufacturer designates as a platform. A group of vehicles sharing a 
common structure or chassis shall be considered to have a

[[Page 1023]]

common platform regardless of whether such vehicles are of the same 
type, are of the same make, or are sold by the same manufacturer.
    Power train means the components or systems of a motor vehicle which 
transfer motive power from the engine to the wheels, including the 
transmission (manual and automatic), gear selection devices and 
associated linkages, clutch, constant velocity joints, transfer case, 
driveline, differential(s), and all driven axle assemblies. This term 
includes all associated switches, control units, connective elements 
(such as wiring harnesses, hoses, piping, etc.), and mounting elements 
(such as brackets, fasteners, etc.).
    Production year means, for equipment and tires, the calendar year in 
which the item was produced.
    Property damage means physical injury to tangible property.
    Property damage claim means a claim for property damage, excluding 
that part of a claim, if any, pertaining solely to damage to a component 
or system of a vehicle or an item of equipment itself based on the 
alleged failure or malfunction of the component, system, or item, and 
further excluding matters addressed under warranty.
    Rear-facing infant seat means a child restraint system that is 
designed to position a child to face only in the direction opposite to 
the normal direction of travel of the motor vehicle.
    Reporting period means a calendar quarter of a year, unless 
otherwise stated.
    Rollover means a single-vehicle crash in which a motor vehicle 
rotates on its longitudinal axis to at least 90 degrees, regardless of 
whether it comes to rest on its wheels.
    Safety recall means an offer by a manufacturer to owners of motor 
vehicles or equipment in a foreign country to provide remedial action to 
address a defect that relates to motor vehicle safety or a failure to 
comply with an applicable safety standard or guideline, whether or not 
the manufacturer agrees to pay the full cost of the remedial action.
    Seats means all components of a motor vehicle that are subject to 
FMVSS Nos. 202, 207, and 209, including all electrical and electronic 
components within the seat that are related to seat positioning, 
heating, and cooling. This term also includes all associated switches, 
control units, connective elements (such as wiring harnesses, hoses, 
piping, etc.), and mounting elements (such as brackets, fasteners, 
etc.).
    Seat belts means any belt system, other than an air bag, that may or 
may not require the occupant to latch, fasten, or secure the components 
of the seat belt/webbing based restraint system to ready its use for 
protection of the occupant in the event of a vehicle crash. This term 
includes the webbing, buckle, anchorage, retractor, belt pretensioner 
devices, load limiters, and all components, hardware and software 
associated with an automatic or manual seat belt system addressed by 
FMVSS No. 209 or 210. This term also includes integrated child restraint 
systems in vehicles, and includes any device (and all components of that 
device), installed in a motor vehicle in accordance with FMVSS No. 213, 
which is designed for use as a safety restraint device for a child too 
small to use a vehicle's seat belts. This term includes all vehicle 
components installed in accordance with FMVSS No. 225. This term also 
includes all associated switches, control units, connective elements 
(such as wiring harnesses, hoses, piping, etc.), and mounting elements 
(such as brackets, fasteners, etc.).
    Seat shell means the portion of a child restraint system that 
provides the structural shape, form and support for the system, and for 
other components of the system such as belt attachment points, and 
anchorage points to allow the system to be secured to a passenger seat 
in a motor vehicle, but not including a shield.
    Service brake system means all components of the service braking 
system of a motor vehicle intended for the transfer of braking 
application force from the operator to the wheels of a vehicle, 
including the foundation braking system, such as the brake pedal, master 
cylinder, fluid lines and hoses, braking assist components, brake 
calipers, wheel cylinders, brake discs, brake drums, brake pads, brake 
shoes, and other related equipment installed in a motor vehicle in order 
to comply with

[[Page 1024]]

FMVSS Nos. 105, 121, 122, or 135 (except equipment relating specifically 
to a parking brake). This term also includes systems and devices for 
automatic control of the brake system such as antilock braking, traction 
control, stability control, and enhanced braking. The term includes all 
associated switches, control units, connective elements (such as wiring 
harnesses, hoses, piping, etc.), and mounting elements (such as 
brackets, fasteners, etc.).
    Sidewall means the area of a tire between the tread and the bead 
area, including the sidewall rubber components, the body ply and its 
coating rubber under the side area, and the inner-liner rubber under the 
body ply in the side area.
    SKU (Stock Keeping Unit) means the alpha-numeric designation 
assigned by a manufacturer to uniquely identify a tire product. This 
term is sometimes referred to as a product code, a product ID, or a part 
number.
    Steering system means all steering control system components, 
including the steering system mechanism and its associated hardware, the 
steering wheel, steering column, steering shaft, linkages, joints 
(including tie-rod ends), steering dampeners, and power steering assist 
systems. This term includes a steering control system as defined by 
FMVSS No. 203 and any subsystem or component of a steering control 
system, including those components defined in FMVSS No. 204. This term 
also includes all associated switches, control units, connective 
elements (such as wiring harnesses, hoses, piping, etc.), and mounting 
elements (such as brackets, fasteners, etc.).
    Structure means any part of a motor vehicle that serves to maintain 
the shape and size of the vehicle, including the frame, the floorpan, 
the body, bumpers, doors, tailgate, hatchback, trunk lid, hood, and 
roof. The term also includes all associated mounting elements (such as 
brackets, fasteners, etc.).
    Suspension system means all components and hardware associated with 
a motor vehicle suspension system, including the associated control 
arms, steering knuckles, spindles, joints, bushings, ball joints, 
springs, shock absorbers, stabilizer (anti sway) bars, and bearings that 
are designed to minimize the impact on the vehicle chassis of shocks 
from road surface irregularities that may be transmitted through the 
wheels, and to provide stability when the vehicle is being operated 
through a range of speed, load, and dynamic conditions. The term also 
includes all electronic control systems and mechanisms for active 
suspension control, as well as all associated components such as 
switches, control units, connective elements (such as wiring harnesses, 
hoses, piping, etc.), and mounting elements (such as brackets, 
fasteners, etc.).
    Tire means an item of motor vehicle equipment intended to interface 
between the road and a motor vehicle. The term includes all the tires of 
a vehicle, including the spare tire. For purposes of Sec. Sec. 579.21 
through 579.24 and Sec. 579.27 of this part, this term also includes the 
tire inflation valves, tubes, and tire pressure monitoring and 
regulating systems, as well as all associated switches, control units, 
connective elements (such as wiring harnesses, hoses, piping, etc.), and 
mounting elements (such as brackets, fasteners, etc.).
    Tire line means the entire name used by a tire manufacturer to 
designate a tire product including all prefixes and suffixes as they 
appear on the sidewall of a tire.
    Trailer hitch means all coupling systems, devices, and components 
thereof, designed to join or connect any two motor vehicles. This term 
also includes all associated switches, control units, connective 
elements (such as wiring harnesses, hoses, piping, etc.), and mounting 
elements (such as brackets, fasteners, etc.).
    Tread (also known as crown) means all materials in the tread area of 
a tire including the rubber that makes up the tread, the sub-base 
rubber, when present, between the tread base and the top of the belts, 
the belt material, either steel and/or fabric, and the rubber coating of 
the same including any rubber inserts, the body ply and its coating 
rubber under the tread area of the tire, and the inner-liner rubber 
under the tread.

[[Page 1025]]

    Type means, in the context of a light vehicle, a vehicle certified 
by its manufacturer pursuant to Sec. 567.4(g)(7) of this chapter as a 
passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck, or a vehicle 
identified by its manufacturer as an incomplete vehicle pursuant to 
Sec. 568.4 of this chapter. In the context of a medium heavy vehicle 
and bus, it means one of the following categories: Truck, tractor, 
transit bus, school bus, coach, recreational vehicle, emergency vehicle, 
or other. In the context of a trailer, it means one of the following 
categories: Recreational trailers, van trailers, flatbed trailer, 
trailer converter dolly, lowbed trailer, dump trailer, tank trailer, dry 
bulk trailer, livestock trailer, boat trailer, auto transporter, or 
other. In the context of a child restraint system, it means the category 
of child restraint system selected from one of the following: rear-
facing infant seat, booster seat, or other.
    Vehicle speed control means the systems and components of a motor 
vehicle that control vehicle speed either by command of the operator or 
by automatic control, including, but not limited, to the accelerator 
pedal, linkages, cables, springs, speed control devices (such as cruise 
control) and speed limiting devices. This term includes, but is not 
limited to the items addressed by FMVSS No. 124 and all associated 
switches, control units, connective elements (such as wiring harnesses, 
hoses, piping, etc.), and mounting elements (such as brackets, 
fasteners, etc.).
    Visibility means the systems and components of a motor vehicle 
through which a driver views the surroundings of the vehicle including 
windshield, side windows, back window, and rear view mirrors, and 
systems and components used to wash and wipe windshields and back 
windows. This term includes those vehicular systems and components that 
can affect the ability of the driver to clearly see the roadway and 
surrounding area, such as the systems and components identified in FMVSS 
Nos. 103, 104, and 111. This term also includes the defogger/defroster 
system, the heater core, blower fan, windshield wiper systems, mirrors, 
windows and glazing material, heads-up display (HUD) systems, and 
exterior view-based television systems, but does not include exterior 
lighting systems which are defined under ``Lighting.'' This term 
includes all associated switches, control units, connective elements 
(such as wiring harnesses, hoses, piping, etc.), and mounting elements 
(such as brackets, fasteners, etc.).
    Warranty means any written affirmation of fact or written promise 
made in connection with the sale or lease of a motor vehicle or motor 
vehicle equipment by a manufacturer to a buyer or lessee that relates to 
the nature of the material or workmanship and affirms or promises that 
such material or workmanship is defect free or will meet a specified 
level of performance over a specified period of time (including any 
extensions of such specified period of time), or any undertaking in 
writing in connection with the sale or lease by a manufacturer of a 
motor vehicle or item of motor vehicle equipment to refund, repair, 
replace, or take other remedial action with respect to such product in 
the event that such product fails to meet the specifications set forth 
in the undertaking.
    Warranty adjustment means any payment or other restitution, such as, 
but not limited to, replacement, repair, credit, or cash refund, made by 
a tire manufacturer to a consumer or to a dealer, in reimbursement for 
payment or other restitution to a consumer, pursuant to a warranty 
program offered by the manufacturer or goodwill.
    Warranty claim means any claim paid by a manufacturer, including 
provision of a credit, pursuant to a warranty program, an extended 
warranty program, or good will. It does not include claims for 
reimbursement for costs or related expenses for work performed to remedy 
a safety-related defect or noncompliance reported to NHTSA under part 
573 of this chapter, or in connection with a motor vehicle emissions-
related recall under the Clean Air Act or in accordance with State law 
as authorized under 42 U.S.C. 7543(b) or 7507.
    Wheel means the assembly or component of a motor vehicle to which a 
tire is mounted. The term includes any item of motor vehicle equipment 
used to attach the wheel to the vehicle, including inner cap nuts and 
the wheel studs, bolts, and nuts.

[[Page 1026]]

    Work product means a document in the broad sense of the word, 
prepared in anticipation of litigation where there is a reasonable 
prospect of litigation and not for some other purpose such as a business 
practice, and prepared or requested by an attorney or an agent for an 
attorney.
    (d) Identical or substantially similar motor vehicle, item of motor 
vehicle equipment, or tire.
    (1) A motor vehicle sold or in use outside the United States is 
identical or substantially similar to a motor vehicle sold or offered 
for sale in the United States if--
    (i) Such a vehicle has been sold in Canada or has been certified as 
complying with the Canadian Motor Vehicle Safety Standards;
    (ii) Such a vehicle is listed in the VSP or VSA columns of Appendix 
A to part 593 of this chapter;
    (iii) Such a vehicle is manufactured in the United States for sale 
in a foreign country; or
    (iv) Such a vehicle uses the same vehicle platform as a vehicle sold 
or offered for sale in the United States.
    (2) An item of motor vehicle equipment sold or in use outside the 
United States is identical or substantially similar to equipment sold or 
offered for sale in the United States if such equipment and the 
equipment sold or offered for sale in the United States have one or more 
components or systems that are the same, and the component or system 
performs the same function in vehicles or equipment sold or offered for 
sale in the United States, regardless of whether the part numbers are 
identical.
    (3) A tire sold or in use outside the United States is substantially 
similar to a tire sold or offered for sale in the United States if it 
has the same size, speed rating, load index, load range, number of plies 
and belts, and similar ply and belt construction and materials, 
placement of components, and component materials, irrespective of plant 
of manufacture or tire line.

[43 FR 38833, Aug. 31, 1978, as amended at 67 FR 63310, Oct. 11, 2002; 
68 FR 4113, Jan. 28, 2003; 68 FR 18142, Apr. 15, 2003; 68 FR 35142, June 
11, 2003; 69 FR 20557, Apr. 16, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 579.5  Notices, bulletins, customer satisfaction campaigns, consumer 
advisories, and other communications.

    (a) Each manufacturer shall furnish to NHTSA a copy of all notices, 
bulletins, and other communications (including those transmitted by 
computer, telefax, or other electronic means and including warranty and 
policy extension communiques and product improvement bulletins) other 
than those required to be submitted pursuant to Sec. 573.6(c)(9) of 
this chapter, sent to more than one manufacturer, distributor, dealer, 
lessor, lessee, owner, or purchaser, in the United States, regarding any 
defect in its vehicles or items of equipment (including any failure or 
malfunction beyond normal deterioration in use, or any failure of 
performance, or any flaw or unintended deviation from design 
specifications), whether or not such defect is safety-related.
    (b) Each manufacturer shall furnish to NHTSA a copy of each 
communication relating to a customer satisfaction campaign, consumer 
advisory, recall, or other safety activity involving the repair or 
replacement of motor vehicles or equipment, that the manufacturer issued 
to, or made available to, more than one dealer, distributor, lessor, 
lessee, other manufacturer, owner, or purchaser, in the United States.
    (c) If a notice or communication is required to be submitted under 
both paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, it need only be submitted 
once.
    (d) Each copy shall be in readable form and shall be submitted not 
later than five working days after the end of the month in which it is 
issued. However, a document described in paragraph (b) of this section 
and issued before July 1, 2003, need not be submitted.

[67 FR 45873, July 10, 2002, as amended at 68 FR 18142, Apr. 15, 2003; 
68 FR 35147, June 11, 2003; 69 FR 49823, Aug. 12, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 579.6  Address for submitting reports and other information.

    (a) Except as provided by paragraph (b) of this section, 
information, reports, and documents required to be submitted to NHTSA 
pursuant to this

[[Page 1027]]

part may be submitted by mail, by facsimile, or by e-mail. If submitted 
by mail, they must be addressed to the Associate Administrator for 
Enforcement, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), 400 
7th Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. If submitted by facsimile, they 
must be addressed to the Associate Administrator for Enforcement and 
transmitted to (202) 366-7882. If submitted by e-mail, submissions under 
subpart B of this part must be submitted to foreign--
recalls@nhtsa.dot.gov and submissions under Sec. 579.5 must be 
submitted to tsb@nhtsa.dot.gov.
    (b) Information, documents and reports that are submitted to NHTSA's 
early warning data repository must be submitted in accordance with Sec. 
579.29 of this part. Submissions must be made by a means that permits 
the sender to verify that the report was in fact received by NHTSA and 
the day it was received by NHTSA.

[68 FR 4113, Jan. 28, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 579.7-579.10  [Reserved]


<R04>
  Subpart B_Reporting of Safety Recalls and Other Safety Campaigns in 
                            Foreign Countries

    Source: 67 FR 63310, Oct. 11, 2002, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 579.11  Reporting responsibilities.

    (a) Determination by a manufacturer. Not later than 5 working days 
after a manufacturer determines to conduct a safety recall or other 
safety campaign in a foreign country covering a motor vehicle, item of 
motor vehicle equipment, or tire that is identical or substantially 
similar to a vehicle, item of equipment, or tire sold or offered for 
sale in the United States, the manufacturer shall report the 
determination to NHTSA. For purposes of this paragraph, this period is 
determined by reference to the general business practices of the office 
in which such determination is made, and the office reporting to NHTSA.
    (b) Determination by a foreign government. Not later than 5 working 
days after a manufacturer receives written notification that a foreign 
government has determined that a safety recall or other safety campaign 
must be conducted in its country with respect to a motor vehicle, item 
of motor vehicle equipment, or tire that is identical or substantially 
similar to a vehicle, item of equipment, or tire sold or offered for 
sale in the United States, the manufacturer shall report the 
determination to NHTSA. For purposes of this paragraph, this period is 
determined by reference to the general business practices of the office 
where the manufacturer receives such notification, the manufacturer's 
international headquarters office (if involved), and the office 
reporting to NHTSA.
    (c) One-time historical reporting. Not later than 30 calendar days 
after November 12, 2002, a manufacturer that has made a determination to 
conduct a recall or other safety campaign in a foreign country, or that 
has received written notification that a foreign government has 
determined that a safety recall or other safety campaign must be 
conducted in its country in the period between November 1, 2000 and 
November 12, 2002, and that has not reported such determination or 
notification of determination to NHTSA in a report that identified the 
model(s) and model year(s) of the vehicles, equipment, or tires that 
were the subject of the foreign recall or other safety campaign, the 
model(s) and model year(s) of the vehicles, equipment, or tires that 
were identical or substantially similar to the subject of the recall or 
campaign, and the defect or other condition that led to the foreign 
recall or campaign, as of November 12, 2002, shall report such 
determination or notification of determination to NHTSA if the safety 
recall or other safety campaign covers a motor vehicle, item of motor 
vehicle equipment, or tire that is identical or substantially similar to 
a vehicle, item of equipment, or tire sold or offered for sale in the 
United States. However, a report need not be resubmitted under this 
paragraph if the original report identified the model(s) and model 
year(s) of the vehicles, equipment, or tires that were the subject of 
the foreign recall or other safety campaign, identified the model(s) and 
model year(s) of the identical or substantially similar products

[[Page 1028]]

in the United States, and identified the defect or other condition that 
led to the foreign recall or other safety campaign.
    (d) Exemptions from reporting. Notwithstanding paragraphs (a), (b), 
and (c) of this section a manufacturer need not report a foreign safety 
recall or other safety campaign to NHTSA if:
    (1) The manufacturer has determined that for the same or 
substantially similar reasons relating to motor vehicle safety that it 
is conducting a safety recall or other safety campaign in a foreign 
country, a safety-related defect or noncompliance with a Federal motor 
vehicle safety standard exists in identical or substantially similar 
motor vehicles, motor vehicle equipment, or tires sold or offered for 
sale in the United States, and has filed a defect or noncompliance 
information report pursuant to part 573 of this chapter, provided that 
the scope of the foreign recall or campaign is not broader than the 
scope of the recall campaign in the United States;
    (2) The component or system that gave rise to the foreign recall or 
other campaign does not perform the same function in any substantially 
similar vehicles or equipment sold or offered for sale in the United 
States; or
    (3) The sole subject of the foreign recall or other campaign is a 
label affixed to a vehicle, item of equipment, or a tire.
    (e) Annual list of substantially similar vehicles. Not later than 
November 1 of each year, each manufacturer of motor vehicles that sells 
or offers a motor vehicle for sale in the United States shall submit to 
NHTSA a document that identifies both each model of motor vehicle that 
the manufacturer sells or plans to sell during the following year in a 
foreign country that the manufacturer believes is identical or 
substantially similar to a motor vehicle sold or offered for sale in the 
United States (or to a motor vehicle that is planned for sale in the 
United States in the following year), and each such identical or 
substantially similar motor vehicle sold or offered for sale in the 
United States. Not later than 30 days after January 28, 2003, each 
manufacturer to which this paragraph applies shall submit an initial 
annual list of vehicles for calendar year 2003 that meets the 
requirements of this paragraph.

[67 FR 63310, Oct. 11, 2002, as amended at 68 FR 4113, Jan. 28, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 579.12  Contents of reports.

    (a) Each report made pursuant to Sec. 579.11 of this part must be 
dated and must include the information specified in Sec. 573.6(c)(1), 
(c)(2), (c)(3), and (c)(5) of this chapter. Each such report must also 
identify each foreign country in which the safety recall or other safety 
campaign is being conducted, state whether the foreign action is a 
safety recall or other safety campaign, state whether the determination 
to conduct the recall or campaign was made by the manufacturer or by a 
foreign government, describe the manufacturer's program for remedying 
the defect or noncompliance (if the action is a safety recall), specify 
the date of the determination and the date the recall or other campaign 
was commenced or will commence in each foreign country, and identify all 
motor vehicles, equipment, or tires that the manufacturer sold or 
offered for sale in the United States that are identical or 
substantially similar to the motor vehicles, equipment, or tires covered 
by the foreign recall or campaign. If a determination has been made by a 
foreign government, the report must also include a copy of the 
determination in the original language and, if the determination is in a 
language other than English, a copy translated into English.
    (b) Information required by paragraph (a) of this section that is 
not available within the 5-working day period specified in Sec. 579.11 
of this part shall be submitted as it becomes available.


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 579.13-579.20  [Reserved]


<R04>
            Subpart C_Reporting of Early Warning Information


<R05>
Sec. 579.21  Reporting requirements for manufacturers of 500 or more light 
vehicles annually.

    For each reporting period, a manufacturer whose aggregate number of 
light vehicles manufactured for sale, sold, offered for sale, introduced 
or delivered for introduction in interstate

[[Page 1029]]

commerce, or imported into the United States, during the calendar year 
of the reporting period or during each of the prior two calendar years 
is 500 or more shall submit the information described in this section. 
For paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section, the manufacturer shall 
submit information separately with respect to each make, model, and 
model year of light vehicle manufactured during the reporting period and 
the nine model years prior to the earliest model year in the reporting 
period, including models no longer in production.
    (a) Production information. Information that states the 
manufacturer's name, the quarterly reporting period, the make, the 
model, the model year, the type, the platform, and the production. The 
production shall be stated as either the cumulative production of the 
current model year to the end of the reporting period, or the total 
model year production for each model year for which production has 
ceased.
    (b) Information on incidents involving death or injury. For all 
light vehicles manufactured during a model year covered by the reporting 
period and the nine model years prior to the earliest model year in the 
reporting period:
    (1) A report on each incident involving one or more deaths or 
injuries occurring in the United States that is identified in a claim 
against and received by the manufacturer or in a notice received by the 
manufacturer which notice alleges or proves that the death or injury was 
caused by a possible defect in the manufacturer's vehicle, together with 
each incident involving one or more deaths occurring in a foreign 
country that is identified in a claim against and received by the 
manufacturer involving the manufacturer's vehicle, if that vehicle is 
identical or substantially similar to a vehicle that the manufacturer 
has offered for sale in the United States. The report shall be submitted 
as a report on light vehicles and organized such that incidents are 
reported alphabetically by make, within each make alphabetically by 
model, and within each model chronologically by model year.
    (2) For each incident described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, 
the manufacturer shall separately report the make, model, model year, 
and VIN of the vehicle, the incident date, the number of deaths, the 
number of injuries for incidents occurring in the United States, the 
State or foreign country where the incident occurred, each system or 
component of the vehicle that allegedly contributed to the incident, and 
whether the incident involved a fire or rollover, coded as follows: 01 
steering system, 02 suspension system, 03 service brake system, 05 
parking brake, 06 engine and engine cooling system, 07 fuel system, 10 
power train, 11 electrical system, 12 exterior lighting, 13 visibility, 
14 air bags, 15 seat belts, 16 structure, 17 latch, 18 vehicle speed 
control, 19 tires, 20 wheels, 22 seats, 23 fire, 24 rollover, 98 where a 
system or component not covered by categories 01 through 22 is specified 
in the claim or notice, and 99 where no system or component of the 
vehicle is specified in the claim or notice. If an incident involves 
more than one such code, each shall be reported separately in the report 
with a limit of five codes to be included.
    (c) Numbers of property damage claims, consumer complaints, warranty 
claims, and field reports. Separate reports on the numbers of those 
property damage claims, consumer complaints, warranty claims, and field 
reports which involve the systems and components that are specified in 
codes 01 through 22 in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, or a fire (code 
23), or rollover (code 24). Each such report shall state, separately by 
each such code, the number of such property damage claims, consumer 
complaints, warranty claims, or field reports, respectively, that 
involves the systems or components or fire or rollover indicated by the 
code. If an underlying property damage claim, consumer complaint, 
warranty claim, or field report involves more than one such code, each 
shall be reported separately in the report with no limit on the number 
of codes to be included. No reporting is necessary if the system or 
component involved is not specified in such codes, and the incident did 
not involve a fire or rollover.
    (d) Copies of field reports. For all light vehicles manufactured 
during a model year covered by the reporting period and the nine model 
years prior to the

[[Page 1030]]

earliest model year in the reporting period, a copy of each field report 
(other than a dealer report) involving one or more of the systems or 
components identified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, or fire, or 
rollover, containing any assessment of an alleged failure, malfunction, 
lack of durability, or other performance problem of a motor vehicle or 
item of motor vehicle equipment (including any part thereof) that is 
originated by an employee or representative of the manufacturer and that 
the manufacturer received during a reporting period. These documents 
shall be submitted alphabetically by make, within each make 
alphabetically by model, and within each model chronologically by model 
year. For purposes of this paragraph, if a field report refers to more 
than one make or model of light vehicle produced by a manufacturer on a 
particular platform, the manufacturer shall submit the report 
alphabetically by platform rather than by make or model. If such a field 
report refers to more than one platform, separate copies shall be 
submitted for each such platform. If a field report refers to more than 
one model year of a specified make/model or platform, the manufacturer 
shall submit it by the earliest model year to which it refers.

[67 FR 45873, July 10, 2002, as amended at 68 FR 18142, Apr. 15, 2003; 
68 FR 35142, June 11, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 579.22  Reporting requirements for manufacturers of 500 or more 
medium-heavy vehicles and buses annually.

    For each reporting period, a manufacturer whose aggregate number of 
medium-heavy vehicles and buses manufactured for sale, sold, offered for 
sale, introduced or delivered for introduction in interstate commerce, 
or imported into the United States, during the calendar year of the 
reporting period or during either of the prior two calendar years is 500 
or more shall submit the information described in this section. For 
paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section, the manufacturer shall submit 
information separately with respect to each make, model, and model year 
of medium-heavy vehicle and bus manufactured during the reporting period 
and the nine model years prior to the earliest model year in the 
reporting period, including models no longer in production.
    (a) Production information. Information that states the 
manufacturer's name, the quarterly reporting period, the make, the 
model, the model year, the type, and the production. The production 
shall be stated as either the cumulative production of the current model 
year to the end of the reporting period, or the total model year 
production for each model year for which production has ceased. For each 
model that is manufactured and available with more than one type of fuel 
system (i.e., gasoline, diesel, or other (including vehicles that can be 
operated using more than one type of fuel, such as gasoline and 
compressed natural gas)), the information required by this subsection 
shall be reported separately by each of the three fuel system types. For 
each model that is manufactured and available with more than one type of 
service brake system (i.e., hydraulic or air), the information required 
by this subsection shall be reported by each of the two brake types. If 
the service brake system in a vehicle is not readily characterized as 
either hydraulic or air, the vehicle shall be considered to have 
hydraulic service brakes.
    (b) Information on incidents involving death or injury. For all 
medium heavy vehicles and buses manufactured during a model year covered 
by the reporting period and the nine model years prior to the earliest 
model year in the reporting period:
    (1) A report on each incident involving one or more deaths or 
injuries occurring in the United States that is identified in a claim 
against and received by the manufacturer or in a notice received by the 
manufacturer which notice alleges or proves that the death or injury was 
caused by a possible defect in the manufacturer's vehicle, together with 
each incident involving one or more deaths occurring in a foreign 
country that is identified in a claim against and received by the 
manufacturer involving the manufacturer's vehicle, if that vehicle is 
identical or substantially similar to a vehicle that the manufacturer 
has offered for sale in the United States. The report shall

[[Page 1031]]

be submitted as a report on medium-heavy vehicles and buses and 
organized such that incidents are reported alphabetically by make, 
within each make alphabetically by model, and within each model 
chronologically by model year.
    (2) For each incident described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, 
the manufacturer shall separately report the make, model, model year, 
and VIN of the medium-heavy vehicle or bus, the incident date, the 
number of deaths, the number of injuries for incidents occurring in the 
United States, the State or foreign country where the incident occurred, 
each system or component of the vehicle that allegedly contributed to 
the incident, and whether the incident involved a fire or rollover, 
coded as follows: 01 steering system, 02 suspension system, 03 service 
brake system, hydraulic, 04 service brake system, air, 05 parking brake, 
06 engine and engine cooling system, 07 fuel system, gasoline, 08 fuel 
system, diesel, 09 fuel system, other, 10 power train, 11 electrical, 12 
exterior lighting, 13 visibility, 14 air bags, 15 seat belts, 16 
structure, 17 latch, 18 vehicle speed control, 19 tires, 20 wheels, 21 
trailer hitch, 22 seats, 23 fire, 24 rollover, 98 where a system or 
component not covered by categories 01 through 22 is specified in the 
claim or notice, and 99 where no system or component of the vehicle is 
specified in the claim or notice. If an incident involves more than one 
such code, each shall be reported separately in the report with a limit 
of five codes to be included.
    (c) Numbers of property damage claims, consumer complaints, warranty 
claims, and field reports. Separate reports on the numbers of those 
property damage claims, consumer complaints, warranty claims, and field 
reports which involve the systems and components that are specified in 
codes 01 through 22 in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, or a fire (code 
23), or rollover (code 24). Each such report shall state, separately by 
each such code, the number of such property damage claims, consumer 
complaints, warranty claims, or field reports, respectively, that 
involves the systems or components or fire or rollover indicated by the 
code. If an underlying property damage claim, consumer complaint, 
warranty claim, or field report involves more than one such code, each 
shall be reported separately in the report with no limit on the number 
of codes to be included. No reporting is necessary if the system or 
component involved is not specified in such codes, and the incident did 
not involve a fire or rollover.
    (d) Copies of field reports. For all medium heavy vehicles and buses 
manufactured during a model year covered by the reporting period and the 
nine model years prior to the earliest model year in the reporting 
period, a copy of each field report (other than a dealer report) 
involving one or more of the systems or components identified in 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section, or fire, or rollover, containing any 
assessment of an alleged failure, malfunction, lack of durability, or 
other performance problem of a motor vehicle or item of motor vehicle 
equipment (including any part thereof) that is originated by an employee 
or representative of the manufacturer and that the manufacturer received 
during a reporting period. These documents shall be submitted 
alphabetically by make, within each make alphabetically by model, and 
within each model chronologically by model year. For purposes of this 
paragraph, if a field report refers to more than one make or model of 
vehicle produced by a manufacturer on a particular platform, the 
manufacturer shall submit the report alphabetically by platform rather 
than by make or model. If such a field report refers to more than one 
platform, separate copies shall be submitted for each such platform. If 
a field report refers to more than one model year of a specified make/
model or platform, the manufacturer shall submit it by the earliest 
model year to which it refers.

[67 FR 45873, July 10, 2002, as amended at 68 FR 18142, Apr. 15, 2003; 
68 FR 35143, June 11, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 579.23  Reporting requirements for manufacturers of 500 or more 
motorcycles annually.

    For each reporting period, a manufacturer whose aggregate number of 
motorcycles manufactured for sale, sold, offered for sale, introduced or 
delivered for introduction in interstate

[[Page 1032]]

commerce, or imported into the United States, during the calendar year 
of the reporting period or during either of the prior two calendar years 
is 500 or more shall submit the information described in this section. 
For paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section, the manufacturer shall 
submit information separately with respect to each make, model, and 
model year of motorcycle manufactured during the reporting period and 
the nine model years prior to the earliest model year in the reporting 
period, including models no longer in production.
    (a) Production information. Information that states the 
manufacturer's name, the quarterly reporting period, the make, the 
model, the model year, and the production. The production shall be 
stated as either the cumulative production of the current model year to 
the end of the reporting period, or the total model year production for 
each model year for which production has ceased.
    (b) Information on incidents involving death or injury. For all 
motorcycles manufactured during a model year covered by the reporting 
period and the nine model years prior to the earliest model year in the 
reporting period:
    (1) A report on each incident involving one or more deaths or 
injuries occurring in the United States that is identified in a claim 
against and received by the manufacturer or in a notice received by the 
manufacturer which notice alleges or proves that the death or injury was 
caused by a possible defect in the manufacturer's motorcycle, together 
with each incident involving one or more deaths occurring in a foreign 
country that is identified in a claim against and received by the 
manufacturer involving the manufacturer's motorcycle, if that motorcycle 
is identical or substantially similar to a motorcycle that the 
manufacturer has offered for sale in the United States. The report shall 
be submitted as a report on motorcycles and organized such that 
incidents are reported alphabetically by make, within each make 
alphabetically by model, and within each model chronologically by model 
year.
    (2) For each incident described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, 
the manufacturer shall separately report the make, model, model year, 
and VIN of the motorcycle, the incident date, the number of deaths, the 
number of injuries for incidents occurring in the United States, the 
State or foreign country where the incident occurred, each system or 
component of the motorcycle that allegedly contributed to the incident, 
and whether the incident involved a fire, coded as follows: 01 steering, 
02 suspension, 03 service brake system, 06 engine and engine cooling, 07 
fuel system, 10 power train, 11 electrical, 12 exterior lighting, 16 
structure,18 vehicle speed control, 19 tires, 20 wheels, 23 fire, 98 
where a system or component not covered by categories 01 through 20 is 
specified in the claim or notice, and 99 where no system or component of 
the vehicle is specified in the claim or notice. If an incident involves 
more than one such code, each shall be reported separately in the report 
with a limit of five codes to be included.
    (c) Numbers of property damage claims, consumer complaints, warranty 
claims, and field reports. Separate reports on the numbers of those 
property damage claims, consumer complaints, warranty claims, and field 
reports which involve the systems and components that are specified in 
codes 01 through 20 in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, or a fire (code 
23). Each such report shall state, separately by each such code, the 
number of such property damage claims, consumer complaints, warranty 
claims, or field reports, respectively, that involves the systems or 
components or fire indicated by the code. If an underlying property 
damage claim, consumer complaint, warranty claim, or field report 
involves more than one such code, each shall be reported separately in 
the report with no limit on the number of codes to be included. No 
reporting is necessary if the system or component involved is not 
specified in such codes, and the incident did not involve a fire.
    (d) Copies of field reports. For all motorcycles manufactured during 
a model year covered by the reporting period and the nine model years 
prior to the earliest model year in the reporting period, a copy of each 
field report (other than a dealer report) involving one or

[[Page 1033]]

more of the systems or components identified in paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section or fire, containing any assessment of an alleged failure, 
malfunction, lack of durability, or other performance problem of a 
motorcycle or item of motor vehicle equipment (including any part 
thereof) that is originated by an employee or representative of the 
manufacturer and that the manufacturer received during a reporting 
period. These documents shall be submitted alphabetically by make, 
within each make alphabetically by model, and within each model 
chronologically by model year. For purposes of this paragraph, if a 
field report refers to more than one make or model of motorcycle 
produced by a manufacturer on a particular platform, the manufacturer 
shall submit the report alphabetically by platform rather than by make 
or model. If such a field report refers to more than one platform, 
separate copies shall be submitted for each such platform. If a field 
report refers to more than one model year of a specified make/model or 
platform, the manufacturer shall submit it by the earliest model year to 
which it refers.

[67 FR 45873, July 10, 2002, as amended at 68 FR 18142, Apr. 15, 2003; 
68 FR 35143, June 11, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 579.24  Reporting requirements for manufacturers of 500 or more 
trailers annually.

    For each reporting period, a manufacturer whose aggregate number of 
trailers manufactured for sale, sold, offered for sale, introduced or 
delivered for introduction in interstate commerce, or imported into the 
United States, during the calendar year of the reporting period or 
during either of the prior two calendar years is 500 or more shall 
submit the information described in this section. For paragraphs (a) and 
(c) of this section, the manufacturer shall submit information with 
respect to each make, model and model year of trailer manufactured 
during the reporting period and the nine model years prior to the 
earliest model year in the reporting period, including models no longer 
in production.
    (a) Production information. Information that states the 
manufacturer's name, the quarterly reporting period, the make, the 
model, the model year, the type, and the production. The production 
shall be stated as either the cumulative production of the current model 
year to the end of the reporting period, or the total model year 
production for each model year for which production has ceased. For each 
model that is manufactured and available with more than one type of 
service brake system (i.e., hydraulic and air), the information required 
by this subsection shall be reported by each of the two brake types 
(i.e., ``H'' for hydraulic, ``A'' for air). If the service brake system 
in a trailer is not readily characterized as either hydraulic or air, 
the trailer shall be considered to have hydraulic service brakes. If a 
model has no brake system, it shall be reported as ``N,'' for none.
    (b) Information on incidents involving death or injury. For all 
trailers manufactured during a model year covered by the reporting 
period and the nine model years prior to the earliest model year in the 
reporting period:
    (1) A report on each incident involving one or more deaths or 
injuries occurring in the United States that is identified in a claim 
against and received by the manufacturer or in a notice received by the 
manufacturer which notice alleges or proves that the death or injury was 
caused by a possible defect in the manufacturer's trailer, together with 
each incident involving one or more deaths occurring in a foreign 
country that is identified in a claim against and received by the 
manufacturer involving the manufacturer's trailer, if that trailer is 
identical or substantially similar to a trailer that the manufacturer 
has offered for sale in the United States. The report shall be submitted 
as a report on trailers and organized such that incidents are reported 
alphabetically by make, with each make alphabetically by model, and 
within each model chronologically by model year.
    (2) For each incident described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, 
the manufacturer shall separately report the make, model, model year, 
and VIN of the trailer, the incident date, the number of deaths, the 
number of injuries for incidents occurring in the United States, the 
State or foreign

[[Page 1034]]

country where the incident occurred, each system or component of the 
trailer that allegedly contributed to the incident, and whether the 
incident involved a fire, coded as follows: 02 suspension, 03 service 
brake system, hydraulic, 04 service brake system, air, 05 parking brake, 
11 electrical, 12 exterior lighting, 16 structure, 17 latch, 19 tires, 
20 wheels, 21 trailer hitch, 23 fire, 98 where a system or component not 
covered by categories 02 through 21 is specified in the claim or notice, 
and 99 where no system or component of the trailer is specified in the 
claim or notice. If an incident involves more than one such code, each 
shall be reported separately in the report with a limit of five codes to 
be included.
    (c) Numbers of property damage claims, consumer complaints, warranty 
claims, and field reports. Separate reports on the numbers of those 
property damage claims, consumer complaints, warranty claims, and field 
reports which involve the systems and components that are specified in 
codes 02 through 21 in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, or a fire (code 
23). Each such report shall state, separately by each such code, the 
number of such property damage claims, consumer complaints, warranty 
claims, or field reports, respectively, that involves the systems or 
components or fire indicated by the code. If an underlying property 
damage claim, consumer complaint, warranty claim, or field report 
involves more than one such code, each shall be reported separately in 
the report with no limit on the number of codes to be included. No 
reporting is necessary if the system or component involved is not 
specified in such codes, and the incident did not involve a fire.
    (d) Copies of field reports. For all trailers manufactured during a 
model year covered by the reporting period and the nine model years 
prior to the earliest model year in the reporting period, a copy of each 
field report (other than a dealer report) involving one or more of the 
systems or components identified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section or 
fire, containing any assessment of an alleged failure, malfunction, lack 
of durability, or other performance problem of a trailer or item of 
motor vehicle equipment (including any part thereof) that is originated 
by an employee or representative of the manufacturer and that the 
manufacturer received during a reporting period. These documents shall 
be submitted alphabetically by make, within each make alphabetically by 
model, and within each model chronologically by model year. For purposes 
of this paragraph, if a field report refers to more than one make or 
model of trailer produced by a manufacturer on a particular platform, 
the manufacturer shall submit the report alphabetically by platform 
rather than by make or model. If such a field report refers to more than 
one platform, separate copies shall be submitted for each such platform. 
If a field report refers to more than one model year of a specified 
make/model or platform, the manufacturer shall submit it by the earliest 
model year to which it refers.

[67 FR 45873, July 10, 2003, as amended at 68 FR 18143, Apr. 15, 2003; 
68 FR 35143, June 11, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 579.25  Reporting requirements for manufacturers of child restraint 
systems.

    For each reporting period, a manufacturer who has manufactured for 
sale, sold, offered for sale, introduced or delivered for introduction 
in interstate commerce, or imported child restraint systems into the 
United States, shall submit the information described in this section. 
For paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section, the manufacturer shall 
submit information separately with respect to each make, model, and 
production year of child restraint system manufactured during the 
reporting period and the four production years prior to the earliest 
production year in the reporting period, including models no longer in 
production. For paragraph (c) of this section, if any consumer 
complaints or warranty claims regarding a model of child restraint 
system do not specify the production year of the system, the 
manufacturer shall submit information for ``unknown'' production year in 
addition to the up-to-five production years for which the manufacturer 
must otherwise report the number of such consumer complaints/warranty 
claims.

[[Page 1035]]

    (a) Production information. Information that states the 
manufacturer's name, the quarterly reporting period, the make, the 
model, the production year, the type, and the production. The production 
shall be stated as either the cumulative production of the current model 
year to the end of the reporting period, or the total calendar year 
production for each calendar year for which production has ceased.
    (b) Information on incidents involving death or injury. For all 
child restraint systems manufactured during a production year covered by 
the reporting period and the four production years prior to the earliest 
production year in the reporting period:
    (1) A report on each incident involving one or more deaths or 
injuries occurring in the United States that is identified in a claim 
against and received by the manufacturer or in a notice received by the 
manufacturer which notice alleges or proves that the death or injury was 
caused by a possible defect in the manufacturer's child restraint 
system, together with each incident involving one or more deaths 
occurring in a foreign country that is identified in a claim against and 
received by the manufacturer involving the manufacturer's child 
restraint system, if the child restraint system is identical or 
substantially similar to a child restraint system that the manufacturer 
has offered for sale in the United States. The report shall be submitted 
as a report on child restraint systems and organized such that incidents 
are reported alphabetically by make, within each make alphabetically by 
model, and within each model chronologically by production year.
    (2) For each such incident described in paragraph (b)(1) of this 
section, the manufacturer shall separately report the make, model, and 
production year of the child restraint system, the incident date, the 
number of deaths, the number of injuries for incidents occurring in the 
United States, the State or foreign country where the incident occurred, 
and each system or component of the child restraint system that 
allegedly contributed to the incident, coded as follows: 51 buckle and 
restraint harness, 52 seat shell, 53 handle, 54 base, 98 where a system 
or component not covered by categories 51 through 54 is specified in the 
claim or notice, and 99 where no system or component of the child 
restraint system is specified in the claim or notice. If an incident 
involves more than one such code, each shall be reported separately in 
the report. If the production year of the child restraint system is 
unknown, the manufacturer shall specify the number ``9999'' in the field 
for production year.
    (c) Numbers of consumer complaints and warranty claims, and field 
reports. Separate reports on the numbers of those consumer complaints 
and warranty claims, and field reports, which involve the systems and 
components that are specified in codes 51 through 54 in paragraph (b)(2) 
of this section. Each such report shall state, separately by each such 
code, the number of such consumer complaints and warranty claims, or 
field reports, respectively, that involves the systems or components 
indicated by the code. If an underlying consumer complaint and warranty 
claim, or field report, involves more than one such code, each shall be 
counted separately in the report with no limit on the number of codes to 
be included. No reporting is necessary if the system or component 
involved is not specified in such codes.
    (d) Copies of field reports. For all child restraint systems 
manufactured during a production year covered by the reporting period 
and the four production years prior to the earliest production year in 
the reporting period, a copy of each field report (other than a dealer 
report) involving one or more of the systems or components identified in 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section, containing any assessment of an 
alleged failure, malfunction, lack of durability, or other performance 
problem of a child restraint system (including any part thereof) that is 
originated by an employee or representative of the manufacturer and that 
the manufacturer received during a reporting period. These documents 
shall be submitted alphabetically by make, within each make 
alphabetically by model, and within each model chronologically by 
production year. For purposes of this paragraph, if a field report 
refers to more than one make or model of child

[[Page 1036]]

restraint system produced by a manufacturer, the manufacturer shall 
submit the report under the first such model in alphabetical order. If a 
field report refers to more than one production year of a specified 
make/model, the manufacturer shall submit it by the earliest production 
year to which it refers.

[67 FR 45873, July 10, 2002, as amended at 68 FR 18143, Apr. 15, 2003; 
68 FR 35144, June 11, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 579.26  Reporting requirements for manufacturers of tires.

    For each reporting period, a manufacturer (including a brand name 
owner) who has manufactured for sale, sold, offered for sale, introduced 
or delivered for introduction in interstate commerce, or imported tires 
in the United States shall submit the information described in this 
section. For purposes of this section, an importer of motor vehicles for 
resale is deemed to be the manufacturer of the tires on and in the 
vehicle at the time of its importation if the manufacturer of the tires 
is not required to report under this section. For paragraphs (a) and (c) 
of this section, the manufacturer shall submit information separately 
with respect to each tire line, size, SKU, plant where manufactured, and 
model year of tire manufactured during the reporting period and the four 
calendar years prior to the reporting period, including tire lines no 
longer in production. For each group of tires with the same SKU, plant 
where manufactured, and year for which the volume produced or imported 
is less than 15,000, or are deep tread, winter-type snow tires, space-
saver or temporary use spare tires, tires with nominal rim diameters of 
12 inches or less, or are not passenger car tires, light truck tires, or 
motorcycle tires, the manufacturer need only report information on 
incidents involving a death or injury, as specified in paragraph (b) of 
this section. For purposes of this section, the two-character DOT 
alphanumeric code for production plants located in the United States 
assigned by NHTSA in accordance with Sec. Sec. 574.5(a) and 574.6(b) of 
this chapter may be used to identify ``plant where manufactured.'' If 
the production plant is located outside the United States, the full 
plant name must be provided.
    (a) Production information. Information that states the 
manufacturer's name, the quarterly reporting period, the tire line, the 
tire size, the tire type code, the SKU, the plant where manufactured, 
whether the tire is approved for use as original equipment on a motor 
vehicle, if so, the make, model, and model year of each vehicle for 
which it is approved, the production year, the cumulative warranty 
production, and the cumulative total production through the end of the 
reporting period. If the manufacturer knows that a particular group of 
tires is not used as original equipment on a motor vehicle, it shall 
state ``N'' in the appropriate field, and if the manufacturer is not 
certain, it shall state ``U'' in that field.
    (b) Information on incidents involving death or injury. For all 
tires manufactured during a production year covered by the reporting 
period and the four production years prior to the earliest production 
year in the reporting period:
    (1) A report on each incident involving one or more deaths or 
injuries occurring in the United States that is identified in a claim 
against and received by the manufacturer or in a notice received by the 
manufacturer which notice alleges or proves that the death or injury was 
caused by a possible defect in the manufacturer's tire, together with 
each incident involving one or more deaths occurring in a foreign 
country that is identified in a claim against and received by the 
manufacturer involving the manufacturer's tire, if that tire is 
identical or substantially similar to a tire that the manufacturer has 
offered for sale in the United States. The report shall be submitted as 
a report on tires and organized such that incidents are reported 
alphabetically by tire line, within each tire line by tire size, and 
within each tire size chronologically by production year.
    (2) For each such incident described in paragraph (b)(1) of this 
section, the manufacturer shall separately report the tire line, size, 
and production year of the tire, the TIN, the incident date, the number 
of deaths, the number of injuries for incidents occurring in the

[[Page 1037]]

United States, the State or foreign country where the incident occurred, 
the make, model, and model year of the vehicle on which the tire was 
installed, and each component of the tire that allegedly contributed to 
the incident, coded as follows: 71 tread, 72 sidewall, 73 bead, 98 where 
a component not covered by categories 71 through 73 is specified in the 
claim or notice, and 99 where no component of the tire is specified in 
the claim or notice. If an incident involves more than one such code, 
each shall be reported separately in the report.
    (c) Numbers of property damage claims and warranty adjustments. 
Separate reports on the numbers of those property damage claims and 
warranty adjustments which involve the components that are specified in 
codes 71 through 73, and 98, in paragraph (b)(2) of this section. Each 
such report shall state, separately by each such code, the numbers of 
such property damage claims and warranty adjustments, respectively, that 
involve the components indicated by the code. If an underlying property 
damage claim or warranty adjustment involves more than one such code, 
each shall be reported separately in the report with no limit on the 
number of codes to be included. No reporting is necessary if the system 
or component involved is not specified in such codes, or if the TIN is 
not specified in any property damage claim.
    (d) Common green tire reporting. With each quarterly report, each 
manufacturer of tires shall provide NHTSA with a list of common green 
tires. For each specific common green tire grouping, the list shall 
provide all relevant tire lines, tire type codes, SKU numbers, brand 
names, and brand name owners.

[67 FR 45873, July 10, 2002, as amended at 68 FR 18143, Apr. 15, 2003; 
68 FR 35144, June 11, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 579.27  Reporting requirements for manufacturers of fewer than 500 

vehicles annually, for manufacturers of original equipment, and for 
manufacturers of 
          replacement equipment other than child restraint systems and 
          tires.

    (a) Applicability. This section applies to all manufacturers of 
vehicles with respect to vehicles that are not covered by reports on 
light vehicles, medium-heavy vehicles and buses, motorcycles, or 
trailers submitted pursuant to Sec. Sec. 579.21 through 579.24 of this 
part, to all manufacturers of original equipment, to all manufacturers 
of replacement equipment other than manufacturers of tires and child 
restraint systems, and to registered importers registered under 49 
U.S.C. 30141(c).
    (b) Information on incidents involving deaths. For each reporting 
period, a manufacturer to which this section applies shall submit a 
report, pertaining to vehicles and/or equipment manufactured or sold 
during the calendar year of the reporting period and the nine calendar 
years prior to the reporting period (four calendar years for equipment), 
including models no longer in production, on each incident involving one 
or more deaths occurring in the United States that is identified in a 
claim against and received by the manufacturer or in a notice received 
by the manufacturer which notice alleges or proves that the death was 
caused by a possible defect in the manufacturer's vehicle or equipment, 
together with each incident involving one or more deaths occurring in a 
foreign country that is identified in a claim against and received by 
the manufacturer involving the manufacturer's vehicle or equipment, if 
it is identical or substantially similar to a vehicle or item of 
equipment that the manufacturer has offered for sale in the United 
States. The report shall be organized such that incidents are reported 
alphabetically by make, within each make alphabetically by model, and 
within each model chronologically by model year. If a manufacturer has 
not received such a claim or notice during a reporting period, the 
manufacturer need not submit a report to NHTSA for that reporting 
period.
    (c) For each incident described in paragraph (b) of this section, 
the manufacturer shall separately report the make, model, and model year 
of the vehicle or equipment, the VIN (for vehicles only), the incident 
date, the number of deaths, the number of injuries for incidents 
occurring in the United States, the State or foreign country where the 
incident occurred, each system or component of the vehicle or

[[Page 1038]]

equipment that allegedly contributed to the incident, and whether the 
incident involved a fire or rollover, as follows:
    (1) For light vehicles, the system or component involved, and the 
existence of a fire or rollover, shall be identified and coded as 
specified in Sec. 579.21(b)(2) of this part.
    (2) For medium-heavy vehicles and buses, the system or component 
involved, and the existence of a fire or rollover, shall be identified 
and coded as specified in Sec. 579.22(b)(2) of this part.
    (3) For motorcycles, the system or component involved, and the 
existence of a fire, shall be identified and coded as specified in Sec. 
579.23(b)(2) of this part.
    (4) For trailers, the system or component involved, and the 
existence of a fire, shall be identified and coded as specified in Sec. 
579.24(b)(2) of this part.
    (5) For original and replacement equipment, a written identification 
of each component of the equipment that was allegedly involved, and 
whether there was a fire, in the manufacturer's own words.
    (6) For original and replacement equipment, if the production year 
of the equipment is unknown, the manufacturer shall specify the number 
``9999'' in the field for model or production year.

[67 FR 45873, July 10, 2002, as amended at 68 FR 18143, Apr. 15, 2003; 
68 FR 35144, June 11, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 579.28  Due date of reports and other miscellaneous provisions.

    (a) Initial submission of reports. Except as provided in paragraph 
(n) of this section, the first calendar quarter for which reports are 
required under Sec. Sec. 579.21 through 579.27 of this subpart is the 
third calendar quarter of 2003.
    (b) Due date of reports. Except as provided in paragraph (n) of this 
section, each manufacturer of motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment 
shall submit each report that is required by this subpart not later than 
30 days after the last day of the reporting period. Notwithstanding the 
prior sentence, the due date for reports covering the third and fourth 
calendar quarter of 2003 and the first calendar quarter of 2004 shall be 
60 days after the last day of the reporting period. Except as provided 
in Sec. 579.27(b), if a manufacturer has not received any of the 
categories of information or documents during a quarter for which it is 
required to report pursuant to Sec. Sec. 579.21 through 579.26, the 
manufacturer's report must indicate that no relevant information or 
documents were received during that quarter. If the due date for any 
report is a Saturday, Sunday, or a Federal holiday, the report shall be 
due on the next business day.
    (c) One-time reporting of historical information. (1) No later than 
January 15, 2004:
    (i) Each manufacturer of vehicles covered by Sec. Sec. 579.21 
through 579.24 of this part shall file separate reports providing 
information on the numbers of warranty claims recorded in the 
manufacturer's warranty system, and field reports, that it received in 
each calendar quarter from July 1, 2000, to June 30, 2003, for vehicles 
manufactured in model years 1994 through 2003 (including any vehicle 
designated as a 2004 model);
    (ii) Each manufacturer of child restraint systems covered by Sec. 
579.25 of this part shall file separate reports covering the numbers of 
warranty claims recorded in the manufacturer's warranty system and 
consumer complaints (added together), and field reports, that it 
received in each calendar quarter from July 1, 2000, to June 30, 2003, 
for child restraint systems manufactured from July 1, 1998, to June 30, 
2003, and
    (iii) Each manufacturer of tires covered by Sec. 579.26 of this 
part shall file separate reports covering the numbers of warranty 
adjustments recorded in the manufacturer's warranty adjustment system 
for tires that it received in each calendar quarter from July 1, 2000, 
to June 30, 2003, for tires manufactured from July 1, 1998, to June 30, 
2003.
    (2) Each report filed under paragraph (c)(1) of this section shall 
include production data, as specified in paragraph (a) of 579.21 through 
579.26 of this part and shall identify the alleged system or component 
covered by warranty claim, warranty adjustment, or field report as 
specified in paragraph (c) of 579.21 through 579.26 of this part.
    (d) Minimal specificity. A claim or notice involving death, a claim 
or notice

[[Page 1039]]

involving injury, a claim involving property damage, a consumer 
complaint, a warranty claim or warranty adjustment, or a field report 
need not be reported if it does not identify the vehicle or equipment 
with minimal specificity. If a manufacturer initially receives a claim, 
notice, complaint, warranty claim, warranty adjustment, or field report 
in which the vehicle or equipment is not identified with minimal 
specificity and subsequently obtains information that provides the 
requisite information needed to identify the product with minimal 
specificity, the claim, etc. shall be deemed to have been received when 
the additional information is received. If a manufacturer receives a 
claim or notice involving death or injury in which the vehicle or 
equipment is not identified with minimal specificity and the matter is 
being handled by legal counsel retained by the manufacturer, the 
manufacturer shall attempt to obtain the missing minimal specificity 
information from such counsel.
    (e) Claims received by registered agents. A claim received by any 
registered agent of a manufacturer under the laws of any State, or the 
agent that any manufacturer offering motor vehicles or motor vehicle 
equipment for import has designated pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 30164(a), 
shall be deemed received by the manufacturer.
    (f) Updating of information required in reports. (1) Except as 
specified in this subsection, a manufacturer need not update its reports 
under this subpart.
    (2) With respect to each report of an incident submitted under 
paragraph (b) of Sec. Sec. 579.21 through 579.26 of this part:
    (i) If a vehicle manufacturer is not aware of the VIN, or a tire 
manufacturer is not aware of the TIN, at the time the incident is 
initially reported, the manufacturer shall submit an updated report of 
such incident in its report covering the reporting period in which the 
VIN or TIN is identified.
    (ii) If a manufacturer indicated code 99 in its report because a 
system or component had not been identified in the claim or notice that 
led to the report, and the manufacturer becomes aware during a 
subsequent calendar quarter that one or more of the specified systems or 
components allegedly contributed to the incident, the manufacturer shall 
submit an updated report of such incident in its report covering the 
reporting period in which the involved specified system(s) or 
component(s) is (are) identified.
    (iii) If one or more systems or components is identified in a 
manufacturer's report of an incident, the manufacturer need not submit 
an updated report to reflect additional systems or components allegedly 
involved in the incident that it becomes aware of in a subsequent 
reporting period.
    (iv) If the report is of an incident involving an injury and an 
injured person dies after a manufacturer has reported the injury to 
NHTSA, the manufacturer need not submit an updated report to NHTSA 
reflecting that death.
    (g) When a report involving a death is not required. A report on 
incident(s) involving one or more deaths occurring in a foreign country 
that is identified in claim(s) against a manufacturer of motor vehicles 
or motor vehicle equipment involving a vehicle or equipment that is 
identical or substantially similar to equipment that the manufacturer 
has offered for sale in the United States need not be furnished if the 
claim specifically alleges that the death was caused by a possible 
defect in a component other than one that is common to the vehicle or 
equipment that the manufacturer has offered for sale in the United 
States.
    (h) When a report involving a claim or notice is not required. If a 
manufacturer has reported a claim or notice relating to an incident 
involving death or injury, the manufacturer need not:
    (1) Report a claim or notice arising out of the incident by a person 
who was not injured physically, and
    (2) Include in its number of property damage claims a property 
damage claim arising out of the incident.
    (i) Reporting on behalf of other manufacturers. Whenever a 
fabricating manufacturer or importer submits a report on behalf of one 
or more other manufacturers (including a brand name owner), as 
authorized under Sec. 579.3(b) of this part, the submitting 
manufacturer must identify each such other manufacturer. Whenever a 
brand name owner submits a report on its own behalf, it must identify 
the fabricating

[[Page 1040]]

manufacturer of each separate product on which it is reporting.
    (j) Abbreviations. Whenever a manufacturer is required to identify a 
State in which an incident occurred, the manufacturer shall use the two-
letter abbreviations established by the United States Postal Service 
(e.g., AZ for Arizona). Whenever a manufacturer is required to identify 
a foreign country in which an incident occurred, the manufacturer shall 
use the English-language name of the country in non-abbreviated form.
    (k) Claims of confidentiality. If a manufacturer claims that any of 
the information, data, or documents that it submits is entitled to 
confidential treatment, it must make such claim in accordance with part 
512 of this chapter.
    (l) Additional related information that NHTSA may request. In 
addition to information required periodically under this subpart, NHTSA 
may request other information that may help identify a defect related to 
motor vehicle safety.
    (m) Use of the plural. As used in this part, the plural includes the 
singular and the singular includes the plural to bring within the scope 
of reporting that which might otherwise be construed to be without the 
scope.
    (n) Submission of copies of field reports. Copies of field reports 
required under this subpart shall be submitted not later than 30 days 
after reports are due pursuant to paragraphs (a) and (b) of this 
section. The first calendar quarter for which copies of field reports 
are required to be submitted under Sec. Sec. 579.21(d), 579.22(d), 
579.23(d), 579.24(d), and 579.25(d) of this subpart is the first 
calendar quarter of 2004.

[67 FR 45873, July 10, 2002, as amended at 68 FR 18143, Apr. 15, 2003; 
68 FR 20225, Apr. 24, 2003; 68 FR 35144, 35148, June 11, 2003; 68 FR 
64569, Nov. 14, 2003]

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 57869, Sept. 28, 2004, Sec. 579.28, 
was amended by revising paragraphs (b) and (n), effective Oct. 28, 2004. 
For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as 
follows:

Sec. 579.28  Due date of reports and other miscellaneous provisions.

                                * * * * *

    (b) Due date of reports. Except as provided in paragraph (n) of this 
section, each manufacturer of motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment 
shall submit each report that is required by this subpart not later than 
60 days after the last day of the reporting period.

                                * * * * *

    (n) Submission of copies of field reports. Copies of field reports 
required under this subpart shall be submitted not later than 15 days 
after reports are due pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 579.29  Manner of reporting.

    (a) Submission of reports. (1) Except as provided in this paragraph, 
each report required under paragraphs (a) through (c) of Sec. Sec. 
579.21 through 579.26 of this part must be submitted to NHTSA's early 
warning data repository identified on NHTSA's Internet homepage 
(www.nhtsa.dot.gov). A manufacturer must use templates provided at the 
early warning website, also identified on NHTSA's homepage, for 
submitting reports. For data files smaller than the size limit of the 
Internet e-mail server of the Department of Transportation, a 
manufacturer may submit a report as an attachment to an e-mail message 
to odi.ewr@nhtsa.dot.gov, using the same templates.
    (2) Each report required under Sec. 579.27 of this part may be 
submitted to NHTSA's early warning data repository as specified in 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section or by manually filling out an 
interactive form on NHTSA's early warning website.
    (b) Submission of documents. A copy of each document required under 
paragraph (d) of Sec. Sec. 579.21 through 579.26 of this part may be 
submitted in digital form using a graphic compression protocol, approved 
by NHTSA, to the NHTSA data repository, or as an attachment to an e-mail 
message, as specified in paragraph (a)(1) of this section. Any digital 
image provided by a manufacturer shall be not less than 200 or more than 
300 dpi (dots per inch) resolution. Such documents may also be submitted 
in paper form. Each document shall be identified in accordance with the 
templates provided at NHTSA's early warning Web site, which is 
identified in paragraph (a)(1) of this section.

[[Page 1041]]

    (c) Designation of manufacturer contacts. Not later than 30 days 
prior to the date of its first quarterly submission, each manufacturer 
must provide the names, office telephone numbers, postal and street 
mailing addresses, and electronic mail addresses of two employees (one 
primary and one back-up) whom NHTSA may contact for resolving issues 
that may arise concerning the submission of information and documents 
required by this part.
    (d) Manufacturer reporting identification and password. Not later 
than 30 days prior to the date of its first quarterly submission, each 
manufacturer must request a manufacturer identification number and a 
password.
    (e) Graphic compression protocol. Not later than 30 days prior to 
the date of its first quarterly submission, each manufacturer which 
wishes to submit a copy of a document in digital form, as provided in 
paragraph (b) of this section, must obtain approval from NHTSA for the 
use of such protocol.
    (f) Information and requests submitted under paragraphs (c), (d), 
and (e) of this section shall be provided in writing to the Director, 
Office of Defects Investigation, NHTSA, 400 Seventh Street, SW., 
Washington, DC 20590.

[67 FR 45873, July 10, 2002, as amended at 68 FR 35145, June 11, 2003]


<R03>
PART 580_ODOMETER DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS--Table of Contents




Sec.
580.1 Scope.
580.2 Purpose.
580.3 Definitions.
580.4 Security of title documents and power of attorney forms.
580.5 Disclosure of odometer information.
580.6 [Reserved]
580.7 Disclosure of odometer information for leased motor vehicles.
580.8 Odometer disclosure statement retention.
580.9 Odometer record retention for auction companies.
580.10 Application for assistance.
580.11 Petition for approval of alternate disclosure requirements.
580.12 Petition for extension of time.
580.13 Disclosure of odometer information by power of attorney.
580.14 Power of attorney to review title documents and acknowledge 
          disclosure.
580.15 Certification by person exercising powers of attorney.
580.16 Access of transferee to prior title and power of attorney 
          documents.
580.17 Exemptions.

Appendix A to Part 580--Secure Printing Processes and Other Secure 
          processes
Appendix B to Part 580--Disclosure Form for Title
Appendix C to Part 580--Separate Disclosure Form
Appendix D to Part 580--Disclosure Form for Leased Vehicle
Appendix E to Part 580--Power of Attorney Disclosure Form

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 32705; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 
1.50(f) and 501.8(e)(1).

    Source: 53 FR 29476, Aug. 5, 1988, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 580.1  Scope.

    This part prescribes rules requiring transferors and lessees of 
motor vehicles to make written disclosure to transferees and lessors 
respectively, concerning the odometer mileage and its accuracy as 
directed by sections 408 (a) and (e) of the Motor Vehicle Information 
and Cost Savings Act as amended, 15 U.S.C. 1988 (a) and (e). In 
addition, this part prescribes the rules requiring the retention of 
odometer disclosure statements by motor vehicle dealers, distributors 
and lessors and the retention of certain other information by auction 
companies as directed by sections 408(g) and 414 of the Motor Vehicle 
Information and Cost Savings Act as amended, 15 U.S.C. 1990(d) and 
1988(g).


<R05>
Sec. 580.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to provide purchasers of motor vehicles 
with odometer information to assist them in determining a vehicle's 
condition and value by making the disclosure of a vehicle's mileage a 
condition of title and by requiring lessees to disclose to their lessors 
the vehicle's mileage at the time the lessors transfer the vehicle. In 
addition, the purpose of this part is to preserve records that are 
needed for the proper investigation of possible violations of the Motor 
Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act and any subsequent 
prosecutorial, adjudicative or other action.

[[Page 1042]]


<R05>
Sec. 580.3  Definitions.

    All terms defined in sections 2 and 402 of the Motor Vehicle 
Information and Cost Savings Act are used in their statutory meaning. 
Other terms used in this part are defined as follows:
    Lessee means any person, or the agent for any person, to whom a 
motor vehicle has been leased for a term of at least 4 months.
    Lessor means any person, or the agent for any person, who has leased 
5 or more motor vehicles in the past 12 months.
    Mileage means actual distance that a vehicle has traveled.
    Original power of attorney means, for single copy forms, the 
document set forth by secure process which is issued by the State, and, 
for multicopy forms, any and all copies set forth by secure process 
which are issued by the State.
    Secure printing process or other secure process means any process 
which deters and detects counterfeiting and/or unauthorized reproduction 
and allows alterations to be visible to the naked eye.
    Transferee means any person to whom ownership of a motor vehicle is 
transferred, by purchase, gift, or any means other than by the creation 
of a security interest, and any person who, as agent, signs an odometer 
disclosure statement for the transferee.
    Transferor means any person who transfers his ownership of a motor 
vehicle by sale, gift, or any means other than by the creation of a 
security interest, and any person who, as agent, signs an odometer 
disclosure statement for the transferor.

[53 FR 29476, Aug. 5, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 35887, Aug. 30, 1989; 56 
FR 47686, Sept. 20, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 580.4  Security of title documents and power of attorney forms.

    Each title shall be set forth by means of a secure printing process 
or other secure process. In addition, power of attorney forms issued 
pursuant to Sec. Sec. 580.13 and 580.14 and documents which are used to 
reassign the title shall be issued by the State and shall be set forth 
by a secure process.

[54 FR 35887, Aug. 30, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 580.5  Disclosure of odometer information.

    (a) Each title, at the time it is issued to the transferee, must 
contain the mileage disclosed by the transferor when ownership of the 
vehicle was transferred and contain a space for the information required 
to be disclosed under paragraphs (c), (d), (e) and (f) of this section 
at the time of future transfer.
    (b) Any documents which are used to reassign a title shall contain a 
space for the information required to be disclosed under paragraphs (c), 
(d), (e) and (f) of this section at the time of transfer of ownership.
    (c) In connection with the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, 
each transferor shall disclose the mileage to the transferee in writing 
on the title or, except as noted below, on the document being used to 
reassign the title. In the case of a transferor in whose name the 
vehicle is titled, the transferor shall disclose the mileage on the 
title, and not on a reassignment document. This written disclosure must 
be signed by the transferor, including the printed name. In connection 
with the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle in which more than one 
person is a transferor, only one transferor need sign the written 
disclosure. In addition to the signature and printed name of the 
transferor, the written disclosure must contain the following 
information:
    (1) The odometer reading at the time of transfer (not to include 
tenths of miles);
    (2) The date of transfer;
    (3) The transferor's name and current address;
    (4) The transferee's name and current address; and
    (5) The identity of the vehicle, including its make, model, year, 
and body type, and its vehicle identification number.
    (d) In addition to the information provided under paragraph (c) of 
this section, the statement shall refer to the Federal law and shall 
state that failure to complete or providing false information may result 
in fines and/or imprisonment. Reference may also be made to applicable 
State law.

[[Page 1043]]

    (e) In addition to the information provided under paragraphs (c) and 
(d) of this section,
    (1) The transferor shall certify that to the best of his knowledge 
the odometer reading reflects the actual mileage, or;
    (2) If the transferor knows that the odometer reading reflects the 
amount of mileage in excess of the designed mechanical odometer limit, 
he shall include a statement to that effect; or
    (3) If the transferor knows that the odometer reading differs from 
the mileage and that the difference is greater than that caused by 
odometer calibration error, he shall include a statement that the 
odometer reading does not reflect the actual mileage, and should not be 
relied upon. This statement shall also include a warning notice to alert 
the transferee that a discrepancy exists between the odometer reading 
and the actual mileage.
    (f) The transferee shall sign the disclosure statement, print his 
name, and return a copy to his transferor.
    (g) If the vehicle has not been titled or if the title does not 
contain a space for the information required, the written disclosure 
shall be executed as a separate document.
    (h) No person shall sign an odometer disclosure statement as both 
the transferor and transferee in the same transaction, unless permitted 
by Sec. Sec. 580.13 or 580.14.

[53 FR 29476, Aug. 5, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 35887, Aug. 30, 1989; 56 
FR 47686, Sept. 20, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 580.6  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 580.7  Disclosure of odometer information for leased motor vehicles.

    (a) Before executing any transfer of ownership document, each lessor 
of a leased motor vehicle shall notify the lessee in writing that the 
lessee is required to provide a written disclosure to the lessor 
regarding the mileage. This notice shall contain a reference to the 
federal law and shall state that failure to complete or providing false 
information may result in fines and/or imprisonment. Reference may also 
be made to applicable State law.
    (b) In connection with the transfer of ownership of the leased motor 
vehicle, the lessee shall furnish to the lessor a written statement 
regarding the mileage of the vehicle. This statement must be signed by 
the lessee and, in addition to the information required by paragraph (a) 
of this section, shall contain the following information:
    (1) The printed name of the person making the disclosure;
    (2) The current odometer reading (not to include tenths of miles);
    (3) The date of the statement;
    (4) The lessee's name and current address;
    (5) The lessor's name and current address;
    (6) The identity of the vehicle, including its make, model, year, 
and body type, and its vehicle identification number;
    (7) The date that the lessor notified the lessee of disclosure 
requirements;
    (8) The date that the completed disclosure statement was received by 
the lessor; and
    (9) The signature of the lessor.
    (c) In addition to the information provided under paragraphs (a) and 
(b) of this section,
    (1) The lessee shall certify that to the best of his knowledge the 
odometer reading reflects the actual mileage; or
    (2) If the lessee knows that the odometer reading reflects the 
amount of mileage in excess of the designed mechanical odometer limit, 
he shall include a statement to that effect; or
    (3) If the lessee knows that the odometer reading differs from the 
mileage and that the difference is greater than that caused by odometer 
calibration error, he shall include a statement that the odometer 
reading is not the actual mileage and should not be relied upon.
    (d) If the lessor transfers the leased vehicle without obtaining 
possession of it, the lessor may indicate on the title the mileage 
disclosed by the lessee under paragraph (b) and (c) of this section, 
unless the lessor has reason to believe that the disclosure by the 
lessee does not reflect the actual mileage of the vehicle.


<R05>
Sec. 580.8  Odometer disclosure statement retention.

    (a) Dealers and distributors of motor vehicles who are required by 
this part to execute an odometer disclosure

[[Page 1044]]

statement shall retain for five years a photostat, carbon or other 
facsimile copy of each odometer mileage statement which they issue and 
receive. They shall retain all odometer disclosure statements at their 
primary place of business in an order that is appropriate to business 
requirements and that permits systematic retrieval.
    (b) Lessors shall retain, for five years following the date they 
transfer ownership of the leased vehicle, each odometer disclosure 
statement which they receive from a lessee. They shall retain all 
odometer disclosure statements at their primary place of business in an 
order that is appropriate to business requirements and that permits 
systematic retrieval.
    (c) Dealers and distributors of motor vehicles who are granted a 
power of attorney by their transferor pursuant to Sec. 580.13, or by 
their transferee pursuant to Sec. 580.14, shall retain for five years a 
photostat, carbon, or other facsimile copy of each power of attorney 
that they receive. They shall retain all powers of attorney at their 
primary place of business in an order that is appropriate to business 
requirements and that permits systematic retrieval.

[53 FR 29476, Aug. 5, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 35888, Aug. 30, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 580.9  Odometer record retention for auction companies.

    Each auction company shall establish and retain at its primary place 
of business in an order that is appropriate to business requirements and 
that permits systematic retrieval, for five years following the date of 
sale of each motor vehicle, the following records:
    (a) The name of the most recent owner (other than the auction 
company);
    (b) The name of the buyer;
    (c) The vehicle identification number; and
    (d) The odometer reading on the date which the auction company took 
possession of the motor vehicle.


<R05>
Sec. 580.10  Application for assistance.

    (a) A State may apply to NHTSA for assistance in revising its laws 
to comply with the requirements of 408(d) (1) and (2) of the Motor 
Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, 15 U.S.C. 1988(d) (1) and (2) 
and Sec. Sec. 580.4 and 580.5 of this part.
    (b) Each application filed under section shall--
    (1) Be written in the English language;
    (2) Be submitted, to the Office of Chief Counsel, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 
20590;
    (3) Include a copy of current motor vehicle titling and/or 
disclosure requirements in effect in the State; and
    (4) Include a draft of legislation or regulations intended to amend 
or revise current State motor vehicle titling and/or disclosure 
requirements to conform with Federal requirements.
    (c) The agency will respond to the applicant, in writing, and 
provide a list of the Federal statutory and/or regulatory requirements 
that the State may have failed to include in its proposal and indicate 
if any sections of the proposal appear to conflict with Federal 
requirements.


<R05>
Sec. 580.11  Petition for approval of alternate disclosure requirements.

    (a) A State may petition NHTSA for approval of disclosure 
requirements which differ from the disclosure requirements of Sec. Sec. 
580.5, 580.7, or 580.13(f) of this part.
    (b) Each petition filed under this section shall--
    (1) Be written in the English language;
    (2) Be submitted to the Office of Chief Counsel, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 
20590;
    (3) Set forth the motor vehicle disclosure requirements in effect in 
the State, including a copy of the applicable State law or regulation; 
and
    (4) Explain how the State motor vehicle disclosure requirements are 
consistent with the purposes of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost 
Savings Act.
    (c) Notice of the petition and an initial determination pending a 
30-day comment period will be published in the Federal Register. Notice 
of final grant or denial of a petition for approval of alternate motor 
vehicle disclosure requirements will be published in the Federal 
Register. The effect of

[[Page 1045]]

the grant of a petition is to relieve a State from responsibility to 
conform the State disclosure requirements with Sec. Sec. 580.5, 580.7, 
or 580.13(f), as applicable, for as long as the approved alternate 
disclosure requirements remain in effect in that State. The effect of a 
denial is to require a State to conform to the requirements of 
Sec. Sec. 580.5, 580.7 or 580.13(f), as applicable, of this part until 
such time as the NHTSA approves any alternate motor vehicle disclosure 
requirements.

[53 FR 29476, Aug. 5, 1988, as amended at 56 FR 47686, Sept. 20, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 580.12  Petition for extension of time.

    (a) If a State cannot conform its laws to achieve compliance with 
this part by April 29, 1989, the State may petition for an extension of 
time.
    (b) Each petition filed under this section shall--
    (1) Be written in the English language;
    (2) Be submitted, by February 28, 1989, to the Office of Chief 
Counsel, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh 
Street SW., Washington, DC, 20590;
    (3) Set forth a chronological analysis of the efforts the State has 
taken to meet the deadline, the reasons why it did not do so, the length 
of time desired for extension and a description of the steps to be taken 
while the extension is in effect.
    (c) Notice of either the grant or denial of the petition is issued 
to the petitioner and will be published in the Federal Register.
    (d) A petition for a renewal of an extension of time must be filed 
no later than 30 days prior to the termination of the extension of time 
granted by the Agency. A petition for a renewal of an extension of time 
must meet the same requirements as the original petition for an 
extension of time.
    (e) If a petition for a renewal of the extension of time which meets 
the requirements of Sec. 580.12(b) is filed, the extension of time will 
continue until a decision is made on the renewal petition.


<R05>
Sec. 580.13  Disclosure of odometer information by power of attorney.

    (a) If the transferor's title is physically held by a lienholder, or 
if the transferor to whom the title was issued by the State has lost his 
title and the transferee obtains a duplicate title on behalf of the 
transferor, and if otherwise permitted by State law, the transferor may 
give a power of attorney to his transferee for the purpose of mileage 
disclosure. The power of attorney shall be on a form issued by the State 
to the transferee that is set forth by means of a secure printing 
process or other secure process, and shall contain, in part A, a space 
for the information required to be disclosed under paragraphs (b), (c), 
(d), and (e) of this section. If a State permits the use of a power of 
attorney in the situation described in Sec. 580.14(a), the form must 
also contain, in part B, a space for the information required to be 
disclosed under Sec. 580.14, and, in part C, a space for the 
certification required to be made under Sec. 580.15.
    (b) In connection with the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, 
each transferor to whom a title was issued by the State whose title is 
physically held by a lienholder or whose title has been lost, and who 
elects to give his transferee a power of attorney for the purpose of 
mileage disclosure, must appoint the transferee his attorney-in-fact for 
the purpose of mileage disclosure and disclose the mileage on the power 
of attorney form issued by the State. This written disclosure must be 
signed by the transferor, including the printed name, and contain the 
following information:
    (1) The odometer reading at the time of transfer (not to include 
tenths of miles);
    (2) The date of transfer;
    (3) The transferor's name and current address;
    (4) The transferee's name and current address; and
    (5) The identity of the vehicle, including its make, model year, 
body type and vehicle identification number.
    (c) In addition to the information provided under paragraph (b) of 
this section, the power of attorney form shall refer to the Federal 
odometer law

[[Page 1046]]

and state that providing false information or the failure of the person 
granted the power of attorney to submit the form to the State may result 
in fines and/or imprisonment. Reference may also be made to applicable 
State law.
    (d) In addition to the information provided under paragraphs (b) and 
(c) of this section:
    (1) The transferor shall certify that to the best of his knowledge 
the odometer reading reflects the actual mileage; or
    (2) If the transferor knows that the odometer reading reflects 
mileage in excess of the designed mechanical odometer limit, he shall 
include a statement to that effect; or
    (3) If the transferor knows that the odometer reading differs from 
the mileage and the difference is greater than that caused by a 
calibration error, he shall include a statement that the odometer 
reading does not reflect the actual mileage and should not be relied 
upon. This statement shall also include a warning notice to alert the 
transferee that a discrepancy exists between the odometer reading and 
the actual mileage.
    (e) The transferee shall sign the power of attorney form, print his 
name, and return a copy of the power of attorney form to the transferor.
    (f) Upon receipt of the transferor's title, the transferee shall 
complete the space for mileage disclosure on the title exactly as the 
mileage was disclosed by the transferor on the power of attorney form. 
The transferee shall submit the original power of attorney form to the 
State that issued it, with a copy of the transferor's title or with the 
actual title when the transferee submits a new title application at the 
same time. The State shall retain the power of attorney form and title 
for three years or a period equal to the State titling record retention 
period, whichever is shorter. If the mileage disclosed on the power of 
attorney form is lower than the mileage appearing on the title, the 
power of attorney is void and the dealer shall not complete the mileage 
disclosure on the title.

[54 FR 35888, Aug. 30, 1989, as amended at 54 FR 40083, Sept. 29, 1989; 
56 FR 47686, Sept. 20, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 580.14  Power of attorney to review title documents and acknowledge 
disclosure.

    (a) In circumstances where part A of a secure power of attorney form 
has been used pursuant to Sec. 580.13 of this part, and if otherwise 
permitted by State law, a transferee may give a power of attorney to his 
transferor to review the title and any reassignment documents for 
mileage discrepancies, and if no discrepancies are found, to acknowledge 
disclosure on the title. The power of attorney shall be on part B of the 
form referred to in Sec. 580.13(a), which shall contain a space for the 
information required to be disclosed under paragraphs (b), (c), (d), and 
(e) of this section and, in part C, a space for the certification 
required to be made under Sec. 580.15.
    (b) The power of attorney must include a mileage disclosure from the 
transferor to the transferee and must be signed by the transferor, 
including the printed name, and contain the following information:
    (1) The odometer reading at the time of transfer (not to include 
tenths of miles);
    (2) The date of transfer;
    (3) The transferor's name and current address;
    (4) The transferee's name and current address; and
    (5) The identity of the vehicle, including its make, model year, 
body type and vehicle identification number.
    (c) In addition to the information provided under paragraph (b) of 
this section, the power of attorney form shall refer to the Federal 
odometer law and state that providing false information or the failure 
of the person granted the power of attorney to submit the form to the 
State may result in fines and/or imprisonment. Reference may also be 
made to applicable State law.
    (d) In addition to the information provided under paragraphs (b) and 
(c) of this section:
    (1) The transferor shall certify that to the best of his knowledge 
the odometer reading reflects the actual mileage;
    (2) If the transferor knows that the odometer reading reflects 
mileage in excess of the designed mechanical

[[Page 1047]]

odometer limit, he shall include a statement to that effect; or
    (3) If the transferor knows that the odometer reading differs from 
the mileage and the difference is greater than that caused by a 
calibration error, he shall include a statement that the odometer 
reading does not reflect the actual mileage and should not be relied 
upon. This statement shall also include a warning notice to alert the 
transferee that a discrepancy exists between the odometer reading and 
the actual mileage.
    (e) The transferee shall sign the power of attorney form, and print 
his name.
    (f) The transferor shall give a copy of the power of attorney form 
to his transferee.

[54 FR 35888, Aug. 30, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 580.15  Certification by person exercising powers of attorney.

    (a) A person who exercises a power of attorney under both Sec. Sec. 
580.13 and 580.14 must complete a certification that he has disclosed on 
the title document the mileage as it was provided to him on the power of 
attorney form, and that upon examination of the title and any 
reassignment documents, the mileage disclosure he has made on the title 
pursuant to the power of attorney is greater than that previously stated 
on the title and reassignment documents. This certification shall be 
under part C of the same form as the powers of attorney executed under 
Sec. Sec. 580.13 and 580.14 and shall include:
    (1) The signature and printed name of the person exercising the 
power of attorney;
    (2) The address of the person exercising the power of attorney; and
    (3) The date of the certification.
    (b) If the mileage reflected by the transferor on the power of 
attorney is less than that previously stated on the title and 
anyreassignment documents, the power of attorney shall be void.

[54 FR 35889, Aug. 30, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 580.16  Access of transferee to prior title and power of attorney 
documents.

    (a) In circumstances in which a power of attorney has been used 
pursuant to Sec. 580.13 of this part, if a subsequent transferee elects 
to return to his transferor to sign the disclosure on the title when the 
transferor obtains the title and does not give his transferor a power of 
attorney to review the title and reassignment documents, upon the 
transferee's request, the transferor shall show to the transferee a copy 
of the power of attorney that he received from his transferor.
    (b) Upon request of a purchaser, a transferor who was granted a 
power of attorney by his transferor and who holds the title to the 
vehicle in his own name, must show to the purchaser the copy of the 
previous owner's title and the power of attorney form.

[54 FR 35889, Aug. 30, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 580.17  Exemptions.

    Notwithstanding the requirements of Sec. Sec. 580.5 and 580.7:
    (a) A transferor or a lessee of any of the following motor vehicles 
need not disclose the vehicle's odometer mileage:
    (1) A vehicle having a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating, as defined in 
Sec. 571.3 of this title, of more than 16,000 pounds;
    (2) A vehicle that is not self-propelled;
    (3) A vehicle that was manufactured in a model year beginning at 
least ten years before January 1 of the calendar year in which the 
transfer occurs; or

    Example to paragraph (a)(3): For vehicle transfers occurring during 
calendar year 1998, model year 1988 or older vehicles are exempt.

    (4) A vehicle sold directly by the manufacturer to any agency of the 
United States in conformity with contractual specifications.
    (b) A transferor of a new vehicle prior to its first transfer for 
purposes other than resale need not disclose the vehicle's odometer 
mileage.
    (c) A lessor of any of the vehicles listed in paragraph (a) of this 
section need not notify the lessee of any of these vehicles of the 
disclosure requirements of Sec. 580.7.

[53 FR 29476, Aug. 5, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 35888, Aug. 30, 1989. 
Redesignated at 62 FR 47765, Sept. 11, 1997; 63 FR 52632, Oct. 1, 1998]

[[Page 1048]]

   Appendix A to Part 580--Secure Printing Processes and Other Secure 
                                Processes

    1. Methods to deter or detect counterfeiting and/or unauthorized 
reproduction.
    (a) Intaglio printing--a printing process utilized in the production 
of bank-notes and other security documents whereby an engraved plate 
meets the paper under extremely high pressure forcing the paper into the 
incisions below the surface of the plate.
    (b) Intaglio Printing With Latent Images--a printing process 
utilized in the production of bank-notes and other security documents 
whereby an engraved plate meets the paper under extremely high pressure 
forcing the paper into the incisions below the surface of the plate. The 
three dimensional nature of intaglio printing creates latent images that 
aid in verification of authenticity and deter counterfeiting.
    (c) High Resolution Printing--a printing process which achieves 
excellent art clarity and detail quality approaching that of the 
intaglio process.
    (d) Micro-line Printing--a reduced line of type that appears to be a 
solid line to the naked eye but contains readable intelligence under 
strong magnification.
    (e) Pantograph Void Feature--wording incorporated into a pantograph 
by varying screen density in the pantograph. The wording will appear 
when attempts are made to photocopy on color copiers.
    (f) Hologram--a defraction foil substrate, produced from a negative 
which was made by splitting a laser beam into two separate beams to 
produce a three dimensional effect.
    (g) Security Paper--paper containing a security watermark and/or a 
security thread.
    2. Methods to allow alterations to be visible to the naked eye.
    (a) Erasure Sensitive Background Inks--a process whereby the text is 
printed in a dark color ink over a fine line erasure-sensitive prismatic 
ink tint.
    (b) Security Lamination--retro-reflective security laminate is 
placed over vital information after it has been entered to allow for 
detection of attempts to alter this information.
    (c) Security Paper--paper which has been chemically treated to 
detect chemical alterations.

            Appendix B to Part 580--Disclosure Form for Title

                      Odometer Disclosure Statement

    Federal law (and State law, if applicable) requires that you state 
the mileage in connection with the transfer of ownership. Failure to 
complete or providing a false statement may result in fines and/or 
imprisonment.
    I state that the odometer now reads ------ (no tenths) miles and to 
the best of my knowledge that it reflects the actual mileage of the 
vehicle described herein, unless one of the following statements is 
checked.
    --(1) I hereby certify that to the best of my knowledge the odometer 
reading reflects the amount of mileage in excess of its mechanical 
limits.
    --(2) I hereby certify that the odometer reading is NOT the actual 
mileage. WARNING--ODOMETER DISCREPANCY.

________________________________________________________________________

(Transferor's Signature)

________________________________________________________________________

(Transferee's Signature)

________________________________________________________________________

(Printed name)

________________________________________________________________________

(Printed name)

Date of Statement_______________________________________________________

Transferee's Name_______________________________________________________
Transferee's Address____________________________________________________

 (Street)

________________________________________________________________________

(City) (State) (ZIP Code)

            Appendix C to Part 580--Separate Disclosure Form

                      Odometer Disclosure Statement

    Federal law (and State law, if applicable) requires that you state 
the mileage upon transfer of ownership. Failure to complete or providing 
a false statement may result in fines and/or imprisonment.
    I, ------------ (transferor's name, Print) state that the odometer 
now reads -------- (no tenths) miles and to the best of my knowledge 
that it reflects the actual mileage of the vehicle described below, 
unless one of the following statements is checked.
    --(1) I hereby certify that to the best of my knowledge the odometer 
reading reflects the amount of mileage in excess of its mechanical 
limits.
    --(2) I hereby certify that the odometer reading is NOT the actual 
mileage. WARNING--ODOMETER DISCREPANCY.

Make____________________________________________________________________
Model___________________________________________________________________
Body Type_______________________________________________________________
Vehicle Identification Number___________________________________________
Year____________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________
(Transferor's Signature)
________________________________________________________________________
(Printed name)
Transferor's Address____________________________________________________

[[Page 1049]]

 (Street)
________________________________________________________________________
 (City) (State) (ZIP Code)
Date of Statement_______________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________
(Transferee's Signature)
________________________________________________________________________
(Printed name)
Transferee's Name_______________________________________________________
Transferee's Address____________________________________________________
 (Street)
________________________________________________________________________
 (City) (State) (ZIP Code)

       Appendix D to Part 580--Disclosure Form for Leased Vehicle

             Odometer Disclosure Statement (Leased Vehicle)

    Federal law (and State law, if applicable) requires that the lessee 
disclose the mileage to the lessor in connection with the transfer of 
ownership. Failure to complete or making a false statement may result in 
fines and/or imprisonment. Complete disclosure form below and return to 
lessor.
    I,------------ (name of person making disclosure, Print) state that 
the odometer now reads -------- (no tenths) miles and to the best of my 
knowledge that it reflects the actual mileage of the vehicle described 
below, unless one of the following statements is checked.
    --(1) I hereby certify that to the best of my knowledge the odometer 
reading reflects the amount of mileage in excess of its mechanical 
limits.
    --(2) I hereby certify that the odometer reading is NOT the actual 
mileage.

Make____________________________________________________________________
Model___________________________________________________________________
Body Type_______________________________________________________________
Vehicle Identification Number___________________________________________
Year____________________________________________________________________
Lessee's Name___________________________________________________________
Lessee's Address________________________________________________________
 (Street)
________________________________________________________________________
 (City) (State) (ZIP Code)
Lessee's Signature______________________________________________________
Date of Statement_______________________________________________________
Lessor's Name___________________________________________________________
Lessor's Address________________________________________________________
 (Street)
________________________________________________________________________
 (City) (State) (ZIP Code)
Date Disclosure Form Sent to Lessee_____________________________________
Date Completed Disclosure Form Received from Lessee_____________________
Lessor's Signature______________________________________________________

        Appendix E to Part 580--Power of Attorney Disclosure Form

    Warning: This form may be used only when title is physically held by 
lienholder or has been lost. This form must be submitted to the state by 
the person exercising powers of attorney. Failure to do so may result in 
fines and/or imprisonment.
    VEHICLE DESCRIPTION

    Year -------- Make --------------
    Model -------------- Body Type --------------
    Vehicle Identification Number ------------------------

              Part A. Power of Attorney to Disclose Mileage

    Federal law (and State Law, if applicable) requires that you state 
the mileage upon transfer of ownership. Providing a false statement may 
result in fines and/or imprisonment.
I, ------------------------------ (transferor's name, Print) appoint --
---------------------------- (transferee's name, Print) as my attorney-
in-fact, to disclose the mileage, on the title for the vehicle described 
above, exactly as stated in my following disclosure.
    I state that the odometer now reads ------------ (no tenths) miles 
and to the best of my knowledge that it reflects the actual mileage 
unless one of the following statements is checked.
    ---- (1) I hereby certify that to the best of my knowledge the 
odometer reading reflect the mileage in excess of its mechanical limits.
    ---- (2) I hereby certify that the odometer reading is NOT the 
actual mileage. WARNING--ODOMETER DISCREPANCY.
________________________________________________________________________
(Transferor's Signature)
________________________________________________________________________
(Printed Name)

Transferor's Address (Street) ------------------------

(City) ------------ (State) ---- (ZIP Code) ----------.

Date of Statement ----------------
________________________________________________________________________
(Transferee's Signature)
________________________________________________________________________
(Printed Name)

Transferee's Name ------------------------

Transferee's Address (Street) ------------------------

(City) ------------ (State) ---- (ZIP Code) ----------.

  Part B. Power of Attorney to Review Title Documents and Acknowledge 
                               Disclosure.

    (Part B is invalid unless Part A has been completed.)
I, ------------------------------ (transferee's name, Print) appoint --
---------------------------- (transferor's name, Print) as my attorney-
in-fact, to sign

[[Page 1050]]

the mileage disclosure, on the title for the vehicle described above, 
only if the disclosure is exactly as the disclosure completed below.
________________________________________________________________________
(Transferee's Signature)
________________________________________________________________________
(Printed Name)

Transferee's Name ------------------------

Transferee's Address (Street) ------------------------

(City) ------------ (State) ---- (ZIP Code) ----------.

    Federal law (and State Law, if applicable) requires that you state 
the mileage upon transfer of ownership. Providing a false statement may 
result in fines and/or imprisonment.

    I, -------------------- (transferor's name, Print) state that the 
odometer now reads ------------ (no tenths) miles and to the best of my 
knowledge that it reflects the actual mileage unless one of the 
following statements is checked.
    ---- (1) I hereby certify that to the best of my knowledge the 
odometer reading reflect the mileage in excess of its mechanical limits.
    ---- (2) I hereby certify that the odometer reading is NOT the 
actual mileage. WARNING--ODOMETER DISCREPANCY.
________________________________________________________________________
(Transferor's Signature)
________________________________________________________________________
(Printed Name)

Transferor's Address (Street) ------------------------

(City) ------------ (State) ---- (ZIP Code) ----------.

Date of Statement ----------------

    Part C. Certification
    (To Be Completed When parts A and B Have Been Used)

    I, ----------------, (person exercising above powers of attorney, 
Print), hereby certify that the mileage I have disclosed on the title 
document is consistent with that provided to me in the above power of 
attorney. Further, upon examination of the title and any reassignment 
documents for the vehicle described above, the mileage diclosure I have 
made on the title pursuant to the power of attorney is greater than that 
previously stated on the title and reassignment documents. This 
certification is not intended to create, nor does it create any new or 
additional liability under Federal or State law.
________________________________________________________________________
(Signature)
________________________________________________________________________
(Printed Name)

________________________________________________________________________
Address (Street)

(City) ---------------- (State) ---- (ZIP Code) ----------
Date ----------------

[54 FR 9816, Mar. 8, 1989, as amended at 54 FR 35889, Aug. 30, 1989]


<R03>
PART 581_BUMPER STANDARD--Table of Contents




Sec.
581.1 Scope.
581.2 Purpose.
581.3 Application.
581.4 Definitions.
581.5 Requirements.
581.6 Conditions.
581.7 Test procedures.
581.8 Exemptions.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 32502; 322, 30111, 30115, 30117 and 30166; 
delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 42 FR 24059, May 12, 1977, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 581.1  Scope.

    This standard establishes requirements for the impact resistance of 
vehicles in low speed front and rear collisions.


<R05>
Sec. 581.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this standard is to reduce physical damage to the 
front and rear ends of a passenger motor vehicle from low speed 
collisions.


<R05>
Sec. 581.3  Application.

    This standard applies to passenger motor vehicles other than 
multipurpose passenger vehicles and low-speed vehicles as defined in 49 
CFR part 571.3(b).

[63 FR 33217, June 17, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 581.4  Definitions.

    All terms defined in 49 U.S.C. 32101 are used as defined therein.
    Bumper face bar means any component of the bumper system that 
contacts the impact ridge of the pendulum test device.

[42 FR 24059, May 12, 1977, as amended at 64 FR 2862, Jan. 19, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 581.5  Requirements.

    (a) Each vehicle shall meet the damage criteria of Sec. Sec. 
581.5(c)(1) through 581.5(c)(9) when impacted by a pendulum-type test 
device in accordance

[[Page 1051]]

with the procedures of Sec. 581.7(b), under the conditions of Sec. 
581.6, at an impact speed of 1.5 m.p.h., and when impacted by a 
pendulum-type test device in accordance with the procedures of Sec. 
581.7(a) at 2.5 m.p.h., followed by an impact into a fixed collision 
barrier that is perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle, 
while traveling longitudinally forward, then longitudinally rearward, 
under the conditions of Sec. 581.6, at 2.5 m.p.h.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) Protective criteria. (1) Each lamp or reflective device except 
license plate lamps shall be free of cracks and shall comply with 
applicable visibility requirements of S5.3.1.1 of Standard No. 108 
(Sec. 571.108 of this chapter). The aim of each headlamp installed on 
the vehicle shall be adjustable to within the beam aim inspection limits 
specified in Table 1 of SAE Recommended Practice J599 AUG97, measured 
with the aiming method appropriate for that headlamp.
    (2) The vehicle's hood, trunk, and doors shall operate in the normal 
manner.
    (3) The vehicle's fuel and cooling systems shall have no leaks or 
constricted fluid passages and all sealing devices and caps shall 
operate in the normal manner.
    (4) The vehicle's exhaust system shall have no leaks or 
constrictions.
    (5) The vehicle's propulsion, suspension, steering, and braking 
systems shall remain in adjustment and shall operate in the normal 
manner.
    (6) A pressure vessel used to absorb impact energy in an exterior 
protection system by the accumulation of gas pressure or hydraulic 
pressure shall not suffer loss of gas or fluid accompanied by separation 
of fragments from the vessel.
    (7) The vehicle shall not touch the test device, except on the 
impact ridge shown in Figures 1 and 2, with a force that exceeds 2000 
pounds on the combined surfaces of Planes A and B of the test device.
    (8) The exterior surfaces shall have no separations of surface 
materials, paint, polymeric coatings, or other covering materials from 
the surface to which they are bonded, and no permanent deviations from 
their original contours 30 minutes after completion of each pendulum and 
barrier impact, except where such damage occurs to the bumper face bar 
and the components and associated fasteners that directly attach the 
bumper face bar to the chassis frame.
    (9) Except as provided in Sec. 581.5(c)(8), there shall be no 
breakage or release of fasteners or joints.

[42 FR 24059, May 12, 1977, as amended at 42 FR 38909, Aug. 1, 1977; 43 
FR 40231, Sept. 11, 1978; 47 FR 21837, May 20, 1982; 64 FR 16360, Apr. 
5, 1999; 64 FR 49092, Sept. 10, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 581.6  Conditions.

    The vehicle shall meet the requirements of Sec. 581.5 under the 
following conditions.
    (a) General. (1) The vehicle is at unloaded vehicle weight.
    (2) The front wheels are in the straight ahead position.
    (3) Tires are inflated to the vehicle manufacturer's recommended 
pressure for the specified loading condition.
    (4) Brakes are disengaged and the transmission is in neutral.
    (5) Trailer hitches, license plate brackets, and headlamp washers 
are removed from the vehicle. Running lights, fog lamps, and equipment 
mounted on the bumper face bar are removed from the vehicle if they are 
optional equipment.
    (b) Pendulum test conditions. The following conditions apply to the 
pendulum test procedures of Sec. 581.7 (a) and (b).
    (1) The test device consists of a block with one side contoured as 
specified in Figure 1 and Figure 2 with the impact ridge made of A1S1 
4130 steel hardened to 34 Rockwell ``C.'' The impact ridge and the 
surfaces in Planes A and B of the test device are finished with a 
surface roughness of 32 as specified by SAE Recommended Practice J449A, 
June 1963. From the point of release of the device until the onset of 
rebound, the pendulum suspension system holds Plane A vertical, with the 
arc described by any point on the impact line lying in a vertical plane 
(for Sec. 581.7(a), longitudinal; for Sec. 581.7(b), at an angle of 
30[deg] to a vertical longitudinal plane) and having a constant radius 
of not less than 11 feet.

[[Page 1052]]

    (2) With Plane A vertical, the impact line shown in Figures 1 and 2 
is horizontal at the same height as the test device's center of 
percussion.
    (3) The effective impacting mass of the test device is equal to the 
mass of the tested vehicle.
    (4) When impacted by the test device, the vehicle is at rest on a 
level rigid concrete surface.
    (c) Barrier test condition. At the onset of a barrier impact, the 
vehicle's engine is operating at idling speed in accordance with the 
manufacturer's specifications. Vehicle systems that are not necessary to 
the movement of the vehicle are not operating during impact.

(Authority: Sec. 102, Pub. L. 92-513, 86 Stat. 947 (15 U.S.C. 1912); 
secs. 103, 119, Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 (15 U.S.C. 1392, 1407); 
delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50 and 501.7)

[42 FR 24059, May 12, 1977, as amended at 42 FR 38909, Aug. 1, 1977; 48 
FR 43331, Sept. 23, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 581.7  Test procedures.

    (a) Longitudinal impact test procedures. (1) Impact the vehicle's 
front surface and its rear surface two times each with the impact line 
at any height from 16 to 20 inches, inclusive, in accordance with the 
following procedure.
    (2) For impacts at a height of 20 inches, place the test device 
shown in Figure 1 so that Plane A is vertical and the impact line is 
horizontal at the specified height.
    (3) For impacts at a height between 20 inches and 16 inches, place 
the test device shown in Figure 2 so that Plane A is vertical and the 
impact line is horizontal at a height within the range.
    (4) For each impact, position the test device so that the impact 
line is at least 2 inches apart in vertical direction from its position 
in any prior impact, unless the midpoint of the impact line with respect 
to the vehicle is to be more than 12 inches apart laterally from its 
position in any prior impact.
    (5) For each impact, align the vehicle so that it touches, but does 
not move, the test device, with the vehicle's longitudinal centerline 
perpendicular to the plane that includes Plane A of the test device and 
with the test device inboard of the vehicle corner test positions 
specified in Sec. 581.7(b).
    (6) Move the test device away from the vehicle, then release it to 
impact the vehicle.
    (7) Perform the impacts at intervals of not less than 30 minutes.
    (b) Corner impact test procedure. (1) Impact a front corner and a 
rear corner of the vehicle once each with the impact line at a height of 
20 inches and impact the other front corner and the other rear corner 
once each with the impact line at any height from 16 to 20 inches, 
inclusive, in accordance with the following procedure.
    (2) For an impact at a height of 20 inches, place the test device 
shown in Figure 1 so that Plane A is vertical and the impact line is 
horizontal at the specified height.
    (3) For an impact at a height between 16 inches and 20 inches, place 
the test device shown in Figure 2 so that Plane A is vertical and the 
impact line is horizontal at a height within the range.
    (4) Align the vehicle so that a vehicle corner touches, but does not 
move, the lateral center of the test device with Plane A of the test 
device forming an angle of 60 degrees with a vertical longitudinal 
plane.
    (5) Move the test device away from the vehicle, then release it to 
impact the vehicle.
    (6) Perform the impact at intervals of not less than 30 minutes.

[[Page 1053]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.197


[42 FR 24059, May 12, 1977, as amended at 42 FR 38909, Aug. 1, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 581.8  Exemptions.

    A manufacturer of a passenger motor vehicle to which a bumper 
standard issued under this part applies may apply to the Administrator:
    (a) For rulemaking as provided in part 552 of this chapter to exempt 
a class of passenger motor vehicles from all or any part of a bumper 
standard issued under this part on the basis that the class of vehicles 
has been manufactured for a special use and that compliance with the 
standard would unreasonably interfere with the special use of the class 
of vehicle; or
    (b) To exempt a make or model of passenger motor vehicle on the 
basis set forth in paragraph (a) of this section or part 555 of this 
chapter.
    (c) An application filed for exemption on the basis of paragraph (a) 
of this section shall contain the information specified in Sec. 555.5 
of this chapter, and set forth data, views, and arguments in support 
that the vehicle has been manufactured for a special use and that 
compliance with the bumper standard would interfere unreasonably with 
the special use of the vehicle.
    (d) An application filed for exemption under part 555 of this 
chapter shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of that part.
    (e) The NHTSA shall process exemption applications in accordance 
with Sec. 555.7 of this chapter. An exemption granted a manufacturer on 
the basis of paragraph (a) of this section is indefinite in length but 
expires when the manufacturer ceases production of the exempted vehicle, 
or when the exempted vehicle as produced has been so modified from its 
original design that the Administrator decides that it is no longer 
manufactured for the special use upon which the application for its 
exemption was based. The Administrator may terminate an exemption in the

[[Page 1054]]

manner set forth in Sec. Sec. 555.8(c) and 555.8(f) of this chapter, 
and for the reasons set forth in Sec. 555.8(d) of this chapter. An 
exempted vehicle shall be labeled in accordance with Sec. 555.9 of this 
chapter. Information relating to an application shall be available to 
the public in the manner specified in Sec. 555.10 of this chapter.

[64 FR 2862, Jan. 19, 1999]


<R03>
PART 582_INSURANCE COST INFORMATION REGULATION--Table of Contents




Sec.
582.1 Scope.
582.2 Purpose.
582.3 Definitions.
582.4 Requirements.
582.5 Information form.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 32303; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 
1.50(f).

    Source: 40 FR 4918, Feb. 3, 1975, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 582.1  Scope.

    This part requires automobile dealers to make available to 
prospective purchasers information reflecting differences in insurance 
costs for different makes and models of passenger motor vehicles based 
upon differences in damage susceptibility and crashworthiness, pursuant 
to section 201(e) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act 
(15 U.S.C. 1941(e)), herein ``the Cost Savings Act.''


<R05>
Sec. 582.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to enable prospective purchasers to 
compare differences in auto insurance costs for the various makes and 
models of passenger motor vehicles, based upon differences in damage 
susceptibility and crashworthiness, and to realize any savings in 
collision insurance resulting from differences in damageability, and any 
savings in medical payment insurance resulting from differences in 
crashworthiness.


<R05>
Sec. 582.3  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory definitions. All terms used in this part which are 
defined in section 2 of the Cost Savings Act are used as so defined.
    (b) Definitions used in this part. (1) Automobile dealer means any 
person who engages in the retail sale of new automobiles as a trade or 
business.
    (2) Collision insurance means insurance that reimburses the insured 
party for physical damage to his property resulting from automobile 
accidents.
    (3) Insurance cost means the insurance premium rate, as expressed in 
appropriate indices, for collision and medical payment, including 
personal injury protection in no-fault states.
    (4) Medical payment insurance means insurance that reimburses the 
insured party for medical expenses sustained by himself, his family, and 
his passengers in automobile accidents.

[40 FR 4918, Feb. 3, 1975, as amended at 58 FR 12550, Mar. 5, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 582.4  Requirements.

    (a) Each automobile dealer shall make available to prospective 
purchasers, without charge, the information specified in Sec. 582.5, at 
each location where he or she offers new vehicles for sale.
    (b) Each automobile dealer shall maintain a sufficient quantity of 
booklets containing the information specified in Sec. 582.5 to assure 
that they are available for retention by prospective purchasers.
    (c) The booklets shall be revised to reflect the updated data 
published by NHTSA each year within 30 days of NHTSA's publication of 
the data in the Federal Register.

[58 FR 12550, Mar. 5, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 582.5  Information form.

    The information made available pursuant to Sec. 582.4 shall be 
presented in writing in the English language and in not less than 10-
point type. It shall be presented in the format set forth below, and 
shall include the complete explanatory text and the updated data 
published annually by NHTSA.

[[Page 1055]]

                       MARCH [YEAR TO BE INSERTED]

COMPARISON OF DIFFERENCES IN INSURANCE COSTS FOR PASSENGER CARS, STATION 
  WAGONS/PASSENGER VANS, PICKUPS AND UTILITY VEHICLES ON THE BASIS OF 
                          DAMAGE SUSCEPTIBILITY

    The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) has 
provided the information in this booklet in compliance with Federal law 
as an aid to consumers considering the purchase of a new vehicle. The 
booklet compares differences in insurance costs for different makes and 
models of passenger cars, station wagons/passenger vans, pickups, and 
utility vehicles on the basis of damage susceptibility. However, it does 
not indicate a vehicle's relative safety.
    The following table contains the best available information 
regarding the effect of damage susceptibility on insurance premiums. It 
was taken from data compiled by the Highway Loss Data Institute (HLDI) 
in its December [YEAR TO BE INSERTED] Insurance Collision Report, and 
reflects the collision loss experience of passenger cars, utility 
vehicles, light trucks, and vans sold in the United States in terms of 
the average loss payment per insured vehicle year for [THREE APPROPRIATE 
YEARS TO BE INSERTED]. NHTSA has not verified the data in this table.
    The table represents vehicles' collision loss experience in relative 
terms, with 100 representing the average for all passenger vehicles. 
Thus, a rating of 122 reflects a collision loss experience that is 22 
percent higher (worse) than average, while a rating of 96 reflects a 
collision loss experience that is 4 percent lower (better) than average. 
The table is not relevant for models that have been substantially 
redesigned for [YEAR TO BE INSERTED], and it does not include 
information about models without enough claim experience.
    Although many insurance companies use the HLDI information to adjust 
the ``base rate'' for the collision portion of their insurance premiums, 
the amount of any such adjustment is usually small. It is unlikely that 
your total premium will vary more than ten percent depending upon the 
collision loss experience of a particular vehicle.
    If you do not purchase collision coverage or your insurance company 
does not use the HLDI information, your premium will not vary at all in 
relation to these rankings.
    In addition, different insurance companies often charge different 
premiums for the same driver and vehicle. Therefore, you should contact 
insurance companies or their agents directly to determine the actual 
premium that you will be charged for insuring a particular vehicle.

    Please Note: In setting insurance premiums, insurance companies 
mainly rely on factors that are not directly related to the vehicle 
itself (except for its value). Rather, they mainly consider driver 
characteristics (such as age, gender, marital status, and driving 
record), the geographic area in which the vehicle is driven, how many 
miles are traveled, and how the vehicle is used. Therefore, to obtain 
complete information about insurance premiums, you should contact 
insurance companies or their agents directly.
    Insurance companies do not generally adjust their premiums on the 
basis of data reflecting the crashworthiness of different vehicles. 
However, some companies adjust their premiums for personal injury 
protection and medical payments coverage if the insured vehicle has 
features that are likely to improve its crashworthiness, such as air 
bags and automatic seat belts.
    Test data relating to vehicle crashworthiness are available from 
NHTSA's New Car Assessment Program (NCAP). NCAP test results demonstrate 
relative frontal crash protection in new vehicles. Information on 
vehicles that NHTSA has tested in the NCAP program can be obtained by 
calling the agency's toll-free Auto Safety Hotline at (800) 424-9393.

[Insert Table To Be Published Each March by the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration]

    If you would like more details about the information in this table, 
or wish to obtain the complete Insurance Collision Report, please 
contact HLDI directly, at: Highway Loss Data Institute, 1005 North Glebe 
Road, Arlington, VA 22201, Tel: (703) 247-1600.

[60 FR 15512, Mar. 24, 1995]


<R03>
PART 583_AUTOMOBILE PARTS CONTENT LABELING--Table of Contents




Sec.
583.1 Scope.
583.2 Purpose.
583.3 Applicability.
583.4 Definitions.
583.5 Label requirements.
583.6 Procedure for determining U.S./Canadian parts content.
583.7 Procedure for determining major foreign sources of passenger motor 
          vehicle equipment.
583.8 Procedure for determining country of origin for engines and 
          transmissions (for purposes of determining the information 
          specified by Sec. Sec. 583.5(a)(4) and 583.5(a)(5) only).
583.9 Attachment and maintenance of label.
583.10 Outside suppliers of passenger motor vehicle equipment.

[[Page 1056]]

583.11 Allied suppliers of passenger motor vehicle equipment.
583.12 Suppliers of engines and transmissions.
583.13 Supplier certification and certificates.
583.14 Currency conversion rate.
583.15 Joint ownership.
583.16 Maintenance of records.
583.17 Reporting.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 32304, 49 CFR 1.50, 501.2(f).

    Source: 59 FR 37330, July 21, 1994, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 583.1  Scope.

    This part establishes requirements for the disclosure of information 
relating to the countries of origin of the equipment of new passenger 
motor vehicles.


<R05>
Sec. 583.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to aid potential purchasers in the 
selection of new passenger motor vehicles by providing them with 
information about the value of the U.S./Canadian and foreign parts 
content of each vehicle, the countries of origin of the engine and 
transmission, and the site of the vehicle's final assembly.


<R05>
Sec. 583.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to manufacturers of new passenger motor vehicles 
manufactured or imported for sale in the United States, suppliers of 
passenger motor vehicle equipment, and dealers of new passenger motor 
vehicles.


<R05>
Sec. 583.4  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. The terms allied supplier, carline, country of 
origin, dealer, foreign content, manufacturer, new passenger motor 
vehicle, of U.S./Canadian origin, outside supplier, passenger motor 
vehicle, passenger motor vehicle equipment, percentage (by value), 
State, and value added in the United States and Canada, defined in 49 
U.S.C. 32304(a), are used in accordance with their statutory meanings 
except as further defined in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) Other terms and further definitions.
    (1) Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration.
    (2) Allied supplier means a supplier of passenger motor vehicle 
equipment that is wholly owned by the manufacturer, or in the case of a 
joint venture vehicle assembly arrangement, any supplier that is wholly 
owned by one member of the joint venture arrangement. A supplier is 
considered to be wholly owned by the manufacturer if a common parent 
company owns both the manufacturer and the supplier, or if a group of 
related companies own both the manufacturer and the supplier and no 
outside interests (interests other than the manufacturer itself or 
companies which own the manufacturer) own the supplier.
    (3) Carline means a name denoting a group of vehicles which has a 
degree of commonality in construction (e.g., body, chassis). Carline 
does not consider any level of decor or opulence and is not generally 
distinguished by such characteristics as roof line, number of doors, 
seats, or windows, except for light duty trucks. Carline is not 
distinguished by country of manufacture, final assembly point, engine 
type, or driveline. Light duty trucks are considered to be different 
carlines than passenger cars. A carline includes all motor vehicles of a 
given nameplate. Special purpose vehicles, vans, and pickup trucks are 
classified as separate carlines.
    (4) Final assembly means all operations involved in the assembly of 
a vehicle, performed at the final assembly point including but not 
limited to assembly of body panels, painting, final chassis assembly, 
trim installation, except engine and transmission fabrication and 
assembly and the fabrication of motor vehicle equipment components 
produced at the same final assembly point using forming processes such 
as stamping, machining or molding processes.
    (5) Final assembly point means the plant, factory, or other place, 
which is a building or series of buildings in close proximity, where a 
new passenger motor vehicle is produced or assembled from passenger 
motor vehicle equipment and from which such vehicle is delivered to a 
dealer or importer in such a condition that all component parts 
necessary to the mechanical operation of such automobile are included 
with such vehicle whether or

[[Page 1057]]

not such component parts are permanently installed in or on such 
vehicle. For multi-stage vehicles, the final assembly point is the 
location where the first stage vehicle is assembled.
    (6) Outside supplier means:
    (i) A non-allied supplier of passenger motor vehicle equipment to a 
manufacturer's allied supplier and
    (ii) Anyone other than an allied supplier who ships directly to the 
manufacturer's final assembly point.
    (7) Passenger motor vehicle equipment means any system, subassembly, 
or component received at the final assembly point for installation on, 
or attachment to, such vehicle at the time of its initial shipment by 
the manufacturer to a dealer for sale to an ultimate purchaser. 
Passenger motor vehicle equipment also includes any system, subassembly, 
or component received by an allied supplier from an outside supplier for 
incorporation into equipment supplied by the allied supplier to the 
manufacturer with which it is allied.
    (8) Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, business 
trust, or any organized group of persons.
    (9) Ultimate purchaser means with respect to any new passenger motor 
vehicle, the first person, other than a dealer purchasing in its 
capacity as a dealer, who in good faith purchases such new passenger 
motor vehicle for purposes other than resale.

[59 FR 37330, July 21, 1994, as amended at 64 FR 40780, July 28, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 583.5  Label requirements.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraphs (f) and (g) of this section, 
each manufacturer of new passenger motor vehicles shall cause to be 
affixed to each passenger motor vehicle manufactured on or after October 
1, 1994, a label that provides the following information:
    (1) U.S./Canadian parts content. The overall percentage, by value, 
of the passenger motor vehicle equipment that was installed on vehicles 
within the carline of which the vehicle is part, and that originated in 
the United States and/or Canada (the procedure for determining U.S./
Canadian Parts Content is set forth in Sec. 583.6);
    (2) Major sources of foreign parts content. The names of any 
countries other than the United States and Canada which contributed at 
least 15 percent of the average overall percentage, by value, of the 
passenger motor vehicle equipment installed on vehicles within the 
carline of which the vehicle is part, and the percentages attributable 
to each such country (if there are more than two such countries, the 
manufacturer need only provide the information for the two countries 
with the highest percentages; the procedure for determining major 
foreign sources of passenger motor vehicle equipment is set forth in 
Sec. 583.7);
    (3) Final assembly point. The city, state (in the case of vehicles 
assembled in the United States), and country of the final assembly point 
of the passenger motor vehicle;
    (4) Country of origin for the engine. The country of origin of the 
passenger motor vehicle's engine (the procedure for making this country 
of origin determination is set forth in Sec. 583.8);
    (5) Country of origin for the transmission. The country of origin of 
the passenger motor vehicle's transmission (the procedure for making 
this country of origin determination is set forth in Sec. 583.8);
    (6) Explanatory note. A statement which explains that parts content 
does not include final assembly, distribution, or other non-parts costs.
    (b) Except as provided in paragraphs (e), (f) and (g) of this 
section, the label required under paragraph (a) of this section shall 
read as follows, with the specified information inserted in the places 
indicated (except that if there are no major sources of foreign parts 
content, omit the section ``Major Sources of Foreign Parts Content''):

                        Parts Content Information

    For vehicles in this carline:

U.S./Canadian Parts Content: (insert number) %
Major Sources of Foreign Parts Content:
    (Name of country with highest percentage): (insert number) %
    (Name of country with second highest percentage): (insert number) %

    Note: Parts content does not include final assembly, distribution, 
or other non-parts costs.

    For this vehicle:

Final Assembly Point: (city, state, country)
Country of Origin:
Engine: (name of country)

[[Page 1058]]

Transmission: (name of country)

    (c) The percentages required to be provided under paragraph (a) of 
this section may be rounded by the manufacturer to the nearest 5 
percent.
    (d) The label required by paragraph (a) of this section shall:
    (1) Be placed in a prominent location on each vehicle where it can 
be read from the exterior of the vehicle with the doors closed, and may 
be either part of the Monroney price information label required by 15 
U.S.C. 1232, part of the fuel economy label required by 15 U.S.C. 2006, 
or a separate label. A separate label may include other consumer 
information.
    (2)(i) Be printed in letters that have a color that contrasts with 
the background of the label; and
    (ii) Have the information required by paragraphs (a)(1) through (5) 
of this section vertically centered on the label in boldface capital 
letters and numerals of 12 point size or larger; and
    (iii) Have the information required by paragraph (a)(6) of this 
section in type that is two points smaller than the information required 
by paragraphs (a)(1) through (5) of this section.
    (3) In the case of a label that is included as part of the Monroney 
price information label or fuel economy label, or a separate label that 
includes other consumer information, be separated from all other 
information on those labels by a solid line that is a minimum of three 
points in width.
    (4) The information required by paragraphs (a)(1) through (6) of 
this section shall be immediately preceded by the words, ``PARTS CONTENT 
INFORMATION,'' in boldface, capital letters that are 12 point size or 
larger.
    (e) Carlines assembled in the U.S./Canada and in one or more other 
countries. (1) If a carline is assembled in the U.S. and/or Canada, and 
in one or more other countries, the manufacturer may, at its option, add 
the following additional information at the end of the explanatory note 
specified in (a)(6), with the specified information inserted in the 
places indicated:

    This carline is assembled in the U.S. and/or Canada, and in [insert 
name of each other country]. The U.S./Canadian parts content for the 
portion of the carline assembled in [insert name of country, treating 
the U.S. and Canada together, i.e., U.S./Canada] is [----]%.

    (2) A manufacturer selecting this option shall divide the carline 
for purposes of this additional information into the following portions: 
the portion assembled in the U.S./Canada and the portions assembled in 
each other country.
    (3) A manufacturer selecting this option for a particular carline 
shall provide the specified additional information on the labels of all 
vehicles within the carline, providing the U.S./Canadian content that 
corresponds to the U.S./Canadian content of the manufacturing location 
shown as the final assembly point (with all U.S. and Canadian locations 
considered as a single assembly point) on the label.
    (f) A final stage manufacturer of vehicles assembled in multiple 
stages need not provide the U.S./Canadian Parts Content or Major Foreign 
Sources items of the label otherwise required under paragraphs (a)(1) 
and (2) of this section.
    (g) A manufacturer that produces a total of fewer than 1000 
passenger motor vehicles in a model year need not provide the U.S./
Canadian Parts Content or Major Foreign Sources items of the label 
otherwise required under paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) of this section.
    (h) Requests for information and certifications relevant to 
information on the label. (1) Each manufacturer and allied supplier 
shall request its suppliers to provide directly to it the information 
and certifications specified by this part which are necessary for the 
manufacturer/allied supplier to carry out its responsibilities under 
this part. The information shall be requested sufficiently early to 
enable the manufacturer to meet the timing requirements specified by 
this part.
    (2) For requests made by manufacturers or allied suppliers to 
outside suppliers:
    (i) The requester shall indicate that the request is being made 
pursuant to 49 CFR part 583, and that the regulation is administered by 
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration;

[[Page 1059]]

    (ii) The requester shall indicate that 49 CFR part 583 requires 
outside suppliers to provide specified information upon the request of a 
manufacturer or allied supplier to which it supplies passenger motor 
vehicle equipment and that, to the best of the requester's knowledge, 
the outside supplier is required to provide the requested information;
    (iii) If any information other than that required by 49 CFR part 583 
is requested, the requester shall indicate which information is required 
by 49 CFR part 583 and which is not;
    (iv) The requester shall indicate that 49 CFR part 583 specifies 
that while information may be requested by an earlier date, the outside 
supplier is not required to provide the information until the date 
specified by the requester or the date 45 days after receipt of the 
request, whichever is later.
    (i) Carlines assembled in more than one assembly plant. (1) If a 
carline is assembled in more than one assembly plant, the manufacturer 
may, at its option, add the following additional information at the end 
of the explanatory note specified in paragraph (a)(6) of this section, 
with the specified information inserted in the places indicated:

    Two or more assembly plants produce the vehicles in this carline. 
The vehicles assembled at the plant where this vehicle was assembled 
have a U.S./Canadian parts content of [--]%.

    (2) A manufacturer selecting this option shall divide the carline 
for purposes of this additional information into portions representing 
each assembly plant.
    (3) A manufacturer selecting this option for a particular carline 
shall provide the specified additional information on the labels of all 
vehicles within the carline.

[59 FR 37330, July 21, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 14229, Mar. 16, 1995; 
60 FR 47893, Sept. 15, 1995; 64 FR 40780, July 28, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 583.6  Procedure for determining U.S./Canadian parts content.

    (a) Each manufacturer, except as specified in Sec. 583.5 (f) and 
(g), shall determine the percentage U.S./Canadian Parts Content for each 
carline on a model year basis. This determination shall be made before 
the beginning of each model year. Items of equipment produced at the 
final assembly point (but not as part of final assembly) are treated in 
the same manner as if they were supplied by an allied supplier. All 
value otherwise added at the final assembly point and beyond, including 
all final assembly costs, is excluded from the calculation of U.S./
Canadian parts content. The country of origin of nuts, bolts, clips, 
screws, pins, braces, gasoline, oil, blackout, phosphate rinse, 
windshield washer fluid, fasteners, tire assembly fluid, rivets, 
adhesives, grommets, and wheel weights, used in final assembly of the 
vehicle, is considered to be the country where final assembly of the 
vehicle takes place.
    (b) Determining the value of items of equipment.
    (1) For items of equipment received at the final assembly point, the 
value is the price paid by the manufacturer for the equipment as 
delivered to the final assembly point.
    (2) For items of equipment produced at the final assembly point (but 
not as part of final assembly), the value is the fair market price that 
a manufacturer of similar size and location would pay a supplier for 
such equipment.
    (3) For items of equipment received at the factory or plant of an 
allied supplier, the value is the price paid by the allied supplier for 
the equipment as delivered to its factory or plant.
    (c) Determining the U.S./Canadian percentage of the value of items 
of equipment.
    (1) Equipment supplied by an outside supplier to a manufacturer or 
allied supplier is considered:
    (i) 100 percent U.S./Canadian, if 70 percent or more of its value is 
added in the United States and/or Canada; and
    (ii) To otherwise have the actual percent of its value added in the 
United States and/or Canada, rounded to the nearest five percent.
    (2) The extent to which an item of equipment supplied by an allied 
supplier is considered U.S./Canadian is determined by dividing the value 
added in the United States and/or Canada by the total value of the 
equipment. The resulting number is multiplied by 100 to determine the 
percentage U.S./Canadian content of the equipment.

[[Page 1060]]

    (3) In determining the value added in the United States and/or 
Canada of equipment supplied by an allied supplier, any equipment that 
is delivered to the allied supplier by an outside supplier and is 
incorporated into the allied supplier's equipment, is considered:
    (i) 100 percent U.S./Canadian, if at least 70 percent of its value 
is added in the United States and/or Canada; and
    (ii) To otherwise have the actual percent of its value added in the 
United States and/or Canada, rounded to the nearest five percent.
    (4)(i) Value added in the United States and/or Canada by an allied 
supplier or outside supplier includes--
    (A) The value added in the U.S. and/or Canada for materials used by 
the supplier, determined according to (4)(ii) for outside suppliers and 
(4)(iii) for allied suppliers, plus,
    (B) For passenger motor vehicle equipment assembled or produced in 
the U.S. or Canada, the value of the difference between the price paid 
by the manufacturer or allied supplier for the equipment, as delivered 
to its factory or plant, and the total value of the materials in the 
equipment.
    (ii) Outside suppliers of passenger motor vehicle equipment will 
determine the value added in the U.S. and/or Canada for materials in the 
equipment as specified in paragraphs (A) and (B).
    (A)(1) For any material used by the supplier which was produced or 
assembled in the U.S. or Canada, the supplier will subtract from the 
total value of the material any value that was not added in the U.S. 
and/or Canada. The determination of the value that was not added in the 
U.S. and/or Canada shall be a good faith estimate based on information 
that is available to the supplier, e.g., information in its records, 
information it can obtain from its suppliers, the supplier's knowledge 
of manufacturing processes, etc.
    (2) The supplier shall consider the amount of value added and the 
location in which that value was added--
    (i) At each earlier stage, counting from the time of receipt of a 
material by the supplier, back to and including the two closest stages 
each of which represented a substantial transformation into a new and 
different product with a different name, character and use.
    (ii) The value of materials used to produce a product in the 
earliest of these two substantial transformation stages shall be treated 
as value added in the country in which that stage occurred.
    (B) For any material used by the supplier which was imported into 
the United States or Canada from a third country, the value added in the 
United States and/or Canada is presumed to be zero. However, if 
documentation is available to the supplier which identifies value added 
in the United States and/or Canada for that material (determined 
according to the principles set forth in (A), such value added in the 
United States and/or Canada is counted.
    (iii) Allied suppliers of passenger motor vehicle equipment shall 
determine the value that is added in the U.S. and/or Canada for 
materials in the equipment in accordance with (c)(3).
    (iv) For the minor items listed in the Sec. 583.4 definition of 
``passenger motor vehicle equipment'' as being excluded from that term, 
outside and allied suppliers may, to the extent that they incorporate 
such items into their equipment, treat the cost of the minor items as 
value added in the country of assembly.
    (v) For passenger motor vehicle equipment which is imported into the 
territorial boundaries of the United States or Canada from a third 
country, the value added in the United States and/or Canada is presumed 
to be zero. However, if documentation is available to the supplier which 
identifies value added in the United States and/or Canada for that 
equipment (determined according to the principles set forth in the rest 
of (c)(4)), such value added in the United States and/or Canada is 
counted.
    (vi) The payment of duty does not result in value added in the 
United States and/or Canada.
    (5) Except as provided in paragraph (c)(6) of this section, if a 
manufacturer or allied supplier does not receive information from one or 
more of its suppliers concerning the U.S./Canadian content of particular 
equipment, the

[[Page 1061]]

U.S./Canadian content of that equipment is considered zero. This 
provision does not affect the obligation of manufacturers and allied 
suppliers to request this information from their suppliers or the 
obligation of the suppliers to provide the information.
    (6) If a manufacturer or allied supplier requests information in a 
timely manner from one or more of its outside suppliers concerning the 
U.S./Canadian content of particular equipment, but does not receive that 
information despite a good faith effort to obtain it, the manufacturer 
or allied supplier may make its own good faith value added 
determinations, subject to the following provisions:
    (i) The manufacturer or allied supplier shall make the same value 
added determinations as would be made by the outside supplier;
    (ii) The manufacturer or allied supplier shall consider the amount 
of value added and the location in which the value was added for all of 
the stages that the outside supplier would be required to consider;
    (iii) The manufacturer or allied supplier may determine that 
particular value is added in the United States and/or Canada only if it 
has a good faith basis to make that determination;
    (iv) A manufacturer and its allied suppliers may, on a combined 
basis, make value added determinations for no more than 10 percent, by 
value, of a carline's total parts content from outside suppliers;
    (v) Value added determinations made by a manufacturer or allied 
supplier under this paragraph shall have the same effect as if they were 
made by the outside supplier;
    (vi) This provision does not affect the obligation of outside 
suppliers to provide the requested information.
    (d) Determination of the U.S./Canadian percentage of the total value 
of a carline's passenger motor vehicle equipment. The percentage of the 
value of a carline's passenger motor vehicle equipment that is U.S./
Canadian is determined by--
    (1) Adding the total value of all of the equipment (regardless of 
country of origin) expected to be installed in that carline during the 
next model year;
    (2) Dividing the value of the U.S./Canadian content of such 
equipment by the amount calculated in paragraph (d)(1) of this section, 
and
    (3) Multiplying the resulting number by 100.
    (e) Alternative calculation procedures. (1) A manufacturer may 
submit a petition to use calculation procedures based on representative 
or statistical sampling, as an alternative to the calculation procedures 
specified in this section to determine U.S./Canadian parts content and 
major sources of foreign parts content.
    (2) Each petition must--
    (i) Be submitted at least 120 days before the manufacturer would use 
the alternative procedure;
    (ii) Be written in the English language;
    (iii) Be submitted in three copies to: Administrator, National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., 
Washington, DC 20590;
    (iv) State the full name and address of the manufacturer;
    (v) Set forth in full the data, views and arguments of the 
manufacturer that would support granting the petition, including--
    (A) the alternative procedure, and
    (B) analysis demonstrating that the alternative procedure will 
produce substantially equivalent results to the procedure set forth in 
this section;
    (vi) Specify and segregate any part of the information and data 
submitted in the petition that is requested to be withheld from public 
disclosure in accordance with part 512 of this chapter (the basic 
alternative procedure and basic supporting analysis must be provided as 
public information, but confidential business information may also be 
used in support of the petition).
    (3) The NHTSA publishes in the Federal Register, affording 
opportunity for comment, a notice of each petition containing the 
information required by this part. A copy of the petition is placed in 
the public docket. However, if NHTSA finds that a petition does not 
contain the information required by this part, it so informs the 
petitioner, pointing out the areas of insufficiency and stating that the 
petition will not receive further consideration until the required 
information is submitted.

[[Page 1062]]

    (4) If the Administrator determines that the petition does not 
contain adequate justification, he or she denies it and notifies the 
petitioner in writing, explaining the reasons for the denial. A copy of 
the letter is placed in the public docket.
    (5) If the Administrator determines that the petition contains 
adequate justification, he or she grants it, and notifies the petitioner 
in writing. A copy of the letter is placed in the public docket.
    (6) The Administrator may attach such conditions as he or she deems 
appropriate to a grant of a petition, which the manufacturer must follow 
in order to use the alternative procedure.

[60 FR 47894, Sept. 15, 1995; as amended at 61 FR 46390, Sept. 3, 1996; 
62 FR 33761, June 23, 1997; 64 FR 40780, July 28, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 583.7  Procedure for determining major foreign sources of passenger 
motor vehicle equipment.

    (a) Each manufacturer, except as specified in Sec. 583.5(f) and 
(g), shall determine the countries, if any, which are major foreign 
sources of passenger motor vehicle equipment and the percentages 
attributable to each such country for each carline on a model year 
basis, before the beginning of each model year. The manufacturer need 
only determine this information for the two such countries with the 
highest percentages. Items of equipment produced at the final assembly 
point (but not as part of final assembly) are treated in the same manner 
as if they were supplied by an allied supplier. In making determinations 
under this section, the U.S. and Canada are treated together as if they 
were one (non-foreign) country. The country of origin of nuts, bolts, 
clips, screws, pins, braces, gasoline, oil, blackout, phosphate rinse, 
windshield washer fluid, fasteners, tire assembly fluid, rivets, 
adhesives, grommets, and wheel weights, used in final assembly of the 
vehicle, is considered to be the country where final assembly of the 
vehicle takes place.
    (b) Determining the value of items of equipment. The value of each 
item of equipment is determined in the manner specified in Sec. 
583.6(b).
    (c) Determining the country of origin of items of equipment.(1) 
Except as provided in (c)(2), the country of origin of each item is the 
country which contributes the greatest amount of value added to that 
item (treating the U.S. and Canada together).
    (2) Instead of making country of origin determinations in the manner 
specified in (c)(1), a manufacturer may, at its option, use any other 
methodology that is used for customs purposes (U.S. or foreign), so long 
as a consistent methodology is employed for all items of equipment, and 
the U.S. and Canada are treated together.
    (d) Determination of the percentage of the total value of a 
carline's passenger motor vehicle equipment which is attributable to 
individual countries other than the U.S. and Canada. The percentage of 
the value of a carline's passenger motor vehicle equipment that is 
attributable to each country other than the U.S. and Canada is 
determined on a model year basis by--
    (1) Adding up the total value of all of the passenger motor vehicle 
equipment (regardless of country of origin) expected to be installed in 
that carline during the next model year;
    (2) Adding up the value of such equipment which originated in each 
country other than the U.S. or Canada;
    (3) Dividing the amount calculated in paragraph (d)(2) of this 
section for each country by the amount calculated in paragraph (d)(1) of 
this section, and multiplying each result by 100.
    (e) A country is a major foreign source of passenger motor vehicle 
equipment for a carline only if the country is one other than the U.S. 
or Canada and if 15 or more percent of the total value of the carline's 
passenger motor vehicle equipment is attributable to the country.
    (f) In determining the percentage of the total value of a carline's 
passenger motor vehicle equipment which is attributable to individual 
countries other than the U.S. and Canada, no value which is counted as 
U.S./Canadian parts content is also counted as being value which 
originated in a country other than the U.S. or Canada.

[59 FR 37330, July 21, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 47895, Sept. 15, 1995; 
64 FR 40781, July 28, 1999]

[[Page 1063]]


<R05>
Sec. 583.8  Procedure for determining country of origin for engines and 

transmissions (for purposes of determining the information specified by 
Sec. Sec. 
          583.5(a)(4) and 583.5(a)(5) only).

    (a) Each supplier of an engine or transmission shall determine the 
country of origin once a year for each engine and transmission. The 
origin of engines shall be calculated for engines of the same 
displacement produced at the same plant. The origin for transmissions 
shall be calculated for transmissions of the same type produced at the 
same plant. Transmissions are of the same type if they have the same 
attributes including: Drive line application, number of forward gears, 
controls, and layout. The U.S. and Canada are treated separately in 
making such determination.
    (b) The value of an engine or transmission is determined by first 
adding the prices paid by the manufacturer of the engine/transmission 
for each component comprising the engine/transmission, as delivered to 
the assembly plant of the engine/transmission, and the fair market value 
of each individual part produced at the plant. The assembly and labor 
costs incurred for the final assembly of the engine/transmission are 
then added to determine the value of the engine or transmission.
    (c) Determining the country of origin of components.
    (1) Except as provided in (c)(2), the country of origin of each item 
of equipment is the country which contributes the greatest amount of 
value added to that item (the U.S. and Canada are treated separately).
    (2) Instead of making country of origin determinations in the manner 
specified in (c)(1), a manufacturer may, at its option, use any other 
methodology that is used for customs purposes (U.S. or foreign), so long 
as a consistent methodology is employed for all components.
    (d) Determination of the total value of an engine/transmission which 
is attributable to individual countries. The value of an engine/
transmission that is attributable to each country is determined by 
adding the total value of all of the components installed in that 
engine/transmission which originated in that country. For the country 
where final assembly of the engine/transmission takes place, the 
assembly and labor costs incurred for such final assembly are also 
added.
    (e) The country of origin of each engine and the country of origin 
of each transmission is the country which contributes the greatest 
amount of value added to that item of equipment (the U.S. and Canada are 
treated separately).

[59 FR 37330, July 21, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 47895, Sept. 15, 1995; 
64 FR 40781, July 28, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 583.9  Attachment and maintenance of label.

    (a) Attachment of the label.
    (1) Except as provided in (a)(2), each manufacturer shall cause the 
label required by Sec. 583.5 to be affixed to each new passenger motor 
vehicle before the vehicle is delivered to a dealer.
    (2) For vehicles which are delivered to a dealer prior to the 
introduction date for the model in question, each manufacturer shall 
cause the label required by Sec. 583.5 to be affixed to the vehicle 
prior to such introduction date.
    (b) Maintenance of the label.
    (1) Each dealer shall cause to be maintained each label on the new 
passenger motor vehicles it receives until after such time as a vehicle 
has been sold to a consumer for purposes other than resale.
    (2) If the manufacturer of a passenger motor vehicle provides a 
substitute label containing corrected information, the dealer shall 
replace the original label with the substitute label.
    (3) If a label becomes damaged so that the information it contains 
is not legible, the dealer shall replace it with an identical, undamaged 
label.


<R05>
Sec. 583.10  Outside suppliers of passenger motor vehicle equipment.

    (a) For each unique type of passenger motor vehicle equipment for 
which a manufacturer or allied supplier requests information, the 
outside supplier shall provide the manufacturer/allied supplier with a 
certificate providing the following information:
    (1) The name and address of the supplier;

[[Page 1064]]

    (2) A description of the unique type of equipment;
    (3) The price of the equipment to the manufacturer or allied 
supplier;
    (4) A statement that the equipment has, or does not have, at least 
70 percent of its value added in the United States and Canada, 
determined under Sec. 583.6(c);
    (5) For equipment which has less than 70 percent of its value added 
in the United States and Canada,
    (i) The country of origin of the equipment, determined under Sec. 
583.7(c); and
    (ii) The percent of its value added in the United States and Canada, 
to the nearest 5 percent, determined under Sec. 583.6(c).
    (6) For equipment that may be used in an engine or transmission, the 
country of origin of the equipment, determined under Sec. 583.8(c);
    (7) A certification for the information, pursuant to Sec. 583.13, 
and the date (at least giving the month and year) of the certification.
    (8) A single certificate may cover multiple items of equipment.
    (b) The information and certification required by paragraph (a) of 
this section shall be provided to the manufacturer or allied supplier no 
later than 45 days after receipt of the request, or the date specified 
by the manufacturer/allied supplier, whichever is later. (A manufacturer 
or allied supplier may request that the outside supplier voluntarily 
provide the information and certification at an earlier date.)
    (c)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (c)(2) of this section, the 
information provided in the certificate shall be the supplier's best 
estimates of price, content, and country of origin for the unique type 
of equipment expected to be supplied during the 12 month period 
beginning on the first July 1 after receipt of the request. If the 
unique type of equipment supplied by the supplier is expected to vary 
with respect to price, content, and country of origin during that 
period, the supplier shall base its estimates on expected averages for 
these factors.
    (2) The 12 month period specified in (c)(1) may be varied in time 
and length by the manufacturer or allied supplier if it determines that 
the alteration is not likely to result in less accurate information 
being provided to consumers on the label required by this part.
    (d) For outside suppliers of engines and transmissions, the 
information and certification required by this section is in addition to 
that required by Sec. 583.12.

[59 FR 37330, July 21, 1994, as amended at 64 FR 40781, July 28, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 583.11  Allied suppliers of passenger motor vehicle equipment.

    (a) For each unique type of passenger motor vehicle equipment which 
an allied supplier supplies to the manufacturer with which it is allied, 
the allied supplier shall provide the manufacturer with a certificate 
providing the following information:
    (1) The name and address of the supplier;
    (2) A description of the unique type of equipment;
    (3) The price of the equipment to the manufacturer;
    (4) The percentage U.S./Canadian content of the equipment, 
determined under Sec. 583.6(c);
    (5) The country of origin of the equipment, determined under Sec. 
583.7(c);
    (6) For equipment that may be used in an engine or transmission, the 
country of origin of the equipment, determined under Sec. 583.8(c);
    (7) A certification for the information, pursuant to Sec. 583.13, 
and the date (at least giving the month and year) of the certification.
    (8) A single certificate may cover multiple items of equipment.
    (b)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, the 
information provided in the certificate shall be the supplier's best 
estimates of price, content, and country of origin for the unique type 
of equipment expected to be supplied during the 12 month period 
beginning on the first July 1 after receipt of the request. If the 
unique type of equipment supplied by the supplier is expected to vary 
with respect to price, content, and country of origin during that 
period, the supplier shall base its estimates on expected averages for 
these factors.
    (2) The 12 month period specified in (b)(1) may be varied in time 
and length by the manufacturer if it determines that the alteration is 
not likely to result in less accurate information being

[[Page 1065]]

provided to consumers on the label required by this part.
    (d) For allied suppliers of engines and transmissions, the 
information and certification required by this section is in addition to 
that required by Sec. 583.12.


<R05>
Sec. 583.12  Suppliers of engines and transmissions.

    (a) For each engine or transmission for which a manufacturer or 
allied supplier requests information, the supplier of such engine or 
transmission shall provide the manufacturer or allied supplier with a 
certificate providing the following information:
    (1) The name and address of the supplier;
    (2) A description of the engine or transmission;
    (3) The country of origin of the engine or transmission, determined 
under Sec. 583.8;
    (4) A certification for the information, pursuant to Sec. 583.13, 
and the date (at least giving the month and year) of the certification.
    (b) The information provided in the certificate shall be the 
supplier's best estimate of country of origin for the unique type of 
engine or transmission. If the unique type of equipment used in the 
engine or transmission is expected to vary with respect to price, 
content, and country of origin during that period, the supplier shall 
base its country of origin determination on expected averages for these 
factors.
    (c) The information and certification required by paragraph (a) of 
this section shall be provided by outside suppliers to the manufacturer 
or allied supplier no later than 45 days after receipt of the request, 
or the date specified by the manufacturer/allied supplier, whichever is 
later. (A manufacturer or allied supplier may request that the outside 
supplier voluntarily provide the information and certification at an 
earlier date.)
    (d) In the event that, during a model year, a supplier of engines or 
transmissions produces an engine of a new displacement or transmission 
of a new type or produces the same engine displacement or transmission 
in a different plant, the supplier shall notify the manufacturer of the 
origin of the new engine or transmission prior to shipment of the first 
engine or transmission that will be installed in a passenger motor 
vehicle intended for public sale.
    (e) A single certificate may cover multiple engines or 
transmissions. If a certificate provided in advance of the delivery of 
an engine or transmission becomes inaccurate because of changed 
circumstances, a corrected certificate shall be provided no later than 
the time of delivery of the engine or transmission.
    (f) For suppliers of engines and transmissions, the information and 
certification required by this section is in addition to that required 
by Sec. Sec. 583.10 and 583.11.


<R05>
Sec. 583.13  Supplier certification and certificates.

    Each supplier shall certify the information on each certificate 
provided under Sec. Sec. 583.10, 583.11, and 583.12 by including the 
following phrase on the certificate: ``This information is certified in 
accordance with DOT regulations.'' The phrase shall immediately precede 
the other information on the certificate. The certificate may be 
submitted to a manufacturer or allied supplier in any mode (e.g., paper, 
electronic) provided the mode contains all information in the 
certificate.


<R05>
Sec. 583.14  Currency conversion rate.

    For purposes of calculations of content value under this part, 
manufacturers and suppliers shall calculate exchange rates using the 
methodology set forth in this section.
    (a) Manufacturers. (1) Unless a manufacturer has had a petition 
approved by the Environmental Protection Agency under 40 CFR 600.511-
80(b)(1), for all calculations made by the manufacturer as a basis for 
the information provided on the label required by Sec. 583.5, 
manufacturers shall take the mean of the exchange rates in effect at the 
end of each quarter set by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for 
twelve calendar quarters prior to and including the calendar quarter 
ending one year prior to the date that the manufacturer submits 
information for a carline under Sec. 583.17.
    (2) A manufacturer that has had a petition approved by the 
Environmental

[[Page 1066]]

Protection Agency under 40 CFR 600.511-80(b)(1), which provides for a 
different method of determining exchange rates, shall use the same 
method as a basis for the information provided on the label required by 
Sec. 583.5, and shall inform the Administrator of the exchange rate 
method it is using at the time the information required by Sec. 583.5 
is submitted.
    (b) Suppliers. For all calculations underlying the information 
provided on each certificate required by Sec. Sec. 583.10, 583.11, and 
583.12, suppliers shall take the mean of the exchange rates in effect at 
the end of each quarter set by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for 
twelve calendar quarters prior to and including the calendar quarter 
ending one year prior to the date of such certificate.


<R05>
Sec. 583.15  Joint ownership.

    (a) A carline jointly owned and/or produced by more than one 
manufacturer shall be attributed to the single manufacturer that markets 
the carline, subject to paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b)(1) The joint owners of a carline may designate, by written 
agreement, the manufacturer of record of that carline.
    (2) The manufacturer of record is responsible for compliance with 
all the manufacturer requirements in this part with respect to the 
jointly owned carline. However, carline determinations must be 
consistent with Sec. 583.4(3).
    (3) A designation under this section of a manufacturer of record is 
effective beginning with the first model year beginning after the 
conclusion of the written agreement, or, if the joint owners so agree in 
writing, with a specified later model year.
    (4) Each manufacturer of record shall send to the Administrator 
written notification of its designation as such not later than 30 days 
after the conclusion of the written agreement, and state the carline of 
which it is considered the manufacturer, the names of the other persons 
which jointly own the carline, and the name of the person, if any, 
formerly considered to be the manufacturer of record.
    (5) The joint owners of a carline may change the manufacturer of 
record for a future model year by concluding a written agreement before 
the beginning of that model year.
    (6) The allied suppliers for the jointly owned carline are the 
suppliers that are wholly owned by any of the manufacturers of the 
jointly owned carline.


<R05>
Sec. 583.16  Maintenance of records.

    (a) General. Each manufacturer of new passenger motor vehicles and 
each supplier of passenger motor vehicle equipment subject to this part 
shall establish, maintain, and retain in organized and indexed form, 
records as specified in this section. All records, including the 
certificates provided by suppliers, may be stored in any mode provided 
the mode contains all information in the records and certificates.
    (b) Manufacturers. Each manufacturer shall maintain all records 
which provide a basis for the information it provides on the labels 
required by Sec. 583.5, including, but not limited to, certificates 
from suppliers, parts lists, calculations of content, and relevant 
contracts with suppliers. The records shall be maintained for five years 
after December 31 of the model year to which the records relate.
    (c) Suppliers. Each supplier shall maintain all records which form a 
basis for the information it provides on the certificates required by 
Sec. Sec. 583.10, 583.11, and 583.12, including, but not limited to, 
calculations of content, certificates from suppliers, and relevant 
contracts with manufacturers and suppliers. The records shall be 
maintained for six years after December 31 of the calendar year set 
forth in the date of each certificate.


<R05>
Sec. 583.17  Reporting.

    For each model year, manufacturers shall submit to the Administrator 
3 copies of the information required by Sec. 583.5(a) to be placed on a 
label for each carline. The information for each carline shall be 
submitted not later than the date the first vehicle of the carline is 
offered for sale to the ultimate purchaser.

[[Page 1067]]


<R03>
PART 585_ADVANCED AIR BAG PHASE-IN REPORTING REQUIREMENTS--Table of Contents




Sec.
585.1 Scope.
585.2 Purpose.
585.3 Applicability.
585.4 Definitions.
585.5 Reporting requirements.
585.6 Records.
585.7 Petitions to extend period to file report.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30117, and 30166; delegation 
of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 65 FR 30769, May 12, 2000, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 585.1  Scope.

    This part establishes requirements for manufacturers of passenger 
cars and trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR 
of 3,855 kg (8500 lb) or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 2,495 kg 
(5500 lb) or less to submit reports, and maintain records related to the 
reports, concerning the number and identification of such vehicles that 
are certified as complying with the advanced air bag requirements of 
Standard No. 208, ``Occupant crash protection'' (49 CFR 571.208).


<R05>
Sec. 585.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of these reporting requirements is to aid the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration in determining whether a 
manufacturer has complied with the advanced air bag requirements of 
Standard No. 208 during the phase-ins of those requirements.


<R05>
Sec. 585.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to manufacturers of passenger cars and trucks, 
buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 3,855 kg (8500 
lb) or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 2,495 kg (5500 lb) or 
less. However, this part does not apply to any manufacturers whose 
production consists exclusively of walk-in vans, vehicles designed to be 
sold exclusively to the U.S. Postal Service, vehicles manufactured in 
two or more stages, and vehicles that are altered after previously 
having been certified in accordance with part 567 of this chapter. In 
addition, this part does not apply to manufacturers whose worldwide 
production of motor vehicles is less than 5000 vehicles in a production 
year.


<R05>
Sec. 585.4  Definitions.

    (a) All terms defined in 49 U.S.C. 30102 are used in accordance with 
their statutory meaning.
    (b) The terms bus, gross vehicle weight rating or GVWR, multipurpose 
passenger vehicle, passenger car, and truck are used as defined in 
section 571.3 of this chapter.
    (c) For the purposes of this part, vehicles means passenger cars and 
trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 3,855 
kg (8500 lb) or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 2,495 kg (5500 
lb) or less manufactured for sale in the United States by manufacturers 
whose worldwide production of motor vehicles is equal to or greater than 
5000 vehicles in a production year, and does not mean walk-in vans, 
vehicles designed to be sold exclusively to the U.S. Postal Service, 
vehicles manufactured in two or more stages, and vehicles that are 
altered after previously having been certified in accordance with part 
567 of this chapter.
    (d) Phase one of the advanced air bag requirements of Standard No. 
208 refers to the requirements set forth in S14.1, S14.2, S14.5.1(a), 
S14.5.2, S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25 of Federal Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standard No. 208, 49 CFR 571.208.
    (e) Phase two of the advanced air bag requirements of Standard No. 
208 refers to the requirements set forth in S14.3, S14.4, S14.5.1(b), 
S14.5.2, S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25 of Federal Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standard No. 208, 49 CFR 571.208.
    (f) Production year means the 12-month period between September 1 of 
one year and August 31 of the following year, inclusive.
    (g) Limited line manufacturer for phase one, means a manufacturer 
that sells three or fewer carlines, as that term is defined in 49 CFR 
583.4, in the United States during a production year; and for phase two, 
a manufacturer that sells two or fewer carlines, as that

[[Page 1068]]

term is defined in 49 CFR 583.4, in the United States during a 
production year.

[65 FR 30769, May 12, 2000, as amended at 68 FR 55320, Sept. 25, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 585.5  Reporting requirements.

    (a) Advanced credit phase-in reporting requirements. (1) Within 60 
days after the end of the production years ending August 31, 2000, 
August 31, 2001, August 31, 2002, and August 31, 2003, each manufacturer 
choosing to certify vehicles manufactured during any of those production 
years as complying with phase one of the advanced air bag requirements 
of Standard No. 208 shall submit a report to the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration as specified in this section.
    (2) Within 60 days after the end of the production year ending 
August 31, 2007, each manufacturer choosing to certify vehicles 
manufactured during that production year as complying with phase two of 
the advanced air bag requirements of Standard No. 208 shall submit a 
report to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration as 
specified in this section.
    (3) Each report shall--
    (i) Identify the manufacturer;
    (ii) State the full name, title, and address of the official 
responsible for preparing the report;
    (iii) Identify the production year being reported on;
    (iv) Provide the information specified in paragraph (c) of this 
section;
    (v) Be written in the English language; and
    (vi) Be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW, Washington, DC 20590.
    (b) Phase-in reporting requirements. (1) Within 60 days after the 
end of the production years ending August 31, 2004, August 31, 2005, and 
August 31, 2006, each manufacturer shall submit a report to the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration regarding its compliance with 
phase one of the advanced air bag requirements of Standard No. 208 for 
its vehicles produced in that production year. Each report shall also 
specify the number of advance credit vehicles, if any, that are being 
applied to the production year being reported on.
    (2) Within 60 days after the end of the production years ending 
August 31, 2008, August 31, 2009, and August 31, 2010, each manufacturer 
shall submit a report to the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration regarding its compliance with phase two of the advanced 
air bag requirements of Standard No. 208 for its vehicles produced in 
that production year. Each report shall also specify the number of 
advance credit vehicles, if any, that are being applied to the 
production year being reported on.
    (3) Each report shall--
    (i) Identify the manufacturer;
    (ii) State the full name, title, and address of the official 
responsible for preparing the report;
    (iii) For limited line manufacturers, specify whether the 
manufacturer has elected to comply with S14.1(a) or S14.1(b), or 
S14.3(a) or S14.3(b) of 49 CFR 571.208, as applicable;
    (iv) Identify the production year being reported on;
    (v) Contain a statement regarding whether or not the manufacturer 
complied with phase one of the advanced air bag requirements of Standard 
No. 208 or phase two of the advanced air bag requirements of Standard 
No. 208, as applicable to the period covered by the report, and the 
basis for that statement;
    (vi) Provide the information specified in paragraph (d) of this 
section;
    (vii) Be written in the English language; and
    (viii) Be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW, Washington, DC 20590.
    (c) Advanced credit phase-in report content--(1) Production of 
complying vehicles. (i) With respect to the reports identified in 
section 585.5(a)(1), each manufacturer shall report for the production 
year for which the report is filed the number of vehicles, by make and 
model year, that meet the applicable advanced air bag requirements of 
Standard No. 208, and to which advanced air bag requirements the 
vehicles are certified.

[[Page 1069]]

    (ii) With respect to the report identified in section 585.5(a)(2), 
each manufacturer shall report the number of vehicles, by make and model 
year, that meet the applicable advanced air bag requirements of Standard 
No. 208, and to which advanced air bag requirements the vehicles are 
certified.
    (2) Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer. Each 
manufacturer whose reporting of information is affected by one or more 
of the express written contracts permitted by S14.1.3.2 or S14.3.3.2 of 
Standard No. 208 shall:
    (i) Report the existence of each contract, including the names of 
all parties to the contract and explain how the contract affects the 
report being submitted.
    (ii) Report the number of vehicles covered by each contract in each 
production year.
    (d) Phase-in report content--(1) Basis for phase-in production 
requirements. For production years ending August 31, 2003, August 31, 
2004, August 31, 2005, August 31, 2007, August 31, 2008, and August 31, 
2009, each manufacturer shall provide the number of vehicles 
manufactured in the current production year, or, at the manufacturer's 
option, for the current production year and each of the prior two 
production years if the manufacturer has manufactured vehicles during 
both of the two production years prior to the year for which the report 
is being submitted.
    (2) Production of complying vehicles. Each manufacturer shall report 
for the production year for which the report is filed the number of 
vehicles, by make and model year, that meet the applicable advanced air 
bag requirements of Standard No. 208, and to which advanced air bag 
requirements the vehicles are certified.
    (3) Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer. Each 
manufacturer whose reporting of information is affected by one or more 
of the express written contracts permitted by S14.1.3.2 or S14.3.3.2 of 
Standard No. 208 shall:
    (i) Report the existence of each contract, including the names of 
all parties to the contract and explain how the contract affects the 
report being submitted.
    (ii) Report the number of vehicles covered by each contract in each 
production year.


<R05>
Sec. 585.6  Records.

    Each manufacturer shall maintain records of the Vehicle 
Identification Number of each vehicle for which information is reported 
under Sec. 585.5(c)(1) and (d)(2) until December 31, 2011.


<R05>
Sec. 585.7  Petitions to extend period to file report.

    A petition for extension of the time to submit a report required 
under this part shall be received not later than 15 days before the 
report is due. The petition shall be submitted to: Administrator, 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW, 
Washington, DC 20590. The filing of a petition does not automatically 
extend the time for filing a report. A petition will be granted only if 
the petitioner shows good cause for the extension, and if the extension 
is consistent with the public interest.


<R03>
PART 586_FUEL SYSTEM INTEGRITY UPGRADE PHASE-IN REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
--Table of Contents




Sec.
586.1 Scope.
586.2 Purpose.
586.3 Applicability.
586.4 Definitions.
586.5 Response to inquiries.
586.6 Reporting requirements.
586.7 Records.
586.8 Petition to extend period to file report.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30117, and 30166; delegation 
of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 68 FR 67086, Dec. 1, 2003, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 586.1  Scope.

    This part establishes requirements for manufacturers of passenger 
cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses with a gross 
vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) or less to 
submit a report, and maintain records related to the report, concerning 
the number of such vehicles that meet the upgraded requirements

[[Page 1070]]

of Standard No. 301, Fuel systems integrity (49 CFR 571.301).


<R05>
Sec. 586.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of these requirements is to assist the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration in determining whether a manufacturer has 
complied with the upgraded requirements of Standard No. 301 (49 CFR 
571.301).


<R05>
Sec. 586.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to manufacturers of passenger cars, multipurpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses with a gross vehicle weight rating 
of 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) or less.


<R05>
Sec. 586.4  Definitions.

    (a) All terms defined in 49 U.S.C. 30102 are used in their statutory 
meaning.
    (b) Bus, gross vehicle weight rating, multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, passenger car, and trucks are used as defined in 49 CFR 571.3.
    (c) Production year means the 12-month period between September 1 of 
one year and August 31 of the following year, inclusive.


<R05>
Sec. 586.5  Response to inquiries.

    At any time during the production years ending August 31, 2007, 
August 31, 2008, and August 31, 2009, each manufacturer must, upon 
request from the Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance, provide 
information identifying the vehicles (by make, model, and vehicle 
identification number) that have been certified as complying with 
S6.2(b) of Standard No. 301 (49 CFR 571.301). The manufacturer's 
designation of a vehicle as a certified vehicle is irrevocable.


<R05>
Sec. 586.6  Reporting requirements.

    (a) Phase-in reporting requirements. Within 60 days after the end of 
the production years ending August 31, 2007, August 31, 2008, and August 
31, 2009, each manufacturer must submit a report to the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration concerning its compliance with S6.2(b) of 
Standard No. 301 (49 CFR 571.301) for its passenger cars, multipurpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses with a gross vehicle weight rating 
of less than 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) produced in that year. Each 
report must--
    (1) Identify the manufacturer;
    (2) State the full name, title, and address of the official 
responsible for preparing the report;
    (3) Identify the production year being reported on;
    (4) Contain a statement regarding whether or not the manufacturer 
complied with the requirements of S6.2(b), or S6.2(c) if applicable, of 
Standard No. 301 (49 CFR 571.301) for the period covered by the report 
and the basis for that statement;
    (5) Provide the information specified in paragraph (b) of this 
section;
    (6) Be written in the English language; and
    (7) Be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590.
    (b) Phase-in report content.
    (1) Basis for statement of compliance. Each manufacturer must 
provide the number of passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles, 
trucks, and buses with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kilograms 
(10,000 pounds) or less manufactured for sale in the United States for 
each of the three previous production years, or, at the manufacturer's 
option, for the previous production year. A new manufacturer that has 
not previously manufactured these vehicles for sale in the United States 
must report the number of such vehicles manufactured during the current 
production year.
    (2) Production. Each manufacturer must report for the production 
year for which the report is filed: the number of passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses with a gross vehicle 
weight rating of 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) or less that meet 
S6.2(b) or S6.3(b) of Standard No. 301 (49 CFR 571.301).
    (3) Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer. Each 
manufacturer whose reporting of information is affected by one or more 
of the express written contracts permitted by S8.3.2 of Standard No. 301 
(49 CFR 571.301) must:
    (i) Report the existence of each contract, including the names of 
all parties to the contract, and explain how

[[Page 1071]]

the contract affects the report being submitted.
    (ii) Report the actual number of vehicles covered by each contract.

[68 FR 67086, Dec. 1, 2003, as amended at 69 FR 51399, Aug. 19, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 586.7  Records.

    Each manufacturer must maintain records of the Vehicle 
Identification Number for each vehicle for which information is reported 
under Sec. 586.6(b)(2) until December 31, 2010.


<R05>
Sec. 586.8  Petition to extend period to file report.

    A manufacturer may petition for extension of time to submit a report 
under this part. A petition will be granted only if the petitioner shows 
good cause for the extension and if the extension is consistent with the 
public interest. The petition must be received not later than 15 days 
before expiration of the time stated in Sec. 586.6(a). The filing of a 
petition does not automatically extend the time for filing a report. The 
petition must be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590.


<R03>
PART 587_DEFORMABLE BARRIERS--Table of Contents




                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
587.1 Scope.
587.2 Purpose.
587.3 Application.

             Subpart B_Side Impact Moving Deformable Barrier

587.4 Definitions.
587.5 Incorporated materials.
587.6 General description.
587.7-587.10 [Reserved]

                   Subpart C_Offset Deformable Barrier

587.11 [Reserved]
587.12 Incorporation by reference.
587.13 General description.
587.14 Deformable face component dimensions and material specifications.
587.15 Verification of aluminum honeycomb crush strength.
587.16 Adhesive bonding procedure.
587.17 Construction.
587.18 Dimensions of fixed rigid barrier.
587.19 Mounting.

Figures to Subpart C

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30117, and 30166; delegation 
of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 55 FR 45779, Oct. 30, 1990, unless otherwise noted.

    Editorial Note: Nomenclature changes to part 587 appear at 69 FR 
18803, Apr. 9, 2004.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 587.1  Scope.

    This part describes deformable impact barriers that are to be used 
for testing compliance of motor vehicles with motor vehicle safety 
standards.

[65 FR 17198, Mar. 31, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 587.2  Purpose.

    The design and performance criteria specified in this part are 
intended to describe measuring tools with sufficient precision to give 
repetitive and correlative results under similar test conditions and to 
reflect adequately the protective performance of a motor vehicle or item 
of motor vehicle equipment with respect to human occupants


<R05>
Sec. 587.3  Application.

    This part does not in itself impose duties or liabilities on any 
person. It is a description of tools that are used in compliance tests 
to measure the performance of occupant protection systems required by 
the safety standards that refer to these tools. It is designed to be 
referenced by, and become part of, the test procedures specified in 
motor vehicle safety standards such as Standard No. 208, Occupant Crash 
Protection, and Standard No. 214, Side Impact Protection.

[65 FR 17199, Mar. 31, 2000]


<R04>
             Subpart B_Side Impact Moving Deformable Barrier


<R05>
Sec. 587.4  Definitions.

    All terms defined in section 102 of the National Traffic and Motor 
Vehicle Safety Act (15 U.S.C. 1391) are used in their statutory meaning.

[[Page 1072]]


<R05>
Sec. 587.5  Incorporated materials.

    (a) The drawings and specifications referred to in this regulation 
that are not set forth in full are hereby incorporated in this part by 
reference. These materials are thereby made part of this regulation. The 
Director of the Federal Register has approved the materials incorporated 
by reference. For materials subject to change, only the specific version 
approved by the Director of the Federal Register and specified in the 
regulation are incorporated. A notice of any change will be published in 
the Federal Register. As a convenience to the reader, the materials 
incorporated by reference are listed in the Finding Aid Table found at 
the end of this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations.
    (b) The drawings and specifications incorporated in this part by 
reference are available for examination in the general reference section 
of Docket 79-04, Docket Section, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, Room 5109, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 
20590. Copies may be obtained from Rowley-Scher Reprographics, Inc., 
1111 14th Street, NW., Washington, DC 20005, telephone (202) 628-6667 or 
(202) 408-8789. The drawings and specifications are also on file in the 
reference library of the Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC.


<R05>
Sec. 587.6  General description.

    (a) The moving deformable barrier consists of component parts and 
component assemblies which are described in drawings and specifications 
that are set forth in this Sec. 587.6 of this chapter (incorporated by 
reference; see Sec. 587.5).
    (b) The moving deformable barrier specifications are provided in the 
drawings shown in DSL-1278 through DSL-1287, except DSL-1282, and the 
drawing shown in DSL-1290 (DSL-1278 through DSL-1287, except for DSL-
1282, and DSL-1290 are incorporated by reference; see Sec. 587.5).
    (1) The specifications for the final assembly of the moving 
deformable barrier are provided in the drawings shown in DSL-1278, dated 
June 2002.
    (2) The specifications for the frame assembly of the moving 
deformable barrier are provided in the drawings shown in DSL-1281, dated 
August 20, 1980.
    (3) The specifications for the face of the moving deformable barrier 
are provided in the drawings shown in DSL-1285, dated October 1991, and 
DSL-1286, dated August 20, 1980.
    (4) The specifications for the ballast installation and details 
concerning the ballast plate are provided in drawings shown in DSL-1279 
and DSL-1280, both dated August 20, 1980.
    (5) The specifications for the hub assembly and details concerning 
the brake are provided in drawings shown in DSL-1283, dated October 
1991.
    (6) The specifications for the rear guide assembly are provided in 
drawings shown in DSL-1284, dated August 20, 1980.
    (7) The specifications for the research axle assembly are provided 
in drawings shown in DSL-1287, dated October 1991.
    (8) The specifications for the compliance axle assembly are provided 
in drawings shown in DSL-1290, dated October 1991.
    (c) In configuration 2 (with two cameras and camera mounts, a light 
trap vane, and ballast reduced), the moving deformable barrier 
(crabbable axle), including the impact surface, supporting structure, 
and carriage, weighs 3,015 pounds, has a track width of 74 inches, and 
has a wheelbase of 102 inches.
    (d) In configuration 2, the moving deformable barrier has the 
following center of gravity:

X=44.2 inches rear of front axle
Y=0.3 inches left of longitudinal center line
Z=19.7 inches from ground.

    (e) The moving deformable barrier has the following moment of 
inertia:

Pitch=1669 ft-lb-sec \2\
Roll=375 ft-lb-sec \2\
Yaw=1897 ft-lb-sec \2\

[55 FR 45779, Oct. 30, 1990; 56 FR 47011, Sept. 17, 1991, as amended at 
57 FR 7558, Mar. 3, 1992; 68 FR 44472, July 29, 2003]

[[Page 1073]]


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 587.7-587.10  [Reserved]


<R04>
                   Subpart C_Offset Deformable Barrier

    Source: 65 FR 17199, Mar. 31, 2000, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 587.11  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 587.12  Incorporation by reference.

    Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Recommended Practice J211/1 
Rev. MAR 95, Instrumentation for Impact Tests-Part 1--Electronic 
Instrumentation, is incorporated by reference in Sec. 587.15 in 
accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. A copy may be 
obtained from SAE at Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., 400 
Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096. A copy of the material may be 
inspected at NHTSA's Docket Section, 400 Seventh Street, S.W., room 
5109, Washington, DC, or at the National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this 
material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/
federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.


<R05>
Sec. 587.13  General description.

    The offset deformable barrier is comprised of two elements: a fixed 
rigid barrier and a deformable face (Figure 1). The fixed rigid barrier 
is adequate to not deflect or displace more than 10 mm during the 
vehicle impact. The deformable face consists of aluminum honeycomb and 
aluminum covering.


<R05>
Sec. 587.14  Deformable face component dimensions and material specifications.

    The dimensions of the deformable face are illustrated in Figure 1 of 
this subpart. The dimensions and materials of the individual components 
are listed separately below. All dimensions allow a tolerance of <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 mm (0.1 in) unless otherwise specified.
    (a) Main honeycomb block.
    (1) Dimensions. The main honeycomb block has a height of 650 mm 
(25.6 in) (in the direction of honeycomb ribbon axis), a width of 1,000 
mm (39.4 in), and a depth of 450 mm (17.7 in)(in the direction of 
honeycomb cell axis).
    (2) Material. The main honeycomb block is constructed of the 
following material. The honeycomb is manufactured out of aluminum 3003, 
with a foil thickness of 0.076 mm (0.003 in) <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.004 
mm (0.002 in) a cell size of 19.14 mm (0.75 in), a density of 28.6 kg/
m\3\ (1.78 lb/ft \3\) <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2kg/m\3\ (0.25 1b/ft \3\), 
and a crush strength of 0.342 MPa (49.6 psi) + 0%-10%, measured in 
accordance with the certification procedure described in Sec. 587.15.
    (b) Bumper element honeycomb.
    (1) Dimensions. The bumper element honeycomb has a height of 330 mm 
(13 in)(in the direction of honeycomb ribbon axis), a width of 1,000 mm 
(39.4 in), and a depth of 90 mm (3.5 in) (in the direction of honeycomb 
cell axis).
    (2) Material. The bumper element honeycomb is constructed of the 
following material. The honeycomb is manufactured out of aluminum 3003, 
with a foil thickness of 0.076 mm (0.003 in) <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.004 
mm (0.0002 in), a cell size of 6.4 mm (0.25 in) <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 
mm (0.040 in), a density of 82.6 kg/m\3\ (5.15 lb/ft \3\) <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 kg/m\3\ (0.19 lb/ft \3\), and a crush strength of 
1.711 MPa (248 psi) + 0% -10%, measured in accordance with the 
certification procedure described in Sec. 587.14.
    (c) Backing sheet.
    (1) Dimensions. The backing sheet has a height of 800 mm (31.5 in), 
a width of 1,000 mm (39.4 in), and a thickness of 2.0 mm (0.08 in) 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 mm (0.004 in).
    (2) Material. The backing sheet is manufactured out of aluminum 
5251/5052.
    (d) Cladding sheet.
    (1) Dimensions. The cladding sheet of the main honeycomb block has a 
total length of 1,700 mm (66.9 in), a width of 1,000 mm (39.4 in), and a 
thickness of 0.81 mm (0.03 in) <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.07 mm (0.003 in). 
It is shaped as indicated in Figure 1.
    (2) Material. The cladding sheet of the main honeycomb block is 
manufactured out of aluminum 5251/5052.
    (e) Bumper element honeycomb facing sheet.
    (1) Dimensions. The bumper facing sheet has a height of 330 mm (13 
in), a width of 1,000 mm (39.4 in), and a thickness of 0.81 mm (0.03 in) 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.07 mm (0.003 in).

[[Page 1074]]

    (2) Material. The bumper element honeycomb facing sheet is 
manufactured out of aluminum 5251/5052.
    (f) Adhesive. The adhesive used throughout is a two-part 
polyurethane. (such as Ciba-Geigy XB5090/1 resin with XB5304 hardener, 
or equivalent).


<R05>
Sec. 587.15  Verification of aluminum honeycomb crush strength.

    The following procedure is used to ascertain the crush strength of 
the main honeycomb block and the bumper element honeycomb, as specified 
in Sec. Sec. 587.14(a)(2) and 587.14(b)(2).
    (a) Sample locations. To ensure uniformity of crush strength across 
the whole of the deformable face, 8 samples are taken from 4 locations 
evenly spaced across the honeycomb material. Seven of these 8 samples 
must meet the crush strength requirements when tested in accordance with 
the following sections. The location of the samples depends on the size 
of the honeycomb material being tested. Four samples, each measuring 300 
mm (11.8 in) x 300 mm (11.8 in) x 25 mm (1 in) thick are cut from the 
honeycomb material. (See Figure 2 for how to locate these samples on two 
different sizes of honeycomb material.) Each of these larger samples is 
cut into samples of the size specified in Sec. 587.15(b). Verification 
is based on the testing of two samples from each of the four locations. 
The other two samples are retained for future verification, if 
necessary.
    (b) Sample size. Samples of the following size are used for testing. 
The length is 150 mm (5.9 in) <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>6 mm (0.24 in), the 
width is 150 mm (5.9 in) <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>6 mm (0.24 in), and the 
thickness is 25 mm (1 in) <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 mm (0.08 in). The 
walls of incomplete cells around the edge of the sample are trimmed as 
follows (See Figure 3). In the width (``W'') direction, the fringes 
(``f'') are no greater than 1.8 mm (0.07 in); in the length (``L'') 
direction, the fringes (``e'') are at least half the length of one 
bonded cell wall (``d'') (in the ribbon direction).
    (c) Area measurement. The length of the sample is measured in three 
locations, 12.7 mm (0.5 in) from each end and in the middle, and 
recorded as L1, L2, and L3 (Figure 3). In the same manner, the width is 
measured and recorded as W1, W2, and W3 (Figure 3). These measurements 
are taken on the centerline of the thickness. The crush area is then 
calculated as:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31MR00.013

    (d) Crush rate and distance. The sample is crushed at a rate of not 
less than 5.1 mm/min (0.2 in/ min) and not more than 7.6 mm/min (0.29 
in/min). The minimum crush distance is 16.5 mm (0.65 in). Force versus 
deflection data are collected in either analog or digital form for each 
sample tested. If analog data are collected, a means of converting the 
data to digital data must be made available. All digital data are 
collected at a rate consistent with SAE Recommended Practice J211/1 Rev. 
MAR 95 (see Sec. 587.12).
    (e) Crush strength determination. Ignore all data prior to 6.4 mm 
(0.25 in) of crush and after 16.5 mm (0.65 in) of crush. Divide the 
remaining data into three sections or displacement intervals (n = 1, 2, 
3) (see Figure 4) as follows. Interval one is from 6.4-9.7 mm (0.25-0.38 
in) deflection, inclusive. Interval two is from 9.7-13.2 mm (0.38-0.52 
in) deflection, exclusive. Interval three is from 13.2-16.5 mm (0.52-
0.65 in) deflection, inclusive. Find the average for each section as 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31MR00.014

    where m represents the number of data points measured in each of the 
three intervals. Calculate the crush strength of each section as 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31MR00.015

    (f) Sample crush strength specification. For a honeycomb sample to 
meet crush strength requirements, the following condition must be met. 
For the 0.342 MPa (49.6 psi) material, the strength must be equal to or 
greater than 0.308 MPa (45 psi) but less than or equal to 0.342 MPa 
(49.6 psi) for all three compression intervals. For the 1.711 MPa (248 
psi) material the strength must be equal to or greater than 1.540 MPa 
(223 psi) but less than or equal to 1.711 MPa (248 psi) for all three 
compression intervals.

[[Page 1075]]

    (g) Testing hardware. (1) The hardware used to verify crush strength 
is capable of applying a load of 13.3 kN (3,000 lb), over at least a 
16.5 mm (0.65 in) stroke. The crush rate is constant and known. To 
ensure that the load is applied to the entire sample, the top and bottom 
crush plates are no smaller than 165 mm by 165 mm (6.5 in x 6.5 in). The 
engaging surfaces of the crush plates have a roughness approximately 
equivalent to 60 grit sandpaper. The bottom crush plate is marked to 
ensure that the applied load is centered on the sample.
    (2) The crush plate assemblies have an average angular rigidity 
(about axes normal to the direction of crush) of at least 1017 Nm/deg 
(750 ft-lb/deg), over the range of 0 to 203 Nm (0 to 150 ft-lb) applied 
torque.


<R05>
Sec. 587.16  Adhesive bonding procedure.

    Immediately before bonding, aluminum sheet surfaces to be bonded are 
thoroughly cleaned using a suitable solvent, such as 1-1-1 
Trichloroethane. This is carried out at least twice and more often if 
required to eliminate grease or dirt deposits. The cleaned surfaces are 
abraded using 120 grit abrasive paper. Metallic/silicon carbide abrasive 
paper is not to be used. The surfaces are thoroughly abraded and the 
abrasive paper changed regularly during the process to avoid clogging, 
which could lead to a polishing effect. Following abrading, the surfaces 
are thoroughly cleaned again, as above. In total, the surfaces are 
solvent-cleaned at least four times. All dust and deposits left as a 
result of the abrading process are removed, as these can adversely 
affect bonding. The adhesive is applied to one surface only, using a 
ribbed rubber roller. In cases where honeycomb is to be bonded to 
aluminum sheet, the adhesive is applied to the aluminum sheet only. A 
maximum pressure of 0.5 kg/m\2\ (11.9 lb/ft\2\) is applied evenly over 
the surface, giving a maximum film thickness of 0.5 mm (0.02 in).


<R05>
Sec. 587.17  Construction.

    (a) The main honeycomb block is bonded to the backing sheet with 
adhesive such that the cell axes are perpendicular to the sheet. The 
cladding sheet is adhesively bonded to the front surface of the main 
honeycomb block. The top and bottom surfaces of the cladding sheet are 
not bonded to the main honeycomb block but are positioned close to it. 
The cladding sheet is adhesively bonded to the backing sheet at the 
mounting flanges. The bumper element honeycomb is adhesively bonded to 
the front of the cladding sheet such that the cell axes are 
perpendicular to the sheet. The bottom of the bumper element honeycomb 
is flush with the bottom surface of the cladding sheet. The bumper 
facing sheet is adhesively bonded to the front of the bumper element 
honeycomb.
    (b) The bumper element honeycomb is divided into three equal 
sections by means of two horizontal slots. These slots are cut through 
the entire depth of the bumper element and extend the whole width of the 
bumper. The slots are cut using a saw; their width is the width of the 
blade used which do not exceed 4.0 mm (0.16 in).
    (c) Clearance holes for mounting the deformable face are drilled in 
the cladding sheet mounting flanges (shown in Figure 5). The holes are 
20 mm (0.79 in) in diameter. Five holes are drilled in the top flange at 
a distance of 40 mm (1.57 in) from the top edge of the flange and five 
holes in the bottom flange at a distance of 40 mm (1.6 in) from the 
bottom edge of the flange. The holes are spaced at 100 mm (3.9 in), 300 
mm (11.8 in), 500 mm (19.7 in), 700 mm (27.5 in), 900 mm (35.4 in) 
horizontally, from either edge of the barrier. All holes are drilled 
within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 mm (0.04 in) of the nominal distances.


<R05>
Sec. 587.18  Dimensions of fixed rigid barrier.

    (a) The fixed rigid barrier has a mass of not less than 7 x 10\4\ kg 
(154,324 lb).
    (b) The height of the fixed rigid barrier is at least as high as the 
highest point on the vehicle at the intersection of the vertical 
transverse plane tangent to the forwardmost point of both front tires, 
when the tires are parallel to the longitudinal centerline of the 
vehicle, and the vertical plane through the longitudinal centerline of 
the vehicle.

[[Page 1076]]


<R05>
Sec. 587.19  Mounting.

    (a) The deformable face is rigidly attached to the edge of the fixed 
rigid barrier or to some rigid structure attached thereto. The front of 
the fixed rigid barrier to which the deformable face is attached is flat 
(continuous over the height and width of the face and vertical <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1 degree and perpendicular <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 
degree to the axis of the run-up track). The edge of the deformable face 
is aligned with the edge of the fixed rigid barrier appropriate for the 
side of the vehicle to be tested.
    (b) The deformable face is attached to the fixed rigid barrier by 
means of ten bolts, five in the top mounting flange and five in the 
bottom, such that the bottom of the bumper element honeycomb is 200 mm 
(7.8 in) <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>15 mm (0.6 in) from the ground. These 
bolts are at least 8 mm (0.3 in) in diameter. Steel clamping strips are 
used for both the top and bottom mounting flanges (Figure 1). These 
strips are 60 mm (2.4 in) high and 1000 mm (39.4 in) wide and have 
thickness of at least 3 mm (0.12 in). Five clearance holes of 20 mm (0.8 
in) diameter are drilled in both strips to correspond with those in the 
mounting flange on the deformable face cladding sheet (see Sec. 
586.17(c)).

                    Figures to Subpart C of Part 587
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31MR00.003


[[Page 1077]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31MR00.004


[[Page 1078]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31MR00.005


[[Page 1079]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31MR00.006


[[Page 1080]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31MR00.007


<R03>
PART 588_CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEMS RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS--Table of Contents




Secs.
588.1 Scope.
588.2 Purpose.
588.3 Applicability.
588.4 Definitions.
588.5 Records.
588.6 Record retention.

    Authority: 15 U.S.C. 1392, 1401, 1407; delegation of authority at 49 
CFR 1.50.

    Source: 57 FR 41438, Sept. 10, 1992, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 588.1  Scope.

    This part establishes requirements for manufacturers of child 
restraint systems to maintain lists of the names and addresses of child 
restraint owners.


<R05>
Sec. 588.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to aid manufacturers in contacting the 
owners of child restraints during notification campaigns conducted in 
accordance with 49 CFR part 577, and to aid the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration in determining whether a manufacturer has met its 
recall responsibilities.


<R05>
Sec. 588.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to manufacturers of child restraint systems, 
except factory-installed built-in restraints.

[[Page 1081]]


<R05>
Sec. 588.4  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory definitions. All terms defined in section 102 of the 
National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act (15 U.S.C. 1391) are used 
in their statutory meaning.
    (b) Motor Vehicle Safety Standard definitions. Unless otherwise 
indicated, all terms used in this part that are defined in the Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standards, part 571 of this subchapter (hereinafter ``the 
Standards''), are used as defined in the Standards.
    (c) Definitions used in this part.
    Child restraint system is used as defined in S4 of 49 CFR 571.213, 
Child Restraint Systems.
    Factory-installed built-in child restraint system is used as defined 
in S4 of 49 CFR 571.213.
    Owners include purchasers.
    Registration form means the form provided with a child restraint 
system in compliance with the requirements of 49 CFR 571.213, and any 
communication from an owner of a child restraint to the manufacturer 
that provides the restraint's model name or number and the owner's name 
and mailing address.


<R05>
Sec. 588.5  Records.

    Each manufacturer, or manufacturer's designee, shall record and 
maintain records of the owners of child restraint systems who have 
submitted a registration form. The record shall be in a form suitable 
for inspection such as computer information storage devices or card 
files, and shall include the names and mailing addresses of the owners, 
and the model name or number and date of manufacture (month, year) of 
the owners' child restraint systems.


<R05>
Sec. 588.6  Record retention.

    Each manufacturer, or manufacturer's designee, shall maintain the 
information specified in Sec. 588.5 of this part for a registered 
restraint system for a period of not less than six years from the date 
of manufacture of that restraint system.


<R03>
PART 589_UPPER INTERIOR COMPONENT HEAD IMPACT PROTECTION PHASE-IN REPORTING 
REQUIREMENTS--Table of Contents




Sec.
589.1 Scope.
589.2 Purpose.
589.3 Applicability.
589.4 Definitions.
589.5 Response to inquiries.
589.6 Reporting requirements.
589.7 Records.
589.8 Petition to extend period to file report.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30117, and 30166; delegation 
of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 60 FR 43061, Aug. 18, 1995, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 589.1  Scope.

    This part establishes requirements for manufacturers of passenger 
cars and trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a gross vehicle 
weight rating of 4,536 kilograms or less and buses with a gross vehicle 
weight rating of 3,860 kilograms or less to respond to NHTSA inquiries, 
to submit a report, and maintain records related to the report, 
concerning the number of such vehicles that meet the upper interior 
component head impact protection requirements of Standard No. 201, 
Occupant protection in interior impact (49 CFR 571.201).

[62 FR 16735, Apr. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 589.2  Purpose.

    This purpose of these reporting requirements is to aid the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration in determining whether a 
manufacturer of passenger cars and trucks and multipurpose passenger 
vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kilograms or less 
and buses with a gross vehicle weight rating of 3,860 kilograms or less 
has complied with the upper interior component head impact protection 
requirements of Standard No. 201.

[62 FR 16735, Apr. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 589.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to manufacturers of passenger cars and trucks and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles with a gross

[[Page 1082]]

vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kilograms or less and buses with a gross 
vehicle weight rating of 3,860 kilograms or less. However, this part 
does not apply to any manufacturers whose production consists 
exclusively of walk-in vans, vehicles manufactured in two or more 
stages, and vehicles that are altered after previously having been 
certified in accordance with part 567 of this chapter.

[62 FR 16735, Apr. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 589.4  Definitions.

    (a) All terms defined in 49 U.S.C. 30102 are used in their statutory 
meaning.
    (b) Bus, gross vehicle weight rating or GVWR, multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, passenger car, and truck are used as defined in Sec. 571.3 of 
this chapter.
    (c) Production year means the 12-month period between September 1 of 
one year and August 31 of the following year, inclusive.


<R05>
Sec. 589.5  Response to inquiries.

    During the production years ending August 31, 1999, August 31, 2000, 
August 31, 2001, and August 31, 2002, each manufacturer shall, upon 
request from the Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance, provide 
information regarding which vehicle make/models are certified as 
complying with the requirements of S6 of Standard No. 201.

[62 FR 16735, Apr. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 589.6  Reporting requirements.

    (a) Phase-in selection reporting requirement. Within 60 days after 
the end of the production year ending August 31, 1999, each manufacturer 
choosing to comply with one of the phase-in schedules permitted by S6.1 
of 49 CFR 571.201 shall submit a report to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration stating which phase-in schedule it will comply 
with until September 1, 2002. Each report shall--
    (1) Identify the manufacturer;
    (2) State the full name, title, and address of the official 
responsible for preparing the report;
    (3) Identify the section number for the phase-in schedule selected;
    (4) Be written in the English language; and
    (5) Be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW, Washington, DC 20590.
    (b) General reporting requirements. Within 60 days after the end of 
the production years ending August 31, 1999, August 31, 2000, August 31, 
2001, and August 31, 2002, each manufacturer shall submit a report to 
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration concerning its 
compliance with the upper interior component head impact protection 
requirements of Standard No. 201 for its passenger cars, trucks, buses 
and multipurpose passenger vehicles produced in that year. Each report 
shall--
    (1) Identify the manufacturer;
    (2) State the full name, title, and address of the official 
responsible for preparing the report;
    (3) Identify the production year being reported on;
    (4) Contain a statement regarding whether or not the manufacturer 
complied with the upper interior component head impact protection 
requirements of the amended Standard No. 201 for the period covered by 
the report and the basis for that statement;
    (5) Provide the information specified in Sec. 589.6(c);
    (6) Be written in the English language; and
    (7) Be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW, Washington, DC 20590.
    (c) Report content--(1) Basis for phase-in production goals. Each 
manufacturer shall provide the number of passenger cars and trucks and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 4,536 kilograms or less 
and buses with a GVWR of 3,860 kilograms or less manufactured for sale 
in the United States for each of the three previous production years, 
or, at the manufacturer's option, for the current production year. A new 
manufacturer that has not previously manufactured passenger cars and 
trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 4,536 
kilograms or less and buses with a GVWR of 3,860 kilograms or less for 
sale in the United States must report the number of such vehicles 
manufactured during the current production

[[Page 1083]]

year. However, manufacturers are not required to report any information 
with respect to those vehicles that are walk-in van type vehicles, 
vehicles manufactured in two or more stages, and/or vehicles that are 
altered after previously having been certified in accordance with part 
567 of this chapter.
    (2) Production. Each manufacturer shall report for the production 
year for which the report is filed the number of passenger cars and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles and trucks with a GVWR of 4,536 
kilograms or less and buses with a GVWR of 3,860 kilograms or less that 
meet the upper interior component head impact protection requirements 
(S6) of Standard No. 201.
    (3) Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer. Each 
manufacturer whose reporting of information is affected by one or more 
of the express written contracts permitted by S6.1.6.2 of Standard No. 
201 shall:
    (i) Report the existence of each contract, including the names of 
all parties to the contract, and explain how the contract affects the 
report being submitted.
    (ii) Report the actual number of vehicles covered by each contract.

[62 FR 16735, Apr. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 589.7  Records.

    Each manufacturer shall maintain records of the Vehicle 
Identification Number for each passenger car, multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck and bus for which information is reported under Sec. 
589.6(c)(2) until December 31, 2003.

[62 FR 16735, Apr. 8, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 589.8  Petition to extend period to file report.

    A petition for extension of the time to submit a report must be 
received not later than 15 days before expiration of the time stated in 
Sec. 589.6(b). The petition must be submitted to: Administrator, 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW, 
Washington, DC 20590. The filing of a petition does not automatically 
extend the time for filing a report. A petition will be granted only if 
the petitioner shows good cause for the extension, and if the extension 
is consistent with the public interest.

[62 FR 16735, Apr. 8, 1997]

                           PART 590 [RESERVED]


<R03>
PART 591_IMPORTATION OF VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT SUBJECT TO FEDERAL SAFETY, 
BUMPER AND THEFT PREVENTION STANDARDS--Table of Contents




Sec.
591.1 Scope.
591.2 Purpose.
591.3 Applicability.
591.4 Definitions.
591.5 Declarations required for importation.
591.6 Documents accompanying declarations.
591.7 Restrictions on importations.
591.8 Conformance bond and conditions.
591.9 Petitions for remission or mitigation of forfeiture.
591.10 Offer of cash deposits or obligations of the United States in 
          lieu of sureties on bonds.

Appendix A to Part 591--Section 591.5(f) Bond for the Entry of a Single 
          Vehicle
Appendix B to Part 591--Section 591.5(f) Bond for the Entry of More Than 
          a Single Vehicle
Appendix C to Part 591--Power of Attorney and Agreement

    Authority: Pub. L. 100-562, 49 U.S.C. 322(a), 30117, 30141-30147; 
delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 54 FR 40078, Sept. 29, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 591.1  Scope.

    This part establishes procedures governing the importation of motor 
vehicles and motor vehicle equipment subject to the Federal motor 
vehicle safety, bumper, and theft prevention standards.

[55 FR 11378, Mar. 28, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 591.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to ensure that motor vehicles and motor 
vehicle equipment permanently imported into the United States conform 
with theft prevention standards issued under part 541 of this chapter 
and that they conform with, or are brought into conformity with, all 
applicable Federal

[[Page 1084]]

motor vehicle safety standards issued under part 571 of this chapter and 
bumper standards issued under part 581 of this chapter. The purpose of 
this part is also to ensure that nonconforming vehicles and equipment 
items imported on a temporary basis are ultimately either exported or 
abandoned to the United States.

[55 FR 11378, Mar. 28, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 591.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to any person offering a motor vehicle or item of 
motor vehicle equipment for importation into the United States.

[55 FR 11378, Mar. 28, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 591.4  Definitions.

    All terms used in this part that are defined in 49 U.S.C. 30102, 
32101, 32301, 32502, and 33101 are used as defined in those sections 
except that the term ``model year'' is used as defined in part 593 of 
this chapter.
    Administrator means the Administrator of NHTSA.
    NHTSA means the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration of 
the Department of Transportation.
    Dutiable value means entered value, as determined by the Secretary 
of the Treasury.
    Original manufacturer means the entity responsible for the original 
manufacture or assembly of a motor vehicle, and does not include any 
person (other than such entity) who converts the motor vehicle after its 
manufacture to conformance with the Federal motor vehicle safety 
standards.
    Reconstructed motor vehicle means a motor vehicle whose body is less 
than 25 years old and which is mounted on a chassis or frame that is not 
its original chassis or frame and that is less than 25 years old.
    Salvage motor vehicle means a motor vehicle, whether or not 
repaired, which has been:
    (1) Wrecked, destroyed, or damaged, to the extent that the total 
estimated or actual cost of parts and labor to rebuild or reconstruct 
the motor vehicle to its pre-accident condition and for legal operation 
on the streets, roads, or highways, exceeds 75 percent of its retail 
value at the time it was wrecked, destroyed, or damaged; or
    (2) Wrecked, destroyed, or damaged, to which an insurance company 
acquires ownership pursuant to a damage settlement (other than a damage 
settlement in connection with a recovered theft vehicle unless such 
motor vehicle sustained sufficient damage to meet the 75 percent 
threshold specified in the first sentence); or
    (3) Voluntarily designated as such by its owner, without regard to 
the extent of the motor vehicle's damage and repairs.

[54 FR 40078, Sept. 29, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 3747, Feb. 5, 1990; 55 
FR 11378, Mar. 28, 1990; 59 FR 52097, Oct. 14, 1994; 60 FR 57954, Nov. 
24, 1995; 69 FR 52092, Aug. 24, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 591.5  Declarations required for importation.

    No person shall import a motor vehicle or item of motor vehicle 
equipment into the United States unless, at the time it is offered for 
importation, its importer files a declaration, in duplicate, which 
declares one of the following:
    (a)(1) The vehicle was not manufactured primarily for use on the 
public roads and thus is not a motor vehicle subject to the Federal 
motor vehicle safety, bumper, and theft prevention standards; or
    (2) The equipment item is not a system, part, or component of a 
motor vehicle and thus is not an item of motor vehicle equipment subject 
to the Federal motor vehicle safety, bumper, and theft prevention 
standards.
    (b) The vehicle or equipment item conforms with all applicable 
safety standards (or the vehicle does not conform solely because readily 
attachable equipment items which will be attached to it before it is 
offered for sale to the first purchases for purposes other than resale 
are not attached), and bumper and theft prevention standards, and bears 
a certification label or tag to that effect permanently affixed by the 
original manufacturer to the vehicle, or by the manufacturer to the 
equipment item or its delivery container, in accordance with, as 
applicable, parts 541, 555, 567, 568, and 581, or 571 (for certain 
equipment items) of this chapter.

[[Page 1085]]

    (c) The vehicle or equipment item does not comply with all 
applicable Federal motor vehicle safety, bumper, and theft prevention 
standards, but is intended solely for export, and the vehicle or 
equipment item, and the outside of the container of the equipment item, 
if any, bears a label or tag to that effect.
    (d) The vehicle does not conform with all applicable Federal motor 
vehicle safety, bumper, and theft prevention standards, but the importer 
is eligible to import it because:
    (1) (S)he is a nonresident of the United States and the vehicle is 
registered in a country other than the United States,
    (2) (S)he is temporarily importing the vehicle for personal use for 
a period not to exceed one year, and will not sell it during that time,
    (3) (S)he will export it not later than the end of one year after 
entry, and
    (4) The declaration contains the importer's passport number and 
country of issue.
    (e) The vehicle or equipment item requires further manufacturing 
operations to perform its intended function, other than the addition of 
readily attachable equipment items such as mirrors, wipers, or tire and 
rim assemblies, or minor finishing operations such as painting, and any 
part of such vehicle that is required to be marked by part 541 of this 
chapter is marked in accordance with that part.
    (f) The vehicle does not conform with all applicable Federal motor 
vehicle safety and bumper standards (but does conform with all 
applicable Federal theft prevention standards), but the importer is 
eligible to import it because:
    (1) The importer has furnished a bond in an amount equal to 150% of 
the dutiable value of the vehicle, containing the terms and conditions 
specified in section 591.8; and
    (2)(i) The importer has registered with NHTSA pursuant to part 592 
of this chapter, and such registration has not been revoked or 
suspended, and the Administrator has determined pursuant to part 593 of 
this chapter that the model and model year of the vehicle to be imported 
is eligible for importation into the United States; or
    (ii) The importer has executed a contract or other agreement with an 
importer who has registered with NHTSA pursuant to part 592 of this 
chapter and whose registration has not been suspended or revoked; and 
the Administrator has determined pursuant to part 593 of this chapter 
that the model and model year of the vehicle to be imported is eligible 
for importation into the United States; and
    (3) The vehicle is not a salvage motor vehicle or a reconstructed 
motor vehicle.
    (g) (For importations for personal use only) The vehicle was 
certified by its original manufacturer as complying with all applicable 
Canadian motor vehicle safety standards and its original manufacturer 
has informed NHTSA that it complies with all applicable Federal motor 
vehicle safety, bumper, and theft prevention standards, or that it 
complies with all such standards except for the labeling requirements of 
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards Nos. 101 and 110 or 120, and/or 
the specifications of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 108 
relating to daytime running lamps. The vehicle is not a salvage motor 
vehicle, a repaired salvage motor vehicle, or a reconstructed motor 
vehicle.
    (h) The vehicle does not conform with all applicable Federal motor 
vehicle safety, bumper, and theft prevention standards, but the importer 
is eligible to import it because (s)he:
    (1)(i) Is a member of the personnel of a foreign government on 
assignment in the United States, or a member of the Secretariat of a 
public international organization so designated under the International 
Organization Immunities Act, and within the class of persons for whom 
free entry of motor vehicles has been authorized by the Department of 
State;
    (ii) Is importing the motor vehicle on a temporary basis for the 
personal use of the importer, and will register it through the Office of 
Foreign Missions of the Department of State;
    (iii) Will not sell the vehicle to any person in the United States, 
other than a person eligible to import a vehicle under this paragraph; 
and
    (iv) Will obtain from the Office of Foreign Missions of the 
Department of

[[Page 1086]]

State, before departing the United States at the conclusion of a tour of 
duty, an ownership title to the vehicle good for export only; or
    (2)(i) Is a member of the armed forces of a foreign country on 
assignment in the United States;
    (ii) Is importing the vehicle on a temporary basis, and for the 
personal use of the importer;
    (iii) Will not sell the vehicle to any person in the United States, 
other than to a person eligible to import a vehicle under this 
subsection; and
    (iv) Will export the vehicle upon departing the United States at the 
conclusion of a tour of duty.
    (i)(1) The vehicle is 25 or more years old.
    (2) The equipment item was manufactured on a date when no applicable 
safety or theft prevention standard was in effect.
    (j)(1) The vehicle or equipment item does not conform with all 
applicable Federal motor vehicle safety and bumper standards, but is 
being imported solely for the purpose of:
    (i) Research;
    (ii) Investigations;
    (iii) Show or display;
    (iv) Demonstrations or training; or
    (v) Competitive racing events;
    (2)(i) The importer has received written permission from NHTSA; or
    (ii) The importer is an original manufacturer of motor vehicles (or 
a wholly owned subsidiary thereof) that are certified to comply with all 
applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards; and
    (3) The importer will provide the Administrator with documentary 
proof of export or destruction not later than 30 days following the end 
of the period for which the vehicle has been admitted into the United 
States.
    (k) The equipment item is subject to the theft prevention standard, 
and is marked in accordance with the requirements of part 541 of this 
chapter.

[54 FR 40078, Sept. 29, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 3747, Feb. 5, 1990; 55 
FR 11378, Mar. 28, 1990; 55 FR 17439, Apr. 25, 1990; 57 FR 2047, Jan. 
17, 1992; 57 FR 44703, Sept. 29, 1992; 59 FR 31560, June 20, 1994; 64 FR 
37882, July 14, 1999; 69 FR 52092, Aug. 24, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 591.6  Documents accompanying declarations.

    Declarations of eligibility for importation made pursuant to Sec. 
591.5 must be accompanied by the following certification and documents, 
where applicable.
    (a) A declaration made pursuant to Sec. 591.5(a) shall be 
accompanied by a statement substantiating that the vehicle was not 
manufactured for use on the public roads, or that the equipment item was 
not manufactured for use on a motor vehicle or is not an item of motor 
vehicle equipment.
    (b) A declaration made pursuant to Sec. 591.5(e) shall be 
accompanied by:
    (1) (For a motor vehicle) a document meeting the requirements of 
Sec. 568.4 of part 568 of this chapter.
    (2) (For an item of motor vehicle equipment) a written statement 
issued by the manufacturer of the equipment item which states the 
applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standard(s) with which the 
equipment item is not in compliance, and which describes the further 
manufacturing required for the equipment item to perform its intended 
function.
    (c) A declaration made pursuant to paragraph (f) of Sec. 591.5, and 
under a bond for the entry of a single vehicle, shall be accompanied by 
a bond in the form shown in Appendix A to this part, in an amount equal 
to 150% of the dutiable value of the vehicle, or, if under bond for the 
entry of more than one vehicle, shall be accompanied by a bond in the 
form shown in Appendix B to this part and by Customs Form CF 7501, for 
the conformance of the vehicle(s) with all applicable Federal motor 
vehicle safety and bumper standards, or, if conformance is not achieved, 
for the delivery of such vehicles to the Secretary of Homeland Security 
for export at no cost to the United Sates, or for its abandonment.
    (d) A declaration made pursuant to Sec. 591.5(f) by an importer who 
is not a Registered Importer shall be accompanied by a copy of the 
contract or other agreement that the importer has with a Registered 
Importer to bring the vehicle into conformance with all applicable 
Federal motor vehicle safety standards.

[[Page 1087]]

    (e) A declaration made pursuant to Sec. 591.5(h) shall be 
accompanied by a copy of the importer's official orders, or, if a 
qualifying member of the personnel of a foreign government on assignment 
in the United States, the name of the embassy to which the importer is 
accredited.
    (f) A declaration made pursuant to Sec. 591.5(j) shall be 
accompanied by the following documentation:
    (1) A declaration made pursuant to Sec. 591.5(j)(1)(i), (ii), (iv), 
or (v) and (j)(2)(i) shall be accompanied by a letter from the 
Administrator authorizing importation pursuant to Sec. 591.5(j)(1)(i), 
(ii), (iv), or (v) and (j)(2)(i). Any person seeking to import a motor 
vehicle or motor vehicle equipment pursuant to these sections shall 
submit, in advance of such importation, a written request to the 
Administrator containing a full and complete statement identifying the 
vehicle or equipment, its make, model, model year or date of 
manufacture, VIN if a motor vehicle, and the specific purpose(s) of 
importation. The discussion of purpose(s) shall include a description of 
the use to be made of the vehicle or equipment. If use on the public 
roads is an integral part of the purpose for which the vehicle or 
equipment is imported, the statement shall request permission for use on 
the public roads, describing the purpose which makes such use necessary, 
and stating the estimated period of time during which use of the vehicle 
or equipment on the public roads is necessary. The request shall also 
state the intended means of final disposition, and disposition date, of 
the vehicle or equipment after completion of the purposes for which it 
is imported. The request shall be addressed to Director, Office of 
Vehicle Safety Compliance (NSA-32), National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, Room 6111, 400 Seventh Street, SW, Washington, DC 20590.
    (2) A declaration made pursuant to Sec. 591.5(j)(1)(iii) and 
(j)(2)(i) shall be accompanied by a letter from the Administrator 
authorizing importation pursuant to Sec. 591.5(j)(1)(iii) and 
(j)(2)(i). Any person seeking to import a motor vehicle or motor vehicle 
equipment pursuant to those sections shall submit, in advance of such 
importation, a written request to the Administrator containing a full 
and complete statement identifying the equipment item or the vehicle and 
its make, model, model year or date of manufacture, VIN, and mileage at 
the time the request is made. The importer's written request to the 
Administrator shall explain why the vehicle or equipment item is of 
historical or technological interest. The importer shall also provide a 
statement that, until the vehicle is not less than 25 years old, (s)he 
shall not sell, or transfer possession of, or title to, the vehicle, and 
shall not license it for use, or operate it on the public roads, except 
under such terms and conditions as the Administrator may authorize. If 
the importer wishes to operate the vehicle on the public roads, the 
request to the Administrator shall include a description of the purposes 
for which (s)he wishes to use it on the public roads, a copy of an 
insurance policy or a contract to acquire an insurance policy, which 
contains as a condition thereof that the vehicle will not accumulate 
mileage of more than 2,500 miles in any 12-month period and a statement 
that the importer shall maintain such policy in effect until the vehicle 
is not less than 25 years old, a statement that the importer will allow 
the Administrator to inspect the vehicle at any time after its 
importation to verify that the accumulated mileage of the vehicle is not 
more than 2,500 miles in any 12-month period, and a statement that the 
vehicle will not be used on the public roads unless it is in compliance 
with the regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency.
    (3) A declaration made pursuant to Sec. 591.5(j)(2)(ii) shall be 
accompanied by the written statement of its importer describing the use 
to be made of the vehicle or equipment item. If use on the public roads 
is an integral part of the purpose for which the vehicle or equipment 
item is imported, the statement shall describe the purpose which makes 
such use necessary, state the estimated period of time during which use 
of the vehicle or equipment item on the public roads is necessary, and 
state the intended means of final disposition (and disposition date) of 
the vehicle or

[[Page 1088]]

equipment item after completion of the purpose for which it is imported.

[54 FR 40078, Sept. 29, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 3747, Feb. 5, 1990; 55 
FR 6994, Feb. 28, 1990; 55 FR 11379, Mar. 28, 1990; 57 FR 2047, Jan. 17, 
1992; 57 FR 29043, June 30, 1992; 58 FR 12908, Mar. 8, 1993; 59 FR 
52097, Oct. 14, 1994; 60 FR 57954, Nov. 24, 1995; 64 FR 37883, July 14, 
1999; 69 FR 52092, Aug. 24, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 591.7  Restrictions on importations.

    (a) A vehicle or equipment item which has entered the United States 
under a declaration made pursuant to Sec. 591.5(j), and for which a 
Temporary Importation Bond has been provided to the Secretary of the 
Treasury, shall not remain in the United States for a period that 
exceeds 3 years from its date of entry.
    (b) If the importer of a vehicle or equipment item under Sec. 
591.5(j) does not intend to export or destroy the vehicle or equipment 
item not later than 3 years after the date of entry, and intends to pay 
duty to the U.S. Customs Service on such vehicle or equipment item, the 
importer shall request permission in writing from the Administrator for 
the vehicle or equipment item to remain in the United States for an 
additional period of time not to exceed 5 years from the date of entry. 
Such a request must be received not later than 60 days before the date 
that is 3 years after the date of entry. Such vehicle or equipment item 
shall not remain in the United States for a period that exceeds 5 years 
from the date of entry, unless further written permission has been 
obtained from the Administrator.
    (c) An importer of a vehicle which has entered the United States 
under a declaration made pursuant to Sec. 591.5(j)(2)(i) shall not 
sell, or transfer possession of, or title to, the vehicle, and shall not 
license it for use, or operate it on the public roads, except under such 
terms and conditions as the Administrator may authorize in writing. An 
importer of a vehicle which has entered the United States under a 
declaration made pursuant to Sec. 591.5(j)(2)(ii) shall at all times 
retain title to it.
    (d) Any violation of a term or condition imposed by the 
Administrator in a letter authorizing importation for on-road use under 
Sec. 591.5(j), or a change of status under paragraph (e) of this 
section, including a failure to allow inspection upon request to verify 
that the accumulated mileage of the vehicle is not more than 2,500 miles 
in any 12-month period, shall be considered a violation of 49 U.S.C. 
30112(a) for which a civil penalty may be imposed. Such a violation will 
also act to void the authorization and require the exportation of the 
vehicle. With respect to importations under Sec. 591.6(f)(2) or a 
change of status to an importation for show or display as provided under 
paragraph (e) of this section, if the Administrator has reason to 
believe that a violation has occurred, the Administrator may tentatively 
conclude that a term of entry has been violated, but shall make no final 
conclusion until the importer or owner has been afforded an opportunity 
to present data, views, and arguments as to why there is no violation or 
why a penalty should not be imposed.
    (e) If the importer of a vehicle under Sec. 591.5(f)(2)(ii) has been 
notified in writing by the Registered Importer with which it has 
executed a contract or other agreement that the registration of the 
Registered Importer has been suspended (for other than the first time) 
or revoked, pursuant to Sec. 592.7 of this chapter, and that it has not 
affixed a certification label on the vehicle and/or filed a 
certification of conformance with the Administrator as required by 
Sec. 592.6 of this chapter, and that it therefore may not release the 
vehicle for the importer, the importer shall execute a contract or other 
agreement with another Registered Importer for the certification of the 
vehicle and submission of the certification of conformance to the 
Administrator. The Administrator shall toll the 120-day period for 
submission of a certification to the Administrator pursuant to 
Sec. 592.6(d) of this chapter during the period from the date of the 
Registered Importer's notification to the importer until the date of the 
contract with the substitute Registered Importer.

[54 FR 40078, Sept. 29, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 6994, Feb. 28, 1990; 
57 FR 2047, Jan. 17, 1992; 58 FR 12908, Mar. 8, 1993; 59 FR 31560, June 
20, 1994; 64 FR 37883, July 14, 1999; 69 FR 52092, Aug. 24, 2004]

[[Page 1089]]


<R05>
Sec. 591.8  Conformance bond and conditions.

    (a) The bond required under section 591.6(c) for importation of a 
vehicle not originally manufactured to conform with all applicable 
standards issued under part 571 and part 581 of this chapter shall cover 
only one motor vehicle, and shall be in an amount equal to 150% of the 
dutiable value of the vehicle. However, a registered importer may enter 
vehicles under a bond of a continuing nature that covers an indefinite 
number of motor vehicles 150% of whose total dutiable value at any point 
in time does not exceed $1,000,000.
    (b) The principal on the bond shall be the importer of the vehicle.
    (c) The surety on the bond shall possess a certificate of authority 
to underwrite Federal bonds. (See list of certificated sureties at 54 FR 
27800, June 30, 1989)
    (d) In consideration of the release from the custody of the Bureau 
of Customs and Border Protection, or the withdrawal from a Customs 
bonded warehouse into the commerce of, or for consumption in, the United 
States, of a motor vehicle not originally manufactured to conform to 
applicable standards issued under part 571 and part 581 of this chapter, 
the obligors (principal and surety) shall agree to the following 
conditions of the bond:
    (1) To have such vehicle brought into conformity with all applicable 
standards issued under part 571 and part 581 of this chapter within the 
number of days after the date of entry that the Administrator has 
established for such vehicle (to wit, 120 days);
    (2) In the case of a vehicle imported pursuant to section 591.5(f), 
to file (or if not a Registered Importer, to cause the Registered 
Importer of the vehicle to file) with the Administrator, a certificate 
that the vehicle complies with each Federal motor vehicle safety and 
bumper standard in the year that the vehicle was manufactured and which 
applies in such year to the vehicle; or
    (3) In the case of a Registered Importer, not to release custody of 
the vehicle to any person for license or registration for use on public 
roads, streets, or highways, or license or register the vehicle from the 
date of entry until 30 calendar days after it has certified compliance 
of the vehicle to the Administrator, unless the Administrator has 
notified the principal before 30 calendar days that (s)he has accepted 
the certification, and that the vehicle and bond may be released, except 
that no such release shall be permitted, before or after the 30th 
calendar day, if the principal has received written notice from the 
Administrator that an inspection of the vehicle will be required or that 
there is reason to believe that such certification is false or contains 
a misrepresentation;
    (4) In the case of a Registered Importer, to cause the vehicle to be 
available for inspection, if the principal has received written notice 
from the Administrator that an inspection is required.
    (5) In the case of a Registered Importer, not to release the vehicle 
until the Administrator is satisfied with the certification and any 
modification thereof, if the principal has received written notice from 
the Administrator that there is reason to believe that the certification 
is false or contains a misrepresentation.
    (6) If the principal has received written notice from the 
Administrator that the vehicle has been found not to comply with all 
applicable Federal motor vehicle safety and bumper standards, and 
written demand that the vehicle be abandoned to the United States, or 
delivered to the Secretary of Homeland Security for export (at no cost 
to the United States), or to abandon the vehicle to the United States, 
or to deliver the vehicle, or cause the vehicle to be delivered to, the 
custody of the Bureau of Customs and Border Protection at the port of 
entry listed above, or to any other port of entry, and to secure all 
documents necessary for exportation of the vehicle from the United 
States at no cost to the United States, or in default of abandonment or 
redelivery after prior notice by the Administrator to the principal, to 
pay to the Administrator the amount of the bond.
    (e) If the principal defaults on the obligation of paragraph (d)(6) 
of this section, to abandon the vehicle to the United States or to 
redeliver the vehicle to the custody of a District Director of Customs 
and to execute all documents necessary for its exportation,

[[Page 1090]]

the obligors shall pay to the Administrator the amount of the bond given 
under the provisions of this section.

[55 FR 11379, Mar. 28, 1990, as amended at 59 FR 31560, June 20, 1994; 
69 FR 52092, Aug. 24, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 591.9  Petitions for remission or mitigation of forfeiture.

    (a) After a bond has been forfeited, a principal and/or a surety may 
petition for remission of forfeiture. A principal and/or surety may 
petition for mitigation of forfeiture only if the motor vehicle has been 
imported pursuant to paragraph 591.5(f) and the condition not met 
relates to the compliance of a passenger motor vehicle with part 581 of 
this chapter.
    (b) A petition for remission or mitigation shall:
    (1) Be addressed to the Administrator, identified as either a 
petition for remission or for mitigation, submitted in triplicate, and 
signed by the principal and/or the surety.
    (2) State the make, model, model year, and VIN of the vehicle 
involved, and contain the Customs Entry number under which the vehicle 
entered the United States.
    (3) State the facts and circumstances relied on by the petitioner to 
justify remission or mitigation.
    (4) Be filed within 30 days from the date of the mailing of the 
notice of forfeiture incurred.
    (c) A false statement contained in a petition may subject the 
petitioner to prosecution under the provisions of 18 U.S.C. 1001.
    (d) If the Administrator finds that all conditions of the bond have, 
in fact, been fulfilled, the forfeiture is remitted.
    (e) A decision to mitigate a forfeiture upon condition that a stated 
amount is paid shall be effective for not more than 60 days from the 
date of notice to the petitioner of such decision. If payment of the 
stated amount is not made, or arrangements made for delayed or 
installment payment, the full claim of forfeiture shall be deemed 
applicable. The Administrator shall collect the claim, or, if unable to 
collect the claim within 120 days, shall refer the matter to the 
Department of Justice.

[55 FR 11380, Mar. 28, 1990, as amended at 59 FR 31560, June 20, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 591.10  Offer of cash deposits or obligations of the United States 
in lieu of sureties on bonds.

    (a) In lieu of sureties on any bond required under Sec. 591.6(c), 
an importer may offer United States money, United States bonds (except 
for savings bonds), United States certificates of indebtedness, Treasury 
notes, or Treasury bills in an amount equal to the amount of the bond.
    (b) At the time the importer deposits any obligation of the United 
States, other than United States money, with the Administrator, (s)he 
shall deliver a duly executed power of attorney and agreement, in the 
form shown in appendix C to this part, authorizing the Administrator or 
delegate of the Administrator, in case of any default in the performance 
of any of the conditions of the bond, to sell the obligation so 
deposited, and to apply the proceeds of sale, in whole or in part, to 
the satisfaction of any penalties for violations of 49 U.S.C. 30112 and 
49 U.S.C. 32506 arising by reasons of default.
    (c) If the importer deposits money of the United States with the 
Administrator, the Administrator, or delegate of the Administrator, may 
apply the cash, in whole or in part, to the satisfaction of any 
penalties for violations of 49 U.S.C. 30112 and 49 U.S.C. 32506 arising 
by reason of default.

[58 FR 12908, Mar. 8, 1993, as amended at 59 FR 52097, Oct. 14, 1994]

Appendix A to Part 591--Section 591.5(f) Bond for the Entry of a Single 
                                 Vehicle

                      Department of Transportation

             National Highway Traffic Safety Administration

BOND TO ENSURE CONFORMANCE WITH FEDERAL MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY AND BUMPER 
                                STANDARDS

(To redeliver vehicle, to produce documents, to perform conditions of 
release such as to bring vehicle into conformance with all applicable 
Federal motor vehicle safety and bumper standards)


[[Page 1091]]


    Know All Men by These Presents That (principal's name, mailing 
address which includes city, state, ZIP code, and state of incorporation 
if a corporation), as principal, and (surety's name, mailing address 
which includes city, state, ZIP code and state of incorporation), as 
surety, are held and firmly bound unto the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA in 
the sum of (bond amount in words) dollars ($ (bond amount in numbers)), 
which represents 150% of the entered value of the following described 
motor vehicle, as determined by the Bureau of Customs and Border 
Protection: (make, model, model year, and VIN) for the payment of which 
we bind ourselves, our heirs, executors, and assigns (jointly and 
severally), firmly bound by these presents.

WITNESS our hands and seals this------day of------, 20----.

WHEREAS, motor vehicles may be entered under the provisions of 49 U.S.C. 
Chapters 301 and 325; and DOT Form HS-7 ``Declaration;''

WHEREAS, pursuant to 49 CFR part 591, a regulation promulgated under the 
provisions of 49 U.S.C. Chapter 301, the above-bounden principal desires 
to import permanently the motor vehicle described above, which is a 
motor vehicle that was not originally manufactured to conform to the 
Federal motor vehicle safety or bumper standards; and

WHEREAS, pursuant to 49 CFR part 592, a regulation promulgated under the 
provisions of 49 U.S.C. Chapter 301, the above-bounden principal has 
been granted the status of Registered Importer of motor vehicles not 
originally manufactured to conform to the Federal motor vehicle safety 
and bumper standards (or, if not a Registered Importer, has a contract 
with a Registered Importer covering the vehicle described above); and

WHEREAS, pursuant to 49 CFR part 593, a regulation promulgated under 49 
U.S.C. Chapter 301, the Administrator of the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration has decided that the motor vehicle described above 
is eligible for importation into the United States; and

WHEREAS, the motor vehicle described above has been imported at the port 
of ----------, and entered at said port for consumption on entry No.----
--, dated------, 20----;

NOW, THEREFORE, THE CONDITION OF THIS OBLIGATION IS SUCH THAT--
    (1) The above-bounden principal (the ``principal''), in 
consideration of the permanent admission into the United States of the 
motor vehicle described above (the ``vehicle''), voluntarily undertakes 
and agrees to have such vehicle brought into conformity with all 
applicable Federal motor vehicle safety and bumper standards within a 
reasonable time after such importation, as specified by the 
Administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (the 
``Administrator'');
    (2) The principal shall then file, or if not a Registered Importer, 
shall then cause the Registered Importer of the vehicle to file, with 
the Administrator, a certificate that the vehicle complies with each 
Federal motor vehicle safety standard in the year that the vehicle was 
manufactured and which applies in such year to the vehicle, and that the 
vehicle complies with the Federal bumper standard (if applicable);
    (3) The principal, if a Registered Importer, shall not release 
custody of the vehicle to any person for license or registration for use 
on public roads, streets, or highways, or license or register the 
vehicle from the date of entry until 30 calendar days after it has 
certified compliance of the vehicle to the Administrator, unless the 
Administrator notifies the principal before 30 calendar days that (s)he 
has accepted such certification and the vehicle and bond may be 
released, except that no such release shall be permitted, before or 
after the 30th calendar day, if the principal has received written 
notice from the Administrator that an inspection of such vehicle will be 
required, or that there is reason to believe that such certification is 
false or contains a misrepresentation.
    (4) And if the principal has received written notice from the 
Administrator that an inspection is required, the principal shall cause 
the vehicle to be available for inspection, and the vehicle and bond 
shall be promptly released after completion of an inspection showing no 
failure to comply. However, if the inspection shows a failure to comply, 
the vehicle and bond shall not be released until such time as the 
failure to comply ceases to exist;
    (5) And if the principal has received written notice from the 
Administrator that there is reason to believe that the certificate is 
false or contains a misrepresentation, the vehicle or bond shall not be 
released until the Administrator is satisfied with the certification and 
any modification thereof;
    (6) And if the principal has received written notice from the 
Administrator that the vehicle has been found not to comply with all 
applicable Federal motor vehicle safety and bumper standards, and 
written demand that the vehicle be abandoned to the United States, or 
delivered to the Secretary of Homeland Security for export (at no cost 
to the United States), the principal shall abandon the vehicle to the 
United States, or shall deliver the vehicle, or cause the vehicle to be 
delivered to, the custody of the Bureau of Customs and Border Protection 
at the port of entry listed above, or any other port of entry, and shall 
execute all documents necessary for exportation of the vehicle from the 
United States, at no cost to the United

[[Page 1092]]

States; or in default of abandonment or redelivery after proper notice 
by the Administrator to the principal, the principal shall pay to the 
Administrator the amount of this obligation;
    Then this obligation shall be void; otherwise it shall remain in 
full force and effect.

Signed, sealed, and delivered in the presence of--

________________________________________________________________________

Name Address
--------------(SEAL)
(Principal)

________________________________________________________________________

Name Address

________________________________________________________________________

Name Address
--------------(SEAL)
(Surety)

________________________________________________________________________

Name Address

                  CERTIFICATE AS TO CORPORATE PRINCIPAL

    I, ------------ certify that I am the -------- of the corporation 
named as principal in the within bond; that ----------, who signed the 
bond on behalf of the principal, was then -------------- of said 
corporation; that I know his/her signature, and his/her signature 
thereto is genuine; and that said bond was duly signed, sealed, and 
attested for and in behalf of said corporation by authority of its 
governing body.
--------------[Corporate Seal]
    To be used when a power of attorney has been filed with NHTSA. May 
be executed by secretary, assistant secretary, or other officer.

[55 FR 11380, Mar. 28, 1990, as amended at 59 FR 52097, Oct. 14, 1994; 
69 FR 52093, Aug. 24, 2004]

  Appendix B to Part 591--Section 591.5 (f) Bond for the Entry of More 
                          Than a Single Vehicle

                      Department of Transportation

             National Highway Traffic Safety Administration

BOND TO ENSURE CONFORMANCE WITH FEDERAL MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY AND BUMPER 
                                STANDARDS

(To redeliver vehicles, to produce documents, to perform conditions of 
release such as to bring vehicles into conformance with all applicable 
Federal motor vehicle safety and bumper standards)

    Know All Men by These Presents That (principal's name, mailing 
address which includes city, state, ZIP code, and state of incorporation 
if a corporation), as principal, and (surety's name, mailing address 
which includes city, state, ZIP code and state of incorporation) as 
surety, are held and firmly bound unto the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA in 
the sum of (bond amount in words) dollars ($ (bond amount in numbers)), 
which represents 150% of the entered value of the following described 
motor vehicle, as determined by the Bureau of Customs and Border 
Protection (make, model, model year, and VIN of each vehicle) for the 
payment of which we bind ourselves, our heirs, executors, and assigns 
(jointly and severally), firmly bound by these presents.

WITNESS our hands and seals this------day of------, 20----.

WHEREAS, motor vehicles may be entered under the provisions of 49 U.S.C. 
Chapters 301 and 325; and DOT Form HS-7 ``Declaration,''

WHEREAS, pursuant to 49 CFR part 591, a regulation promulgated under the 
provisions of 49 U.S.C. Chapter 301, the above-bounden principal desires 
to import permanently the motor vehicles described above, which are 
motor vehicles that were not originally manufactured to conform to the 
Federal motor vehicle safety, or bumper, or theft prevention standards; 
and

WHEREAS, pursuant to 49 CFR part 592, a regulation promulgated under the 
provisions of 49 U.S.C. Chapter 301, the above-bounden principal has 
been granted the status of Registered Importer of motor vehicles not 
originally manufactured to conform to the Federal motor vehicle safety, 
bumper, and theft prevention standards; and

WHEREAS, pursuant to 49 CFR part 593, a regulation promulgated under 49 
U.S.C. Chapter 301, the Administrator of the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration has decided that each motor vehicle described 
above is eligible for importation into the United States; and

WHEREAS, the motor vehicles described above have been imported at the 
port of------, and entered at said port for consumption on entry No.----
----, dated---- --, 20----;

NOW, THEREFORE, THE CONDITION OF THIS OBLIGATION IS SUCH THAT--
    (1) The above-bounden principal (``the principal''), in 
consideration of the permanent admission into the United States of the 
motor vehicles described above, voluntarily undertakes and agrees to 
have such vehicles brought into conformity with all applicable Federal 
motor vehicle safety and bumper standards within a reasonable time after 
such importation, as specified by the Administrator of the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration (the ``Administrator'');
    (2) For each vehicle described above (``such vehicle''), the 
principal shall then file, with

[[Page 1093]]

the Administrator, a certificate that such vehicle complies with each 
Federal motor vehicle safety standard in the year that such vehicle was 
manufactured and which applies in such year to such vehicle, and that 
such vehicle complies with the Federal bumper standard (if applicable);
    (3) The principal shall not release custody of any vehicle to any 
person, or license or register the vehicle, from the date of entry until 
30 calendar days after it has certified compliance of such vehicle to 
the Administrator, unless the Administrator notifies the principal 
before 30 days that (s)he has accepted such certification and such 
vehicle and all liability under this bond for such vehicle may be 
released, except that no such release shall be permitted, before or 
after the 30th calendar day, if the principal has received written 
notice from the Administrator that an inspection of such vehicle will be 
required, or that there is reason to believe that such certification is 
false or contains a misrepresentation.
    (4) And if the principal has received written notice from the 
Administrator that an inspection of such vehicle is required, the 
principal shall cause such vehicle to be available for inspection, and 
such vehicle and all liability under this bond for such vehicle shall be 
promptly released after completion of an inspection showing no failure 
to comply. However, if the inspection shows a failure to comply, such 
vehicle and all liability under this bond for such vehicle shall not be 
released until such time as the failure to comply ceases to exist;
    (5) And if the principal has received written notice from the 
Administrator that there is reason to believe that such certificate is 
false or contains a misrepresentation, such vehicle and all liability 
under this bond for such vehicle shall not be released until the 
Administrator is satisfied with such certification and any modification 
thereof;
    (6) And if the principal has received written notice from the 
Administrator that such vehicle has been found not to comply with all 
applicable Federal motor vehicle safety and bumper standards, and 
written demand that such vehicle be abandoned to the United States, or 
delivered to the Secretary of Homeland Security for export (at no cost 
to the United States), the principal shall abandon such vehicle to the 
United States, or shall deliver such vehicle, or cause such vehicle to 
be delivered to, the custody of the Bureau of Customs and Border 
Protection at the port of entry listed above, or any other port of 
entry, and shall execute all documents necessary for exportation of such 
vehicle from the United States, at no cost to the United States; or in 
default of abandonment or redelivery after proper notice by the 
Administrator to the principal, the principal shall pay to the 
Administrator an amount equal to 150% of the entered value of such 
vehicle as determined by the Bureau of Customs and Border Protection;
    Then this obligation shall be void; otherwise it shall remain in 
full force and effect. [At this point the terms agreed upon between the 
principal and surety for termination of the obligation may be entered]
    Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of

________________________________________________________________________

PRINCIPAL: (name and address)

________________________________________________________________________

(Signature) (SEAL)

________________________________________________________________________

(Printed name and title)

________________________________________________________________________

SURETY: (name and address)

________________________________________________________________________

(Signature)

________________________________________________________________________

(Printed name and title)

[60 FR 57954, Nov. 24, 1995, as amended at 69 FR 52093, Aug. 24, 2004]

         Appendix C to Part 591--Power of Attorney and Agreement

    -------------- does constitute and appoint the Administrator of the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, United States Department 
of Transportation, or delegate, as attorney for the undersigned, for and 
in the name of the undersigned to collect or to sell, assign, and 
transfer the securities described below as follows:

Title
Matures
Int. Rate
Denom.
Serial <greek-i>
Coupon/registered

    The securities having been deposited by it as security for the 
performance of the agreements undertaken in a bond with the United 
States, executed on the date of ---------- , ------, the terms and 
conditions of which are incorporated by reference into this power of 
attorney and agreement and made a part hereof. The undersigned agrees 
that in case of any default in the performance of any of the agreements 
the attorney shall have full power to collect the securities or any part 
thereof, or to sell, assign, and transfer the securities or any part 
thereof, or to sell, assign, and transfer the securities of any part 
thereof at public or private sale, without notice, free from any equity 
of redemption and without appraisement or valuation, notice and right to 
redeem being waived and to apply the proceeds of the sale or collection

[[Page 1094]]

in whole or in part to the satisfaction of any obligation arising by 
reason of default. The undersigned further agrees that the authority 
granted by this agreement is irrevocable. The undersigned ratifies and 
confirms whatever the attorney shall do by virtue of this agreement.
    Witnessed and signed this ---------- day of ----------, ------.

________________________________________________________________________

    Before me, the undersigned, a notary public within and for the 
County of ------------ in the State of ------------, personally appeared 
-------------- and acknowledged the execution of the foregoing power of 
attorney.
    Witness my hand and notarial seal this ---------- day of ----------, 
199--.

[Notarial seal]

Notary Public ----------------

[58 FR 12909, Mar. 8, 1993]


<R03>
PART 592_REGISTERED IMPORTERS OF VEHICLES NOT ORIGINALLY MANUFACTURED TO 
CONFORM TO THE FEDERAL MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY STANDARDS--Table of Contents




Sec.
592.1 Scope.
592.2 Purpose.
592.3 Applicability.
592.4 Definitions.
592.5 Requirements for registration and its maintenance.
592.6 Duties of a registered importer.
592.7 Suspension, revocation, and reinstatement of suspended 
          registration.
592.8 Inspection; release of vehicle and bond.
592.9 Forfeiture of bond.

    Authority: Pub. L. 100-562, 49 U.S.C. 322(a), 30117, 30141-30147; 
delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 54 FR 40090, Sept. 29, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 592.1  Scope.

    This part establishes procedures under 49 U.S.C. 30141(c) for the 
registration of importers of motor vehicles that were not originally 
manufactured to comply with all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety 
standards. This part also establishes the duties of Registered 
Importers.

[59 FR 52098, Oct. 14, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 592.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to provide content and format 
requirements for persons who wish to register with the Administrator as 
importers of motor vehicles not originally manufactured to conform to 
all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards, to provide 
procedures for the registration f importers and for the suspension, 
revocation and reinstatement of registration, and to set forth the 
duties required of Registered Importers.


<R05>
Sec. 592.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to any person who wishes to register with the 
Administrator as an importer of nonconforming vehicles, and to any 
person who is registered as an importer.


<R05>
Sec. 592.4  Definitions.

    All terms in this part that are defined in 49 U.S.C. 30102 and 30125 
are used as defined therein.
    Administrator means the Administrator, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration.
    Independent insurance company means an entity that is registered 
with any State and authorized by that State to conduct an insurance 
business including the issuance or underwriting of a service insurance 
policy, none of whose affiliates, shareholders, officers, directors, or 
employees, or any person in affinity with such, is employed by, or has a 
financial interest in, or otherwise controls or participates in the 
business of, a Registered Importer to which it issues or underwrites a 
service insurance policy.
    NHTSA means the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
    Principal, with respect to a Registered Importer, means any officer 
of a corporation, a general partner of a partnership, or the sole 
proprietor of a sole proprietorship. The term includes a director of an 
incorporated Registered Importer, and any person whose ownership 
interest in a Registered Importer is 10% or more.
    Registered Importer means any person that the Administrator has 
registered as an importer pursuant to section 592.5(b).
    Safety recall means a notification and remedy campaign conducted 
pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 30118-30120 to address a noncompliance with a 
Federal motor

[[Page 1095]]

vehicle safety standard or a defect that relates to motor vehicle 
safety.
    Service insurance policy means any policy issued or underwritten by 
an independent insurance company which covers a specific motor vehicle 
and guarantees that any noncompliance with a Federal motor vehicle 
safety standard or defect related to motor vehicle safety determined to 
exist in that vehicle will be remedied without charge to the owner of 
the vehicle.

[54 FR 40090, Sept. 29, 1989, as amended at 59 FR 52098, Oct. 14, 1994; 
69 FR 52094, Aug. 24, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 592.5  Requirements for registration and its maintenance.

    (a) Any person wishing to register as an importer of motor vehicles 
not originally manufactured to conform to all applicable Federal motor 
vehicle safety standards must file an application which:
    (1) Is headed with the words ``Application for Registration as 
Importer'', and submitted in three copies to: Administrator, National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Room 6115, 400 7th Street SW., 
Washington, DC 20590, Attn: NEF-32 Importer Registration.
    (2) Is written in the English language.
    (3) Sets forth the full name, street address, and title of the 
person preparing the application, and the full name, street address, e-
mail address (if any), and telephone and facsimile machine (if any) 
numbers in the United States of the person for whom application is made 
(the ``applicant'').
    (4) Specifies the form of the applicant's organization (i.e., sole 
proprietorship, partnership, or corporation) and the State under which 
it is organized, and:
    (i) If the applicant is an individual, the application must include 
the full name, street address, date of birth, and Social Security Number 
of the individual;
    (ii) If the applicant is a partnership, the application must include 
the full name, street address, date of birth, and Social Security Number 
of each partner; if one or more of the partners is a limited 
partnership, the application must include the names and street addresses 
of the general partners and limited partners; if one or more of the 
partners is a corporation, the application must include the information 
specified by either paragraph (a)(4)(iii) or (iv) of this section, as 
applicable;
    (iii) If the applicant is a non-public corporation, the application 
must include the full name, street address, date of birth, and Social 
Security Number of each officer, director, manager, and person who is 
authorized to sign documents on behalf of the corporation. The 
application must also include the name of any person who owns or 
controls 10 percent or more of the corporation. The applicant must also 
provide a statement issued by the Office of the Secretary of State, or 
other responsible official of the State in which the applicant is 
incorporated, certifying that the applicant is a corporation in good 
standing;
    (iv) If the applicant is a public corporation, the applicant must 
include a copy of its latest 10-K filing with the Securities and 
Exchange Commission, and provide the name and address of any person who 
is authorized to sign documents on behalf of the corporation;
    (v) Contains a statement that the applicant has never had a 
registration revoked pursuant to Sec. 592.7, nor is it, nor was it, 
directly or indirectly, owned or controlled by, or under common 
ownership or control with, a Registered Importer that has had a 
registration revoked pursuant to Sec. 592.7; and
    (vi) Identifies any shareholder, officer, director, employee, or any 
person in affinity with such, who has been previously affiliated with 
another Registered Importer in any capacity. If any such persons are 
identified, the applicant shall state the name of each such Registered 
Importer and the affiliation of any identified person.
    (5) Includes the following:
    (i) The street address and telephone number in the United States of 
each of its facilities for conformance, storage, and repair that the 
applicant will use to fulfill its duties as a Registered Importer and 
where the applicant will maintain the records it is required by this 
part to keep;
    (ii) The street address that the applicant designates as its mailing 
address (in addition, an applicant may list a

[[Page 1096]]

post office box, provided that it is in the same city as the street 
address designated as its mailing address);
    (iii) A copy of the applicant's business license or other similar 
document issued by an appropriate State or local authority, authorizing 
it to do business as an importer, or modifier, or seller of motor 
vehicles, as applicable to the applicant and with respect to each 
facility that the applicant has identified pursuant to paragraph 
(a)(5)(i) of this section, or a statement by the applicant that it has 
made a bona fide inquiry and is not required by such State or local 
authority to have such a license or document;
    (iv) The name of each principal of the applicant whom the applicant 
authorizes to submit conformity certifications to NHTSA and the street 
address of the repair, storage, or conformance facility where each such 
principal will be located; and
    (v) If an applicant is a corporation not organized under the laws of 
a State of the United States, or is a sole proprietorship or partnership 
located outside the United States, the application must be accompanied 
by the applicant's designation of an agent for service of process in the 
form specified by Section 551.45 of this chapter.
    (6) Contains a statement that the applicant has never had a 
registration revoked pursuant to Sec. 592.7, nor is it or was it, 
directly or indirectly, owned or controlled by, or under common 
ownership or control with, a person who has had a registration revoked 
pursuant to Sec. 592.7.
    (7) Contains a certified check payable to the Treasurer of the 
United States, for the amount of the initial annual fee established 
pursuant to part 594 of this chapter.
    (8) Contains a copy of a contract to acquire, effective upon its 
registration as an importer, a prepaid mandatory service insurance 
policy underwritten by an independent insurance company, or a copy of 
such policy, in an amount that equals $2,000 for each motor vehicle for 
which the applicant will furnish a certificate of conformity to the 
Administrator, for the purpose of ensuring that the applicant will be 
able financially to remedy any noncompliance or safety related defect 
determined to exist in any such motor vehicle in accordance with part 
573 and part 577 of this chapter. If the application is accompanied by a 
copy of a contract to acquire such a policy, the applicant shall provide 
NHTSA with a copy of the policy within 10 days after it has been issued 
to the applicant.
    (9) Sets forth in full complete descriptive information, views, and 
arguments sufficient to establish that the applicant:
    (i) Is technically able to modify any nonconforming motor vehicle to 
conform to all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety and bumper 
standards, including but not limited to the professional qualifications 
of the applicant and its employees at the time of the application (such 
as whether any such persons have been certified as mechanics), and a 
description of their experience in conforming and repairing vehicles;
    (ii) Owns or leases one or more facilities sufficient in nature and 
size to repair, conform, and store the vehicles for which it provides 
certification of conformance to NHTSA and which it imports and may hold 
pending release of conformance bonds, including a copy of a deed or 
lease evidencing ownership or tenancy for each such facility, still or 
video photographs of each such facility, the street address and 
telephone number of each such facility;
    (iii) Is financially and technically able to provide notification of 
and to remedy a noncompliance with a Federal motor vehicle safety 
standard or a defect related to motor vehicle safety determined to exist 
in the vehicles that it imports and/or for which it provides 
certification of conformity to NHTSA through repair, repurchase or 
replacement of such vehicles; and
    (iv) Is able to acquire and maintain information regarding the 
vehicles that it imported and the names and addresses of owners of the 
vehicles that it imported and/or for which it provided certifications of 
conformity to NHTSA in order to notify such owners when a noncompliance 
or a defect related to motor vehicle safety has been determined to exist 
in such vehicles.
    (10) Segregates and specifies any part of the information and data 
submitted under this part that the applicant

[[Page 1097]]

wishes to have withheld from public disclosure in accordance with part 
512 of this chapter.
    (11) Contains the statement: ``I certify that I have read and 
understood the duties of a Registered Importer, as set forth in 49 CFR 
592.6, and that [name of applicant] will fully comply with each such 
duty. I further certify that all the information provided in this 
application is true and correct. I further certify that I understand 
that, in the event the registration for which it is applying is 
suspended or revoked, or lapses, [name of applicant] will remain 
obligated to notify owners and to remedy noncompliances or safety 
related defects, as required by 49 CFR 592.6(j), for each vehicle for 
which it has furnished a certificate of conformity to the 
Administrator.''
    (12) Has the applicant's signature acknowledged by a notary public.
    (b) If the application is incomplete, the Administrator notifies the 
applicant in writing of the information that is needed for the 
application to be complete and advises that no further action will be 
taken on the application until the applicant has furnished all the 
information needed.
    (c) If the Administrator deems it necessary for a determination upon 
the application, NHTSA conducts an inspection of the applicant. 
Subsequent to the inspection, NHTSA calculates the costs attributable to 
such inspection, and notifies the applicant in writing that such costs 
comprise a component of the initial annual fee and must be paid before a 
determination is made upon its application.
    (d) When the application is complete (and, if applicable, when the 
applicant has paid a sum representing the inspection component of the 
initial annual fee), the Administrator reviews the application and 
decides whether the applicant has complied with the requirements 
prescribed in paragraph (a) of this section. The Administrator shall 
base this decision on the application and upon any inspection NHTSA may 
have conducted of the applicant's conformance, storage, and 
recordkeeping facilities and any assessment of the applicant's 
personnel. If the Administrator decides that the applicant complies with 
the requirements, (s)he informs the applicant in writing and issues it a 
Registered Importer Number.
    (e)(1) The Administrator shall deny registration to any applicant 
who (s)he decides does not comply with the requirements of paragraph (a) 
of this section and to an applicant whose previous registration has been 
revoked. The Administrator also may deny registration to an applicant 
that is or was owned or controlled by, or under common ownership or 
control with, or in affinity with, a Registered Importer whose 
registration has been revoked. In determining whether to deny an 
application, the Administrator may consider whether the applicant is 
comprised in whole or in part of relatives, employees, major 
shareholders, partners, or relatives of former partners or major 
shareholders, of a Registered Importer whose registration was revoked.
    (2) If the Administrator denies an application, (s)he informs the 
applicant in writing of the reasons for denial and that the applicant is 
entitled to a refund of that component of the initial annual fee 
representing the remaining costs of administration of the registration 
program, but not those components of the initial annual fee representing 
the costs of processing the application, and, if applicable, the costs 
of conducting an inspection of the applicant's facilities.
    (3) Within 30 days from the date of the denial, the applicant may 
submit a petition for reconsideration. The applicant may submit 
information and/or documentation supporting its request. If the 
Administrator grants registration as a result of the request, (s)he 
notifies the applicant in writing and issues it a Registered Importer 
Number. If the Administrator denies registration, (s)he notifies the 
applicant in writing and refunds that component of the initial annual 
fee representing the remaining costs of administration of the 
registration program, but does not refund those components of the 
initial annual fee representing the costs of processing the application, 
and, if applicable, the costs of conducting an inspection.
    (f) In order to maintain its registration, a Registered Importer 
must file an annual statement. The Registered

[[Page 1098]]

Importer must affirm in its annual statement that all information 
provided in its application or pursuant to Sec. 592.6(r), or as may 
have been changed in any notification that it has provided to the 
Administrator in compliance with Sec. 592.6(m), remains correct, and 
that it continues to comply with the requirements for being a Registered 
Importer. The Registered Importer must include with its annual statement 
a current copy of its service insurance policy. Such statement must be 
titled ``Yearly Statement of Registered Importer,'' and must be filed 
not later than September 30 of each year. A Registered Importer must 
also pay any annual fee, and any other fee that is established under 
part 594 of this chapter. An annual fee must be paid not later than 
September 30 of any calendar year for the fiscal year that begins on 
October 1 of that calendar year. The Registered Importer must pay any 
other fee not later than 15 days after the date of the written notice 
from the Administrator.
    (g) A registration granted under this part is not transferable.
    (h) An applicant whose application is pending on September 30, 2004, 
and which has not provided the information required by paragraph (a) of 
this section, as amended, must provide all the information required by 
that subsection before the Administrator will give further consideration 
to the application.

[54 FR 40090, Sept. 29, 1989, as amended at 54 FR 47088, Nov. 9, 1989; 
55 FR 37330, Sept. 11, 1990; 69 FR 52094, Aug. 24, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 592.6  Duties of a registered importer.

    Each Registered Importer must:
    (a) With respect to each motor vehicle that it imports into the 
United States, assure that the Administrator has decided that the 
vehicle is eligible for importation pursuant to part 593 of this 
chapter, prior to such importation. The Registered Importer must also 
bring such vehicle into conformity with all applicable Federal motor 
vehicle safety standards prescribed under part 571 of this chapter and 
the bumper standard prescribed under part 581 of this chapter, if 
applicable, and furnish certification to the Administrator pursuant to 
paragraph (e) of this section, within 120 calendar days after such 
entry. For each motor vehicle, the Registered Importer must furnish to 
the Secretary of Homeland Security at the time of importation a bond in 
an amount equal to 150 percent of the dutiable value of the vehicle, as 
determined by the Secretary of Homeland Security, to ensure that such 
vehicle either will be brought into conformity with all applicable 
Federal motor vehicle safety and bumper standards or will be exported 
(at no cost to the United States) by the importer or the Secretary of 
Homeland Security or abandoned to the United States. However, if the 
Registered Importer has procured a continuous entry bond, it must 
furnish the Administrator with such bond, and must furnish the Secretary 
of Homeland Security (acting on behalf of the Administrator) with a 
photocopy of such bond and Customs Form CF 7501 at the time of 
importation of each motor vehicle.
    (b) Establish, maintain, and retain, for 10 years from the date of 
entry, at the facility in the United States it has identified in its 
application pursuant to Sec. 592.5 (a)(5)(i), for each motor vehicle 
for which it furnishes a certificate of conformity, the following 
records, including correspondence and other documents, in hard copy 
format:
    (1) The declaration required by Sec. 591.5 of this chapter.
    (2) All vehicle or equipment purchase or sales orders or agreements, 
conformance agreements between the Registered Importer and persons who 
import motor vehicles for personal use, and correspondence between the 
Registered Importer and the owner or purchaser of the vehicle.
    (3) The make, model, model year, odometer reading, and VIN of each 
vehicle that it imports and the last known name and address of the owner 
or purchaser of the vehicle.
    (4) Records, including photographs and other documents, sufficient 
to identify the vehicle and to substantiate that it has been brought 
into conformity with all Federal motor vehicle safety and bumper 
standards that apply to the vehicle, that the certification label has 
been affixed, and that either the vehicle is not subject to any

[[Page 1099]]

safety recalls or that all noncompliances and safety defects covered by 
such recalls were remedied before the submission to the Administrator 
under paragraph (d) of this section. All photographs submitted shall be 
unaltered.
    (5) A copy of the certification submitted to the Administrator 
pursuant to paragraph (d) of this section.
    (6) The number that the issuer has assigned to the service insurance 
policy that will accompany the vehicle and the full corporate or other 
business name of the issuer of the policy, and substantiation that the 
Registered Importer has notified the issuer of the policy that the 
policy has been provided with the vehicle.
    (c) Take possession of the vehicle and perform all modifications 
necessary to conform the vehicle to all Federal motor vehicle safety and 
bumper standards that apply to the vehicle at a facility that it has 
identified to the Administrator pursuant to Sec. 592.5(a)(5)(i), and 
permanently affix to the vehicle at that facility, upon completion of 
conformance modifications and remedy of all noncompliances and defects 
that are the subject of any pending safety recalls, a label that 
identifies the Registered Importer and states that the Registered 
Importer certifies that the vehicle complies with all Federal motor 
vehicle safety and bumper standards that apply to the vehicle, and 
contains all additional information required by Sec. 567.4 of this 
chapter.
    (d) For each motor vehicle, certify to the Administrator:
    (1) Within 120 days of the importation that it has brought the motor 
vehicle into conformity with all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety 
and bumper standards in effect at the time the vehicle was manufactured 
by the fabricating manufacturer. Such certification shall state verbatim 
either that ``I know that the vehicle that I am certifying conforms with 
all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety and bumper standards because 
I personally witnessed each modification performed on the vehicle to 
effect compliance,'' or that ``I know that the vehicle I am certifying 
conforms with all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety and bumper 
standards because the person who performed the necessary modifications 
to the vehicle is an employee of [RI name] and has provided full 
documentation of the work that I have reviewed, and I am satisfied that 
the vehicle as modified complies.'' The Registered Importer shall also 
certify, as appropriate, that either:
    (i) The vehicle is not required to comply with the parts marking 
requirements of the theft prevention standard (part 541 of this 
chapter); or
    (ii) The vehicle complied as manufactured with those parts marking 
requirements.
    (2) If the Registered Importer certifies that the vehicle was 
originally manufactured to comply with a standard that does not apply to 
the vehicle or that it has modified the vehicle to conform to such 
standard, or if the certification is incomplete, the Administrator may 
refuse to accept the certification. The Administrator shall refuse to 
accept a certification for a vehicle that has not been determined to be 
eligible for importation under part 593 of this chapter. If the 
Administrator does not accept a submission, (s)he shall return it to the 
Registered Importer. The costs associated with such a return will be 
charged to the Registered Importer. If the Administrator returns the 
submission as described above and the vehicle is eligible for 
importation, the 120-day period specified in paragraph (d)(1) of this 
section continues to run, but the 30-day period specified in paragraph 
(f) of this section does not begin to run until the Administrator has 
accepted the submission. If the vehicle is not eligible for importation, 
the importer must export it from, or abandon it to, the United States. 
If the Registered Importer certifies that it has modified the vehicle to 
bring it into compliance with a standard and has, in fact, not performed 
all required modifications, the Administrator will regard such 
certification as ``knowingly false'' within the meaning of 49 U.S.C. 
30115 and 49 U.S.C. 30141(c)(4)(B).
    (3) The certification must be signed and submitted by a principal of 
the Registered Importer designated in its registration application 
pursuant to Sec. 592.5(a)(5)(iv), with an original hand-

[[Page 1100]]

written signature and not with a signature that is stamped or 
mechanically applied.
    (4) The certification to the Administrator must specify the location 
of the facility where the vehicle was conformed, and the location where 
the Administrator may inspect the motor vehicle.
    (5) The certification to the Administrator must state and contain 
substantiation either that the vehicle is not subject to any safety 
recalls as of the time of such certification, or, alternatively, that 
all noncompliances and defects that are the subject of those safety 
recalls have been remedied.
    (6) When a Registered Importer certifies a make, model, and model 
year of a motor vehicle for the first time, its certification must 
include:
    (i) The make, model, model year and date of manufacture, odometer 
reading, VIN that complies with Sec. 565.4(b), (c), and (g) of this 
chapter, and Customs Entry Number,
    (ii) A statement that it has brought the vehicle into conformity 
with all Federal motor vehicle safety and bumper standards that apply to 
the vehicle, and a description, with respect to each standard for which 
modifications were needed, of the modifications performed,
    (iii) A copy of the bond given at the time of entry to ensure 
conformance with the safety and bumper standards,
    (iv) The vehicle's vehicle eligibility number, as stated in Appendix 
A to part 593 of this chapter,
    (v) A copy of the HS-7 Declaration form executed at the time of its 
importation if a Customs broker did not make an electronic entry for the 
vehicle with the Bureau of Customs and Border Protection,
    (vi) Unaltered front, side, and rear photographs of the vehicle,
    (vii) Unaltered photographs of the original manufacturer's 
certification label and the certification label of the Registered 
Importer affixed to the vehicle (and, if the vehicle is a motorcycle, a 
photograph or photocopy of the Registered Importer certification label 
before it has been affixed),
    (viii) Unaltered photographs and documentation sufficient to 
demonstrate conformity with all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety 
and bumper standards to which the vehicle was not originally 
manufactured to conform,
    (ix) The policy number of the service insurance policy furnished 
with the vehicle pursuant to paragraph (g) of this section, and the full 
corporate or other business name of the insurer that issued the policy, 
and
    (x) A statement that the submission is the Registered Importer's 
initial certification submission for the make, model, and model year of 
the vehicle covered by the certification.
    (7) Except as specified in this paragraph, a Registered Importer's 
second and subsequent certification submissions for a given make, model, 
and model year vehicle must contain the information required by 
paragraph (d)(6) of this section. If the Registered Importer conformed 
such a vehicle in the same manner as it stated in its initial 
certification submission, it may say so in a subsequent submission and 
it need not provide the description required by paragraph (d)(6)(ii) of 
this section.
    (e) With respect to each motor vehicle that it imports, not take any 
of the following actions until the bond referred to in paragraph (a) of 
this section has been released, unless 30 days have elapsed from the 
date the Administrator receives the Registered Importer's certification 
of compliance of the motor vehicle in accordance with paragraph (d) of 
this section (the 30-day period will be extended if the Administrator 
has made written demand to inspect the motor vehicle):
    (1) Operate the motor vehicle on the public streets, roads, and 
highways for a purpose other than transportation to and from a 
franchised dealership of the vehicle's original manufacturer for 
remedying a noncompliance or safety-related defect;
    (2) Sell the motor vehicle or offer it for sale;
    (3) Store the motor vehicle on the premises of a motor vehicle 
dealer;
    (4) Title the motor vehicle in a name other than its own, or license 
or register it for use on public streets, roads, or highways; or
    (5) Release custody of the motor vehicle to a person for sale, or 
for license or registration for use on public

[[Page 1101]]

streets, roads, and highways, or for titling in a name other than that 
of the Registered Importer who imported the vehicle.
    (f) Furnish with each motor vehicle for which it furnishes 
certification or information to the Administrator in accordance with 
paragraph (d) of this section, not later than the time it sells the 
vehicle, or releases custody of a vehicle to an owner who has imported 
it for personal use, a service insurance policy written or underwritten 
by an independent insurance company, in the amount of $2,000. The 
Registered Importer shall provide the insurance company with a monthly 
list of the VINs of vehicles covered by the policies of the insurance 
company, and shall retain a copy of each such list in its files.
    (g) Comply with the requirements of part 580 of this chapter, 
Odometer Disclosure Requirements, when the Registered Importer is a 
transferor of a vehicle as defined by Sec. 580.3 of this chapter.
    (h) With respect to any motor vehicle it has imported and for which 
it has furnished a performance bond, deliver such vehicle to the 
Secretary of Homeland Security for export, or abandon it to the United 
States, upon demand by the Administrator, if such vehicle has not been 
brought into conformity with all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety 
and bumper standards within 120 days from entry.
    (i)(1) With respect to any motor vehicle that it has imported or for 
which it has furnished a certificate of conformity or information to the 
Administrator as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, provide 
notification in accordance with part 577 of this chapter and a remedy 
without charge to the vehicle owner, after any notification under part 
573 of this chapter that a vehicle to which such motor vehicle is 
substantially similar contains a defect related to motor vehicle safety 
or fails to conform with an applicable Federal motor vehicle safety 
standard. However, this obligation does not exist if the manufacturer of 
the vehicle or the Registered Importer of such vehicle demonstrates to 
the Administrator that the defect or noncompliance is not present in 
such vehicle, or that the defect or noncompliance was remedied before 
the submission of the certificate or the information to the 
Administrator, or that the original manufacturer of the vehicle will 
provide such notification and remedy.
    (2) If a Registered Importer becomes aware (from whatever source) 
that the manufacturer of a vehicle it has imported will not provide a 
remedy without charge for a defect or noncompliance that has been 
determined to exist in that vehicle, within 30 days thereafter, the 
Registered Importer must inform NHTSA and submit a copy of the 
notification letter that it intends to send to owners of the vehicle(s) 
in question.
    (3) Any notification to vehicle owners sent by a Registered Importer 
must contain the information specified in Sec. 577.5 of this chapter, 
and must include the statement that if the Registered Importer's repair 
facility is more than 50 miles from the owner's mailing address, 
remedial repairs may be performed at no charge at a specific facility 
designated by the Registered Importer that is within 50 miles of the 
owner's mailing address, or, if no such facility is designated, that 
repairs may be performed anywhere, with the cost of parts and labor to 
be reimbursed by the Registered Importer.
    (4) Defect and noncompliance notifications by a Registered Importer 
must conform to the requirements of Sec. Sec. 577.7 and 577.8 of this 
chapter, and are subject to Sec. Sec. 577.9 and 577.10 of this chapter.
    (5) Except as provided in this paragraph, instead of the six 
quarterly reports required by Sec. 573.7(a) of this chapter, the 
Registered Importer must submit to the Administrator two reports 
containing the information specified in Sec. 573.7(b)(1) through (4) of 
this chapter. The reports shall cover the periods ending nine and 18 
months after the commencement of the owner notification campaign, and 
must be submitted within 30 days of the end of each period. However, the 
reporting requirements established by this paragraph shall not apply to 
any safety recall that a vehicle manufacturer conducts that includes 
vehicles for which the Registered Importer has submitted the information 
required by paragraph (d) of this section.

[[Page 1102]]

    (6) The requirement that the remedy be provided without charge does 
not apply if the motor vehicle was bought by its first purchaser from 
the Registered Importer (or, if imported for personal use, conformed 
pursuant to a contract with the Registered Importer) more than 10 
calendar years before the date the Registered Importer or the original 
manufacturer notifies the Administrator of the noncompliance or safety-
related defect pursuant to part 573 of this chapter.
    (j) In order that the Administrator may determine whether the 
Registered Importer is meeting its statutory responsibilities, allow 
representatives of NHTSA during operating hours, upon demand, and upon 
presentation of credentials, to copy documents, or to inspect, monitor, 
or photograph any of the following:
    (1) Any facility identified by the Registered Importer where any 
vehicle for which a Registered Importer has the responsibility of 
providing a certificate of conformity to the Administrator is being 
modified, repaired, tested, or stored, and any facility where any record 
or other document relating to the modification, repair, testing, or 
storage of these vehicles is kept;
    (2) Any part or aspect of activities relating to the modification, 
repair, testing, or storage of vehicles by the Registered Importer; and
    (3) Any motor vehicle for which the Registered Importer has provided 
a certification of conformity to the Administrator before the 
Administrator releases the conformance bond.
    (k) Provide an annual statement and pay an annual fee as required by 
Sec. 592.5(f).
    (l) Except as noted in this paragraph, notify the Administrator in 
writing of any change that occurs in the information which was submitted 
in its registration application, not later than the 30th calendar day 
after such change. If a Registered Importer intends to use a facility 
that was not identified in its registration application, not later than 
30 days before it begins to use such facility, it must notify the 
Administrator of its intent to use such facility and provide a 
description of the intended use, a copy of the lease or deed evidencing 
the Registered Importer's ownership or tenancy of the facility, and a 
copy of the license or similar document issued by an appropriate state 
or municipal authority stating that the Registered Importer is licensed 
to do business at that facility as an importer and/or modifier and/or 
seller of motor vehicles (or a statement that it has made a bona fide 
inquiry and is not required by state or local law to have such a license 
or permission), and a sufficient number of unaltered photographs of that 
facility to fully depict the Registered Importer's intended use. If a 
Registered Importer intends to change its street address or telephone 
number or discontinue use of a facility that was identified in its 
registration application, it shall notify the Administrator not less 
than 10 days before such change or discontinuance of such use, and 
identify the facility, if any, that will be used instead.
    (m) Assure that at least one full-time employee of the Registered 
Importer is present at at least one of the Registered Importer's 
facilities in the United States during normal business hours.
    (n) Not co-utilize the same employee, or any repair or conformance 
facility, with any other Registered Importer. If a Registered Importer 
co-utilizes the same storage facility with another Registered Importer 
or another entity, the storage area of each Registered Importer must be 
clearly delineated, and the vehicles being stored by each Registered 
Importer may not be mingled with vehicles for which that Registered 
Importer is not responsible.
    (o) Make timely, complete, and accurate responses to any requests by 
the Administrator for information, whether by general or special order 
or otherwise, to enable the Administrator to decide whether the 
Registered Importer has complied or is complying with 49 U.S.C. Chapters 
301 and 325, and the regulations issued thereunder.
    (p) Pay all fees either by certified check, cashier's check, money 
order, credit card, or Electronic Funds Transfer System made payable to 
the Treasurer of the United States, in accordance with the invoice of 
fees incurred by the Registered Importer in the previous month that is 
provided by the

[[Page 1103]]

Administrator. All such fees are due and payable not later than 15 days 
from the date of the invoice.
    (q) Not later than November 1, 2004, file with the Administrator all 
information required by Sec. 592.5(a), as amended. If a Registered 
Importer has previously provided any item of information to the 
Administrator in its registration application, annual statement, or 
notification of change, it may incorporate that item by reference in the 
filing required under this subsection, provided that it clearly 
indicates the date, page, and entry of the previously-provided document.

[69 FR 52095, Aug. 24, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 592.7  Suspension, revocation, and reinstatement of suspended 
registrations.

    This section specifies the acts and omissions that may result in 
suspensions and revocations of registrations issued to Registered 
Importers by NHTSA, the process for such suspensions and revocations, 
and the provisions applicable to the reinstatement of suspended 
registrations.
    (a) Automatic suspension of a registration. 49 U.S.C. 30141(c)(4)(B) 
explicitly authorizes NHTSA to automatically suspend a registration when 
a Registered Importer does not, in a timely manner, pay a fee required 
by part 594 of this chapter or knowingly files a false or misleading 
certification under 49 U.S.C. 30146. NHTSA also may automatically 
suspend a registration under other circumstances, as specified in 
paragraphs (3), (4) and (5) of this section.
    (1) If the Administrator has not received the annual fee from a 
Registered Importer by the close of business on October 10 of a year, 
or, if October 10 falls on a weekend or holiday, by the next business 
day thereafter, or has not received any other fee owed by a Registered 
Importer within 15 calendar days from the date of the Administrator's 
invoice, the Registered Importer's registration will be automatically 
suspended at the beginning of the next business day. The Administrator 
will promptly notify the Registered Importer in writing of the 
suspension. Such suspension shall remain in effect until reinstated 
pursuant to paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
    (2) If the Administrator decides that a Registered Importer has 
knowingly filed a false or misleading certification, (s)he shall 
promptly notify the Registered Importer in writing that its registration 
is automatically suspended. The notification shall inform the Registered 
Importer of the facts and conduct upon which the decision is based, and 
the period of suspension (which begins as of the date indicated in the 
Administrator's written notification). The notification shall afford the 
Registered Importer an opportunity to seek reconsideration of the 
decision by presenting data, views, and arguments in writing and/or in 
person, within 30 days. Not later than 30 days after the submission of 
data, views, and arguments, the Administrator, after considering all the 
information available, shall notify the Registered Importer in writing 
of his or her decision on reconsideration. Any suspension issued under 
this paragraph shall remain in effect until reinstated pursuant to 
paragraph (c)(2) of this section.
    (3) If mail is undeliverable to the Registered Importer at the 
official street address it has provided to the Administrator, or if the 
telephone has been disconnected at the telephone number specified by the 
Registered Importer, the Administrator may automatically suspend the 
Registered Importer's registration. Such suspension shall remain in 
effect until the registration is reinstated pursuant to paragraph (c)(3) 
of this section.
    (4) If a Registered Importer, not later than November 1, 2004, does 
not file with the Administrator all information required by Sec. 
592.5(a), as required by Sec. 592.6(q), the Administrator may 
automatically suspend the registration. The Administrator shall promptly 
notify the Registered Importer in writing of the suspension. Such a 
suspension shall remain in effect until the registration is reinstated 
pursuant to paragraph (c)(4) of this section.
    (5) If a Registered Importer releases one or more motor vehicles on 
the basis of a forged or falsified bond release letter, and the 
Administrator has

[[Page 1104]]

not in fact issued such a letter, the Administrator may automatically 
suspend the registration. The Administrator shall promptly notify the 
Registered Importer in writing of the suspension.
    (6) The Administrator, in his or her sole discretion, may provide 
notice of a proposed automatic suspension or revocation for reasons 
specified in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(5) of this section.
    (7) The notification shall afford the Registered Importer an 
opportunity to seek reconsideration of the decision by presenting data, 
views, and arguments in writing and/or in person, within 30 days of such 
notification, before a decision, as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section. Not later than 30 days after the submission of data, views, and 
arguments, the Administrator, after considering all the information 
available, shall notify the Registered Importer in writing of his or her 
decision on reconsideration. Any automatic suspension issued under this 
paragraph shall remain in effect until reinstated pursuant to paragraph 
(c)(2) of this section.
    (b) Non-automatic suspension or revocation of a registration. (1) 49 
U.S.C. 30141(c)(4)(A) authorizes NHTSA to revoke or suspend a 
registration if a Registered Importer does not comply with a requirement 
of 49 U.S.C. 30141-30147, or any of 49 U.S.C. 30112, 30115, 30117-30122, 
30125(c), 30127, or 30166, or any regulations issued under these 
sections. These regulations include, but are not limited to, parts 567, 
568, 573, 577, 591, 593, and 594 of this chapter.
    (2) When the Administrator has reason to believe that a Registered 
Importer has violated one or more of the statutes or regulations cited 
in paragraph (b)(1) of this section and that suspension or revocation 
would be an appropriate sanction under the circumstances, (s)he shall 
notify the Registered Importer in writing of the facts giving rise to 
the allegation of a violation and the proposed length of a suspension, 
if applicable, or revocation. The notice shall afford the Registered 
Importer an opportunity to present data, views, and arguments, in 
writing and/or in person, within 30 days of the date of the notice, as 
to whether the violation occurred, why the registration ought not to be 
suspended or revoked, or whether the suspension should be shorter than 
proposed. If the Administrator decides, on the basis of the available 
information, that the Registered Importer has violated a statute or 
regulation, the Administrator may suspend or revoke the registration. 
The Administrator shall notify the Registered Importer in writing of the 
decision, including the reasons for it. A suspension or revocation is 
effective as of the date of the Administrator's written notification 
unless another date is specified therein. The Administrator shall state 
the period of any suspension in the notice to the Registered Importer. 
There shall be no opportunity to seek reconsideration of a decision 
issued under this paragraph.
    (c) Reinstatement of suspended registrations. (1) When a 
registration has been suspended under paragraph (a)(1) of this section, 
the Administrator will reinstate the registration when all fees owing 
are paid by wire transfer or certified check from a bank in the United 
States, together with a sum representing 10 percent of the amount of the 
fees that were not timely paid.
    (2) When a registration has been suspended under paragraph (a)(2) or 
(a)(5) of this section, the registration will be reinstated after the 
expiration of the period of suspension specified by the Administrator, 
or such earlier date as the Administrator may subsequently decide is 
appropriate.
    (3) When a registration has been suspended under paragraph (a)(3) of 
this section, the registration will be reinstated when the Administrator 
decides that the Registered Importer has provided a street address to 
which mail to it is deliverable and a telephone number in its name that 
is in service.
    (4) When a registration has been suspended under paragraph (a)(4) of 
this section, the registration will be reinstated when the Administrator 
decides that the Registered Importer has provided all relevant 
documentation and information required by Sec. 592.6(q).
    (5) When a registration has been suspended under paragraph (b) of 
this section, the registration will be reinstated after the expiration 
of the period of

[[Page 1105]]

suspension specified by the Administrator, or such earlier date as the 
Administrator may subsequently decide is appropriate.
    (6) When a suspended registration has been reinstated, NHTSA shall 
notify the Bureau of Customs and Border Protection promptly.
    (7) If a Registered Importer imports a motor vehicle on or after the 
date that its registration is suspended and before the date that the 
suspension ends, the Administrator may extend the suspension period by 
one day for each day that the Registered Importer has imported a motor 
vehicle during the time that its registration has been suspended.
    (d) Effect of suspension or revocation. (1) If a Registered 
Importer's registration is suspended or revoked, as of the date of 
suspension or revocation the entity will not be considered a Registered 
Importer, will not have the rights and authorities appertaining thereto, 
and must cease importing, and will not be allowed to import, vehicles 
for resale. The Registered Importer will not be refunded any annual or 
other fees it has paid for the fiscal year in which its registration is 
revoked. The Administrator shall notify the Bureau of Customs and Border 
Protection of any suspension or revocation of a registration not later 
than the first business day after such action is taken.
    (2) With respect to any vehicle for which it has not affixed a 
certification label and submitted a certificate of conformity to the 
Administrator under Sec. 592.6(d) at the time it is notified that its 
registration has been suspended or revoked, the Registered Importer must 
affix a certification label and submit a certificate of conformity 
within 120 days from the date of entry.
    (3) When a registration has been revoked or suspended, the 
Registered Importer must export within 30 days of the effective date of 
the suspension or revocation all vehicles that it imported to which it 
has not affixed a certification label and furnished a certificate of 
conformity to the Administrator pursuant to Sec. 592.6(d).
    (4) With respect to any vehicle imported pursuant to Sec. 
591.5(f)(2)(ii) of this chapter that the Registered Importer has agreed 
to bring into compliance with all applicable standards and for which it 
has not certified and furnished a certificate of conformity to the 
Administrator, the Registered Importer must immediately notify the owner 
of the vehicle in writing that its registration has been suspended or 
revoked.
    (e) Continuing obligations. A Registered Importer whose registration 
is suspended or revoked remains obligated under Sec. 592.6(i) to notify 
owners and to remedy noncompliances or safety related defects for each 
vehicle for which it has furnished a certificate of conformity to the 
Administrator.

[69 FR 52098, Aug. 24, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 592.8  Inspection; release of vehicle and bond.

    (a) With respect to any motor vehicle for which it must provide a 
certificate of conformity to the Administrator as required by Sec. 
592.6(d), a Registered Importer shall not obtain title, licensing, or 
registration of the motor vehicle for use on the public roads, or 
release custody of it for such titling, licensing, or registration, 
except in accordance with the provisions of this section.
    (b) When conformance modifications to a motor vehicle have been 
completed, a Registered Importer shall submit the certification required 
by Sec. 592.6(d) to the Administrator. In certifying a vehicle that the 
Administrator has determined to be substantially similar to one that has 
been certified by its original manufacturer for sale in the United 
States, the Registered Importer may rely on any certification by the 
original manufacturer with respect to identical safety features if it 
also certifies that any modification that it undertook did not affect 
the compliance of such safety features. Each submission shall be mailed 
by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by private carriers such 
as Federal Express, to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, Room 6115, 400 7th Street SW., Washington, DC, 20590, 
Attn: NEF-32, or be submitted electronically by FAX (202-366-1024), or 
in person. Each submission shall identify the location where the vehicle 
will be stored and is available for inspection, pending NHTSA action 
upon the submission.

[[Page 1106]]

    (c) Before the end of the 30th calendar day after receiving a 
complete certification under Sec. 592.6(d), the Administrator may 
notify the Registered Importer in writing that an inspection of the 
vehicle is required to verify the certification. Written notice includes 
a proposed inspection date, which is as soon as practicable. If 
inspection of the vehicle indicates that the vehicle has been properly 
certified, at the conclusion of the inspection the Registered Importer 
is provided an instrument of release. If inspection of the vehicle shows 
that the vehicle has not been properly certified, the Registered 
Importer shall either make the modifications necessary to substantiate 
its certification, and provide a new certification for the standard(s) 
in the manner provided for in paragraph (b) of this section, or deliver 
the vehicle to the Secretary of the Treasury for export, or abandon it 
to the United States. Before the end of the 30th calendar day after 
receipt of new certification, the Administrator may require a further 
inspection in accordance with the provisions of this subsection.
    (d) The Administrator may by written notice request the Registered 
Importer to verify its certification of a motor vehicle before the end 
of the 30th calendar day after the date the Administrator receives a 
complete certification under Sec. 592.6(d). If the basis for such 
request is that the certification is false or contains a 
misrepresentation, the Registered Importer shall be afforded an 
opportunity to present written data, views, and arguments as to why the 
certification is not false or misleading or does not contain a 
misrepresentation. The Administrator may require an inspection pursuant 
to paragraph (c) of this section. The motor vehicle and performance bond 
involved shall not be released unless the Administrator is satisfied 
with the certification.
    (e) If the Registered Importer has received no written notice from 
the Administrator by the end of the 30th calendar day after it has 
furnished a complete certification under section 592.6(d) of this 
chapter, the Registered Importer may release the vehicle from custody, 
sell or offer it for sale, or have it titled, licensed, or registered 
for use on the public roads.
    (f) If the Administrator accepts a certification without requiring 
an inspection, (s)he notifies the Registered Importer in writing, and 
provides a copy to the importer of record. Such notification shall be 
provided not later than the 25th calendar day after the Administrator 
has received such certification.
    (g) Release of the performance bond shall constitute acceptance of 
certification or completion of inspection of the vehicle concerned, but 
shall not preclude a subsequent decision by the Administrator pursuant 
to 49 U.S.C. 30118 that the vehicle fails to conform to any applicable 
Federal motor vehicle safety standard.

[54 FR 40090, Sept. 29, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 37330, Sept. 11, 1990; 
59 FR 52098, Oct. 14, 1994; 69 FR 52100, Aug. 24, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 592.9  Forfeiture of bond.

    A Registered Importer is required by Sec. 591.6 of this chapter to 
furnish a bond with respect to each motor vehicle that it imports. The 
conditions of the bond are set forth in Sec. 591.8 of this chapter. 
Failure to fulfill any one of these conditions may result in forfeiture 
of the bond. A bond may be forfeited if the Registered Importer:
    (a) Fails to bring the motor vehicle covered by the bond into 
compliance with all applicable standards issued under part 571 and part 
581 of this chapter within 120 days from the date of entry;
    (b) Fails to file with the Administrator a certificate that the 
motor vehicle complies with each Federal motor vehicle safety, bumper, 
and theft prevention standard in effect at the time the vehicle was 
manufactured and which applies to the vehicle;
    (c) Fails to cause a motor vehicle to be available for inspection if 
it has received written notice from the Administrator that an inspection 
is required;
    (d) Releases the motor vehicle before the Administrator accepts the 
certification and any modification thereof, if it has received written 
notice from the Administrator that there is reason to believe that the 
certification is false or contains a misrepresentation;
    (e) Before the bond is released, releases custody of the motor 
vehicle to

[[Page 1107]]

any person for license or registration for use on public roads, streets, 
and highways, or licenses or registers the vehicle, including titling 
the vehicle in the name of another person, unless 30 calendar days have 
elapsed after the Registered Importer has filed a complete certification 
under Sec. 592.6(d), and the Registered Importer has not received 
written notice pursuant to paragraph (a)(3) or (a)(4) of this section. 
For purposes of this part, a vehicle is deemed to be released from 
custody if it is not located at a duly identified facility of the 
Registered Importer and the Registered Importer has not notified the 
Administrator in writing of the vehicle's location or, if written notice 
has been provided, if the Administrator is unable to inspect the 
vehicle, or if the Registered Importer has transferred title to any 
other person regardless of the vehicle's location; or
    (f) Fails to deliver the vehicle, or cause it to be delivered, to 
the custody of the Bureau of Customs and Border Protection at any port 
of entry, for export or abandonment to the United States, and to execute 
all documents necessary to accomplish such purposes, if the 
Administrator has furnished it written notice that the vehicle has been 
found not to comply with all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety 
standards along with a demand that the vehicle be delivered for export 
or abandoned to the United States.

[69 FR 52100, Aug. 24, 2004]


<R03>
PART 593_DETERMINATIONS THAT A VEHICLE NOT ORIGINALLY MANUFACTURED TO 

CONFORM TO THE FEDERAL MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY STANDARDS IS ELIGIBLE FOR 
IMPORTATION--Table of Contents




Sec.
593.1 Scope.
593.2 Purpose.
593.3 Applicability.
593.4 Definitions.
593.5 Petitions for eligibility determinations.
593.6 Basis for petition.
593.7 Processing of petitions.
593.8 Determinations on the agency's initiative.
593.9 Effect of affirmative determinations; lists.
593.10 Availability for public inspection.

Appendix A to Part 593--List of Vehicles Determined To Be Eligible for 
          Importation

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322 and 30141(b); delegation of authority at 49 
CFR 1.50.

    Source: 54 FR 40099, Sept. 29, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 593.1  Scope.

    This part establishes procedures under section 108(c) of the 
National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act, as amended (15 U.S.C. 
1397(c)), for making determinations whether a vehicle that was not 
originally manufactured to conform with all applicable Federal motor 
vehicle safety standards, and is not otherwise eligible for importation 
under part 591 of this chapter, may be imported into the United States 
because it can be modified to meet the Federal standards.


<R05>
Sec. 593.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to provide content and format 
requirements for any Registered Importer and manufacturer who wishes to 
petition the Administrator for a determination that a vehicle not 
originally manufactured to conform to all applicable Federal motor 
vehicle safety standards is eligible to be imported into the United 
States because it can be modified to meet the standards. The purpose of 
this part is also to specify procedures under which the Administrator 
makes eligibility determinations pursuant to those petitions as well as 
eligibility determinations on the agency's initiative.


<R05>
Sec. 593.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to a motor vehicle that was not originally 
manufactured and certified by its original manufacturer to conform with 
all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards and that is 
offered for importation into the United States.


<R05>
Sec. 593.4  Definitions.

    All terms in this part that are defined in section 102 of the 
National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act (15 U.S.C. 1391) are used 
as defined therein.

[[Page 1108]]

    Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration.
    Model year means the year used by a manufacturer to designate a 
discrete vehicle model irrespective of the calendar year in which the 
vehicle was actually produced, or the model year as designated by the 
vehicle's country of origin, or, if neither the manufacturer nor the 
country of origin has made such a designation, the calendar year that 
begins on September 1 and ends on August 31 of the next calendar year.
    NHTSA means the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
    Registered Importer means any person who has been granted registered 
importer status by the Administrator pursuant to paragraph 592.5(b) of 
this chapter, and whose registration has not been revoked.


<R05>
Sec. 593.5  Petitions for eligibility determinations.

    (a) A manufacturer or Registered Importer may petition the 
Administrator for a determination that a vehicle that does not comply 
with all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards is eligible 
for importation, either
    (1) On the basis that the vehicle:
    (i) Is substantially similar to a vehicle which was originally 
manufactured for importation into and sale in the United States and 
which bore a certification affixed by its manufacturer pursuant to part 
567 of this chapter, and
    (ii) Is capable of being readily modified to conform to all 
applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards; or
    (2) On the basis that the vehicle has safety features that comply 
with or are capable of being modified to comply with all applicable 
Federal motor vehicle safety standards.
    (b) Each petition filed under this part must--
    (1) Be written in the English language;
    (2) Be headed with the words ``Petition for Import Eligibility 
Determination'' and submitted in three copies to: Administrator, 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Room 6115, 400 7th 
Street SW., Washington, DC 20590, Attn: NEF-32 Import Eligibility 
Determinations;
    (3) State the full name and address of the petitioner.
    (4) If the petitioner is a Registered Importer, include the 
Registered Importer Number assigned by NHTSA pursuant to part 592 of 
this chapter.
    (5) Set forth the basis for the petition and the information 
required by Sec. 593.6 (a) or (b), as appropriate;
    (6) Specify any part of the information and data submitted which 
petitioner requests be withheld from public disclosure in accordance 
with part 512 of this chapter; and
    (7) Submit a certified check payable to the Treasurer of the United 
States, for the amount of the vehicle eligibility petition fee 
established pursuant to part 594 of this chapter.
    (c) The knowing and willful submission of false, fictitious or 
fraudulent information may subject the petitioner to the criminal 
penalties of 18 U.S.C. 1001.

[54 FR 40099, Sept. 29, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 37330, Sept. 11, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 593.6  Basis for petition.

    (a) If the basis for the petition is that the vehicle is 
substantially similar to a vehicle which was originally manufactured for 
importation into and sale in the United States, and which was certified 
by its manufacturer pursuant to part 567 of this chapter, and that it is 
capable of being readily modified to conform to all applicable Federal 
motor vehicle safety standards, the petitioner shall provide the 
following information:
    (1) Identification of the original manufacturer, model, and model 
year of the vehicle for which a determination is sought.
    (2) Identification of the original manufacturer, model, and model 
year of the vehicle which the petitioner believes to be substantially 
similar to that for which a determination is sought.
    (3) Substantiation that the manufacturer of the vehicle identified 
by the petitioner under paragraph (a)(2) of this section originally 
manufactured it for importation into and sale in the United States, and 
affixed a label to it certifying that it complied with all applicable 
Federal motor vehicle safety standards.

[[Page 1109]]

    (4) Data, views and arguments demonstrating that the vehicle 
identified by the petitioner under paragraph (a)(1) of this section is 
substantially similar to the vehicle identified by the petitioner under 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section.
    (5) With respect to each Federal motor vehicle safety standard that 
applied to the vehicle identified by the petitioner under paragraph 
(a)(2) of this section, data, views, and arguments demonstrating that 
the vehicle identified by the petitioner under paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section either was originally manufactured to conform to such standard, 
or is capable of being readily modified to conform to such standard.
    (b) If the basis of the petition is that the vehicle's safety 
features comply with or are capable of being modified to comply with all 
applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards, the petitioner shall 
provide the following information:
    (1) Identification of the model and model year of the vehicle for 
which a determination is sought.
    (2) With respect to each Federal motor vehicle safety standard that 
would have applied to such vehicle had it been originally manufactured 
for importation into and sale in the United States, data, views, and 
arguments demonstrating that the vehicle has safety features that comply 
with or are capable of being modified to conform with such standard. The 
latter demonstration shall include a showing that after such 
modifications, the features will conform with such standard.


<R05>
Sec. 593.7  Processing of petitions.

    (a) NHTSA will review each petition for sufficiency under Sec. Sec. 
593.5 and 593.6. If the petition does not contain all the information 
required by this part, NHTSA notifies the petitioner, pointing out the 
areas of insufficiency, and stating that the petition will not receive 
further consideration until the required information is provided. If the 
additional information is not provided within the time specified by 
NHTSA in its notification, NHTSA may dismiss the petition as incomplete, 
and so notify the petitioner. When the petition is complete, its 
processing continues.
    (b) NHTSA publishes in the Federal Register, affording opportunity 
for comment, a notice of each petition containing the information 
required by this part.
    (c) No public hearing, argument, or other formal proceeding is held 
on a petition filed under this part.
    (d) If the Administrator is unable to determine that the vehicle in 
a petition submitted under Sec. 593.6(a) is one that is substantially 
similar, or (if it is substantially similar) is capable of being readily 
modified to meet the standards, (s)he notifies the petitioner, and 
offers the petitioner the opportunity to supplement the petition by 
providing the information required for a petition submitted under 
paragraph 593.6(b).
    (e) If the Administrator determines that the petition does not 
clearly demonstrate that the vehicle model is eligible for importation, 
(s)he denies it and notifies the petitioner in writing. (S)he also 
publishes in the Federal Register a notice of denial and the reasons for 
it. A notice of denial also states that the Administrator will not 
consider a new petition covering the model that is the subject of the 
denial until at least 3 months from the date of the notice of denial. 
There is no administrative reconsideration available for petition 
denials.
    (f) If the Administrator determines that the petition clearly 
demonstrates that the vehicle model is eligible for importation, (s)he 
grants it and notifies the petitioner. (S)he also publishes in the 
Federal Register a notice of grant and the reasons for it.

[54 FR 40099, Sept. 29, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 37330, Sept. 11, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 593.8  Determinations on the agency's initiative.

    (a) The Administrator may make a determination of eligibility on his 
or her own initiative. The agency publishes in the Federal Register, 
affording opportunity for comment, a notice containing the information 
available to the agency (other than confidential information) relevant 
to the basis upon which eligibility may be determined.
    (b) No public hearing, argument, or other formal proceeding is held 
upon a notice published under this section.

[[Page 1110]]

    (c) The Administrator publishes a second notice in the Federal 
Register in which (s)he announces his or her determination whether the 
vehicle is eligible or ineligible for importation, and states the 
reasons for the determination. A notice of ineligibility also announces 
that no further determination for the same model of motor vehicle will 
be made for at least 3 months following the date of publication of the 
notice. There is no administrative reconsideration available for a 
decision of ineligibility.


<R05>
Sec. 593.9  Effect of affirmative determinations; lists.

    (a) A notice of grant is sufficient authority for the importation by 
persons other than the petitioner of any vehicle of the same model 
specified in the grant.
    (b) The Administrator publishes annually in the Federal Register a 
list of determinations made under Sec. 593.7, and Sec. 593.8.


<R05>
Sec. 593.10  Availability for public inspection.

    (a) Except as specified in paragraph (b) of this section, 
information relevant to a determination under this part, including a 
petition and supporting data, and the grant or denial of the petition or 
the making of a determination on the Administrator's initiative, is 
available for public inspection in the Docket Section, Room 5109, 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh St., SW., 
Washington, DC 20590. Copies of available information may be obtained, 
as provided in part 7 of this chapter.
    (b) Except for release of confidential information authorized under 
part 512 of this chapter, information made available for inspection 
under paragraph (a) of this section does not include information for 
which confidentiality has been requested and granted in accordance with 
part 512 of this chapter, and 5 U.S.C. 552(b). To the extent that a 
petition contains material relating to the methodology by which the 
petitioner intends to achieve conformance with a specific standard, the 
petitioner may request confidential treatment of such material on the 
grounds that it contains a trade secret or confidential information in 
accordance with part 512 of this chapter.

 Appendix A to Part 593--List of Vehicles Determined To Be Eligible for 
                               Importation

    (a) Each vehicle on the following list is preceded by a vehicle 
eligibility number. The importer of a vehicle admissible under any 
eligibility decision must enter that number on the HS-7 Declaration Form 
accompanying entry to indicate that the vehicle is eligible for 
importation.
    (1) ``VSA'' eligibility numbers are assigned to all vehicles that 
are decided to be eligible for importation on the initiative of the 
Administrator under Sec. 593.8.
    (2) ``VSP'' eligibility numbers are assigned to vehicles that are 
decided to be eligible under Sec. 593.7(f), based on a petition from a 
manufacturer or registered importer submitted under Sec. 593.5(a)(1), 
which establishes that a substantially similar U.S.-certified vehicle 
exists.
    (3) ``VCP'' eligibility numbers are assigned to vehicles that are 
decided to be eligible under Sec. 593.7(f), based on a petition from a 
manufacturer or registered importer submitted under Sec. 593.5(a)(2), 
which establishes that the vehicle has safety features that comply with, 
or are capable of being altered to comply with, all applicable Federal 
motor vehicle safety standards.
    (b) Vehicles for which eligibility decisions have been made are 
listed alphabetically by make. Eligible models within each make are 
listed numerically by ``VSA,'' ``VSP,'' or ``VCP'' number.
    (c) All hyphens used in the Model Year column mean ``through'' (for 
example, ``1973-1989'' means ``1973 through 1989'').
    (d) The initials ``MC'' used in the Manufacturer column mean 
``motorcycle.''
    (e) The initials ``SWB'' used in the Model Type column mean ``Short 
Wheel Base.''
    (f) The initials ``LWB'' used in the Model Type column mean ``Long 
Wheel Base.''
    (g) For vehicles with a European country of origin, the term ``Model 
Year'' ordinarily means calendar year in which the vehicle was produced.
    (h) All vehicles are left-hand-drive vehicles unless noted as RHD. 
The initials ``RHD'' used in the Model Type column mean ``Right-Hand-
Drive.''

[[Page 1111]]



 Vehicles Certified by Their Original Manufacturer as Complying With All
           Applicable Canadian Motor Vehicle Safety Standards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 VSA-80................  (a) All passenger cars less than 25 years old
                          that were manufactured before September 1,
                          1989;
                         (b) All passenger cars manufactured on or after
                          September 1, 1989, and before September 1,
                          1996, that, as originally manufactured, are
                          equipped with an automatic restraint system
                          that complies with Federal Motor Vehicle
                          Safety Standard (FMVSS) No. 208;
                         (c) All passenger cars manufactured on or after
                          September 1, 1996, and before September 1,
                          2002, that, as originally manufactured, are
                          equipped with an automatic restraint system
                          that complies with FMVSS No. 208, and that
                          comply with FMVSS No. 214;
                         (d) All passenger cars manufactured on or after
                          September 1, 2002, and before September 1,
                          2007, that, as originally manufactured, are
                          equipped with an automatic restraint system
                          that complies with FMVSS No. 208, and that
                          comply with FMVSS Nos. 201, 214, 225, and 401.
VSA-81.................  (a) All multipurpose passenger vehicles,
                          trucks, and buses with a GVWR of 4,536 kg
                          (10,000 lb) or less that are less than 25
                          years old and that were manufactured before
                          September 1, 1991;
                         (b) All multipurpose passenger vehicles,
                          trucks, and buses with a GVWR of 4,536 kg
                          (10,000 lb) or less that were manufactured on
                          and after September 1, 1991, and before
                          September 1, 1993 and that, as originally
                          manufactured, comply with FMVSS Nos. 202 and
                          208;
                         (c) All multipurpose passenger vehicles,
                          trucks, and buses with a GVWR of 4,536 kg
                          (10,000 lb) or less that were manufactured on
                          or after September 1, 1993, and before
                          September 1, 1998, and that, as originally
                          manufactured, comply with FMVSS Nos. 202, 208,
                          and 216;
                         (d) All multipurpose passenger vehicles,
                          trucks, and buses with a GVWR of 4,536 kg
                          (10,000 lb) or less that were manufactured on
                          or after September 1, 1998, and before
                          September 1, 2002, and that, as originally
                          manufactured, comply with FMVSS Nos. 202, 208,
                          214, and 216;
                         (e) All multipurpose passenger vehicles,
                          trucks, and buses with a GVWR of 4,536 kg
                          (10,000 lb) or less that were manufactured on
                          or after September 1, 2002, and before
                          September 1, 2007, and that, as originally
                          manufactured, comply with FMVSS Nos. 201, 202,
                          208, 214, and 216, and, insofar as it is
                          applicable, with FMVSS No. 225.
VSA-82.................  All multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks,
                          and buses with a GVWR greater than 4,536 kg
                          (10,000 lb) that are less than 25 years old.
VSA-83.................  All trailers and motorcycles less than 25 years
                          old.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 1112]]


                                                Vehicles Manufactured for Other Than the Canadian Market
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Manufacturer               VSP          VSA          VCP        Model type(s)       Body                        Model year(s)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Acura.........................           51  ...........  ...........  Legend..........  ...........                                                1988
Acura.........................           77  ...........  ...........  Legend..........  ...........                                                1989
Acura.........................          305  ...........  ...........  Legend..........  ...........                                           1990-1992
Alfa Romeo....................          196  ...........  ...........  164.............  ...........                                                1989
Alfa Romeo....................           76  ...........  ...........  164.............  ...........                                                1991
Alfa Romeo....................          156  ...........  ...........  164.............  ...........                                                1994
Alfa Romeo....................          124  ...........  ...........  GTV.............  ...........                                                1985
Alfa Romeo....................           70  ...........  ...........  Spider..........  ...........                                                1987
Aston Martin..................          430  ...........  ...........  Vanquish........  ...........                                           2002-2004
Audi..........................          223  ...........  ...........  80..............  ...........                                           1998-1989
Audi..........................           93  ...........  ...........  100.............  ...........                                                1989
Audi..........................          317  ...........  ...........  100.............  ...........                                           1990-1992
Audi..........................          244  ...........  ...........  100.............  ...........                                                1993
Audi..........................          160  ...........  ...........  200 Quattro.....  ...........                                                1985
Audi..........................          352  ...........  ...........  A4..............  ...........                                           1996-2000
Audi..........................          400  ...........  ...........  A4, RS4, S4.....           8D                                           2000-2001
Audi..........................          332  ...........  ...........  A6..............  ...........                                           1998-1999
Audi..........................          337  ...........  ...........  A8..............  ...........                                           1997-2000
Audi..........................          424  ...........  ...........  A8..............  ...........                                                2000
Audi..........................          238  ...........  ...........  Avant Quattro...  ...........                                                1996
Audi..........................          443  ...........  ...........  RS6 & RS Avant..  ...........                                                2003
Audi..........................          428  ...........  ...........  S6..............  ...........                                                1996
Audi..........................          424  ...........  ...........  S8..............  ...........                                                2000
Audi..........................          364  ...........  ...........  TT..............  ...........                                           2000-2001
Bimota (MC)...................          397  ...........  ...........  DB4.............  ...........                                                2000
Bimota (MC)...................          397  ...........  ...........  SB8.............  ...........                                           1999-2000
BMW...........................  ...........           66  ...........  316.............  ...........                                           1979-1982
BMW...........................           25  ...........  ...........  316.............  ...........                                                1986
BMW...........................          248  ...........  ...........  3 Series........  ...........                                           1995-1997
BMW...........................          379  ...........  ...........  3 Series........  ...........                                          1999, 2001
BMW...........................          356  ...........  ...........  3 Series........  ...........                                                2000
BMW...........................  ...........           23  ...........  318i, 318iA.....  ...........                                           1981-1989
BMW...........................  ...........           16  ...........  320, 320i, 320iA  ...........                                           1979-1985
BMW...........................          283  ...........  ...........  320i............  ...........                                           1990-1991
BMW...........................  ...........           67  ...........  323i............  ...........                                           1979-1985
BMW...........................  ...........           30  ...........  325, 325i,        ...........                                           1985-1989
                                                                        325iA, 325E.
BMW...........................  ...........           24  ...........  325e, 325eA.....  ...........                                           1984-1987
BMW...........................           96  ...........  ...........  325i............  ...........                                                1991
BMW...........................          197  ...........  ...........  325i............  ...........                                           1992-1996
BMW...........................  ...........           31  ...........  325iS, 325iSA...  ...........                                           1987-1989
BMW...........................          205  ...........  ...........  325iX...........  ...........                                                1990
BMW...........................  ...........           33  ...........  325iX, 325iXA...  ...........                                           1988-1989
BMW...........................          194  ...........  ...........  5 Series........  ...........                                           1990-1995
BMW...........................          249  ...........  ...........  5 Series........  ...........                                           1995-1997
BMW...........................          314  ...........  ...........  5 Series........  ...........                                           1998-1999
BMW...........................          345  ...........  ...........  5 Series........  ...........                                                2000

[[Page 1113]]

 
BMW...........................          414  ...........  ...........  5 Series........  ...........                                           2000-2002
BMW...........................            4  ...........  ...........  518i............  ...........                                                1986
BMW...........................  ...........           68  ...........  520, 520i.......  ...........                                           1979-1983
BMW...........................            9  ...........  ...........  520iA...........  ...........                                                1989
BMW...........................  ...........           26  ...........  524tdA..........  ...........                                           1985-1986
BMW...........................  ...........           69  ...........  525, 525i.......  ...........                                           1979-1982
BMW...........................            5  ...........  ...........  525i............  ...........                                                1989
BMW...........................  ...........           21  ...........  528e, 528eA.....  ...........                                           1982-1988
BMW...........................  ...........           20  ...........  528i, 528iA.....  ...........                                           1979-1984
BMW...........................  ...........           22  ...........  533i, 533iA.....  ...........                                           1983-1984
BMW...........................  ...........           25  ...........  535i, 535iA.....  ...........                                           1985-1989
BMW...........................           15  ...........  ...........  625CSi..........  ...........                                                1981
BMW...........................           32  ...........  ...........  628CSi..........  ...........                                                1980
BMW...........................  ...........           18  ...........  633CSi, 633CSiA.  ...........                                           1979-1984
BMW...........................  ...........           27  ...........  635, 635CSi,      ...........                                           1979-1989
                                                                        635CSiA.
BMW...........................          299  ...........  ...........  7 Series........  ...........                                           1990-1991
BMW...........................          232  ...........  ...........  7 Series........  ...........                                                1992
BMW...........................          299  ...........  ...........  7 Series........  ...........                                           1993-1994
BMW...........................          313  ...........  ...........  7 Series........  ...........                                           1995-1999
BMW...........................          366  ...........  ...........  7 Series........  ...........                                           1999-2001
BMW...........................  ...........           70  ...........  728, 728i.......  ...........                                           1979-1985
BMW...........................           14  ...........  ...........  728i............  ...........                                                1986
BMW...........................  ...........           71  ...........  730, 730i, 730iA  ...........                                           1979-1980
BMW...........................            6  ...........  ...........  730iA...........  ...........                                                1988
BMW...........................  ...........           72  ...........  732i............  ...........                                           1980-1984
BMW...........................  ...........           19  ...........  733i, 733iA.....  ...........                                           1979-1984
BMW...........................  ...........           28  ...........  735, 735i, 735iA  ...........                                           1980-1989
BMW...........................  ...........           73  ...........  745i............  ...........                                           1980-1986
BMW...........................          361  ...........  ...........  8 Series........  ...........                                           1991-1995
BMW...........................          396  ...........  ...........  850 Series......  ...........                                                1997
BMW...........................           10  ...........  ...........  850i............  ...........                                                1990
BMW...........................  ...........           78  ...........  All other models  ...........                                           1979-1989
                                                                        except those in
                                                                        the M1 and Z1
                                                                        series..
BMW...........................  ...........           29  ...........  L7..............  ...........                                           1986-1987
BMW...........................  ...........           35  ...........  M3..............  ...........                                           1988-1989
BMW...........................  ...........           34  ...........  M5..............  ...........                                                1988
BMW...........................  ...........           32  ...........  M6..............  ...........                                           1987-1988
BMW...........................          260  ...........  ...........  Z3..............  ...........                                           1996-1998
BMW...........................          350  ...........  ...........  Z8..............  ...........                                           2000-2001
BMW...........................          406  ...........  ...........  Z8..............  ...........                                                2002
BMW (MC)......................          228  ...........  ...........  K1..............  ...........                                           1990-1993
BMW (MC)......................          285  ...........  ...........  K100............  ...........                                           1984-1992
BMW (MC)......................          303  ...........  ...........  K1100, K1200....  ...........                                           1993-1998
BMW (MC)......................          229  ...........  ...........  K75S............  ...........                                           1987-1995
BMW (MC)......................          231  ...........  ...........  R1100...........  ...........                                           1994-1997
BMW (MC)......................          368  ...........  ...........  R1100...........  ...........                                           1998-2001
BMW (MC)......................          177  ...........  ...........  R1100RS.........  ...........                                                1994
BMW (MC)......................          359  ...........  ...........  R1200C..........  ...........                                           1998-2001
BMW (MC)......................          295  ...........  ...........  R80, R100.......  ...........                                           1986-1995
Bristol Bus...................  ...........  ...........            2  VRT Bus--Double   ...........                                           1979-1981
                                                                        Decker.

[[Page 1114]]

 
Buell (MC)....................          399  ...........  ...........  All Models......  ...........                                           1995-2002
Cadillac......................          300  ...........  ...........  DeVille.........  ...........                                           1994-1999
Cadillac......................          375  ...........  ...........  Seville.........  ...........                                                1991
Cagiva........................          444  ...........  ...........  Gran Canyon 900   ...........                                                1999
                                                                        motorcycle.
Chevrolet.....................          150  ...........  ...........  400SS...........  ...........                                                1995
Chevrolet.....................          298  ...........  ...........  Astro Van.......  ...........                                                1997
Chevrolet.....................          405  ...........  ...........  Blazer..........  ...........                                                1986
Chevrolet.....................          349  ...........  ...........  Blazer (plant     ...........                                                1997
                                                                        code of ``K''
                                                                        or ``2'' in the
                                                                        11th position
                                                                        of the VIN).
Chevrolet.....................          435  ...........  ...........  Camaro..........  ...........                                                1999
Chevrolet.....................          369  ...........  ...........  Cavalier........  ...........                                                1997
Chevrolet.....................          365  ...........  ...........  Corvette........  ...........                                                1992
Chevrolet.....................          419  ...........  ...........  Corvette Coupe..  ...........                                                1999
Chevrolet.....................          242  ...........  ...........  Suburban........  ...........                                           1989-1991
Chrysler......................          344  ...........  ...........  Daytona.........  ...........                                                1992
Chrysler......................          373  ...........  ...........  Grand Voyager...  ...........                                                1998
Chrysler......................          276  ...........  ...........  LHS               ...........                                                1996
                                                                        (manufactured
                                                                        for sale in
                                                                        Mexico).
Chrysler......................          216  ...........  ...........  Shadow (Middle    ...........                                                1989
                                                                        Eastern market).
Chrysler......................          273  ...........  ...........  Town and Country  ...........                                                1993
Citroen.......................  ...........  ...........            1  XM..............  ...........                                           1990-1992
Daimler.......................           12  ...........  ...........  Limousine.......  ...........                                                1985
Dodge.........................          135  ...........  ...........  Ram.............  ...........                                           1994-1995
Ducati (MC)...................          241  ...........  ...........  600SS...........  ...........                                           1992-1996
Ducati (MC)...................          421  ...........  ...........  748.............  ...........                                           1999-2003
Ducati (MC)...................          220  ...........  ...........  748 Biposto.....  ...........                                           1996-1997
Ducati (MC)...................          201  ...........  ...........  900SS...........  ...........                                           1991-1996
Ducati (MC)...................          421  ...........  ...........  916.............  ...........                                           1999-2003
Ducati (MC)...................          398  ...........  ...........  996R............  ...........                                           2001-2002
Ducati (MC)...................          407  ...........  ...........  Monster 600.....  ...........                                                2001
Eagle.........................          323  ...........  ...........  Vision..........  ...........                                                1994
Ferrari.......................  ...........           76  ...........  208, 208 Turbo    ...........                                           1979-1988
                                                                        (all models).
Ferrari.......................  ...........           36  ...........  308 (all models)  ...........                                           1979-1985
Ferrari.......................  ...........           37  ...........  328 (except GTS)  ...........                                     1985, 1988-1989
Ferrari.......................  ...........           37  ...........  328 GTS.........  ...........                                           1985-1989
Ferrari.......................           86  ...........  ...........  348 TB..........  ...........                                                1992
Ferrari.......................          161  ...........  ...........  348 TS..........  ...........                                                1992
Ferrari.......................          376  ...........  ...........  360.............  ...........                                                2001
Ferrari.......................          433  ...........  ...........  360               ...........                                                2002
                                                                        (manufactured
                                                                        after August
                                                                        31, 2002).
Ferrari.......................          402  ...........  ...........  360               ...........                                                2002
                                                                        (manufactured
                                                                        before
                                                                        September 1,
                                                                        2002).
Ferrari.......................          327  ...........  ...........  360 Modena......  ...........                                           1999-2000
Ferrari.......................          410  ...........  ...........  360 Spider &      ...........                                                2003
                                                                        Coupe.
Ferrari.......................          256  ...........  ...........  456.............  ...........                                                1995
Ferrari.......................          408  ...........  ...........  456 GT & GTA....  ...........                                           1997-1998
Ferrari.......................          173  ...........  ...........  512 TR..........  ...........                                                1993

[[Page 1115]]

 
Ferrari.......................          377  ...........  ...........  550.............  ...........                                                2001
Ferrari.......................          292  ...........  ...........  550 Marinello...  ...........                                           1997-1999
Ferrari.......................          415  ...........  ...........  575.............  ...........                                           2002-2003
Ferrari.......................          436  ...........  ...........  Enzo............  ...........                                           2003-2004
Ferrari.......................          259  ...........  ...........  F355............  ...........                                                1995
Ferrari.......................          355  ...........  ...........  F355............  ...........                                           1996-1998
Ferrari.......................          391  ...........  ...........  F355............  ...........                                                1999
Ferrari.......................          226  ...........  ...........  F50.............  ...........                                                1995
Ferrari.......................  ...........           38  ...........  GTO.............  ...........                                                1985
Ferrari.......................  ...........           74  ...........  Mondial (all      ...........                                           1980-1989
                                                                        models).
Ferrari.......................  ...........           39  ...........  Testarossa......  ...........                                           1987-1989
Ford..........................          265  ...........  ...........  Bronco            ...........                                           1995-1996
                                                                        (manufactured
                                                                        in Venezuela).
Ford..........................          322  ...........  ...........  Escort            ...........                                                1996
                                                                        (Nicaragua).
Ford..........................  ...........  ...........            9  Escort RS         ...........                                           1994-1995
                                                                        Cosworth.
Ford..........................          268  ...........  ...........  Explorer          ...........                                           1991-1998
                                                                        (manufactured
                                                                        in Venezuela).
Ford..........................          425  ...........  ...........  F150............  ...........                                                2000
Ford..........................          367  ...........  ...........  Mustang.........  ...........                                                1993
Ford..........................          250  ...........  ...........  Windstar........  ...........                                           1995-1998
Freightliner..................          179  ...........  ...........  FLD12064ST......  ...........                                           1991-1996
Freightliner..................          178  ...........  ...........  FTLD112064SD....  ...........                                           1991-1996
GMC...........................          383  ...........  ...........  Jimmy...........  ...........                                                1980
GMC...........................          134  ...........  ...........  Suburban........  ...........                                           1992-1994
Harley Davidson (MC)..........          202  ...........  ...........  FX, FL, XL        ...........                                           1979-1997
                                                                        Series.
Harley Davidson (MC)..........          253  ...........  ...........  FX, FL, XL        ...........                                                1998
                                                                        Series.
Harley Davidson (MC)..........          281  ...........  ...........  FX, FL, XL        ...........                                                1999
                                                                        Series.
Harley Davidson (MC)..........          321  ...........  ...........  FX, FL, XL        ...........                                                2000
                                                                        Series.
Harley Davidson (MC)..........          362  ...........  ...........  FX, FL, XL        ...........                                                2001
                                                                        Series.
Harley Davidson (MC)..........          372  ...........  ...........  FX, FL, XL        ...........                                                2002
                                                                        Series.
Harley Davidson (MC)..........          393  ...........  ...........  FX, FL, XL        ...........                                                2003
                                                                        Series.
Harley Davidson (MC)..........          422  ...........  ...........  FX, FL, XL        ...........                                                2004
                                                                        Series.
Harley Davidson (MC)..........          374  ...........  ...........  VRSCA...........  ...........                                                2002
Harley Davidson (MC)..........          394  ...........  ...........  VRSCA...........  ...........                                                2003
Harley Davidson (MC)..........          422  ...........  ...........  VRSCA...........  ...........                                                2004
Hobson........................  ...........            8  ...........  Horse Trailer...  ...........                                                1985
Honda.........................          280  ...........  ...........  Accord..........  ...........                                                1991
Honda.........................          319  ...........  ...........  Accord..........  ...........                                           1992-1999
Honda.........................          128  ...........  ...........  Civic DX          ...........                                                1989
                                                                        Hatchback.
Honda.........................          191  ...........  ...........  Prelude.........  ...........                                                1989
Honda.........................          309  ...........  ...........  Prelude.........  ...........                                           1994-1997
Honda (MC)....................          440  ...........  ...........  CB 750            ...........                                                1996
                                                                        (CB750F2T).
Honda (MC)....................          106  ...........  ...........  CB1000F.........  ...........                                                1988
Honda (MC)....................  ...........  ...........           22  CBR 250.........  ...........                                           1989-1994
Honda (MC)....................          348  ...........  ...........  CMX250C.........  ...........                                           1979-1987
Honda (MC)....................          174  ...........  ...........  CP450SC.........  ...........                                                1986
Honda (MC)....................          358  ...........  ...........  RVF 400.........  ...........                                           1994-2000
Honda (MC)....................          290  ...........  ...........  VF750...........  ...........                                           1994-1998
Honda (MC)....................          358  ...........  ...........  VFR 400.........  ...........                                           1994-2000
Honda (MC)....................  ...........  ...........           24  VFR 400, RVF 400  ...........                                           1989-1993
Honda (MC)....................           34  ...........  ...........  VFR750..........  ...........                                                1990
Honda (MC)....................          315  ...........  ...........  VFR750..........  ...........                                           1991-1997

[[Page 1116]]

 
Honda (MC)....................          315  ...........  ...........  VFR800..........  ...........                                           1998-1999
Honda (MC)....................          294  ...........  ...........  VT600...........  ...........                                           1991-1998
Hyundai.......................          269  ...........  ...........  Elantra.........  ...........                                           1992-1995
Jaguar........................           78  ...........  ...........  Sovereign.......  ...........                                                1993
Jaguar........................          411  ...........  ...........  S-Type..........  ...........                                           2000-2002
Jaguar........................  ...........           41  ...........  XJ6.............  ...........                                           1979-1986
Jaguar........................           47  ...........  ...........  XJ6.............  ...........                                                1987
Jaguar........................          215  ...........  ...........  XJ6 Sovereign...  ...........                                                1988
Jaguar........................  ...........           40  ...........  XJS.............  ...........                                           1980-1987
Jaguar........................          175  ...........  ...........  XJS.............  ...........                                                1991
Jaguar........................          129  ...........  ...........  XJS.............  ...........                                                1992
Jaguar........................          195  ...........  ...........  XJS.............  ...........                                           1994-1996
Jaguar........................          336  ...........  ...........  XJS, XJ6........  ...........                                           1988-1990
Jaguar........................          330  ...........  ...........  XK-8............  ...........                                                1998
Jeep..........................          254  ...........  ...........  Cherokee........  ...........                                                1993
Jeep..........................          180  ...........  ...........  Cherokee........  ...........                                                1995
Jeep..........................          211  ...........  ...........  Cherokee          ...........                                                1991
                                                                        (European
                                                                        market).
Jeep..........................          164  ...........  ...........  Cherokee          ...........                                                1992
                                                                        (Venezuelan).
Jeep..........................          224  ...........  ...........  CJ-7............  ...........                                                1979
Jeep..........................          404  ...........  ...........  Grand Cherokee..  ...........                                                1994
Jeep..........................          431  ...........  ...........  Grand Cherokee..  ...........                                                1997
Jeep..........................          382  ...........  ...........  Grand Cherokee..  ...........                                                2001
Jeep..........................          217  ...........  ...........  Wrangler........  ...........                                                1993
Jeep..........................          255  ...........  ...........  Wrangler........  ...........                                                1995
Jeep..........................          341  ...........  ...........  Wrangler........  ...........                                                1998
Jeep..........................          389  ...........  ...........  Grand Cherokee    ...........                                                1997
                                                                        (LHD) (Japanese
                                                                        market).
Kawasaki (MC).................          233  ...........  ...........  EL250...........  ...........                                           1992-1994
Kawasaki (MC).................          190  ...........  ...........  KZ550B..........  ...........                                                1982
Kawasaki (MC).................          182  ...........  ...........  ZX1000-B1.......  ...........                                                1988
Kawasaki (MC).................          222  ...........  ...........  ZX400...........  ...........                                           1987-1997
Kawasaki (MC).................          312  ...........  ...........  ZX6, ZX7, ZX9,    ...........                                           1987-1999
                                                                        ZX10, ZX11.
Kawasaki (MC).................          288  ...........  ...........  ZX600...........  ...........                                           1985-1998
Kawasaki (MC).................          247  ...........  ...........  ZZR1100.........  ...........                                           1993-1998
Ken-Mex.......................          187  ...........  ...........  T800............  ...........                                           1990-1996
Kenworth......................          115  ...........  ...........  T800............  ...........                                                1992
KTM (MC)......................          363  ...........  ...........  Duke II.........  ...........                                           1995-2000
Lamborghini...................          416  ...........  ...........  Diablo (except    ...........                                           1996-1997
                                                                        1997 Coupe).
Lamborghini...................  ...........  ...........           26  Diablo Coupe....  ...........                                                1997
Land Rover....................          212  ...........  ...........  Defender 110....  ...........                                                1993
Land Rover....................          432  ...........  ...........  Defender 90       ...........                                                1997
                                                                        (manufactured
                                                                        before 9/1/
                                                                        1997).
Land Rover....................          338  ...........  ...........  Discovery.......  ...........                                           1994-1998
Land Rover....................          437  ...........  ...........  Discovery (II)..  ...........                                                2000
Lexus.........................          293  ...........  ...........  GS300...........  ...........                                           1993-1996
Lexus.........................          307  ...........  ...........  RX300...........  ...........                                           1998-1999

[[Page 1117]]

 
Lexus.........................          225  ...........  ...........  SC300, SC400....  ...........                                           1991-1996
Lincoln.......................          144  ...........  ...........  Mark VII........  ...........                                                1992
Magni (MC)....................          264  ...........  ...........  Australia, Sfida  ...........                                           1996-1999
Maserati......................          155  ...........  ...........  Bi-Turbo........  ...........                                                1985
Mazda.........................          413  ...........  ...........  MPV.............  ...........                                                2000
Mazda.........................          184  ...........  ...........  MX-5 Miata......  ...........                                           1990-1993
Mazda.........................  ...........           42  ...........  RX-7............  ...........                                           1979-1981
Mazda.........................          199  ...........  ...........  RX-7............  ...........                                                1986
Mazda.........................          279  ...........  ...........  RX-7............  ...........                                           1987-1995
Mazda.........................          351  ...........  ...........  Xedos 9.........  ...........                                           1995-2000
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           54  ...........  190.............      201.022                                                1984
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           54  ...........  190 D...........      201.126                                           1984-1989
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           54  ...........  190 D (2.2).....      201.122                                           1984-1989
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           54  ...........  190 E...........      201.028                                           1986-1989
Mercedes Benz.................           22  ...........  ...........  190 E...........      201.024                                                1990
Mercedes Benz.................           45  ...........  ...........  190 E...........      201.024                                                1991
Mercedes Benz.................           71  ...........  ...........  190 E...........      201.028                                                1992
Mercedes Benz.................          126  ...........  ...........  190 E...........      201.018                                                1992
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           54  ...........  190 E (2.3).....      201.024                                           1983-1989
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           54  ...........  190 E (2.6).....      201.029                                           1986-1989
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           54  ...........  190 E 2.3 16....      201.034                                           1984-1989
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  200.............      123.020                                           1979-1980
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  200.............      123.220                                           1979-1985
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           55  ...........  200.............      124.020                                                1985
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  200 D...........      123.120                                           1980-1982
Mercedes Benz.................           17  ...........  ...........  200 D...........      124.120                                                1986
Mercedes Benz.................           11  ...........  ...........  200 E...........      124.021                                                1989
Mercedes Benz.................          109  ...........  ...........  200 E...........      124.012                                                1991
Mercedes Benz.................           75  ...........  ...........  200 E...........      124.019                                                1993
Mercedes Benz.................            3  ...........  ...........  200 TE..........      124.081                                                1989
Mercedes Benz.................          168  ...........  ...........  220 E...........  ...........                                                1993
Mercedes Benz.................          167  ...........  ...........  220 TE Station    ...........                                           1993-1996
                                                                        Wagon.
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  230.............      123.023                                           1979-1985
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  230 C...........      123.043                                           1979-1980
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  230 CE..........      123.243                                           1980-1984
Mercedes Benz.................           84  ...........  ...........  230 CE..........      124.043                                                1991
Mercedes Benz.................          203  ...........  ...........  230 CE..........  ...........                                                1992
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  230 E...........      123.223                                           1979-1985
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           55  ...........  230 E...........      124.023                                           1985-1987
Mercedes Benz.................            1  ...........  ...........  230 E...........      124.023                                                1988
Mercedes Benz.................           20  ...........  ...........  230 E...........      124.023                                                1989
Mercedes Benz.................           19  ...........  ...........  230 E...........      124.023                                                1990
Mercedes Benz.................           74  ...........  ...........  230 E...........      124.023                                                1991
Mercedes Benz.................          127  ...........  ...........  230 E...........      124.023                                                1993
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  230 T...........      123.083                                           1979-1985
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  230 TE..........      123.283                                           1979-1985
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           55  ...........  230 TE..........      124.083                                                1985
Mercedes Benz.................            2  ...........  ...........  230 TE..........      124.083                                                1989
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  240 D...........      123.123                                           1979-1985
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  240 TD..........      123.183                                           1979-1985

[[Page 1118]]

 
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  250.............      123.026                                           1979-1985
Mercedes Benz.................          172  ...........  ...........  250 D...........  ...........                                                1992
Mercedes Benz.................          245  ...........  ...........  250 E...........  ...........                                           1990-1993
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           55  ...........  260 E...........      124.026                                           1985-1989
Mercedes Benz.................          105  ...........  ...........  260 E...........      124.026                                                1992
Mercedes Benz.................           18  ...........  ...........  260 SE..........      126.020                                                1986
Mercedes Benz.................           28  ...........  ...........  260 SE..........      126.020                                                1989
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  280.............      123.030                                           1979-1985
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  280 C...........      123.050                                           1979-1980
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  280 CE..........      123.053                                           1979-1985
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  280 E...........      123.033                                           1979-1985
Mercedes Benz.................          166  ...........  ...........  280 E...........  ...........                                                1993
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           51  ...........  280 S...........      116.020                                           1979-1980
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           53  ...........  280 S...........      126.021                                           1980-1983
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           51  ...........  280 SE..........      116.024                                           1979-1988
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           53  ...........  280 SE..........      126.022                                           1980-1985
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           51  ...........  280 SEL.........      116.025                                           1979-1980
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           53  ...........  280 SEL.........      126.023                                           1980-1985
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           44  ...........  280 SL..........      107.042                                           1979-1985
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           44  ...........  280 SLC.........      107.022                                           1979-1981
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  280 TE..........      123.093                                           1979-1985
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  300 CD..........      123.150                                           1979-1985
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           55  ...........  300 CE..........      124.050                                           1988-1989
Mercedes Benz.................           64  ...........  ...........  300 CE..........      124.051                                                1990
Mercedes Benz.................           83  ...........  ...........  300 CE..........      124.051                                                1991
Mercedes Benz.................          117  ...........  ...........  300 CE..........      124.050                                                1992
Mercedes Benz.................           94  ...........  ...........  300 CE..........      124.061                                                1993
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  300 D...........      123.133                                           1979-1985
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  300 D...........      123.130                                           1979-1985
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           55  ...........  300 D...........      124.130                                           1985-1986
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           55  ...........  300 D Turbo.....      124.133                                           1985-1989
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           55  ...........  300 E...........      124.030                                           1985-1989
Mercedes Benz.................          114  ...........  ...........  300 E...........      124.031                                                1992
Mercedes Benz.................          192  ...........  ...........  300 E 4-Matic...  ...........                                           1990-1993
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           53  ...........  300 SD..........      126.120                                           1981-1989
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           53  ...........  300 SE..........      126.024                                           1985-1989
Mercedes Benz.................           68  ...........  ...........  300 SE..........      126.024                                                1990
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           53  ...........  300 SEL.........      126.025                                           1986-1989
Mercedes Benz.................           21  ...........  ...........  300 SEL.........      126.025                                                1990
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           44  ...........  300 SL..........      107.041                                           1986-1988
Mercedes Benz.................            7  ...........  ...........  300 SL..........      107.041                                                1989
Mercedes Benz.................           54  ...........  ...........  300 SL..........      129.006                                                1992
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           52  ...........  300 TD..........      123.193                                           1979-1985
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           55  ...........  300 TD Turbo....      124.193                                           1986-1989
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           55  ...........  300 TE..........      124.090                                           1986-1989
Mercedes Benz.................           40  ...........  ...........  300 TE..........      124.090                                                1990

[[Page 1119]]

 
Mercedes Benz.................          193  ...........  ...........  300 TE..........  ...........                                                1992
Mercedes Benz.................          310  ...........  ...........  320 CE..........  ...........                                                1993
Mercedes Benz.................          142  ...........  ...........  320 SL..........  ...........                                           1992-1993
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           51  ...........  350 SE..........      116.028                                           1979-1980
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           51  ...........  350 SEL.........      116.029                                           1979-1980
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           44  ...........  350 SLC.........      107.023                                                1979
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           53  ...........  380 SE..........      126.032                                           1979-1989
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           53  ...........  380 SE..........      126.043                                           1982-1989
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           53  ...........  380 SEL.........      126.033                                           1980-1989
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           44  ...........  380 SL..........      107.045                                           1980-1989
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           44  ...........  380 SLC.........      107.025                                           1981-1989
Mercedes Benz.................          296  ...........  ...........  400 SE..........  ...........                                           1992-1994
Mercedes Benz.................          169  ...........  ...........  420 E...........  ...........                                                1993
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           53  ...........  420 SE..........      126.034                                           1985-1989
Mercedes Benz.................          230  ...........  ...........  420 SE..........  ...........                                           1990-1991
Mercedes Benz.................          209  ...........  ...........  420 SEC.........  ...........                                                1990
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           53  ...........  420 SEL.........      126.035                                           1986-1989
Mercedes Benz.................           48  ...........  ...........  420 SEL.........      126.035                                                1990
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           44  ...........  420 SL..........      107.047                                                1986
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           51  ...........  450 SE..........      116.032                                           1979-1980
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           51  ...........  450 SEL.........      116.033                                           1979-1988
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           51  ...........  450 SEL (6.9)...      116.036                                           1979-1988
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           44  ...........  450 SL..........      107.044                                           1979-1989
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           44  ...........  450 SLC.........      107.024                                           1979-1989
Mercedes Benz.................           56  ...........  ...........  500 E...........      124.036                                                1991
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           53  ...........  500 SE..........      126.036                                           1980-1986
Mercedes Benz.................           35  ...........  ...........  500 SE..........      126.036                                                1988
Mercedes Benz.................          154  ...........  ...........  500 SE..........  ...........                                                1990
Mercedes Benz.................           26  ...........  ...........  500 SE..........      140.050                                                1991
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           53  ...........  500 SEC.........      126.044                                           1981-1989
Mercedes Benz.................           66  ...........  ...........  500 SEC.........      126.044                                                1990
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           53  ...........  500 SEL.........      126.037                                           1980-1989
Mercedes Benz.................          153  ...........  ...........  500 SEL.........  ...........                                                1990
Mercedes Benz.................           63  ...........  ...........  500 SEL.........      126.037                                                1991
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           44  ...........  500 SL..........      107.046                                           1980-1989
Mercedes Benz.................           23  ...........  ...........  500 SL..........      129.066                                                1989
Mercedes Benz.................           33  ...........  ...........  500 SL..........      126.066                                                1991
Mercedes Benz.................           60  ...........  ...........  500 SL..........      129.006                                                1992
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           44  ...........  500 SLC.........      107.026                                           1979-1981
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           53  ...........  560 SEC.........      126.045                                           1986-1989
Mercedes Benz.................          141  ...........  ...........  560 SEC.........      126.045                                                1990
Mercedes Benz.................          333  ...........  ...........  560 SEC.........  ...........                                                1991
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           53  ...........  560 SEL.........      126.039                                           1986-1989
Mercedes Benz.................           89  ...........  ...........  560 SEL.........      126.039                                                1990
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           44  ...........  560 SL..........      107.048                                           1986-1989
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           43  ...........  600.............      100.012                                           1979-1981
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           43  ...........  600 Landaulet...      100.015                                           1979-1981
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           43  ...........  600 Long 4dr....      100.014                                           1979-1981
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           43  ...........  600 Long 6dr....      100.016                                           1979-1981
Mercedes Benz.................          185  ...........  ...........  600 SEC Coupe...  ...........                                                1993

[[Page 1120]]

 
Mercedes Benz.................          271  ...........  ...........  600 SEL.........      140.057                                           1993-1998
Mercedes Benz.................          121  ...........  ...........  600 SL..........      129.076                                                1992
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........           77  ...........  All other models  ...........                                           1979-1989
                                                                        except Model ID
                                                                        114 and 115
                                                                        with sales
                                                                        designations.
Mercedes Benz.................          331  ...........  ...........  C Class.........  ...........                                           1994-1999
Mercedes Benz.................          441  ...........  ...........  C-320...........          203                                           2001-2002
Mercedes Benz.................          277  ...........  ...........  CL500...........  ...........                                                1998
Mercedes Benz.................          370  ...........  ...........  CL500...........  ...........                                           1999-2001
Mercedes Benz.................          370  ...........  ...........  CL600...........  ...........                                           1999-2001
Mercedes Benz.................          380  ...........  ...........  CLK.............  ...........                                           1999-2001
Mercedes Benz.................          357  ...........  ...........  CLK320..........  ...........                                                1998
Mercedes Benz.................          401  ...........  ...........  E Class.........         W210                                           1996-2002
Mercedes Benz.................          429  ...........  ...........  E Class.........          211                                           2003-2004
Mercedes Benz.................          354  ...........  ...........  E Series........  ...........                                           1991-1995
Mercedes Benz.................          207  ...........  ...........  E200............  ...........                                                1994
Mercedes Benz.................          278  ...........  ...........  E200............  ...........                                           1995-1998
Mercedes Benz.................          168  ...........  ...........  E220............  ...........                                           1994-1996
Mercedes Benz.................          245  ...........  ...........  E250............  ...........                                           1994-1995
Mercedes Benz.................          166  ...........  ...........  E280............  ...........                                           1994-1996
Mercedes Benz.................          240  ...........  ...........  E320............  ...........                                           1994-1998
Mercedes Benz.................          418  ...........  ...........  E320............          211                                           2002-2003
Mercedes Benz.................          318  ...........  ...........  E320 Station      ...........                                           1994-1999
                                                                        Wagon.
Mercedes Benz.................          169  ...........  ...........  E420............  ...........                                           1994-1996
Mercedes Benz.................          163  ...........  ...........  E500............  ...........                                                1994
Mercedes Benz.................          304  ...........  ...........  E500............  ...........                                           1995-1997
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........  ...........           11  G-Wagon.........          463                                                1996
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........  ...........           15  G-Wagon.........          463                                                1997
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........  ...........           16  G-Wagon.........          463                                                1998
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........  ...........           18  G-Wagon.........          463                                           1999-2000
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........  ...........            5  G-Wagon 300.....      463.228                                           1990-1992
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........  ...........            3  G-Wagon 300.....      463.228                                                1993
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........  ...........            5  G-Wagon 300.....      463.228                                                1994
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........  ...........            6  G-Wagon 320 LWB.          463                                                1995
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........  ...........           21  G-Wagon 5 DR LWB          463                                                2001
Mercedes Benz.................          392  ...........  ...........  G-Wagon 5 DR LWB          463                                                2002
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........  ...........           13  G-Wagon LWB V-8.          463                                           1992-1996
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........  ...........           14  G-Wagon SWB.....          463                                           1990-1996
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........  ...........           25  G-Wagon SWB               463                                           2001-2003
                                                                        Cabriolet & 3DR.
Mercedes Benz.................          423  ...........  ...........  S Class.........          140                                           1991-1994
Mercedes Benz.................          395  ...........  ...........  S Class.........  ...........                                                1993
Mercedes Benz.................          342  ...........  ...........  S Class.........  ...........                                           1995-1998
Mercedes Benz.................          325  ...........  ...........  S Class.........  ...........                                           1998-1999
Mercedes Benz.................          387  ...........  ...........  S Class.........         W220                                           1999-2002
Mercedes Benz.................          442  ...........  ...........  S Class.........          220                                           2002-2004
Mercedes Benz.................           85  ...........  ...........  S280............      140.028                                                1994
Mercedes Benz.................          236  ...........  ...........  S320............  ...........                                           1994-1998

[[Page 1121]]

 
Mercedes Benz.................          267  ...........  ...........  S420............  ...........                                           1994-1997
Mercedes Benz.................          235  ...........  ...........  S500............  ...........                                           1994-1997
Mercedes Benz.................          371  ...........  ...........  S500............  ...........                                           2000-2001
Mercedes Benz.................          297  ...........  ...........  S600............  ...........                                           1995-1999
Mercedes Benz.................          371  ...........  ...........  S600............  ...........                                           2000-2001
Mercedes Benz.................          185  ...........  ...........  S600 Coupe......  ...........                                                1994
Mercedes Benz.................          214  ...........  ...........  S600L...........  ...........                                                1994
Mercedes Benz.................          343  ...........  ...........  SE Class........  ...........                                           1992-1994
Mercedes Benz.................          343  ...........  ...........  SEL Class.......  ...........                                           1992-1994
Mercedes Benz.................          329  ...........  ...........  SL Class........  ...........                                           1993-1996
Mercedes Benz.................          386  ...........  ...........  SL Class........         W129                                           1997-2000
Mercedes Benz.................  ...........  ...........           19  SL Class........         R230                                           2001-2002
Mercedes Benz.................          257  ...........  ...........  SLK.............  ...........                                           1997-1998
Mercedes Benz.................          381  ...........  ...........  SLK.............  ...........                                           2000-2001
Mitsubishi....................           13  ...........  ...........  Galant Super      ...........                                                1989
                                                                        Salon.
Mitsubishi....................            8  ...........  ...........  Galant VX.......  ...........                                                1988
Mitsubishi....................          170  ...........  ...........  Pajero..........  ...........                                                1984
Moto Guzzi (MC)...............          403  ...........  ...........  California EV...  ...........                                                2002
Moto Guzzi (MC)...............          118  ...........  ...........  Daytona.........  ...........                                                1993
Moto Guzzi (MC)...............          264  ...........  ...........  Daytona RS......  ...........                                           1996-1999
MV Agusta.....................          420  ...........  ...........  F4..............  ...........                                                2000
Nissan........................          162  ...........  ...........  240SX...........  ...........                                                1988
Nissan........................          198  ...........  ...........  300ZX...........  ...........                                                1984
Nissan........................  ...........           75  ...........  Fairlady,         ...........                                                1979
                                                                        Fairlady Z.
Nissan........................  ...........  ...........           17  GTS, GTR (RHD)..  ...........                                           1990-1999
Nissan........................          138  ...........  ...........  Maxima..........  ...........                                                1989
Nissan........................          316  ...........  ...........  Pathfinder......  ...........                                           1987-1995
Nissan........................          412  ...........  ...........  Pathfinder......  ...........                                                2002
Nissan........................          139  ...........  ...........  Stanza..........  ...........                                                1987
Nissan........................  ...........           75  ...........  Z, 280Z.........  ...........                                           1979-1981
Peugeot.......................           65  ...........  ...........  405.............  ...........                                                1989
Plymouth......................          353  ...........  ...........  Voyager.........  ...........                                                1996
Pontiac (MPV).................          189  ...........  ...........  Trans Sport.....  ...........                                                1993
Porsche.......................          346  ...........  ...........  911.............  ...........                                           1997-2000
Porsche.......................          439  ...........  ...........  911 (996)         ...........                                           2002-2004
                                                                        Carrera.
Porsche.......................          438  ...........  ...........  911 (996) GT3...  ...........                                                2004
Porsche.......................           29  ...........  ...........  911 C4..........  ...........                                                1990
Porsche.......................  ...........           56  ...........  911 Cabriolet...  ...........                                           1984-1989
Porsche.......................  ...........           56  ...........  911 Carrera.....  ...........                                           1979-1989
Porsche.......................          165  ...........  ...........  911 Carrera.....  ...........                                                1993
Porsche.......................          103  ...........  ...........  911 Carrera.....  ...........                                                1994
Porsche.......................          165  ...........  ...........  911 Carrera.....  ...........                                           1995-1996
Porsche.......................           52  ...........  ...........  911 Carrera 2 &   ...........                                                1992
                                                                        Carrera 4.
Porsche.......................  ...........           56  ...........  911 Coupe.......  ...........                                           1979-1989
Porsche.......................  ...........           56  ...........  911 Targa.......  ...........                                           1979-1989
Porsche.......................  ...........           56  ...........  911 Turbo.......  ...........                                           1979-1989
Porsche.......................          125  ...........  ...........  911 Turbo.......  ...........                                                1992
Porsche.......................          347  ...........  ...........  911 Turbo.......  ...........                                                2001
Porsche.......................  ...........           59  ...........  924 Coupe.......  ...........                                           1979-1989
Porsche.......................  ...........           59  ...........  924 S...........  ...........                                           1987-1989

[[Page 1122]]

 
Porsche.......................  ...........           59  ...........  924 Turbo Coupe.  ...........                                           1979-1989
Porsche.......................          266  ...........  ...........  928.............  ...........                                           1991-1996
Porsche.......................          272  ...........  ...........  928.............  ...........                                           1993-1998
Porsche.......................  ...........           60  ...........  928 Coupe.......  ...........                                           1979-1989
Porsche.......................  ...........           60  ...........  928 GT..........  ...........                                           1979-1989
Porsche.......................  ...........           60  ...........  928 S Coupe.....  ...........                                           1983-1989
Porsche.......................  ...........           60  ...........  928 S4..........  ...........                                           1979-1989
Porsche.......................          210  ...........  ...........  928 S4..........  ...........                                                1990
Porsche.......................  ...........           61  ...........  944 Coupe.......  ...........                                           1982-1989
Porsche.......................           97  ...........  ...........  944 S Cabriolet.  ...........                                                1990
Porsche.......................  ...........           61  ...........  944 S Coupe.....  ...........                                           1987-1989
Porsche.......................          152  ...........  ...........  944 S2 (2-door    ...........                                                1990
                                                                        Hatchback).
Porsche.......................  ...........           61  ...........  944 Turbo Coupe.  ...........                                           1985-1989
Porsche.......................          116  ...........  ...........  946 Turbo.......  ...........                                                1994
Porsche.......................  ...........           79  ...........  All models        ...........                                           1979-1989
                                                                        except Model
                                                                        959.
Porsche.......................          390  ...........  ...........  Boxster.........  ...........                                           1997-2001
Porsche.......................          390  ...........  ...........  Boxster           ...........                                                2002
                                                                        (manufactured
                                                                        before 9/1/
                                                                        2002).
Porsche.......................  ...........  ...........           20  GT2.............  ...........                                                2001
Porsche.......................          388  ...........  ...........  GT2.............  ...........                                                2002
Rolls Royce...................          340  ...........  ...........  Bentley.........  ...........                                           1987-1989
Rolls Royce...................          186  ...........  ...........  Bentley           ...........                                                1993
                                                                        Brooklands.
Rolls Royce...................          258  ...........  ...........  Bentley           ...........                                           1990-1993
                                                                        Continental R.
Rolls Royce...................           53  ...........  ...........  Bentley Turbo...  ...........                                                1986
Rolls Royce...................          291  ...........  ...........  Bentley Turbo R.  ...........                                           1992-1993
Rolls Royce...................          243  ...........  ...........  Bentley Turbo R.  ...........                                                1995
Rolls Royce...................          122  ...........  ...........  Camargue........  ...........                                           1984-1985
Rolls Royce...................          339  ...........  ...........  Corniche........  ...........                                           1979-1985
Rolls Royce...................  ...........           62  ...........  Silver Shadow...  ...........                                                1979
Rolls Royce...................          188  ...........  ...........  Silver Spur.....  ...........                                                1984
Saab..........................          426  ...........  ...........  9.3.............  ...........                                                2003
Saab..........................          158  ...........  ...........  900.............  ...........                                                1983
Saab..........................          270  ...........  ...........  900 S...........  ...........                                           1987-1989
Saab..........................          219  ...........  ...........  900 SE..........  ...........                                           1990-1994
Saab..........................          213  ...........  ...........  900 SE..........  ...........                                                1995
Saab..........................          219  ...........  ...........  900 SE..........  ...........                                           1996-1997
Saab..........................           59  ...........  ...........  9000............  ...........                                                1988
Saab..........................          334  ...........  ...........  9000............  ...........                                                1994
Smart Car.....................  ...........  ...........           27  City-Coupe, City- ...........                                           2002-2004
                                                                        Coupe Glass
                                                                        Top, & Cabrio.
Sprite (trailer)..............  ...........  ...........           12  Musketeer.......  ...........                                                1980
Suzuki (MC)...................          111  ...........  ...........  GS 850..........  ...........                                                1985
Suzuki (MC)...................          287  ...........  ...........  GSF 750.........  ...........                                           1996-1998
Suzuki (MC)...................          208  ...........  ...........  GSX 750.........  ...........                                                1983
Suzuki (MC)...................          227  ...........  ...........  GSX-R 1100......  ...........                                           1986-1997
Suzuki (MC)...................          275  ...........  ...........  GSX-R 750.......  ...........                                           1986-1998

[[Page 1123]]

 
Suzuki (MC)...................          417  ...........  ...........  GSX-R 750.......  ...........                                           1999-2003
Toyota........................          308  ...........  ...........  Avalon..........  ...........                                           1995-1998
Toyota........................  ...........           63  ...........  Camry...........  ...........                                           1987-1988
Toyota........................           39  ...........  ...........  Camry...........  ...........                                                1989
Toyota........................  ...........           64  ...........  Celica..........  ...........                                           1987-1988
Toyota........................  ...........           65  ...........  Corolla.........  ...........                                           1987-1988
Toyota........................          320  ...........  ...........  Land Cruiser....  ...........                                           1979-1980
Toyota........................          252  ...........  ...........  Land Cruiser....  ...........                                           1981-1988
Toyota........................          101  ...........  ...........  Land Cruiser....  ...........                                                1989
Toyota........................          218  ...........  ...........  Land Cruiser....  ...........                                           1990-1996
Toyota........................          324  ...........  ...........  MR2.............  ...........                                           1990-1991
Toyota........................          326  ...........  ...........  Previa..........  ...........                                           1991-1992
Toyota........................          302  ...........  ...........  Previa..........  ...........                                           1993-1997
Toyota........................          328  ...........  ...........  RAV4............  ...........                                                1996
Toyota........................          200  ...........  ...........  Van.............  ...........                                           1987-1988
Triumph (MC)..................          311  ...........  ...........  Thunderbird.....  ...........                                           1995-1999
Triumph (MC)..................          409  ...........  ...........  TSS.............  ...........                                                1982
Vespa (MC)....................          378  ...........  ...........  ET2, ET4........  ...........                                           2001-2002
Volkswagen....................          237  ...........  ...........  Beetle            ...........                                                1979
                                                                        Convertible.
Volkswagen....................          306  ...........  ...........  Eurovan.........  ...........                                           1993-1994
Volkswagen....................          159  ...........  ...........  Golf............  ...........                                                1987
Volkswagen....................           80  ...........  ...........  Golf............  ...........                                                1988
Volkswagen....................           92  ...........  ...........  Golf III........  ...........                                                1993
Volkswagen....................           73  ...........  ...........  Golf Rallye.....  ...........                                                1988
Volkswagen....................          149  ...........  ...........  GTI (Canadian)..  ...........                                                1991
Volkswagen....................          274  ...........  ...........  Jetta...........  ...........                                           1994-1996
Volkswagen....................          148  ...........  ...........  Passat 4-door     ...........                                                1992
                                                                        Sedan.
Volkswagen....................           42  ...........  ...........  Scirocco........  ...........                                                1986
Volkswagen....................          427  ...........  ...........  Transporter.....  ...........                                           1979-1980
Volkswagen....................          284  ...........  ...........  Transporter.....  ...........                                           1988-1989
Volkswagen....................          251  ...........  ...........  Transporter.....  ...........                                                1990
Volvo.........................           43  ...........  ...........  262C............  ...........                                                1981
Volvo.........................          137  ...........  ...........  740 GL..........  ...........                                                1992
Volvo.........................           87  ...........  ...........  740 Sedan.......  ...........                                                1988
Volvo.........................          286  ...........  ...........  850 Turbo.......  ...........                                           1995-1998
Volvo.........................          137  ...........  ...........  940 GL..........  ...........                                                1992
Volvo.........................           95  ...........  ...........  940 GL..........  ...........                                                1993
Volvo.........................          132  ...........  ...........  945 GL..........  ...........                                                1994
Volvo.........................          176  ...........  ...........  960 Sedan &       ...........                                                1994
                                                                        Wagon.
Volvo.........................          434  ...........  ...........  C70.............  ...........                                                2000
Volvo.........................          335  ...........  ...........  S70.............  ...........                                           1998-2000
Yamaha (MC)...................          113  ...........  ...........  FJ1200 (4 CR)...  ...........                                                1991
Yamaha (MC)...................  ...........  ...........           23  FJR 1300........  ...........                                                2002
Yamaha (MC)...................          360  ...........  ...........  R1..............  ...........                                                2000
Yamaha (MC)...................          171  ...........  ...........  RD-350..........  ...........                                                1983
Yamaha (MC)...................          301  ...........  ...........  Virago..........  ...........                                           1990-1998
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 1124]]


[69 FR 58356, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R03>
PART 594_SCHEDULE OF FEES AUTHORIZED BY 49 U.S.C. 30141--Table of Contents




Sec.
594.1 Scope.
594.2 Purpose.
594.3 Applicability.
594.4 Definitions.
594.5 Establishment and payment of fees.
594.6 Annual fee for administration of the registration program.
594.7 Fee for filing petition for a determination whether a vehicle is 
          eligible for importation.
594.8 Fee for importing a vehicle pursuant to a determination by the 
          Administrator.
594.9 Fee for reimbursement of bond processing costs.
594.10 Fee for review and processing of conformity certificate.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 30141, 31 U.S.C. 9701; delegation of authority 
at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 54 FR 40107, Sept. 29, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 594.1  Scope.

    This part establishes the fees authorized by 49 U.S.C. 30141.

[61 FR 51045, Sept. 30, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 594.2  Purpose.

    The purposes of this part is to ensure that NHTSA is reimbursed for 
costs incurred in administering the importer registration program, in 
making determinations whether a nonconforming vehicle is eligible for 
importation into the United States, and in processing the bond furnished 
to the Secretary of the Treasury given to ensure that an imported 
vehicle not originally manufactured to conform to all applicable Federal 
motor vehicle safety standards is brought into compliance with the 
safety standards, or will be exported, or abandoned to the United 
States.


<R05>
Sec. 594.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to any person who applies to NHTSA to be granted 
the status of Registered Importer under part 592 of this chapter, to any 
person who has been granted such status, to any manufacturer not a 
Registered Importer who petitions the Administrator for a determination 
pursuant to part 593 of this chapter, and to any person who imports a 
motor vehicle into the United States pursuant to such determination.

[55 FR 40667, Oct. 4, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 594.4  Definitions.

    All terms used in this part that are defined in 49 U.S.C. 30102 are 
used as defined in that section.
    Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration.
    NHTSA means the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
    Registered Importer means any person who has been granted the status 
of registered importer under part 592 of this chapter, and whose 
registration has not been revoked.

[54 FR 40107, Sept. 29, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 51045, Sept. 30, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 594.5  Establishment and payment of fees.

    (a) The fees established by this part continue in effect until 
adjusted by the Administrator. The Administrator reviews the amount or 
rate of fees established under this part and, if appropriate, adjusts 
them by rule at least every 2 years.
    (b) The fees applicable in any fiscal year are established before 
the beginning of such year. Each fee is calculated in accordance with 
this part, and is published in the Federal Register not later than 
September 30 of each year.
    (c) An applicant for status as Registered Importer shall submit an 
initial annual fee with the application. A Registered Importer shall pay 
an annual fee not later than October 31 of each year. The fee is that 
specified in Sec. 594.6(i).
    (d) A person who petitions the Administrator for a determination 
that a vehicle is eligible for importation shall file with the petition 
the fee specified in Sec. 594.7(e).
    (e) No application or petition will be accepted for filing or 
processed before payment of the full amount specified. Except as 
provided in Sec. 594.6(d), a fee shall be paid irrespective of NHTSA's 
disposition of the application, or of a withdrawal of an application.
    (f) The Administrator will furnish each Registered Importer with a

[[Page 1125]]

monthly invoice of the fees owed by the Registered Importer for 
reimbursement for bond processing costs and for the review and 
processing of conformity certificates and information regarding 
importation of motor vehicles as provided in Section 592.4 of this 
chapter. A person who for personal use imports a vehicle covered by a 
determination of the Administrator must pay the fee specified in either 
Sec. 594.8(b) or (c), as appropriate, to the Registered Importer, and 
the invoice will also include these fees. The Registered Importer must 
pay the fees within 15 days of the date of the invoice.
    (g) Fee payments must be by certified check, cashier's check, money 
order, credit card, or Electronic Funds Transfer System, made payable to 
the Treasurer of the United States.

[54 FR 40107, Sept. 29, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 40667, Oct. 4, 1990; 
62 FR 50882, Sept. 29, 1997; 69 FR 52100, Aug. 24, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 594.6  Annual fee for administration of the registration program.

    (a) Each person filing an application to be granted the status of a 
Registered Importer pursuant to part 592 of this chapter on or after 
October 1, 2004, must pay an annual fee of $830, as calculated below, 
based upon the direct and indirect costs attributable to:
    (1) Processing and acting upon such application;
    (2) Any inspection deemed required for a determination upon such 
application;
    (3) The estimated remaining activities of administering the 
registration program in the fiscal year in which such application is 
intended to become effective.
    (b) That portion of the initial annual fee attributable to the 
processing of the application for applications filed on and after 
October 1, 2004, is $537. The sum of $537, representing this portion, 
shall not be refundable if the application is denied or withdrawn.
    (c) If, in order to make a determination upon an application, NHTSA 
must make an inspection of the applicant's facilities, NHTSA notifies 
the applicant in writing after the conclusion of any such inspection, 
that a supplement to the initial annual fee in a stated amount is due 
upon receipt of such notice to recover the direct and indirect costs 
associated with such inspection and notification, and that no 
determination will be made upon the application until such sum is 
received. Such sum is not refundable if the application is denied or 
withdrawn.
    (d) That portion of the initial annual fee attributable to the 
remaining activities of administering the registration program on and 
after October 1, 2004, is set forth in paragraph (i) of this section. 
This portion shall be refundable if the application is denied, or 
withdrawn before final action upon it.
    (e) Each Registered Importer who wishes to maintain the status of 
Registered Importer shall pay a regular annual fee based upon the direct 
and indirect costs of administering the registration program, including 
the suspension and reinstatement, and revocation of such registration.
    (f) The elements of administering the registration program that are 
included in the regular annual fee are:
    (1) Calculating, revising, and publishing the fees to apply in the 
next fiscal year, including such coordination as may be required with 
the U.S. Customs Service.
    (2) Processing and reviewing the annual statement attesting to the 
fact that no material change has occurred in the Registered Importer's 
status since filing its original application.
    (3) Processing the annual fee.
    (4) Processing and reviewing any amendments to an annual statement 
received in the course of a fiscal year.
    (5) Verifying through inspection or otherwise that a Registered 
Importer is complying with the requirements of Sec. 592.6(b)(3) of this 
chapter for recordkeeping.
    (6) Verifying through inspection or otherwise that a Registered 
Importer is able technically and financially to carry out its 
responsibilities pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 30118 et seq.
    (7) Invoking procedures for suspension of registration and its 
reinstatement, and for revocation of registration pursuant to Sec. 592.7 
of this chapter.
    (g) The direct costs included in establishing the annual fee for 
maintaining registered importer status are the estimated costs of 
professional and clerical

[[Page 1126]]

staff time, computer and computer operator time, and postage, per 
Registered Importer. The direct costs included in establishing the 
annual fee for a specific Registered Importer are costs of 
transportation and per diem attributable to inspections conducted with 
respect to that Registered Importer in administering the registration 
program, which have not been included in a previous annual fee.
    (h) The indirect costs included in establishing the annual fee for 
maintaining Registered Importer status are a pro rata allocation of the 
average salary and benefits of persons employed in processing annual 
statements, or changes thereto, in recommending continuation of 
Registered Importer status, and a pro rata allocation of the costs 
attributable to maintaining the office space, and the computer or word 
processor. This cost is $20.07 per man-hour for the period beginning 
October 1, 2004.
    (i) Based upon the elements and indirect costs of paragraphs (f), 
(g), and (h) of this section, the component of the initial annual fee 
attributable to administration of the registration program, covering the 
period beginning October 1, 2004, is $537. When added to the costs of 
registration of $293, as set forth in paragraph (b) of this section, the 
costs per applicant to be recovered through the annual fee are $830. The 
annual renewal registration fee for the period beginning October 1, 
2004, is $745.

[54 FR 40107, Sept. 29, 1989; 55 FR 78, Jan. 2, 1990, as amended at 55 
FR 40667, Oct. 4, 1990; 56 FR 49429, Sept. 30, 1991; 58 FR 51023, Sept. 
30, 1993; 61 FR 51045, Sept. 30, 1996; 63 FR 45185, Aug. 25, 1998; 65 FR 
56500, Sept. 19, 2000; 67 FR 60599, Sept. 26, 2002; 67 FR 62897, Oct. 9, 
2002; 69 FR 57873, Sept. 28, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 594.7  Fee for filing petition for a determination whether a vehicle 
is eligible for importation.

    (a) Each manufacturer or registered importer who petitions NHTSA for 
a determination that--
    (1) A nonconforming vehicle is substantially similar to a vehicle 
originally manufactured for importation into and sale in the United 
States and of the same model year as the model for which petition is 
made, and is capable of being readily modified to conform to all 
applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards, or
    (2) A nonconforming vehicle has safety features that comply with or 
are capable of being modified to comply with all applicable Federal 
motor vehicle safety standards,

shall pay a fee based upon the direct and indirect costs of processing 
and acting upon such petition.
    (b) The direct costs attributable to processing a petition filed 
pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section include the average cost per 
professional staff-hour, computer and computer operator time, and 
postage. The direct costs also include those attributable to any 
inspection of a vehicle requested by a petitioner in substantiation of 
its petition.
    (c) The indirect costs attributable to processing and acting upon a 
petition filed pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section include a pro 
rata allocation of the average salary and benefits of persons employed 
in processing the petitions and recommending decisions on them, and a 
pro rata allocation of the costs attributable to maintaining the office 
space, and the computer or word processor.
    (d) The direct costs attributable to acting upon a petition filed 
pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section, also include the cost of 
publishing a notice in the Federal Register seeking public comment, the 
cost of publishing a second notice with the agency's determination, and 
a pro rata share of the cost of publishing an annual list of 
nonconforming vehicles determined to be eligible for importation.
    (e) For petitions filed on and after October 1, 2004, the fee 
payable for seeking a determination under paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section is $175. The fee payable for a petition seeking a determination 
under paragraph (a)(2) of this section is $800. If the petitioner 
requests an inspection of a vehicle, the sum of $827 shall be added to 
such fee. No portion of this fee is refundable if the petition is 
withdrawn or denied.
    (f) In adopting a fee for the next fiscal year, the Administrator 
employs data based upon the cost of determinations and the amount of 
fees received for the 12-month period ending June 30

[[Page 1127]]

of the fiscal year preceding that fiscal year.

[54 FR 40107, Sept. 29, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 40667, Oct. 4, 1990; 
56 FR 49429, Sept. 30, 1991; 58 FR 51023, Sept. 30, 1993; 61 FR 51045, 
Sept. 30, 1996; 65 FR 56500, Sept. 19, 2000; 67 FR 60599, Sept. 26, 
2002; 69 FR 57873, Sept. 28, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 594.8  Fee for importing a vehicle pursuant to a determination by 
the Administrator.

    (a) A fee as specified in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section 
shall be paid by each importer of a vehicle covered by a determination 
made under part 593 of this chapter to cover the direct and indirect 
costs incurred by NHTSA in making such determinations.
    (b) If a determination has been made pursuant to a petition, the fee 
for each vehicle is $150. The direct and indirect costs that determine 
the fee are those set forth in Sec. 594.7(b), (c), and (d).
    (c) If a determination has been made on or after October 1, 2004, 
pursuant to the Administrator's initiative, the fee for each vehicle is 
$125. The direct and indirect costs that determine the fee are those set 
forth in Sec. Sec. 594.7(b), (c), and (d), and references to 
``petition'' shall be understood as relating to NHTSA's documents that 
serve as a basis for initiating determinations on its own initiative.

[55 FR 40667, Oct. 4, 1990, as amended at 58 FR 51023, Sept. 30, 1993; 
61 FR 51045, Sept. 30, 1996; 63 FR 45186, Aug. 25, 1998; 65 FR 56500, 
Sept. 19, 2000; 67 FR 60599, Sept. 26, 2002; 69 FR 57874, Sept. 28, 
2004]


<R05>
Sec. 594.9  Fee for reimbursement of bond processing costs.

    (a) Each Registered Importer must pay a fee based upon the direct 
and indirect costs of processing each bond furnished to the Secretary of 
Homeland Security on behalf of the Administrator with respect to each 
vehicle for which it furnishes a certificate of conformity pursuant to 
Sec. 592.6(d) of this chapter.
    (b) The direct and indirect costs attributable to processing a bond 
are provided to NHTSA by the U.S. Customs Service.
    (c) The bond processing fee for each vehicle imported on and after 
October 1, 2004, for which a certificate of conformity is furnished, is 
$9.30.

[54 FR 40107, Sept. 29, 1989, as amended at 56 FR 49429, Sept. 30, 1991; 
58 FR 51023, Sept. 30, 1993; 61 FR 51045, Sept. 30, 1996; 63 FR 45186, 
Aug. 25, 1998; 65 FR 56500, Sept. 19, 2000; 67 FR 60599, Sept. 26, 2002; 
69 FR 52100, Aug. 24, 2004; 69 FR 57874, Sept. 28, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 594.10  Fee for review and processing of conformity certificate.

    (a) Each registered importer shall pay a fee based on the agency's 
direct and indirect costs for the review and processing of each 
certificate of conformity furnished to the Administrator pursuant to 
Sec. 591.7(e) of this chapter.
    (b) The direct costs attributable to the review and processing of a 
certificate of conformity include the estimated cost of contract and 
professional staff time, computer usage, and record assembly, marking, 
shipment and storage costs.
    (c) The indirect costs attributable to the review and processing of 
a certificate of conformity include a pro rata allocation of the average 
benefits of persons employed in reviewing and processing the 
certificates, and a pro rata allocation of the costs attributable to the 
rental and maintenance of office space and equipment, the use of office 
supplies, and other overhead items.
    (d) The review and processing fee for each certificate of conformity 
submitted on and after October 1, 2004 is $18. However, if the vehicle 
covered by the certificate has been entered electronically with the U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security through the Automated Broker Interface 
and the registered importer submitting the certificate has an e-mail 
address, the fee for the certificate is $6, provided that the fee is 
paid by a credit card issued to the registered importer. If NHTSA finds 
that the information in the entry or the certificate is incorrect, 
requiring further processing, the processing fee shall be $48.

[62 FR 50882, Sept. 29, 1997, as amended at 63 FR 45186, Aug. 25, 1998; 
65 FR 56500, Sept. 19, 2000; 67 FR 60599, Sept. 26, 2002; 69 FR 57874, 
Sept. 28, 2004]

[[Page 1128]]


<R03>
PART 595_RETROFIT ON-OFF SWITCHES FOR AIR BAGS--Table of Contents




                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
595.1 Scope.
595.2 Purpose.
595.3 Applicability.
595.4 Definitions.

             Subpart B_Retrofit On-Off Switches for Air Bags

595.5 Requirements.

 Subpart C_Vehicle Modifications to Accommodate People With Disabilities

595.6 Modifier identification.
595.7 Requirements for vehicle modifications to accommodate people with 
          disabilities.

Appendix A to Part 595--Information Brochure.
Appendix B to Part 595--Request Form.
Appendix C to Part 595--Installation Of Air Bag On-off Switches.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30117, 30122 and 30166; 
delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 62 FR 62442, Nov. 21, 1997, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 595.1  Scope.

    This part establishes conditions under which the compliance of motor 
vehicles and motor vehicle equipment with the Federal motor vehicle 
safety standards may be made inoperative.

[66 FR 12655, Feb. 27, 2001]


<R05>
Sec. 595.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to provide an exemption from the ``make 
inoperative'' provision of 49 U.S.C. 30122 that permits motor vehicle 
dealers and motor vehicle repair businesses to install retrofit air bag 
on-off switches and to otherwise modify motor vehicles to enable people 
with disabilities to operate or ride as a passenger in a motor vehicle.

[66 FR 12655, Feb. 27, 2001]


<R05>
Sec. 595.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to dealers and motor vehicle repair businesses.


<R05>
Sec. 595.4  Definitions.

    The term dealer, defined in 49 U.S.C. 30102(a), is used in 
accordance with its statutory meaning.
    The term motor vehicle repair business is defined in 49 U.S.C. 
30122(a) as ``a person holding itself out to the public to repair for 
compensation a motor vehicle or motor vehicle equipment.'' This term 
includes businesses that receive compensation for servicing vehicles 
without malfunctioning or broken parts or systems by adding or removing 
features or components to or from those vehicles or otherwise 
customizing those vehicles.


<R04>
             Subpart B_Retrofit On-Off Switches for Air Bags


<R05>
Sec. 595.5  Requirements.

    (a) Beginning January 19, 1998, a dealer or motor vehicle repair 
business may modify a motor vehicle manufactured before September 1, 
2012 by installing an on-off switch that allows an occupant of the 
vehicle to turn off an air bag in that vehicle, subject to the 
conditions in paragraphs (b)(1) through (5) of this section.
    (b)(1) The dealer or motor vehicle repair business receives from the 
owner or lessee of the motor vehicle a letter from the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration that authorizes the installation of an on-
off switch in that vehicle for that air bag and includes a form to be 
filled in by the dealer or motor vehicle repair business with 
information identifying itself and describing the installation it makes.
    (2) The dealer or motor vehicle repair business installs the on-off 
switch in accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer of the 
switch.
    (3) The on-off switch meets all of the conditions specified in 
paragraphs (b)(3)(i) and (ii) of this section.
    (i) The on-off switch is operable solely by a key or a key-like 
object. The on-off switch shall be separate from the ignition switch for 
the vehicle, so that the driver must take some action other than 
inserting the ignition key or turning the ignition key in the ignition 
switch to turn off the air bag. Once turned off, the air bag shall 
remain off until it is turned back on by means of

[[Page 1129]]

the device. If a single on-off switch is installed for both air bags, 
the on-off switch shall allow each air bag to be turned off without 
turning off the other air bag. The readiness indicator required by 
S4.5.2 of Sec. 571.208 of this chapter shall continue to monitor the 
readiness of the air bags even when one or both air bags has been turned 
off. The readiness indicator light shall not be illuminated solely 
because an air bag has been deactivated by means of an on-off switch.
    (ii) A telltale light in the interior of the vehicle shall be 
illuminated whenever the driver or passenger air bag is turned off by 
means of the on-off switch. The telltale for a driver air bag shall be 
clearly visible to an occupant of the driver's seating position. The 
telltale for a passenger air bag shall be clearly visible to occupants 
of all front seating positions. The telltale for an air bag:
    (A) Shall be yellow;
    (B) Shall have the identifying words ``DRIVER AIR BAG OFF'', 
``PASSENGER AIR BAG OFF'', or ``PASS AIR BAG OFF'', as appropriate, on 
the telltale or within 25 millimeters of the telltale;
    (C) Shall remain illuminated for the entire time that the air bag is 
``off;''
    (D) Shall not be illuminated at any time when the air bag is ``on;'' 
and,
    (E) Shall not be combined with the readiness indicator required by 
S4.5.2 of Sec. 571.208 of this chapter.
    (4) The dealer or motor vehicle repair business provides the owner 
or lessee with an insert for the vehicle owner's manual that--
    (i) Describes the operation of the on-off switch,
    (ii) Lists the risk groups on the request form set forth in Appendix 
B of this Part,
    (iii) States that an on-off switch should only be used to turn off 
an air bag for a member of one of those risk groups, and
    (iv) States the safety consequences for using the on-off switch to 
turn off an air bag for persons who are not members of any of those risk 
groups. The description of those consequences includes information, 
specific to the make, model and model year of the owner's or lessee's 
vehicle, about any seat belt energy managing features, e.g., load 
limiters, that will affect seat belt performance when the air bag is 
turned off.
    (5) In the form included in the agency authorization letter 
specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the dealer or motor 
vehicle repair business fills in information describing itself and the 
on-off switch installation(s) it makes in the motor vehicle. The dealer 
or motor vehicle repair business then sends the form to the address 
below within 7 working days after the completion of the described 
installations: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
Attention: Air Bag Switch Request Forms, 400 Seventh Street, S.W., 
Washington, D.C. 20590-1000.

[62 FR 62442, Nov. 21, 1997; 62 FR 67754, Dec. 30, 1997, as amended at 
65 FR 30770, May 12, 2000; 69 FR 31034, June 2, 2004]


<R04>
 Subpart C_Vehicle Modifications To Accommodate People With Disabilities

    Source: 66 FR 12655, Feb. 27, 2001, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 595.6  Modifier identification.

    (a) Any motor vehicle repair business that modifies a motor vehicle 
to enable a person with a disability to operate, or ride as a passenger 
in, the motor vehicle and intends to avail itself of the exemption 
provided in 49 CFR 595.7 shall furnish the information specified in 
paragraphs (a)(1) through (3) of this section to: Administrator, 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., 
Washington, DC 20590.
    (1) Full individual, partnership, or corporate name of the motor 
vehicle repair business.
    (2) Residence address of the motor vehicle repair business and State 
of incorporation if applicable.
    (3) A statement that the motor vehicle repair business modifies a 
motor vehicle to enable a person with a disability to operate, or ride 
as a passenger in, the motor vehicle and intends to avail itself of the 
exemption provided in 49 CFR 595.7.

[[Page 1130]]

    (b) Each motor business repair business required to submit 
information under paragraph (a) of this section shall submit the 
information not later than August 27, 2001. After that date, each motor 
business repair business that modifies a motor vehicle to enable a 
person with a disability to operate, or ride as a passenger in, the 
motor vehicle and intends to avail itself of the exemption provided in 
49 CFR 595.7 shall submit the information required under paragraph (a) 
not later than 30 days after it first modifies a motor vehicle to enable 
a person with a disability to operate, or ride as a passenger in, the 
motor vehicle. Each motor vehicle repair business who has submitted 
required information shall keep its entry current, accurate and complete 
by submitting revised information not later than 30 days after the 
relevant changes in the business occur.


<R05>
Sec. 595.7  Requirements for vehicle modifications to accommodate people 
with disabilities.

    (a) Any motor vehicle repair business that modifies a motor vehicle 
to enable a person with a disability to operate, or ride as a passenger 
in, the motor vehicle is exempted from the ``make inoperative'' 
prohibition of 49 U.S.C. 30122 to the extent that those modifications 
affect the motor vehicle's compliance with the Federal motor vehicle 
safety standards or portions thereof specified in paragraph (c) of this 
section. Modifications that would take a vehicle out of compliance with 
any other Federal motor vehicle safety standards, or portions thereof, 
are not covered by this exemption.
    (b) Any motor vehicle repair business that modifies a motor vehicle 
to enable a person with a disability to operate, or ride as a passenger 
in, the motor vehicle in such a manner as to make inoperative any part 
of a device or element of design installed on or in the motor vehicle in 
compliance with a Federal motor vehicle safety standard or portion 
thereof specified in paragraph (c) of this section must affix to the 
motor vehicle a permanent label of the type and in the manner described 
in paragraph (d) of this section and must provide and retain a document 
of the type and in the manner described in paragraph (e) of this 
section.
    (c)(1) 49 CFR 571.101, except for S5.2 (a), S5.3.1, S5.3.2, and 
S5.3.5 of that section.
    (2) S5.1.1.5 of 49 CFR 571.108, in the case of a motor vehicle that 
is modified to be driven without a steering wheel or for which it is not 
feasible to retain the turn signal canceling device installed by the 
vehicle manufacturer.
    (3) S4.4 and S4.5 of 49 CFR 571.114, in any case in which the 
original key-locking system must be modified.
    (4) S4(a) of 49 CFR 571.118, in any case in which the medical 
condition of the person for whom the vehicle is modified necessitates 
the installation of a remote ignition switch to start the vehicle.
    (5) S5.1 and S5.2.1 of 49 CFR 571.123, in any case in which the 
modification necessitates the relocation of original equipment 
manufacturer's controls.
    (6) S5.3.1 of 49 CFR 571.135, in any case in which the modification 
necessitates the removal of the original equipment manufacturer foot 
pedal.
    (7) 49 CFR 571.201 with respect to:
    (i) Targets located on the right side rail, the right B-pillar and 
the first right side ``other'' pillar adjacent to the stowed platform of 
a lift or ramp that stows vertically, inside the vehicle.
    (ii) Targets located on the left side rail, the left B-pillar and 
the first left side ``other'' pillar adjacent to the stowed platform of 
a lift or ramp that stows vertically, inside the vehicle.
    (iii) Targets located on the rear header and the rearmost pillars 
adjacent to the stowed platform of a lift or ramp that stows vertically, 
inside the vehicle.
    (8) 49 CFR 571.202, in any case in which:
    (i) A motor vehicle is modified to be operated by a driver seated in 
a wheelchair and no other seat is supplied with the vehicle for the 
driver;
    (ii) A motor vehicle is modified to transport a right front 
passenger seated in a wheelchair and no other right front passenger seat 
is supplied with the vehicle; or
    (9) S4.3(b)(1) and (2) of 49 CFR 571.202, in any case in which the 
driver's head restraint must be modified to accommodate a driver with a 
disability.

[[Page 1131]]

    (10) S5.1 of 49 CFR 571.203, in any case in which the modification 
necessitates a structural change to, or removal of, the original 
equipment manufacturer steering shaft.
    (11) S5.2 of 49 CFR 571.203, in any case in which an item of 
adaptive equipment must be mounted on the steering wheel.
    (12) 49 CFR 571.204, in any case in which the modification 
necessitates a structural change to, or removal of, the original 
equipment manufacturer steering shaft.
    (13) S4.1 of 49 CFR 571.207, in any case in which a vehicle is 
modified to be driven by a person seated in a wheelchair and no other 
driver's seat is supplied with the vehicle, provided that a wheelchair 
securement device is installed at the driver's position.
    (14) S4.1.5.1(a)(1), S4.1.5.1(a)(3), S4.2.6.2, S5, S7.1, S7.2 and 
S7.4 of 49 CFR 571.208 for the designated seating position modified, 
provided Type 2 or 2A seat belts meeting the requirements of 571.209 and 
571.210 of this chapter are installed at that position.
    (15) S5 of 49 CFR 571.214 for the designated seating position 
modified, in any cases in which the restraint system and/or seat at that 
position must be changed to accommodate a person with a disability.
    (d) The label required by paragraph (b) of this section shall:
    (1) Be permanently affixed to the vehicle,
    (2) Be located adjacent to the original certification label or the 
alterer's certification label, if applicable,
    (3) Give the modifier's name and physical address,
    (4) Contain the statement ``This vehicle has been modified in 
accordance with 49 CFR 595.6 and may no longer comply with all Federal 
Motor Vehicle Safety Standards in effect at the time of its original 
manufacture.''
    (e) The document required by paragraph (b) of this section shall:
    (1) Be provided, in original or photocopied form, to the owner of 
the vehicle at the time the vehicle is delivered to the owner,
    (2) Be kept, in original or photocopied form, at the same address 
provided on the label described in paragraph (c) of this section for a 
period not less than five years after the vehicle, as modified, is 
delivered to the individual for whom the modifications were performed,
    (3) Be clearly identifiable as to the vehicle that has been 
modified,
    (4) Contain a list of the Federal motor vehicle safety standards or 
portions thereof specified in paragraph (c) of this section with which 
the vehicle may no longer be in compliance.
    (5) Indicate any reduction in the load carrying capacity of the 
vehicle of more than 100 kg (220 lb) after the modifications are 
completed. In providing this information, the modifier must state 
whether the weight of a user's wheelchair is included in the available 
load capacity.

[66 FR 12655, Feb. 27, 2001, as amended at 69 FR 21069, Apr. 20, 2004]

[[Page 1132]]

              Appendix A to Part 595--Information Brochure
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21NO97.000


[[Page 1133]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21NO97.001


[[Page 1134]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21NO97.002


[[Page 1135]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21NO97.003


[[Page 1136]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21NO97.004


[[Page 1137]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21NO97.005


[[Page 1138]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21NO97.006


[[Page 1139]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21NO97.007


[[Page 1140]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21NO97.008


[[Page 1141]]



                  Appendix B to Part 595--Request Form
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21NO97.009


[[Page 1142]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21NO97.010


[[Page 1143]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21NO97.011


[[Page 1144]]



     Appendix C to Part 595--Installation of Air Bag On-Off Switches
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21NO97.012


<R03>
PART 596_CHILD RESTRAINT ANCHORAGE SYSTEM PHASE-IN REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
--Table of Contents




Sec.
596.1 Scope.
596.2 Purpose.
596.3 Applicability.
596.4 Definitions.
596.5 Response to inquiries.
596.6 Reporting requirements.
596.7 Records.
596.8 Petition to extend period to file report.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30117, and 30166; delegation 
of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 64 FR 10847, Mar. 5, 1999, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 596.1  Scope.

    This part establishes requirements for manufacturers of passenger 
cars, and of trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a gross 
vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 3,855 kilograms (8,500 pounds) or less, 
and of buses with a GVWR of 4,536 kg (10,000 lb) or less, to submit a 
report, and maintain records related to the report, concerning the 
number of such vehicles that meet the requirements of Standard No. 225, 
Child restraint anchorage systems (49 CFR 571.225).


<R05>
Sec. 596.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of these reporting requirements is to assist the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration

[[Page 1145]]

in determining whether a manufacturer has complied with Standard No. 225 
(49 CFR 571.225).


<R05>
Sec. 596.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to manufacturers of passenger cars, and of trucks 
and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating 
(GVWR) of 3,855 kilograms (8,500 pounds) or less, and of buses with a 
GVWR of 4536 kg (10,000 lb) or less. However, this part does not apply 
to vehicles excluded by S5 of Standard No. 225 (49 CFR 571.225) from the 
requirements of that standard.


<R05>
Sec. 596.4  Definitions.

    (a) All terms defined in 49 U.S.C. 30102 are used in their statutory 
meaning.
    (b) Bus, gross vehicle weight rating or GVWR, multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, passenger car, and truck are used as defined in 49 CFR 571.3.
    (c) Production year means the 12-month period between September 1 of 
one year and August 31 of the following year, inclusive.


<R05>
Sec. 596.5  Response to inquiries.

    At anytime during the production years ending August 31, 2000, 
August 31, 2001, August 31, 2002, and August 31, 2005, each manufacturer 
shall, upon request from the Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance, 
provide information identifying the vehicles (by make, model and vehicle 
identification number) that have been certified as complying with 
Standard No. 225 (49 CFR 571.225). The manufacturer's designation of a 
vehicle as a certified vehicle is irrevocable.

[68 FR 54861, Sept. 19, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 596.6  Reporting requirements.

    (a) General reporting requirements. Within 60 days after the end of 
the production years ending August 31, 2000, August 31, 2001, and August 
31, 2002, each manufacturer shall submit a report to the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration concerning its compliance with the 
child restraint anchorage system requirements of Standard No. 225 (49 
CFR 571.225) for its passenger cars, trucks, buses, and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles produced in that year. Each report shall--
    (1) Identify the manufacturer;
    (2) State the full name, title, and address of the official 
responsible for preparing the report;
    (3) Identify the production year being reported on;
    (4) Contain a statement regarding whether or not the manufacturer 
complied with the child restraint anchorage system requirements of 
Standard No. 225 (49 CFR 571.225) for the period covered by the report 
and the basis for that statement;
    (5) Provide the information specified in paragraph (b) of this 
section;
    (6) Be written in the English language; and
    (7) Be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20590.
    (b) Report content.
    (1) Basis for phase-in production goals. Each manufacturer shall 
provide the number of passenger cars and trucks and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 3,855 
kilograms (8,500 pounds) or less, and buses with a GVWR of 4,536 kg 
(10,000 lb) or less manufactured for sale in the United States for each 
of the three previous production years, or, at the manufacturer's 
option, for the current production year. A new manufacturer that has not 
previously manufactured these vehicles for sale in the United States 
shall report the number of such vehicles manufactured during the current 
production year.
    (2) Production. (i) Each manufacturer shall report for the 
production year for which the report is filed, except for the production 
year ending August 31, 2005: the number of passenger cars and trucks and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating 
(GVWR) of 3,855 kilograms (kg) (8,500 pounds) or less, and buses with a 
GVWR of 4,536 kg (10,000 pounds) or less, that meet Standard No. 225 (49 
CFR 571.225).
    (ii) Each manufacturer shall report for the production year ending 
August 31, 2005: the number of passenger cars and trucks and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles with a gross vehicle weight

[[Page 1146]]

rating (GVWR) of 3,855 kilograms (kg) (8,500 pounds) or less, and buses 
with a GVWR of 4,536 kg (10,000 pounds) or less, that meet S6.3.1 and 
S9.4 of Standard No. 225 (49 CFR 571.225).
    (3) Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer. Each 
manufacturer whose reporting of information is affected by one or more 
of the express written contracts permitted by S13.1.2(c) and S14.2.2 of 
Standard No. 225 (49 CFR 571.225) shall:
    (i) Report the existence of each contract, including the names of 
all parties to the contract, and explain how the contract affects the 
report being submitted.
    (ii) Report the actual number of vehicles covered by each contract.

[64 FR 10847, Mar. 5, 1999, as amended at 68 FR 38231, June 27, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 596.7  Records.

    Each manufacturer shall maintain records of the Vehicle 
Identification Number for each vehicle for which information is reported 
under Sec. 596.6(b)(2)(i) until December 31, 2004. Each manufacturer 
shall maintain records of the Vehicle Identification Number for each 
vehicle for which information is reported under Sec. 596.6(b)(2)(ii) 
until December 31, 2007.

[68 FR 38231, June 27, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 596.8  Petition to extend period to file report.

    A manufacturer may petition for extension of time to submit a report 
under this Part. A petition will be granted only if the petitioner shows 
good cause for the extension and if the extension is consistent with the 
public interest. The petition must be received not later than 15 days 
before expiration of the time stated in Sec. 596.6(a). The filing of a 
petition does not automatically extend the time for filing a report. The 
petition must be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20590.


<R03>
PART 597_TIRES FOR MOTOR VEHICLES WITH A GVWR OF 10,000 POUNDS OR LESS 
PHASE-IN REPORTING REQUIREMENTS--Table of Contents




Sec.
597.1 Scope.
597.2 Purpose.
597.3 Applicability.
597.4 Definitions.
597.5 Response to inquiries.
597.6 Reporting requirements.
597.7 Records.
597.8 Petition to extend period to file report.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30117, and 30166; delegation 
of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 67 FR 69631, Nov. 18, 2002, unless otherwise noted.

    Effective Date Note: At 67 FR 69631, Nov. 18, 2002, part 597 was 
added, effective Sept. 1, 2003. At 68 FR 33655, June 5, 2003, the 
effective date was delayed until Sept. 1, 2004. At 69 FR 31306, June 3, 
2004, the effective date was further delayed until Sept. 1, 2005.


<R05>
Sec. 597.1  Scope.

    This part establishes requirements for manufacturers of new 
pneumatic tires for motor vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating of 
10,000 pounds or less to submit reports, and maintain records related to 
the reports, concerning the number of such tires that meet the 
requirements of Standard No. 139, New Pneumatic Tires for Light Vehicles 
(49 CFR 571.139).


<R05>
Sec. 597.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of these reporting requirements in this part is to 
assist the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in determining 
whether a manufacturer has complied with Standard No. 139 (49 CFR 
571.139).


<R05>
Sec. 597.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to manufacturers of tires for motor vehicles with 
a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less.


<R05>
Sec. 597.4  Definitions.

    (a) All terms defined in 49 U.S.C. 30102 are used in their statutory 
meaning.

[[Page 1147]]

    (b) ``Motor vehicle'' and ``gross vehicle weight rating'' are used 
as defined in 49 CFR 571.3.
    (c) ``Production year'' means the 12-month period between September 
1 of one year and August 31 of the following year, inclusive.


<R05>
Sec. 597.5  Response to inquiries.

    Each manufacturer shall, upon request from the Office of Vehicle 
Safety Compliance, provide information identifying the tires (by make, 
model, brand and tire identification number) that have been certified as 
complying with Standard No. 139 (49 CFR 571.139). The manufacturer's 
designation of a tire as a certified tire is irrevocable.


<R05>
Sec. 597.6  Reporting requirements.

    (a) General reporting requirements. Within 60 days after the end of 
the production years ending August 31, 2005 and August 31, 2006, each 
manufacturer shall submit a report to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration concerning its compliance with Standard No. 139 
(49 CFR 571.139) for its tires produced in that year for motor vehicles 
with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less. Each report shall--
    (1) Identify the manufacturer;
    (2) State the full name, title, and address of the official 
responsible for preparing the report;
    (3) Identify the production year being reported on;
    (4) Contain a statement regarding whether or not the manufacturer 
complied with Standard No. 139 (49 CFR 571.139) for the period covered 
by the report and the basis for that statement;
    (5) Provide the information specified in paragraph (b) of this 
section;
    (6) Be written in the English language; and
    (7) Be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590.
    (b) Report Content--(1) Basis for phase-in production goals. Each 
manufacturer shall provide the number of tires for motor vehicles with a 
gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less manufactured for 
sale in the United States for each of the three previous production 
years, or, at the manufacturer's option, for the production year for 
which the report is filed. A new manufacturer that has not previously 
manufactured these tires for sale in the United States shall report the 
number of such tires manufactured during the current production year.
    (2) Production. Each manufacturer shall report for the production 
year for which the report is filed: the number of new pneumatic tires 
for motor vehicles with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less that meet 
Standard No. 139 (49 CFR 571.139).

    Effective Date Note: At 69 FR 31321, June 3, 2004, Sec. 597.6 was 
amended by revising the first sentence of paragraph (a), effective Sept. 
1, 2005. For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth 
as follows:

Sec. 597.6  Reporting requirements.

    (a) General reporting requirements. Within 60 days after the end of 
the production years ending August 31, 2006 and August 31, 2007, each 
manufacturer shall submit a report to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration concerning its compliance with Standard No. 139 
(49 CFR 571.139) for its tires produced in that year for motor vehicles 
with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less. * * *

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 597.7  Records.

    Each manufacturer must maintain records of the tire identification 
number for each tire for which information is reported under 49 CFR 
590.6(b)(2) until December 31, 2007.


<R05>
Sec. 597.8  Petition to extend period to file report.

    A manufacturer may petition for extension of time to submit a report 
under this part. A petition will be granted only if the petitioner shows 
good cause for the extension and if the extension is consistent with the 
public interest. The petition must be received not later than 15 days 
before expiration of the time stated in Sec. 597.6(a). The filing of a 
petition does not automatically extend the time for filing a report. The 
petition must be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590.

                        PARTS 598-599 [RESERVED]



[[Page 1149]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference
  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  List of CFR Sections Affected

[[Page 1151]]

            Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference

                     (Revised as of October 1, 2004)

  The Director of the Federal Register has approved under 5 U.S.C. 
552(a) and 1 CFR part 51 the incorporation by reference of the following 
publications. This list contains only those incorporations by reference 
effective as of the revision date of this volume. Incorporations by 
reference found within a regulation are effective upon the effective 
date of that regulation. For more information on incorporation by 
reference, see the preliminary pages of this volume.


49 CFR (PARTS 400-599)

NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF 
TRANSPORTATION
                                                                  49 CFR
  All materials are available from the Office of 
  Rulemaking, DOT-NHTSA, 400 7th St. SW., 
  Washington, DC 20590


American Association of Textile Chemists and Colorists

  Post Office Box 886, Durham, NC
AATCC Chart for Measuring Transference of Color...               571.209
Standard Test Method 8-1961 Colorfast to Crocking.               571.209
Standard Test Method 30-1957T Fungicides,                        571.209
  Evaluation of Textiles; Mildew and Rot 
  Resistence of Textiles: Section 1C1, Water 
  Leaching; Section 1C2, Volatilization; Section 
  1B3, Soil Burial Test.
Standard Test Method 107-1981 Colorfastness to                   571.209
  Water.
Geometric Gray Scale..............................               571.209


American National Standards Institute (ANSI)

  25 West 43rd Street, Fourth floor, New York, NY 
  10036 Telephone: (212) 642-4900; Copies of 
  certain standards may be obtained from RESNA, 
  1700 North Moore Street, Suite 1540, Arlington, 
  VA 22209-1903
ANSI Z26.1-1977 as suppl. by Z26.1a-80 Safety Code               571.205
  for Safety Glazing Materials for Glazing Motor 
  Vehicles Operating on Land Highways.
ANSI Z-26.1-1977, Safety Code for Safety Glazing                 571.500
  Materials for Glazing Motor Vehicles Operating 
  on Land Highways, January 28, 1977, as 
  supplemented by Z26.1a, July 3, 1980.
ANSI/SAE Z26.1, American National Standard for            571.5; 571.205
  Safety Glazing Materials for Glazing Motor 
  Vehicles and Motor Vehicle Equipment Operating 
  on Land Highways--Safety Standard, 1996.
ANSI/RESNA Standard WC/Vol. 1-1998, Section 13,           571.5, 571.403
  ``Wheelchairs: Determination of Coefficient of 
  Friction of Test Surfaces``.


American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME)

  Three Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016-5990; 
  Telephone: (800) THE-ASME
ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section IX,         571.5; 571.304
  Article II, QW-304 and QW-305 (1992).
ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section             571.5; 571.304
  VIII, UW-12 (1989).
ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section             571.5; 571.304
VIII, U-1 through U-3, and UW-51 through UW-53 

[[Page 1152]]

American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)

  100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA, 
  19428-2959, Telephone (610) 832-9585, FAX (610) 
  832-9555
ASTM 1003-61 Haze and Luminous Transmittance of                  571.108
  Transparent Plastic.
ASTM A 166-61T Tentative Specifications for             571.208; 571.209
  Electrodeposited Coatings of Nickel and Chromium 
  on Steel.
ASTM A 505-87, Standard Specification for Steel,          571.5; 571.304
  Sheet and Strip, Alloy, Hot-Rolled and Cold-
  Rolled, General Requirements for.
ASTM A 255-89, Standard Method for End-Quench Test        571.5; 571.304
  for Hardenability of Steel.
ASTM B 117-73 Standard Method of Salt Spray (fog)     571.106; 571.125; 
  Testing.                                                       571.209
ASTM B 117-97 Standard Practice for Operating Salt        571.5; 571.403
  Spray (fog) Apparatus.
ASTM B 456-79 Standard Specification for                         571.209
  Electrodeposited Coatings of Copper Plus Nickel 
  Plus Chromium and Nickel Plus Chronium.
ASTM B 456-95 Standard Specification for                  571.5; 571.403
  Electrodeposited Coatings of Copper Plus Nickel 
  Plus Chromium and Nickel Plus Chronium.
ASTM C 150-77 Standard Specification for Portland                571.108
  Cement.
ASTM D 362-84 Standard Specification for                571.108; 571.205
  Industrial Grade Toluene.
ASTM D 445-65 Standard Method of Test for                        571.116
  Viscosity of Transparent and Opaque Liquids 
  (Kinematic and Dynamic Viscosity), Appendix 1.
ASTM D 471-64T Tentative Method of Test for Change               571.106
  in Properties of Elastomeric Volcanizates 
  Resulting from Immersion in Liquids.
ASTM D 484-71 Standard Specifications for                        571.301
  Hydrocarbon Dry Cleaning Solvent.
ASTM D 523-62T Tentative Method of Test for                      571.107
  Specular Glass.
ASTM D 756-78 Standard Practice for Determination                571.209
  of Weight and Shape Changes of Plastics Under 
  Accelerated Service Conditions.
ASTM D 1056-73 Standard Specifications for                       571.213
  Flexible Cellular Materials Sponge or Expanded 
  Rubber.
ASTM D 1121-67 Standard Method of Test for Reserve               571.116
  Alaklinity of Engine Antifreezes and Antirusts, 
  Appendix A1.1, A1.2, and A1.3.
ASTM D 1123-59 Standard Method of Test for Water                 571.116
  in Concentrated Engine Anti-Freezes by the 
  Iodine Reagent Method.
ASTM D 1193-70 Standard Specifications for Reagent               571.116
  Water.
ASTM D 1415-68 Tentative Method of Test for                      571.116
  International Hardness of Volcanized Natural and 
  Synthetic Rubbers.
ASTM D 1564-71 Standard Method of Testing Flexible               571.213
  Cellular Materials--Slab Urethane Foam.
ASTM D 1565-76 Standard Specifications for                       571.213
  Flexible Cellular Materials--Vinyl Chloride 
  Polymers and Copolymers (Open-Cell Foam).
ASTM D 2343-67, (Reapproved 1985), Standard Test          571.5; 571.304
  Method for Tensile Properties of Glass Fiber 
  Strands, Yarns, and Rovings Used in Reinforced 
  Plastics.
ASTM D 2344-84, (Reapproved 1989), Standard Test          571.5; 571.304
Method for Apparent Interlaminar Shear Strength 
of Parallel Fiber Composites by Short-Beam 
  Method.

[[Page 1153]]

ASTM D 2515-66 Standard Specifications for                       571.116
  Kinematic Glass Viscosity.
ASTM E 1-68 Standard Specifications for ASTM                     571.116
  Thermometers.
ASTM E 4-64 Methods of Verification of Testing          571.106; 571.209
  Machines.
ASTM E 4-72 Methods of Verification of Testing                   571.221
  Machines.
ASTM E 4-79 Standard Methods of Load Verification                571.209
  of Testing Machines.
ASTM E 8-93, Standard Test Methods for Tension            571.5; 571.304
  Testing of Metallic Materials.
ASTM E 77-66 Standard Method for Inspection, Test                571.116
  and Standardization of Liquid-in-Glass 
  Thermometers.
ASTM E 274-65T Skid Resistance of Pavements Using       571.208; 571.301
  a Two Wheel Trailer.
ASTM E 274-79 Standard Test Method for Skid           571.105; 571.116; 
  Resistance of Paved Surfaces Using a Full-Scale                575.104
  Tire.
ASTM E 298-68 Standard Methods for Assay of                      571.116
  Organic Peroxides.
ASTM E 501-76 Standard Tire for Pavement Skid      575.104(f)(1)(ii) and 
  Resistance Tests.                                                (vii)
ASTM E 1136-93, Standard Specification for a                     571.500
  Radial Standard Reference Test Tire.
ASTM E 1137-90, Standard Test Method for                         571.500
  Determining Longitudinal Peak Braking 
  Coefficient of Paved Surfaces Using a Standard 
  Reference Test Tire.
ASTM F 377-74 Standard Method for Calibration of        575.104(f)(1)(v)
  Braking Force for Testing of Pneumatic Tires.
ASTM G 23-81 Standard Practice for Operating Light               571.209
  Exposure Apparatus (Carbon Arc Type) with and 
  without Water for Exposure of Nonmetallic 
  Materials.
1985 Annual Book of ASTM Standards, Vol. 5.04,          571.108; 571.205
  ``Motor Fuels'', Section I, A2.3.2, A2.3.3. and 
  A2.7 in Annex 2.


General Motors Corporation

  c/o Docket 74-14, Docket Section, National 
  Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Room 
  5109, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 
  20590
The Anthropomorphic Test Dummy Parts List, dated               572.31(a)
  December 15, 1987, and a Parts List Index, dated 
  December 15, 1987.
The Anthromorphic Test Dummy Parts List, dated                 572.31(a)
  April 22, 1986.
The Anthromorphic Test Dummy Parts List, dated                 572.31(a)
  September 9, 1996.
A listing of Optional Hybrid III Dummy                         572.31(a)
  Transducers, dated April 22, 1986.
A General Motors Drawing Package identified by GM              572.31(a)
  drawing No. 78051-218 revision R and subordinate 
  drawings.
A General Motors Drawing Package identified by GM              572.31(a)
  drawing No. 78051-218 revision S, ``Hybrid III 
  Anthromorphic Test Dummy'', dated May 20, 1978.
GE Drawing No. 78051-218, Revision U, and                 572.31; 572.34
  subordinate drawings dated August 30, 1998.
Drawing No. 78051-55, ``Instrumentation Assembly -              Part 572
  Pelvic Accelerometer'', dated August 2, 1979.
Drawing No. 78051-59, Revision G, Pelvic Assembly-                572.31
Complete-Hybrid III, dated June 30, 1998.

[[Page 1154]]

Drawing No. 78051-60, Revision E, Pelvic                          572.31
  Structure-Molded ASM-Hybrid III, dated June 30, 
  1998.
Drawing No. 78051-61, Revision T, ``Head                        Part 572
  Assembly'', complete, dated May 20, 1978.
Drawing No. 78051-61X, Revision C, ``Head            Part 572, subpart M
  Assembly'', complete, dated March 28, 1997.
Drawing No. 78051-70 , Revision E, ``Lower Torso                Part 572
  Assembly'', complete, dated August 20, 1996.
Drawing No. 78051-70, Revision F, Lower Torso                     572.31
  Assembly-Complete-Hybrid III, dated June 30, 
  1998.
Drawing No. 78051-89, Revision K, ``Upper Torso                 Part 572
  Assembly'', complete, dated May 20, 1978.
Drawing No. 78051-90, Revision A, ``Neck            Part 572; part 572, 
  Assembly'', complete, dated May 20, 1978.                    subpart M
Drawing No. 78051-123, Revision D, ``Arm                        Part 572
  Assembly'', complete, dated May 20, 1978.
Drawing No. 78051-124, Revision D, ``Arm                        Part 572
  Assembly'', complete, dated May 20, 1978.
Drawing number 78051-383X, Revision P, titled        Part 572, subpart M
  ``Neck Transducer Structural Replacement'', 
  dated November 1, 1995.
Drawing 86-5001-001, Revision A, ``Leg Assembly'',              Part 572
  complete, dated March 26, 1996.
Drawing 86-5001-002, Revision A, ``Leg Assembly'',              Part 572
  complete, dated March 26, 1996.
A General Motors Drawing No. 78051-218, Revision          572.31; 572.34
  T, ``Hybrid III Anthromorphic Test Dummy'', 
  dated May 20, 1978.
Disassembly, Inspection, Assembly and Limbs                    572.31(a)
  Adjustment Procedures for the Hybrid III dummy, 
  dated July 15, 1986.
Disassembly, Inspection, Assembly and Limbs                    572.31(a)
  Adjustment Procedures for the Hybrid III dummy, 
  dated September 1996.
Disassembly, Inspection, Assembly and Limbs                    572.31(a)
  Adjustment Procedures for the Hybrid III dummy, 
  dated April 1997.
Sign Convention for the signal outputs of Hybrid               572.31(a)
  III dummy transducers, dated July 15, 1986.
Exterior Dimensions of the Hybrid III dummy, dated             572.31(a)
  July 15, 1986.


General Services Administration

  Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government 
  Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402, Telephone 
  202-512-1800
Federal Specification L-S-300 1965, Sheeting and                 571.108
  Tape Reflective: Nonexposed Lens, Adhesive 
  Backing.


Illuminating Engineering Society of North America

  345 East 47th St., New York, NY 10017
LM-45 IES Approved Method for Electrical and                     571.108
  Photometric Measurements of General Service 
  Incandescent Filament Lamps (April 1980).


Leet-Melbrook

  18810 Woodfield Road, Gaithersburg, Maryland 
  20879
NHTSA 213-2003, FMVSS No. 213, dated June 3, 2003, NHTSA Standard Seat 
  Assembly Drawing Package, including of drawings and a bill of 
  materials:
  Drawing Package Cover Sheet, Drawing Package:           571.5; 571.213
NHTSA Standard Seat Assembly, FMVSS No. 213, NO. 
NHTSA-213-2003, dated June 3, 2003

[[Page 1155]]

  Drawing No. 2003HA100, Seat Assembly, NHTSA             571.5; 571.213
  Seat, May 14, 2003
  Drawing No. 2003HA200, Frame Assembly, NHTSA            571.5; 571.213
  Seat, May 14, 2003
  Drawing No. 2003HA201, Frame, Front and Side            571.5; 571.213
  Assembly, NHTSA Seat, May 7, 2003
  Drawing No. 2003HA202, Frame, Bottom Assembly,          571.5; 571.213
  NHTSA Seat, May 14, 2003
  Drawing No. 2003HA203, Frame, Top Assembly,             571.5; 571.213
  NHTSA Seat, May 7, 2003
  Drawing No. 2003HA204, Anchor Points Assembly,          571.5; 571.213
  NHTSA Seat, May 14, 2003
  Drawing No. 2003HA205, Frame, Back Assembly,            571.5; 571.213
  NHTSA Seat, May 7, 2003
  Drawing No. 2003HA300, Cushion Assembly, NHTSA          571.5; 571.213
  Seat, May 21, 2003
  Drawing No. 2003HA301, Cushion, Seat Assembly,          571.5; 571.213
  NHTSA Seat, May 7, 2003
  Drawing No. 2003HA302, Cushion, Back Assembly,          571.5; 571.213
  NHTSA Seat, May 21, 2003
  Drawing No. 2003HA303, Backing, Seat and Back           571.5; 571.213
  Assembly, NHTSA Seat, May 21, 2003


National Aeronautics and Space Administration

  600 Independence Ave. SW., Washington, DC 20546
NASA NAS 3-6292, Computer Program for the Analysis        571.5; 571.304
  of Filament-Reinforced Metal-Shell Pressure 
  Vessels (May 1966).


Department of Defense

  DODSSP Standardization Document Order Desk, 700 
  Robbins Ave., Bldg , Philadelphia, PA 19111-5098
Military Specifications:
  MIL-S-13192, Shoes, Men's, Dress, 1976                571.208; 571.214
  MIL-S-13192P, 1988,``Military Specification,                   571.208
  Shoes, Men's Dress, Oxford,'' Amendment 1, 
  October 14, 1994
  MIL-S-21711E, 1982,``Military Specification,                   571.208
  Shoes, Women's,'' Amendment 2, October 14, 1994


National Health Survey Data

  Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government 
  Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402, Telephone 
  202-512-1800
5th Percentile adult female and 95th Percentile                    571.3
  adult male: Public Health Service Pub. No. 1000, 
  Series 11, No. 8, ``Weight, Height, and Selected 
  Body Dimensions of Adults'', 1965.


National Highway Traffic Safety Administration

  Office of Vehicle Safety Standards, DOT-NHTSA, 
  400 7th St. SW., Washington, DC 20590
Drawing Package, SAS-100-1000, Standard Seat                     571.213
  Assembly with Addendum A, Seat Base Weldment, 
  dated July 1, 1993.
Drawing Package, SAS-100-1000, Addendum A, Seat                  571.213
  Base Weldment, dated October 23, 1998.
A User's Manual entitled ``Free-Motion Headform       572.100; 572.101, 
  User's Manual,'' version 2, March 1995.                        572.103

[[Page 1156]]

Reprographic Technologies

  9107 Gaither Road, Gaithersburg, MD 20877, 
  Telephone (301) 419-5070,FAX (301) 419-5069
Drawings and Specifications:
  SA 150 M010--Head Assembly, 1973                              Part 572
  SA 150 M020--Neck Assembly, 1973                              Part 572
  SA 150 M030--Shoulder-thorax Assembly, 1973                   Part 572
  SA-SID-M030, Revision A, titled ``Thorax           Part 572, subpart M
  Assembly'', complete, dated May 18, 1994
  SA 150 M050--Lumbar Spine Assembly, 1973                      Part 572
  SA-SID-M050, Revision A, titled ``Lumbar Spine     Part 572, subpart M
  Assembly'', dated May 18, 1994
  SA-SID-M050-- Lumbar Spine Assembly drawing,                  Part 572
  Revision B, dated September 12, 1996
  SA-SID-053 ``Lumbar Spine Assembly'', Revision     Part 572, subpart M
  A, dated May 18, 1994
  SA 150 M060--Pelvis and Abdomen Assembly, 1973                Part 572
  SA-SID-M060, Revision A, ``Pelvis and Abdomen      Part 572, subpart M
  Assembly'', dated May 18, 1994
  SA 150 M070--Right Arm Assembly, 1973                         Part 572
  SA 150 M071--Left Arm Assembly, 1973                          Part 572
  SA 150 M080--Right Leg Assembly, 1973                         Part 572
  SA-SID-M080, ``Leg Assembly, Right'', dated        Part 572, subpart M
  August 13, 1987
  SA 150 M081--Left Leg Assembly, 1973                          Part 572
  SA-SID-M081, ``Leg Assembly, Left'', dated         Part 572, subpart M
  August 13, 1987
  Operation and Maintenance Manual for 3-year-old               Part 572
  Test Dummy, SA 103C, Contract No. DOT-HS-6-
  01294, dated May 28, 1976
  SA 103C 010 Head Assembly, 1976                               Part 572
  SA 103C 020 Neck Assembly, 1976                               Part 572
  SA 103C 030 Torso Assembly, 1976                              Part 572
  SA 103C 141 Upper Arm Assembly Left, 1976                     Part 572
  SA 103C 142 Upper Arm Assembly Right, 1976                    Part 572
  SA 103C 051 Forearm Hand Assembly Left, 1976                  Part 572
  SA 103C 052 Forearm Hand Assembly Right, 1976                 Part 572
  SA 103C 061 Upper Leg Assembly Left, 1976                     Part 572
  SA 103C 062 Upper Leg Assembly Right, 1976                    Part 572
  SA 103C 071 Lower Leg Assembly Left, 1976                     Part 572
  SA 103C 072 Lower Leg Assembly Right, 1976                    Part 572
  SA 103C 081 Foot Assembly Left, 1976                          Part 572
  SA 103C 082 Foot Assembly Right, 1976                         Part 572
Parts List and Drawings, Subpart R, CRABI 12-                    572.150
  month-old Infant Crash Test Dummy (CRABI-12, 
  Alpha version), August 2001.
Parts List and Drawings, Subpart R, CRABI 12-month-old Infant Crash Test 
  Dummy (CRABI-12, Alpha version), August 2001, consisting of:
  Drawing No. 921022-001, Head Assembly               572.150, 572.151, 
                                                      572.152, 572.154, 
                                                                 572.155
  Drawing No. 921022-041, Neck Assembly               572.150, 572.151, 
                                                      572.153, 572.154, 
                                                                 572.155

[[Page 1157]]

  Drawing No. TE-3200-160, Headform                   572.150, 572.151, 
                                                                 572.153
  Drawing No. 921022-060, Torso Assembly              572.150, 572.151, 
                                                        572.154, 572.155
  921022-055, Leg Assembly                            572.150, 572.151, 
                                                                 572.155
  921022-054, Arm Assembly                            572.150; 572.151; 
                                                                 572.155
  The CRABI-12 Test Dummy Parts List                             572.150
Procedures for Assembly, Disassembly, and               572.150, 572.151
  Inspection (PADI), Subpart R, CRABI 12-month-old 
  Infant Crash Test Dummy (CRABI-12, Alpha 
  version), August 2001.
Parts List and Drawings, Subpart P, Hybrid III 3-year-old Child Crash 
  Test Dummy (H-III3C, Alpha version), September 2001, including:
  Drawing No. 210-1000, Head Assembly                 572.140, 572.141, 
                                                      572.142, 572.144, 
                                                        572.145, 572.146
  Drawing No. 210-2001, Neck Assembly                 572.140, 572.141, 
                                                      572.143, 572.144, 
                                                        572.145, 572.146
  Drawing No. 210-3000, Upper/Lower Torso Assembly    572.140, 572.141, 
                                                                 572.143
  Drawing No. 210-5000-1(L), -2(R), Leg Assembly      572.140, 572.141, 
                                                      572.144, 572.145, 
                                                                 572.146
  Drawing No. 210-6000-1(L), -2(R), Arm Assembly      572.140, 572.141, 
                                                        572.144, 572.145
  The Hybrid III Three-year-old Dummy Parts List                 572.140
Procedures for Assembly, Disassembly, and               572.140, 572.141
  Inspection (PADI), Subpart P, Hybrid III 3-year-
  old Child Crash Test Dummy (H-III3C, Alpha 
  version), September 2001.
AGA, 572.141RD-AR-330 Hybrid III Dummy Transducers                572.31
  list, Anthropomorphic Dummies for Crash and 
  Escape System Testing, Chapter 6, table 6-2, 
  North Atlantic Treaty Organization, July 1996.
Construction of an Infant Dummy (Mark II) for                   Part 572
  Dynamic Tests of Crash Restraint Systems, July 
  2, 1974.
SA 106, C001, C010, C020, C030, C041, C042, C050,               Part 572
  C060, C071 and C072 establishing specifications 
  for an anthropomorphic test dummy representing a 
  6-year-old child.
SA 106C 001, ``Crash Test Dummy Ass'y. 6 Yr. Old        572.71; 572.74; 
  Child'', sheets 1 through 7, released July 11,                  572.78
  1997, technical drawings and specifications, 
  parts list package, and list of measurement 
  definitions (``Landmark Definitions'' (sheet 18) 
  for anthropomorphic test dummy representing 6-
  year-old child.
Drawings and Specifications for the Hybrid III 6-year-old child dummy 
  (H-III6C) Subpart I, Beta Version, June 2002 consisting of:
  Drawing No. 127-1000, Head Assembly                            572.120
  Drawing No. 127-1015-Neck Assembly                             572.120
  Drawing No. 127-2000, Upper Torso Assembly                     572.120
  Drawing No. 127-3000, Lower Torso Assembly                     572.120
  Drawing No. 127-4000, Leg Assembly                             572.120

[[Page 1158]]

  Drawing No. 127-5000, Arm Assembly                             572.120
  The Hybrid III Six-year-old Parts List                         572.120
Procedures for Assembly, Disassembly, and                        572.120
  Inspection (PADI) of the Hybrid III 6-year-old 
  Child Crash Test Dummy, Beta version (June 
  2002).
SA 106C 010, Revision A (sheet 8) Head Assembly,                Part 572
  1989.
SA 106C 020, Revision A (sheet 9) Neck Assembly,                Part 572
  1989.
SA 106C 030, Revision C (sheet 10) Thorax                       Part 572
  Assembly, 1996 (including 6C-1610-1 through -4 
  Screw Button Head Socket, 1996, and 6C-1021 
  Ballast, 6-year-old Thoraxc [for 7267A], 1996).
SA 106C 030, Revision D (sheet 11) Thorax                       Part 572
  Assembly, 1996 (including 6C-909, Revision A, 
  Cover-chest Accelerometer, 1996 and 6C-1000-1, 
  Revision C, Sternum Thoracic Weld Ass'y., 1996).
SA 106C 041, Revision A (sheet 14) Arm Assembly,                Part 572
  Right, 1989.
SA 106C 042, Revision A (sheet 15) Arm Assembly,                Part 572
  Left, 1989.
SA 106C 050, Revision A (sheet 12) Lumbar Spine                 Part 572
  Assembly, 1989.
SA 106C 060, Revision A (sheet 13) Pelvis                       Part 572
  Assembly, 1989.
SA 106C 071, Revision B (sheet 16) Leg Assembly,                Part 572
  Right, 1995.
SA 106C 072, Revision B (sheet 17) Leg Assembly,                Part 572
  Left, 1995.
User's Manual entitled ``Six-Year-Old Size Child                Part 572
  Test Dummy SA106C,'' October 28, 1991.
LP 1049/1 through 1049/54, dummy components and                 Part 572
  parts.
LP 1049/A, March 1979, assembled dummy with its                 Part 572
  major components.
LP 1049/0 parts list (5 sheets), index............              Part 572
The TNO P3/4, Child Dummy Users Manual, January                 Part 572
  1979, Instituut voor Wegtransportmiddelen TNO.
SA 1001, 1974.....................................              Part 572
FIR100 Filter Program, Version 1.0, dated July 16,                572.44
  1990.
Parts List and Drawings, Part 572 Subpart S Hybrid III Weighted Six-
  Year-Old Child Test Dummy (H-III6CW, Alpha Version), April 13, 2004, 
  including:
  Drawing No. 167-0000, Complete Assembly              572.160, 572.161 
                                                               Table A, 
                                                           572.161(a)(1)
  Drawing No. 167-2000, Upper Torso Assembly             572.160(a)(1), 
                                                       572.161, 572.161 
                                                      Table A, 572.164, 
                                                              572.165(a)
  Drawing No. 167-2020, Spine Box Weight                 572.160(a)(1), 
                                                         572.161(a)(1), 
                                                       572.161 Table A, 
                                                              572.165(a)
  Drawing No. 167-3000, Lower Torso Assembly             572.160(a)(1), 
                                                         572.161(a)(1), 
                                                       572.161 Table A, 
                                                              572.165(a)
  Drawing No. 167-3010, Lumbar Weight Base               572.160(a)(1), 
                                                         572.161(a)(1), 
                                                       572.161 Table A, 
                                                              572.165(a)

[[Page 1159]]

Procedures for Assembly, Disassembly, and                572.160(a)(1), 
  Inspection (PADI) of the Weighted Hybrid III 6-          572.161(a)(3)
  year-old Child Crash Test Dummy (H-III6CW), 
  April 2004.
The Hybrid III Weighted Six-Year-Old Child Parts/        572.160(a)(1); 
  Drawings List, April 13, 2004.                           572.161(a)(1)
Side Impact Moving Deformable Barrier Drawings,                    587.6
  DSL-1279, 1280, 1281, 1284, and 1286 dated Aug. 
  20, 1980; DSL 1278; 1283, 1285, 1287, and 1290 
  dated October 1991.
Drawing numbers 126-0000 through 126-0015 (sheets    Part 572, subpart K
  1 through 3), 126-0017 through 126-0027, and a 
  parts list ``Parts List for CAMI Newborn 
  Dummy'', Construction of the Newborn Infant 
  Dummy, 1992.
Dummy assembly drawing SA-SID-M001, revision C,                 Part 572
  ``50th Percentile Anthropomorphic Side Impact 
  Dummy'', dated September 12, 1996.
Dummy Assembly drawings SID-M001A revision A, SID-                572.41
  M001 revision B, SA-SID-M030 revision A, SA-SID-
  050 revision A, SA-SID-M060 revision A, SA-SID-
  087 sheet 1 revision H and SA-SID-087 sheet 2 
  revision H, all dated May 18, 1994; and the 
  User's Manual dated May 1994.
Drawing SA-SID-M001A revision A dated May 18, 1994  572.42(a); 572.43(a)
Drawing SA-SID-M001A, revision B, ``Completed                   Part 572
  Assembly Side Impact Dummy'', dated September 
  12, 1996.
Drawing SID-SM-001, dated May 12, 1994............              Part 572
Drawing SID-SM-002, dated May 12, 1994............              Part 572
Drawing SID-005 revision F dated May 18, 1994.....          572.44(b)(1)
Drawing SID-087 revision H dated May 18, 1994.....             572.44(c)
Procedures for Disassembly, Inspection, Assembly                  572.31
  and Limbs Adjustment of the Hybrid III Dummy 
  issued April 1997, revised June 1998.
Side Impact Dummy, Hybrid III, Anthropomorphic       Part 572, subpart M
  Test Dummy Parts List, dated May 10, 1997, and 
  Users Manual, dated May 1997.
Anthropomorphic Test Dummy Parts List, Hybrid III,                572.31
  dated June 26, 1998, and Parts List Index, dated 
  June 26, 1998.
Drawing SA-SIDH3-M001 ``Complete Assembly SIDH3'',   Part 572, subpart M
  dated April 19, 1997.
Drawing SIDH3-001, ``Head-Neck Bracket'', dated      Part 572, subpart M
  August 30, 1996.
Drawing SIDH3-006, ``Upper and Middle Shoulder       Part 572, subpart M
  Foam'', dated May 10, 1997.
Parts List and Drawings, Part 272 Subpart O Hybrid      572.130, 572.131
  III Fifth Percentile Small Adult Female Crash 
  Test Dummy (H-III5F, Alpha Version), June 2002.
Parts List and Drawings, Part 272 Subpart O Hybrid III Fifth Percentile 
  Small Adult Female Crash Test Dummy (H-III5F, Alpha Version), June 
  2002, including:
  Drawing No. 880105-100X, Head Assembly              572.130, 572.131, 
                                                      572.132, 572.133, 
                                                      572.134, 572.135, 
                                                                 572.137
  Drawing No. 880105-250, Neck Assembly               572.130, 572.131, 
                                                      572.133, 572.134, 
                                                        572.135, 572.137

[[Page 1160]]

  Drawing No. 880105-300, Upper Torso Assembly        572.130, 572.131, 
                                                      572.134, 572.135, 
                                                                 572.137
  Drawing No. 880105-450, Lower Torso Assembly        572.130, 572.131, 
                                                      572.134, 572.135, 
                                                                 572.137
  Drawing No. 880105-560-1, Complete Leg Assembly-    572.130, 572.131, 
  left                                                572.135, 572.136, 
                                                                 572.137
  Drawing No. 880105-560-2, Complete Leg Assembly-    572.130, 572.131, 
  right                                               572.135, 572.136, 
                                                                 572.137
  Drawing No. 880105-728-1, Complete Arm Assembly-    572.130, 572.131, 
  left                                                  572.134, 572.135
  Drawing No. 880105-728-2, Complete Arm Assembly-    572.130, 572.131, 
  right                                                 572.134, 572.135
  Hybrid III Fifth Percentile Small Adult Female        572.130, 572.131
  Crash Test Dummy Parts List
Procedures for Assembly, Disassembly, and               572.130, 572.132
  Inspection (PADI) of the Hybrid III Fifth 
  Percentile Small Adult Female Crash Test Dummy, 
  Alpha Version (February 2002).
The ``Free Motion Headform Drawing Package'' consisting of the following 
  drawings:
  Drawing number 92041-001 titled ``Head Form         572.100, 572.101; 
  Assembly,'' dated November 30, 1992                   572.102; 572.103
  Drawing number 92041-002 titled, ``Skull            572.100, 572.101; 
  Assembly,'' dated November 30, 1992                   572.102; 572.103
  Drawing number 92041-003 titled, ``Skull Cap        572.100, 572.101; 
  Plate Assembly,'' dated November 30, 1992             572.102; 572.103
  Drawing number 92041-004 titled, ``Skull Cap        572.100, 572.101; 
  Plate,'' dated November 30, 1992                      572.102; 572.103
  Drawing number 92041-005 titled, ``Threaded         572.100, 572.101; 
  Pin,'' dated November 30, 1992                        572.102; 572.103
  Drawing number 92041-006 titled, ``Hex Nut,''       572.100, 572.101; 
  dated November 30, 1992                               572.102; 572.103
  Drawing number 92041-008 titled, ``Head Skin        572.100, 572.101; 
  without Nose,'' dated November 30, 1992, as           572.102; 572.103
  amended March 6, 1995
  Drawing number 92041-009 titled, ``Six-Axis Load    572.100, 572.101; 
  Cell Simulator Assembly,'' dated November 30,         572.102; 572.103
  1992
  Drawing number 92041-011 titled, ``Head Ballast     572.100, 572.101; 
  Weight,'' dated November 30, 1992                     572.102; 572.103
  Drawing number 92041-018, ``Head Form Bill of       572.100, 572.101; 
  Materials,'' dated November 30, 1992                  572.102; 572.103
  Drawing number 78051-148, titled ``Skull-Head       572.100, 572.101; 
  (cast) Hybrid III,'' dated May 20, 1978, as           572.102; 572.103
  amended August 17, 1978
  Drawing number 78051-228/78051-229 titled           572.100, 572.101; 
  ``Skin-Hybrid III,'' dated May 20, 1978 as            572.102; 572.103
  amended through September 24, 1979
  Drawing number 78051-339 titled ``Pivot Pin--       572.100, 572.101; 
  Neck Transducer,'' dated May 20, 1978, as             572.102; 572.103
  amended May 14, 1986
  Drawing number 78051-372 titled ``Vinyl Skin        572.100, 572.101; 
  Formulation Hybrid III,'' dated May 20, 1978          572.102; 572.103

[[Page 1161]]

  Drawing number C-1797, ``Neck Blank, dated          572.100, 572.101; 
  August 1, 1989                                        572.102; 572.103
  Drawing number SA572-S4, titled ``Accelerometer     572.100, 572.101; 
  Specification,'' dated November 30, 1992              572.102; 572.103


Society of Automotive Engineers

  400 Commonwealth Dr., Warrendale, PA 15096-0001, 
  Telephone: (412) 776-4841
SAE Recommended Practice J100, Class A Vehicle            571.5; 571.205
  Glazing Shade Bands, 1995.
SAE J186a Supplemental High Mounted Stop and Rear                571.108
  Turn Signal Lamps, September 1977.
SAE J211-1980 Instrumentation for Impact Tests....  571.218; 572.36(i); 
                                                                  572.44
SAE J211-1995 Instrumentation for Impact Tests--      572.36; part 572, 
  Parts 1 and 2, dated March, 1995.                   subpart M; 572.120
SAE J211/1, Revised March 1995,`` Instrumentation       571.5; 571.208; 
  for Impact Tests--Part 1: Electronic                571.403; 572.137; 
  Instrumentation''.                                  572.146; 572.150; 
                                                       572.155; 587.12; 
                                                                  587.15
SAE J211/2, Revised March 1995, Instrumentation                  572.137
  for Impact Tests--Part 2: Photographic 
  Instrumentation.
SAE J211a-1971 Instrumentation for Impact Tests...      571.213; 571.222
SAE J222-1970 Parking Lamps (Position Lamps)......               571.108
SAE J387-NOV 1987 Terminology-Motor Vehicle                     Part 571
  Lighting.
SAE J449a-1963 Surface Texture Control............           581.6(b)(1)
SAE J527-1967 Brazed Double Wall Low Carbon Steel                571.116
  Tubing.
SAE J564a-1964 Headlamp Beam Switching............               571.108
SAE J565b-1969 Semi-Automatic Headlamp Beam                      571.108
  Switching Devices.
SAE J566-1960 Headlamp Mountings..................               571.108
SAE J567b-1970 Bulb Sockets.......................               571.108
SAE J571d-1976 Dimensional Specification for                     571.108
  Sealed Beam Headlamp Units.
SAE J573d-1968 Lamp Bulbs and Sealed Units........               571.108
SAE J575, July 1983, Tests for Motor Vehicle                     571.131
  Lighting Devices and Components.
SAE J575d-1967 Test for Motor Vehicle Lighting                   571.108
  Devices and Components.
SAE J575e-1970 Test for Motor Vehicle Lighting                   571.108
  Devices and Components.
SAE J576b-1966 Plastic Materials for Use in                      571.108
  Optical Parts, such as Lenses and Reflectors, of 
  Motor Vehicle Lighting Devices.
SAE J576c-1970 Plastic Materials for Use in                      571.108
  Optical Parts, such as Lenses and Reflectors, of 
  Motor Vehicle Lighting Devices.
SAE J578, May 1988, Color Specification...........               571.131
SAE J578, June 1995, Color Specification..........        571.5; 571.403
SAE J578a-1966 Color Specification for Electric                  571.108
  Signal Lighting Devices.
SAE J578c-1977 Color Specification for Electric                  571.108
  Signal Lighting Devices.
SAE J579-1984 Sealed Beam Headlamp Units for Motor               571.108
Vehicles.

[[Page 1162]]

SAE J579c-1978 Sealed Beam Headlamp Units for                    571.108
  Motor Vehicles.
SAE J580b-1974 Sealed Beam Headlamp Assembly......               571.108
SAE J580-1986 Sealed Beam Headlamp Assembly.......               571.108
SAE J584-1964 Motorcycle and Motor Driven Cycle                  571.108
  Headlamps.
SAE J585d-1970 Tail Lamps (Rear Position Light)...               571.108
SAE J585e-1977 Tail Lamps (Rear Position Lamps)...               571.108
SAE J586b-1966 Stop Lamps.........................               571.108
SAE J586c-1970 Stop Lamps.........................               571.108
SAE J586 FEB84 Stop Lamps for Use on Motor                       571.108
  Vehicles Less than 2032 mm in Overall Width.
SAE J587-1981 License Plate Lamps (Rear                          571.108
  Registration Plate Lamps).
SAE J588d-1966 Turn Signal Lamps..................               571.108
SAE J588e-1970 Turn Signal Lamps..................               571.108
SAE J588 NOV84 Turn Signal Lamps for Use on Motor                571.108
  Vehicles Less than 2032 mm in Overall Width.
SAE J589-1964 Turn Signal Switch..................               571.108
SAE J590b-1965 Automotive Turn Signal Flashers....               571.108
SAE J592-1992 Clearance, Side Marker and                         571.121
  Identification Lamps.
SAE J592e-1972 Clearance, Side Marker and               571.108; 571.121
  Identification Lamps.
SAE J593c-1968 Backup Lamps.......................               571.108
SAE J594f-1977 Reflex Reflectors..................               571.108
SAE J599b-1970 Lighting Inspection Code...........              581.5(c)
SAE J599c-1973 Lighting Inspection Code...........               571.108
SAE J602-1980 Headlamps Aiming Device for                        571.108
  Mechanically Aimable Sealed Beam Headlamp Units.
SAE J602a-1970 Headlamp Aiming Device for                       581.5(c)
  Mechanically Aimable Sealed Beam Headlamp Units.
SAE J673a-1967 Automotive Glazing.................               571.205
SAE J673-1993 Automotive Safety Glasses...........        571.5; 571.205
SAE J726a-1962 Recommended Practice, Air Cleaner                 571.209
  Test Code.
SAE J759-1995 Recommended Practice, Lighting                     571.121
  Identification Code.
SAE J787(g) 1966 Motor Vehicle Seat Belt Anchorage                 571.3
SAE J800b-1965 Recommended Practice, Motor Vehicle               571.209
  Seat Belt Installations.
SAE J826-Nov.1962 Manikins for Use in Defining               571.3(b)(3)
  Vehicle Seating Accomodations.
SAE J826-1980 Devices for Use in Defining Vehicle       571.3; 571.108; 
  Seating Accommodations.                               571.208; 571.214
SAE J826-May 87 Devices for Use in Defining and                  571.210
  Measuring Vehicle Seating Accomodation.
SAE J826-1992 Devices for Use in Defining and                    571.225
  Measuring Vehicle Seating Accomodations.
SAE J839b-1965 Passenger Car Side Door Latch            571.201; 571.206
  System.
SAE J843a-1966 Brake System Road Test Code--               575.101(e)(2)
  Passenger.
SAE J885a-1966 Human Tolerance to Impact                         571.208
  Conditions as Related to Motor Vehicle Design.
SAE J887-1964 School Bus Red Signal Lamps.........               571.108
SAE J902-1964 Recommended Practice, Passenger Car                571.103
  Windshield Defrosting Systems.
SAE J902a-1967 Passenger Car Windshield Defrosting               571.103
  Systems.
SAE J903a-1966 Passenger Car Windshield Wiper                    571.104
Systems.

[[Page 1163]]

SAE J910-1966 Vehicle Hazard Warning Signal                      571.108
  Flasher.
SAE J921-1965 Recommended Practice, Instrument                   571.201
  Panel Laboratory Impact Test Procedure.
SAE J934-1965 Recommended Practice Vehicle                       571.206
  Passenger Door Hinge Systems.
SAE J941-1965 Passenger Car Driver's Eye Range....      571.104; 571.107
SAE J942-1965 Passenger Car Windshield Washer                    571.104
  System.
SAE J944-JUN80 Steering Control System-Passenger                 571.203
  Car-Laboratory Test Procedure.
SAE J945b-1966 Vehicular Hazard Warning Signal                   571.108
  Flashers.
SAE J964a-1974 Test Procedure for Determining                    571.111
  Reflectivity of Rear View Mirrors.
SAE J972-1966 Moving Barrier Collision Test.......               571.105
SAE J977-1966 Instrumentation for Laboratory                     571.201
  Impact Tests.
SAE J1100a Motor Vehicle Dimensions...............                 571.3
SAE J1100 Jun84 Motor Vehicle Dimensions..........               571.210
SAE J1100-1993 Recommended Practice, Motor Vehicle               571.225
  Dimensions.
SAE J1132-1976 Sealed Beam Headlamp Units.........               571.108
SAE J1133, April 1984, School Bus Stop Arm........               571.131
SAE J1383-1985 Performance Requirements for Motor                571.108
  Vehicle Headlamps.
SAE J1395 APR85 Turn Signal Lamps for Use on Motor               571.108
  Vehicles 2032mm or More in Overall Width.
SAE J1398 MAY85 Stop Lamps for Use on Motor                      571.108
  Vehicles 2032 mm or More in Overall Width.
SAE J1703 JAN 1995, Motor Vehicle Brake Fluid,          571.106; 571.116
  Appendix B, SAE RM-66-04 Compatibility Fluid.
SAE J1733 1994-12, Information Report ``Sign         571.121; Part 572, 
  Convention for Vehicle Crash Testing,'',          Subpart M; 572.120; 
  December 1994.                                      572.137; 572.140; 
                                                      572.146; 572.150; 
                                                                 572.155
SAE Aero Space and Car and Body Measuring Standard               571.202
ANSI/SAE Z26.1, American National Standard for            571.5; 571.205
  Safety Glazing Materials for Glazing Motor 
  Vehicles and Motor Vehicle Equipment Operating 
  on Land Highways--Safety Standard, 1996.


Suppliers of Advanced Composite Materials Association

  1600 Wilson Blvd., Suite 1008, Arlington, VA 
  22209
SACMA SRM 16-90, Recommended Test Method for Tow          571.5; 571.304
  Tensile Testing of Carbon Fibers.


United Nations

  Conference Services Division, Distribution and 
  Sales Section, Office C.115-1, Palais des 
  Nations, CH-1211, Geneva 10, Switzerland
``Uniform Provisions Concerning the Approval of           571.5; 571.108
  Vehicles with Regard to the Installation of 
  Lighting and Light-Signalling Devices'', 
  Economic Commission for Europe Regulation 48:E/
  ECE/324-E/ECE/TRANS/505, Rev.1/Add.47/Rev.1/
  Corr.2, p.17 (February 26, 1996).

[[Page 1165]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters


<R04>

                     (Revised as of October 1, 2004)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                    Title 2--Grants and Agreements

            Subtitle A--Office of Management and Budget Guidance 
                for Grants and Agreements
         I  [Reserved]
        II  Office of Management and Budget Circulars and Guidance 
                [Reserved]
            Subtitle B--Federal Agency Regulations for Grants and 
                Agreements [Reserved]


                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  General Accounting Office (Parts 1--99)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Part 2100)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)

[[Page 1166]]

        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)
      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Part 3201)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Part 3301)
      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Part 3401)
       XXV  Department of the Interior (Part 3501)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Part 3601)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Part 3801)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Part 4301)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Part 4501)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Part 5001)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Part 5101)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Part 5201)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Part 5301)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Part 5501)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Part 5601)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Part 5701)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Part 5801)
         L  Department of Transportation (Part 6001)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Part 6201)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Part 6401)
        LV  National Endowment for the Arts (Part 6501)
       LVI  National Endowment for the Humanities (Part 6601)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Part 6701)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Part 
                6801)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Part 
                6901)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Part 7001)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Part 7101)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Part 7201)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Part 7301)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Part 
                7501)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Part 
                7601)
     LXVII  Institute of Museum and Library Services (Part 7701)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Part 7901)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Part 8101)
    LXXIII  Department of Agriculture (Part 8301)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Part 
                8401)

[[Page 1167]]

     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Part 8601)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Part 8701)

                      Title 6--Homeland Security

         I  Department of Homeland Security, Office of the 
                Secretary (Parts 0--99)

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture
         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Nutrition Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)
       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
        XX  Local Television Loan Guarantee Board (Parts 2200--
                2299)

[[Page 1168]]

      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  Office of Procurement and Property Management, 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 3200--3299)
    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3400--
                3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)
     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)
    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Department of Homeland Security (Immigration and 
                Naturalization) (Parts 1--499)
         V  Executive Office for Immigration Review, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1000--1399)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)
       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 300--599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)

[[Page 1169]]

       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)
     XVIII  Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste 
                Commission (Part 1800)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1500--1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700--1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 500--599)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)

[[Page 1170]]

       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        VI  Air Transportation System Stabilization (Parts 1300--
                1399)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Industry and Security, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

[[Page 1171]]

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  Bureau of Customs and Border Protection, Department of 
                Homeland Security; Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 
                Department of Homeland Security (Parts 400--599)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Employment Standards Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)
        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 1000--1099)

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)

[[Page 1172]]

        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 700--
                799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board Regulations (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)
        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Housing and Office of Multifamily Housing 
                Assistance Restructuring, Department of Housing 
                and Urban Development (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]

[[Page 1173]]

       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs, Section 202 Direct Loan Program, Section 
                202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly Program and 
                Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons With 
                Disabilities Program) (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--1699)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)
        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 1000--1199)
       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1200)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--899)

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, Department 
                of the Treasury (Parts 1--399)
        II  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, 
                Department of Justice (Parts 400--699)

[[Page 1174]]

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--299)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the 
                District of Columbia (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact Council 
                (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Department of Justice and Department of State (Parts 
                1100--1199)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)
      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Employee Benefits Security Administration, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Minerals Management Service, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 200--299)
       III  Board of Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 300--399)

[[Page 1175]]

        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Claims Collection Standards (Department of the 
                Treasury--Department of Justice) (Parts 900--999)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
     XVIII  National Counterintelligence Center (Parts 1800--1899)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                1--199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)

[[Page 1176]]

        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100--1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

                        Title 35--Panama Canal

         I  Panama Canal Regulations (Parts 1--299)

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Presidio Trust (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        XV  Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust (Part 1501)
       XVI  Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National 
                Environmental Policy Foundation (Parts 1600--1699)

[[Page 1177]]

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  United States Patent and Trademark Office, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--99)

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--1099)
        IV  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Defense; Uniform National Discharge Standards for 
                Vessels of the Armed Forces (Parts 1700--1799)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training Service, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 61-1--61-999)
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       102  Federal Management Regulation (Parts 102-1--102-299)
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)

[[Page 1178]]

       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System
       201  Federal Information Resources Management Regulation 
                (Parts 201-1--201-99) [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       300  General (Parts 300-1--300-99)
       301  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--
                301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)
       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Part 303-70)
       304  Payment of Travel Expenses from a Non-Federal Source 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)
        IV  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department 
                of Health and Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200--499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)
       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10010)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare

[[Page 1179]]

        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899)
         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                1200--1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)
       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                1--199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
       III  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage), Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)

[[Page 1180]]

       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Department of Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300--
                399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  United States Agency for International Development 
                (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        19  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)
        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        30  Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security 
                Acquisition Regulation (HSAR) (Parts 3000--3099)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        35  Panama Canal Commission (Parts 3500--3599)
        44  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 4400--4499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)
        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement (Parts 5300--5399)

[[Page 1181]]

        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Parts 
                5400--5499)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  General Services Administration Board of Contract 
                Appeals (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Research and Special Programs Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)
         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)
        XI  Bureau of Transportation Statistics, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1400--1499)
       XII  Transportation Security Administration, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 1500--1699)

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)
        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)

[[Page 1182]]

         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR

[[Page 1183]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR


<R04>

                     (Revised as of October 1, 2004)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or 
                     Agency                               Chapter

Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Advanced Research Projects Agency                 32, I
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development, United      22, II
     States
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department                            5, LXXIII
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Chief Financial Officer, Office of              7, XXX
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Cooperative State Research, Education, and      7, XXXIV
       Extension Service
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy, Office of                               7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Food and Nutrition Service                      7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Procurement and Property Management, Office of  7, XXXII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Air Transportation Stabilization Board            14, VI
Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau          27, I
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,       27, II
     Bureau of
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee   25, VII
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I
Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX

[[Page 1184]]

Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
     Compliance Board
Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Armed Forces Retirement Home                      5, XI
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Benefits Review Board                             20, VII
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase From People Who Are
Broadcasting Board of Governors                   22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services          42, IV
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Chief Financial Officer, Office of                7, XXX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Civil Rights, Commission on                       45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)                46, III
Commerce Department                               44, IV
  Census Bureau                                   15, I
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Fishery Conservation and Management             50, VI
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  Industry and Security, Bureau of                15, VII
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV, VI
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office, United States      37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Cooperative State Research, Education, and        7, XXXIV
     Extension Service
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Corporation for National and Community Service    45, XII, XXV
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency    28, VIII
     for the District of Columbia
Customs and Border Protection Bureau              19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A; 
                                                  40, VII

[[Page 1185]]

  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII
  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51
  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I
  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 2
  National Imagery and Mapping Agency             32, I
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
District of Columbia, Court Services and          28, VIII
     Offender Supervision Agency for the
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board       13, V
Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board              13, IV
Employee Benefits Security Administration         29, XXV
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Environmental Protection Agency                   5, LIV; 40, I, IV, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV
  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 
                                                  48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2
  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II

[[Page 1186]]

  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export-Import Bank of the United States           5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII
Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1
Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
Federal Claims Collection Standards               31, IX
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 44
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Labor Relations Authority, and General    5, XIV; 22, XIV
     Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations 
     Authority
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Management Regulation                     41, 102
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration       49, III
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Fishery Conservation and Management               50, VI
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Nutrition Service                        7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX
Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Accounting Office                         4, I
General Services Administration                   5, LVII; 41, 105
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5

[[Page 1187]]

  Federal Management Regulation                   41, 102
  Federal Property Management Regulations         41, 101
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  General                                         41, 300
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
       of Certain Employees
  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302
  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances          41, 301
Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          5, XLV; 45, Subtitle A
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services        42, IV
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V; 42, I
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Homeland Security, Department of                  6, I
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)              46, III
  Customs and Border Protection Bureau            19, I
  Federal Emergency Management Agency             44, I
  Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau      19, IV
  Immigration and Naturalization                  8, I
  Transportation Security Administration          49, XII
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      5, LXV; 24, Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing     24, IV
       Assistance Restructuring, Office of
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing       24, IV
     Assistance Restructuring, Office of
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau        19, IV
Immigration and Naturalization                    8, I
Immigration Review, Executive Office for          8, V
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
     Secretary
Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V; 42, I
Industry and Security, Bureau of                  15, VII
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General

[[Page 1188]]

  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Interior Department
  American Indians, Office of the Special         25, VII
       Trustee
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  Minerals Management Service                     30, II
  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III
  National Park Service                           36, I
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I
  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board   30, III
       of
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, United States Agency   22, II
     for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
International Fishing and Related Activities      50, III
International Investment, Office of               31, VIII
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                5, XXVIII; 28, I, XI; 40, 
                                                  IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,     27, II
       Bureau of
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             31, IX
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration Review, Executive Office for        8, V
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII
  Benefits Review Board                           20, VII
  Employee Benefits Security Administration       29, XXV
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29
  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Standards, Office of           29, II, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A

[[Page 1189]]

  Veterans' Employment and Training Service,      41, 61; 20, IX
       Office of the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Standards, Office of             29, II, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
Local Television Loan Guarantee Board             7, XX
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 
                                                  48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II
Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minerals Management Service                       30, II
Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV
Monetary Offices                                  31, I
Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in     36, XVI
     National Environmental Policy Foundation
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National and Community Service, Corporation for   45, XII, XXV
National Archives and Records Administration      5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Bureau of Standards                      15, II
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Counterintelligence Center               32, XVIII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact     28, IX
     Council
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 49, V
National Imagery and Mapping Agency               32, I
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Labor Relations Board                    5, LXI; 29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV, VI
National Mediation Board                          29, X
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       5, XLIII; 45, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
National Weather Service                          15, IX
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste  10, XVIII
   Commission
[[Page 1190]]

Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust             36, XV
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Panama Canal Commission                           48, 35
Panama Canal Regulations                          35, I
Patent and Trademark Office, United States        37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
       Acquisition Regulation
  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Postal Rate Commission                            5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI
President's Commission on White House             1, IV
     Fellowships
Presidential Documents                            3
Presidio Trust                                    36, X
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Procurement and Property Management, Office of    7, XXXII
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Refugee Resettlement, Office of                   45, IV
Regional Action Planning Commissions              13, V
Relocation Allowances                             41, 302
Research and Special Programs Administration      49, I
Rural Business-Cooperative Service                7, XVIII, XLII
Rural Development Administration                  7, XLII
Rural Housing Service                             7, XVIII, XXXV
Rural Telephone Bank                              7, XVI
Rural Utilities Service                           7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation     33, IV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of          32, XXIV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and     47, II
     National Security Council
Secret Service                                    31, IV
Securities and Exchange Commission                17, II
Selective Service System                          32, XVI
Small Business Administration                     13, I
Smithsonian Institution                           36, V
Social Security Administration                    20, III; 48, 23
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States        5, XI
Special Counsel, Office of                        5, VIII
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,    34, III
     Office of
State Department                                  22, I; 28, XI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 6
Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board of  30, III
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,       30, VII
     Office of
Surface Transportation Board                      49, X
Susquehanna River Basin Commission                18, VIII
Technology Administration                         15, XI
Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for        37, IV

[[Page 1191]]

Technology, Under Secretary for                   37, V
Tennessee Valley Authority                        5, LXIX; 18, XIII
Thrift Supervision Office, Department of the      12, V
     Treasury
Trade Representative, United States, Office of    15, XX
Transportation, Department of                     5, L
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 63
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 12
  Federal Aviation Administration                 14, I
  Federal Highway Administration                  23, I, II
  Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration     49, III
  Federal Railroad Administration                 49, II
  Federal Transit Administration                  49, VI
  Maritime Administration                         46, II
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  23, II, III; 49, V
  Research and Special Programs Administration    49, I
  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation   33, IV
  Secretary of Transportation, Office of          14, II; 49, Subtitle A
  Surface Transportation Board                    49, X
  Transportation Statistics Bureau                49, XI
Transportation, Office of                         7, XXXIII
Transportation Security Administration            49, XII
Transportation Statistics Bureau                  49, XI
Travel Allowances, Temporary Duty (TDY)           41, 301
Treasury Department                               5, XXI; 12, XV; 17, IV; 
                                                  31, IX
  Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau        27, I
  Community Development Financial Institutions    12, XVIII
       Fund
  Comptroller of the Currency                     12, I
  Customs and Border Protection Bureau            19, I
  Engraving and Printing, Bureau of               31, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 10
  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center         31, VII
  Fiscal Service                                  31, II
  Foreign Assets Control, Office of               31, V
  Internal Revenue Service                        26, I
  International Investment, Office of             31, VIII
  Monetary Offices                                31, I
  Secret Service                                  31, IV
  Secretary of the Treasury, Office of            31, Subtitle A
  Thrift Supervision, Office of                   12, V
Truman, Harry S. Scholarship Foundation           45, XVIII
United States and Canada, International Joint     22, IV
     Commission
United States and Mexico, International Boundary  22, XI
     and Water Commission, United States Section
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation      43, III
     Commission
Veterans Affairs Department                       38, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 8
Veterans' Employment and Training Service,        41, 61; 20, IX
     Office of the Assistant Secretary for
Vice President of the United States, Office of    32, XXVIII
Vocational and Adult Education, Office of         34, IV
Wage and Hour Division                            29, V
Water Resources Council                           18, VI
Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of         20, I
World Agricultural Outlook Board                  7, XXXVIII

[[Page 1193]]


<R03>
List of CFR Sections Affected

<R04>

All changes in this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations that were 
made by documents published in the Federal Register since January 1, 
2001, are enumerated in the following list. Entries indicate the nature 
of the changes effected. Page numbers refer to Federal Register pages. 
The user should consult the entries for chapters and parts as well as 
sections for revisions.
For the period before January 1, 2001, see the ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected, 1949-1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, and 1986-2000'' published in 
11 separate volumes.

                                  2001

49 CFR
                                                                   66 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter V
533.5 (a) Table IV revised.........................................17516
541 Appendices A, A-I, A-II and B revised..........................40624
544.5 (a) revised..................................................53733
544 Appendices A and B revised.....................................53733
    Appendix C revised.............................................53734
571 Policy statement................................................9673
    Actions on petitions...........................................18208
    Regulation at 66 FR 20199 withdrawn............................64358
571.121 Amended....................................................64158
571.122 Amended; eff. 8-14-02......................................42617
571.208 Amended.............................................48221, 65403
571.221 Regulation at 63 FR 59740 eff. date delayed to 6-1-02......20199
    Amended........................................................64366
571.305 Regulation at 65 FR 57988 eff. date delayed to 12-1-01......9533
    Amended........................................................60160
571.401 Revised....................................................43121
572.113 (b)(2), (3) and (4) revised................................51882
572.140 (a)(1) introductory text, (2) and (b)(1) revised...........64376
572.144 (b)(1) revised; (c)(7) added...............................64376
572.146 (a) and Figure P4 revised; (1)(2)(iv) added................64376
572.150 (a)(1) introductory text and (2) revised...................45784
572.154 (c)(7) added...............................................45784
572.155 (a) revised; (i)(2)(iv) added..............................45784
573.3 (a) revised; (g) added.......................................38162
575 Notice of final decision........................................3388
578.6 (f)(1) and (g)(1) amended; (g)(2) revised....................41151
578.7 (b) revised..................................................38384
593 Appendix A revised.............................................48363
595.1--595.4 (Subpart A) Heading added.............................12655
595.1 Revised......................................................12655
595.2 Revised......................................................12655
595.5 (Subpart B) Heading added....................................12655
595.6--595.7 (Subpart C) Added.....................................12655

                                  2002

49 CFR
                                                                   67 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter V
501.3 (a)(3) and (c) revised; (a)(4) and (6) removed; (a)(5) and 
        (7) redesignated as (a)(4) and (5); new (a)(6) added.......44083
    (a)(3) removed; eff. 10-3-02...................................44085
501.4 Revised......................................................44084
    Revised; eff. 10-3-02..........................................44085
501.8 (b), (e), (f) and (g) revised; (h) through (k) removed; (l) 
        redesignated as new (h)....................................44084
    (b) removed; eff. 10-3-02......................................44085
533.5 (a) table revised............................................16060
541 Policy statement...............................................53756
    Appendices A and A-1 revised...................................44087
544.5 (a) revised..................................................46611
544 Appendices A, B and C revised..................................46611
567.4 (h)(2) revised...............................................69623
571.3 (b) amended; eff. 12-27-04...................................79439

[[Page 1194]]

571.5 (b)(2) through (6) and (8) revised...........................77193
571.101 Amended....................................................38743
571.105 Amended; eff. 12-27-04.....................................79439
571.109 Amended....................................................69623
571.110 Heading revised; text amended; Figures 1 and 2 added.......69623
571.117 Amended....................................................69627
571.120 Amended....................................................69627
571.121 Amended....................................................36820
571.129 Amended....................................................69627
571.138 Added......................................................38746
571.139 Added......................................................69627
571.201 Amended; interim...........................................41354
    Amended; eff. 12-27-04.........................................79439
571.205 Amended; eff. 12-27-04.....................................79439
571.208 Amended; eff. 12-27-04.....................................79439
571.213 Amended; eff. 10-1-03......................................61529
    Amended........................................................61529
    Amended; interim...............................................64823
571.217 Amended; eff. 4-21-03......................................19351
    Figures 6A through D added; eff. 4-21-03.......................19352
571.401 Amended....................................................19523
571.403 Added; eff. 12-27-04.......................................79439
571.404 Added; eff. 12-27-04.......................................79451
572.120--572.127 (Subpart N) Heading revised.......................47327
572.120 (a)(1), (2) and (c)(1) revised.............................47327
572.124 (b) and (c) revised........................................47327
572.126 (b) revised; (c)(6) added..................................47328
572.127 (a), (b) and (k) through (p) revised.......................47328
572.120-572.127 (Subpart N) Figures N1, N2, N3 and N6 revised......47329
    Figure N5 correctly revised....................................59023
572.130 (a)(1) introductory text, (2) and (c)(1) revised...........46413
572.131 (a)(2) revised.............................................46414
572.133 Table B revised............................................46414
572.134 (b)(1) amended; (c)(7) added...............................46415
572.136 (c)(6) added...............................................46415
572.137 (a), (b), (m)(3)(ii), (iii) and (6) revised; (m)(2)(iv) 
        added......................................................46415
572.130--572.137 (Subpart O) Figures O1 through O5 revised.........46415
573 Heading revised................................................19697
    Technical correction...........................................49263
    Heading and authority revised..................................45872
573.1 Revised......................................................45872
573.2 Revised......................................................45872
573.3 (a) revised; (h) and (i) added...............................19697
573.4 Amended......................................................45872
573.5 Redesignated as 573.6; new 573.5 added.......................45872
573.6 Redesignated as 573.7; new 573.6 redesignated from 573.5.....45872
    (c)(7), (8)(i), and (10) revised...............................64063
573.7 Redesignated as 573.8; new 573.7 redesignated from 573.6.....45872
573.8 Removed; new 573.8 redesignated from 573.7...................45872
573.11 Added.......................................................19697
573.12 Added.......................................................19698
573.13 Added.......................................................64063
573.14 Added.......................................................72392
574 Authority revised..............................................45872
    Technical correction...........................................49263
574.5 (d) and Figures 1 and 2 revised..............................69628
574.7 (d) revised..................................................45872
574.10 Amended.....................................................45872
575 Heading and authority citation revised.........................67494
575.1--575.7 (Subpart A) Heading revised...........................67494
575.6 Amended; (a)(4) and (5) added................................69631
575.101--575.105 (Subpart B) Heading revised.......................67494
575.201 (Subpart C) Added..........................................67494
576 Authority revised..............................................45872
    Technical correction...........................................49263
576.1 Revised......................................................45872
576.3 Revised......................................................45873
576.4 Revised......................................................45874
576.5 Revised......................................................45874
576.6 Revised......................................................45874
577.11 Added.......................................................64065
577.12 Added.......................................................72393
579 Revised........................................................45874
579.2 Revised......................................................63310
579.3 (a) revised; (b) and (c) redesignated as (c) and (d); new 
        (b) added..................................................63310
579.4 (c) and (d) amended..........................................63310
579.11--579.20 (Subpart B) Revised.................................63310
    Technical correction...........................................49263
590 Revised........................................................38748
593 Appendix A revised.............................................59099
594.6 (a) introductory text, (b), (h) and (i) revised; (d) amended
                                                                   60599
    (d) correctly added............................................62897

[[Page 1195]]

594.7 (e) revised..................................................60599
594.8 (c) amended..................................................60599
594.9 (c) revised..................................................60599
594.10 (d) revised.................................................60599
595 Actions on petitions...........................................38423
597 Added..........................................................69631

                                  2003

49 CFR
                                                                   68 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter IV
Chapter IV Heading correctly added.................................16953
Chapter V
512 Revised........................................................44228
533.5 (a) Table IV revised.........................................16899
541 Theft data.....................................................54857
    Appendices A and A-I revised...................................39473
544.5 (a) revised..................................................59135
544 Appendices A and C revised.....................................59135
567.4 Regulation at 67 FR 69623 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04........33655
571 Announcement...................................................43972
    Actions on petitions...........................................69046
571.3 (b) amended..................................................44901
571.5 (b)(10) redesignated as (b)(11); new (b)(10) added; eff. 12-
        22-03......................................................37654
571.101 Amended; Table 2 revised...................................65406
571.105 Amended; eff. 10-10-03.....................................47495
571.108 Amended....................................................44901
571.109 Regulation at 67 FR 69623 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04......33655
    Amended........................................................37982
    Amended; heading revised; eff. 6-1-07..........................38146
571.110 Regulation at 67 FR 69623 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04......33655
    Amended........................................................37982
    Amended; eff. 6-1-07...........................................38146
571.117 Regulation at 67 FR 69627 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04......33655
571.119 Amended; eff. 6-1-07.......................................38148
571.120 Regulation at 67 FR 69627 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04......33655
    Amended........................................................37982
    Amended; eff. 6-1-07...........................................38149
571.121 Amended; eff.10-10-03......................................47497
571.129 Regulation at 67 FR 69627 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04......33655
571.131 Amended....................................................44901
571.138 Amended.....................................................4110
    Removed........................................................65409
571.139 Regulation at 67 FR 69627 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04......33655
    Amended; eff. 6-1-07...........................................38150
571.201 Amended; interim...........................................51711
571.205 Amended; Figure 1 removed..................................43971
    Regulation at 68 FR 43971 eff. date delayed to 1-22-04.........55545
    Amended; eff. 1-22-04..........................................55544
571.208 Amended..................................513, 4965, 23617, 50078
    Figures 6a, 6b, 7, 8 and 9 revised.............................34839
    Amended; Figure 13 added.......................................65191
571.213 Amended; eff. 12-22-03.....................................37654
    Regulation at 67 FR 64818 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04..........66741
    Amended........................................................66743
571.214 Amended....................................................67083
571.217 Regulation at 67 FR 19351 eff. date corrected to 4-21-04 
                                                                   19752
    Corrected; CFR correction......................................48572
571.221 Corrected...................................................6360
571.225 Amended; interim...........................................24667
    Amended........................................................38226
571.301 Amended....................................................44471
    Figure 2 revised...............................................44472
    Amended; Figure 3 added........................................67083
571.500 Amended....................................................43972
    Regulation at 68 FR 43972 eff. date delayed to 1-22-04.........55544
572 Actions on petitions...........................................13856
573.3 (b) through (f) amended......................................18142
574.5 Regulation at 67 FR 69628 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04........33655
575 Policy statement...............................................59250
575.6 Regulation at 67 FR 69631 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04........33655
575.104 (e)(1)(iv) revised.........................................35185
    Heading correctly revised......................................43339
577.5 (a) amended..................................................18142
577.10 (a) amended.................................................18142
579.4 (c) amended.....................................4113, 18142, 35142
579.5 (d) revised..................................................18142
    (d) amended....................................................35147
579.6 Revised.......................................................4113
579.11 (d)(2) revised; (e) amended..................................4113
579.21 Introductory text amended...................................18142
    (b) introductory text and (d) revised..........................35142
579.22 Introductory text amended...................................18142
    (a) amended; (b) introductory text and (d) revised.............35143

[[Page 1196]]

579.23 Introductory text amended...................................18142
    (b) introductory text and (d) revised; (c) amended.............35143
579.24 Introductory text amended...................................18143
    (a), (b) introductory text and (d) revised.....................35143
579.25 Introductory text amended...................................18143
    Introductory text, (a), and (b)(2) amended; (b) introductory 
text and (d) revised...............................................35144
579.26 Introductory text amended...................................18143
    Introductory text revised; (a), (c) and (d) amended; (b) 
introductory text added............................................35144
579.27 (a) revised.................................................18143
    (b) amended; (c)(6) added......................................35144
579.28 (c) revised.................................................18143
    (c) corrected..................................................20225
    (b) amended; (h) through (l) redesignated as (i) through (m); 
new (h) added......................................................35144
    (a), (b), and (c)(1) revised; (n) added........................35148
    (c)(1) introductory text revised...............................64569
579.29 (b) amended.................................................35145
585.4 (g) revised..................................................55320
587.6 (b)(1) revised...............................................44472
586 Revised........................................................67086
590 Removed........................................................65409
590.3 Revised.......................................................4111
593 Appendix A revised.............................................55546
596.5 Introductory text revised....................................38231
    Corrected......................................................54861
596.6 (b) (2) revised..............................................38231
596.7 Revised......................................................38231
597 Regulation at 67 FR 69631 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04..........33655

                                  2004

  (Regulations published from January 1, 2004, through October 1, 2004)

49 CFR
                                                                   69 FR
                                                                    Page
Title 49 Nomenclature change.......................................18803
Chapter IV
450 Authority citation revised.....................................58352
450.3 (a)(2)(iv)(B) amended; (a)(2)(v) added.......................58352
450.11 (a) and (d) amended.........................................58352
450.12 (a) introductory text amended...............................58352
450.13 Amended.....................................................58352
450.14 Amended.....................................................58352
450.15 (a) amended.................................................58352
450.16 (a) introductory text and (b) introductory text amended.....58352
451 Authority citation revised.....................................58352
451.1 (a) amended..................................................58352
451.3 (a) amended..................................................58352
451.5 (b) amended..................................................58352
451.7 (a) amended..................................................58352
451.12 (a)(4) amended..............................................58353
451.18 (a) amended.................................................58353
452 Authority citation revised.....................................58353
452.1 (a) amended..................................................58353
452.3 (a)(2) and (b) amended.......................................58353
452.7 (a) amended; OMB number......................................58353
452.9 (b) amended; OMB number......................................58353
453 Authority citation revised.....................................58353
453.7 Nomenclature change; (a) amended.............................58353
Chapter V
512.21 (c) revised.................................................21425
512 Appendices B and C amended.....................................21425
538.1 Revised.......................................................7703
538.2 Revised.......................................................7703
538.9 Added.........................................................7703
541 Authority citation.............................................34612
    Revised; eff. 9-1-06...........................................17967
    Theft data.....................................................53354
541.3 (a) corrected; eff. 9-1-06...................................34612
541.5 (e)(2) amended; eff. 9-1-06..................................17967
541 Appendices A and AI revised.....................................9965
    Appendices A and B revised; Appendices A-I, A-II and C 
amended; eff. 9-1-06...............................................17967
     Appendix C corrected; eff. 9-1-06.............................34613
542 Heading revised; eff. 9-1-06...................................17967
    Authority citation corrected...................................34613
542.1 Revised; eff. 9-1-06.........................................17967
     (b) corrected; eff. 9-1-06....................................34613
542.2 Revised; eff. 9-1-06.........................................17968
543 Authority citation.............................................34613
543.3 Revised; eff. 9-1-06.........................................17968
543.5 (a) revised; eff. 9-1-06.....................................17968
544.5 (a) revised..................................................41976
544 Appendices A and C revised.....................................41976

[[Page 1197]]

567.4 Regulation at 67 FR 69623 and 68 FR 37981 eff. date delayed 
        to 9-1-05..................................................31317
571 Policy statement.................................................279
    Actions on petitions.....................................9229, 55993
571.108 Amended....................................................48814
571.109 Regulation at 67 FR 69623 and 68 FR 37981 eff. date 
        delayed to 9-1-05..........................................31317
571.110 Regulation at 67 FR 69623 and 68 FR 37981 eff. date 
        delayed to 9-1-05..........................................31317
    Amended; Figures 1 and 2 revised; eff. 9-1-05..................31317
    Correctly amended.......................................51399, 51400
571.111 Amended....................................................18497
571.117 Regulation at 67 FR 69627 and 68 FR 37981 eff. date 
        delayed to 9-1-05..........................................31317
    Amended; eff. 9-1-05...........................................31319
571.118 Amended; eff. 11-15-04.....................................55531
    Amended; eff. 9-1-05...........................................55544
571.120 Regulation at 67 FR 69627 and 68 FR 37981 eff. date 
        delayed to 9-1-05..........................................31317
571.129 Regulation at 67 FR 69627 and 68 FR 37981 eff. date 
        delayed to 9-1-05..........................................31317
    Amended; eff. 9-1-05...........................................31319
571.139 Regulation at 67 FR 69627 and 68 FR 37981 eff. date 
        delayed to 9-1-05..........................................31317
    Heading revised; text amended; eff. 9-1-05.....................31319
571.201 Amended.....................................................9226
    Corrected......................................................54249
571.205 Amended....................................................51191
571.208 Amended.............................................31034, 51604
571.208a Added......................................................3840
571.213 Amended; Figure 12 added...................................10934
    Amended.................................................11340, 13958
    Amended; eff. 1-12-05..........................................42601
571.217 Regulation at 67 FR 19351 and 68 FR 19752 eff. date 
        delayed to 4-21-06.........................................11815
571.225 Amended....................................................48823
571.301 Amended..............................................6583, 51398
571.305 Amended....................................................51399
571.403 Amended; eff. 12-27-04.....................................58852
571.404 Amended; eff. 12-27-04.....................................58855
572.160--572.167 (Subpart S) Added; eff. 1-12-05...................42602
573 Authority citation revised.....................................34959
    Actions on petitions...........................................49819
573.1 Revised; eff. 10-21-04.......................................34959
573.6 (c)(8)(ii) revised; eff. 10-21-04............................34959
     (c)(9), (10) and (11) redesignated as (c)(10), (11) and (12); 
new (c)(9) added; eff. 11-12-04....................................50084
573.7 (b)(7) added; eff. 11-12-04..................................50085
573.8 Heading and (a) revised; eff. 10-21-04.......................34959
574 Authority citation corrected...................................51400
574.5 Regulation at 67 FR 69628 and 68 FR 37981 eff. date delayed 
        to 9-1-05..................................................31317
    (d) revised; eff. 9-1-05.......................................31320
    Introductory text correctly amended; (d) correctly revised.....51400
575.6 Regulation at 67 FR 69631 and 68 FR 37981 eff. date delayed 
        to 9-1-05..................................................31317
    (a)(4) introductory text and (5) revised; eff. 9-1-05..........31320
577 Authority citation revised.....................................34959
    Actions on petitions...........................................49819
577.1 Revised; eff. 10-21-04.......................................34959
577.2 Amended; eff. 10-21-04.......................................34959
577.7 (c) and (d) added; eff. 10-21-04.............................34959
577.13 Added; eff. 10-21-04........................................34960
578.6 (a)(1), (2), (c)(2) and (d) revised; eff. 10-28-04...........57866
579.4 (c) amended..................................................20557
579.5 (a) revised..................................................49823
579.28 (b) and (n) revised; eff. 10-28-04..........................57869
586.6 (a)(4) revised...............................................51399
591 Authority citation revised.....................................52092
591.4 Amended......................................................52092
591.5 (f)(2)(ii) amended; (f)(3) and (g) added.....................52092
591.6 (c) revised..................................................52092
591.7 (e) revised..................................................52092
591.8 (d) introductory text, (1), (3) and (6) revised..............52092
591 Appendices A and B amended.....................................52093
592 Authority citation revised.....................................52094
592.4 Amended......................................................52094
592.5 (a)(3), (4), (5), (9), (11), (b), (d), (e) and (f) revised; 
        (h) added..................................................52094
592.6 Revised......................................................52095
592.7 Revised......................................................52098
592.8 (a) and (e) revised; (c) and (d) amended.....................52100
592.9 Revised......................................................52100
593 Appendix A revised.............................................58356

[[Page 1198]]

594.5 (e) 
</pre></body></html>
