<html><body><pre>
[Title 50 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - October 1, 2012 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]



[[Page i]]

          
<R02>
          Title 50

Wildlife and Fisheries


________________________

Part 17 (Sec. Sec.  17.95(c) to 17.95(e))

                         Revised as of October 1, 2012

          Containing a codification of documents of general 
          applicability and future effect

          As of October 1, 2012
                    Published by the Office of the Federal Register 
                    National Archives and Records Administration as a 
                    Special Edition of the Federal Register

[[Page ii]]

          U.S. GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL EDITION NOTICE

          Legal Status and Use of Seals and Logos
          <GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>
          
          The seal of the National Archives and Records Administration 
              (NARA) authenticates the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) as 
              the official codification of Federal regulations established 
              under the Federal Register Act. Under the provisions of 44 
              U.S.C. 1507, the contents of the CFR, a special edition of the 
              Federal Register, shall be judicially noticed. The CFR is 
              prima facie evidence of the original documents published in 
              the Federal Register (44 U.S.C. 1510).

          It is prohibited to use NARA's official seal and the stylized Code 
              of Federal Regulations logo on any republication of this 
              material without the express, written permission of the 
              Archivist of the United States or the Archivist's designee. 
              Any person using NARA's official seals and logos in a manner 
              inconsistent with the provisions of 36 CFR part 1200 is 
              subject to the penalties specified in 18 U.S.C. 506, 701, and 
              1017.

          Use of ISBN Prefix

          This is the Official U.S. Government edition of this publication 
              and is herein identified to certify its authenticity. Use of 
              the 0-16 ISBN prefix is for U.S. Government Printing Office 
              Official Editions only. The Superintendent of Documents of the 
              U.S. Government Printing Office requests that any reprinted 
              edition clearly be labeled as a copy of the authentic work 
              with a new ISBN.

              <GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>
              
          U . S . G O V E R N M E N T P R I N T I N G O F F I C E

          ------------------------------------------------------------------

          U.S. Superintendent of Documents <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Washington, DC 
              20402-0001

          http://bookstore.gpo.gov

          Phone: toll-free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800

[[Page iii]]







As of October 1, 2012

Title 50, Part 17 (Sec.  17.95(c) to the end of Sec.  17.95)

Revised as of October 1, 2011

Is Replaced by

Title 50, Part 17 (Sec.  17.95(c) to Sec.  17.95(e))

and

Title 50, Part 17 (Sec.  17.95(f) to the end of Sec.  17.95)



[[Page v]]




<R02>
                            Table of Contents


<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................     vii

  Title 50:
          Chapter I--United States Fish and Wildlife Service, 
          Department of the Interior (Continued)                     3
  Finding Aids:
      Table of CFR Titles and Chapters........................     837
      Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR......     857
      List of CFR Sections Affected...........................     867

[[Page vi]]





                     ----------------------------

                     Cite this Code: CFR
                     To cite the regulations in 
                       this volume use title, 
                       part and section number. 
                       Thus, 50 CFR 17.95 refers 
                       to title 50, part 17, 
                       section 95.

                     ----------------------------

[[Page vii]]



                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1

    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, October 1, 2012), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page viii]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 2001, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, or 1986-2000, published in eleven separate 
volumes. For the period beginning January 1, 2001, a ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

``[RESERVED]'' TERMINOLOGY

    The term ``[Reserved]'' is used as a place holder within the Code of 
Federal Regulations. An agency may add regulatory information at a 
``[Reserved]'' location at any time. Occasionally ``[Reserved]'' is used 
editorially to indicate that a portion of the CFR was left vacant and 
not accidentally dropped due to a printing or computer error.

INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

    What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was 
established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the 
requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring 
to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be 
valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal 
effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as 
if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)). 
This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force 
of law.
    What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the 
Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when 
the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which 
approval is based are:
    (a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of 
material published in the Federal Register.
    (b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent 
necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative 
process.
    (c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for 
publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
    What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If 
you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed as 
an approved incorporation by reference, please contact the agency that 
issued the regulation containing that incorporation. If, after 
contacting the agency, you find the material is not available, please 
notify the Director of the Federal Register, National Archives and 
Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road, College Park, MD 20740-6001, 
or call 202-741-6010.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Authorities 
and Rules. A list of CFR titles, chapters, subchapters, and parts and an 
alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are also included in 
this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.

[[Page ix]]

    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.
    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-741-6000 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road, College Park, MD 
20740-6001 or e-mail fedreg.info@nara.gov.

SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call toll-free, 
866-512-1800, or DC area, 202-512-1800, M-F 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or 
fax your order to 202-512-2104, 24 hours a day. For payment by check, 
write to: US Government Printing Office - New Orders, P.O. Box 979050, 
St. Louis, MO 63197-9000.

ELECTRONIC SERVICES

    The full text of the Code of Federal Regulations, the LSA (List of 
CFR Sections Affected), The United States Government Manual, the Federal 
Register, Public Laws, Public Papers of the Presidents of the United 
States, Compilation of Presidential Documents and the Privacy Act 
Compilation are available in electronic format via www.ofr.gov. For more 
information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government 
Printing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free). E-
mail, gpo@custhelp.com.
    The Office of the Federal Register also offers a free service on the 
National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) World Wide Web 
site for public law numbers, Federal Register finding aids, and related 
information. Connect to NARA's web site at www.archives.gov/federal-
register.

    Charles A. Barth,
    Director,
    Office of the Federal Register.
    October 1, 2012.







[[Page xi]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 50--Fish and Wildlife is composed of thirteen volumes. The 
parts in these volumes are arranged in the following order: Parts 1-16; 
part 17 (17.1 to 17.95(a)), part 17 (17.95(b)), part (17.95(c) to (e)), 
part 17 (17.95(f) to end of 17.95), part 17 (17.96 to 17.98), part 17 
(17.99(a) to 17.99(h)), part 17 (17.99(i) to end of part 17), parts 18-
199, parts 200-227, parts 228-599, parts 600-659, and part 660 to end. 
The first nine volumes consist of parts 1-16, part 17 (17.1 to 
17.95(a)), part 17 (17.95(b)), part 17 (17.95(c) to (e)), part 17 
(17.95(f) to end of 17.95), part 17 (17.96 to 17.98), part 17 (17.99(a) 
to 17.99(h), part 17 (17.99(i) to end of part 17), and parts 18-199 and 
contain the current regulations issued under chapter I--United States 
Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior. The tenth volume 
(parts 200-227) contains the current regulations issued under chapter 
II--the National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration. The eleventh volume (parts 228-599) contains 
the remaining current regulations issued under chapter II--National 
Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, Department of Commerce; and the current regulations 
issued under chapter III--International Fishing and Related Activities, 
chapter IV--Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife Service, 
Department of the Interior and National Marine Fisheries Service, 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
Commerce); Endangered Species Committee regulations; and chapter V--
Marine Mammal Commission. The twelfth and thirteenth volumes (parts 600-
659 and part 660 to end) contain the current regulations issued under 
chapter VI--Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce. The contents of 
these volumes represent all current regulations codified under this 
title of the CFR as of October 1, 2012.

    Alphabetical listings of endangered and threatened wildlife and 
plants appear in Sec. Sec.  17.11 and 17.12.

    The OMB control numbers for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration appear in 15 CFR 902.1.

    For this volume, Cheryl E. Sirofchuck was Chief Editor. The Code of 
Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of 
Michael L. White, assisted by Ann Worley.

[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                    TITLE 50--WILDLIFE AND FISHERIES


<R02>

      (This book contains part 17, Sec. Sec. 17.95(c) to 17.95(e))

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Part

chapter i--United States Fish and Wildlife Service, 
  Department of the Interior (Continued)....................          17

[[Page 3]]


<R02>
 CHAPTER I--UNITED STATES FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE, DEPARTMENT OF THE 
                          INTERIOR (CONTINUED)


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

   SUBCHAPTER B--TAKING, POSSESSION, TRANSPORTATION, SALE, PURCHASE, 
 BARTER, EXPORTATION, AND IMPORTATION OF WILDLIFE AND PLANTS (CONTINUED)
Part                                                                Page
17              Endangered and threatened wildlife and 
                    plants (Continued)......................           5

[[Page 5]]


<R03>
SUBCHAPTER B_TAKING, POSSESSION, TRANSPORTATION, SALE, PURCHASE, BARTER, 
     EXPORTATION, AND IMPORTATION OF WILDLIFE AND PLANTS (CONTINUED)

<R05>


<R03>
PART 17_ENDANGERED AND THREATENED WILDLIFE AND PLANTS (CONTINUED)--
Table of Contents



              Subpart I_Interagency Cooperation (Continued)

Sec.
17.95 Critical habitat--fish and wildlife. (Continued)

    Authority: 16 U.S.C. 1361-1407; 16 U.S.C. 1531-1544; 16 U.S.C. 4201-
4245; Pub. L. 99-625, 100 Stat. 3500; unless otherwise noted.

    Source: 40 FR 44415, Sept. 26, 1975, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
              Subpart I_Interagency Cooperation (Continued)

    Editorial Note: Paragraphs (a)-(b) of Sec. 17.95 appear in 50 Part 
17, Sec. Sec. 17.1 to 17.95(a) and 50 Part 17, Sec. 17.95(b).


<R05>
Sec. 17.95  Critical habitat--fish and wildlife. (Continued)

    (c) Reptiles.

             Culebra Island Giant Anole (Anolis roosevetti)

    Note: No text. Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.051
    
                 Mona Boa (Epicrates monensis monensis)

    Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. Mona Island--entire island.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.052
    
                 American Crocodile (Crocodylus acutus)

    Florida. All land and water within the following boundary: Beginning 
at the easternmost tip of Turkey Point, Dade County, on the coast of 
Biscayne Bay; thence southeastward along a straight line to Christmas 
Point at the southernmost tip of Elliott Key; thence southwestward along 
a line following the shores of the Atlantic Ocean side of Old Rhodes 
Key, Palo Alto Key, Anglefish Key, Key Largo, Plantation Key, Windley 
Key, Upper Matecumbe Key, Lower Matecumbe Key, and Long Key, to the 
westernmost tip of Long Key; thence Northwestward along a straight line 
to the westernmost tip of Middle Cape; thence northward along the shore 
of the Gulf of Mexico to the north side of the mouth of Little Sable 
Creek; thence eastward along a straight line to the northernmost point 
of Nine-Mile Pond; thence northeastward along a straight line to the 
point of beginning.
    Note: No map.

              Monito Gecko (Sphaerodactylus micropithecus)

    Puerto Rico. Isla Monito--entire island.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 6]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.053

                 Mona Ground Iguana (Cyclura stejnegeri)

    Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. Mona Island--entire island.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.054
    
           Coachella Valley Fringe-Toed Lizard (Uma inornata)

    California. Riverside County. S\1/2\ Section 5, SE\1/4\ Section 6, 
E\1/2\ Section 7, all of sections 8 through 11, W\1/2\ Section 12, W\1/
2\ Section 13, all of sections 14 through 16, E\1/2\ Section 17, E\1/
2\NW\1/4\ Section 17, E\1/2\SW\1/4\ Section 17, all of sections 21 
through 26, E\1/2\NW\1/4\, NW\1/4\SE\1/4\, E\1/2\SE\1/4\, NE\1/4\ 
Section 27, all of sections 35 and 36, T4S R6E.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.055
    
                 St. Croix Ground Lizard (Ameiva polops)

    U.S. Virgin Islands. Protestant Cay, roughly defined by the 
coordinates 64[deg]42[min]15[sec] N. and 17[deg]45[min]7.5[sec] W.; and 
Green Cay, roughly defined by the coordinates 67[deg]37[min]30[sec] N. 
and 17[deg]46[min][sec] W.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.056
    
    New Mexican Ridge-Nosed Rattlesnake (Crotalus willardi obscurus)

    New Mexico. Hidalgo County. Elevations between 6,200 feet and 8,532 
feet in Bear, Indian, and Spring Canyons, Animas Mountains.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 7]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.057

         Desert Tortoise--Mojave Population (Gopherus agassizii)

    Index map of approximate locations of critical habitat units 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.059

    California. Areas of land as follows:
    1. Fremont-Kramer Unit. Kern, Los Angeles, and San Bernardino 
Counties. From BLM Maps: Victorville 1978 and Cuddeback Lake 1978. 
(Index map location A).
    Mt. Diablo Meridian: T. 29 S., R. 39 E., secs. 13, 14, 22-26, 35, 
and 36; T. 29 S., R. 40 E., secs. 12-33; T. 29 S., R. 41 E., secs. 7, 8, 
17-20, 27-30, and 32-36; T. 30 S., R. 38 E., secs. 24-26, 35, and 36; T. 
30 S., R. 39 E., secs. 1-36 except secs. 3-5; T. 30 S., R. 40 E., secs. 
4-9 and 13-36 except those portions of secs. 13, 14, and 23 lying 
northwesterly of the Randsburg-Mojave Road; T. 30 S., R. 41 E., secs. 1-
36 except secs. 5-8 and 20 and those portions of secs. 17 and 18 lying 
easterly of U.S. Hwy. 395; T. 30 S., R. 42 E., secs. 7-10, 15-22, and 
27-34; T. 31 S., R. 40 E., secs. 1 and 6 except that portion of sec. 6 
lying southeasterly of the Randsburg-Mojave Road; T. 31 S., R. 41 E., 
secs. 1-17, 20-29, and 32-36 except those portions of secs. 20, 29 and 
32 lying westerly of U.S. Hwy. 395; T. 31 S., R. 42 E., secs. 3-10, 15-
22, and 27-34; T. 32 S., R. 41 E., secs. 1-4, 9-16, 21-28, and 34-36 
except those portions of secs. 4, 9, 16, 21, 27, 28, and 34 lying 
westerly of U.S. Hwy. 395; T. 32 S., R. 42 E.; T. 32 S., R. 43 E., secs. 
4-9, 16-21, and 28-33.
    San Bernardino Meridian: T. 7 N., R. 5 W., secs. 2-11 and 14-18 
except that portion of sec. 18 lying west of U.S. Hwy. 395; T. 7 N., R. 
6 W., secs. 1-6, 12, and 13 except those portions of secs. 1, 12, and 13 
lying westerly of U.S. Hwy. 395; T. 7 N., R. 7 W., secs. 1-6; T. 7 N., 
R. 8 W., secs. 1-4; T. 8 N., R. 4 W., secs. 6, 7, and 18; T. 8 N., R. 5 
W., secs. 1-35 except secs. 24 and 25; T. 8 N., R. 6 W.; T. 8 N., R. 7 
W.; T. 8 N., R. 8 W., secs. 1-28, and 33-36; T. 8 N., R. 9 W., secs. 1 
and 7-24; T. 9 N., R. 4 W., secs. 2-11, 14-23, 30, and 31; T. 9 N., R. 5 
W.; T. 9 N., R. 6 W.; T. 9 N., R. 7 W., secs. 1-4, 9-16, and 19-36; T. 9 
N., R. 8 W., secs. 24, 25, and 31-36; T. 9 N., R. 9 W., sec. 36; T. 10 
N., R. 4 W., secs. 6, 7, 18-20, and 29-34; T. 10 N., R. 5 W.; T. 10 N., 
R. 6 W., secs. 1-36 except sec. 6; T. 10 N., R. 7 W., secs. 9-16, 21-28, 
and 33-36; T. 11 N., R. 5 W., secs. 2-11, 14-23, and 26-35; T. 11 N., R. 
6 W., secs. 1-36 except those portions of secs. 6, 7, 18, 19, 30, and 31 
lying westerly of U.S. Hwy. 395; T. 11 N., R. 7 W., that portion of sec. 
1 lying easterly U.S. Hwy. 395; T. 12 N., R. 5 W., secs. 31-35; T. 12 
N., R. 6 W., secs. 31-36; T. 12 N., R. 7 W., that portion of sec. 36 
lying easterly of U.S. Hwy. 395.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.060

    2. Superior-Cronese Unit. San Bernardino County. From BLM Maps: 
Cuddeback Lake 1978, Soda Mts. 1978, Victorville 1978, and Newberry 
Springs 1978. (Index map location B).

[[Page 8]]

    Mt. Diablo Meridian: T. 29 S., R. 42 E., secs. 35 and 36; T. 29 S., 
R. 43 E., secs. 25, 26, and 31-36; T. 29 S., R. 44 E., secs. 20-36; T. 
29 S., R. 45 E., secs. 14-16, 19-23, and 25-36; T. 29 S., R. 46 E., 
secs. 30-32; T. 30 S., R. 42 E., secs. 1, 2, 11-14, 23-26, 35, and 36; 
T. 30 S., R. 43 E.; T. 30 S., R. 44 E.; T. 30 S., R. 45 E.; T. 30 S., R. 
46 E., secs. 3-36; T. 30 S., R. 47 E., secs. 7-10, 15-22, and 27-34; T. 
31 S., R. 42 E., secs. 1, 2, 11-14, 23-26, 35, and 36; T. 31 S., R. 43 
E.; T. 31 S., R. 44 E.; T. 31 S., R. 45 E.; T. 31 S., R. 46 E.; T. 31 
S., R. 47 E., secs. 3-10, 15-22, and 27-34; T. 32 S., R. 43 E., secs. 1-
3, 10-15, 22-27, and 34-36; T. 32 S., R. 44 E.; T. 32 S., R. 45 E.; T. 
32 S., R. 46 E.; T. 32 S., R. 47 E., secs. 3-10, 15-22, and 27-34.
    San Bernardino Meridian: T. 9 N., R. 1 W., those portions of secs. 1 
and 2 lying northerly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 9 N., R. 1 E., that 
portion of sec. 6 lying northerly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 10 N., R. 2 
W., secs. 1-29; T. 10 N., R. 1 W., secs. 1-28, 30, and 33-36 except 
those portions of secs. 33-35 lying southwesterly of Interstate Hwy. 15; 
T. 10 N., R. 1 E., secs. 18, 19, 30, and 31; T. 10 N., R. 2 E., secs. 1-
5, 8-17, and 22-34 except those portions of secs. 25, 26, and 34 lying 
southeasterly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 10 N., R. 3 E., secs. 1-12, 14-
21, and 30 except those portions of secs. 11, 12, 14-16, 19-21, and 30 
lying southeasterly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 10 N., R. 4 E., those 
portions of secs. 5-7 lying northwesterly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 11 
N., R. 5 W., secs. 1 and 12; T. 11 N., R. 4 W., secs. 1-7, 9, 11, and 
12; T. 11 N., R. 3 W., secs. 1-18; T. 11 N., R. 2 W.; T. 11 N., R. 1 W.; 
T. 11 N., R. 1 E., secs. 1-31; T. 11 N., R. 2 E., secs. 1-36 except sec. 
31; T. 11 N., R. 3 E.; T. 11 N., R. 4 E., secs. 1-34 except those 
portions of secs. 25, 26, 33, and 34 lying southeasterly of Interstate 
Hwy. 15; T. 11 N., R. 5 E., secs. 1-11 and 15-20 except those portions 
of secs. 1, 2, 10, 11, 15-17, 19, and 20 lying southeasterly of 
Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 12 N., R. 5 W., sec. 36; T. 12 N., R. 4 W., secs. 
31-36; T. 12 N., R. 3 W., secs. 31-36; T. 12 N., R. 2 W., secs. 31-36; 
T. 12 N., R. 1 W., secs. 31-36; T. 12 N., R. 1 E.; T. 12 N., R. 2 E., 
secs. 3-36; T. 12 N., R. 3 E., secs. 7-36; T. 12 N., R. 4 E., secs. 7-
36; T. 12 N., R. 5 E., secs. 1-5 and 7-36; T. 12 N., R. 6 E., secs. 5-9, 
15-22, and 27-34 except those portions of secs. 31-34 lying southerly of 
Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 13 N., R. 1 E.; T. 13 N., R. 2 E., secs. 19 and 
29-34; T. 13 N., R. 5 E., secs. 26-28 and 32-36; T. 14 N., R. 1 E., 
secs. 5-10, 15-23, and 24-36.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.061

    3. Ord-Rodman Unit. San Bernardino County. From BLM Maps: Newberry 
Springs 1978 and Victorville 1978. (Index map location C).
    San Bernardino Meridian: T. 6 N., R. 1 E., secs. 1-6, 10-15, 22-27, 
and 34-36; T. 6 N., R. 2 E., secs. 1-11, 14-22, and 28-33; T. 7 N., R. 1 
W., secs. 1-4, 9-15, 22-26, 35, and 36 except those portions of secs. 4, 
9, 10, 15, 22, 23, 26, and 35 lying southwesterly of State Hwy. 247; T. 
7 N., R. 1 E.; T. 7 N., R. 2 E.; T. 7 N., R. 3 E.; T. 7 N., R. 4 E.; T. 
7 N., R. 5 E., secs. 4-9 and 17-19 except those portions of secs. 4, 8, 
9, and 17-19 lying southerly of the northern boundary of Twentynine 
Palms Marine Corps Base; T. 8 N., R. 1 W., secs. 1-18, 20-29, and 32-36 
except those portions of secs. 6, 7, 17, 18, 20, 29, 32, and 33 lying 
southwesterly of State Hwy. 247; T. 8 N., R. 1 E.; T. 8 N., R. 2 E., 
secs. 2-36; T. 8 N., R. 3 E., secs. 7 and 18-36; T. 8 N., R. 4 E., secs. 
13-16 and 18-36; T. 8 N., R. 5 E., secs. 16-18, 19-21, 28-30, and 31-33 
except those portions of secs. 16 and 17 lying northerly of Interstate 
Hwy. 40; T. 8 N., R. 6 E., secs. 18-21 and 27-36 except those portions 
of secs. 18-21, 27, 28, 34, and 35 lying northerly of Interstate Hwy. 
40; T. 9 N., R. 1 W., secs. 19, 20, and 25-36 except those portions of 
secs. 19, 20, and 29-31 lying westerly of State Hwy. 247; T. 9 N., R. 1 
E., secs. 25-36 except those portions of secs. 25-27 lying northerly of 
Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 9 N., R. 2 E., secs. 27-35 except those portions 
of secs. 27-30 lying northerly of Interstate Hwy. 40.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.062


[[Page 9]]


    4. Chuckwalla Unit. Imperial and Riverside Counties. From BLM Maps: 
Chuckwalla <greek-i>18 1978, Parker-Blythe <greek-i>16 1978, Salton Sea 
<greek-i>20 1978, and Midway Well <greek-i>21 1979. (Index map location 
D).
    San Bernardino Meridian: T. 3 S., R. 13 E., secs. 19-21 and 27-35; 
T. 4 S., R. 8 E., secs. 1-6, 8-16, 22-26, and 36; T. 4 S., R. 9 E., 
secs. 6-10, and 15-36; T. 4 S., R. 10 E., secs. 19-21, and 27-34; T. 4 
S., R. 13 E., secs. 2-36 except secs. 12 and 13; T. 4 S., R. 14 E., 
secs. 27-36; T. 4 S., R. 15 E., secs. 31 and 32; T. 5 S., R. 9 E., secs. 
1-4, 12, 13, and 24; T. 5 S., R. 10 E., secs. 2-36 except sec. 31; T. 5 
S., R. 11 E., secs. 19-21 and 28-33; T. 5 S., R. 12 E., sec. 36; T. 5 
S., R. 13 E., secs. 1-36 except secs. 6 and 7; T. 5 S., R. 14 E.; T. 5 
S., R. 15 E., secs. 4-9, 16-21, 25, S \1/2\ sec. 26, S \1/2\ sec. 27, 
and secs. 28-36; T. 5 S., R. 16 E., secs. 28-35; T. 6 S., R. 10 E., 
secs. 1-4, 9-16, 21-26, 35 and 36; T. 6 S., R. 11 E., secs. 4-36; T. 6 
S., R. 12 E.; T. 6 S., R. 13 E.; T. 6 S., R. 14 E.; T. 6 S., R. 15 E.; 
T. 6 S., R. 16 E.; T. 6 S., R. 17 E., secs. 5-9, and 14-36; T. 6 S., R. 
18 E., secs. 29-36; T. 6 S., R. 19 E., secs. 31-36; T. 6 S., R. 20 E., 
secs. 31-34; T. 7 S., R. 11 E., sec. 1; T. 7 S., R. 12 E., secs. 1-6, 9-
15, and 23-25; T. 7 S., R. 13 E., secs. 1-30 and 31-36; T. 7 S., R. 14 
E.; T. 7 S., R. 15 E.; T. 7 S., R. 16 E.; T. 7 S., R. 17 E.; T. 7 S., R. 
18 E.; T. 7 S., R. 19 E.; T. 7 S., R. 20 E., secs. 3-10, 14-23, and 26-
35; T. 8 S., R. 13 E., secs. 1, 2, and 11-14; T. 8 S., R. 14 E., secs. 
1-18, and secs. 21-26; T. 8 S., R. 15 E., secs. 1-30 and 34-36; T. 8 S., 
R. 16 E.; T. 8 S., R. 17 E.; T. 8 S., R. 18 E.; T. 8 S., R. 19 E.; T. 8 
S., R. 20 E., secs. 3-10, 15-22, and 28-33; T. 9 S., R. 15 E., sec. 1; 
T. 9 S., R. 16 E., secs. 1-17, 20-29, and 32-36; T. 9 S., R. 17 E.; T. 9 
S., R. 18 E.; T. 9 S., R. 19 E.; T. 9 S., R. 20 E., secs. 5-8, 17-20, 
and 29-33; T. 10 S., R. 16 E., secs. 1-5, 9-16, and 22-26; T. 10 S., R. 
17 E.; T. 10 S., R. 18 E.; T. 10 S., R. 19 E.; T. 10 S., R. 20 E., secs. 
3-36; T. 10 S., R. 21 E., secs. 18-21 and 28-34; T. 10 \1/2\ S., R. 21 
E., secs. 31-33; T. 11 S., R. 17 E., secs. 1-5 and 8-15; T. 11 S., R. 18 
E., secs. 1-24; T. 11 S., R. 19 E., secs. 1-26, 35, and 36; T. 11 S., R. 
20 E., secs. 1-23 and 26-34; T. 11 S., R. 21 E., secs. 4-8; T. 12 S., R. 
19 E., secs. 1, 2, 11-14, 23-26, 35, and 36; T. 12 S., R. 20 E., secs. 
3-10, 15-22, and 27-34; T. 13 S., R. 19 E., secs. 1, 2, 11, 12, 22-27, 
and 34-36; T. 13 S., R. 20 E., secs. 3-10, 14-23, and 26-34.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.063

    5. Pinto Mountain Unit. Riverside and San Bernardino Counties. From 
BLM Maps: Yucca Valley 1982, Sheep Hole Mountains 1978, Chuckwalla 1978, 
and Palm Springs <greek-i>17 1978. (Index map location E).
    San Bernardino Meridian: T. 1 S., R. 9 E., secs. 10-15, 24, 25, and 
36; T. 1 S., R. 10 E., secs. 7-36; T. 1 S., R. 11 E., secs. 7-36; T. 1 
S., R. 12 E., secs. 7-36 except sec. 12; T. 1 S., R. 13 E., secs. 13-36; 
T. 1 S., R. 14 E., secs. 13-32; T. 1 S., R. 15 E., secs. 13-30 and 36; 
T. 1 S., R. 16 E., secs. 18, 19, and 30-32; T. 2 S., R. 9 E., secs. 1, 
12, and 13; T. 2 S., R. 10 E., secs. 1-24; T. 2 S., R. 11 E., secs. 1-
24; T. 2 S., R. 12 E., secs. 1-22 except sec. 13; T. 2 S., R. 13 E., 
secs. 3-6; T. 2 S., R. 15 E., sec. 1; T. 2 S., R. 16 E., secs. 4-9, 16, 
17, 20, 21, 28, 29, 32, and 33; T. 3 S., R. 16 E., secs. 4, 5, 8, and 9.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.064

    6. Chemehuevi Unit. San Bernardino County. From BLM Maps: Sheep Hole 
Mts. 1978, Parker 1979, Needles 1978, and Amboy 1991. (Index map 
location F).
    San Bernardino Meridian: T. 1 S., R. 22 E., those portions of secs. 
3-5 lying northwesterly of the Atchison Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad; T. 
1 S., R. 23 E., those portions of secs. 1-3 lying northerly of the 
Atchison Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad except that portion of sec. 1 
lying easterly of U.S. Hwy. 95; T. 1 N., R. 22 E., secs. 1-4, 9-16, 20-
29, and 32-36 except those portions of secs. 34-36 lying southerly of 
the Atchison Topeka and Santa

[[Page 10]]

Fe Railroad; T. 1 N., R. 23 E., secs. 1-36 except those portions of 
secs. 31-34 lying southerly of Atchison Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad; T. 
1 N., R. 24 E., secs. 4-9, 16-21, and 29-31; T. 2 N., R. 18 E., secs. 1-
5, and 9-14; T. 2 N., R. 19 E., secs. 2-10, and 16-18; T. 2 N., R. 22 
E., secs. 1-5, 8-16, 21-28, and 33-36; T. 2 N., R. 23 E., secs. 5-8, 17-
21, and 26-36; T. 2 N., R. 24 E., secs. 31 and 32; T. 3 N., R. 17 E., 
secs. 12, 13, 24, and 25; T. 3 N., R. 18 E.; T. 3 N., R. 19 E., secs. 1-
35; T. 3 N., R. 20 E., secs. 5-8, 18, and 19; T. 3 N., R. 21 E., secs. 
1-5, 9-16, 23, and 24; T. 3 N., R. 22 E., secs. 1-36 except sec. 31; T. 
3 N., R. 23 E., secs. 2-11, 14-22, and 28-32; T. 4 N., R. 18 E., secs. 
1, 2, 10-15, 21-28, and 32-36; T. 4 N., R. 19 E.; T. 4 N., R. 20 E., 
secs. 1-12, 16-20, and 29-32; T. 4 N., R. 21 E., secs. 1-17, 20-29, and 
32-36; T. 4 N., R. 22 E.; T. 4 N., R. 23 E., secs. 1-35; T. 4 N., R. 24 
E., Secs 6, 7, 18, and 19; T. 5 N., R. 15 E., secs. 1-6; T. 5 N., R. 16 
E., secs. 4-6; T. 5 N., R. 18 E., secs. 1-6, 8-17, 22-26, 35, and 36; T. 
5 N., R. 19 E.; T. 5 N., R. 20 E.; T. 5 N., R. 21 E.; T. 5 N., R. 22 E., 
secs. 2-36; (Unsurveyed) T. 5 N., R. 23 E., protracted secs. 19, and 29-
33; T. 6 N., R. 14 E., secs. 1-3, 10-15, and 23-25; T. 6 N., R. 15 E.; 
T. 6 N., R. 16 E., secs. 1-23, and 27-34; T. 6 N., R. 17 E., secs. 1-18, 
22-26, and 36; T. 6 N., R. 18 E.; T. 6 N., R. 19 E.; T. 6 N., R. 20 E.; 
T. 6 N., R. 21 E.; T. 6 N., R. 22 E., secs. 3-10, 15-23, and 26-35; T. 7 
N., R. 14 E., secs. 1-5, 8-17, 21-28, and 33-36; T. 7 N., R. 15 E.; T. 7 
N., R. 16 E.; T. 7 N., R. 17 E.; T. 7 N., R. 18 E.; T. 7 N., R. 19 E.; 
T. 7 N., R. 20 E.; T. 7 N., R. 21 E.; T. 7 N., R. 22 E., secs. 18-20, 
and 28-34; T. 8 N., R. 14 E., secs. 13, 23-28, and 31-36 except those 
portions of secs. 13, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 31, 32, and 33 lying 
northwesterly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 8 N., R. 15 E., secs. 9-36 
except those portions of secs. 9-12, 17, and 18 lying northwesterly of 
Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 8 N., R. 16 E., secs. 1, 2, and 7-36 except those 
portions of secs. 1, 2, and 7-10 and 11 lying northerly of Interstate 
Hwy. 40; T. 8 N., R. 17 E., secs. 1-36 except those portions of secs. 1-
6 lying northerly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 8 N., R. 18 E., secs. 1-36 
except that portion of sec. 6 lying northerly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 
8 N., R. 19 E.; T. 8 N., R. 20 E.; T. 8 N., R. 21 E., secs. 7, 17-21, 
and 27-35; T. 9 N., R. 18 E., those portions of secs. 31-36 lying 
southerly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 9 N., R. 19 E., secs. 23-29 and 31-
36 except those portions of secs. 23, 24, 26-29, 31, and 32 lying 
northerly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 9 N., R. 20 E., secs. 19, 20, and 
29-33 except those portions of secs. 19 and 20 lying northerly of 
Interstate Hwy. 40 and S\1/2\ S\1/2\ sec. 27, SW\1/4\ SW\1/4\ sec. 26, 
and W\1/2\ W\1/2\ sec. 35.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.065

    7. Ivanpah Unit. San Bernardino County. From BLM Maps: Amboy 1991, 
Ivanpah 1979, and Mesquite Lake 1990. (Index map location G).
    San Bernardino Meridian: T. 9 N., R. 12 E., secs. 1, 2, 11-14, and 
24; T. 9 N., R. 13 E., secs. 4-9, 16-21, and 28-30; T. 10 N., R. 12 E., 
secs. 25, 35, and 36; T. 10 N., R. 13 E., secs. 3-10, 16-21, and 28-33; 
T. 11 N., R. 12 E., secs. 1, 12, 13, 24, 25, and 36; T. 11 N., R. 13 E., 
secs. 1-12, 15-21, and 28-33; T. 11 N., R. 14 E., sec. 6; T. 12 N., R. 
11 E., secs. 1-5 and 9-15; T. 12 N., R. 12 E., secs. 1-18, 21-27, 35, 
and 36; T. 12 N., R. 13 E.; T. 12 N., R. 14 E., secs. 4-9, 16-21, and 
29-32; T. 13 N., R. 10 E., secs. 1-5, 10-14, 24, and 25; T. 13 N., R. 11 
E.; T. 13 N., R. 12 E.; T. 13 N., R. 13 E.; T. 13 N., R. 14 E., secs. 3-
9, 16-21, and 28-33; T. 14 N., R. 9 E., secs. 1, 12, 13, and 24; T. 14 
N., R. 10 E.; (Unsurveyed) T. 14 N., R. 11 E., Protracted secs. 1-35; T. 
14 N., R. 11 E., sec. 36; T. 14 N., R. 12 E.; T. 14 N., R. 13 E.; T. 14 
N., R. 14 E., secs. 1-5, 8-17, and 19-35; T. 14 N., R. 15 E., secs. 1-
12, and 14-22; T. 14 N., R. 16 E., sec. 6; T. 15 N., R. 9 E., secs. 24, 
25, and 36; T. 15 N., R. 10 E., secs. 1-36 except sec. 6; T. 15 N., R. 
11 E.; T. 15 N., R. 12 E.; T. 15 N., R. 13 E., secs. 3-11 and 14-36; T. 
15 N., R. 14 E., secs. 12, 13, 23-28, and 33-36; T. 15 N., R. 15 E.; T. 
15 N., R. 16 E., secs. 1-11, 14-22, and 28-33; T. 15\1/2\ N., R. 14 E., 
secs. 24 and 25; T. 15\1/2\ N., R. 15 E., secs. 19-36; T. 15\1/2\ N., R. 
16 E., secs. 19-35; T. 16 N., R. 10 E., secs. 25, 35, and 36; T. 16 N., 
R. 11 E.; T. 16 N., R. 12 E.; T. 16 N., R. 12\1/2\ E., secs. 12, 13, 24, 
25, and 36; T. 16 N., R. 13 E., secs. 7, 17-20, and 29-33; T. 16 N., R. 
14 E., secs. 24, 25, 35, and 36 except those portions of secs. 24 and 35 
lying northwesterly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 16 N., R. 15 E., secs. 1-
3, 10-14, and 23-36; T. 16 N., R. 16 E., secs. 6-8, 16-22, and 26-36; T. 
17 N., R. 11 E., secs. 1-5, 8-17, 20-29, and 31-36; T. 17 N., R. 12 E., 
secs. 3-10, 14-23, and 26-36; T. 18 N., R. 11 E., secs. 13, 14, 22-28, 
and 33-36; T. 18 N., R. 12 E., secs. 18-20, and 28-33.

[[Page 11]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.066

    8. Piute-Eldorado Unit. San Bernardino County. From BLM Maps: Amboy 
1991, Needles 1978, and Ivanpah 1979. (Index map location H).
    San Bernardino Meridian: T. 8 N., R. 14 E., secs. 1-4, 8-17, 19-24, 
26-30, 32, and 33 except those portions of secs. 13, 23, 24, 26-28, 32, 
and 33 lying southeasterly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 8 N., R. 15 E., 
secs. 1-12, 17, and 18 except those portions of secs. 1, 8-12, 17, and 
18 lying southeasterly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 8 N., R. 16 E., secs. 
1-10 except those portions of sections 1-3 and 6-10 lying southerly of 
Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 8 N., R. 17 E., those portions of secs. 1-6 lying 
northerly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 9 N., R. 14 E., secs. 1-3, 10-15, 
22-28, and 33-36; T. 9 N., R. 15 E.; T. 9 N., R. 16 E.; T. 9 N., R. 17 
E., secs. 1-36 except that portion of sec. 36 lying southerly of 
Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 9 N., R. 18 E., secs. 1-36 except those portions 
of secs. 31-36 lying southerly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 9 N., R. 19 E., 
secs. 1-24 and 26-32 except those portions of secs. 26-29, 31, and 32 
lying southerly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 9 N., R. 20 E., secs. 3-8 and 
17-20 except those portions of secs. 19 and 20 lying southerly of 
Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 10 N., R. 14 E., secs. 11-14, 22-27, and 34-36; 
T. 10 N., R. 15 E., secs. 1-3, 9-16, and 18-36; T. 10 N., R. 16 E.; T. 
10 N., R. 17 E.; T. 10 N., R. 18 E.; T. 10 N., R. 19 E.; T. 10 N., R. 20 
E.; T. 10 N., R. 21 E., secs. 3-10, 15-22, and 28-31; T. 11 N., R. 15 
E., secs. 9, 15, 16, 21, 22, 25-29, and 33-36; T. 11 N., R. 16 E., secs. 
9, 15, 16, 21-23, 25-28, 31, and 33-36; T. 11 N., R. 17 E., secs. 8, 12-
17, and 19-36; T. 11 N., R. 18 E., secs. 1-4 and 7-36; T. 11 N., R. 19 
E., secs. 1-13, 18, 19, 23-27, and 29-36; T. 11 N., R. 20 E., secs. 1-
11, 14-23, and 26-35; T. 12 N., R. 19 E.; T. 12 N., R. 20 E., secs. 3-11 
and 13-36; T. 12 N., R. 21 E., secs. 19, 30, and 31; T. 13 N., R. 19 E., 
secs. 3-11 and 13-36; T. 13 N., R. 20 E., secs. 19 and 29-33; T. 14 N., 
R. 19 E., secs. 19 and 29-33.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.067

    Nevada. Areas of land as follows:
    9. Piute-Eldorado Unit. Clark County. From BLM Maps: Mesquite Lake 
1990, Boulder City 1978, Ivanpah 1979, and Davis Dam 1979. (Index map 
location H).
    Mt. Diablo Meridian: T. 23 S., R. 64 E., secs. 31-36 except that 
portion of sec. 31 lying northwesterly of the powerline and also except 
those portions of secs. 34-36 lying northeasterly of the powerline; T. 
23 \1/2\ S., R. 64 E., secs. 31-36 except that portion of sec. 31 lying 
northwesterly of the powerline; T. 23 \1/2\ S., R. 65 E., that portion 
of sec. 31 lying southwesterly of the powerline; T. 24 S., R. 63 E., 
secs. 1, 2, 11-15, 22-28, and 33-36 except those portions of secs. 1, 2, 
11, 14, and 15 lying northwesterly of the powerline and those portions 
of secs. 22, 27, 28, and 33 lying northwesterly of U.S. Hwy. 95; T. 24 
S., R. 64 E.; T. 24 S., R. 65 E., secs. 6, 7, 18, 19, 30, and 31; T. 25 
S., R. 61 E., secs. 13-15, E \1/2\ sec. 16, E \1/2\ sec. 21, secs. 22-
27, E \1/2\ sec. 28, secs. 35 and 36; T. 25 S., R. 62 E., secs. 4-9, and 
secs. 16-36; T. 25 S., R. 63 E., secs. 1-4, 9-16, and 19-36 except those 
portions of secs. 4, 9, and 16 lying northwesterly of U.S. Hwy. 95; T. 
25 S., R. 64 E., secs. 1-35 except secs. 13, 24, and 25,; T. 25 S. R. 65 
E., sec. 6; T. 26 S., R. 61 E., secs. 1, 2, 11-14, 24, 25, and 36; T. 26 
S., R. 62 E., secs. 1-36 except secs. 28 and 33; T. 26 S., R. 63 E., 
secs. 2-36 except sec. 12; T. 26 S., R. 64 E., secs. 18-20, and 29-33; 
T. 27 S., R. 62 E., secs. 1-3, 5-8, 10-15, 22-26, 35, and 36; T. 27 S., 
R. 62 \1/2\ E., secs. 1, 12, 13, 24, 25, and 36; T. 27 S., R. 63 E.; T. 
27 S., R. 64 E., secs. 4-9, 16-21, and 26-36; T. 27 S., R. 65 E., secs. 
31-35; T. 28 S., R. 62 E., secs. 1-3, 9-16, 21-28, and 33-36; T. 28 S., 
R. 63 E., secs. 1-20, and 29-32; T. 28 S., R. 64 E., secs. 1-18, 21-26, 
35, and 36; T. 28 S., R. 65 E., secs. 2-11, 14-21, and 28-35; T. 29 S., 
R. 62 E., secs. 1-4, 9-16, 21-28, 34, 35 and 36; T. 29 S., R. 63 E., 
secs. 5-10, 15-23, and 26-36; T. 29 S., R. 64 E., secs. 1-3, 9-16, 21-
28, and 31-36; T. 29 S., R. 65 E., secs. 2-36 except secs. 12 and 13; T. 
29 S., R. 66 E., secs. 30-32; T. 30 S., R. 62 E., secs. 1, 2, and 11-14; 
T. 30 S., R. 63 E., secs. 1-36 except secs. 30 and 31; T. 30 S., R. 64 
E.; T. 30 S., R. 65 E., secs. 1-26, 30, 31, 35, and 36; T. 30 S., R. 66 
E., secs. 4-9, 16-21, and 28-33; T. 31

[[Page 12]]

S., R. 63 E., secs. 1-5, 8-16, 22-26, and 36; T. 31 S., R. 64 E.; T. 31 
S., R. 65 E., secs. 1, 2, 6, 11-14, and 23-36 except that portion of 
sec. 36 lying southwesterly of State Hwy. 163; T. 31 S., R. 66 E., secs. 
3-10, 15-22, and 27-34 except that portion of sec. 31 lying 
southwesterly of State Hwy. 163; T. 32 S., R. 64 E., secs. 1-6, 8-16, 
22-26, and 36; T. 32 S., R. 65 E., secs. 1-12, 17-20, and 29-32 except 
those portions of secs. 1 and 9-12 lying southeasterly or easterly of 
State Hwy. 163; T. 32 S., R. 66 E., those portions of secs. 3-6 lying 
northerly of State Hwy. 163; T. 33 S., R. 65 E., sec. 5.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.068

    10. Mormon Mesa Unit. Clark and Lincoln Counties. From BLM Maps: 
Pahranagat 1978, Clover Mts. 1978, Overton 1978, Indian Springs 1979, 
Lake Mead 1979, and Las Vegas 1986. (Index map location I).
    Mt. Diablo Meridian: T. 9 S., R. 62 E., secs. 13-15, 22-27, and 34-
36 except those portions of secs. 15, 22, 27, and 34 lying westerly of 
the easterly boundary line of the Desert National Wildlife Range; T. 9 
S., R. 63 E., secs. 18, 19, 30, and 31; T. 10 S., R. 62 E., secs. 1, 2, 
11-14, 23-25, and 36 except those portions of secs. 14, 23, 35, and 36 
lying westerly of the easterly boundary line of the Desert National 
Wildlife Range; T. 10 S., R. 63 E., secs. 6, 7, 13-15, 18-20, and 22-36; 
T. 10 S., R. 64 E., secs. 13-24 and 26-34; T. 10 S., R. 65 E., secs. 18, 
and 19; T. 11 S., R. 62 E., that portion of sec. 1 lying easterly of the 
easterly boundary line of the Desert National Wildlife Range; T. 11 S., 
R. 63 E.; T. 11 S., R. 64 E., secs. 4-9, 17-20, 30, and 31; T. 11 S., R. 
66 E., secs. 31-36; T. 12 S., R. 63 E.; T. 12 S., R. 64 E., secs. 6, 7, 
and 25-36; T. 12 S., R. 65 E., secs. 1, 12, 13, and 24-36 except those 
portions of secs. 1, 2, 13, and 24 lying westerly of Union Pacific 
Railroad; T. 12 S., R. 66 E.; T. 12 S., R. 67 E., secs. 6-8, 16-22, and 
27-33; T. 12 S., R. 68 E., secs. 23-29 and 31-36; T. 12 S., R. 69 E., 
secs. 1-5, 8-17, and 19-36; T. 12\1/2\ S., R. 62 E., that portion of 
sec. 36 lying easterly of the easterly boundary line of the Desert 
National Wildlife Range; T. 13 S., R. 62 E., those portions of secs. 1, 
12, 13, 24, and 25 lying easterly of the easterly line of the Desert 
National Wildlife Range; T. 13 S., R. 63 E.; T. 13 S., R. 64 E.; T. 13 
S., R. 65 E., secs. 1-24, N \1/2\ 26, N \1/2\ 27, N \1/2\ and SW \1/4\ 
sec. 28, 29-32, and W \1/2\ 33; T. 13 S., R. 66 E., secs. 1-26, W \1/2\ 
sec. 27, 35, and 36; T. 13 S., R. 67 E.; T. 13 S., R. 68 E., secs. 1-36 
except those portions of secs. 25 and 33-36 lying southeasterly of 
Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 13 S., R. 69 E., secs. 1-30 except those portions 
of secs. 25-30 lying southerly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 13 S., R. 70 
E., secs. 6, 7, 18, 19, 30, and 31 except those portions of secs. 30 and 
31 lying southerly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 13\1/2\ S., R. 63 E., secs. 
31-36; T. 13\1/2\ S., R. 64 E., secs. 31-36 except that portion of sec. 
36 lying southwesterly of State Hwy. 168; T. 14 S., R. 63 E., secs. 1-
23, and 26-35; T. 14 S., R. 64 E., secs. 2-6, 8-11, 15, and 16; T. 14 
S., R. 66 E., secs. 1, E \1/2\ sec. 2, 12, E \1/2\ sec. 13, and E \1/2\ 
sec. 24; T. 14 S., R. 67 E., secs. 1-12 and 14-22 except those portions 
of secs. 12, 14, 15, 21, and 22 lying southerly of Interstate Hwy. 15; 
T. 14 S., R. 68 E., those portions of secs. 4-7 lying northwesterly of 
Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 15 S., R. 63 E., secs. 2-11, 14-22, and 27-34; T. 
16 S., R. 63 E., secs. 3-10, 15-22, and 28-33; T. 17 S., R. 63 E., secs. 
7-9, 16-21, and 28-32 except those portions of secs. 29 and 32 lying 
easterly of the westerly boundary line of the Apex Disposal Road; T. 18 
S., R. 63 E., secs. 5-8, 17-19, and 29-31 except those portions of secs. 
5, 8, 17-19, and 29-31 lying easterly of the westerly boundary line of 
the Apex Disposal Road and that portion of sec. 31 lying westerly of the 
easterly boundary line of Desert National Wildlife Range.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.069

    11. Gold Butte-Pakoon Unit. Clark County. From BLM Maps: Overton 
1978 and Lake Mead 1979. (Index map location J).

[[Page 13]]

    Mt. Diablo Meridian: T. 13 S., R. 71 E., secs. 32-34; T. 14 S., R. 
69 E., secs. 24-26, and 34-36; T. 14 S., R. 70 E., secs. 1, and 10-36; 
T. 14 S., R. 71 E., secs. 3-10, 15-22, and 27-34; T. 15 S., R. 69 E., 
secs. 1-3, 9-16, 21-28, and 33-36; T. 15 S., R. 70 E., secs. 2-11, 15-
22, and 28-33; T. 16 S., R. 69 E., secs. 1-36 except secs. 6, 7, and 29-
32; T. 16 S., R. 70 E., secs. 4-36 except sec. 12; T. 16 S., R. 71 E., 
secs. 19, and 29-32; T. 17 S., R. 69 E., secs. 1-3, 11-14, 24, 25, and 
36; T. 17 S., R. 70 E.; T. 17 S., R. 71 E., secs. 4-10, 15-22, and 27-
34; T. 18 S., R. 69 E., sec. 1; T. 18 S., R. 70 E., secs. 1-6, 10-15, 
22-27, and 34-36; T. 18 S., R. 71 E., secs. 3-10, 15-22, and 27-34; T. 
19 S., R. 71 E., secs. 3, 4, 9, 10, 15, 16, 21, 22, 27, 28, 33 and 34; 
T. 20 S., R. 71 E., secs. 3 and 4.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.070

    12. Beaver Dam Slope Unit. Lincoln County. From BLM Maps: Clover 
Mountains 1978 and Overton 1978. (Index map location K).
    Mt. Diablo Meridian: T. 8 1/2 S., R. 71 E., that portion of sec. 34 
lying south of a westerly extension of the north line of sec. 26, T. 41 
S., R. 20 W. (Salt Lake Meridian), Washington County, Utah; T. 9 S., R. 
71 E., secs. 3, 10, 15-17, 20-22, 27-29, and 32-34; T. 10 S., R. 70 E., 
secs. 19-36; T. 10 S., R. 71 E., secs. 3-5, 7-10, 15-22, and 27-34; T. 
11 S., R. 70 E.; T. 11 S., R. 71 E., secs. 3-10, 15-22, and 27-34; T. 12 
S., R. 70 E., secs. 1-12, 14-23, and 28-33; T. 12 S., R. 71 E., secs. 3-
10.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.071

    Utah. Areas of land as follows:
    13. Beaver Dam Slope Unit. Washington County. From BLM Maps: St. 
George 1980 and Clover Mts. 1978. (Index map location K).
    Salt Lake Meridian: T. 40 S., R. 19 W., S 1/2 sec. 28, S 1/2 sec. 
29, S 1/2 sec. 31, secs. 32 and 33; T. 41 S., R. 19 W., S 1/2 sec. 2, S 
1/2 sec. 3, secs. 4, 5, 6, E 1/2 sec. 7, secs. 8-11, 15-17, E 1/2 sec. 
18, and secs. 19-22, and 28-33; T. 41 S., R. 20 W., E 1/2 sec. 1, secs. 
24-26, 35, and 36; T. 42 S., R. 19 W., secs. 4-9, 16-22, and 27-34; T. 
42 S., R. 20 W., secs. 1, 2, 11-14, 23-26, 35, and 36; T. 43 S., R. 18 
W., secs. 7, 8, S 1/2 sec. 16, secs. 17-21, and 27-34; T. 43 S., R. 19 
W., secs. 1-36 except N 1/2 sec. 1; T. 43 S., R. 20 W., secs. 1, 2, 11-
14, 23-26, 35, and 36.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.072

    14. Upper Virgin River Unit. Washington County. From BLM Map: St. 
George 1980. (Index map location L).
    Salt Lake Meridian: T. 41 S., R. 13 W., secs. 17-21 except NW 1/4 NW 
1/4 sec. 18, also W 1/2 and W 1/2 E 1/2 sec. 27, sec. 28 except that 
portion lying westerly of Gould Wash, N 1/2 sec. 29, N 1/2 sec. 30, N 1/
2 N 1/2 sec. 33 except that portion lying westerly of Gould Wash, and N 
1/2 NW 1/4 and NW 1/4 NE 1/4 sec. 34; T. 41 S., R. 14 W., S 1/2 S 1/2 
and NE 1/4 SE 1/4 and SE 1/4 NE 1/4 sec. 13, that portion of sec. 14 
lying westerly of Red Cliff Road, secs. 15-

[[Page 14]]

17 except N 1/2 NW 1/4 and SW 1/4 NW 1/4 sec. 17, secs. 19-22, that 
portion of sec. 23 lying westerly of Red Cliff Road and westerly of 
Interstate Hwy. 15, sec. 24, E 1/2 and N 1/2 SE 1/4 and SW 1/4 SE 1/4 
sec. 25, and those portions of secs. 26, 27, and 32-34 lying 
northwesterly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 41 S., R. 15 W., secs. 14, 19, 
20, and 22-36; T. 41 S., R. 16 W., secs. 4, 9, 10, S 1/2 sec. 14, 15-16, 
19, 21, W 1/2 sec. 22, secs. 24-25 except W 1/2 SW 1/4 sec. 24 and W 1/2 
NW 1/4 and NW 1/4 SW 1/4 sec. 25, and W 1/2 W 1/2 sec. 25, SW 1/4 NE 1/4 
and NW 1/4 NW 1/4 and S 1/2 NW 1/4 and SW 1/4 and W 1/2 SE 1/4 sec. 27, 
E 1/2 and E 1/2 W 1/2 and NW 1/4 NW 1/4 and SW 1/4 SW 1/4 sec. 28, N 1/2 
and SE 1/4 and E 1/2 SW 1/4 sec. 30, NE 1/4 sec. 31, N 1/2 sec. 32, N 1/
2 and SE 1/4 and N 1/2 SW 1/4 sec. 33, sec. 34, SE 1/4 SE 1/4 and that 
portion of sec. 35 lying westerly of State Hwy. 18, and sec. 36; T. 41 
S., R. 17 W., secs. 9, 14-16, NE 1/4 sec. 21, N 1/2 sec. 22, NW 1/4 and 
E 1/2 sec. 23, sec. 24, and NE 1/4 sec. 25; T. 42 S., R. 14 W., those 
portions of secs. 5 and 6 lying northwesterly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 
42 S., R. 15 W., sec. 1, N 1/2 and N 1/2 S 1/2 sec. 2, NE 1/4 and W 1/2 
sec. 3, secs. 4-9, W 1/2 W 1/2 sec. 10, N 1/2 N 1/2 sec. 12, secs. 16-
18, N 1/2 and N 1/2 SE 1/4 and NE 1/4 SW 1/4 sec. 19, and W 1/2 NW 1/4 
and NW 1/4 SW 1/4 sec. 20, except those portions of secs. 1 and 12 lying 
southeasterly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 42 S., R. 16 W., secs. 1-2, NW 
1/4 and E 1/2 sec. 3, NE 1/4 NE 1/4 sec. 4, NE 1/4 sec. 10, NW 1/4 and E 
1/2 sec. 11-12, E 1/2 and NW 1/4 and N 1/2 SW 1/4 sec. 13 except that 
portion lying westerly of State Hwy. 18, and N 1/2 NE 1/4 sec. 24.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.073

    Arizona. Areas of land as follows:
    15. Beaver Dam Slope Unit. Mohave County. From BLM Maps: Overton 
1978 and Littlefield 1987. (Index map location K).
    Gila and Salt River Meridian: T. 41 N., R. 14 W., secs. 6, 7, 18, 
and 19; T. 41 N., R. 15 W., secs. 1-24, 26-28, 30, and 31; T. 41 N., R. 
16 W., secs. 1-5, 8-17, 20-29, and 32-36; T. 42 N., R. 14 W., sec. 31; 
T. 42 N., R. 15 W., secs. 31-36; T. 42 N., R. 16 W., secs. 32-36.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.074

    16. Gold Butte-Pakoon Unit. Mohave County. From BLM Maps: Overton 
1978, Littlefield 1987, Mount Trumbull 1986, and Lake Mead 1979. (Index 
map location J).
    Gila and Salt River Meridian: T. 32 N., R. 15 W., secs. 1-18 except 
those portions of secs. 13-18 lying south of the Lake Mead National 
Recreation area boundary line; T. 32 N., R. 16 W., secs. 1, 2, 12, and 
13; T. 32 1/2 N., R. 15 W., secs. 31-36; T. 32 1/2 N., R. 16 W., secs. 
35 and 36; T. 33 N., R. 14 W., secs. 4-8, 18, 19, and 28-31; T. 33 N., 
R. 15 W.; T. 33 N., R. 16 W., secs. 1-14, 17-20, 23-26, 29-32, 35, and 
36; T. 34 N., R. 14 W., secs. 4-9, 17-19, 30, 31, 33, and 34; T. 34 N., 
R. 15 W.; T. 34 N., R. 16 W.; T. 35 N., R. 14 W., secs. 3-9, 16-22, and 
28-35 ; T. 35 N., R. 15 W.; T. 35 N., R. 16 W.; T. 36 N., R. 14 W., 
secs. 2-11, 14-22, and 27-34; T. 36 N., R. 15 W.; T. 36 N., R. 16 W., 
secs. 1-36 except secs. 4-9; T. 37 N., R. 14 W., secs. 15, 22, 27, 31, 
and 33-35; T. 37 N., R. 15 W., secs. 5, 8, 17-22, and 27-36; T. 37 N., 
R. 16 W., sec. 35; T. 38 N., R. 15 W., sec. 6; T. 38 N., R. 16 W., secs. 
1-12 and 14-22; T. 39 N., R. 15 W., secs. 2-10, 16-21, and 29-32; T. 39 
N., R. 16 W., secs. 1, 12, 13, 20, 23-29, and 32-36; T. 40 N., R. 14 W., 
sec. 6; T. 40 N., R. 15 W., secs. 1, 10-15, and 21-36.

[[Page 15]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.075

    Primary constituent elements: Desert lands that are used or 
potentially used by the desert tortoise for nesting, sheltering, 
foraging, dispersal, or gene flow.

              Hawksbill Sea Turtle (Eretmochelys imbricata)

    Puerto Rico: (1) Isla Mona. All areas of beachfront on the west, 
south, and east sides of the island from mean high tide inland to a 
point 150 meters from shore. This includes all 7.2 kilometers of beaches 
on Isla Mona. (2) Culebra Island. The following areas of beachfront on 
the north shore of the island from mean high tide inland to a point 150 
meters from shore: Playa Resaca, Playa Brava, and Playa Larga. (3) Cayo 
Norte. South beach, from mean high tide inland to a point 150 meters 
from shore. (4) Isla Culebrita. All beachfront areas on the southwest 
facing shore, east facing shore, and northwest facing shore of the 
island from mean high tide inland to a point 150 meters from shore.
    Note: Maps follow.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.076
    
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.077
    
              Leatherback Sea Turtle (Dermochelys coriacea)

    U.S. Virgin Islands--A strip of land 0.2 mile wide (from mean high 
tide inland) at Sandy Point Beach on the western end of the island of 
St. Croix beginning at the southwest cape to the south and running 1.2 
miles northwest and then northeast along the western and northern 
shoreline, and from the southwest cape 0.7 mile east along the southern 
shoreline.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.078
    
       Plymouth Red-Bellied Turtle (Chrysemys rubriventris bangsi)

    Massachusetts (Plymouth County).

    An area including Briggs Reservoir, Cooks Pond, Little South Pond, 
South Triangle Pond, Great South Pond, Powderhorn Pond,

[[Page 16]]

Boat Pond, Hoyte Pond, Gunners Exchange Pond, Crooked Pond and Island 
Pond as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of the 
right-of-way of the Boston Edison and New Bedford Gas and Edison Light 
Company transmission lines and the westerly right-of-way line of Long 
Pond Road, thence southeasterly, along the westerly right-of-way line of 
Long Pond Road, 10,370 feet to the intersection of the said right-of-way 
line and the boundary line of the Myles Standish State Forest; thence 
southerly and westerly, along the boundary line of the Myles Standish 
State Forest, crossing and re-crossing Snake Hill Road, 11,200 feet, 
more or less; thence westerly, leaving the boundary line of the State 
Forest, 1,550 feet, more or less, to the boundary line of the Myles 
Standish State Forest; thence westerly, along the boundary line of the 
Myles Standish State Forest, 9,180 feet, more or less, to the 
intersection of the boundary of the said State Forest and the easterly 
right-of-way line of the Algonquin Gas Transmission Company pipeline; 
thence northerly, along the easterly right-of-way line of the said 
pipeline, 6,223 feet, more or less, to the intersection of the easterly 
right-of-way line of the said pipeline and the northerly right-of-way 
line of Kings Pond Plain Road; thence northeasterly, along the northerly 
right-of-way line of said road 3,100 feet to a point; thence northerly, 
800 feet, more or less, to the southerly right-of-way line of the Boston 
Edison and new Bedford Gas and Edison Light Company transmission lines; 
thence northwesterly, along the southerly right-of-way base of the said 
transmission lines, 4,150 feet, more or less, to the intersection of the 
southerly right-of-way line of the said transmission lines and the 
easterly right-of-way line of the Algonquin Gas Transmission Company 
pipeline; thence northerly, along the easterly right-of-way line of the 
said pipeline, 2,500 feet, more or less, to the intersection of the 
easterly right-of-way line of the said pipeline and the southerly right-
of-way line of Black Cat Road; thence southeasterly, along the southerly 
right-of-way line of said road, crossing South Pond Road and continuing 
southeasterly, along the southerly right-of-way line of an unnamed road, 
10,370 feet, more or less, to a point; thence southerly 2,300 feet, more 
or less, to the northerly right-of-way line of the Boston Edison and New 
Bedford Gas and Edison Light Company transmission lines, thence 
easterly, along the northerly right-of-way line of the said transmission 
lines, 1,300 feet, more or less, to the intersection of the northerly 
right-of-way line of the said transmission lines and the westerly right-
of-way line of Long Pond Road; thence southerly, along the westerly 
right-of-way line of said road, 100 feet, more or less, the place of 
beginning.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.079
    
          Alameda Whipsnake (Masticophis lateralis euryxanthus)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Alameda, Contra Costa, 
San Joaquin, and Santa Clara counties, California, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements (PCEs) of critical habitat for 
the Alameda whipsnake (Masticophis lateralis euryxanthus) are the 
habitat components that provide:
    (i) Scrub/shrub communities with a mosaic of open and closed canopy: 
Scrub/shrub vegetation dominated by low- to medium-stature woody shrubs 
with a mosaic of open and closed canopy, as characterized by the 
chamise, chamise-eastwood manzanita, chaparral whitethorn, and interior 
live oak shrub vegetation series occurring at elevations from sea level 
to approximately 3,850 feet (1,170 meters). Such scrub/shrub vegetation 
within these series form a pattern of open and closed canopy used by the 
Alameda whipsnake for shelter from predators; temperature regulation, 
because it provides sunny and shady locations; prey-viewing 
opportunities; and nesting habitat and substrate. These features 
contribute to support a prey base consisting of western fence lizards 
and other prey species such as skinks, frogs, snakes, and birds.
    (ii) Woodland or annual grassland plant communities contiguous to 
lands containing PCE 1: Woodland or annual grassland vegetation series 
comprised of one or more of the following: Blue oak, coast live oak, 
California bay, California buckeye, and California annual grassland 
vegetation series. This mosaic of vegetation supports a prey base 
consisting of western fence lizards and other prey species such as 
skinks, frogs, snakes,

[[Page 17]]

and birds, and provides opportunities for: Foraging, by allowing snakes 
to come in contact with and visualize, track, and capture prey 
(especially western fence lizards, along with other prey such as skinks, 
frogs, birds); short and long distance dispersal within, between, or 
adjacent to areas containing essential features (i.e., PCE 1 or PCE 3); 
and contact with other Alameda whipsnakes for mating and reproduction.
    (iii) Lands containing rock outcrops, talus, and small mammal 
burrows. These areas are used for retreats (shelter), hibernacula, 
foraging, and dispersal, and provide additional prey population support 
functions.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures existing on 
the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements, such as buildings, aqueducts, airports, 
and roads, and the land on which such structures are located.

                       Critical Habitat Unit Maps

    (4) GIS data layers defining map units were created on a base of 
USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles, and critical habitat units were then mapped 
using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates.
    (5) Note: Index map (Map 1) follows:

[[Page 18]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02OC06.000

    (6) Unit 1: Tilden-Briones Unit, Alameda and Contra Costa Counties, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Benecia, Richmond, Briones 
Valley, Walnut Creek. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 
coordinates (E, N): 559589, 4200848; 559600, 4200866; 559610, 4200873; 
559622, 4200883; 559668, 4200910; 559710, 4200940; 559715, 4200943; 
559727, 4200952; 559753, 4200969; 559781, 4200994; 559806, 4201021; 
559817, 4201037; 559840,

[[Page 19]]

4201073; 559850, 4201093; 559874, 4201113; 559878, 4201115; 559895, 
4201123; 559909, 4201130; 559929, 4201135; 559955, 4201148; 560009, 
4201170; 560047, 4201192; 560059, 4201212; 560058, 4201230; 560055, 
4201250; 560049, 4201289; 560047, 4201306; 560041, 4201332; 560035, 
4201363; 560029, 4201381; 560024, 4201403; 560018, 4201432; 560016, 
4201456; 560009, 4201486; 560008, 4201508; 560027, 4201518; 560061, 
4201509; 560277, 4201575; 560304, 4201584; 560308, 4201587; 560316, 
4201583; 560411, 4201602; 560673, 4201602; 560694, 4201602; 560784, 
4201604; 560794, 4201635; 560795, 4201674; 560794, 4201701; 560795, 
4201737; 560793, 4201770; 560784, 4201808; 560789, 4201847; 560781, 
4201888; 560778, 4201912; 560787, 4201944; 560802, 4201953; 560814, 
4201960; 560827, 4201961; 560841, 4201962; 560859, 4201967; 560885, 
4201957; 560924, 4201964; 560963, 4201972; 561010, 4201974; 561046, 
4201975; 561085, 4201974; 561112, 4201969; 561131, 4201962; 561143, 
4201941; 561158, 4201908; 561162, 4201880; 561176, 4201857; 561200, 
4201847; 561244, 4201832; 561286, 4201830; 561337, 4201830; 561384, 
4201835; 561422, 4201840; 561464, 4201835; 561497, 4201814; 561518, 
4201778; 561523, 4201757; 561522, 4201714; 561523, 4201670; 561535, 
4201628; 561567, 4201583; 561633, 4201578; 561664, 4201585; 561676, 
4201599; 561698, 4201630; 561743, 4201673; 561773, 4201694; 561793, 
4201727; 561809, 4201771; 561825, 4201815; 561840, 4201826; 561863, 
4201820; 561892, 4201798; 561922, 4201775; 561950, 4201759; 561983, 
4201753; 562031, 4201743; 562087, 4201741; 562142, 4201740; 562201, 
4201735; 562251, 4201731; 562327, 4201726; 562402, 4201715; 562451, 
4201695; 562483, 4201684; 562515, 4201676; 562520, 4201673; 562524, 
4201668; 562648, 4201533; 562609, 4201434; 562618, 4201405; 562618, 
4201401; 562629, 4201363; 562660, 4201340; 562698, 4201311; 562741, 
4201294; 562778, 4201281; 562820, 4201273; 562852, 4201262; 562877, 
4201265; 562892, 4201277; 562923, 4201298; 562949, 4201336; 562974, 
4201369; 563001, 4201384; 563007, 4201373; 563208, 4201106; 563205, 
4201067; 563205, 4201065; 563161, 4201021; 563142, 4200970; 563186, 
4200952; 563142, 4200832; 563139, 4200818; 563123, 4200790; 563125, 
4200770; 563146, 4200742; 563162, 4200718; 563186, 4200699; 563215, 
4200696; 563243, 4200706; 563272, 4200721; 563288, 4200746; 563308, 
4200752; 563332, 4200763; 563376, 4200779; 563421, 4200784; 563442, 
4200782; 563501, 4200700; 563552, 4200705; 563575, 4200685; 563598, 
4200656; 563709, 4200752; 563829, 4200743; 564014, 4200365; 564039, 
4200383; 564043, 4200372; 564054, 4200336; 564087, 4200298; 564131, 
4200262; 564176, 4200238; 564206, 4200230; 564240, 4200230; 564288, 
4200239; 564318, 4200251; 564348, 4200269; 564383, 4200299; 564422, 
4200330; 564466, 4200350; 564498, 4200363; 564540, 4200391; 564575, 
4200417; 564612, 4200445; 564623, 4200459; 564628, 4200460; 564628, 
4200465; 564626, 4200508; 564625, 4200550; 564601, 4200580; 564489, 
4200581; 564471, 4200581; 564471, 4200584; 564477, 4200616; 564487, 
4200636; 564471, 4200649; 564475, 4200653; 564528, 4200688; 564593, 
4200648; 564634, 4200740; 564648, 4200799; 564514, 4200855; 564437, 
4200917; 564365, 4200985; 564332, 4201032; 564294, 4201014; 564285, 
4201011; 564265, 4201031; 564236, 4201060; 564207, 4201086; 564224, 
4201161; 564184, 4201193; 564147, 4201209; 564148, 4201210; 564178, 
4201233; 564210, 4201259; 564246, 4201295; 564274, 4201321; 564316, 
4201359; 564319, 4201361; 564442, 4201318; 564455, 4201349; 564461, 
4201348; 564501, 4201340; 564549, 4201331; 564564, 4201357; 564567, 
4201388; 564566, 4201432; 564555, 4201478; 564531, 4201503; 564495, 
4201540; 564480, 4201553; 564654, 4201564; 564602, 4201626; 564638, 
4201649; 564692, 4201649; 564764, 4201721; 564810, 4201767; 564900, 
4201803; 564973, 4201957; 565036, 4202002; 565145, 4201993; 565263, 
4202011; 565354, 4202038; 565390, 4201984; 565444, 4201984; 565535, 
4201921; 565616, 4201757; 565689, 4201739; 565707, 4201776; 565761, 
4201748; 565807, 4201767; 565825, 4201803; 565916, 4201839; 565943, 
4201739; 565861, 4201667; 565816, 4201585; 565816, 4201522; 565897, 
4201576; 566015, 4201603; 566079, 4201522; 566197, 4201495; 566287, 
4201513; 566323, 4201540; 566396, 4201549; 566441, 4201612; 566423, 
4201694; 566378, 4201803; 566342, 4201893; 566278, 4201975; 566233, 
4202066; 566224, 4202093; 566242, 4202183; 566251, 4202256; 566414, 
4202156; 566421, 4202175; 566459, 4202274; 566532, 4202637; 566577, 
4203099; 566668, 4203507; 567592, 4204522; 568182, 4205111; 568472, 
4205447; 568476, 4205455; 568831, 4206130; 568847, 4206125; 568875, 
4206127; 568906, 4206134; 568926, 4206141; 568939, 4206151; 568947, 
4206174; 568941, 4206195; 568937, 4206225; 568932, 4206254; 568928, 
4206288; 568927, 4206308; 568925, 4206339; 568921, 4206370; 568913, 
4206408; 568910, 4206442; 568899, 4206491; 568895, 4206528; 568900, 
4206560; 568915, 4206578; 568948, 4206582; 568959, 4206575; 568975, 
4206565; 568998, 4206552; 569027, 4206533; 569052, 4206513; 569089, 
4206488; 569127, 4206468; 569163, 4206457; 569207, 4206436; 569241, 
4206414; 569271, 4206411; 569306, 4206389; 569333, 4206380; 569376, 
4206378; 569391, 4206415; 569400, 4206433; 569400, 4206513; 569403, 
4206596; 569397, 4206647; 569375, 4206689; 569320, 4206753; 569275, 
4206791; 569231, 4206839; 569195, 4206859; 569173, 4206878; 569173, 
4206904; 569224, 4206929; 569269, 4206942; 569317, 4206952; 569368, 
4206958; 569439, 4206971; 569512, 4206993; 569560, 4207000; 569653, 
4207009; 569717, 4207019; 569781, 4207019; 569826, 4207028; 569839, 
4207044; 569861, 4207055; 569880, 4207074; 569899, 4207089; 569928, 
4207115; 569965, 4207146; 570045, 4207198; 570111, 4207248; 570172, 
4207285; 570215, 4207316; 570262, 4207355; 570304, 4207381; 570355, 
4207412; 570424, 4207449; 570451, 4207464; 570507, 4207492; 570534, 
4207505; 570605, 4207531; 570687, 4207563; 570733, 4207594; 570760, 
4207613; 570788, 4207630; 570820, 4207650; 570850, 4207667; 570868, 
4207677; 570918, 4207695; 570966, 4207705; 571001, 4207706; 571057, 
4207695; 571070, 4207694; 571112, 4207711; 571145, 4207731; 571159, 
4207740; 571170, 4207748; 571214, 4207783; 571248, 4207829; 571264, 
4207848; 571286, 4207865; 571309, 4207875; 571370, 4207888; 571421, 
4207892; 571456, 4207896; 571497, 4207895; 571550, 4207894; 571617, 
4207896; 571671, 4207893; 571706, 4207895; 571744, 4207892; 571777, 
4207886; 571811, 4207880; 571860, 4207871; 571900, 4207859; 571961, 
4207836; 571997, 4207824; 572010, 4207821; 572096, 4207796; 572124, 
4207776; 572155, 4207742; 572185, 4207709; 572219, 4207674; 572245, 
4207647; 572261, 4207633; 572291, 4207609; 572309, 4207594; 572318, 
4207585; 572336, 4207561; 572350, 4207536; 572369, 4207506; 572385, 
4207476; 572402, 4207449; 572424, 4207421; 572450, 4207395; 572491, 
4207352; 572526, 4207323; 572564, 4207295; 572589, 4207272; 572622, 
4207237; 572641, 4207215; 572666,

[[Page 20]]

4207187; 572699, 4207151; 572733, 4207112; 572768, 4207070; 572791, 
4207041; 572815, 4207014; 572831, 4206995; 572845, 4206979; 572858, 
4206959; 572864, 4206944; 572878, 4206912; 572881, 4206900; 572897, 
4206859; 572909, 4206820; 572924, 4206769; 572934, 4206708; 572945, 
4206655; 572950, 4206603; 572952, 4206576; 572955, 4206545; 572957, 
4206510; 572963, 4206472; 572969, 4206440; 572976, 4206417; 572987, 
4206395; 573004, 4206355; 573022, 4206317; 573043, 4206272; 573057, 
4206243; 573073, 4206211; 573094, 4206178; 573116, 4206145; 573133, 
4206121; 573147, 4206103; 573180, 4206076; 573205, 4206061; 573239, 
4206048; 573264, 4206043; 573281, 4206042; 573300, 4206040; 573350, 
4206038; 573368, 4206037; 573405, 4206034; 573453, 4206014; 573478, 
4205993; 573511, 4205970; 573542, 4205949; 573613, 4205923; 573679, 
4205909; 573702, 4205901; 573714, 4205898; 573740, 4205895; 573800, 
4205892; 573879, 4205889; 573957, 4205890; 574007, 4205890; 574050, 
4205891; 574081, 4205892; 574182, 4205885; 574218, 4205871; 574272, 
4205858; 574344, 4205841; 574407, 4205826; 574430, 4205822; 574472, 
4205813; 574520, 4205802; 574554, 4205797; 574589, 4205795; 574638, 
4205745; 574687, 4205708; 574737, 4205663; 574789, 4205614; 574835, 
4205564; 574873, 4205508; 574890, 4205463; 574898, 4205445; 574925, 
4205416; 574947, 4205386; 574948, 4205327; 574950, 4205216; 574953, 
4205090; 574988, 4205087; 575042, 4204930; 575062, 4204924; 575111, 
4204861; 575111, 4204836; 575172, 4204793; 575241, 4204764; 575416, 
4204759; 575468, 4204711; 575555, 4204713; 575553, 4204762; 575663, 
4204768; 575768, 4204779; 575854, 4204792; 575859, 4204779; 576227, 
4204939; 576222, 4204952; 576383, 4205009; 576392, 4205002; 576402, 
4204994; 576413, 4204977; 576471, 4204831; 576517, 4204744; 576518, 
4204744; 576520, 4204737; 576537, 4204692; 576563, 4204635; 576588, 
4204586; 576613, 4204538; 576635, 4204495; 576656, 4204446; 576675, 
4204407; 576700, 4204359; 576724, 4204321; 576743, 4204271; 576754, 
4204241; 576770, 4204197; 576783, 4204152; 576795, 4204097; 576800, 
4204053; 576795, 4204005; 576791, 4203960; 576765, 4203912; 576750, 
4203894; 576765, 4203871; 576573, 4203766; 576477, 4203728; 576427, 
4203685; 576426, 4203684; 576431, 4203680; 576441, 4203672; 576448, 
4203667; 576465, 4203672; 576511, 4203685; 576513, 4203685; 576546, 
4203664; 576700, 4203708; 576700, 4203694; 576699, 4203675; 576712, 
4203673; 576729, 4203671; 576712, 4203531; 576654, 4203432; 576645, 
4203426; 576637, 4203399; 576627, 4203344; 576616, 4203317; 576612, 
4203308; 576609, 4203299; 576608, 4203299; 576585, 4203295; 576559, 
4203305; 576542, 4203296; 576528, 4203277; 576518, 4203265; 576494, 
4203262; 576457, 4203257; 576412, 4203264; 576358, 4203250; 576332, 
4203263; 576215, 4203352; 576217, 4203332; 576218, 4203332; 576218, 
4203330; 576219, 4203319; 576156, 4203317; 576140, 4203316; 576129, 
4203292; 576136, 4203265; 575971, 4203325; 575985, 4203337; 575981, 
4203430; 575812, 4203328; 575812, 4203328; 575813, 4203332; 575793, 
4203351; 575733, 4203379; 575600, 4203414; 575550, 4203365; 575550, 
4203365; 575544, 4203371; 575528, 4203379; 575484, 4203433; 575442, 
4203433; 575406, 4203351; 575400, 4203338; 575394, 4203338; 574863, 
4203334; 574863, 4203334; 574816, 4203333; 574814, 4203317; 574805, 
4203293; 574789, 4203257; 574773, 4203228; 574746, 4203193; 574722, 
4203163; 574695, 4203133; 574665, 4203106; 574677, 4203080; 574665, 
4203035; 574719, 4202955; 574744, 4202888; 574773, 4202784; 574779, 
4202765; 574777, 4202755; 574769, 4202706; 574785, 4202699; 574788, 
4202678; 574793, 4202627; 574798, 4202578; 574803, 4202544; 574446, 
4202541; 574352, 4202580; 574354, 4202445; 574446, 4202434; 574534, 
4202424; 574559, 4202422; 574596, 4202398; 574639, 4202361; 574686, 
4202347; 574749, 4202325; 574734, 4202316; 574700, 4202310; 574679, 
4202319; 574650, 4202325; 574622, 4202340; 574597, 4202348; 574566, 
4202347; 574557, 4202331; 574564, 4202309; 574574, 4202293; 574593, 
4202276; 574623, 4202258; 574654, 4202248; 574684, 4202238; 574706, 
4202226; 574737, 4202205; 574758, 4202188; 574781, 4202170; 574781, 
4202172; 574783, 4202184; 574846, 4202186; 574855, 4202199; 574862, 
4202235; 574877, 4202256; 574927, 4202280; 574933, 4202300; 574974, 
4202269; 574973, 4202239; 574964, 4201505; 575052, 4201535; 575241, 
4201597; 575195, 4201668; 575198, 4201759; 575232, 4201791; 575271, 
4201928; 575242, 4201927; 575276, 4202021; 575534, 4202030; 575603, 
4201994; 575630, 4201998; 575934, 4202051; 576037, 4201903; 575925, 
4201664; 575940, 4201645; 575959, 4201630; 575979, 4201619; 576000, 
4201612; 576024, 4201610; 576038, 4201606; 576045, 4201614; 576066, 
4201544; 576150, 4201518; 576170, 4201561; 576165, 4201595; 576222, 
4201746; 576282, 4201829; 576248, 4201881; 576272, 4201920; 576235, 
4201988; 576323, 4202106; 576390, 4202154; 576421, 4202154; 576452, 
4202128; 576506, 4202156; 576554, 4202156; 576553, 4202325; 576572, 
4202357; 576752, 4202358; 576822, 4202289; 576913, 4202375; 576922, 
4202382; 576934, 4202365; 576961, 4202338; 576988, 4202306; 577016, 
4202282; 577035, 4202279; 577057, 4202280; 577079, 4202300; 577096, 
4202321; 577104, 4202338; 577110, 4202362; 577127, 4202369; 577142, 
4202361; 577143, 4202360; 577165, 4202394; 577276, 4202319; 577286, 
4202312; 577299, 4202332; 577351, 4202409; 577375, 4202446; 577370, 
4202469; 577358, 4202508; 577328, 4202547; 577295, 4202574; 577291, 
4202575; 577261, 4202610; 577272, 4202622; 577191, 4202613; 577186, 
4202604; 577102, 4202647; 577004, 4202699; 576997, 4202698; 576967, 
4202695; 576954, 4202695; 576903, 4202757; 576898, 4202764; 576879, 
4202771; 576865, 4202787; 576861, 4202806; 576863, 4202821; 576864, 
4202822; 576857, 4202826; 576834, 4202850; 576825, 4202860; 576810, 
4202852; 576807, 4202859; 576803, 4202885; 576806, 4202886; 576806, 
4202886; 576795, 4202904; 576806, 4202918; 576804, 4202960; 576824, 
4202960; 576829, 4203023; 576828, 4203083; 576809, 4203080; 576809, 
4203083; 576811, 4203113; 576822, 4203124; 576826, 4203141; 576871, 
4203175; 576875, 4203164; 576875, 4203164; 576876, 4203165; 576897, 
4203150; 576931, 4203258; 576973, 4203390; 576955, 4203427; 576963, 
4203455; 576949, 4203459; 576995, 4203594; 577025, 4203581; 577050, 
4203637; 577032, 4203654; 577085, 4203711; 577062, 4203730; 577063, 
4203731; 577045, 4203748; 577064, 4203768; 577070, 4203780; 577090, 
4203780; 577122, 4203780; 577152, 4203809; 577123, 4203838; 577122, 
4203839; 577126, 4203855; 577126, 4203856; 577128, 4203858; 577130, 
4203871; 577129, 4203872; 577128, 4203872; 577123, 4203886; 577128, 
4203890; 577248, 4203967; 577503, 4204117; 577524, 4204130; 577581, 
4204065; 577547, 4204027; 577516, 4203997; 577478, 4203946; 577496, 
4203906; 577427, 4203867; 577404, 4203859; 577381, 4203855; 577356, 
4203855; 577348, 4203849; 577347, 4203843; 577350, 4203832; 577354, 
4203829; 577370, 4203789; 577398,

[[Page 21]]

4203786; 577468, 4203821; 577544, 4203867; 577613, 4203946; 577628, 
4203963; 577637, 4203955; 577728, 4203834; 577827, 4203697; 577839, 
4203724; 577842, 4203721; 577878, 4203682; 577922, 4203646; 577968, 
4203601; 578004, 4203568; 578032, 4203538; 578036, 4203533; 577989, 
4203469; 578035, 4203421; 578041, 4203420; 578026, 4203410; 577997, 
4203384; 577972, 4203354; 577964, 4203342; 577926, 4203313; 577834, 
4203315; 577836, 4203269; 577888, 4203272; 577940, 4203186; 577956, 
4203244; 577966, 4203246; 578004, 4203264; 578032, 4203296; 578067, 
4203326; 578090, 4203349; 578146, 4203330; 578173, 4203288; 578187, 
4203263; 578199, 4203229; 578202, 4203204; 578222, 4203168; 578242, 
4203139; 578238, 4203134; 578287, 4203060; 578331, 4202980; 578377, 
4203024; 578400, 4203000; 578413, 4203008; 578439, 4202982; 578457, 
4202958; 578472, 4202938; 578479, 4202910; 578463, 4202880; 578446, 
4202864; 578404, 4202846; 578354, 4202821; 578317, 4202804; 578296, 
4202788; 578283, 4202763; 578294, 4202728; 578311, 4202694; 578326, 
4202674; 578342, 4202655; 578380, 4202644; 578420, 4202642; 578455, 
4202648; 578497, 4202651; 578536, 4202658; 578585, 4202686; 578609, 
4202712; 578640, 4202741; 578659, 4202763; 578673, 4202772; 578690, 
4202774; 578708, 4202769; 578735, 4202752; 578755, 4202730; 578782, 
4202696; 578808, 4202675; 578840, 4202679; 578866, 4202692; 578904, 
4202707; 578945, 4202699; 578955, 4202695; 578979, 4202684; 579013, 
4202665; 579036, 4202647; 579053, 4202628; 579077, 4202605; 579074, 
4202582; 579068, 4202577; 579053, 4202561; 579022, 4202548; 578985, 
4202534; 578959, 4202523; 578952, 4202505; 578944, 4202480; 578933, 
4202447; 578907, 4202425; 578880, 4202417; 578843, 4202414; 578797, 
4202416; 578774, 4202415; 578748, 4202413; 578745, 4202394; 578760, 
4202376; 578802, 4202363; 578839, 4202358; 578866, 4202350; 578689, 
4202259; 578647, 4202240; 578514, 4202180; 578556, 4202165; 578418, 
4202044; 578395, 4202016; 578347, 4201956; 578167, 4202075; 578180, 
4202322; 578129, 4202378; 578067, 4202323; 578065, 4202314; 578053, 
4202305; 578040, 4202279; 578030, 4202240; 578016, 4202196; 578006, 
4202168; 577990, 4202146; 577967, 4202130; 577933, 4202116; 577896, 
4202112; 577877, 4202109; 577851, 4202131; 577816, 4202100; 577782, 
4202069; 577749, 4202101; 577564, 4202280; 577529, 4202245; 577485, 
4202199; 577485, 4202199; 577485, 4202198; 577460, 4202173; 577370, 
4202080; 577376, 4202072; 577433, 4202019; 577363, 4201778; 577331, 
4201778; 577332, 4201711; 577396, 4201713; 577394, 4201779; 577428, 
4201779; 577430, 4201779; 577512, 4201779; 577530, 4201779; 577537, 
4201779; 577537, 4201770; 577538, 4201706; 577545, 4201705; 577544, 
4201700; 577540, 4201671; 577542, 4201638; 577541, 4201632; 577538, 
4201611; 577536, 4201564; 577534, 4201530; 577538, 4201529; 577538, 
4201402; 577538, 4201293; 577537, 4201253; 577536, 4201192; 577535, 
4201120; 577534, 4201081; 577536, 4201079; 577534, 4201077; 577533, 
4201030; 577538, 4200585; 577552, 4200594; 577608, 4200632; 577613, 
4200617; 577621, 4200607; 577640, 4200605; 577659, 4200614; 577681, 
4200630; 577705, 4200650; 577728, 4200669; 577767, 4200692; 577786, 
4200702; 577810, 4200710; 577827, 4200701; 577834, 4200697; 577849, 
4200689; 578289, 4200465; 578511, 4200312; 578408, 4200202; 578408, 
4200201; 578384, 4200180; 578284, 4200090; 578248, 4200058; 578332, 
4199980; 578336, 4199979; 578335, 4199978; 578400, 4199934; 578410, 
4199922; 578467, 4199857; 578476, 4199822; 578457, 4199735; 578361, 
4199646; 578289, 4199669; 578237, 4199677; 578204, 4199683; 578151, 
4199678; 578145, 4199661; 578199, 4199638; 578317, 4199588; 578296, 
4199524; 578257, 4199464; 578209, 4199408; 578213, 4199362; 578134, 
4199277; 578107, 4199251; 578080, 4199250; 578043, 4199213; 577984, 
4199186; 578027, 4199158; 578065, 4199194; 578090, 4199182; 578063, 
4199113; 578034, 4199097; 577976, 4199082; 577965, 4199072; 577947, 
4199026; 577934, 4198990; 577989, 4199022; 578085, 4199082; 578120, 
4199131; 578127, 4199141; 578202, 4199253; 578307, 4199384; 578293, 
4199408; 578332, 4199460; 578353, 4199450; 578376, 4199468; 578490, 
4199606; 578558, 4199671; 578548, 4199703; 578627, 4199727; 578664, 
4199697; 578679, 4199663; 578696, 4199653; 578746, 4199655; 578798, 
4199609; 578909, 4199444; 578515, 4199325; 578494, 4199343; 578464, 
4199342; 578443, 4199319; 578444, 4199289; 578465, 4199270; 578318, 
4199132; 578347, 4199129; 578393, 4199102; 578412, 4199086; 578431, 
4199059; 578437, 4199032; 578442, 4199010; 578428, 4198978; 578417, 
4198958; 578414, 4198942; 578402, 4198941; 578203, 4199021; 578194, 
4199011; 578213, 4198971; 578220, 4198933; 578265, 4198888; 578279, 
4198865; 578289, 4198800; 578291, 4198793; 578298, 4198747; 578130, 
4198670; 578107, 4198717; 578107, 4198717; 578063, 4198646; 577915, 
4198592; 577914, 4198585; 577904, 4198580; 577903, 4198581; 577892, 
4198559; 577878, 4198531; 577861, 4198504; 577848, 4198471; 577827, 
4198453; 577815, 4198437; 577799, 4198413; 577796, 4198408; 577864, 
4198261; 577830, 4198271; 577780, 4198264; 577731, 4198288; 577714, 
4198260; 577674, 4198299; 577671, 4198289; 577672, 4198262; 577673, 
4198232; 577679, 4198218; 577680, 4198196; 577686, 4198176; 577686, 
4198160; 577688, 4198146; 577688, 4198118; 577689, 4198097; 577690, 
4198088; 577690, 4198078; 577682, 4198058; 577672, 4198043; 577649, 
4198017; 577622, 4197994; 577589, 4197982; 577556, 4197977; 577556, 
4197951; 577562, 4197928; 577572, 4197905; 577584, 4197874; 577593, 
4197853; 577591, 4197828; 577567, 4197811; 577536, 4197821; 577516, 
4197831; 577515, 4197831; 577516, 4197830; 577508, 4197762; 577429, 
4197762; 577430, 4197756; 577441, 4197730; 577451, 4197711; 577474, 
4197673; 577482, 4197666; 577488, 4197672; 577535, 4197621; 577555, 
4197599; 577613, 4197520; 577653, 4197458; 577684, 4197403; 577722, 
4197348; 577734, 4197239; 577737, 4197211; 577741, 4197160; 577742, 
4197127; 577730, 4197021; 577724, 4196998; 577737, 4196969; 577766, 
4196954; 577768, 4196921; 577735, 4196882; 577708, 4196898; 577708, 
4196898; 577688, 4196910; 577627, 4196905; 577596, 4196918; 577546, 
4196938; 577521, 4196951; 577509, 4196935; 577483, 4196947; 577435, 
4196939; 577460, 4196893; 577412, 4196906; 577402, 4196908; 577399, 
4196911; 577333, 4196950; 577294, 4196957; 577242, 4196987; 577243, 
4196904; 577245, 4196840; 577377, 4196780; 577413, 4196717; 577438, 
4196720; 577539, 4196735; 577571, 4196739; 577621, 4196706; 577720, 
4196591; 577741, 4196567; 577710, 4196462; 577815, 4196397; 577817, 
4196396; 577881, 4196284; 577926, 4196101; 577928, 4196094; 577946, 
4196033; 577878, 4195883; 577945, 4195861; 578135, 4195648; 578135, 
4195648; 578137, 4195644; 578141, 4195630; 578143, 4195624; 578143, 
4195624; 578090, 4195543; 578080, 4195527; 578055, 4195549; 577980, 
4195616; 577981, 4195723; 577981, 4195727; 577961, 4195734; 577958, 
4195735; 577905, 4195718; 577877,

[[Page 22]]

4195669; 577822, 4195567; 577760, 4195614; 577761, 4195616; 577772, 
4195630; 577777, 4195636; 577691, 4195699; 577663, 4195678; 577612, 
4195640; 577578, 4195615; 577329, 4195684; 577312, 4195688; 577246, 
4195707; 577160, 4195731; 577157, 4195732; 577125, 4195731; 577072, 
4195730; 577077, 4195742; 577099, 4195794; 577015, 4195791; 577022, 
4195747; 577019, 4195743; 577017, 4195742; 577026, 4195729; 577008, 
4195728; 576942, 4195727; 576926, 4195727; 576931, 4195700; 576950, 
4195592; 576895, 4195531; 576936, 4195472; 576945, 4195478; 576952, 
4195482; 576961, 4195457; 576950, 4195432; 576946, 4195423; 576949, 
4195401; 576946, 4195383; 576932, 4195362; 576929, 4195344; 576935, 
4195311; 576935, 4195310; 576940, 4195281; 576920, 4195284; 576914, 
4195285; 576861, 4195294; 576813, 4195302; 576803, 4195304; 576757, 
4195323; 576670, 4195356; 576668, 4195357; 576669, 4195358; 576705, 
4195420; 576704, 4195475; 576626, 4195509; 576615, 4195496; 576613, 
4195494; 576580, 4195522; 576594, 4195548; 576538, 4195578; 576499, 
4195511; 576477, 4195438; 576469, 4195413; 576454, 4195412; 576389, 
4195415; 576358, 4195435; 576296, 4195474; 576238, 4195511; 576169, 
4195539; 576170, 4195542; 576170, 4195542; 576090, 4195574; 576020, 
4195551; 575992, 4195558; 575787, 4195668; 575829, 4195785; 575829, 
4195785; 575837, 4195804; 575844, 4195867; 575776, 4195887; 575766, 
4195866; 575745, 4195856; 575707, 4195858; 575653, 4195884; 575639, 
4195878; 575622, 4195870; 575591, 4195870; 575590, 4196115; 575260, 
4196113; 575179, 4196112; 575019, 4196111; 574968, 4196111; 574917, 
4196111; 574872, 4196072; 574860, 4196005; 574704, 4196004; 574702, 
4196110; 574633, 4196109; 574290, 4196108; 574366, 4196205; 574365, 
4196436; 574365, 4196444; 574326, 4196475; 574294, 4196481; 574227, 
4196520; 574173, 4196532; 574112, 4196537; 574000, 4196554; 573946, 
4196599; 573918, 4196596; 573891, 4196576; 573830, 4196635; 573840, 
4196652; 573757, 4196656; 573758, 4196566; 573750, 4196552; 573588, 
4196643; 573365, 4196769; 573237, 4196937; 572967, 4196827; 572909, 
4196822; 572715, 4196763; 572675, 4196764; 572599, 4196749; 572520, 
4196762; 572458, 4196795; 572422, 4196970; 572342, 4197052; 572025, 
4197097; 571893, 4197104; 571721, 4197127; 571489, 4197179; 571327, 
4197231; 571031, 4197288; 571036, 4197334; 570991, 4197340; 570955, 
4197362; 570939, 4197372; 570919, 4197410; 570873, 4197450; 570800, 
4197494; 570797, 4197491; 570794, 4197497; 570737, 4197520; 570687, 
4197495; 570620, 4197478; 570582, 4197421; 570564, 4197372; 570546, 
4197296; 570513, 4197291; 570439, 4197280; 570481, 4197264; 570505, 
4197245; 570540, 4197220; 570529, 4197198; 570492, 4197209; 570433, 
4197226; 570473, 4197138; 570360, 4197057; 570301, 4197053; 570303, 
4197014; 570266, 4196934; 570274, 4196922; 570249, 4196902; 570265, 
4196829; 570235, 4196805; 570245, 4196764; 570265, 4196669; 570265, 
4196627; 570265, 4196568; 570293, 4196500; 570298, 4196498; 570294, 
4196490; 570343, 4196413; 570371, 4196368; 570323, 4196259; 570185, 
4196258; 570186, 4196221; 570182, 4196076; 570191, 4196075; 570447, 
4196078; 570428, 4195831; 570413, 4195618; 570626, 4195533; 570848, 
4195445; 570778, 4195390; 570184, 4194917; 570160, 4194904; 570115, 
4194878; 570071, 4194857; 570058, 4194848; 570056, 4194834; 569756, 
4194603; 569733, 4194586; 569640, 4194514; 569633, 4194514; 569631, 
4194510; 569554, 4194466; 569507, 4194430; 569495, 4194402; 569413, 
4194308; 569257, 4194294; 569224, 4194317; 568839, 4194095; 568798, 
4193986; 568832, 4193941; 568867, 4193955; 568902, 4193912; 568958, 
4193839; 568372, 4193367; 568401, 4193278; 568467, 4193201; 568479, 
4193179; 568497, 4193087; 568500, 4193074; 568535, 4192993; 568652, 
4192885; 568829, 4192725; 568816, 4192719; 568794, 4192710; 568668, 
4192690; 568516, 4192684; 568350, 4192684; 568198, 4192684; 568154, 
4192688; 568059, 4192697; 567874, 4192737; 567735, 4192796; 567596, 
4192862; 567470, 4192915; 567365, 4192955; 567193, 4193015; 567014, 
4193041; 566895, 4193034; 566776, 4192988; 566650, 4192915; 566650, 
4192915; 566627, 4192907; 566624, 4192906; 566624, 4192905; 566624, 
4192905; 566597, 4192895; 566552, 4192888; 566521, 4192917; 566488, 
4192936; 566462, 4192947; 566440, 4192960; 566427, 4192961; 566400, 
4192966; 566374, 4192986; 566356, 4193003; 566343, 4193028; 566329, 
4193054; 566313, 4193082; 566303, 4193114; 566300, 4193137; 566308, 
4193173; 566304, 4193194; 566299, 4193206; 566295, 4193224; 566289, 
4193242; 566272, 4193263; 566264, 4193283; 566257, 4193304; 566244, 
4193328; 566218, 4193353; 566191, 4193372; 566172, 4193392; 566153, 
4193417; 566142, 4193427; 566130, 4193452; 566116, 4193473; 566110, 
4193492; 566107, 4193514; 566107, 4193528; 566135, 4193541; 566161, 
4193552; 566206, 4193554; 566224, 4193561; 566242, 4193562; 566256, 
4193561; 566279, 4193564; 566318, 4193554; 566350, 4193555; 566369, 
4193539; 566383, 4193537; 566412, 4193510; 566443, 4193494; 566492, 
4193479; 566516, 4193476; 566576, 4193472; 566614, 4193469; 566635, 
4193452; 566659, 4193446; 566685, 4193446; 566726, 4193452; 566775, 
4193453; 566815, 4193462; 566865, 4193470; 566882, 4193472; 566928, 
4193481; 566957, 4193473; 566973, 4193477; 566999, 4193498; 567067, 
4193498; 567140, 4193530; 567231, 4193610; 567262, 4193679; 567196, 
4193738; 567112, 4193745; 567064, 4193797; 566998, 4193888; 566914, 
4193947; 566907, 4193947; 566744, 4194028; 566704, 4194054; 566645, 
4194123; 566629, 4194171; 566590, 4194250; 566542, 4194313; 566475, 
4194340; 566430, 4194341; 566357, 4194341; 566306, 4194332; 566236, 
4194326; 566187, 4194311; 566166, 4194288; 566181, 4194263; 566226, 
4194236; 566297, 4194219; 566346, 4194200; 566359, 4194141; 566321, 
4194109; 566219, 4194071; 566123, 4194045; 566121, 4194043; 566085, 
4194028; 566045, 4194009; 566000, 4193982; 565973, 4193974; 565949, 
4193974; 565929, 4193985; 565924, 4194001; 565935, 4194013; 565972, 
4194030; 565986, 4194039; 565987, 4194043; 565994, 4194065; 565999, 
4194093; 565974, 4194197; 565965, 4194189; 565956, 4194186; 565953, 
4194186; 565949, 4194187; 565945, 4194192; 565943, 4194195; 565945, 
4194202; 565948, 4194209; 565948, 4194210; 565950, 4194215; 565949, 
4194231; 565939, 4194249; 565923, 4194263; 565904, 4194273; 565885, 
4194283; 565866, 4194296; 565852, 4194308; 565845, 4194312; 565841, 
4194314; 565831, 4194315; 565821, 4194311; 565811, 4194302; 565798, 
4194289; 565779, 4194291; 565761, 4194300; 565755, 4194322; 565755, 
4194340; 565752, 4194362; 565770, 4194383; 565785, 4194398; 565819, 
4194420; 565866, 4194442; 565891, 4194460; 565919, 4194465; 565958, 
4194462; 565969, 4194455; 565986, 4194446; 566001, 4194440; 566020, 
4194434; 566040, 4194431; 566058, 4194437; 566074, 4194447; 566088, 
4194458; 566099, 4194472; 566109, 4194480; 566121, 4194495; 566126, 
4194508; 566112, 4194521; 566103, 4194532; 566069, 4194560; 566057, 
4194586; 566045, 4194618; 566026,

[[Page 23]]

4194655; 566019, 4194681; 566006, 4194705; 565985, 4194738; 565976, 
4194749; 565920, 4194749; 565872, 4194728; 565854, 4194719; 565832, 
4194719; 565820, 4194726; 565795, 4194734; 565773, 4194719; 565761, 
4194712; 565747, 4194694; 565734, 4194685; 565721, 4194674; 565702, 
4194663; 565686, 4194654; 565668, 4194651; 565650, 4194655; 565637, 
4194648; 565622, 4194645; 565601, 4194642; 565588, 4194640; 565575, 
4194637; 565559, 4194637; 565538, 4194643; 565522, 4194648; 565509, 
4194650; 565472, 4194660; 565458, 4194661; 565442, 4194671; 565435, 
4194687; 565439, 4194719; 565454, 4194754; 565456, 4194779; 565460, 
4194815; 565455, 4194847; 565447, 4194877; 565445, 4194905; 565447, 
4194921; 565447, 4194956; 565448, 4194986; 565456, 4195011; 565466, 
4195024; 565463, 4195042; 565454, 4195052; 565441, 4195063; 565419, 
4195084; 565408, 4195090; 565396, 4195102; 565382, 4195127; 565370, 
4195137; 565359, 4195146; 565343, 4195143; 565325, 4195121; 565306, 
4195101; 565295, 4195090; 565281, 4195074; 565258, 4195057; 565219, 
4195034; 565190, 4195018; 565160, 4195014; 565127, 4195009; 565113, 
4195012; 565081, 4195008; 565051, 4194998; 565029, 4194989; 565013, 
4194970; 564996, 4194953; 564979, 4194948; 564964, 4194951; 564949, 
4194967; 564948, 4194986; 564949, 4195005; 564953, 4195018; 564955, 
4195044; 564957, 4195058; 564951, 4195077; 564942, 4195097; 564931, 
4195114; 564920, 4195131; 564911, 4195141; 564876, 4195174; 564861, 
4195179; 564840, 4195187; 564817, 4195200; 564795, 4195226; 564762, 
4195259; 564738, 4195281; 564712, 4195315; 564683, 4195340; 564665, 
4195356; 564642, 4195375; 564626, 4195391; 564612, 4195406; 564592, 
4195421; 564575, 4195441; 564565, 4195453; 564553, 4195473; 564540, 
4195468; 564532, 4195474; 564512, 4195476; 564481, 4195468; 564449, 
4195463; 564420, 4195458; 564390, 4195452; 564373, 4195446; 564348, 
4195701; 564487, 4195799; 564397, 4195881; 564368, 4195873; 564342, 
4195867; 564314, 4195886; 564283, 4195904; 564263, 4195925; 564253, 
4195948; 564232, 4195968; 564224, 4195980; 564213, 4196012; 564194, 
4196038; 564172, 4196029; 564139, 4196011; 564101, 4195997; 564069, 
4195996; 564028, 4196023; 564005, 4196063; 563978, 4196099; 563970, 
4196131; 563963, 4196161; 563954, 4196194; 563912, 4196245; 563886, 
4196211; 563874, 4196195; 563848, 4196223; 563837, 4196235; 563814, 
4196215; 563672, 4196374; 563668, 4196379; 563374, 4196709; 563398, 
4196736; 563390, 4196745; 563353, 4196786; 563361, 4196794; 563374, 
4196806; 563372, 4196815; 563368, 4196838; 563324, 4196856; 563294, 
4196891; 563274, 4196912; 563271, 4196960; 563277, 4196964; 563271, 
4196972; 563265, 4196984; 563255, 4196996; 563235, 4197007; 563205, 
4197055; 563186, 4197043; 563168, 4197079; 563163, 4197088; 563149, 
4197105; 563120, 4197133; 563107, 4197145; 563084, 4197172; 563077, 
4197184; 563070, 4197195; 563052, 4197180; 563045, 4197174; 563026, 
4197197; 563000, 4197243; 562983, 4197271; 562945, 4197316; 562925, 
4197338; 562792, 4197491; 562755, 4197535; 562721, 4197596; 562710, 
4197616; 562691, 4197651; 562660, 4197663; 562660, 4197668; 562654, 
4197671; 562641, 4197682; 562629, 4197697; 562622, 4197704; 562612, 
4197722; 562597, 4197755; 562582, 4197785; 562563, 4197812; 562545, 
4197821; 562522, 4197832; 562498, 4197840; 562481, 4197843; 562454, 
4197845; 562433, 4197852; 562412, 4197866; 562392, 4197882; 562380, 
4197892; 562385, 4197969; 562334, 4197999; 562316, 4198008; 562286, 
4198022; 562253, 4198072; 562234, 4198106; 562323, 4198187; 562340, 
4198202; 562293, 4198255; 562289, 4198258; 562274, 4198273; 562204, 
4198341; 562172, 4198372; 562161, 4198373; 562136, 4198392; 562126, 
4198391; 562028, 4198432; 561966, 4198470; 561938, 4198488; 561911, 
4198517; 561858, 4198567; 561833, 4198643; 561789, 4198671; 561716, 
4198706; 561475, 4198986; 561222, 4199269; 561229, 4199290; 561241, 
4199326; 561155, 4199391; 561058, 4199464; 561057, 4199464; 561046, 
4199476; 560935, 4199588; 560845, 4199680; 560590, 4199939; 560545, 
4199874; 560535, 4199859; 560524, 4199843; 560513, 4199853; 560435, 
4199926; 560447, 4199939; 560454, 4199946; 560510, 4200002; 560509, 
4200103; 560508, 4200141; 560507, 4200172; 560445, 4200222; 560418, 
4200390; 560502, 4200435; 560502, 4200435; 560499, 4200577; 560482, 
4200603; 560460, 4200629; 560443, 4200647; 560423, 4200667; 560410, 
4200681; 560384, 4200707; 560347, 4200709; 560305, 4200700; 560224, 
4200695; 560218, 4200724; 560170, 4200698; 560075, 4200679; 560070, 
4200609; 560069, 4200592; 560069, 4200590; 560066, 4200591; 560040, 
4200605; 559975, 4200626; 559910, 4200633; 559865, 4200650; 559821, 
4200653; 559787, 4200684; 559678, 4200689; 559675, 4200682; 559668, 
4200687; 559655, 4200696; 559633, 4200718; 559617, 4200742; 559611, 
4200753; 559601, 4200788; 559591, 4200818; returning to 559589, 4200848; 
excluding 565010, 4199872; 564877, 4199656; 564878, 4199620; 564977, 
4199555; 565008, 4199524; 565015, 4199497; 565039, 4199385; 565060, 
4199332; 565083, 4199317; 565156, 4199348; 565189, 4199315; 565220, 
4199264; 565216, 4199173; 565239, 4199148; 565346, 4199105; 565346, 
4199075; 565313, 4199018; 565314, 4198968; 565334, 4198947; 565433, 
4198908; 565464, 4198882; 565468, 4198722; 565491, 4198715; 565518, 
4198776; 565553, 4198817; 565586, 4198822; 565617, 4198789; 565617, 
4198751; 565600, 4198698; 565595, 4198644; 565618, 4198609; 565621, 
4198543; 565650, 4198470; 565653, 4198406; 565638, 4198355; 565646, 
4198330; 565644, 4198198; 565657, 4198193; 565710, 4198201; 565733, 
4198142; 565756, 4198137; 565818, 4198182; 565856, 4198167; 565913, 
4198111; 565931, 4198068; 565969, 4198018; 566006, 4197947; 566008, 
4197922; 566026, 4197914; 566089, 4197714; 566165, 4197710; 566209, 
4197682; 566232, 4197619; 566286, 4197594; 566314, 4197574; 566353, 
4197480; 566381, 4197450; 566534, 4197360; 566570, 4197355; 566628, 
4197381; 566712, 4197390; 566959, 4197351; 566959, 4197318; 566806, 
4197119; 566799, 4197083; 566809, 4197063; 566829, 4197071; 566905, 
4197150; 566968, 4197186; 567067, 4197208; 567087, 4197198; 567115, 
4197155; 567178, 4197018; 567188, 4196978; 567222, 4196940; 567240, 
4196889; 567378, 4196786; 567403, 4196784; 567434, 4196820; 567456, 
4196830; 567487, 4196831; 567494, 4196818; 567495, 4196780; 567462, 
4196731; 567463, 4196698; 567550, 4196610; 567547, 4196600; 567555, 
4196595; 567558, 4196572; 567546, 4196524; 567587, 4196481; 567606, 
4196354; 567621, 4196344; 567669, 4196355; 567697, 4196330; 567718, 
4196276; 567711, 4196256; 567645, 4196238; 567612, 4196214; 567607, 
4196194; 567617, 4196187; 567711, 4196195; 567782, 4196181; 567806, 
4196150; 567827, 4196079; 567809, 4196046; 567809, 4196026; 567891, 
4195978; 567907, 4195940; 567968, 4195918; 568064, 4195911; 568092, 
4195901; 568116, 4195871; 568134, 4195821; 568149, 4195805; 568228, 
4195829; 568253, 4195806; 568289, 4195797; 568333, 4195754; 568376, 
4195739; 568444,

[[Page 24]]

4195740; 568480, 4195722; 568546, 4195746; 568584, 4195716; 568645, 
4195731; 568722, 4195691; 568762, 4195692; 568815, 4195733; 568815, 
4195743; 568830, 4195756; 568914, 4195744; 568968, 4195668; 569004, 
4195628; 569028, 4195567; 569034, 4195453; 569062, 4195441; 569084, 
4195481; 569081, 4195573; 569034, 4195664; 568937, 4195798; 568847, 
4195830; 568749, 4195819; 568713, 4195803; 568677, 4195808; 568639, 
4195841; 568570, 4195855; 568532, 4195880; 568504, 4195885; 568438, 
4195877; 568415, 4195884; 568369, 4195942; 568308, 4195962; 568267, 
4196007; 568241, 4196050; 568185, 4196078; 568164, 4196105; 568163, 
4196194; 568143, 4196225; 568147, 4196311; 568139, 4196326; 568116, 
4196331; 568098, 4196351; 568070, 4196442; 568006, 4196475; 567946, 
4196576; 567895, 4196591; 567877, 4196608; 567877, 4196672; 567904, 
4196718; 567903, 4196845; 567841, 4196981; 567843, 4197027; 567863, 
4197091; 567878, 4197111; 567931, 4197134; 568010, 4197128; 568025, 
4197135; 568026, 4197148; 568027, 4197161; 567994, 4197181; 567862, 
4197169; 567735, 4197153; 567705, 4197163; 567671, 4197196; 567560, 
4197151; 567534, 4197164; 567501, 4197202; 567505, 4197334; 567492, 
4197351; 567418, 4197399; 567400, 4197427; 567405, 4197450; 567468, 
4197473; 567468, 4197516; 567371, 4197520; 567351, 4197533; 567340, 
4197576; 567365, 4197642; 567412, 4197711; 567415, 4197734; 567361, 
4197736; 567241, 4197606; 567205, 4197600; 567182, 4197608; 567182, 
4197638; 567197, 4197676; 567176, 4197765; 567153, 4197788; 567117, 
4197805; 567056, 4197817; 567030, 4197845; 567030, 4197893; 567012, 
4197906; 566989, 4197905; 566951, 4197880; 566936, 4197826; 566909, 
4197790; 566883, 4197790; 566826, 4197907; 566857, 4197950; 566884, 
4198016; 566950, 4198052; 566949, 4198088; 566926, 4198154; 566905, 
4198171; 566860, 4198174; 566811, 4198148; 566749, 4198084; 566642, 
4198088; 566616, 4198115; 566616, 4198146; 566646, 4198179; 566646, 
4198192; 566628, 4198220; 566609, 4198301; 566530, 4198391; 566524, 
4198432; 566562, 4198488; 566578, 4198659; 566555, 4198658; 566505, 
4198635; 566434, 4198556; 566406, 4198560; 566383, 4198581; 566350, 
4198631; 566323, 4198776; 566254, 4198846; 566233, 4198894; 566174, 
4198957; 566168, 4199021; 566137, 4199058; 566109, 4199147; 566110, 
4199254; 566127, 4199312; 566215, 4199501; 566275, 4199593; 566287, 
4199601; 566341, 4199604; 566396, 4199653; 566565, 4199746; 566737, 
4199831; 566760, 4199874; 566841, 4199875; 566828, 4199913; 566833, 
4199961; 566930, 4200163; 566919, 4200201; 566897, 4200196; 566869, 
4200137; 566776, 4200022; 566736, 4200001; 566657, 4200001; 566637, 
4199990; 566592, 4199916; 566562, 4199885; 566519, 4199862; 566372, 
4199812; 566296, 4199802; 566248, 4199753; 566078, 4199749; 565996, 
4199796; 565960, 4199796; 565958, 4199748; 565997, 4199636; 566001, 
4199570; 565971, 4199478; 565891, 4199325; 565871, 4199325; 565807, 
4199370; 565686, 4199435; 565566, 4199576; 565444, 4199631; 565418, 
4199725; 565367, 4199771; 565361, 4199832; 565343, 4199842; 565242, 
4199861; 565165, 4199912; 565125, 4199878; 565094, 4199868; returning to 
565010, 4199872; and excluding 569193, 4197159; 569166, 4197029; 569175, 
4196978; 569248, 4196700; 569266, 4196677; 569414, 4196617; 569568, 
4196517; 569801, 4196306; 569869, 4196304; 569892, 4196317; 569924, 
4196373; 569928, 4196541; 569950, 4196597; 569983, 4196618; 570110, 
4196619; 570145, 4196647; 570153, 4196683; 570142, 4196705; 570096, 
4196756; 570053, 4196771; 569989, 4196765; 569890, 4196784; 569852, 
4196799; 569808, 4196875; 569810, 4196906; 569825, 4196929; 569984, 
4197027; 570007, 4197067; 570026, 4197162; 570054, 4197167; 570092, 
4197152; 570156, 4197145; 570166, 4197155; 570186, 4197222; 570289, 
4197296; 570297, 4197314; 570296, 4197370; 570253, 4197372; 570185, 
4197349; 570106, 4197338; 570086, 4197348; 570060, 4197378; 570060, 
4197406; 570095, 4197459; 570109, 4197515; 570162, 4197574; 570166, 
4197717; 570203, 4197783; 570291, 4197903; 570291, 4197964; 570305, 
4198020; 570341, 4198061; 570399, 4198090; 570467, 4198101; 570533, 
4198101; 570683, 4198069; 570714, 4198039; 570730, 4197999; 570778, 
4197951; 570802, 4197893; 570858, 4197850; 570915, 4197741; 570979, 
4197686; 571068, 4197649; 571112, 4197621; 571143, 4197571; 571296, 
4197514; 571360, 4197476; 571446, 4197447; 571479, 4197444; 571530, 
4197458; 571626, 4197456; 571824, 4197514; 571910, 4197512; 572007, 
4197475; 572137, 4197446; 572188, 4197446; 572370, 4197486; 572418, 
4197512; 572555, 4197536; 572601, 4197508; 572690, 4197542; 572736, 
4197550; 572794, 4197523; 572845, 4197485; 572899, 4197460; 572950, 
4197455; 573062, 4197444; 573115, 4197462; 573125, 4197475; 573112, 
4197493; 573056, 4197494; 572937, 4197496; 572873, 4197518; 572796, 
4197594; 572788, 4197617; 572803, 4197696; 572777, 4197700; 572765, 
4197690; 572730, 4197616; 572661, 4197603; 572626, 4197585; 572593, 
4197579; 572552, 4197599; 572494, 4197599; 572478, 4197609; 572476, 
4197634; 572486, 4197662; 572526, 4197721; 572525, 4197784; 572505, 
4197792; 572492, 4197782; 572427, 4197641; 572418, 4197603; 572397, 
4197580; 572276, 4197574; 572174, 4197532; 572139, 4197550; 572078, 
4197552; 572067, 4197572; 572003, 4197642; 571914, 4197657; 571850, 
4197682; 571810, 4197684; 571777, 4197673; 571675, 4197672; 571660, 
4197690; 571583, 4197702; 571583, 4197776; 571557, 4197775; 571517, 
4197752; 571431, 4197744; 571428, 4197794; 571372, 4197804; 571313, 
4197837; 571186, 4197835; 571130, 4197870; 571084, 4197916; 571076, 
4197933; 571090, 4198033; 571072, 4198050; 570963, 4198098; 570957, 
4198123; 570970, 4198166; 571000, 4198194; 571071, 4198218; 571098, 
4198246; 571121, 4198284; 571120, 4198330; 571108, 4198348; 571041, 
4198380; 571036, 4198398; 571043, 4198444; 571068, 4198513; 571103, 
4198551; 571159, 4198582; 571179, 4198605; 571211, 4198720; 571208, 
4198773; 571187, 4198796; 571154, 4198795; 570986, 4198618; 570917, 
4198620; 570902, 4198595; 570885, 4198534; 570867, 4198513; 570816, 
4198518; 570788, 4198540; 570742, 4198619; 570706, 4198656; 570675, 
4198656; 570676, 4198626; 570702, 4198575; 570702, 4198537; 570692, 
4198527; 570651, 4198516; 570628, 4198526; 570580, 4198574; 570534, 
4198581; 570513, 4198606; 570457, 4198601; 570447, 4198629; 570454, 
4198705; 570430, 4198865; 570340, 4198940; 570315, 4198940; 570307, 
4198894; 570321, 4198808; 570303, 4198589; 570275, 4198541; 570235, 
4198533; 570165, 4198588; 570167, 4198669; 570177, 4198705; 570176, 
4198763; 570158, 4198809; 570138, 4198806; 570118, 4198783; 570071, 
4198658; 570040, 4198648; 569994, 4198688; 569948, 4198705; 569908, 
4198710; 569908, 4198687; 569916, 4198674; 569936, 4198632; 569939, 
4198591; 569932, 4198563; 569872, 4198471; 569872, 4198451; 569943, 
4198431; 569967, 4198396; 569969, 4198357; 569912, 4198301; 569858, 
4198278; 569851, 4198257; 569821, 4198227; 569819, 4198173; 569829, 
4198120; 569718,

[[Page 25]]

4198099; 569692, 4198109; 569597, 4198209; 569398, 4198385; 569349, 
4198461; 569313, 4198461; 569319, 4198412; 569458, 4198188; 569553, 
4198084; 569630, 4197978; 569651, 4197935; 569667, 4197847; 569713, 
4197799; 569698, 4197745; 569676, 4197732; 569622, 4197727; 569553, 
4197759; 569528, 4197759; 569528, 4197731; 569569, 4197665; 569567, 
4197615; 569540, 4197579; 569535, 4197551; 569589, 4197508; 569600, 
4197432; 569607, 4197427; 569600, 4197396; 569516, 4197385; 569437, 
4197395; 569343, 4197447; 569323, 4197450; 569267, 4197416; 569209, 
4197418; 569181, 4197393; 569171, 4197372; 569169, 4197319; 569182, 
4197258; returning to 569193, 4197159.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 1 is provided in paragraph (c)(7)(ii) of this 
section.
    (7) Unit 2: Oakland-Las Trampas, Alameda and Contra Costa Counties, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Oakland East, Las Trampas 
Ridge, Diablo, and Hayward. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 571706, 4187420; 571707, 4187421; 571716, 
4187451; 571727, 4187468; 571744, 4187490; 571756, 4187508; 571757, 
4187509; 571759, 4187532; 571763, 4187571; 571791, 4187646; 571825, 
4187732; 571832, 4187744; 571768, 4187924; 571751, 4187967; 571760, 
4187990; 571768, 4188011; 571781, 4188026; 571784, 4188027; 571801, 
4188031; 571833, 4188037; 571847, 4188046; 571858, 4188064; 571875, 
4188082; 571889, 4188088; 571893, 4188091; 571896, 4188095; 571896, 
4188099; 571894, 4188105; 571889, 4188115; 571883, 4188127; 571882, 
4188131; 571881, 4188133; 571874, 4188139; 571867, 4188142; 571869, 
4188144; 571870, 4188147; 571873, 4188153; 571877, 4188157; 571881, 
4188161; 571886, 4188165; 571886, 4188165; 571887, 4188165; 571887, 
4188166; 571888, 4188166; 571970, 4188166; 572045, 4188160; 572146, 
4188147; 572259, 4188110; 572340, 4188072; 572447, 4188022; 572560, 
4187984; 572686, 4187965; 572824, 4187978; 572943, 4188003; 573050, 
4188034; 573163, 4188053; 573251, 4188072; 573371, 4188084; 573484, 
4188097; 573597, 4188103; 573710, 4188122; 573804, 4188122; 573898, 
4188116; 573986, 4188110; 574055, 4188110; 574149, 4188116; 574237, 
4188122; 574257, 4188128; 574325, 4188147; 574377, 4188181; 574417, 
4188200; 574462, 4188219; 574506, 4188251; 574532, 4188257; 574559, 
4188255; 574595, 4188243; 574671, 4188202; 574720, 4188178; 574784, 
4188151; 574851, 4188129; 574880, 4188128; 574915, 4188133; 574952, 
4188142; 574985, 4188145; 575011, 4188148; 575032, 4188129; 575085, 
4188086; 575123, 4188062; 575145, 4188029; 575188, 4187979; 575247, 
4187914; 575286, 4187884; 575323, 4187866; 575346, 4187881; 575374, 
4187887; 575422, 4187858; 575450, 4187851; 575471, 4187835; 575514, 
4187792; 575542, 4187762; 575570, 4187738; 575637, 4187712; 575669, 
4187690; 575696, 4187677; 575706, 4187662; 575710, 4187644; 575705, 
4187631; 575693, 4187617; 575685, 4187605; 575714, 4187557; 575731, 
4187532; 575756, 4187493; 575778, 4187453; 575796, 4187419; 575810, 
4187401; 575830, 4187378; 575844, 4187365; 575883, 4187331; 575900, 
4187309; 575938, 4187268; 575975, 4187234; 575999, 4187206; 576010, 
4187191; 576021, 4187178; 576025, 4187160; 576017, 4187139; 576025, 
4187109; 576034, 4187085; 576054, 4187060; 576071, 4187037; 576103, 
4186998; 576130, 4186976; 576151, 4186962; 576165, 4186950; 576214, 
4186909; 576246, 4186887; 576271, 4186860; 576285, 4186851; 576285, 
4186887; 576280, 4186901; 576305, 4186895; 576323, 4186892; 576351, 
4186868; 576365, 4186840; 576382, 4186826; 576403, 4186793; 576410, 
4186758; 576418, 4186721; 576422, 4186672; 576431, 4186640; 576455, 
4186595; 576483, 4186563; 576522, 4186540; 576540, 4186531; 576573, 
4186516; 576617, 4186500; 576647, 4186471; 576698, 4186434; 576741, 
4186412; 576784, 4186389; 576828, 4186362; 576865, 4186341; 576890, 
4186319; 576908, 4186301; 576918, 4186292; 576919, 4186268; 576939, 
4186211; 576961, 4186191; 576989, 4186123; 577003, 4186087; 577018, 
4186047; 577028, 4186006; 577037, 4185975; 577048, 4185937; 577052, 
4185907; 577044, 4185888; 577014, 4185884; 576994, 4185863; 576992, 
4185806; 577000, 4185748; 577000, 4185691; 576995, 4185650; 576987, 
4185615; 576986, 4185589; 576973, 4185569; 576956, 4185538; 576951, 
4185517; 576955, 4185497; 576969, 4185458; 576987, 4185413; 577009, 
4185384; 577020, 4185357; 577034, 4185341; 577052, 4185346; 577078, 
4185351; 577086, 4185361; 577101, 4185376; 577129, 4185377; 577159, 
4185364; 577219, 4185358; 577250, 4185388; 577260, 4185400; 577301, 
4185373; 577309, 4185354; 577320, 4185332; 577333, 4185301; 577351, 
4185280; 577383, 4185260; 577414, 4185254; 577441, 4185255; 577491, 
4185234; 577514, 4185223; 577544, 4185233; 577561, 4185255; 577570, 
4185278; 577567, 4185291; 577558, 4185302; 577542, 4185311; 577529, 
4185314; 577510, 4185312; 577520, 4185336; 577542, 4185344; 577559, 
4185346; 577583, 4185348; 577601, 4185349; 577630, 4185345; 577650, 
4185329; 577665, 4185322; 577679, 4185316; 577693, 4185306; 577707, 
4185296; 577729, 4185273; 577737, 4185264; 577734, 4185255; 577742, 
4185226; 577748, 4185173; 577764, 4185130; 577775, 4185083; 577782, 
4185053; 577802, 4185000; 577810, 4184990; 577859, 4184961; 577874, 
4184960; 577871, 4184928; 577885, 4184903; 577920, 4184864; 577939, 
4184840; 577985, 4184805; 578040, 4184768; 578085, 4184750; 578135, 
4184742; 578163, 4184741; 578187, 4184743; 578212, 4184749; 578243, 
4184761; 578249, 4184800; 578243, 4184825; 578238, 4184875; 578240, 
4184897; 578235, 4184935; 578230, 4184956; 578226, 4184993; 578220, 
4185031; 578216, 4185050; 578213, 4185073; 578227, 4185072; 578262, 
4185046; 578275, 4185042; 578287, 4185051; 578298, 4185075; 578294, 
4185105; 578281, 4185129; 578292, 4185145; 578303, 4185170; 578320, 
4185191; 578333, 4185222; 578332, 4185287; 578326, 4185329; 578311, 
4185376; 578300, 4185413; 578294, 4185471; 578284, 4185489; 578266, 
4185508; 578241, 4185518; 578222, 4185513; 578211, 4185495; 578209, 
4185446; 578215, 4185404; 578216, 4185342; 578209, 4185297; 578202, 
4185265; 578145, 4185242; 578137, 4185239; 578084, 4185239; 578033, 
4185229; 577980, 4185239; 577945, 4185275; 577934, 4185307; 577920, 
4185350; 577911, 4185403; 577904, 4185467; 577904, 4185506; 577904, 
4185540; 577907, 4185634; 577926, 4185691; 577956, 4185791; 577977, 
4185843; 577980, 4185850; 578013, 4185903; 578038, 4185917; 578073, 
4185943; 578101, 4185961; 578150, 4185972; 578206, 4185967; 578217, 
4185958; 578239, 4185947; 578287, 4185938; 578330, 4185930; 578387, 
4185914; 578427, 4185911; 578457, 4185918; 578486, 4185957; 578504, 
4185965; 578525, 4185975; 578554, 4185980; 578587, 4185973; 578628, 
4185976; 578678, 4185983; 578731, 4185995; 578768, 4186014; 578803, 
4186041; 578804, 4186044; 578881, 4186031; 579094, 4186094; 579221, 
4186099; 579275, 4186121; 579352, 4186171; 579424, 4186243; 579528, 
4186334;

[[Page 26]]

579610, 4186361; 579700, 4186375; 579777, 4186343; 579800, 4186343; 
579913, 4186384; 580017, 4186438; 580053, 4186470; 580107, 4186587; 
580148, 4186623; 580148, 4186625; 580116, 4186705; 580107, 4186773; 
580053, 4186881; 579854, 4187288; 579795, 4187311; 579736, 4187393; 
579573, 4187424; 579456, 4187411; 579420, 4187442; 579415, 4187469; 
579397, 4187533; 579388, 4187573; 579352, 4187646; 579298, 4187791; 
579212, 4187953; 579144, 4188026; 579130, 4188071; 579003, 4188302; 
578832, 4188302; 578773, 4188324; 578732, 4188347; 578672, 4188405; 
578748, 4188508; 578783, 4188556; 578895, 4188582; 578900, 4188576; 
578900, 4188576; 578917, 4188593; 578922, 4188626; 578914, 4188660; 
578936, 4188693; 578958, 4188703; 578984, 4188719; 579018, 4188732; 
579048, 4188745; 579062, 4188775; 579063, 4188778; 579180, 4188868; 
579109, 4188917; 579116, 4188925; 579117, 4188956; 579104, 4188979; 
579084, 4189001; 579054, 4189040; 579046, 4189051; 579228, 4189052; 
579246, 4189157; 579199, 4189178; 579168, 4189192; 579243, 4189244; 
579295, 4189281; 579295, 4189354; 579217, 4189314; 579201, 4189306; 
579150, 4189399; 579150, 4189419; 579149, 4189477; 578994, 4189492; 
578994, 4189414; 578649, 4189419; 578612, 4189480; 578435, 4189486; 
578438, 4189519; 578456, 4189605; 578474, 4189645; 578501, 4189704; 
578519, 4189713; 578551, 4189736; 578619, 4189790; 578696, 4189835; 
578723, 4189903; 578755, 4189939; 578777, 4189976; 578786, 4190071; 
578804, 4190138; 578845, 4190206; 578881, 4190270; 578913, 4190272; 
578896, 4190263; 578938, 4190252; 578973, 4190242; 578980, 4190229; 
579006, 4190209; 579036, 4190186; 579037, 4190186; 579067, 4190163; 
579085, 4190150; 579100, 4190140; 579138, 4190138; 579147, 4190171; 
579159, 4190185; 579175, 4190206; 579190, 4190256; 579201, 4190290; 
579241, 4190339; 579249, 4190414; 579301, 4190411; 579350, 4190408; 
579374, 4190373; 579419, 4190349; 579483, 4190345; 579606, 4190266; 
579629, 4190235; 579657, 4190210; 579702, 4190197; 579793, 4190185; 
579793, 4190185; 579906, 4190178; 579954, 4190194; 580009, 4190148; 
580042, 4190149; 580041, 4190145; 580046, 4190149; 580041, 4190115; 
580035, 4190084; 580020, 4190025; 580019, 4190018; 580003, 4190002; 
579976, 4189965; 579969, 4189926; 579965, 4189870; 580170, 4189874; 
580164, 4189928; 580241, 4190157; 580242, 4190158; 580246, 4190154; 
580346, 4190092; 580385, 4190071; 580436, 4190051; 580513, 4190034; 
580514, 4190033; 580610, 4190033; 580609, 4190164; 580605, 4190346; 
580606, 4190349; 580611, 4190348; 580612, 4190348; 580654, 4190253; 
580684, 4190258; 580696, 4190261; 580714, 4190266; 580734, 4190284; 
580653, 4190471; 580655, 4190477; 580675, 4190477; 580712, 4190469; 
580744, 4190468; 580766, 4190473; 580737, 4190564; 580735, 4190566; 
580742, 4190598; 580743, 4190630; 580710, 4190650; 580654, 4190809; 
580735, 4190839; 580737, 4190842; 580737, 4190842; 580695, 4190930; 
580686, 4190949; 580687, 4190949; 580724, 4190994; 580781, 4191063; 
580791, 4191055; 580848, 4191065; 580843, 4191050; 580851, 4191011; 
580866, 4190962; 580879, 4190918; 580896, 4190914; 580914, 4190924; 
580941, 4190951; 580964, 4190983; 580965, 4190973; 580958, 4190948; 
580962, 4190927; 580979, 4190903; 580991, 4190885; 581002, 4190855; 
581003, 4190844; 581003, 4190819; 581010, 4190791; 581024, 4190776; 
581032, 4190772; 581057, 4190768; 581095, 4190770; 581125, 4190756; 
581145, 4190739; 581166, 4190732; 581172, 4190738; 581231, 4190723; 
581287, 4190700; 581309, 4190678; 581307, 4190657; 581304, 4190630; 
581305, 4190612; 581316, 4190579; 581314, 4190549; 581312, 4190549; 
581193, 4190527; 581154, 4190396; 581235, 4190263; 581268, 4190283; 
581308, 4190236; 581390, 4190258; 581420, 4190260; 581423, 4190218; 
581421, 4190198; 581424, 4190175; 581433, 4190158; 581444, 4190149; 
581475, 4190122; 581508, 4190096; 581533, 4190079; 581564, 4190066; 
581594, 4190057; 581623, 4190058; 581648, 4190061; 581697, 4190063; 
581733, 4190071; 581789, 4190070; 581825, 4190066; 581848, 4190054; 
581868, 4190025; 581881, 4190004; 581906, 4189988; 581942, 4189970; 
581956, 4189958; 581977, 4189921; 581997, 4189898; 582044, 4189871; 
582080, 4189861; 582130, 4189842; 582155, 4189819; 582170, 4189806; 
582194, 4189778; 582219, 4189760; 582245, 4189744; 582271, 4189729; 
582295, 4189723; 582337, 4189715; 582382, 4189698; 582415, 4189680; 
582442, 4189639; 582450, 4189615; 582462, 4189575; 582470, 4189554; 
582476, 4189536; 582500, 4189503; 582525, 4189470; 582542, 4189447; 
582575, 4189400; 582602, 4189346; 582625, 4189298; 582636, 4189283; 
582645, 4189280; 582790, 4189203; 582960, 4189113; 582985, 4189099; 
583060, 4189078; 583061, 4189078; 583273, 4189019; 583334, 4189094; 
583230, 4189179; 583294, 4189284; 583253, 4189439; 583286, 4189458; 
583324, 4189584; 583108, 4189725; 583075, 4189801; 583072, 4189804; 
583072, 4189817; 583067, 4189850; 583065, 4189867; 583083, 4189901; 
583113, 4189936; 583126, 4189941; 583165, 4189958; 583209, 4189971; 
583220, 4189975; 583335, 4189977; 583317, 4190355; 583314, 4190356; 
583317, 4190357; 583312, 4190446; 583307, 4190539; 583306, 4190565; 
583336, 4190623; 583337, 4190625; 583375, 4190663; 583397, 4190663; 
583427, 4190663; 583499, 4190656; 583573, 4190755; 583607, 4190801; 
583610, 4190801; 583609, 4190804; 583903, 4190822; 583907, 4190813; 
583907, 4190812; 583907, 4190812; 583968, 4190690; 583984, 4190656; 
583994, 4190636; 584086, 4190447; 584114, 4190392; 584026, 4190377; 
583964, 4190357; 583968, 4190277; 583887, 4190259; 583867, 4190323; 
583808, 4190242; 583754, 4190267; 583694, 4190209; 583774, 4190138; 
583724, 4190064; 583745, 4190051; 583765, 4190030; 583809, 4189998; 
583874, 4189971; 583935, 4189920; 583964, 4189871; 584061, 4189766; 
584100, 4189670; 584145, 4189630; 584135, 4189626; 584151, 4189608; 
584174, 4189579; 584200, 4189531; 584200, 4189531; 584140, 4189507; 
584223, 4189404; 584197, 4189361; 584148, 4189280; 584247, 4189222; 
584458, 4189260; 584458, 4189260; 584481, 4189245; 584499, 4189212; 
584434, 4189155; 584443, 4189073; 584546, 4189138; 584548, 4189129; 
584535, 4189100; 584526, 4189072; 584502, 4189015; 584497, 4189002; 
584439, 4188974; 584349, 4188983; 584349, 4188984; 584316, 4189004; 
584279, 4189027; 584246, 4189036; 584226, 4189016; 584283, 4188956; 
584336, 4188914; 584451, 4188841; 584511, 4188795; 584512, 4188795; 
584450, 4188719; 584436, 4188718; 584277, 4188712; 584279, 4188665; 
584356, 4188523; 584380, 4188523; 584376, 4188447; 584566, 4188447; 
584581, 4188448; 584619, 4188391; 584619, 4188391; 584619, 4188391; 
584628, 4188377; 584646, 4188316; 584649, 4188306; 584723, 4188326; 
584741, 4188330; 584749, 4188338; 584784, 4188367; 584780, 4188373; 
584780, 4188373; 584805, 4188338; 584972, 4188451; 584973, 4188448; 
584975, 4188456; 584996, 4188470; 585065, 4188374; 585116, 4188289; 
585131, 4188251; 585134, 4188226; 585137, 4188204; 585123, 4188175; 
585157, 4188144; 585118, 4188116;

[[Page 27]]

585122, 4188112; 585224, 4187998; 585290, 4188057; 585291, 4188058; 
585293, 4188060; 585322, 4188086; 585387, 4188013; 585336, 4187981; 
585336, 4187981; 585365, 4187930; 585370, 4187915; 585386, 4187889; 
585406, 4187867; 585428, 4187842; 585456, 4187817; 585485, 4187791; 
585513, 4187772; 585531, 4187752; 585551, 4187731; 585570, 4187704; 
585585, 4187673; 585609, 4187636; 585628, 4187606; 585641, 4187618; 
585647, 4187621; 585695, 4187639; 585709, 4187663; 585711, 4187637; 
585724, 4187602; 585751, 4187575; 585772, 4187535; 585780, 4187519; 
585714, 4187446; 585718, 4187289; 585719, 4187221; 585720, 4187185; 
585720, 4187184; 585721, 4187158; 585722, 4187101; 585729, 4187080; 
585729, 4187079; 585753, 4186996; 585808, 4186921; 585802, 4186926; 
585805, 4186922; 585819, 4186897; 585490, 4187081; 585466, 4187094; 
585461, 4186866; 585494, 4186824; 585533, 4186846; 585528, 4186859; 
585832, 4186868; 585831, 4186866; 585836, 4186869; 585891, 4186735; 
585890, 4186735; 585902, 4186689; 585720, 4186691; 585722, 4186639; 
585750, 4186637; 585748, 4186628; 585741, 4186562; 585765, 4186486; 
585761, 4186475; 585750, 4186437; 585719, 4186437; 585745, 4186365; 
585812, 4186380; 585837, 4186402; 585900, 4186394; 585934, 4186390; 
585988, 4186401; 585995, 4186425; 586025, 4186439; 586052, 4186421; 
586070, 4186435; 586124, 4186384; 586022, 4186289; 585996, 4186269; 
585948, 4186246; 585936, 4186157; 585782, 4186212; 585739, 4186228; 
585739, 4186098; 585739, 4185967; 585739, 4185809; 585955, 4185947; 
585968, 4185930; 585971, 4185926; 586013, 4185871; 585997, 4185833; 
585968, 4185760; 585991, 4185775; 586033, 4185726; 586039, 4185719; 
586083, 4185668; 586146, 4185594; 586168, 4185571; 586190, 4185558; 
586248, 4185471; 586238, 4185448; 586342, 4185521; 586356, 4185501; 
586400, 4185531; 586416, 4185526; 586433, 4185512; 586447, 4185514; 
586465, 4185507; 586474, 4185506; 586480, 4185503; 586484, 4185499; 
586500, 4185475; 586511, 4185461; 586533, 4185440; 586556, 4185418; 
586571, 4185396; 586577, 4185379; 586582, 4185359; 586591, 4185354; 
586610, 4185345; 586621, 4185333; 586631, 4185307; 586630, 4185282; 
586632, 4185254; 586645, 4185199; 586739, 4185019; 587160, 4185020; 
587162, 4185018; 587372, 4185015; 587384, 4185092; 587392, 4185136; 
587415, 4185157; 587435, 4185174; 587435, 4185174; 587435, 4185174; 
587485, 4185199; 587522, 4185217; 587567, 4185221; 587605, 4185238; 
587608, 4185239; 587627, 4185246; 587652, 4185256; 587659, 4185258; 
587690, 4185270; 587705, 4185252; 587705, 4185252; 587705, 4185252; 
587694, 4185239; 587695, 4185200; 587704, 4185161; 587721, 4185124; 
587743, 4185101; 587778, 4185076; 587811, 4185066; 587815, 4185065; 
587817, 4185064; 587833, 4185059; 587902, 4185111; 587946, 4185154; 
587948, 4185159; 587949, 4185158; 587966, 4185147; 587940, 4185119; 
587932, 4185097; 587882, 4185037; 587882, 4185037; 587773, 4184945; 
587740, 4184748; 587965, 4184460; 588249, 4184573; 588254, 4184566; 
588267, 4184561; 588288, 4184557; 588307, 4184559; 588337, 4184571; 
588367, 4184588; 588382, 4184598; 588415, 4184590; 588445, 4184575; 
588479, 4184530; 588503, 4184503; 588518, 4184470; 588536, 4184433; 
588551, 4184408; 588562, 4184384; 588573, 4184358; 588586, 4184338; 
588605, 4184310; 588617, 4184282; 588625, 4184258; 588629, 4184245; 
588642, 4184217; 588645, 4184210; 588655, 4184192; 588932, 4184209; 
588954, 4184164; 588958, 4184164; 588971, 4184151; 588990, 4184113; 
588997, 4184090; 589011, 4184066; 589027, 4184031; 589058, 4183979; 
589062, 4183958; 589063, 4183953; 589068, 4183934; 589058, 4183925; 
589050, 4183923; 589009, 4183924; 588941, 4183911; 588933, 4183889; 
588977, 4183792; 589121, 4183474; 589036, 4183450; 588877, 4183409; 
588629, 4183397; 588617, 4183343; 588585, 4183204; 588591, 4183060; 
588624, 4182930; 588678, 4182812; 588706, 4182764; 588643, 4182720; 
588685, 4182661; 588748, 4182704; 588822, 4182599; 589256, 4182617; 
589529, 4182206; 589528, 4182109; 589513, 4182107; 589491, 4182097; 
589486, 4182077; 589492, 4182044; 589492, 4182044; 589158, 4182039; 
589160, 4181853; 589160, 4181853; 589161, 4181806; 589162, 4181692; 
589042, 4181714; 588881, 4181517; 588560, 4181409; 588361, 4181441; 
588361, 4181490; 588355, 4181901; 588056, 4181855; 587726, 4181803; 
587756, 4181737; 587802, 4181752; 587849, 4181748; 587888, 4181742; 
587932, 4181736; 587948, 4181734; 587990, 4181758; 588068, 4181705; 
588152, 4181587; 588181, 4181541; 588177, 4181515; 588198, 4181453; 
588212, 4181343; 588241, 4181315; 588185, 4181121; 588188, 4181098; 
588168, 4181097; 588061, 4181063; 588040, 4181050; 588041, 4181049; 
588012, 4181034; 587891, 4180950; 587787, 4180869; 587690, 4180958; 
587565, 4180998; 587502, 4180998; 587384, 4180990; 587298, 4181021; 
587274, 4181092; 587274, 4181225; 587235, 4181398; 587188, 4181515; 
587055, 4181672; 586874, 4181861; 586670, 4181994; 586592, 4181994; 
586521, 4182017; 586474, 4182064; 586419, 4182096; 586372, 4182112; 
586333, 4182166; 586074, 4182355; 585792, 4182527; 585556, 4182637; 
585446, 4182692; 585266, 4182810; 585264, 4182807; 585015, 4182457; 
585015, 4182425; 585038, 4182355; 585046, 4182300; 585015, 4182276; 
584968, 4182198; 584944, 4182127; 584936, 4182049; 584968, 4181915; 
584999, 4181766; 584973, 4181615; 584952, 4181477; 584910, 4181233; 
584814, 4181063; 584825, 4180978; 584782, 4180936; 584750, 4180819; 
584251, 4180861; 583806, 4181031; 583392, 4181382; 582606, 4182199; 
581871, 4182797; 581863, 4182804; 581831, 4182687; 581842, 4182581; 
581820, 4182443; 581672, 4182273; 581672, 4182264; 581682, 4182125; 
581704, 4181997; 581672, 4181796; 581566, 4181605; 581544, 4181477; 
581619, 4181201; 581651, 4181010; 581629, 4180777; 581629, 4180681; 
581714, 4180639; 581873, 4180575; 581980, 4180479; 582001, 4180278; 
582033, 4180140; 582043, 4179917; 582107, 4179768; 582118, 4179566; 
582118, 4179120; 582224, 4179046; 582394, 4178961; 582457, 4178823; 
582574, 4178600; 582606, 4178399; 582691, 4178303; 582691, 4178176; 
582744, 4178059; 582680, 4177857; 582691, 4177730; 582797, 4177443; 
582882, 4177284; 582893, 4177231; 582935, 4177125; 583031, 4177040; 
583041, 4176944; 583036, 4176877; 582970, 4176854; 582939, 4176805; 
582913, 4176773; 582882, 4176745; 582837, 4176717; 582798, 4176689; 
582776, 4176658; 582779, 4176647; 582808, 4176613; 582856, 4176588; 
582882, 4176570; 582903, 4176548; 582904, 4176536; 582880, 4176494; 
582848, 4176440; 582838, 4176423; 582847, 4176412; 582869, 4176398; 
582894, 4176384; 582926, 4176371; 582955, 4176337; 582948, 4176317; 
582925, 4176285; 582894, 4176252; 582866, 4176226; 582862, 4176182; 
582866, 4176144; 582852, 4176123; 582826, 4176101; 582809, 4176099; 
582796, 4176101; 582771, 4176098; 582734, 4176089; 582719, 4176075; 
582669, 4176052; 582649, 4176039; 582635, 4176024; 582637, 4175999; 
582636, 4175967; 582649, 4175926; 582665, 4175887; 582686, 4175855; 
582712, 4175810; 582711, 4175783;

[[Page 28]]

582708, 4175736; 582703, 4175699; 582708, 4175669; 582720, 4175638; 
582737, 4175608; 582724, 4175597; 582712, 4175574; 582697, 4175554; 
582699, 4175539; 582708, 4175508; 582709, 4175506; 582687, 4175494; 
582639, 4175468; 582618, 4175434; 582641, 4175408; 582628, 4175357; 
582630, 4175355; 582630, 4175355; 582637, 4175343; 582647, 4175322; 
582654, 4175300; 582653, 4175291; 582607, 4175288; 582530, 4175262; 
582496, 4175180; 582492, 4175178; 582446, 4175182; 582316, 4175238; 
582237, 4175262; 582171, 4175315; 582104, 4175328; 582038, 4175304; 
581925, 4175267; 581821, 4175262; 581715, 4175278; 581663, 4175293; 
581607, 4175291; 581569, 4175253; 581567, 4175251; 581567, 4175251; 
581540, 4175233; 581440, 4175350; 581239, 4175537; 581168, 4175640; 
581136, 4175763; 581117, 4176047; 581084, 4176190; 581052, 4176357; 
581013, 4176538; 581026, 4176687; 581175, 4176848; 581317, 4176900; 
581427, 4176978; 581478, 4177120; 581478, 4177236; 581311, 4177204; 
581110, 4177062; 580942, 4176919; 580833, 4176616; 580787, 4176396; 
580820, 4176261; 580871, 4176144; 580942, 4175989; 580858, 4175938; 
580816, 4175992; 580805, 4176080; 580690, 4176299; 580633, 4176448; 
580621, 4176690; 580667, 4176828; 579816, 4177334; 579793, 4177426; 
579781, 4177564; 579793, 4177737; 579793, 4177818; 579666, 4177956; 
579597, 4178082; 579597, 4178151; 579816, 4178174; 580000, 4178232; 
580149, 4178335; 580264, 4178485; 580172, 4178565; 580057, 4178807; 
580011, 4178957; 579908, 4179198; 579827, 4179463; 579770, 4179647; 
579747, 4179808; 579741, 4179808; 579597, 4179808; 579597, 4179818; 
579589, 4179826; 579578, 4179955; 579475, 4180043; 579404, 4180073; 
579381, 4180108; 579322, 4180131; 579301, 4180184; 579243, 4180206; 
579225, 4180234; 579222, 4180264; 579168, 4180310; 579168, 4180365; 
579122, 4180398; 579124, 4180423; 579184, 4180480; 579184, 4180531; 
579103, 4180540; 579092, 4180558; 579097, 4180586; 579117, 4180637; 
579106, 4180677; 579119, 4180718; 579134, 4180736; 579133, 4180772; 
579092, 4180804; 579085, 4180824; 579102, 4180853; 579120, 4180863; 
579124, 4180921; 579155, 4180952; 579228, 4181001; 579288, 4181123; 
579287, 4181169; 579246, 4181217; 579217, 4181298; 579220, 4181321; 
579252, 4181357; 579326, 4181398; 579440, 4181425; 579516, 4181458; 
579558, 4181502; 579558, 4181520; 579551, 4181527; 579482, 4181516; 
579426, 4181488; 579343, 4181482; 579282, 4181461; 579249, 4181464; 
579208, 4181483; 579188, 4181481; 579130, 4181437; 579089, 4181444; 
579016, 4181426; 578993, 4181433; 578980, 4181453; 578964, 4181519; 
578933, 4181511; 578886, 4181468; 578871, 4181419; 578846, 4181389; 
578810, 4181383; 578767, 4181426; 578756, 4181454; 578753, 4181492; 
578727, 4181545; 578700, 4181535; 578685, 4181440; 578696, 4181387; 
578691, 4181347; 578663, 4181351; 578653, 4181361; 578616, 4181458; 
578593, 4181468; 578583, 4181462; 578579, 4181384; 578567, 4181348; 
578554, 4181340; 578498, 4181342; 578473, 4181317; 578435, 4181334; 
578379, 4181300; 578278, 4181282; 578234, 4181297; 578216, 4181319; 
578216, 4181360; 578258, 4181462; 578203, 4181614; 578195, 4181665; 
578172, 4181690; 578162, 4181743; 578133, 4181778; 578120, 4181816; 
578110, 4181824; 578102, 4181877; 578028, 4181884; 578018, 4181894; 
578007, 4181942; 578060, 4182047; 578087, 4182080; 578105, 4182134; 
578186, 4182134; 578183, 4182165; 578173, 4182177; 578178, 4182208; 
578195, 4182223; 578205, 4182287; 578184, 4182315; 578189, 4182335; 
578259, 4182442; 578355, 4182504; 578413, 4182515; 578451, 4182561; 
578517, 4182590; 578588, 4182595; 578634, 4182575; 578700, 4182573; 
578741, 4182554; 578777, 4182508; 578810, 4182450; 578834, 4182374; 
578868, 4182313; 578924, 4182281; 578978, 4182228; 579031, 4182198; 
579123, 4182199; 579201, 4182182; 579322, 4182112; 579375, 4182123; 
579473, 4182169; 579575, 4182173; 579583, 4182183; 579580, 4182203; 
579539, 4182238; 579539, 4182264; 579627, 4182308; 579635, 4182321; 
579644, 4182422; 579725, 4182456; 579724, 4182487; 579714, 4182499; 
579713, 4182593; 579713, 4182613; 579680, 4182606; 579660, 4182580; 
579650, 4182519; 579585, 4182460; 579583, 4182366; 579561, 4182350; 
579515, 4182350; 579444, 4182293; 579399, 4182273; 579335, 4182270; 
579302, 4182279; 579246, 4182320; 579165, 4182329; 579109, 4182318; 
579086, 4182331; 578999, 4182426; 578962, 4182523; 578954, 4182571; 
578928, 4182586; 578855, 4182608; 578819, 4182648; 578778, 4182676; 
578726, 4182734; 578693, 4182723; 578648, 4182695; 578597, 4182700; 
578567, 4182720; 578503, 4182691; 578447, 4182696; 578414, 4182708; 
578381, 4182741; 578361, 4182728; 578349, 4182659; 578280, 4182623; 
578227, 4182625; 578217, 4182587; 578161, 4182571; 578149, 4182530; 
578134, 4182505; 578058, 4182461; 578062, 4182331; 578034, 4182301; 
578030, 4182275; 577999, 4182242; 577997, 4182221; 577987, 4182196; 
577944, 4182157; 577907, 4182114; 577886, 4182116; 577866, 4182136; 
577840, 4182197; 577799, 4182242; 577786, 4182275; 577775, 4182349; 
577757, 4182377; 577759, 4182433; 577728, 4182458; 577727, 4182539; 
577702, 4182592; 577701, 4182645; 577668, 4182681; 577664, 4182772; 
577626, 4182802; 577661, 4182902; 577628, 4182901; 577579, 4182886; 
577531, 4182895; 577480, 4182948; 577456, 4183001; 577408, 4183047; 
577392, 4183074; 577401, 4183204; 577421, 4183235; 577500, 4183258; 
577535, 4183320; 577567, 4183348; 577576, 4183472; 577644, 4183615; 
577691, 4183682; 577711, 4183750; 577734, 4183789; 577746, 4183842; 
577766, 4183881; 577902, 4184014; 577961, 4184136; 577989, 4184167; 
578021, 4184251; 578021, 4184274; 578021, 4184284; 578001, 4184282; 
577971, 4184230; 577885, 4184138; 577815, 4184011; 577770, 4183964; 
577677, 4183905; 577667, 4183872; 577538, 4183744; 577516, 4183655; 
577436, 4183522; 577391, 4183483; 577361, 4183475; 577305, 4183477; 
577236, 4183535; 577167, 4183550; 577090, 4183595; 577082, 4183613; 
577084, 4183661; 577069, 4183714; 577041, 4183721; 577008, 4183668; 
576973, 4183660; 576939, 4183680; 576891, 4183720; 576895, 4183796; 
576869, 4183834; 576862, 4183862; 576844, 4183862; 576834, 4183846; 
576824, 4183790; 576773, 4183790; 576694, 4183840; 576561, 4183973; 
576550, 4183996; 576553, 4184027; 576583, 4184085; 576572, 4184093; 
576501, 4184100; 576455, 4184145; 576403, 4184236; 576374, 4184358; 
576351, 4184398; 576338, 4184441; 576315, 4184479; 576289, 4184560; 
576255, 4184603; 576224, 4184671; 576139, 4184770; 576113, 4184876; 
576092, 4184914; 576081, 4185051; 576150, 4185217; 576233, 4185383; 
576273, 4185436; 576371, 4185526; 576381, 4185557; 576378, 4185590; 
576360, 4185625; 576354, 4185673; 576305, 4185813; 576266, 4185868; 
576225, 4185906; 576194, 4185966; 576192, 4185972; 576202, 4185995; 
576204, 4186045; 576191, 4186053; 576168, 4186032; 576151, 4186002; 
576132, 4185831; 576150, 4185786; 576205, 4185677; 576205, 4185662; 
576215, 4185652; 576233, 4185599; 576236, 4185517; 576227, 4185479; 
576179, 4185428; 576064, 4185201;

[[Page 29]]

576034, 4185180; 575948, 4185090; 575908, 4185077; 575882, 4185100; 
575806, 4185145; 575772, 4185239; 575741, 4185271; 575667, 4185294; 
575657, 4185291; 575657, 4185258; 575696, 4185218; 575701, 4185177; 
575719, 4185154; 575722, 4185099; 575835, 4184985; 575864, 4184912; 
575897, 4184889; 575938, 4184841; 575990, 4184710; 576108, 4184574; 
576119, 4184551; 576121, 4184508; 576135, 4184470; 576258, 4184319; 
576266, 4184273; 576299, 4184215; 576308, 4184167; 576349, 4184088; 
576365, 4184017; 576399, 4183921; 576502, 4183787; 576600, 4183618; 
576689, 4183599; 576745, 4183551; 576865, 4183506; 576942, 4183449; 
576985, 4183441; 577125, 4183372; 577179, 4183324; 577177, 4183286; 
577164, 4183260; 577160, 4183232; 577183, 4183197; 577186, 4183154; 
577178, 4183131; 577179, 4183072; 577187, 4183060; 577187, 4182999; 
577197, 4182986; 577213, 4182908; 577262, 4182875; 577280, 4182850; 
577298, 4182779; 577431, 4182704; 577465, 4182661; 577475, 4182626; 
577496, 4182588; 577540, 4182451; 577563, 4182416; 577569, 4182317; 
577611, 4182218; 577645, 4182162; 577691, 4182125; 577704, 4182061; 
577807, 4181869; 577869, 4181814; 577892, 4181746; 577962, 4181675; 
577969, 4181657; 577967, 4181612; 577920, 4181550; 577927, 4181522; 
577945, 4181500; 577984, 4181419; 577977, 4181388; 577959, 4181378; 
577868, 4181377; 577781, 4181419; 577727, 4181485; 577681, 4181490; 
577668, 4181530; 577617, 4181601; 577556, 4181628; 577507, 4181610; 
577482, 4181627; 577454, 4181670; 577422, 4181749; 577389, 4181759; 
577371, 4181774; 577358, 4181814; 577333, 4181847; 577309, 4181920; 
577253, 4181930; 577225, 4181955; 577222, 4181993; 577183, 4182049; 
577178, 4182079; 577155, 4182107; 577144, 4182150; 577134, 4182163; 
577083, 4182162; 577058, 4182172; 577047, 4182190; 576994, 4182220; 
576991, 4182271; 576952, 4182308; 576917, 4182333; 576883, 4182376; 
576847, 4182470; 576818, 4182498; 576800, 4182543; 576794, 4182660; 
576766, 4182710; 576679, 4182776; 576640, 4182816; 576568, 4182930; 
576545, 4182983; 576522, 4183010; 576506, 4183015; 576506, 4183014; 
576307, 4183277; 576275, 4183301; 576236, 4183342; 576193, 4183382; 
576165, 4183423; 576148, 4183458; 576107, 4183496; 576077, 4183541; 
576049, 4183586; 576019, 4183601; 575968, 4183612; 575931, 4183608; 
575914, 4183606; 575878, 4183623; 575850, 4183633; 575828, 4183633; 
575809, 4183636; 575785, 4183655; 575777, 4183670; 575766, 4183706; 
575743, 4183739; 575687, 4183747; 575670, 4183756; 575659, 4183771; 
575650, 4183794; 575610, 4183811; 575509, 4183871; 575486, 4183893; 
575476, 4183970; 575413, 4184009; 575325, 4184048; 575286, 4184092; 
575257, 4184150; 575208, 4184267; 575173, 4184358; 574651, 4184981; 
574584, 4185041; 574438, 4185139; 574346, 4185217; 574229, 4185324; 
574151, 4185382; 574063, 4185460; 573966, 4185529; 573834, 4185650; 
573795, 4185709; 573727, 4185821; 573639, 4185933; 573532, 4186016; 
573420, 4186079; 573298, 4186201; 573255, 4186220; 573201, 4186245; 
573147, 4186293; 573079, 4186381; 573031, 4186444; 572875, 4186517; 
572753, 4186581; 572690, 4186586; 572646, 4186595; 572568, 4186644; 
572529, 4186737; 572485, 4186771; 572280, 4186912; 572134, 4187019; 
572003, 4187141; 571939, 4187185; 571900, 4187234; returning to 571706, 
4187420.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 2 (Unit 1, Unit 2, and Unit 6 (Map 2) 
follows:

[[Page 30]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02OC06.001

    (8) Unit 3: Hayward-Pleasanton Ridge, Alameda County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Hayward, Newark, Dublin, 
and Niles. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 585269, 4165999; 585371, 4166270; 585519, 4166567; 585450, 
4166770; 585431, 4166955; 585623, 4167122; 585713, 4167237; 585733, 
4167344; 585763, 4167406; 585800, 4167440; 585819, 4167443; 585875, 
4167470; 585920, 4167470;

[[Page 31]]

585930, 4167470; 585952, 4167464; 585987, 4167462; 586262, 4167359; 
586524, 4167014; 586710, 4167050; 586725, 4167112; 586738, 4167184; 
586741, 4167200; 586738, 4167237; 586744, 4167250; 586759, 4167275; 
586746, 4167307; 586733, 4167314; 586730, 4167349; 586719, 4167443; 
586755, 4167465; 586782, 4167533; 586796, 4167652; 586895, 4167475; 
586894, 4167475; 586924, 4167422; 586941, 4167422; 586973, 4167053; 
587028, 4167054; 587029, 4167040; 587030, 4167024; 587030, 4167024; 
587030, 4167024; 587032, 4166970; 587059, 4166943; 587086, 4166942; 
587106, 4166933; 587159, 4166923; 587177, 4166933; 587191, 4166944; 
587201, 4166952; 587214, 4166964; 587245, 4166945; 587312, 4166906; 
587326, 4166909; 587355, 4166915; 587370, 4166898; 587378, 4166889; 
587442, 4166875; 587453, 4166885; 587525, 4166937; 587579, 4166871; 
587655, 4166806; 587755, 4166771; 587765, 4166767; 587766, 4166404; 
587767, 4166201; 587891, 4166132; 588035, 4166079; 588064, 4166075; 
588160, 4165989; 588151, 4165958; 588199, 4165920; 588288, 4165905; 
588435, 4165906; 588444, 4165874; 588460, 4165492; 588106, 4165477; 
588124, 4165066; 587770, 4165051; 587771, 4164884; 588557, 4164310; 
589385, 4164346; 589368, 4165876; 589365, 4166259; 589175, 4166273; 
589139, 4166304; 589139, 4166304; 589140, 4166304; 589141, 4166304; 
589143, 4166304; 589144, 4166304; 589145, 4166304; 589146, 4166304; 
589147, 4166304; 589148, 4166304; 589149, 4166304; 589151, 4166304; 
589152, 4166304; 589153, 4166304; 589154, 4166304; 589155, 4166304; 
589156, 4166304; 589157, 4166304; 589159, 4166304; 589160, 4166304; 
589161, 4166304; 589162, 4166304; 589163, 4166305; 589164, 4166305; 
589192, 4166310; 589200, 4166317; 589200, 4166318; 589201, 4166318; 
589201, 4166319; 589202, 4166319; 589202, 4166320; 589202, 4166320; 
589203, 4166321; 589203, 4166321; 589203, 4166322; 589204, 4166322; 
589204, 4166323; 589204, 4166323; 589204, 4166324; 589205, 4166324; 
589205, 4166325; 589205, 4166325; 589205, 4166326; 589206, 4166327; 
589206, 4166327; 589206, 4166328; 589206, 4166328; 589206, 4166329; 
589206, 4166329; 589206, 4166330; 589207, 4166331; 589207, 4166331; 
589207, 4166332; 589207, 4166332; 589207, 4166333; 589207, 4166334; 
589207, 4166334; 589207, 4166335; 589207, 4166335; 589207, 4166336; 
589207, 4166337; 589206, 4166337; 589206, 4166338; 589206, 4166338; 
589206, 4166339; 589206, 4166339; 589206, 4166340; 589206, 4166341; 
589205, 4166341; 589205, 4166342; 589205, 4166342; 589205, 4166343; 
589205, 4166343; 589204, 4166344; 589204, 4166344; 589199, 4166354; 
589198, 4166355; 589198, 4166355; 589198, 4166356; 589198, 4166356; 
589197, 4166356; 589197, 4166357; 589197, 4166357; 589196, 4166358; 
589196, 4166358; 589196, 4166358; 589195, 4166359; 589195, 4166359; 
589195, 4166359; 589194, 4166360; 589194, 4166360; 589193, 4166360; 
589193, 4166360; 589193, 4166361; 589192, 4166361; 589192, 4166361; 
589191, 4166361; 589191, 4166362; 589190, 4166362; 589190, 4166362; 
589189, 4166362; 589189, 4166362; 589188, 4166363; 589188, 4166363; 
589187, 4166363; 589187, 4166363; 589174, 4166365; 589173, 4166366; 
589172, 4166366; 589172, 4166366; 589171, 4166366; 589171, 4166366; 
589170, 4166366; 589169, 4166367; 589169, 4166367; 589168, 4166367; 
589167, 4166367; 589167, 4166368; 589166, 4166368; 589166, 4166368; 
589165, 4166369; 589164, 4166369; 589164, 4166369; 589163, 4166370; 
589145, 4166381; 589145, 4166381; 589144, 4166382; 589144, 4166382; 
589143, 4166382; 589143, 4166382; 589142, 4166383; 589142, 4166383; 
589141, 4166383; 589141, 4166383; 589140, 4166383; 589140, 4166383; 
589139, 4166384; 589139, 4166384; 589138, 4166384; 589138, 4166384; 
589137, 4166384; 589137, 4166384; 589136, 4166384; 589136, 4166384; 
589135, 4166384; 589134, 4166384; 589134, 4166384; 589133, 4166384; 
589133, 4166384; 589132, 4166384; 589132, 4166384; 589131, 4166384; 
589131, 4166384; 589130, 4166384; 589130, 4166384; 589129, 4166383; 
589129, 4166383; 589128, 4166383; 589128, 4166383; 589122, 4166381; 
589121, 4166380; 589121, 4166380; 589120, 4166380; 589120, 4166380; 
589119, 4166379; 589119, 4166379; 589118, 4166379; 589118, 4166379; 
589117, 4166378; 589117, 4166378; 589116, 4166378; 589116, 4166377; 
589100, 4166365; 589063, 4166369; 589063, 4166369; 589003, 4166420; 
588991, 4166418; 588913, 4166496; 589008, 4166621; 588926, 4166711; 
588883, 4166692; 588780, 4166774; 588757, 4166753; 588501, 4166908; 
588193, 4167217; 588192, 4167218; 588491, 4167267; 588860, 4167493; 
588871, 4167510; 588871, 4167510; 588551, 4167496; 588495, 4168400; 
588136, 4168395; 588130, 4168799; 587859, 4168799; 587859, 4168847; 
587327, 4169253; 586635, 4168711; 586635, 4168711; 586635, 4168701; 
586626, 4168705; 586571, 4168705; 586534, 4168742; 586351, 4168898; 
586259, 4168990; 586241, 4169091; 586186, 4169137; 586149, 4169182; 
586121, 4169237; 586094, 4169348; 586075, 4169458; 586048, 4169614; 
586048, 4169733; 586057, 4169870; 586167, 4169971; 586314, 4170035; 
586397, 4170091; 586470, 4170155; 586690, 4170173; 586881, 4170173; 
587061, 4170205; 587082, 4170332; 587050, 4170596; 586818, 4170882; 
586606, 4171263; 586468, 4171475; 586469, 4171668; 586479, 4171682; 
586502, 4171722; 586523, 4171744; 586553, 4171782; 586571, 4171809; 
586592, 4171842; 586603, 4171866; 586618, 4171899; 586631, 4171917; 
586643, 4171939; 586650, 4171954; 586655, 4171964; 586665, 4171988; 
586671, 4172002; 586680, 4172037; 586681, 4172048; 586673, 4172077; 
586667, 4172100; 586661, 4172111; 586651, 4172125; 586637, 4172137; 
586628, 4172145; 586597, 4172164; 586587, 4172169; 586571, 4172174; 
586528, 4172189; 586511, 4172196; 586487, 4172206; 586437, 4172227; 
586416, 4172240; 586374, 4172262; 586353, 4172281; 586332, 4172299; 
586318, 4172319; 586308, 4172335; 586299, 4172351; 586291, 4172364; 
586279, 4172382; 586273, 4172393; 586265, 4172416; 586253, 4172437; 
586248, 4172453; 586244, 4172468; 586244, 4172482; 586244, 4172493; 
586246, 4172512; 586250, 4172531; 586259, 4172550; 586270, 4172585; 
586282, 4172626; 586298, 4172653; 586313, 4172673; 586325, 4172693; 
586338, 4172714; 586349, 4172731; 586362, 4172752; 586373, 4172770; 
586384, 4172789; 586390, 4172810; 586393, 4172819; 586399, 4172845; 
586403, 4172869; 586404, 4172883; 586406, 4172912; 586408, 4172921; 
586412, 4172933; 586417, 4172946; 586436, 4172958; 586460, 4172965; 
586482, 4172977; 586497, 4172989; 586509, 4173001; 586519, 4173012; 
586535, 4173024; 586551, 4173037; 586562, 4173049; 586582, 4173069; 
586592, 4173077; 586608, 4173092; 586625, 4173107; 586645, 4173124; 
586664, 4173140; 586676, 4173149; 586689, 4173161; 586706, 4173175; 
586715, 4173184; 586724, 4173195; 586753, 4173212; 586764, 4173214; 
586788, 4173216; 586805, 4173223; 586825, 4173227; 586856, 4173232; 
586887, 4173239; 586908, 4173243; 586932, 4173245; 586958, 4173245; 
586982, 4173250; 587010, 4173255; 587033, 4173258; 587055, 4173264; 
587084, 4173269; 587108, 4173270;

[[Page 32]]

587132, 4173273; 587171, 4173274; 587188, 4173277; 587242, 4173279; 
587272, 4173281; 587285, 4173281; 587309, 4173280; 587326, 4173280; 
587357, 4173279; 587389, 4173275; 587406, 4173275; 587429, 4173275; 
587463, 4173275; 587475, 4173276; 587493, 4173279; 587508, 4173280; 
587535, 4173281; 587544, 4173282; 587559, 4173282; 587583, 4173283; 
587609, 4173283; 587628, 4173284; 587653, 4173284; 587673, 4173285; 
587696, 4173286; 587708, 4173286; 587735, 4173286; 587751, 4173285; 
587762, 4173286; 587781, 4173286; 587811, 4173283; 587821, 4173283; 
587842, 4173286; 587872, 4173287; 587888, 4173291; 587901, 4173293; 
587915, 4173296; 587934, 4173298; 587955, 4173301; 587974, 4173305; 
588016, 4173304; 588037, 4173304; 588050, 4173302; 588092, 4173292; 
588108, 4173288; 588135, 4173280; 588151, 4173269; 588170, 4173262; 
588185, 4173256; 588193, 4173250; 588220, 4173238; 588252, 4173225; 
588272, 4173218; 588275, 4173213; 588529, 4173138; 588702, 4173099; 
588854, 4173025; 588988, 4172966; 589160, 4172888; 589260, 4172878; 
589278, 4172870; 589288, 4172866; 589303, 4172859; 589320, 4172852; 
589334, 4172847; 589349, 4172841; 589372, 4172834; 589405, 4172822; 
589419, 4172820; 589429, 4172817; 589450, 4172811; 589470, 4172806; 
589483, 4172803; 589516, 4172796; 589557, 4172780; 589566, 4172777; 
589578, 4172773; 589617, 4172759; 589631, 4172757; 589647, 4172753; 
589657, 4172751; 589675, 4172749; 589701, 4172744; 589711, 4172741; 
589726, 4172737; 589746, 4172728; 589756, 4172718; 589769, 4172707; 
589780, 4172691; 589785, 4172669; 589794, 4172663; 589804, 4172654; 
589820, 4172647; 589834, 4172643; 589850, 4172644; 589858, 4172649; 
589859, 4172653; 589866, 4172649; 590046, 4172523; 590097, 4172410; 
590195, 4172296; 590238, 4172275; 590281, 4172276; 590362, 4172317; 
590344, 4172351; 590351, 4172402; 590391, 4172433; 590434, 4172457; 
590508, 4172445; 590579, 4172428; 590606, 4172421; 590681, 4172527; 
590734, 4172567; 590740, 4172568; 590754, 4172571; 590773, 4172574; 
590779, 4172574; 590806, 4172547; 590818, 4172492; 590830, 4172479; 
591370, 4172472; 592495, 4172468; 592495, 4172469; 592548, 4172468; 
592577, 4172462; 592597, 4172459; 592634, 4172451; 592649, 4172452; 
592664, 4172451; 592673, 4172450; 592640, 4172397; 592706, 4172349; 
592766, 4172440; 592771, 4172439; 592861, 4172439; 592862, 4172439; 
592864, 4172331; 592864, 4172326; 592865, 4172264; 592830, 4172268; 
592821, 4172262; 592821, 4172246; 592824, 4172235; 592833, 4172217; 
592837, 4172207; 592848, 4172192; 592856, 4172180; 592737, 4172211; 
592697, 4172225; 592685, 4172236; 592665, 4172235; 592663, 4172209; 
592685, 4172164; 592723, 4172119; 592772, 4172075; 592810, 4172048; 
592804, 4172039; 592794, 4172026; 592792, 4172006; 592802, 4171984; 
592833, 4171939; 592851, 4171927; 592785, 4171852; 592786, 4171803; 
592891, 4171806; 592891, 4171773; 592888, 4171769; 592891, 4171690; 
592895, 4171678; 592891, 4171647; 592893, 4171628; 592898, 4171586; 
592901, 4171567; 592915, 4171539; 592936, 4171510; 592951, 4171498; 
592960, 4171492; 592977, 4171490; 592996, 4171486; 593012, 4171482; 
593024, 4171479; 593034, 4171475; 593054, 4171474; 593080, 4171484; 
593120, 4171492; 593139, 4171493; 593173, 4171488; 593197, 4171482; 
593206, 4171484; 593206, 4171506; 593200, 4171531; 593191, 4171562; 
593174, 4171601; 593174, 4171602; 593177, 4171602; 593208, 4171640; 
593231, 4171711; 593231, 4171748; 593214, 4171764; 593199, 4171788; 
593197, 4171793; 593225, 4171790; 593275, 4171783; 593317, 4171778; 
593352, 4171771; 593391, 4171762; 593406, 4171759; 593443, 4171753; 
593473, 4171758; 593530, 4171760; 593571, 4171766; 593604, 4171765; 
593640, 4171766; 593695, 4171758; 593753, 4171746; 593797, 4171730; 
593834, 4171710; 593880, 4171688; 593919, 4171664; 593943, 4171648; 
593976, 4171622; 594006, 4171600; 594023, 4171581; 594026, 4171548; 
593988, 4171476; 593945, 4171435; 593856, 4171366; 593770, 4171299; 
593712, 4171213; 593704, 4171136; 593710, 4171038; 593747, 4170958; 
593796, 4170879; 593869, 4170821; 593951, 4170779; 594017, 4170765; 
594079, 4170782; 594081, 4170783; 594082, 4170783; 594083, 4170786; 
594115, 4170830; 594117, 4170833; 594140, 4170830; 594148, 4170813; 
594157, 4170768; 594181, 4170752; 594213, 4170763; 594231, 4170797; 
594239, 4170832; 594253, 4170843; 594280, 4170811; 594301, 4170784; 
594315, 4170747; 594336, 4170717; 594355, 4170714; 594390, 4170713; 
594412, 4170728; 594542, 4170730; 594644, 4170753; 594708, 4170777; 
594756, 4170803; 594769, 4170807; 594790, 4170820; 594807, 4170831; 
594833, 4170845; 594836, 4170848; 594870, 4170864; 594881, 4170870; 
594969, 4170703; 595378, 4169293; 595550, 4169164; 595777, 4168678; 
596053, 4168453; 595932, 4168389; 595956, 4168312; 595958, 4168285; 
595947, 4168270; 595940, 4168263; 595917, 4168244; 595908, 4168229; 
595906, 4168217; 595903, 4168183; 595908, 4168151; 595926, 4168100; 
595939, 4168079; 595949, 4168069; 595964, 4168048; 595992, 4168019; 
596003, 4168015; 596031, 4168000; 596051, 4167990; 596073, 4167977; 
596091, 4167970; 596115, 4167950; 596133, 4167933; 596097, 4167900; 
596072, 4167808; 596097, 4167764; 596081, 4167684; 596062, 4167618; 
596084, 4167557; 596123, 4167529; 596159, 4167521; 596172, 4167485; 
596189, 4167440; 596206, 4167390; 596222, 4167369; 596230, 4167341; 
596233, 4167299; 596236, 4167275; 596241, 4167240; 596250, 4167212; 
596265, 4167160; 596273, 4167144; 596279, 4167135; 596288, 4167130; 
596303, 4167130; 596315, 4167130; 596344, 4167131; 596379, 4167138; 
596402, 4167142; 596430, 4167152; 596449, 4167157; 596471, 4167164; 
596487, 4167169; 596497, 4167171; 596508, 4167174; 596529, 4167177; 
596547, 4167178; 596572, 4167177; 596586, 4167166; 596602, 4167148; 
596616, 4167120; 596612, 4167094; 596595, 4167085; 596585, 4167071; 
596552, 4167061; 596542, 4167058; 596511, 4167052; 596482, 4167047; 
596472, 4167045; 596426, 4167035; 596393, 4167024; 596379, 4167007; 
596367, 4166977; 596361, 4166963; 596354, 4166945; 596359, 4166928; 
596363, 4166907; 596371, 4166892; 596385, 4166869; 596393, 4166857; 
596403, 4166835; 596404, 4166820; 596410, 4166793; 596421, 4166782; 
596433, 4166755; 596446, 4166722; 596455, 4166700; 596470, 4166674; 
596482, 4166654; 596488, 4166641; 596496, 4166622; 596510, 4166602; 
596522, 4166582; 596529, 4166569; 596543, 4166546; 596549, 4166527; 
596552, 4166516; 596561, 4166488; 596571, 4166455; 596582, 4166427; 
596594, 4166395; 596611, 4166366; 596618, 4166354; 596627, 4166340; 
596649, 4166312; 596672, 4166279; 596683, 4166265; 596692, 4166256; 
596721, 4166237; 596740, 4166223; 596748, 4166215; 596760, 4166201; 
596779, 4166183; 596786, 4166172; 596791, 4166159; 596788, 4166127; 
596779, 4166095; 596764, 4166067; 596750, 4166044; 596743, 4166014; 
596741, 4166001; 596737, 4165952; 596743, 4165927; 596754, 4165905; 
596767, 4165888; 596785, 4165869; 596800, 4165854; 596816, 4165839; 
596845, 4165815; 596862, 4165797;

[[Page 33]]

596880, 4165769; 596888, 4165756; 596895, 4165731; 596904, 4165706; 
596911, 4165691; 596930, 4165657; 596942, 4165643; 596955, 4165629; 
596978, 4165597; 597001, 4165568; 597026, 4165541; 597037, 4165534; 
597050, 4165529; 597093, 4165508; 597105, 4165502; 597138, 4165479; 
597160, 4165463; 597178, 4165446; 597209, 4165422; 597220, 4165409; 
597243, 4165385; 597263, 4165362; 597275, 4165348; 597289, 4165326; 
597307, 4165295; 597322, 4165272; 597337, 4165251; 597353, 4165235; 
597377, 4165210; 597423, 4165180; 597442, 4165170; 597466, 4165157; 
597503, 4165136; 597541, 4165121; 597557, 4165115; 597593, 4165106; 
597612, 4165120; 597621, 4165126; 597632, 4165141; 597653, 4165161; 
597682, 4165182; 597698, 4165198; 597710, 4165209; 597728, 4165225; 
597753, 4165242; 597777, 4165254; 597797, 4165263; 597832, 4165279; 
597860, 4165292; 597886, 4165300; 597907, 4165281; 597928, 4165249; 
597939, 4165230; 597948, 4165208; 597957, 4165184; 597965, 4165174; 
597972, 4165166; 597994, 4165152; 598026, 4165151; 598052, 4165157; 
598104, 4165164; 598149, 4165154; 598170, 4165146; 598188, 4165136; 
598205, 4165121; 598226, 4165079; 598241, 4165068; 598255, 4165059; 
598275, 4165038; 598299, 4165013; 598316, 4164986; 598329, 4164959; 
598344, 4164932; 598357, 4164898; 598364, 4164869; 598369, 4164856; 
598377, 4164835; 598389, 4164808; 598401, 4164777; 598429, 4164725; 
598438, 4164716; 598448, 4164710; 598468, 4164691; 598478, 4164685; 
598497, 4164678; 598519, 4164672; 598546, 4164664; 598565, 4164657; 
598588, 4164644; 598637, 4164618; 598649, 4164613; 598665, 4164601; 
598698, 4164578; 598718, 4164562; 598727, 4164538; 598744, 4164497; 
598751, 4164455; 598758, 4164425; 598772, 4164378; 598780, 4164350; 
598790, 4164316; 598804, 4164272; 598820, 4164215; 598832, 4164180; 
598846, 4164141; 598858, 4164110; 598865, 4164093; 598873, 4164072; 
598882, 4164049; 598896, 4164020; 598912, 4163980; 598928, 4163941; 
598944, 4163907; 598964, 4163866; 598980, 4163838; 598999, 4163798; 
599030, 4163743; 599049, 4163697; 599076, 4163650; 599093, 4163620; 
598650, 4163199; 598162, 4163032; 597935, 4162556; 597447, 4162401; 
596649, 4162377; 596727, 4161559; 596679, 4161553; 596493, 4161501; 
596337, 4161460; 596182, 4161377; 595985, 4161325; 595978, 4161334; 
595835, 4161377; 595690, 4161418; 595607, 4161480; 595524, 4161563; 
595452, 4161646; 595369, 4161750; 595234, 4161812; 595130, 4161853; 
595006, 4161884; 594871, 4161874; 594799, 4161853; 594685, 4161791; 
594623, 4161729; 594550, 4161667; 594426, 4161553; 594374, 4161480; 
594312, 4161377; 594271, 4161253; 594229, 4161128; 594146, 4161066; 
594053, 4161035; 593991, 4161045; 593939, 4161087; 593898, 4161128; 
593836, 4161190; 593815, 4161253; 593815, 4161335; 593804, 4161418; 
593794, 4161543; 593784, 4161667; 593753, 4161781; 593670, 4161843; 
593597, 4161864; 593483, 4161833; 593359, 4161781; 593235, 4161729; 
593110, 4161698; 593028, 4161719; 592945, 4161750; 592841, 4161760; 
592655, 4161791; 592530, 4161750; 592489, 4161688; 592406, 4161605; 
592334, 4161501; 592261, 4161429; 592199, 4161335; 592095, 4161149; 
592033, 4161025; 591992, 4160880; 591950, 4160755; 591909, 4160704; 
591795, 4160610; 591775, 4160603; 591660, 4160559; 591567, 4160486; 
591464, 4160424; 591407, 4160360; 590912, 4160704; 589936, 4161024; 
589484, 4161385; 588893, 4161607; 588409, 4162058; 588155, 4162354; 
587761, 4162321; 587490, 4162378; 587244, 4162641; 586956, 4162846; 
586784, 4162879; 586784, 4162887; 586790, 4163066; 586792, 4163117; 
586769, 4163141; 586644, 4163273; 586431, 4163527; 586291, 4163766; 
586168, 4163954; 586029, 4164176; 585897, 4164233; 585807, 4164324; 
585717, 4164644; 585716, 4164653; 585712, 4164739; 585701, 4164972; 
585701, 4164986; 585712, 4165171; 585832, 4165497; 585658, 4165554; 
585646, 4165742; 585381, 4165840; returning to 585269, 4165999.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 3 (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 34]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02OC06.002

    (9) Unit 4: Mount Diablo-Black Hills, Contra Costa County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Diablo, Tassajara, Walnut 
Creek, Clayton. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 
coordinates (E, N): 587469, 4194136; 587939, 4194568; 588429, 4194484; 
588517, 4194568; 588718, 4194677; 588869, 4194828; 588894, 4194853; 
588913, 4194953; 588927, 4195024; 588899, 4195658; 588832, 4195885; 
588601, 4196521; 588591, 4196523;

[[Page 35]]

588592, 4196524; 588541, 4196661; 588513, 4196736; 588530, 4196754; 
588603, 4196809; 588653, 4196812; 588711, 4196735; 588752, 4196709; 
588774, 4196773; 588822, 4196829; 588817, 4196858; 588874, 4196856; 
588923, 4196851; 588978, 4196874; 589014, 4196931; 589062, 4196960; 
589090, 4196976; 589125, 4197042; 589163, 4197117; 589092, 4197248; 
589049, 4197337; 588951, 4197415; 588878, 4197515; 588807, 4197513; 
588719, 4197544; 588683, 4197488; 588634, 4197493; 588606, 4197473; 
588481, 4197436; 588514, 4197345; 588387, 4197362; 588264, 4197341; 
588239, 4197371; 588153, 4197461; 588048, 4197462; 587967, 4197688; 
587998, 4197701; 588197, 4197775; 588208, 4197815; 588219, 4197874; 
588215, 4197923; 588179, 4197993; 588116, 4198041; 588057, 4198145; 
588027, 4198240; 588069, 4198275; 588049, 4198330; 587987, 4198461; 
587703, 4198447; 587617, 4198658; 587635, 4198690; 587734, 4198896; 
587828, 4199024; 587977, 4199159; 588113, 4199284; 588173, 4199495; 
588149, 4199683; 588155, 4199884; 588155, 4199906; 588211, 4200053; 
588236, 4200118; 588304, 4200203; 588318, 4200196; 588335, 4200186; 
588440, 4200119; 588492, 4199940; 588634, 4199995; 588719, 4199995; 
588818, 4199983; 588976, 4199963; 589017, 4199991; 589071, 4200049; 
589154, 4200075; 589213, 4200087; 589189, 4200499; 589188, 4200511; 
589337, 4200529; 589399, 4200536; 589557, 4200549; 589631, 4200554; 
589707, 4200525; 589737, 4200514; 589698, 4200337; 589687, 4199962; 
589926, 4199910; 590103, 4199986; 590148, 4200033; 590148, 4200067; 
590152, 4200123; 590162, 4200201; 590195, 4200260; 590211, 4200273; 
590238, 4200140; 590238, 4199868; 590238, 4199631; 590146, 4199425; 
590144, 4199402; 590129, 4199228; 590122, 4199141; 589488, 4199124; 
589423, 4199065; 589384, 4199049; 589399, 4198938; 589438, 4198871; 
589480, 4198804; 589452, 4198667; 589395, 4198502; 589397, 4198419; 
589504, 4198350; 589776, 4198339; 589897, 4198345; 589993, 4198339; 
590092, 4198309; 590129, 4198284; 590129, 4198131; 590238, 4197805; 
590509, 4197805; 590528, 4197805; 590889, 4197805; 591201, 4197805; 
591211, 4197738; 591216, 4197601; 591211, 4197496; 591268, 4197411; 
591415, 4197312; 591576, 4197402; 591596, 4197423; 591704, 4197099; 
591866, 4196983; 592467, 4197245; 593008, 4197752; 593012, 4198200; 
593037, 4198195; 593799, 4198194; 593804, 4198194; 593802, 4197973; 
593800, 4197665; 594249, 4197677; 594262, 4197408; 594618, 4197387; 
594647, 4196609; 595450, 4196605; 595458, 4195926; 595671, 4195936; 
595674, 4196109; 596111, 4196119; 596027, 4195950; 596184, 4195952; 
596281, 4196126; 597137, 4196128; 597151, 4194892; 598757, 4194910; 
598752, 4195293; 598936, 4195287; 598872, 4195917; 598742, 4196057; 
597972, 4196028; 597966, 4196498; 598436, 4196509; 598524, 4196362; 
598740, 4196238; 598741, 4196154; 598976, 4195997; 598984, 4195971; 
599024, 4195342; 599136, 4194911; 599038, 4194400; 599071, 4194357; 
599349, 4194091; 597975, 4194029; 597956, 4193671; 597159, 4193680; 
597159, 4193266; 596748, 4193261; 596778, 4192517; 597149, 4192513; 
597156, 4189977; 597242, 4189986; 597514, 4189551; 597894, 4189334; 
598165, 4189117; 598491, 4188791; 598709, 4188511; 598753, 4188511; 
598753, 4188455; 598871, 4188302; 599577, 4188411; 600012, 4188411; 
600446, 4187977; 600880, 4187651; 601695, 4186728; 602129, 4186456; 
602944, 4185370; 603324, 4185153; 603650, 4184936; 603779, 4184807; 
603542, 4184796; 601470, 4184564; 600272, 4184571; 600238, 4184570; 
600195, 4184570; 600147, 4184570; 599989, 4184567; 599977, 4184239; 
599550, 4184239; 599550, 4183913; 599340, 4184011; 598785, 4184138; 
598786, 4184147; 598772, 4184597; 598771, 4184647; 598763, 4185302; 
598761, 4185412; 598758, 4185541; 598755, 4185742; 598755, 4185749; 
598754, 4185765; 598750, 4186082; 598639, 4186080; 598470, 4186163; 
598367, 4186076; 598252, 4186058; 598249, 4186065; 598207, 4186074; 
598159, 4186018; 598117, 4186002; 598011, 4185918; 597984, 4185821; 
597924, 4185799; 597753, 4185622; 597719, 4185636; 597626, 4185685; 
597525, 4185702; 597426, 4185779; 597369, 4185868; 597416, 4185961; 
597493, 4186033; 597548, 4185942; 597641, 4185957; 597599, 4186043; 
597618, 4186093; 597687, 4186112; 597752, 4186146; 597745, 4186227; 
597804, 4186333; 597826, 4186358; 597805, 4186397; 597766, 4186378; 
597734, 4186380; 597646, 4186425; 597605, 4186411; 597553, 4186316; 
597463, 4186346; 597449, 4186405; 597478, 4186430; 597464, 4186469; 
597413, 4186463; 597382, 4186509; 597327, 4186508; 597309, 4186656; 
597316, 4186737; 597342, 4186783; 597337, 4186788; 597354, 4186834; 
597403, 4186877; 597481, 4186910; 597469, 4186984; 597351, 4186920; 
597272, 4186833; 597170, 4186823; 597163, 4186771; 597203, 4186697; 
597206, 4186686; 597204, 4186675; 597127, 4186611; 597023, 4186628; 
596933, 4186658; 596921, 4186625; 596959, 4186587; 596961, 4186540; 
597091, 4186479; 597095, 4186403; 597103, 4186386; 597151, 4186191; 
597107, 4186163; 596981, 4186073; 596847, 4186065; 596749, 4186139; 
596747, 4186198; 596669, 4186270; 596665, 4186338; 596691, 4186540; 
596643, 4186586; 596616, 4186654; 596575, 4186713; 596484, 4186784; 
596407, 4186701; 596360, 4186729; 596334, 4186756; 596317, 4186745; 
596281, 4186732; 596201, 4186675; 596157, 4186654; 596097, 4186656; 
596025, 4186654; 595957, 4186653; 595747, 4186647; 595746, 4186683; 
596008, 4186985; 596001, 4187244; 595730, 4187237; 595719, 4187540; 
595808, 4187704; 595759, 4187758; 595729, 4187774; 595703, 4187743; 
595667, 4187710; 595585, 4187614; 595558, 4187648; 595528, 4187667; 
595499, 4187679; 595487, 4187698; 595468, 4187800; 595447, 4187855; 
595413, 4187888; 595429, 4187967; 595434, 4188064; 595407, 4188098; 
595386, 4188085; 595340, 4188061; 595350, 4188041; 595347, 4187986; 
595324, 4187940; 595291, 4187920; 595266, 4187812; 595294, 4187742; 
595299, 4187714; 595293, 4187693; 595257, 4187654; 595225, 4187582; 
595197, 4187526; 595193, 4187381; 595173, 4187306; 595140, 4187260; 
595071, 4187230; 595069, 4187225; 595055, 4187217; 595022, 4187220; 
594918, 4187213; 594836, 4187242; 594742, 4187278; 594650, 4187314; 
594641, 4187318; 594544, 4187327; 594544, 4187327; 594443, 4187362; 
594349, 4187395; 594305, 4187448; 594282, 4187528; 594262, 4187601; 
594259, 4187610; 594243, 4187669; 594230, 4187682; 594226, 4187687; 
594226, 4187719; 594228, 4187774; 594222, 4187774; 593800, 4187766; 
593776, 4187904; 593715, 4187966; 593667, 4187969; 593636, 4187970; 
593366, 4187931; 593343, 4187957; 593320, 4187982; 593151, 4187981; 
593144, 4187981; 593142, 4187978; 593010, 4188098; 592921, 4188293; 
592931, 4188292; 592842, 4188494; 592804, 4188582; 592739, 4188729; 
592734, 4188740; 592670, 4188720; 592613, 4188713; 592610, 4188712; 
592607, 4188712; 592607, 4188718; 592608, 4188849; 592585, 4188842; 
592585, 4188842; 592563, 4188852; 592554, 4188879; 592548, 4188897; 
592581, 4188931; 592583, 4188954; 592400, 4189066; 592401, 4189071; 
592408, 4189112; 592415, 4189115;

[[Page 36]]

592460, 4189134; 592442, 4189198; 592436, 4189221; 592206, 4189212; 
592206, 4189328; 592216, 4189495; 592268, 4189579; 592267, 4189601; 
592258, 4189791; 592258, 4189799; 592373, 4189936; 592436, 4190030; 
592541, 4190082; 592625, 4190103; 592625, 4190449; 592531, 4190449; 
592436, 4190460; 592363, 4190481; 592300, 4190460; 592216, 4190491; 
592101, 4190533; 591996, 4190596; 591881, 4190690; 591839, 4190764; 
591797, 4190837; 591775, 4190852; 591734, 4190879; 591639, 4190932; 
591493, 4191047; 591445, 4191063; 591429, 4191068; 591304, 4191110; 
591241, 4191162; 591105, 4191267; 591010, 4191267; 590916, 4191298; 
590843, 4191246; 590843, 4191120; 590798, 4191044; 590769, 4190994; 
590692, 4191040; 590643, 4191068; 590570, 4191120; 590507, 4191141; 
590423, 4191246; 590339, 4191372; 590266, 4191382; 590245, 4191414; 
590235, 4191634; 590140, 4191917; 589899, 4191739; 589857, 4191686; 
589763, 4191487; 589648, 4191519; 589480, 4191529; 589333, 4191508; 
589092, 4191676; 589040, 4191644; 588977, 4191644; 588851, 4191686; 
588851, 4191704; 588851, 4191728; 588966, 4191969; 588977, 4192085; 
588966, 4192116; 588872, 4192158; 588809, 4192252; 588809, 4192305; 
588725, 4192483; 588788, 4192619; 588746, 4192630; 588694, 4192630; 
588536, 4192777; 588410, 4192861; 588295, 4192944; 588295, 4193007; 
588264, 4193154; 588159, 4193238; 588096, 4193353; 587700, 4193738; 
returning to 587469, 4194136.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 4 (Map 4) follows:

[[Page 37]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02OC06.003

    (10) Unit 5A: Cedar Mountain, Alameda and San Joaquin Counties, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Altamont, Midway, 
Mendenhall Springs, and Cedar Mtn. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 624962, 4170579; 625090, 4170515; 
625154, 4170515; 625282, 4170515; 625474, 4170515; 625645, 4170558; 
625731, 4170366; 625837, 4170216; 626179, 4170216; 626478, 4170066; 
626585, 4170066; 626607, 4170195;

[[Page 38]]

626586, 4170399; 626612, 4170390; 626615, 4170402; 626626, 4170412; 
626629, 4170422; 626647, 4170434; 626684, 4170436; 626707, 4170437; 
626747, 4170425; 626770, 4170407; 626790, 4170391; 626813, 4170378; 
626916, 4170347; 626952, 4170323; 626958, 4170301; 626972, 4170253; 
626979, 4170229; 626989, 4170208; 627014, 4170156; 627029, 4170132; 
627056, 4170089; 627067, 4170049; 627082, 4170002; 627104, 4169947; 
627139, 4169865; 627167, 4169809; 627195, 4169785; 627228, 4169767; 
627251, 4169785; 627304, 4169793; 627382, 4169802; 627397, 4169763; 
627414, 4169719; 627433, 4169669; 627458, 4169619; 627478, 4169587; 
627515, 4169552; 627558, 4169537; 627589, 4169507; 627605, 4169498; 
627635, 4169480; 627660, 4169479; 627680, 4169489; 627710, 4169497; 
627746, 4169507; 627774, 4169519; 627799, 4169530; 627821, 4169526; 
627879, 4169517; 627925, 4169510; 627973, 4169509; 628048, 4169503; 
628109, 4169500; 628174, 4169480; 628209, 4169464; 628262, 4169442; 
628292, 4169436; 628335, 4169426; 628368, 4169417; 628404, 4169394; 
628430, 4169357; 628450, 4169311; 628467, 4169264; 628487, 4169239; 
628505, 4169216; 628508, 4169199; 628522, 4169179; 628555, 4169134; 
628575, 4169119; 628598, 4169094; 628639, 4169047; 628666, 4169011; 
628750, 4168928; 628805, 4168875; 628842, 4168896; 628863, 4168894; 
628886, 4168893; 628938, 4168875; 628971, 4168851; 629006, 4168810; 
629023, 4168784; 629021, 4168755; 629020, 4168729; 629029, 4168691; 
629039, 4168653; 629035, 4168625; 629041, 4168604; 629049, 4168574; 
629076, 4168531; 629098, 4168485; 629141, 4168434; 629182, 4168396; 
629196, 4168394; 629218, 4168381; 629270, 4168352; 629286, 4168227; 
629286, 4168009; 629326, 4167870; 629564, 4167612; 629544, 4167413; 
629524, 4167116; 629504, 4166838; 629643, 4166600; 629683, 4166342; 
629584, 4166104; 629385, 4165985; 629167, 4166005; 628671, 4165925; 
628532, 4165786; 628314, 4165628; 628155, 4165370; 627897, 4165012; 
627738, 4164655; 627599, 4164358; 627183, 4164020; 626925, 4163643; 
626925, 4163246; 627024, 4162929; 627202, 4162770; 627163, 4162631; 
626845, 4162393; 626627, 4162175; 626250, 4161996; 625774, 4161798; 
625416, 4161758; 625297, 4161540; 625357, 4161341; 625615, 4161063; 
625952, 4160647; 626270, 4160389; 626309, 4160091; 626250, 4159575; 
626270, 4159377; 626409, 4159139; 626349, 4158781; 626369, 4158385; 
626239, 4157942; 626171, 4157710; 625893, 4157511; 625674, 4157492; 
625436, 4157630; 625278, 4157531; 624901, 4157571; 624762, 4157412; 
624524, 4157313; 624206, 4157293; 623809, 4157293; 623373, 4157273; 
623369, 4157265; 623273, 4157015; 622122, 4157293; 621011, 4157928; 
620436, 4158722; 619801, 4159258; 619761, 4159774; 619543, 4159754; 
619166, 4159694; 618888, 4159734; 618531, 4159774; 618293, 4159833; 
617896, 4159774; 617538, 4159694; 617360, 4159436; 616983, 4159337; 
616586, 4159218; 615732, 4159484; 615878, 4159699; 615819, 4160001; 
615780, 4160265; 615771, 4160548; 615878, 4160899; 615917, 4161191; 
615790, 4161328; 615771, 4161679; 615653, 4162020; 615897, 4162459; 
616170, 4162645; 616375, 4163064; 616328, 4163465; 616368, 4163901; 
616308, 4164397; 616658, 4164712; 616715, 4164704; 616865, 4164811; 
617057, 4164918; 617164, 4165025; 617207, 4165153; 617249, 4165196; 
617484, 4165260; 617698, 4165260; 617912, 4165260; 618061, 4165174; 
618296, 4165025; 618339, 4164896; 618446, 4164896; 618531, 4164854; 
618659, 4164768; 618745, 4164597; 618830, 4164533; 618873, 4164405; 
618980, 4164362; 619108, 4164362; 619236, 4164234; 619514, 4163999; 
619599, 4163978; 619792, 4163935; 619941, 4163871; 620048, 4163871; 
620133, 4163743; 620411, 4163743; 620603, 4163572; 620689, 4163572; 
620796, 4163529; 621137, 4163422; 621244, 4163444; 621437, 4163358; 
621543, 4163316; 621672, 4163294; 621800, 4163187; 621821, 4162995; 
621832, 4163004; 622206, 4163294; 622206, 4163465; 622206, 4163572; 
622248, 4163679; 622013, 4163935; 621928, 4163956; 621800, 4163999; 
621736, 4164085; 621714, 4164277; 621565, 4164341; 621415, 4164384; 
621372, 4164576; 621330, 4164640; 621266, 4164726; 621266, 4164832; 
621415, 4164961; 621522, 4165046; 621650, 4165131; 621714, 4165238; 
621693, 4165345; 621672, 4165473; 621714, 4165580; 621693, 4165815; 
621607, 4165965; 621586, 4166071; 621565, 4166232; 621565, 4166285; 
621650, 4166520; 621821, 4166712; 622013, 4166926; 622099, 4166947; 
622334, 4167140; 622547, 4167204; 622633, 4167289; 622590, 4167396; 
622526, 4167588; 622526, 4167866; 622526, 4167994; 622483, 4168144; 
622462, 4168315; 622676, 4168528; 622782, 4168742; 622782, 4168891; 
622654, 4169020; 622505, 4169126; 622355, 4169126; 622377, 4169233; 
622419, 4169426; 622419, 4169596; 622419, 4169767; 622312, 4169810; 
624150, 4169789; 624342, 4169874; 624492, 4170024; 624492, 4170152; 
624492, 4170323; 624534, 4170494; 624705, 4170601; 624833, 4170643; 
returning to 624962, 4170579.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 5A is provided in paragraph (11)(ii) of this 
section.
    (11) Unit 5B; Alameda County and Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Niles, La Costa Valley, 
Mendenhall Springs, Calaveras Reservoir, Mt. Day. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 602197, 4155953; 
602394, 4155892; 602698, 4155953; 602747, 4156027; 603122, 4156019; 
603577, 4155710; 603854, 4155726; 603919, 4155564; 604114, 4155499; 
604130, 4155353; 604634, 4155174; 604797, 4154979; 605138, 4155483; 
605561, 4155580; 605805, 4155743; 606943, 4154914; 607089, 4154702; 
607349, 4154670; 607658, 4154410; 607772, 4154166; 608146, 4153922; 
608309, 4153499; 608585, 4153402; 608666, 4153255; 608926, 4153255; 
609203, 4153125; 609284, 4152979; 609609, 4152995; 610195, 4152816; 
610634, 4152394; 610699, 4152198; 611398, 4152198; 611983, 4152475; 
612373, 4152475; 612650, 4152361; 613056, 4152540; 613446, 4152524; 
613593, 4152361; 614487, 4151955; 614617, 4151961; 614780, 4151820; 
614962, 4151397; 614905, 4151070; 615116, 4150964; 615241, 4150715; 
615366, 4150801; 615750, 4150782; 616019, 4150206; 616192, 4150109; 
616413, 4149812; 616499, 4149254; 616134, 4148909; 615641, 4148634; 
615372, 4147941; 614624, 4147768; 614579, 4147670; 614189, 4147648; 
613874, 4147530; 613683, 4147420; 613492, 4147170; 613184, 4147002; 
613007, 4146920; 612824, 4147011; 612733, 4146904; 612627, 4146904; 
612475, 4146920; 612323, 4147102; 611959, 4147102; 611701, 4147481; 
611337, 4147588; 611185, 4147542; 610866, 4148043; 610638, 4148134; 
610699, 4148241; 610623, 4148301; 610365, 4148286; 610365, 4148362; 
610092, 4148575; 609849, 4148575; 609257, 4148800; 609257, 4149227; 
609090, 4149379; 608771, 4149288; 608391, 4149531; 608057, 4149516; 
607693, 4149789; 607161, 4149470; 606645, 4149546; 606478, 4149956; 
606463, 4150457; 606387, 4150518; 605901, 4150472; 605795, 4150563; 
605750, 4150913; 605628, 4151034;

[[Page 39]]

605036, 4151186; 604763, 4151398; 604186, 4151429; 604292, 4151095; 
604277, 4150821; 604034, 4150791; 603973, 4150472; 603867, 4150609; 
603533, 4150746; 603396, 4151262; 603199, 4151565; 603108, 4151550; 
603047, 4151656; 602759, 4151778; 602425, 4151793; 602377, 4151646; 
602030, 4151353; 601817, 4151292; 601301, 4150943; 601438, 4150852; 
601377, 4150670; 600982, 4150624; 600724, 4150320; 600239, 4150290; 
600087, 4150487; 599829, 4150548; 599737, 4150700; 599707, 4151292; 
599586, 4151626; 598902, 4152355; 599039, 4152385; 599191, 4152552; 
599510, 4153372; 599540, 4153645; 599358, 4153827; 599555, 4153949; 
599662, 4154161; 599677, 4154526; 599798, 4154541; 600056, 4154860; 
600421, 4154936; 600922, 4154799; 601392, 4154966; 601514, 4155042; 
601575, 4155179; 601544, 4155437; 601711, 4155558; 601833, 4155877; 
602106, 4156074; returning to 602197, 4155953.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 5A and Unit 5B (Map 5) follows:

[[Page 40]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02OC06.004

    (12) Unit 6: Caldecott Tunnel, Alameda and Contra Costa Counties, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Briones Valley, and Oakland 
East. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E, 
N): 566273, 4191731; 566273, 4191775; 566276, 4191777; 566275, 4191780; 
566294, 4191824; 566332, 4191876; 566329, 4191875; 566330, 4191877; 
566390, 4191931; 566415, 4191935; 566458, 4191942; 566525, 4191942; 
566600, 4191940;

[[Page 41]]

566669, 4191935; 566750, 4191950; 566752, 4191952; 566839, 4191957; 
566944, 4191974; 567064, 4191950; 567124, 4191941; 567186, 4191988; 
567240, 4192047; 567227, 4192102; 567203, 4192172; 567156, 4192217; 
567079, 4192271; 567066, 4192295; 567040, 4192363; 567037, 4192422; 
567001, 4192463; 566959, 4192511; 566950, 4192542; 566937, 4192585; 
566909, 4192628; 566891, 4192658; 566845, 4192729; 566798, 4192772; 
566741, 4192832; 566727, 4192843; 566723, 4192842; 566687, 4192855; 
566647, 4192882; 566625, 4192904; 566624, 4192905; 566624, 4192906; 
566627, 4192907; 566650, 4192915; 566650, 4192915; 566776, 4192988; 
566895, 4193034; 567014, 4193041; 567193, 4193015; 567365, 4192955; 
567470, 4192915; 567596, 4192862; 567735, 4192796; 567874, 4192737; 
568059, 4192697; 568154, 4192688; 568198, 4192684; 568350, 4192684; 
568516, 4192684; 568668, 4192690; 568794, 4192710; 568816, 4192719; 
568885, 4192674; 569349, 4192659; 570105, 4192947; 570104, 4192949; 
570201, 4192984; 570206, 4192985; 570967, 4193256; 571027, 4193166; 
571060, 4193146; 571089, 4193100; 571085, 4193094; 571113, 4193087; 
571153, 4193067; 571189, 4193034; 571239, 4192998; 571292, 4192955; 
571345, 4192912; 571391, 4192879; 571440, 4192856; 571474, 4192826; 
571493, 4192770; 571507, 4192720; 571507, 4192677; 571509, 4192637; 
571500, 4192615; 571485, 4192563; 571471, 4192513; 571463, 4192468; 
571449, 4192419; 571443, 4192379; 571428, 4192347; 571426, 4192341; 
571396, 4192291; 571336, 4192158; 571335, 4192155; 571309, 4192084; 
571230, 4191987; 571131, 4191901; 571110, 4191870; 571063, 4191824; 
571036, 4191808; 571021, 4191784; 571000, 4191768; 570982, 4191756; 
570968, 4191741; 570953, 4191723; 570942, 4191705; 570924, 4191679; 
570902, 4191656; 570890, 4191641; 570876, 4191624; 570855, 4191599; 
570818, 4191574; 570789, 4191551; 570766, 4191532; 570748, 4191520; 
570730, 4191505; 570713, 4191489; 570696, 4191477; 570666, 4191470; 
570652, 4191472; 570642, 4191487; 570624, 4191517; 570623, 4191557; 
570610, 4191565; 570597, 4191564; 570569, 4191545; 570544, 4191533; 
570522, 4191522; 570481, 4191513; 570431, 4191507; 570377, 4191500; 
570335, 4191500; 570296, 4191493; 570271, 4191488; 570228, 4191474; 
570182, 4191457; 570131, 4191433; 570106, 4191422; 570052, 4191402; 
570011, 4191390; 569972, 4191372; 569929, 4191357; 569883, 4191341; 
569840, 4191327; 569800, 4191313; 569709, 4191263; 569680, 4191243; 
569662, 4191230; 569631, 4191209; 569607, 4191194; 569587, 4191178; 
569562, 4191158; 569542, 4191128; 569529, 4191089; 569518, 4191057; 
569512, 4191026; 569507, 4191000; 569503, 4190973; 569497, 4190945; 
569491, 4190916; 569480, 4190893; 569464, 4190866; 569458, 4190850; 
569450, 4190828; 569442, 4190801; 569422, 4190770; 569400, 4190748; 
569378, 4190719; 569367, 4190704; 569361, 4190680; 569366, 4190659; 
569394, 4190657; 569425, 4190659; 569453, 4190661; 569483, 4190662; 
569506, 4190650; 569526, 4190643; 569539, 4190637; 569548, 4190661; 
569558, 4190707; 569565, 4190747; 569575, 4190779; 569593, 4190830; 
569602, 4190856; 569612, 4190892; 569622, 4190907; 569630, 4190935; 
569639, 4190973; 569642, 4190993; 569647, 4191031; 569650, 4191055; 
569660, 4191091; 569666, 4191105; 569679, 4191137; 569688, 4191146; 
569718, 4191166; 569782, 4191200; 569814, 4191218; 569865, 4191241; 
569965, 4191276; 570008, 4191299; 570032, 4191310; 570064, 4191321; 
570101, 4191336; 570140, 4191343; 570186, 4191350; 570223, 4191351; 
570235, 4191352; 570263, 4191311; 570652, 4191238; 570706, 4191244; 
570724, 4191310; 570758, 4191385; 570802, 4191401; 570818, 4191407; 
570862, 4191409; 570947, 4191357; 571019, 4191288; 571101, 4191224; 
571197, 4191141; 571215, 4191127; 571062, 4190723; 571068, 4190712; 
571078, 4190695; 571080, 4190684; 571082, 4190675; 571089, 4190659; 
571103, 4190639; 571130, 4190610; 571154, 4190584; 571169, 4190573; 
571187, 4190563; 571187, 4190553; 571189, 4190539; 571201, 4190525; 
571209, 4190518; 571220, 4190521; 571233, 4190526; 571251, 4190537; 
571261, 4190535; 571280, 4190532; 571307, 4190531; 571329, 4190534; 
571338, 4190526; 571353, 4190516; 571363, 4190508; 571365, 4190503; 
571375, 4190488; 571395, 4190466; 571413, 4190452; 571434, 4190442; 
571446, 4190439; 571462, 4190438; 571501, 4190409; 571518, 4190382; 
571532, 4190368; 571530, 4190356; 571530, 4190350; 571532, 4190326; 
571543, 4190299; 571554, 4190284; 571569, 4190268; 571587, 4190253; 
571621, 4190240; 571650, 4190240; 571676, 4190245; 571711, 4190256; 
571727, 4190260; 571727, 4190257; 571728, 4190233; 571737, 4190205; 
571757, 4190178; 571799, 4190134; 571837, 4190109; 571864, 4190088; 
571906, 4190051; 571936, 4190024; 571957, 4190013; 572007, 4189996; 
572029, 4189908; 572044, 4189882; 572057, 4189869; 572066, 4189862; 
572094, 4189850; 572124, 4189847; 572160, 4189839; 572205, 4189832; 
572226, 4189836; 572263, 4189846; 572304, 4189859; 572342, 4189843; 
572359, 4189837; 572382, 4189835; 572400, 4189837; 572427, 4189846; 
572448, 4189859; 572461, 4189872; 572473, 4189859; 572490, 4189852; 
572538, 4189848; 572694, 4189850; 572729, 4189845; 572755, 4189840; 
572861, 4189793; 572876, 4189783; 572913, 4189747; 572989, 4189665; 
573044, 4189602; 573076, 4189564; 573078, 4189557; 573124, 4189412; 
573209, 4189380; 573237, 4189455; 573402, 4189420; 573445, 4189336; 
573625, 4188983; 573587, 4188867; 573568, 4188810; 573554, 4188767; 
574038, 4188607; 574070, 4188596; 574233, 4188195; 574259, 4188130; 
574257, 4188128; 574237, 4188122; 574149, 4188116; 574055, 4188110; 
573986, 4188110; 573898, 4188116; 573804, 4188122; 573710, 4188122; 
573597, 4188103; 573484, 4188097; 573371, 4188084; 573251, 4188072; 
573163, 4188053; 573050, 4188034; 572943, 4188003; 572824, 4187978; 
572686, 4187965; 572560, 4187984; 572447, 4188022; 572340, 4188072; 
572259, 4188110; 572146, 4188147; 572045, 4188160; 571970, 4188166; 
571888, 4188166; 571887, 4188166; 571887, 4188166; 571887, 4188165; 
571886, 4188165; 571886, 4188165; 571881, 4188161; 571877, 4188157; 
571873, 4188153; 571871, 4188149; 571870, 4188147; 571869, 4188144; 
571867, 4188142; 571864, 4188142; 571861, 4188142; 571853, 4188140; 
571840, 4188132; 571830, 4188124; 571820, 4188118; 571808, 4188115; 
571795, 4188114; 571786, 4188115; 571778, 4188116; 571765, 4188119; 
571749, 4188124; 571727, 4188134; 571718, 4188138; 571708, 4188144; 
571698, 4188159; 571692, 4188165; 571679, 4188165; 571670, 4188161; 
571655, 4188156; 571634, 4188158; 571592, 4188163; 571567, 4188176; 
571565, 4188179; 571512, 4188141; 571496, 4188145; 571484, 4188148; 
571473, 4188148; 571459, 4188148; 571450, 4188148; 571425, 4188145; 
571395, 4188147; 571362, 4188155; 571338, 4188158; 571339, 4188199; 
571336, 4188202; 571332, 4188206; 571316, 4188221; 571290, 4188247; 
571267, 4188268; 571159, 4188361; 571159, 4188361; 571152, 4188367; 
571152, 4188367; 571152, 4188369; 571147, 4188412; 571139, 4188431; 
571124, 4188447; 571110, 4188455;

[[Page 42]]

571092, 4188459; 571077, 4188458; 571059, 4188452; 571045, 4188442; 
571037, 4188430; 571036, 4188431; 570979, 4188447; 570979, 4188503; 
570910, 4188502; 570903, 4188514; 570896, 4188523; 570877, 4188533; 
570872, 4188536; 570858, 4188540; 570843, 4188543; 570813, 4188552; 
570797, 4188566; 570784, 4188581; 570763, 4188592; 570733, 4188594; 
570735, 4188667; 570745, 4188667; 570754, 4188667; 570787, 4188661; 
570788, 4188661; 570806, 4188660; 570819, 4188664; 570830, 4188660; 
570833, 4188677; 570824, 4188685; 570803, 4188734; 570801, 4188738; 
570730, 4188783; 570704, 4188807; 570690, 4188830; 570693, 4188851; 
570693, 4188866; 570696, 4188864; 570697, 4188875; 570701, 4188926; 
570692, 4188981; 570673, 4189023; 570620, 4189064; 570596, 4189097; 
570554, 4189137; 570547, 4189144; 570529, 4189180; 570491, 4189204; 
570482, 4189203; 570441, 4189197; 570400, 4189209; 570348, 4189212; 
570323, 4189220; 570316, 4189215; 570313, 4189213; 570304, 4189214; 
570277, 4189222; 570237, 4189275; 570227, 4189303; 570206, 4189322; 
570160, 4189358; 570140, 4189388; 570127, 4189406; 570119, 4189422; 
570108, 4189444; 570081, 4189442; 570074, 4189388; 570068, 4189365; 
570062, 4189348; 570055, 4189335; 570039, 4189356; 570011, 4189362; 
569994, 4189361; 569984, 4189360; 569972, 4189368; 569961, 4189370; 
569955, 4189354; 569962, 4189345; 569981, 4189335; 569988, 4189319; 
569980, 4189290; 569976, 4189256; 569979, 4189255; 569976, 4189241; 
569962, 4189230; 569954, 4189216; 569954, 4189193; 569947, 4189169; 
569934, 4189135; 569917, 4189099; 569908, 4189068; 569904, 4189038; 
569901, 4189010; 569887, 4188982; 569881, 4188962; 569876, 4188940; 
569869, 4188915; 569858, 4188902; 569837, 4188888; 569819, 4188877; 
569814, 4188860; 569809, 4188835; 569817, 4188807; 569833, 4188798; 
569830, 4188740; 569812, 4188737; 569797, 4188801; 569800, 4188803; 
569795, 4188810; 569711, 4189182; 569653, 4189441; 569641, 4189496; 
569636, 4189583; 569616, 4189631; 569598, 4189682; 569594, 4189688; 
569411, 4189917; 569406, 4189923; 569374, 4189924; 569274, 4189980; 
569225, 4190030; 569177, 4190078; 569155, 4190106; 569155, 4190106; 
569136, 4190157; 569081, 4190173; 569032, 4190167; 569002, 4190189; 
568998, 4190224; 568980, 4190269; 568946, 4190290; 568922, 4190323; 
568917, 4190364; 568874, 4190407; 568830, 4190433; 568805, 4190445; 
568769, 4190447; 568737, 4190460; 568752, 4190479; 568751, 4190531; 
568734, 4190563; 568709, 4190593; 568678, 4190593; 568668, 4190561; 
568653, 4190529; 568616, 4190528; 568591, 4190563; 568571, 4190602; 
568571, 4190642; 568572, 4190676; 568572, 4190713; 568544, 4190750; 
568497, 4190740; 568399, 4190730; 568348, 4190753; 568311, 4190797; 
568321, 4190846; 568286, 4190879; 568234, 4190900; 568189, 4190901; 
568159, 4190874; 568128, 4190840; 568090, 4190857; 568083, 4190876; 
568077, 4190892; 568039, 4190907; 568033, 4190907; 567986, 4190905; 
567958, 4190903; 567880, 4191055; 567753, 4191088; 567774, 4191141; 
567786, 4191184; 567793, 4191211; 567628, 4191208; 567585, 4191141; 
567544, 4191110; 567515, 4191105; 567484, 4191124; 567463, 4191153; 
567439, 4191163; 567405, 4191148; 567395, 4191124; 567395, 4191098; 
567398, 4191072; 567273, 4191000; 567225, 4190952; 567182, 4190935; 
566962, 4190894; 566820, 4190877; 566797, 4190871; 566794, 4190872; 
566746, 4190862; 566691, 4190848; 566634, 4190839; 566578, 4190827; 
566565, 4190839; 566538, 4190851; 566505, 4190864; 566476, 4190886; 
566455, 4190918; 566441, 4190942; 566440, 4190975; 566440, 4191017; 
566445, 4191065; 566448, 4191102; 566445, 4191121; 566437, 4191147; 
566426, 4191175; 566420, 4191219; 566417, 4191239; 566550, 4191256; 
566714, 4191328; 566840, 4191413; 566850, 4191422; 566864, 4191428; 
566894, 4191453; 566899, 4191506; 566850, 4191574; 566801, 4191623; 
566722, 4191661; 566642, 4191669; 566549, 4191647; 566476, 4191647; 
566431, 4191648; 566387, 4191648; 566317, 4191674; 566287, 4191694; 
returning to 566273, 4191731.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 6 provided in paragraph (7)(ii) of this 
section.

    (d) Amphibians.

                Golden Coqui (Eleutherodactylus jasperi)

    Puerto Rico. Areas of land, water and airspace with the following 
components: (1) Cerro Avispa-elevation above 700 meters on the south and 
southeastern slope of the mountain: from the northern junction of 
Highway 715 and an unnumbered dirt road southeast and southwest along 
Highway 715 to the southern junction with the same unnumbered dirt road 
and Highway 715, north and northeast along the unnumbered dirt road just 
below the southeast facing crest of Cerro Avispa to its junction with 
Highway 715.
    (2) Monte el Gato-entire summit above 700 meters: from the junction 
of Highway 715 to the junction of Highway 715 and the 700 meter contour 
interval west along Highway 715 to the junction of Highway 715 and an 
unnumbered road, north and northeast along this road to where it crosses 
the 700 meter contour interval, and east along the 700 meter contour 
interval to where it crosses Highway 715.
    (3) Sierra de Cayey-elevations above 700 meters: southeast from the 
junction of Highways 738 and 15 along Highway 15 to point .5 kilometer 
south of Benchmark 684.5, northeast from this point in a line to a point 
on Highway 7741 two kilometers south of the junction of Highway 738 and 
7741, north and northwest along Highway 7741 to its junction with 
Highway 738, and northwest from the junction of Highways 7741 and 738 
along Highway 738 to its junction with Highway 15.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 43]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.080

    Refer to 7.5 minute U.S.G.S. Topographical Map, Cayey, Puerto Rico, 
1972.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.081
    
               California Red-legged Frog (Rana draytonii)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Alameda, Butte, 
Calaveras, Contra Costa, El Dorado, Kern, Kings, Los Angeles, Marin, 
Mendocino, Merced, Monterey, Napa, Nevada, Placer, Riverside, San 
Benito, San Joaquin, San Luis Obispo, San Mateo, Santa Barbara, Santa 
Clara, Santa Cruz, Solano, Sonoma, Stanislaus, Ventura, and Yuba 
Counties, California, on the maps below.
    (2) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements for the 
California red-legged frog consist of four components:
    (i) Aquatic Breeding Habitat. Standing bodies of fresh water (with 
salinities less than 4.5 ppt), including natural and manmade (e.g., 
stock) ponds, slow-moving streams or pools within streams, and other 
ephemeral or permanent water bodies that typically become inundated 
during winter rains and hold water for a minimum of 20 weeks in all but 
the driest of years.
    (ii) Aquatic Non-Breeding Habitat. Freshwater pond and stream 
habitats, as described in paragraph (2)(i) of this entry, that may not 
hold water long enough for the species to complete its aquatic life 
cycle but which provide for shelter, foraging, predator avoidance, and 
aquatic dispersal of juvenile and adult California red-legged frogs. 
Other wetland habitats considered to meet these criteria include, but 
are not limited to: plunge pools within intermittent creeks, seeps, 
quiet water refugia within streams during high water flows, and springs 
of sufficient flow to withstand short-term dry periods.
    (iii) Upland Habitat. Upland areas adjacent to or surrounding 
breeding and non-breeding aquatic and riparian habitat up to a distance 
of 1 mi (1.6 km) in most cases (i.e., depending on surrounding landscape 
and dispersal barriers) including various vegetational series such as 
grassland, woodland, forest, wetland, or riparian areas that provide 
shelter, forage, and predator avoidance for the California red-legged 
frog. Upland habitat should include structural features such as 
boulders, rocks and organic debris (e.g., downed trees, logs), small 
mammal burrows, or moist leaf litter. Upland features are also essential 
in that they are needed to maintain the hydrologic, geographic, 
topographic, ecological, and edaphic features that support and surround 
the aquatic, wetland, or riparian habitat. These upland features 
contribute to:
    (A) Filling of aquatic, wetland, or riparian habitats;
    (B) Maintaining suitable periods of pool inundation for larval frogs 
and their food sources; and
    (C) Providing non-breeding, feeding, and sheltering habitat for 
juvenile and adult frogs (e.g., shelter, shade, moisture, cooler 
temperatures, a prey base, foraging opportunities, and areas for 
predator avoidance).
    (iv) Dispersal Habitat. Accessible upland or riparian habitat within 
and between occupied locations within a minimum of 1 mi (1.6 km) of each 
other and that support movement between such sites. Dispersal habitat 
includes various natural habitats, and altered habitats such as 
agricultural fields, that do not contain barriers (e.g., heavily 
traveled roads without bridges or culverts) to dispersal. Dispersal 
habitat does not include moderate- to high-density urban or industrial 
developments with large expanses of asphalt or concrete, nor does it 
include large lakes or reservoirs over 50 ac (20 ha) in size, or other 
areas that do not contain those features identified in paragraphs 
(2)(i), (2)(ii), and (2)(iii) of this entry as essential to the 
conservation of the species.

[[Page 44]]

    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures existing on 
the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements, such as buildings, aqueducts, airports, 
and roads, and the land on which such structures are located.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles using USDA National 
Agricultural Imagery Program (NAIP) county-wide MrSID compressed mosaics 
of 1 meter resolution and natural color aerial photography from summer 
2005. Critical habitat units were then mapped using Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) zone 10 and zone 11, North American Datum (NAD) 1983 
coordinates.
    (5) Note: Index map for California red-legged frog critical habitat 
units in northern California follows:

[[Page 45]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.000

    (6) Note: Index map for California red-legged frog critical habitat 
units in southern California follows:

[[Page 46]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.001

    (7) Unit BUT-1: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Pulga, Berry Creek and Brush Creek.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 635284, 4400926; 635453, 4400907; 635539, 4400870; 635603, 
4400930; 635726, 4400934; 635749, 4400994; 635820,

[[Page 47]]

4401042; 635906, 4401042; 635992, 4400997; 636377, 4401020; 636414, 
4401012; 636415, 4400967; 636836, 4400961; 636840, 4400584; 636819, 
4400561; 636032, 4400541; 636000, 4400474; 635993, 4400141; 637654, 
4400205; 637658, 4400775; 637782, 4400748; 637961, 4400640; 638164, 
4400598; 638444, 4400303; 639062, 4400378; 639174, 4400326; 639318, 
4400212; 639414, 4400098; 639616, 4400002; 639664, 4399875; 639667, 
4399772; 639609, 4399578; 639492, 4399337; 639498, 4399218; 639397, 
4398995; 639477, 4398627; 639628, 4398345; 640086, 4398179; 640120, 
4398056; 640189, 4397932; 640243, 4397727; 640310, 4397601; 640281, 
4397365; 640293, 4397311; 640545, 4397124; 640596, 4397057; 640533, 
4396958; 639179, 4396957; 639206, 4395692; 639231, 4395681; 639236, 
4395406; 637864, 4395379; 637968, 4395351; 637962, 4395169; 637764, 
4395285; 637655, 4395303; 637710, 4395306; 637686, 4395325; 637232, 
4395428; 637143, 4395417; 636893, 4395251; 636845, 4395236; 636813, 
4395252; 636787, 4395300; 636787, 4395375; 636949, 4395589; 636995, 
4395733; 637000, 4396105; 636934, 4396262; 636952, 4396314; 636898, 
4396328; 636885, 4396372; 636786, 4396417; 636724, 4396549; 636677, 
4396526; 636439, 4396726; 636424, 4396791; 636347, 4396812; 636254, 
4396975; 636152, 4397085; 636057, 4397151; 635947, 4397190; 635885, 
4397279; 635630, 4397454; 635579, 4397526; 635070, 4397817; 634758, 
4397876; 634647, 4397940; 634514, 4397948; 634391, 4398277; 634290, 
4398434; 634290, 4398815; 634318, 4398953; 635222, 4398966; 635190, 
4399731; 634716, 4399737; 634701, 4399998; 634738, 4400050; 634701, 
4400050; 634614, 4400166; 634510, 4400417; 634517, 4400544; 634570, 
4400623; 634618, 4400645; 634629, 4400803; 634730, 4400889; 634843, 
4401080; 634817, 4401226; 634899, 4401218; 635086, 4401053; 635180, 
4401035; returning to 635284, 4400926.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit BUT-1 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 48]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.002

    (8) Unit YUB-1: Yuba County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Challenge.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 656776,4370030; 656932,4369825; 657462,4368370; 657481,4367769; 
657672,4367445; 658105,4367098;

[[Page 49]]

658503,4366871; 658905,4366554; 659124,4366290; 659222,4366053; 
659528,4365883; 659624,4365706; 659383,4365704; 659384,4365583; 
659340,4365600; 659261,4365537; 659101,4365527; 659061,4365567; 
658998,4365584; 658985,4365687; 658888,4365790; 658764,4365830; 
658726,4365936; 658579,4365929; 658490,4365853; 658400,4365837; 
658396,4365782; 658421,4365733; 658465,4365719; 658581,4365826; 
658634,4365834; 658674,4365736; 658794,4365641; 658794,4365469; 
658552,4365295; 658524,4365193; 658427,4365180; 658431,4365157; 
658564,4365144; 658659,4365199; 658707,4365123; 658730,4365136; 
658747,4365240; 658809,4365247; 658850,4365176; 658882,4365226; 
658947,4365220; 658998,4365252; 659078,4365182; 659147,4365239; 
659181,4365235; 659238,4365207; 659273,4365132; 659332,4365140; 
659368,4365118; 659105,4365028; 659020,4364875; 658939,4364572; 
658531,4364168; 658410,4364131; 657788,4364103; 657792,4363648; 
658106,4363673; 657655,4363358; 657395,4363049; 657087,4362405; 
656227,4362436; 656051,4362735; 655683,4362963; 655558,4363109; 
655202,4363849; 655669,4364315; 655690,4364586; 655218,4365202; 
655027,4365526; 654779,4365758; 654445,4365837; 654319,4366013; 
654187,4366370; 654149,4366639; 653990,4366874; 653952,4367143; 
653883,4367381; 653710,4367531; 653696,4367950; 653744,4368109; 
653740,4369028; 653836,4369294; 653990,4369404; 654143,4369566; 
654687,4369794; 655104,4369939; 655245,4369920; 655453,4369987; 
655896,4370242; 656198,4370221; 656470,4370170; returning to 
656776,4370030.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit YUB-1 and NEV-1 for the California red-legged 
frog follows:

[[Page 50]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.003

    (9) Unit NEV-1: Nevada County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Nevada City and North Bloomfield.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 676906,4356394; 676962,4356305; 677130,4356317; 677131,4356238; 
677181,4356231; 677306,4356068;

[[Page 51]]

677485,4355987; 677670,4355985; 677882,4356056; 678051,4356296; 
678231,4356310; 678224,4356187; 678277,4355825; 678274,4355759; 
678217,4355664; 678229,4355623; 678444,4355409; 678448,4355341; 
678354,4355125; 678356,4355083; 678510,4354644; 678540,4354482; 
678642,4354231; 678650,4353980; 678734,4353879; 678852,4353796; 
679227,4353902; 679563,4353782; 680349,4353649; 680352,4353517; 
679422,4352362; 679148,4352080; 677270,4350680; 677199,4350636; 
676807,4350614; 676812,4350531; 676440,4350485; 676117,4350571; 
675995,4350556; 675686,4350459; 675457,4350453; 675325,4350412; 
675325,4350616; 675293,4350711; 675206,4350862; 675166,4350990; 
675063,4351133; 674920,4351180; 674673,4351196; 672710,4351546; 
672074,4351586; 671684,4351705; 671438,4351872; 670969,4352039; 
670738,4352158; 670668,4352774; 670633,4354099; 670847,4354102; 
670960,4354053; 671174,4353907; 671435,4353852; 671437,4353664; 
672180,4353672; 672287,4353562; 672450,4353566; 672716,4353754; 
672817,4353800; 672938,4353818; 672900,4353937; 673158,4353946; 
673148,4354137; 672855,4354130; 672783,4354295; 672757,4354434; 
672842,4354522; 672941,4354578; 673021,4354593; 673117,4354665; 
673119,4354745; 673191,4354837; 673253,4355088; 673175,4355379; 
673188,4355465; 673283,4355581; 673402,4355344; 673616,4355327; 
673903,4355380; 674072,4355387; 674378,4355543; 674440,4355612; 
674698,4355703; 674907,4355945; 675027,4355928; 675092,4355868; 
675414,4355681; 675647,4355612; 675763,4355477; 675773,4355263; 
675827,4355213; 676036,4355164; 676143,4355418; 676255,4355555; 
676269,4355603; 676400,4355681; 676445,4355779; 676405,4355981; 
676456,4356381; 676693,4356744; 676751,4356738; returning to 
676906,4356394.
    (ii) Note: Unit NEV-1 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (8)(ii) of this entry.
    (10) Unit PLA-1: Placer County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Forest Hill and Michigan Bluff.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 696102,4324325; 696269,4324238; 696581,4324246; 696792,4324349; 
696895,4324349; 697034,4324294; 697148,4324059; 697227,4323980; 
697317,4323673; 697571,4323570; 697601,4323365; 697577,4323190; 
697456,4322900; 697239,4322683; 696979,4322484; 696678,4322393; 
696303,4322242; 695802,4322441; 695501,4322665; 695350,4322846; 
695229,4322942; 695006,4323045; 694933,4323220; 694909,4323498; 
694849,4323636; 694740,4323745; 694233,4323817; 694197,4323884; 
694209,4324180; 694577,4324391; 694831,4324626; 695096,4324795; 
695374,4324837; 695615,4324825; 695748,4324795; 695881,4324708; 
695908,4324628; 695996,4324611; 696033,4324574; returning to: 
696102,4324325. Excluding: 695636,4324153; 695563,4324116; 
695471,4324147; 695380,4324137; 695482,4323950; 695575,4323941; 
695636,4323824; 695782,4323867; 695815,4323840; 695885,4323710; 
695875,4323548; 695757,4323455; 695789,4323364; 695821,4323355; 
695847,4323389; 695974,4323437; 695975,4323571; 696121,4323615; 
696178,4323884; 696037,4323867; 695941,4323923; 695775,4324220; 
returning to 695636,4324153.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit PLA-1 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 52]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.004

    (11) Unit ELD-1: El Dorado County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Camino, Pollock Pines and Sly Park.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 712042,4292979; 712243,4292856; 712419,4292796; 712540,4292683; 
712511,4292523; 712319,4292151;

[[Page 53]]

712259,4292082; 711866,4291905; 711680,4291585; 711650,4291319; 
711576,4291195; 711182,4290958; 710956,4290705; 710718,4290490; 
710400,4290528; 710054,4290648; 709815,4290648; 709523,4290568; 
708926,4289838; 708873,4289705; 708661,4289533; 708515,4289347; 
708143,4289015; 707771,4289015; 707493,4288896; 707400,4288789; 
707161,4288617; 707148,4288404; 706922,4288245; 706715,4288156; 
706471,4288294; 706007,4288251; 705507,4288398; 705231,4288234; 
704826,4288214; 704683,4288368; 704536,4288381; 704329,4288707; 
704126,4288577; 703960,4288838; 703439,4288864; 702684,4289323; 
702371,4289290; 702165,4289393; 702324,4289643; 702406,4289714; 
702744,4289897; 702829,4289991; 703050,4290362; 703106,4290570; 
703147,4290632; 703210,4290691; 703248,4290770; 703486,4290934; 
704423,4290921; 704732,4291034; 704878,4291038; 704899,4290959; 
705129,4290959; 705154,4290925; 705217,4290699; 705221,4290478; 
705267,4290369; 705355,4290336; 705497,4290340; 705522,4290361; 
705522,4290423; 705493,4290545; 705522,4290574; 705761,4290578; 
705798,4290616; 705811,4290733; 705911,4290733; 706007,4290942; 
706112,4291025; 706162,4291113; 706262,4291122; 706379,4291172; 
706634,4291402; 706902,4291506; 707291,4291531; 707379,4291577; 
707659,4291644; 708236,4291933; 708554,4292134; 708989,4292267; 
709302,4292489; 709674,4292706; 709766,4292736; 709775,4292665; 
709816,4292639; 710126,4292920; 710327,4293012; 711141,4293016; 
711258,4292972; 711367,4292964; 711830,4293033; returning to 
712042,4292979. Excluding: 708426, 4291544; 708412,4291176; 
709003,4291194; 709025,4291561; returning to 708426,4291544.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit ELD-1 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 54]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.005

    (12) Unit CAL-1: Calaveras County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Jackson, Valley Springs and Mokelumne Hill.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 695574,4232384; 695607,4232132; 695588,4232071; 695277,4232108; 
695111,4231955; 695024,4231930;

[[Page 55]]

694907,4231961; 694835,4231923; 694824,4231874; 694873,4231770; 
694707,4231700; 694580,4231609; 694379,4231528; 694281,4231528; 
694211,4231471; 694118,4231465; 694033,4231489; 694012,4231420; 
693863,4231366; 693739,4231289; 693654,4231174; 693651,4231132; 
693252,4230731; 693004,4230419; 692634,4230055; 692359,4229874; 
691998,4229785; 692018,4230045; 691947,4230296; 691889,4230367; 
691886,4230503; 691709,4230866; 691720,4230928; 691815,4231060; 
691913,4231097; 692029,4231237; 692120,4231471; 692443,4231627; 
692450,4231851; 692565,4231990; 692585,4232062; 692511,4232208; 
692327,4232231; 692290,4232293; 692259,4232435; 692310,4232683; 
692368,4232737; 692368,4232782; 692402,4232822; 692684,4232917; 
692752,4233002; 692752,4233057; 692596,4233165; 692596,4233216; 
692630,4233298; 692823,4233484; 692884,4233603; 692871,4233695; 
692959,4233892; 692959,4233939; 693010,4234004; 693129,4234041; 
693163,4234079; 693215,4234298; 693464,4234572; 693847,4234885; 
694412,4235538; 694500,4235538; 694564,4235506; 694660,4235397; 
694853,4234891; 695013,4234718; 695006,4234379; 695032,4234257; 
695153,4234123; 695281,4234110; 695397,4233969; 695531,4233649; 
695559,4233627; 695562,4233280; 695729,4233158; 695863,4233013; 
695875,4232870; 695807,4232615; 695598,4232462; returning to 
695574,4232384.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit CAL-1 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 56]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.006

    (13) Unit MEN-1: Mendocino County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Cold Spring, Eureka Hill, Mallo Pass Creek, and Point 
Arena.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 447886,4320218; 447951,4320066; 447983,4319889; 447958,4319651; 
447916,4319542; 447922,4319483;

[[Page 57]]

447971,4319445; 448196,4319365; 448430,4319368; 448547,4319333; 
448853,4319365; 449490,4319517; 449733,4319755; 449789,4319784; 
450035,4319807; 450150,4319759; 450210,4319703; 450420,4319414; 
450504,4319347; 450635,4319305; 450810,4319130; 451092,4318916; 
451162,4318828; 451226,4318719; 451042,4318062; 450935,4317981; 
450714,4317937; 450597,4317880; 450510,4317818; 450481,4317760; 
450521,4317204; 450486,4317057; 450570,4316902; 450786,4316828; 
450855,4316749; 450925,4316588; 451352,4316246; 451467,4316018; 
451510,4315844; 451502,4315781; 451442,4315626; 451328,4315533; 
451284,4315450; 451251,4315220; 451407,4315001; 451584,4314832; 
451501,4314714; 451453,4314558; 451352,4314505; 451151,4314476; 
450897,4314504; 450723,4314445; 450591,4314336; 450524,4314325; 
450307,4314414; 450136,4314528; 450080,4314502; 450050,4314395; 
449837,4314281; 449646,4314320; 449478,4314469; 449346,4314504; 
449277,4314477; 449180,4314383; 448930,4314388; 448748,4314292; 
448552,4314343; 448395,4314250; 448291,4314293; 448159,4314397; 
448041,4314742; 447804,4315012; 447535,4315087; 447379,4315047; 
447121,4315049; 447112,4314819; 447229,4314525; 447228,4314463; 
447143,4314230; 447092,4314181; 446968,4313845; 446785,4313679; 
446746,4313591; 446742,4313514; 446885,4313345; 447133,4313254; 
447301,4313116; 447441,4312938; 447582,4312493; 447147,4312559; 
447023,4312509; 446876,4312524; 446701,4312427; 446660,4312227; 
446554,4312026; 446346,4311900; 446289,4311794; 446259,4311663; 
446182,4311580; 446019,4311506; 445891,4311224; 445615,4310903; 
445416,4310807; 445267,4310672; 445095,4310678; 444754,4310641; 
444565,4310659; 444408,4310515; 444184,4310425; 444141,4310311; 
444029,4310153; 443818,4309984; 443679,4309807; 443673,4309764; 
443988,4309404; 443936,4309239; 443919,4308998; 443738,4308891; 
443825,4308738; 444132,4308361; 444318,4308088; 444424,4307816; 
444304,4307845; 444112,4307837; 443601,4307714; 443377,4307684; 
442745,4307493; 442148,4307413; 441776,4307182; 441681,4307145; 
441575,4307166; 441248,4307317; 441024,4307329; 440921,4307226; 
440624,4307211; 440402,4307138; 440274,4307148; 440225,4307257; 
440122,4307360; 439886,4307499; 439886,4307571; 439735,4307898; 
439729,4308019; 439584,4308086; 439433,4308285; 439251,4308467; 
439221,4308667; 439166,4308818; 439100,4308909; 438888,4309018; 
438858,4309151; 438652,4309447; 438573,4309526; 438513,4309641; 
438410,4309732; 437964,4309936; 437707,4310146; 437526,4310621; 
437526,4310749; 437635,4310785; 437738,4310785; 438041,4310567; 
438022,4310240; 438228,4310016; 438585,4309938; 438652,4309956; 
438670,4310022; 439039,4310016; 439136,4310113; 439469,4310113; 
439796,4310174; 439838,4310204; 440032,4310204; 440165,4310392; 
440056,4310730; 440074,4310779; 440135,4310827; 440159,4311027; 
440147,4311366; 440237,4311505; 440244,4311699; 440449,4312026; 
440371,4312134; 440262,4312207; 440116,4312207; 440038,4312231; 
439989,4312310; 439983,4312419; 439947,4312498; 439874,4312582; 
439911,4312697; 439893,4312812; 439759,4313012; 439741,4313115; 
439790,4313121; 439941,4313066; 440086,4312915; 440116,4312818; 
440092,4312758; 440189,4312721; 440135,4312649; 440153,4312576; 
440213,4312498; 440310,4312552; 440546,4312479; 440643,4312534; 
440667,4312619; 440764,4312740; 440915,4312812; 441218,4312818; 
441648,4312927; 441775,4313042; 441884,4313224; 441811,4313399; 
441660,4313545; 441617,4313660; 441424,4313684; 441381,4313847; 
441290,4314029; 441363,4314125; 441369,4314392; 441351,4314440; 
441212,4314555; 441169,4314628; 441157,4314815; 441054,4314973; 
441054,4315154; 440885,4315336; 440824,4315499; 440697,4315548; 
440116,4315536; 439941,4315457; 439566,4315421; 439215,4315481; 
439172,4315838; 439318,4316238; 439414,4316365; 439729,4316371; 
440050,4316516; 440038,4316698; 439959,4316952; 439826,4317127; 
439820,4317315; 439771,4317424; 439971,4318374; 440143,4319025; 
440350,4318995; 440659,4319045; 441220,4318935; 441393,4318859; 
441630,4318649; 441938,4318577; 442062,4318514; 442160,4318520; 
442408,4318660; 442467,4318672; 442885,4318606; 443037,4318624; 
443458,4318958; 443570,4318994; 443736,4318986; 443817,4318930; 
443942,4318700; 444130,4318174; 444206,4318204; 444488,4318702; 
444560,4318739; 444613,4318738; 444781,4318655; 444885,4318566; 
445107,4318524; 445246,4318439; 445439,4318513; 445542,4318514; 
445685,4318482; 445803,4318417; 446226,4318336; 446298,4318348; 
446424,4318418; 446549,4318578; 446661,4319187; 446707,4319293; 
446880,4319476; 447042,4319552; 447098,4319734; 447056,4319893; 
447068,4320031; 447180,4320199; 447351,4320194; 447394,4320214; 
447485,4320382; 447722,4320332; returning to 447886,4320218.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit MEN-1 for the California red-legged

[[Page 58]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.007

    (14) Unit SON-1: Sonoma County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Santa Rosa and Kenwood.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 536171,4251731; 536307,4251324; 536231,4250750; 536103,4250388; 
535718,4250087; 535462,4250177;

[[Page 59]]

535251,4250336; 534851,4250494; 534579,4250705; 534389,4250676; 
534308,4250419; 534298,4250194; 534123,4250079; 533794,4250578; 
533501,4250593; 533472,4250583; 533452,4250531; 533276,4250470; 
533146,4250524; 532957,4250539; 532814,4250509; 532248,4250796; 
532309,4250962; 532316,4251120; 532497,4251422; 532905,4251407; 
533025,4251475; 533327,4251437; 533608,4251509; 533772,4252033; 
533885,4252267; 534180,4252501; 534602,4252689; 535068,4252700; 
535824,4252154; returning to 536171,4251731.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units SON-1, SON-2 and SON-3 for the California 
red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 60]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.008

    (15) Unit SON-2: Sonoma County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Cotati and Glen Ellen.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 535134,4244142; 535187,4244062; 535622,4244348; 535838,4244353; 
535971,4244499; 536040,4244436;

[[Page 61]]

536393,4244436; 536655,4243995; 536702,4243674; 537129,4243407; 
537300,4242457; 537009,4242237; 537121,4241673; 537315,4241438; 
537510,4240808; 538274,4240465; 538488,4239638; 538778,4239243; 
538778,4238977; 538645,4238790; 538605,4238404; 538446,4238045; 
538180,4237686; 536152,4237939; 536037,4238617; 536157,4239291; 
536104,4239642; 535917,4240041; 535829,4240117; 535319,4240068; 
534653,4240161; 534496,4240364; 534786,4240840; 534813,4241186; 
533414,4242273; 533056,4242396; 532833,4242624; 532537,4242609; 
532391,4242756; 532418,4243049; 532604,4243222; 533841,4243454; 
534135,4243980; 534633,4244287; 534706,4244539; 534912,4244479; 
returning to 535134,4244142.
    (ii) Note: Unit SON-2 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (14)(ii) of this entry.
    (16) Unit SON-3: Sonoma and Marin Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Petaluma.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 530959,4230115; 531149,4229843; 531149,4229781; 531041,4229699; 
530868,4229705; 530792,4229641; 530642,4229379; 529979,4228622; 
529625,4228730; 529454,4228860; 529138,4228447; 529190,4228085; 
529057,4227870; 529301,4227268; 529301,4226775; 528922,4226523; 
528796,4226223; 528732,4225860; 528463,4225746; 528322,4225545; 
528070,4225434; 527675,4225545; 527499,4225858; 526791,4226136; 
526503,4226700; 526618,4227501; 526791,4227912; 527227,4228272; 
527718,4228328; 528554,4228970; 528535,4229182; 528890,4229679; 
529111,4229695; 529317,4230021; 529918,4229965; 530079,4229860; 
530210,4230039; 530275,4230068; 530354,4230068; 530421,4230102; 
530542,4230070; 530681,4230122; returning to 530959,4230115.
    (ii) Note: Unit SON-3 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (14)(ii) of this entry.
    (17) Unit NAP-1: Napa County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Capell Valley.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 571668,4256238; 571744,4256065; 571928,4256108; 572003,4256097; 
572230,4255795; 572479,4255665; 572879,4255676; 573030,4255503; 
573063,4255384; 573495,4255265; 573603,4255200; 573798,4255395; 
573895,4255427; 573949,4255535; 574100,4255568; 574187,4255535; 
574327,4255427; 574468,4255395; 574835,4255535; 575278,4255406; 
575408,4255427; 575430,4255244; 575408,4255017; 575592,4254887; 
575765,4254649; 575808,4254465; 575581,4254195; 575408,4254033; 
575214,4253957; 575333,4253892; 575419,4253676; 575321,4253562; 
574972,4253480; 574899,4253535; 574781,4253445; 574508,4253381; 
574411,4253302; 574367,4253332; 574279,4253463; 574146,4253508; 
573831,4253776; 573715,4253702; 573552,4253734; 573386,4253663; 
573186,4253794; 573088,4253822; 572972,4253911; 572909,4253921; 
572820,4253898; 572740,4253845; 572582,4253833; 572328,4253749; 
572104,4253461; 572027,4253479; 572020,4253414; 571495,4253784; 
571420,4254011; 571420,4254184; 571204,4254368; 570339,4254400; 
570079,4254573; 569593,4254725; 569474,4254865; 569431,4255060; 
569290,4255416; 569344,4255525; 569463,4255568; 569669,4255568; 
569852,4255600; 570015,4255676; 570207,4255556; 570241,4255438; 
570458,4255211; 570641,4255200; 570804,4255060; 570966,4255049; 
571020,4255211; 571009,4255330; 571031,4255449; 571009,4255752; 
571031,4255870; 571085,4255968; 571117,4256141; 571301,4256141; 
571560,4256281; returning to 571668,4256238.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit NAP-1 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 62]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.009

    (18) Unit MRN-1: Marin County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Valley Ford and Tomales.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 503193,4241015; 503294,4241015; 503446,4240937; 503876,4240603; 
504256,4240551; 504408,4240473;

[[Page 63]]

504433,4240421; 504484,4240396; 504584,4240395; 504545,4240350; 
504587,4240298; 504674,4240281; 504733,4240225; 504875,4240159; 
504851,4240030; 504874,4239956; 504766,4239840; 504829,4239728; 
504862,4239600; 504835,4239306; 504896,4239139; 504977,4239052; 
505087,4238842; 505172,4238850; 505319,4238813; 505493,4238806; 
505516,4238668; 505626,4238434; 505673,4238392; 506091,4238339; 
506140,4238393; 506448,4238501; 506551,4238326; 506504,4237813; 
506618,4237620; 506517,4237109; 506625,4236375; 506329,4236129; 
506284,4235230; 506524,4234994; 506343,4234300; 506695,4233557; 
506620,4233316; 506090,4233083; 506024,4233103; 505937,4233091; 
505855,4233143; 505762,4233160; 505672,4233255; 505316,4233212; 
505140,4233280; 505088,4233359; 505061,4233502; 504853,4233737; 
504730,4233985; 504594,4234030; 504488,4234115; 504418,4234208; 
504373,4234221; 504244,4234161; 503885,4234079; 503816,4234126; 
503687,4234290; 503645,4234307; 503492,4234276; 503439,4234355; 
503308,4234448; 503306,4234629; 503108,4234736; 502977,4234755; 
502885,4234906; 502888,4235086; 502871,4235112; 502733,4235138; 
502717,4235160; 502784,4235437; 502764,4235462; 502661,4235385; 
502555,4235379; 502381,4235521; 502256,4235562; 502146,4235673; 
501997,4235752; 502182,4235744; 502251,4235776; 502356,4235907; 
502405,4236072; 502480,4236149; 502493,4236237; 502526,4236262; 
502696,4236169; 502907,4235905; 503090,4235814; 503103,4235727; 
503078,4235649; 503097,4235618; 503146,4235709; 503147,4235834; 
502966,4235913; 502896,4235997; 502848,4236145; 502693,4236274; 
502563,4236320; 502474,4236284; 502354,4236108; 502304,4235881; 
502188,4235785; 502104,4235813; 502031,4235871; 501753,4235794; 
501647,4235813; 501648,4235849; 501527,4235955; 501544,4236012; 
501498,4236014; 501409,4236114; 501183,4236116; 501128,4236244; 
501074,4236286; 501097,4236453; 501048,4236477; 500968,4236596; 
500991,4236836; 500972,4236920; 500902,4236997; 500660,4237080; 
500559,4237170; 500458,4237221; 500395,4237383; 500401,4237476; 
500279,4237575; 500302,4237634; 500287,4237695; 500227,4237771; 
500253,4237811; 500238,4237936; 500164,4238003; 499987,4238094; 
500014,4238175; 499962,4238343; 499796,4238588; 499601,4238795; 
499742,4238649; 499813,4238660; 499948,4238829; 500076,4238905; 
500483,4239029; 500560,4239079; 500586,4239129; 500587,4239256; 
500537,4239409; 500539,4239562; 500438,4239717; 500464,4239818; 
500541,4239843; 500642,4239816; 500768,4239714; 500871,4239788; 
500922,4239864; 501127,4240016; 501203,4240015; 501203,4239990; 
501254,4240014; 501406,4240013; 501458,4240090; 501484,4240267; 
501535,4240317; 501688,4240315; 501713,4240341; 501815,4240289; 
501916,4240288; 502120,4240363; 502298,4240388; 502349,4240335; 
502602,4240208; 502730,4240307; 502756,4240485; 502834,4240586; 
502867,4240891; 502964,4240992; returning to 503193,4241015.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units MRN-1, MRN-2 and MRN-3 for the California 
red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 64]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.010

    (19) Unit MRN-2: Marin County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Point Reyes NE, Inverness, and Petaluma.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 512634,4232438; 512942,4232244; 513098,4232298; 513362,4232450; 
513497,4232455; 513734,4232386;

[[Page 65]]

513918,4232251; 513953,4232187; 513939,4232023; 513849,4231832; 
513855,4231619; 513876,4231594; 513952,4231792; 514067,4231818; 
514387,4231769; 514431,4231744; 514482,4231533; 514514,4231516; 
514663,4231619; 514738,4231830; 514879,4231915; 514984,4231862; 
515164,4231822; 515265,4231703; 515413,4231696; 515480,4231654; 
515682,4231600; 515773,4231673; 515857,4231825; 515889,4231847; 
516011,4231747; 516087,4231574; 516258,4231510; 516369,4231437; 
516551,4231414; 516624,4231372; 516733,4231367; 517058,4231285; 
517107,4231304; 517391,4231679; 517463,4231696; 517588,4231597; 
517667,4231496; 517768,4231273; 517772,4231173; 517811,4231094; 
517939,4231058; 518083,4230966; 518200,4231014; 518308,4231014; 
518391,4230977; 518538,4230841; 518822,4230448; 518810,4230285; 
518942,4230355; 519137,4230506; 519237,4230507; 519320,4230466; 
519549,4230605; 519594,4230608; 519685,4230581; 519829,4230580; 
519999,4230511; 520091,4230394; 520239,4230269; 520162,4230139; 
519882,4229855; 519840,4229621; 519867,4229461; 519849,4229396; 
519739,4229280; 519592,4229059; 519476,4228998; 519454,4228924; 
519378,4228818; 519315,4228630; 519042,4228213; 518464,4227912; 
518370,4227840; 518322,4227831; 518197,4227891; 517943,4228049; 
517694,4228069; 517400,4227982; 517268,4227880; 517186,4227771; 
517199,4227646; 517250,4227548; 517224,4227253; 517185,4227094; 
517202,4227018; 517172,4226789; 517183,4226684; 517345,4226172; 
517540,4225917; 517664,4225822; 517996,4225774; 518119,4225599; 
518363,4225531; 518498,4225403; 518610,4225441; 518768,4225408; 
518968,4225411; 519092,4225528; 519190,4225560; 519233,4225531; 
519388,4225502; 519507,4225352; 519594,4225350; 519749,4225266; 
519810,4225258; 520064,4225362; 520184,4225514; 520277,4225592; 
520630,4225713; 520910,4225546; 520992,4225569; 521097,4225648; 
521150,4225647; 521266,4225514; 521483,4225374; 521560,4225362; 
521593,4225446; 521576,4225682; 521628,4225793; 521667,4225821; 
521971,4225822; 522029,4225860; 522041,4225912; 522179,4225963; 
522417,4225897; 522749,4226030; 523034,4226041; 523183,4225960; 
523305,4225859; 523473,4225826; 523554,4225753; 523698,4225705; 
523900,4225560; 523999,4225413; 524219,4225251; 524366,4225189; 
524417,4225181; 524508,4225322; 524595,4225339; 524810,4225202; 
524934,4225191; 525064,4225131; 525135,4225139; 525269,4225297; 
525386,4225307; 525742,4225446; 525981,4225301; 526083,4225122; 
526277,4225058; 526307,4225022; 526328,4224957; 526330,4224726; 
526452,4224537; 526214,4224486; 526042,4224410; 525929,4224415; 
525873,4224347; 525811,4224326; 525748,4224320; 525586,4224443; 
525534,4224449; 525296,4224366; 525206,4224371; 525133,4224279; 
525087,4224261; 524966,4224252; 524839,4224204; 524671,4224229; 
524546,4224086; 524230,4223937; 523845,4224016; 523743,4223997; 
523685,4223952; 523498,4223688; 523434,4223663; 523161,4223685; 
522965,4223495; 522819,4223448; 522613,4223424; 522407,4223176; 
522258,4223101; 522271,4222843; 522364,4222760; 522445,4222581; 
522555,4222444; 522613,4222102; 522588,4222018; 522343,4221918; 
522236,4221786; 522055,4221641; 521969,4221349; 521990,4221082; 
521763,4220864; 521855,4220541; 521793,4220391; 521774,4220127; 
521784,4220067; 521896,4219981; 521924,4219896; 521848,4219817; 
521755,4219800; 521656,4219700; 521494,4219662; 521368,4219377; 
521240,4219304; 521152,4219225; 521114,4219151; 520863,4218981; 
520678,4218787; 520578,4218796; 520378,4218869; 520247,4218872; 
520018,4218822; 519872,4218838; 519845,4218996; 519642,4219152; 
519519,4219421; 519233,4219697; 518902,4219651; 518634,4219717; 
518312,4219719; 518147,4219746; 517999,4219816; 517719,4219868; 
517653,4219916; 517287,4219900; 517225,4219917; 517183,4220084; 
517009,4220242; 516987,4220313; 517103,4220544; 517122,4220629; 
517253,4220802; 517367,4221065; 517182,4221254; 517129,4221341; 
517036,4221398; 516768,4221243; 516693,4221247; 516601,4221165; 
516444,4221115; 516150,4221102; 515956,4221049; 515673,4221081; 
515460,4221071; 515380,4221101; 515114,4221102; 515014,4220983; 
514867,4220920; 514780,4220772; 514755,4220678; 514594,4220665; 
514492,4220871; 514430,4221146; 514439,4221253; 514360,4221329; 
514351,4221370; 514397,4221492; 514268,4221673; 514071,4221758; 
513978,4221885; 513976,4222125; 513829,4222366; 513771,4222562; 
513695,4222672; 513628,4222855; 513572,4222850; 513466,4222715; 
513416,4222692; 513297,4222704; 513134,4222645; 512740,4222361; 
512600,4222391; 512449,4222344; 512292,4222366; 512112,4222334; 
512046,4222390; 511964,4222543; 511866,4222643; 511826,4222861; 
511675,4222929; 511527,4223048; 511437,4223216; 511547,4223360; 
511503,4223547; 511501,4223757; 511620,4224148; 511629,4224296; 
511786,4224456; 511844,4224569; 511874,4224719; 511854,4224868; 
511902,4224965; 511904,4225113; 512071,4225338; 512157,4225513; 
512204,4225552; 512337,4225573; 512368,4225726; 512356,4225792; 
512428,4225869; 512529,4226054; 512591,4226107; 512660,4226098; 
512756,4226159; 512859,4226140; 513037,4226157; 513287,4226362; 
513607,4226528; 513677,4226611; 513728,4226781; 513769,4226828; 
513982,4226839; 514078,4226893; 514253,4227043; 514392,4227258; 
514369,4227563; 514393,4227680; 514388,4227874; 514142,4227981; 
514068,4228051; 513987,4228072; 513829,4228182; 513610,4228246; 
513532,4228309; 513362,4228319; 513228,4228439; 512822,4228591; 
512709,4228749; 512692,4228880; 512618,4229002; 512598,4229082; 
512424,4229178; 512261,4229363; 512328,4229469; 512328,4229507; 
512245,4229751; 512645,4230037; 512816,4230363; 512774,4230537; 
512777,4230732; 512685,4231053; 512590,4231193; 512559,4231357; 
512387,4231685; 512254,4231827; 512208,4231918; 512249,4232203; 
512365,4232457; 512525,4232501; returning to 512634,4232438.
    (ii) Note: Unit MRN-2 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (18)(ii) of this entry.
    (20) Unit MRN-3: Marin County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Drakes Bay and Inverness.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 510133,4216765; 510270,4216372; 510239,4216321; 510281,4216124; 
510629,4215830; 510849,4215727; 510877,4215571; 510978,4215595; 
511057,4215680; 511122,4215630; 511147,4215593; 511161,4215478; 
511210,4215387; 511275,4215332; 511518,4214941; 511553,4214727; 
511602,4214667; 511785,4214601; 511919,4214612; 512054,4214589; 
512332,4214656; 512415,4214708; 512707,4214574; 512889,4214540;

[[Page 66]]

512963,4214501; 513029,4214420; 513116,4214029; 513217,4214012; 
513416,4214031; 513512,4213950; 513576,4213953; 513736,4214119; 
513846,4214332; 513925,4214400; 514141,4214492; 514240,4214562; 
514366,4214810; 514400,4214999; 514442,4215075; 514510,4215014; 
514513,4215057; 514413,4215323; 514255,4215636; 514267,4215701; 
514317,4215712; 514365,4215687; 514559,4215488; 514642,4215319; 
514725,4215282; 514603,4215579; 514621,4215694; 514779,4215441; 
515018,4215186; 515077,4215033; 515232,4214981; 515342,4214897; 
515288,4214710; 515275,4214564; 515381,4214375; 515711,4213988; 
515746,4213733; 515733,4213354; 515750,4213055; 515781,4212901; 
515830,4212870; 516367,4212892; 516503,4212932; 516644,4213042; 
516860,4212910; 516926,4212822; 517040,4212830; 517088,4212791; 
517172,4212791; 517374,4212518; 517264,4212465; 517339,4212311; 
517414,4212254; 517480,4212267; 517595,4212205; 517661,4212078; 
517787,4212085; 517933,4212205; 518079,4212282; 518260,4212635; 
518544,4212979; 518683,4213112; 518803,4213102; 518927,4212967; 
519118,4212921; 519159,4212887; 519291,4212649; 519280,4212589; 
519210,4212517; 519196,4212418; 519336,4212358; 519353,4212325; 
519335,4212205; 519349,4212132; 519401,4212089; 519504,4212103; 
519628,4212046; 520171,4211644; 520055,4211392; 520030,4211190; 
520097,4210910; 520586,4210785; 520815,4210783; 520850,4210769; 
520892,4210704; 520861,4210397; 520721,4210162; 520600,4210028; 
520590,4209949; 520646,4209898; 520887,4209871; 521006,4209793; 
521031,4209751; 521041,4209527; 521004,4209454; 521114,4209240; 
521104,4208959; 521141,4208913; 521339,4208949; 521419,4208921; 
521461,4208889; 521598,4208620; 521501,4208595; 521346,4208500; 
520950,4208483; 520727,4208354; 520374,4208079; 520220,4208045; 
519885,4207813; 519438,4207400; 519240,4207065; 519025,4206781; 
518852,4206795; 518859,4206992; 518825,4207242; 518779,4207341; 
518633,4207493; 518590,4207597; 518303,4207765; 518255,4207851; 
518165,4207884; 518049,4207875; 518013,4207892; 517908,4208057; 
517861,4208082; 517771,4208080; 517601,4207985; 517354,4207996; 
517125,4207882; 516970,4208017; 516925,4208111; 516780,4208118; 
516653,4208173; 516549,4208178; 516215,4207960; 516078,4207893; 
516028,4207896; 516070,4207700; 516038,4207514; 515826,4207401; 
515664,4207236; 515598,4207042; 515590,4206816; 515322,4206667; 
515113,4206403; 515080,4206186; 515096,4206019; 515065,4205839; 
514688,4206208; 514367,4206421; 514164,4206598; 514016,4206652; 
513803,4206859; 513688,4206894; 513604,4206970; 513520,4206990; 
513373,4207120; 513147,4207269; 513080,4207355; 512595,4207687; 
511835,4208055; 510313,4208639; 509246,4208876; 508651,4208951; 
507880,4209000; 507124,4208993; 506775,4209072; 506615,4209014; 
506389,4209039; 506185,4209217; 506100,4209325; 506026,4209510; 
506062,4209603; 506147,4209545; 506522,4209169; 506599,4209122; 
506704,4209127; 507025,4209067; 507050,4209081; 507021,4209143; 
507076,4209099; 507177,4209122; 507283,4209116; 507420,4209185; 
507483,4209182; 507616,4209126; 507643,4209139; 507686,4209105; 
507724,4209130; 507788,4209094; 507905,4209139; 507930,4209221; 
508127,4209185; 508246,4209094; 508475,4209068; 508605,4209086; 
508742,4209175; 509023,4209151; 509049,4209111; 509162,4209163; 
509287,4209156; 509499,4209071; 509720,4209108; 509812,4208918; 
509891,4208860; 509994,4208851; 510052,4208894; 510045,4208952; 
510136,4208954; 510157,4208984; 510131,4209303; 510153,4209435; 
510272,4209507; 510319,4209698; 510496,4209864; 510535,4210135; 
510476,4210146; 510415,4210004; 510296,4209863; 510147,4209602; 
510074,4209535; 509993,4209279; 509919,4209208; 509881,4209127; 
509880,4209033; 509912,4208981; 510016,4208932; 510001,4208886; 
509935,4208880; 509859,4208919; 509794,4209132; 509665,4209263; 
509602,4209288; 509535,4209402; 509522,4209605; 509542,4209833; 
509599,4209906; 509582,4209938; 509531,4209958; 509498,4210182; 
509497,4210378; 509530,4210514; 509481,4210581; 509421,4210611; 
509363,4210579; 509397,4210503; 509347,4210265; 509376,4209961; 
509337,4209815; 509262,4209739; 509322,4209688; 509335,4209619; 
509231,4209471; 509045,4209333; 508894,4209327; 508634,4209341; 
508147,4209491; 508043,4209600; 508011,4209679; 508173,4209875; 
508255,4210124; 508276,4210307; 508411,4210455; 508358,4210636; 
508157,4210758; 508218,4210924; 508310,4211016; 508308,4211083; 
508069,4211277; 507969,4211477; 507982,4211523; 507957,4211557; 
507908,4211517; 507891,4211365; 507858,4211301; 507856,4210821; 
507724,4210572; 507654,4210495; 507635,4210336; 507564,4210209; 
507584,4210056; 507624,4209986; 507623,4209788; 507582,4209630; 
507506,4209538; 507402,4209523; 507316,4209544; 507282,4209578; 
507243,4209663; 507223,4209841; 507189,4209938; 507155,4209926; 
507137,4209871; 507120,4209657; 507072,4209525; 506934,4209479; 
506640,4209505; 506585,4209679; 506405,4209809; 506374,4209808; 
506330,4209751; 506300,4209746; 505982,4209766; 505968,4209916; 
505932,4209915; 505904,4210075; 505989,4210384; 505975,4210478; 
505841,4210606; 505717,4210639; 505621,4210708; 505541,4210808; 
505483,4210945; 505662,4211260; 505803,4211801; 505861,4211906; 
506155,4212049; 506253,4212142; 506528,4212306; 506603,4212436; 
506660,4212449; 506814,4212424; 506833,4212520; 506806,4212654; 
506849,4212713; 506972,4212769; 507062,4212882; 506897,4212979; 
506875,4213038; 506870,4213078; 506970,4213237; 507091,4213310; 
507337,4213389; 507473,4213521; 507701,4213616; 507766,4213902; 
507762,4213958; 507701,4213945; 507619,4213805; 507498,4213731; 
507377,4213715; 507325,4213740; 507320,4213683; 507208,4213594; 
507194,4213554; 507141,4213533; 506822,4213739; 506815,4213782; 
506850,4213857; 506771,4214113; 506743,4214115; 506675,4214021; 
506726,4213828; 506726,4213696; 506678,4213492; 506493,4213195; 
506389,4212903; 506254,4212836; 506213,4212761; 506114,4212799; 
505874,4212950; 505835,4213134; 505797,4213179; 505897,4213364; 
505883,4213473; 505786,4213556; 505841,4213871; 505829,4213936; 
505714,4214048; 505700,4214146; 505822,4214442; 505999,4214691; 
505996,4214804; 505922,4214995; 505744,4215071; 505667,4215174; 
505682,4215213; 505800,4215221; 505869,4215291; 506047,4215394; 
506071,4215552; 506153,4215767; 506306,4215910; 506113,4215969; 
506033,4215923; 505970,4215915; 505940,4215851; 505734,4215768; 
505663,4215684; 505665,4215590; 505714,4215479; 505716,4215417; 
505473,4215046; 505480,4214996; 505551,4214971; 505562,4214934; 
505526,4214858; 505519,4214764; 505394,4214667; 505239,4214416; 
505308,4214248; 505286,4213725;

[[Page 67]]

505166,4213472; 505131,4213280; 505078,4213202; 505125,4212897; 
505079,4212810; 504900,4212697; 504875,4212624; 504885,4212573; 
504699,4212565; 504579,4212601; 504277,4212526; 504121,4212539; 
504025,4212680; 504012,4212738; 504102,4212844; 504120,4212904; 
504015,4213135; 504046,4213215; 504113,4213731; 503996,4213871; 
504034,4213972; 503978,4214093; 503977,4214204; 503830,4214257; 
503835,4214302; 503876,4214339; 503876,4214401; 503815,4214438; 
503738,4214410; 503736,4214280; 503812,4214133; 503817,4214085; 
503769,4213973; 503833,4213955; 503823,4213683; 503896,4213564; 
503833,4213478; 503729,4213414; 503716,4213377; 503716,4213290; 
503691,4213250; 503706,4213134; 503833,4212871; 503783,4212787; 
503653,4212683; 503653,4212655; 503848,4212534; 503974,4212395; 
504304,4212249; 504383,4212104; 504416,4211984; 504527,4211838; 
504502,4211391; 504441,4211246; 504386,4211242; 504228,4211389; 
503976,4211540; 503867,4211561; 503708,4211770; 503572,4211855; 
503491,4211936; 503412,4211941; 503199,4212071; 503161,4212073; 
503125,4212040; 503208,4211906; 503395,4211843; 503522,4211746; 
503496,4211685; 503407,4211715; 503382,4211680; 503447,4211617; 
503633,4211529; 503660,4211433; 503726,4211397; 503763,4211345; 
503792,4211211; 503904,4211249; 504028,4211206; 504185,4211117; 
504333,4210980; 504453,4210930; 504659,4210567; 504878,4210346; 
504957,4210209; 505062,4210144; 505202,4209880; 505237,4209682; 
505324,4209654; 505374,4209663; 505343,4209781; 505363,4209797; 
505547,4209768; 505624,4209689; 505611,4209581; 505577,4209548; 
505377,4209502; 505306,4209375; 505228,4209324; 504720,4209278; 
504495,4209232; 503790,4209003; 503381,4208827; 502952,4208525; 
502424,4208062; 502092,4207655; 501862,4207309; 501600,4206827; 
501470,4206438; 501401,4206059; 501407,4205930; 501463,4205808; 
501466,4205587; 501645,4205532; 501759,4205459; 501846,4205437; 
501883,4205393; 501964,4205388; 502079,4205256; 502351,4205134; 
502442,4205166; 502497,4205140; 502567,4205152; 502686,4205086; 
502750,4205080; 502867,4205113; 502873,4205060; 503019,4204813; 
503124,4204736; 503115,4204722; 502956,4204673; 502927,4204721; 
502810,4204750; 502632,4204765; 502492,4204737; 502373,4204742; 
502323,4204822; 502347,4204896; 502292,4204963; 502181,4204983; 
502112,4204967; 501888,4205031; 501683,4204983; 501563,4205013; 
501477,4204995; 501377,4205051; 501227,4205013; 501227,4204947; 
501192,4204936; 501123,4205000; 501156,4205033; 501127,4205088; 
501050,4205076; 500973,4205148; 500811,4205234; 500575,4205162; 
500552,4205058; 500420,4205028; 500409,4205116; 500293,4205180; 
500176,4205160; 500112,4205121; 500082,4205134; 500035,4205076; 
500014,4205138; 499960,4205144; 499933,4205132; 499908,4205069; 
499856,4205055; 499796,4205072; 499774,4205044; 499700,4205069; 
499499,4205076; 499452,4205234; 499347,4205261; 499348,4205303; 
499300,4205322; 499161,4205311; 499129,4205276; 499091,4205304; 
499077,4205280; 499042,4205321; 499001,4205306; 499005,4205265; 
499023,4205267; 498993,4205231; 498985,4205317; 498933,4205329; 
498893,4205265; 498794,4205213; 498766,4205151; 498712,4205145; 
498599,4205178; 498517,4205164; 498476,4205219; 498452,4205161; 
498348,4205198; 498327,4205256; 498173,4205288; 498083,4205254; 
498014,4205270; 497983,4205215; 497891,4205242; 497876,4205290; 
497903,4205377; 497979,4205447; 498051,4205586; 498106,4205613; 
498115,4205676; 498188,4205786; 498243,4205796; 498308,4205758; 
498360,4205764; 498497,4205674; 498587,4205715; 498578,4205773; 
498665,4205838; 498695,4205922; 498819,4205919; 498847,4205899; 
498954,4205918; 499075,4206064; 499253,4206407; 499399,4206801; 
499539,4207277; 499907,4208172; 500142,4208871; 500345,4209347; 
500720,4210420; 500986,4211087; 501012,4211233; 501361,4212122; 
501901,4213703; 502491,4215316; 503094,4217156; 503345,4217022; 
503679,4216629; 503730,4216579; 503799,4216555; 503958,4216581; 
504285,4216561; 504526,4216621; 504859,4216757; 505264,4217009; 
505550,4217104; 506541,4216757; 506604,4217067; 506525,4217161; 
506532,4217185; 506994,4217323; 507410,4217877; 508102,4217877; 
509072,4218155; 509626,4218155; 510135,4217982; 510344,4217819; 
510140,4217687; 510054,4217459; 509963,4217330; 509962,4217179; 
510098,4216973; 510136,4216841; returning to 510133,4216765.
    (ii) Note: Unit MRN-3 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (18)(ii) of this entry.
    (21) Unit SOL-1: Solano and Napa Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles Cordelia, Benecia, Fairfield South and Vine 
Hill.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 573848,4228015; 573903,4227912; 573977,4227914; 574101,4228001; 
574144,4227996; 574168,4227924; 574108,4227756; 574045,4227438; 
574091,4227308; 574369,4227183; 574607,4226770; 574709,4226724; 
574710,4226757; 574752,4226739; 575176,4225375; 575367,4224934; 
575363,4224914; 575154,4224811; 575156,4224422; 575340,4224312; 
575272,4224261; 575277,4224221; 575430,4223998; 575543,4223916; 
575898,4223882; 575951,4223933; 575956,4224042; 576548,4224315; 
576613,4224309; 577094,4224080; 577185,4224072; 577294,4223874; 
577241,4223622; 577294,4223503; 577394,4223421; 577361,4223317; 
577276,4223227; 577093,4223198; 577026,4223148; 577088,4222761; 
577231,4222620; 577424,4222494; 577487,4222409; 577764,4222437; 
577901,4222389; 577908,4222309; 577823,4222231; 578000,4222065; 
577976,4222018; 577851,4221975; 577819,4221920; 577874,4221749; 
577847,4221604; 577479,4221571; 577347,4221465; 577347,4221267; 
577254,4221042; 577263,4220963; 577240,4220963; 577232,4220845; 
577157,4220753; 577148,4220519; 577207,4220260; 577340,4219959; 
577708,4219717; 577833,4219667; 578061,4219640; 578022,4219507; 
577850,4219230; 578141,4219044; 578141,4218548; 578071,4218516; 
577638,4218687; 576844,4218674; 576474,4218621; 576315,4218370; 
576130,4218317; 575892,4218145; 575693,4217814; 575535,4217616; 
575045,4217139; 574873,4216862; 574304,4217100; 574026,4217139; 
573391,4217351; 573100,4217311; 572730,4217510; 572550,4217698; 
572484,4217823; 572498,4218787; 572276,4219425; 572241,4219668; 
571809,4219995; 571486,4220345; 571285,4220358; 571097,4220460; 
570722,4220804; 570712,4220888; 570467,4221496; 569971,4222168; 
569322,4222661; 569141,4222871; 568932,4223029; 569100,4223446; 
569287,4223455; 569617,4223245; 569859,4223239; 569998,4223461; 
570161,4223803; 570212,4223793; 570589,4223923;

[[Page 68]]

570713,4223831; 570802,4223659; 570802,4223501; 570936,4223240; 
571008,4222761; 571145,4222466; 571240,4222370; 571367,4222173; 
571848,4221869; 571964,4221615; 572129,4221634; 572415,4221529; 
572618,4221361; 572912,4221346; 572919,4221484; 573182,4221670; 
573101,4221744; 573080,4222159; 572894,4222695; 572719,4223078; 
572686,4223384; 572555,4223800; 572555,4224434; 572609,4224828; 
572596,4225163; 572424,4225185; 572290,4225081; 572133,4225232; 
572065,4225225; 571881,4225001; 571574,4224781; 571484,4224773; 
571338,4224672; 571231,4224490; 570850,4224490; 570733,4224439; 
570602,4224420; 570585,4224503; 570453,4224690; 570576,4224852; 
570722,4224934; 570875,4225093; 570763,4225322; 570670,4225406; 
570879,4225740; 571040,4225925; 571358,4226168; 571485,4226295; 
571618,4226478; 571663,4226445; 571710,4226470; 571678,4226529; 
571802,4226631; 571975,4226718; 572345,4226851; 572506,4226954; 
572764,4227177; 573262,4227884; 573371,4227967; 573657,4228044; 
573766,4228055; returning to 573848,4228015.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units SOL-1, SOL-2 and SOL-3 for the California 
red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 69]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.011

    (22) Unit SOL-2: Solano and Napa Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Cordelia.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 570458,4232242; 570722,4232209; 571086,4232374; 571367,4232573; 
571880,4232606; 572552,4232394;

[[Page 70]]

572809,4232259; 572809,4232155; 572756,4231996; 572637,4231837; 
572637,4231639; 573009,4231625; 573192,4231413; 573390,4231275; 
573441,4231119; 573467,4230836; 573406,4230775; 573470,4230566; 
573705,4230214; 573992,4230187; 574036,4230088; 574120,4230009; 
574352,4229667; 574403,4229391; 574344,4229350; 573890,4229241; 
573760,4229329; 573519,4229412; 573113,4229431; 572770,4229520; 
572598,4229533; 572300,4229291; 571970,4229190; 571766,4229253; 
571606,4229514; 571658,4230168; 571639,4230536; 571519,4230834; 
571360,4230968; 571023,4230968; 570750,4231012; 570560,4230936; 
570294,4230699; 569918,4230136; 569626,4230110; 569334,4230180; 
568858,4230392; 568747,4230511; 568604,4230722; 568466,4230826; 
568420,4230947; 568427,4231151; 568370,4231153; 568241,4231036; 
568170,4231061; 568251,4231202; 568522,4231421; 568329,4231625; 
568273,4231618; 568199,4231461; 568133,4231392; 568051,4231386; 
567956,4231463; 567912,4231543; 567727,4231690; 567729,4231878; 
567994,4232292; 567944,4232639; 568093,4233152; 568821,4233152; 
569151,4233185; 569548,4233185; 569846,4233019; 570061,4232854; 
returning to 570458,4232242.
    (ii) Note: Unit SOL-2 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (21)(ii) of this entry.
    (23) Unit SOL-3: Solano and Napa Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Cordelia.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 567740,4229171; 568267,4229171; 568477,4228910; 568712,4228853; 
568966,4228656; 569087,4228510; 569334,4228485; 569607,4228396; 
569918,4228237; 570276,4228164; 571071,4228258; 571556,4228946; 
572117,4228927; 572376,4228815; 572535,4228688; 572789,4228707; 
573052,4228841; 573309,4228751; 573595,4228530; 573591,4228489; 
572973,4227712; 572720,4227679; 572641,4227523; 572604,4227377; 
572604,4227200; 572266,4227009; 572043,4226973; 571747,4226787; 
571739,4226736; 571691,4226684; 571607,4226655; 571371,4226453; 
571252,4226308; 570965,4226045; 570780,4225806; 570606,4225519; 
570453,4225433; 570323,4225316; 570088,4225297; 569929,4225225; 
569754,4225196; 569569,4225199; 569376,4225109; 569270,4225000; 
569119,4224961; 569074,4224876; 568960,4224768; 568745,4224634; 
568523,4224574; 568380,4224504; 568010,4224527; 567864,4224622; 
567019,4224654; 566765,4224802; 566704,4225101; 566522,4225215; 
566353,4225363; 566462,4225788; 566610,4226015; 566604,4226126; 
566731,4226294; 566877,4226326; 567175,4226542; 567232,4226739; 
567105,4226948; 567076,4227307; 567417,4228231; 567664,4228428; 
567740,4228580; returning to 567740,4229171.
    (ii) Note: Unit SOL-3 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (21)(ii) of this entry.
    (24) Unit CCS-1: Contra Costa County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Richmond, Benecia, Briones Valley and Walnut Creek.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 572162,4205268; 572327,4205277; 572442,4205195; 572582,4205195; 
572788,4205283; 572909,4205274; 573122,4204829; 573298,4204638; 
573495,4204549; 573519,4204473; 573487,4204382; 573594,4204332; 
573672,4204255; 573639,4204185; 573520,4204083; 573424,4203726; 
573355,4203671; 573267,4203695; 573150,4203787; 572928,4203867; 
572737,4204064; 572574,4203972; 572526,4203835; 571765,4203776; 
571660,4203656; 571783,4202972; 571741,4202650; 571991,4202253; 
572214,4201968; 572486,4201677; 572471,4201544; 572497,4201511; 
572614,4201480; 572794,4201502; 572878,4201552; 573135,4201820; 
573168,4201827; 573218,4201660; 573237,4201425; 573292,4201268; 
573364,4201222; 573484,4200970; 573443,4201046; 573544,4201047; 
573651,4201342; 573748,4201343; 573742,4201477; 574217,4201456; 
574155,4201560; 574504,4201744; 574537,4201730; 574501,4201794; 
574535,4201949; 574691,4201984; 574719,4201926; 574749,4201918; 
574771,4201939; 574774,4202005; 574799,4202006; 574807,4201453; 
575241,4201597; 575195,4201668; 575198,4201759; 575232,4201791; 
575271,4201928; 575242,4201927; 575276,4202021; 575390,4202092; 
575386,4202303; 575527,4202304; 575672,4202256; 575687,4202126; 
575729,4202104; 575803,4202084; 575955,4202109; 575936,4202055; 
576042,4201903; 575989,4201793; 576046,4201771; 576025,4201654; 
576171,4201610; 576222,4201746; 576282,4201829; 576248,4201881; 
576272,4201920; 576235,4201988; 576381,4202154; 576452,4202128; 
576537,4202156; 576696,4201885; 576871,4201782; 576922,4201934; 
577022,4202086; 577036,4202077; 577059,4202163; 577129,4202252; 
577122,4202327; 577165,4202394; 577286,4202312; 577377,4202449; 
577553,4202269; 577370,4202080; 577433,4202019; 577181,4201778; 
577331,4201778; 577332,4201711; 577396,4201713; 577394,4201778; 
577538,4201779; 577538,4201608; 577375,4201499; 577180,4201413; 
577177,4201270; 577253,4201191; 577192,4200992; 577204,4200806; 
577331,4200562; 577350,4200480; 577311,4200435; 577192,4200372; 
577162,4200287; 577028,4200293; 576947,4200268; 576858,4200184; 
576906,4200083; 576929,4199888; 576926,4199829; 576851,4199719; 
576847,4199627; 576744,4199595; 576480,4199299; 576670,4199097; 
576790,4199053; 576934,4198944; 577000,4198816; 576998,4198671; 
576909,4198588; 576860,4198575; 576798,4198592; 576812,4198531; 
576357,4198119; 576106,4197955; 575987,4197664; 576046,4197240; 
576005,4197111; 575797,4196993; 575587,4196999; 575432,4196824; 
575436,4196897; 575386,4197011; 575161,4197151; 575066,4197298; 
574718,4197534; 574156,4197457; 574162,4197390; 573973,4197317; 
573757,4197318; 573683,4197437; 573738,4197634; 573750,4197950; 
573599,4197933; 573543,4198199; 573353,4198414; 573281,4198460; 
573166,4198456; 573063,4198504; 573022,4198458; 572836,4198432; 
572610,4198534; 572532,4198601; 572485,4198723; 572417,4198723; 
572221,4198785; 572141,4198998; 572010,4199081; 571881,4199118; 
571670,4199102; 571566,4199147; 571524,4199202; 571507,4199310; 
571533,4199362; 571350,4199393; 571009,4199625; 570836,4199835; 
570696,4199866; 570536,4199789; 570280,4199549; 569826,4199391; 
569478,4199475; 568851,4199841; 568699,4199671; 568627,4199387; 
568691,4199069; 568353,4199245; 567529,4198875; 566350,4199375; 
566284,4199599; 566341,4199604; 566737,4199831; 566760,4199874; 
566841,4199875; 566833,4199961; 566930,4200163; 566919,4200201; 
566776,4200022; 566657,4200001; 566562,4199885;

[[Page 71]]

566296,4199802; 566239,4199753; 566203,4199876; 565621,4200086; 
565429,4200430; 565511,4200537; 565521,4200525; 566258,4201186; 
566869,4201553; 566786,4201997; 566461,4202226; 566270,4202570; 
565402,4203167; 565751,4203676; 566022,4203755; 566817,4203589; 
567187,4203774; 567307,4204369; 567551,4204653; 567971,4204786; 
568162,4205016; 568316,4205601; 569243,4205726; 569500,4206028; 
569786,4206162; 571795,4205888; 571822,4205812; 572102,4205486; 
572129,4205309; returning to 572162,4205268.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit CCS-1 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 72]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.012

    (25) Unit CCS-2: Contra Costa and Alameda Counties, California.
    (i) Subunit CCS-2A. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Walnut 
Creek, Clayton, and Diablo. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 590966,4195381; 591584,4195077; 591596,4194986; 
591659,4194914; 591743,4194903; 591896,4194623;

[[Page 73]]

592141,4194355; 592189,4194330; 592235,4194205; 592329,4194137; 
592442,4194139; 592470,4194106; 592527,4193846; 592688,4193638; 
592834,4193634; 592942,4193372; 593298,4193329; 593278,4193189; 
592898,4193026; 592464,4192592; 592410,4192158; 592410,4191723; 
592301,4191397; 591867,4191017; 591595,4190529; 591495,4190495; 
591457,4190511; 591447,4190592; 591142,4190699; 591124,4190836; 
590955,4190873; 590648,4191074; 589965,4191056; 589873,4191079; 
589807,4191148; 589751,4191159; 589656,4191120; 589656,4191026; 
589428,4191042; 589293,4190997; 588928,4190974; 588851,4191280; 
588891,4191357; 588857,4191474; 588834,4191480; 588831,4191683; 
588477,4191754; 588478,4191791; 588335,4191796; 588267,4191865; 
588296,4191958; 588224,4192037; 588213,4192087; 588248,4192180; 
588129,4192225; 588074,4192281; 588047,4192349; 588100,4192405; 
588063,4192545; 587986,4192680; 587925,4192733; 587796,4192729; 
587701,4192678; 587606,4192858; 587356,4193019; 587222,4193159; 
587396,4193281; 587505,4193429; 587711,4193321; 588016,4193393; 
588207,4193552; 588289,4193768; 588378,4193831; 588728,4193850; 
588804,4194250; 588982,4194638; 589026,4194983; 589108,4195198; 
589323,4195327; 589882,4195381; 590548,4195274; returning to 
590966,4195381.
    (ii) Subunit CCS-2B. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Diablo, 
Tassajara, Byron Hot Springs, Dublin, Livermore, Altamont, Midway, and 
Clifton Court Forebay. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 
coordinates (E,N): 599361,4176006; 599341,4176048; 599341,4176174; 
599284,4176237; 599339,4176375; 599328,4176394; 599351,4176409; 
599193,4176675; 599350,4177063; 599085,4177291; 598887,4177526; 
598831,4177784; 598883,4178009; 598893,4178237; 598946,4178300; 
598936,4178389; 599076,4178612; 599001,4178659; 598939,4178780; 
598982,4178937; 599256,4179309; 599170,4179461; 599348,4180125; 
599348,4180303; 599494,4180570; 599710,4180868; 599735,4181179; 
599932,4181459; 600465,4181344; 601189,4181433; 601265,4181573; 
601010,4181785; 601010,4182167; 601038,4182207; 601226,4182275; 
601305,4182383; 601321,4182514; 601408,4182609; 601544,4182684; 
601770,4182693; 602052,4182635; 601992,4183824; 601846,4184616; 
600555,4184616; 600399,4184565; 600269,4184571; 600243,4184637; 
600179,4184639; 600087,4184579; 599915,4184539; 599359,4184962; 
599227,4185769; 598974,4186032; 599082,4186368; 597914,4186452; 
597879,4186793; 597685,4186967; 597681,4187031; 597633,4187076; 
597562,4187077; 597525,4187112; 597176,4187118; 597174,4186906; 
597046,4186902; 596844,4187007; 596646,4187013; 596172,4187079; 
595987,4187174; 595752,4187566; 595813,4187685; 595746,4187785; 
595523,4187813; 595445,4188105; 595352,4188108; 595240,4188044; 
595240,4187971; 595198,4187857; 595210,4187761; 595151,4187633; 
595069,4187629; 594873,4187497; 594601,4187391; 594459,4187434; 
594459,4187518; 594309,4187529; 594261,4187722; 594233,4187736; 
594223,4187841; 594131,4187785; 593748,4187977; 593705,4188078; 
593606,4188042; 593474,4188081; 593410,4188204; 593240,4188182; 
593132,4188217; 593036,4188421; 592987,4188416; 592913,4188598; 
592625,4188865; 592566,4188841; 592547,4188887; 592579,4188947; 
592403,4189055; 592432,4189145; 592389,4189312; 592346,4189373; 
592327,4189556; 592289,4189590; 592283,4189782; 592464,4189714; 
593007,4189660; 593441,4189388; 594039,4189171; 594364,4189225; 
594907,4189225; 595342,4188900; 595722,4188520; 596211,4188465; 
596428,4188845; 596482,4189334; 596699,4189931; 597242,4189986; 
597514,4189551; 597894,4189334; 598165,4189117; 598491,4188791; 
598871,4188302; 599577,4188411; 600012,4188411; 600336,4188087; 
600351,4186962; 601470,4186982; 601695,4186728; 602129,4186456; 
602944,4185370; 603650,4184936; 603867,4184719; 604410,4184556; 
606690,4182112; 606690,4181081; 607776,4180266; 621397,4184549; 
621470,4184429; 621507,4184287; 621983,4184349; 621788,4184672; 
623318,4185153; 623256,4185109; 623331,4184969; 623311,4184795; 
623520,4184478; 623692,4184338; 623735,4184117; 623472,4184116; 
623479,4183966; 623791,4183970; 623813,4183913; 623940,4183799; 
623890,4183477; 623954,4183316; 624056,4183260; 624119,4183134; 
624022,4182579; 624054,4182471; 624181,4182344; 624213,4182236; 
624206,4182046; 624323,4181863; 624472,4181801; 624471,4181577; 
624777,4181462; 624962,4181261; 625001,4181120; 625034,4180699; 
624946,4180302; 624892,4180389; 624579,4180724; 624473,4180770; 
623882,4180767; 623692,4180833; 623559,4181043; 623364,4181183; 
623224,4181383; 623257,4181585; 623226,4181707; 623107,4181751; 
623051,4181839; 622963,4181907; 622678,4182332; 622560,4182376; 
622472,4182442; 622425,4182514; 622328,4182564; 621806,4182439; 
621645,4182584; 621674,4182640; 621703,4182642; 621709,4182689; 
621528,4182836; 621453,4182808; 621431,4182743; 621406,4182776; 
621381,4182923; 621490,4183263; 621445,4183403; 621342,4183538; 
621098,4183711; 621050,4183843; 621031,4184097; 621241,4184338; 
621139,4184357; 621006,4184237; 620949,4184103; 620949,4183835; 
620983,4183702; 621309,4183387; 621332,4183208; 621247,4183062; 
621234,4182871; 621347,4182624; 621380,4182609; 621400,4182556; 
621389,4182512; 621238,4182326; 621169,4182277; 621146,4182237; 
621203,4182212; 621140,4182070; 621049,4181958; 621071,4181920; 
621203,4181983; 621390,4182187; 621500,4182201; 621508,4182234; 
621462,4182320; 621555,4182405; 621608,4182406; 621772,4182312; 
622035,4182252; 622121,4182186; 622129,4182128; 622076,4182055; 
621966,4181995; 621990,4181963; 622087,4181953; 622193,4182005; 
622344,4182150; 622373,4182150; 622324,4181968; 622489,4182014; 
622512,4181967; 622438,4181807; 622507,4181784; 622607,4181864; 
622646,4181844; 622646,4181772; 622586,4181578; 622576,4181510; 
622593,4181479; 622690,4181578; 622756,4181595; 622746,4181709; 
622829,4181733; 622898,4181650; 623013,4181402; 622971,4181220; 
623021,4181194; 623122,4181313; 623190,4181189; 623441,4180906; 
623501,4180763; 623628,4180649; 624135,4180591; 624429,4180624; 
624619,4180516; 624856,4180172; 624907,4179859; 625025,4179696; 
625203,4179620; 625248,4179512; 625271,4179192; 625357,4179099; 
625221,4179013; 625094,4178683; 624999,4178137; 624186,4177959; 
623602,4177870; 623284,4177769; 622719,4177737; 621971,4177625; 
621163,4177429; 621071,4177365; 621001,4177389; 620839,4177350; 
620531,4177175; 620338,4176956; 620073,4176555; 619557,4176372; 
619398,4176387; 618445,4175921; 617741,4175699; 617214,4175661; 
616985,4175845; 616827,4175893; 616726,4176023; 616595,4176069;

[[Page 74]]

616465,4175916; 616300,4175916; 616199,4175967; 615952,4175987; 
615645,4175956; 615550,4175968; 615445,4176022; 615277,4176155; 
615204,4176187; 615014,4176190; 614869,4176077; 614818,4175888; 
614818,4175781; 614758,4175694; 614621,4175571; 614115,4175445; 
613667,4175272; 613613,4176416; 613543,4176702; 612845,4176702; 
612559,4176794; 612400,4176791; 612405,4176585; 612468,4176496; 
612180,4176347; 612010,4176352; 612010,4176485; 611878,4176498; 
611851,4176683; 611698,4176683; 611670,4176703; 611263,4176692; 
611257,4176915; 611178,4176961; 611109,4177229; 610888,4177229; 
610888,4177496; 611059,4177908; 611149,4177904; 611195,4177958; 
611343,4178037; 611193,4178156; 611193,4178602; 611068,4178930; 
610967,4179021; 610819,4179105; 610460,4179200; 610330,4179268; 
609942,4179653; 609884,4179675; 609747,4179649; 609678,4179584; 
609502,4179091; 609208,4179078; 609149,4178483; 608938,4178402; 
608889,4178405; 608832,4178467; 608803,4178607; 608865,4178832; 
608944,4178926; 609022,4179100; 609060,4179514; 608923,4179877; 
607783,4179877; 607783,4180239; 607592,4180175; 607605,4179870; 
607484,4179865; 607370,4179978; 606881,4179934; 606870,4179354; 
607316,4178848; 607596,4178386; 607665,4178177; 607653,4177923; 
607603,4177779; 607537,4177711; 607502,4177695; 607417,4177711; 
607172,4177871; 607079,4177880; 606952,4177811; 607119,4177617; 
607167,4177594; 607178,4177547; 607313,4177374; 607361,4177193; 
607383,4176794; 607422,4176549; 607376,4176262; 607269,4175975; 
607245,4175797; 607203,4175727; 607089,4175779; 606953,4175988; 
606888,4175970; 606501,4175670; 606083,4175437; 605976,4175309; 
605778,4174901; 605660,4174762; 605340,4174590; 605260,4174590; 
605062,4175042; 604508,4175020; 604524,4174007; 603715,4173996; 
603645,4173682; 603510,4173621; 603327,4173595; 603249,4173617; 
603170,4173716; 602842,4173817; 602840,4173677; 602595,4173680; 
602368,4173630; 602125,4173622; 601350,4173736; 601331,4173978; 
601403,4174098; 601431,4174282; 601370,4174292; 601409,4174480; 
601336,4174586; 601270,4174580; 601326,4174955; 601262,4175552; 
601290,4175975; 601215,4176027; 601041,4176273; 600792,4176312; 
600663,4176411; 600507,4176407; 600411,4176520; 600516,4176742; 
600494,4176951; 600239,4177033; 600094,4177043; 599730,4176899; 
599700,4176852; 599576,4176774; 599452,4176577; 599452,4176098; 
599402,4176098; returning to 599361,4176006. Excluding: 622742,4184043; 
622742,4183973; 623170,4183986; 623154,4184309; 622828,4184300; 
622828,4184064; returning to 622742,4184043.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit CCS-2, subunits CCS-2A and CCS-2B, for the 
California red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 75]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.013

    (26) Unit ALA-1: Alameda and Contra Costa Counties, California.
    (i) Subunit ALA-1A. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Hayward and 
Dublin. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 589322,4176556; 589405,4176494; 589496,4176505; 589924,4176319; 
589935,4176295; 590430,4176229; 590671,4176222;

[[Page 76]]

591266,4175498; 591719,4174774; 591948,4174305; 591853,4174108; 
591642,4173986; 591604,4173865; 591542,4173820; 591545,4173707; 
591486,4173693; 591355,4173389; 591499,4173241; 591694,4173149; 
591840,4172933; 591448,4172833; 590725,4172829; 589688,4172994; 
589054,4173369; 588658,4173519; 588382,4173575; 588034,4173607; 
587897,4173519; 587616,4173529; 587503,4173596; 587361,4173580; 
587265,4173454; 587091,4173433; 586954,4173495; 586775,4173449; 
586544,4173495; 586531,4173449; 586293,4173369; 586242,4173425; 
586242,4173859; 586210,4173945; 586247,4174005; 586500,4174070; 
586630,4174164; 587008,4174540; 587167,4174927; 587446,4175244; 
587548,4175454; 587414,4175727; 587586,4176114; 587681,4176546; 
587654,4176671; 587794,4176717; 587912,4176814; 588009,4176960; 
588352,4177224; 588496,4177249; 588745,4177130; 588812,4177013; 
588827,4176886; 588916,4176782; 589103,4176705; returning to 
589322,4176556.
    (ii) Subunit ALA-1B. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Hayward, 
Newark, Dublin and Niles. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 588321,4173181; 588639,4173092; 589000,4172905; 
589752,4172727; 589798,4172674; 589766,4172519; 590315,4172407; 
590489,4172393; 591221,4172426; 591396,4172458; 591606,4172445; 
592102,4172231; 592172,4172044; 592189,4171371; 592042,4171279; 
592151,4170380; 592223,4170274; 592266,4169980; 592295,4169974; 
592376,4169868; 592356,4169776; 592382,4169675; 592366,4169540; 
592758,4169210; 592904,4169127; 593012,4169114; 593047,4169002; 
592837,4168532; 592484,4168000; 592339,4168097; 592026,4168424; 
591967,4168457; 591926,4168450; 591490,4168898; 591583,4168715; 
591600,4168604; 591552,4168555; 591445,4168506; 591391,4168384; 
591375,4168229; 591314,4168047; 591180,4167755; 591302,4167480; 
591364,4167166; 591324,4167114; 590985,4166944; 590847,4166939; 
590568,4166990; 590483,4166904; 590440,4166758; 590366,4166722; 
590240,4166746; 590127,4166801; 590009,4166810; 589907,4166736; 
589879,4166634; 589923,4166536; 589913,4166354; 589951,4166210; 
589925,4166027; 589834,4165738; 589459,4165656; 589211,4165548; 
589046,4165281; 588824,4165281; 588533,4165134; 588437,4164907; 
588163,4164532; 587725,4164310; 587497,4164106; 587332,4163903; 
587131,4163906; 586555,4163647; 586163,4163992; 586062,4164145; 
585877,4164291; 585839,4164456; 585687,4164710; 585560,4165078; 
585538,4165286; 585395,4165510; 585247,4165573; 585201,4165782; 
585288,4165951; 585380,4166061; 585520,4166085; 585508,4166256; 
585528,4166374; 585693,4166513; 585897,4166640; 585970,4166766; 
586129,4166878; 586344,4166952; 586414,4167028; 587090,4167066; 
587119,4167029; 587158,4167029; 587452,4166869; 587732,4166767; 
587973,4166786; 588170,4166970; 588155,4167200; 587681,4167758; 
587459,4168183; 587133,4168507; 586360,4168839; 586047,4169778; 
586218,4170240; 586313,4170161; 586909,4170161; 587125,4170201; 
587109,4170285; 586997,4170377; 586969,4170461; 587015,4170485; 
587041,4170593; 586953,4170669; 586905,4170757; 586805,4170789; 
586701,4170933; 586613,4171125; 586609,4171265; 586467,4171532; 
586545,4171729; 586438,4172049; 586603,4172104; 586673,4172189; 
586317,4172358; 586229,4172533; 586556,4173120; 586809,4173225; 
587468,4173169; 587883,4173268; 588111,4173240; returning to 
588321,4173181.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit ALA-1, subunits ALA-1A and ALA-1B, for the 
California red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 77]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.014

    (27) Unit ALA-2: Alameda, Santa Clara and San Joaquin Counties, 
California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Niles, La Costa Valley, 
Calaveras Reservoir, Altamont, Mendenhall Springs, Mt. Day, Midway, 
Cedar Mtn., Tracy, Lone Tree Creek and Eylar Mountain.

[[Page 78]]

    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 612040,4142329; 612012,4142381; 611689,4142634; 611459,4142899; 
611408,4142925; 611372,4142893; 611151,4142845; 610999,4142707; 
610789,4142438; 610751,4142259; 610676,4142133; 610614,4142075; 
610415,4141989; 610315,4141978; 610194,4142032; 610088,4142027; 
610012,4142113; 609851,4142170; 609797,4142102; 609743,4141951; 
609564,4141864; 609511,4141864; 609375,4141928; 609329,4141976; 
609302,4142219; 609083,4142211; 608996,4142296; 608848,4142388; 
608741,4142579; 608679,4142620; 608587,4142636; 608300,4142611; 
607907,4142380; 607725,4142387; 607382,4142516; 607250,4142594; 
607141,4142701; 606927,4142780; 606795,4142870; 606679,4142882; 
606543,4142829; 606416,4142871; 606314,4142929; 606224,4143019; 
606057,4143065; 605791,4143243; 605701,4143423; 605554,4143520; 
605210,4143551; 605067,4143500; 604810,4143466; 604716,4143478; 
604622,4143530; 604624,4143653; 604557,4143790; 604374,4143877; 
604337,4143986; 604155,4144066; 603854,4144086; 603712,4144172; 
603514,4144160; 603469,4144204; 603430,4144299; 603248,4144436; 
603200,4144536; 603197,4144624; 603256,4144680; 603339,4144934; 
603197,4145061; 603314,4145117; 603550,4145109; 603669,4145241; 
603714,4145425; 603787,4145493; 603795,4145566; 603837,4145620; 
604148,4145841; 604353,4145949; 604472,4145956; 604495,4145903; 
604643,4145908; 604707,4145860; 604790,4145919; 605318,4145910; 
605495,4145971; 605524,4145952; 605593,4145960; 605658,4145913; 
605722,4145903; 605837,4146012; 605829,4146068; 605639,4146251; 
605594,4146337; 605663,4146343; 605738,4146225; 605845,4146183; 
605916,4146229; 605801,4146507; 605762,4146550; 605428,4146660; 
605483,4146707; 605416,4146780; 605464,4146836; 605387,4146944; 
605365,4147079; 605394,4147165; 605442,4147212; 605552,4147114; 
605551,4147218; 605593,4147302; 605336,4147373; 605322,4147431; 
605352,4147500; 605277,4147575; 605329,4147701; 605256,4147690; 
605245,4147738; 605214,4147753; 605096,4147703; 605044,4147733; 
605034,4147773; 605096,4147840; 605096,4147871; 604965,4147973; 
604914,4148051; 604845,4148083; 604885,4148277; 604991,4148413; 
605033,4148434; 605095,4148424; 605127,4148265; 605251,4148083; 
605431,4148129; 605537,4148188; 605655,4148273; 605818,4148448; 
606075,4148398; 606331,4148228; 606492,4148189; 606493,4148131; 
606428,4148018; 606466,4147818; 606599,4147772; 606755,4147834; 
606834,4147825; 606980,4147710; 607100,4147683; 607329,4147689; 
607345,4147608; 607317,4147567; 607349,4147443; 607255,4147276; 
607243,4147215; 607251,4147137; 607316,4147026; 607487,4147002; 
607524,4147018; 607557,4147061; 607569,4147349; 607611,4147397; 
607996,4147308; 608117,4147213; 608174,4147074; 608207,4147072; 
608169,4147104; 608103,4147246; 608026,4147319; 607940,4147361; 
607568,4147455; 607508,4147378; 607463,4147091; 607430,4147073; 
607361,4147095; 607345,4147122; 607361,4147285; 607416,4147398; 
607414,4147743; 607371,4147778; 607304,4147790; 607048,4147807; 
606761,4147977; 606612,4147924; 606576,4147974; 606641,4148036; 
606650,4148153; 606567,4148327; 606317,4148401; 606245,4148473; 
606127,4148523; 606022,4148618; 606011,4148697; 605972,4148760; 
605956,4148648; 605875,4148588; 605794,4148552; 605740,4148579; 
605677,4148566; 605645,4148530; 605425,4148449; 605302,4148488; 
605261,4148568; 605078,4148759; 604968,4148794; 604811,4148733; 
604743,4148753; 604626,4148724; 604618,4148800; 604509,4148765; 
604453,4148777; 604411,4148891; 604307,4148872; 604115,4148999; 
604035,4149085; 604024,4149133; 604042,4149326; 604139,4149315; 
604097,4149449; 604123,4149581; 604103,4149599; 604101,4149703; 
604131,4149764; 604225,4149775; 604253,4149801; 604388,4149988; 
604441,4150019; 604438,4150052; 604397,4150085; 604375,4150151; 
604142,4150150; 604089,4150109; 603999,4150169; 603908,4150143; 
603794,4150164; 603778,4150233; 603721,4150298; 603693,4150280; 
603707,4150191; 603646,4150211; 603615,4150238; 603609,4150314; 
603550,4150375; 603499,4150366; 603474,4150381; 603465,4150437; 
603404,4150447; 603348,4150592; 603203,4151558; 603140,4151552; 
603093,4151598; 602802,4151744; 602597,4151755; 602487,4151789; 
602423,4151775; 602339,4151609; 602165,4151495; 602039,4151369; 
601813,4151278; 601645,4151127; 601369,4151014; 601287,4150951; 
601305,4150919; 601463,4150837; 601460,4150773; 601374,4150664; 
600991,4150604; 600900,4150486; 600709,4150330; 600593,4150316; 
600405,4150249; 600286,4150258; 600228,4150285; 600135,4150455; 
599878,4150496; 599744,4150676; 599763,4150829; 599721,4150914; 
599715,4151215; 599571,4151627; 599425,4151760; 599256,4151991; 
598935,4152325; 598994,4152320; 599022,4152342; 599297,4152714; 
599395,4153026; 599416,4153204; 599523,4153331; 599517,4153429; 
599553,4153602; 599451,4153719; 599339,4153768; 599384,4153847; 
599517,4153896; 599586,4154036; 599657,4154112; 599674,4154219; 
599658,4154487; 599787,4154525; 599832,4154564; 599890,4154672; 
600055,4154874; 600151,4154920; 600292,4154897; 600382,4154931; 
600844,4154804; 600949,4154802; 601259,4154869; 601469,4154994; 
601548,4155076; 601597,4155224; 601511,4155405; 601693,4155514; 
601743,4155684; 601817,4155756; 601782,4155824; 601798,4155853; 
601877,4155865; 602072,4156065; 602136,4156056; 602233,4155908; 
602310,4155871; 602656,4155945; 602838,4156068; 602813,4156118; 
602652,4156215; 602583,4156379; 602431,4156538; 602419,4156664; 
602388,4156715; 602257,4156867; 601881,4157136; 601861,4157211; 
601941,4157456; 601943,4157586; 601992,4157658; 601991,4157850; 
601808,4158002; 601645,4158526; 601585,4158580; 601470,4158625; 
601408,4158719; 601423,4158781; 601512,4158831; 601622,4158758; 
601752,4158717; 601898,4158596; 602033,4158637; 602067,4158587; 
602086,4158475; 602142,4158584; 602282,4158604; 602297,4158635; 
602321,4158635; 602311,4158415; 602331,4158379; 602437,4158596; 
602558,4158545; 602650,4158451; 602706,4158308; 602805,4158219; 
602926,4158054; 603037,4158013; 602827,4158277; 602648,4158679; 
602798,4158650; 603040,4158674; 602776,4158754; 602703,4158797; 
602703,4158879; 602810,4158896; 602805,4158971; 602894,4158933; 
602923,4158841; 603015,4158899; 603083,4158860; 603129,4158889; 
603216,4158884; 603214,4158913; 603098,4158945; 602965,4159029; 
603073,4159117; 603168,4159046; 603185,4159071; 603250,4159068; 
603265,4159087; 603168,4159143; 603236,4159172; 603461,4159032; 
603492,4158860; 603538,4158766; 603550,4158928; 603741,4158838; 
603741,4158877; 603613,4158981; 603543,4159097; 603565,4159141;

[[Page 79]]

603678,4159218; 603732,4159221; 603751,4159250; 603659,4159274; 
603478,4159165; 603417,4159206; 603417,4159240; 603366,4159242; 
603282,4159308; 603475,4159334; 603487,4159361; 603676,4159424; 
603666,4159470; 603690,4159513; 603897,4159734; 603965,4159654; 
604021,4159650; 603961,4159728; 603949,4159767; 603970,4159788; 
604166,4159765; 604156,4159788; 604023,4159840; 603891,4159842; 
603843,4159867; 603860,4160059; 603916,4160117; 603934,4160229; 
604036,4160251; 604063,4160345; 604119,4160411; 604402,4160462; 
604532,4160438; 604539,4160396; 604611,4160425; 604785,4160307; 
604836,4160247; 604959,4160235; 604961,4160328; 604907,4160415; 
604799,4160508; 604896,4160510; 604990,4160481; 605025,4160446; 
605052,4160454; 605049,4160535; 605091,4160560; 605099,4160638; 
605188,4160556; 605161,4160369; 605207,4160208; 605432,4160204; 
605639,4160059; 605658,4160065; 605647,4160127; 605589,4160148; 
605664,4160156; 605668,4160177; 605558,4160196; 605517,4160266; 
605412,4160355; 605356,4160371; 605354,4160429; 605418,4160492; 
605416,4160574; 605383,4160611; 605329,4160769; 605097,4160903; 
604896,4160982; 604898,4161015; 605031,4161075; 605211,4161062; 
605250,4161083; 605354,4161052; 605393,4161125; 605321,4161083; 
605248,4161139; 605229,4161104; 605078,4161129; 605130,4161201; 
605116,4161213; 604965,4161110; 604882,4161098; 604849,4161211; 
604830,4161106; 604725,4161094; 604719,4161145; 604772,4161251; 
604743,4161387; 604836,4161458; 604840,4161588; 604785,4161648; 
604674,4161661; 604643,4161706; 604539,4161905; 604530,4162062; 
604477,4162055; 604402,4161896; 604331,4161865; 604293,4161816; 
604201,4161825; 604223,4162298; 604245,4162381; 604326,4162500; 
604256,4162686; 604287,4163126; 604402,4163244; 604489,4163238; 
604534,4163384; 604453,4163523; 604392,4163562; 604261,4163606; 
604110,4163595; 604048,4163634; 603989,4163770; 603966,4163928; 
604037,4164092; 604238,4164099; 604777,4164253; 604854,4164136; 
604916,4164096; 604969,4164096; 605148,4164169; 605350,4164352; 
605649,4164257; 605875,4164270; 606040,4164321; 606197,4164286; 
606378,4164305; 606748,4164218; 606807,4164177; 606956,4163861; 
607033,4163799; 607137,4163817; 607200,4163795; 607268,4163723; 
607406,4163317; 607437,4163070; 607399,4162974; 607509,4162882; 
607489,4162781; 607497,4162559; 607612,4162491; 607662,4162347; 
607884,4162241; 607987,4162290; 608041,4162397; 608293,4162412; 
608369,4162379; 608463,4162419; 608631,4162415; 608789,4162338; 
608939,4162358; 609035,4162342; 609251,4162174; 609303,4162095; 
609507,4162059; 609821,4161959; 609961,4161787; 610119,4161756; 
610377,4161516; 610474,4161581; 610495,4161639; 610408,4161802; 
610304,4161934; 610281,4162055; 610366,4162111; 610529,4162091; 
610616,4162113; 610662,4162180; 610689,4162326; 610174,4162444; 
610131,4162487; 610080,4162627; 609932,4162662; 609887,4162694; 
609833,4162853; 609836,4162929; 609999,4163118; 610132,4163212; 
610249,4163343; 610316,4163543; 610317,4163675; 610415,4163690; 
610523,4163664; 610579,4163673; 610592,4163705; 610595,4163608; 
610668,4163472; 610657,4163365; 610744,4163376; 610786,4163237; 
610819,4163245; 610831,4163322; 610873,4163365; 610965,4163326; 
611159,4163301; 611202,4163271; 611290,4163341; 611432,4163346; 
611461,4163328; 611474,4163252; 611534,4163149; 611593,4163114; 
611595,4162990; 611636,4162967; 611635,4162879; 611702,4162824; 
611806,4162617; 611790,4162515; 611874,4162493; 611875,4162422; 
611979,4162414; 612067,4162316; 612076,4162260; 612130,4162220; 
612151,4162172; 612272,4162060; 612422,4161996; 612454,4161956; 
612432,4161882; 612311,4161816; 612309,4161796; 612413,4161792; 
612514,4161819; 612591,4161744; 612678,4161700; 612661,4161344; 
612611,4161249; 612715,4161266; 612821,4161156; 612964,4161105; 
613031,4161029; 613138,4161026; 613391,4160895; 613523,4160757; 
613511,4160668; 613568,4160646; 613630,4160685; 613909,4160554; 
614053,4160437; 614094,4160428; 614139,4160301; 614169,4160307; 
614196,4160383; 614239,4160384; 614317,4160278; 614319,4160159; 
614374,4160203; 614410,4160204; 614588,4159980; 614786,4159869; 
614999,4159887; 615160,4159798; 615214,4159743; 615218,4159659; 
615277,4159609; 615382,4159585; 615451,4159520; 615506,4159445; 
615511,4159244; 615627,4159137; 615734,4159077; 615774,4158966; 
615883,4158975; 615967,4158961; 616016,4158926; 616001,4158756; 
616053,4158653; 616070,4158533; 615937,4158437; 615937,4158415; 
615976,4158395; 616031,4158406; 616342,4158535; 616404,4158655; 
616395,4158754; 616189,4158934; 615951,4159202; 615675,4159338; 
615628,4159393; 615652,4159505; 615754,4159626; 615705,4159877; 
615559,4159969; 615593,4160096; 615699,4160258; 615689,4160306; 
615558,4160205; 615507,4160217; 615249,4160467; 615111,4160529; 
615021,4160616; 614906,4160648; 614920,4160732; 614847,4160690; 
614743,4160701; 614584,4160803; 614304,4160664; 614064,4160734; 
613882,4160844; 613864,4160886; 613915,4161004; 613815,4160942; 
613708,4160968; 613663,4161051; 613668,4161227; 613605,4161238; 
613532,4161329; 613395,4161296; 613163,4161379; 613047,4161352; 
612998,4161367; 612939,4161432; 612944,4161612; 612978,4161702; 
613114,4161754; 613228,4161830; 613321,4161841; 613475,4161930; 
613497,4161981; 613561,4161990; 613692,4162073; 613696,4162098; 
613638,4162100; 613494,4162045; 613460,4162092; 613345,4161966; 
613160,4161935; 613159,4161989; 613267,4162112; 613258,4162204; 
613178,4162261; 613202,4162353; 613153,4162408; 613107,4162415; 
613065,4162384; 612971,4162367; 612965,4162405; 613007,4162469; 
612951,4162479; 612958,4162555; 613039,4162719; 612954,4162672; 
612887,4162714; 612906,4162615; 612858,4162607; 612862,4162536; 
612811,4162530; 612828,4162406; 612785,4162380; 612763,4162329; 
612755,4162219; 612699,4162213; 612556,4162267; 612445,4162380; 
612461,4162466; 612390,4162486; 612328,4162551; 612320,4162607; 
612395,4162681; 612401,4162753; 612378,4162757; 612331,4162701; 
612207,4162658; 611973,4162868; 611902,4162989; 611866,4163202; 
611963,4163186; 611988,4163229; 612087,4163253; 612086,4163284; 
611964,4163330; 611963,4163361; 612087,4163424; 612048,4163469; 
612045,4163509; 612058,4163647; 612090,4163723; 612163,4163755; 
612358,4163623; 612384,4163735; 612386,4163768; 612305,4163788; 
612327,4163851; 612240,4163863; 612260,4163916; 612234,4163959; 
612005,4163966; 611979,4163991; 612006,4164052; 612201,4164101; 
612211,4164122; 612096,4164150; 612075,4164211; 612052,4164216; 
612002,4164154; 611921,4164153; 611912,4164224; 611872,4164228; 
611848,4164271; 611877,4164368;

[[Page 80]]

611877,4164399; 611851,4164401; 611764,4164288; 611744,4164277; 
611685,4164322; 611655,4164291; 611673,4164238; 611745,4164188; 
611741,4164148; 611596,4164163; 611533,4164124; 611510,4164137; 
611475,4164248; 611474,4164324; 611419,4164405; 611369,4164404; 
611366,4164246; 611259,4164224; 611307,4164106; 611154,4163999; 
611074,4163841; 611001,4163839; 610927,4163872; 610880,4163980; 
611039,4164436; 611135,4164568; 611250,4164665; 611276,4164742; 
611299,4164750; 611417,4164686; 611517,4164715; 611877,4164958; 
612038,4164886; 612296,4164820; 612347,4164780; 612407,4164645; 
612647,4164556; 612875,4164171; 612995,4164092; 613061,4163899; 
613180,4163791; 613271,4163581; 613617,4163370; 613818,4163372; 
613863,4163331; 613895,4163203; 613918,4163188; 614088,4163210; 
614324,4163351; 614453,4163275; 614626,4163296; 614666,4163414; 
614856,4163572; 614869,4163807; 614964,4163865; 615129,4163865; 
615251,4163719; 615688,4163445; 616025,4163376; 616264,4163384; 
616374,4163496; 616273,4163596; 615872,4163712; 615829,4163887; 
615321,4164105; 614755,4164569; 614749,4164767; 614831,4164944; 
614654,4165026; 614436,4165689; 614437,4165903; 614928,4165903; 
615345,4165598; 615550,4165937; 615503,4166296; 615732,4166487; 
615913,4166505; 616346,4167008; 617079,4167466; 617161,4167694; 
617282,4167808; 617685,4167845; 617722,4167868; 617791,4167845; 
618542,4167827; 618910,4167557; 619378,4167402; 619738,4167192; 
620013,4167100; 620140,4167117; 620246,4167338; 620119,4167637; 
619714,4167794; 619300,4168266; 619052,4168672; 618735,4168989; 
618678,4169104; 618172,4169787; 617995,4170301; 617442,4170382; 
617100,4170624; 616950,4170652; 616831,4170719; 616555,4171289; 
616503,4171452; 616564,4171666; 616895,4171920; 616821,4172319; 
616570,4172325; 616497,4172427; 616466,4172568; 616555,4172634; 
616539,4172754; 616454,4172763; 616429,4172996; 616084,4173186; 
616089,4173209; 616012,4173321; 615823,4173370; 615795,4173413; 
615698,4173413; 615541,4173562; 615595,4173691; 615669,4173698; 
615657,4173836; 615759,4174079; 615732,4174234; 615848,4174335; 
615749,4174500; 615756,4174555; 615850,4174586; 615884,4174669; 
615890,4174767; 615741,4174884; 615691,4174984; 616109,4175483; 
616349,4175539; 617074,4175362; 617379,4175216; 617766,4175316; 
618401,4175381; 618446,4175547; 620310,4176319; 620776,4176912; 
621036,4177108; 621473,4177190; 622154,4177242; 622497,4177318; 
622691,4177393; 623360,4177451; 624015,4177665; 625449,4178004; 
625762,4177489; 626189,4177521; 626257,4177554; 626311,4177469; 
626437,4177148; 626561,4176510; 626532,4176306; 626438,4176248; 
626132,4176243; 625961,4176202; 625907,4176037; 626005,4175816; 
626053,4175640; 626277,4175140; 626234,4175070; 626115,4174713; 
626135,4174197; 626968,4173820; 627405,4173998; 628873,4173959; 
629548,4174058; 630024,4174058; 630461,4173998; 630850,4173810; 
631367,4173496; 631624,4173272; 631969,4172827; 632177,4172507; 
632469,4172176; 632866,4171580; 633332,4171086; 633589,4170893; 
634348,4169941; 634544,4169640; 634643,4169401; 634311,4169041; 
634104,4168872; 633965,4168813; 633458,4168704; 633211,4168586; 
633149,4168471; 633108,4168299; 633101,4167912; 633166,4167824; 
633425,4167943; 633525,4168027; 633556,4168078; 633627,4168434; 
633751,4168565; 634026,4168402; 634183,4168410; 634260,4168368; 
634339,4168285; 634380,4168195; 634404,4167792; 634441,4167676; 
634312,4167513; 634247,4167338; 634248,4167274; 634433,4166949; 
634491,4166914; 634591,4166641; 634651,4166578; 634775,4166559; 
634813,4166500; 634945,4166407; 634982,4166274; 635134,4166039; 
635193,4166018; 635339,4166026; 635436,4166172; 635755,4166100; 
635700,4165993; 635691,4165894; 635833,4165753; 636016,4165716; 
636064,4165670; 636114,4165539; 636258,4165403; 636260,4165303; 
636477,4165075; 636521,4164927; 636584,4164836; 636653,4164490; 
636339,4164170; 635862,4163958; 635734,4163921; 635562,4163936; 
635496,4163921; 635355,4163786; 635276,4163743; 635081,4163725; 
635051,4163743; 635046,4163613; 634982,4163466; 635041,4163309; 
634993,4163253; 634854,4163205; 634732,4163063; 634741,4163023; 
634840,4162913; 634801,4162849; 634805,4162736; 634718,4162574; 
634607,4162475; 634575,4162358; 634477,4162212; 634562,4162117; 
634646,4162069; 634842,4162053; 635096,4161977; 635302,4161943; 
635667,4161777; 635742,4161773; 636069,4161897; 636215,4161871; 
636391,4161768; 636343,4161499; 636488,4161367; 636505,4161281; 
636375,4161122; 636210,4160834; 636051,4160777; 635924,4160628; 
635808,4160589; 635644,4160626; 635525,4160703; 635390,4160729; 
635113,4160859; 634925,4160843; 634746,4160904; 634644,4160981; 
634582,4161068; 634259,4161244; 634069,4161303; 633923,4161417; 
633779,4161457; 633667,4161542; 633555,4161531; 633388,4161453; 
632937,4161306; 632800,4161371; 632713,4161385; 632487,4161344; 
632215,4161558; 632083,4161449; 631968,4161416; 631869,4161342; 
631799,4161100; 631807,4160972; 631788,4160935; 631345,4160821; 
631146,4160825; 630921,4160773; 630897,4160466; 630917,4160371; 
630973,4160314; 630956,4160241; 630838,4160218; 630643,4160290; 
630537,4160241; 630354,4160270; 630250,4160169; 630145,4160113; 
630088,4159996; 629833,4159832; 629707,4159689; 629552,4159394; 
629602,4159258; 629583,4159103; 629526,4159075; 629357,4159113; 
629298,4159097; 628603,4158708; 628420,4158526; 628172,4157726; 
628567,4155976; 628195,4155657; 627118,4155118; 626866,4154744; 
626072,4154665; 625607,4155084; 625524,4154995; 625513,4154941; 
625536,4154846; 625599,4154744; 625493,4154679; 625463,4154608; 
625490,4154496; 625541,4154421; 625550,4154238; 625740,4154018; 
625739,4153961; 625633,4153790; 625526,4153735; 625220,4153646; 
625204,4153582; 625139,4153501; 625159,4153319; 625017,4153337; 
624952,4153321; 624866,4153269; 624748,4153146; 624737,4153000; 
624671,4152882; 624377,4152543; 624319,4152300; 624290,4152255; 
624165,4152183; 624012,4152192; 623913,4152153; 623832,4152011; 
623618,4151858; 623541,4151842; 623448,4151871; 623269,4151759; 
623162,4151743; 623100,4151695; 622804,4151586; 622730,4151531; 
622674,4151396; 622665,4151241; 622583,4151034; 622587,4150819; 
622617,4150679; 622450,4150382; 622197,4150260; 622030,4150280; 
621804,4150082; 621625,4150040; 621396,4150024; 621330,4149996; 
621248,4149920; 621154,4149738; 620947,4149601; 620818,4149560; 
620754,4149493; 620636,4149276; 620256,4149217; 620137,4149231; 
620012,4149280; 619945,4149270; 619596,4149026; 619495,4148997; 
619459,4148942; 619254,4148825; 619118,4148793; 619087,4148700; 
618666,4148833; 617890,4148580;

[[Page 81]]

617797,4148216; 617361,4148176; 616645,4148456; 616250,4148335; 
616166,4148424; 616047,4148593; 616039,4148704; 615966,4148768; 
615968,4148808; 616331,4149065; 616490,4149268; 616506,4149456; 
616416,4149564; 616424,4149735; 616405,4149809; 616359,4149879; 
616255,4149959; 616202,4150114; 616048,4150176; 616006,4150223; 
615856,4150630; 615749,4150763; 615624,4150797; 615366,4150793; 
615278,4150702; 615254,4150704; 615114,4150959; 614994,4151014; 
614893,4151097; 614906,4151187; 614664,4151097; 614394,4151118; 
614196,4151102; 614139,4151111; 613932,4151244; 613819,4151240; 
613707,4151302; 613490,4151198; 613287,4150929; 613057,4150951; 
612955,4150900; 612878,4150824; 612817,4150663; 612550,4150498; 
612364,4150441; 612168,4150495; 612127,4150474; 611931,4150091; 
611765,4150016; 611693,4149948; 611663,4149850; 611696,4149683; 
611658,4149539; 611420,4149275; 611265,4149211; 611223,4149172; 
611197,4148882; 611156,4148715; 610957,4148293; 610880,4148036; 
610929,4147898; 611187,4147546; 611249,4147572; 611377,4147569; 
611584,4147462; 611676,4147475; 611780,4147420; 611979,4147091; 
612299,4147084; 612468,4146929; 612585,4146887; 612734,4146894; 
612815,4147009; 612914,4146974; 612996,4146904; 613008,4146804; 
613095,4146713; 613126,4146601; 613342,4146462; 613413,4146384; 
613500,4146065; 613687,4146076; 613806,4146015; 613904,4145888; 
613935,4145803; 614183,4145527; 614240,4145531; 614497,4145391; 
614524,4145292; 614580,4145250; 614664,4145233; 614893,4145270; 
615411,4145165; 615464,4144957; 615626,4144771; 615644,4144645; 
615490,4144251; 615387,4144182; 615268,4144252; 615163,4144353; 
615120,4144355; 614983,4144207; 614904,4144173; 614659,4144184; 
614240,4144101; 613823,4144161; 613678,4144033; 613402,4144076; 
613126,4143957; 613071,4143816; 613088,4143711; 613063,4143570; 
612942,4143405; 612758,4142885; 612658,4142813; 612574,4142655; 
612371,4142458; 612237,4142374; returning to 612040,4142329.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit ALA-2 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 82]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.015

    (28) Unit SNM-1: San Mateo County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Montara Mountain, Half Moon Bay, San Mateo and 
Woodside.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 547630,4164045; 547744,4163977; 547818,4163983; 547963,4163840; 
548003,4163821; 548075,4163840;

[[Page 83]]

548154,4163787; 548153,4163732; 548244,4163618; 548399,4163493; 
548584,4163581; 548727,4163782; 549022,4163842; 549445,4163265; 
549662,4163019; 549773,4162861; 549895,4162605; 550021,4162446; 
550354,4162086; 550600,4161758; 551542,4160713; 551788,4160393; 
551799,4160319; 551944,4160134; 552084,4160038; 552243,4159834; 
552407,4159687; 552523,4159489; 552902,4158657; 553256,4158186; 
553696,4157816; 553834,4157670; 553823,4157626; 553845,4157594; 
553929,4157579; 554007,4157453; 554066,4157221; 554201,4157191; 
554220,4157113; 554166,4157054; 554193,4156993; 554257,4156937; 
554333,4156948; 554427,4156913; 554508,4156694; 554629,4156541; 
554593,4156418; 554660,4156373; 554607,4156236; 554715,4156157; 
554745,4156059; 554851,4155898; 554808,4155832; 554829,4155792; 
555118,4155748; 555222,4155647; 555357,4155646; 555636,4155305; 
555857,4154813; 555939,4154569; 556122,4154292; 556154,4154208; 
556143,4154129; 556320,4153982; 556461,4153761; 556574,4153469; 
557000,4152696; 557532,4152000; 557762,4151768; 558014,4151373; 
558318,4151148; 558897,4150855; 559085,4150704; 559381,4150587; 
559688,4150537; 559998,4150521; 560300,4150410; 560575,4150209; 
560919,4150048; 561406,4149886; 561583,4149791; 561726,4149680; 
561856,4149534; 561936,4149173; 561888,4148062; 561974,4147672; 
562316,4147299; 562358,4147124; 562178,4147011; 561549,4147169; 
561302,4147169; 561232,4147204; 561247,4147242; 561193,4147339; 
561284,4147458; 560695,4148054; 560281,4147651; 560384,4147185; 
559753,4147258; 559303,4147393; 558697,4147640; 558360,4147640; 
558023,4147797; 557844,4147955; 557394,4148044; 557058,4147865; 
556698,4147618; 556564,4147416; 556451,4147146; 556114,4147101; 
555239,4147303; 555059,4147236; 554967,4147015; 554570,4146922; 
554295,4146742; 554026,4146653; 553971,4146586; 553899,4146546; 
553653,4146575; 553443,4146740; 553174,4146834; 553149,4146836; 
553089,4146772; 553044,4146769; 552740,4146824; 552651,4146923; 
552646,4147040; 552620,4147093; 552355,4147149; 552211,4147123; 
552047,4146981; 551417,4146719; 551274,4146763; 551254,4146926; 
551347,4147012; 551556,4147431; 551552,4147528; 551759,4147743; 
551848,4147802; 551961,4147810; 552486,4147520; 552743,4147426; 
552803,4147446; 552402,4147733; 552226,4147814; 552595,4148011; 
552585,4148107; 552654,4148138; 552669,4148252; 552550,4148396; 
552397,4148405; 552340,4148333; 551865,4148180; 551654,4148525; 
551591,4148487; 551702,4148145; 551416,4147821; 551154,4147714; 
550940,4147904; 550797,4148071; 550380,4148643; 550071,4148666; 
549999,4148809; 549847,4148969; 549866,4149048; 549831,4149121; 
549625,4149308; 549541,4149485; 549541,4149729; 549429,4150056; 
549372,4150439; 549429,4150626; 549234,4151034; 549298,4151393; 
549249,4151982; 549344,4152076; 549223,4152356; 549082,4152487; 
548989,4152684; 548830,4152787; 548495,4152839; 548306,4153011; 
548231,4153170; 548091,4153207; 547957,4153207; 547895,4153165; 
547738,4152873; 547642,4152753; 547118,4152738; 546916,4152655; 
546749,4152524; 546689,4152345; 546511,4152286; 546177,4152298; 
545963,4152226; 545796,4152083; 545653,4152022; 545579,4152060; 
545411,4152060; 545297,4152030; 545261,4152121; 545258,4152236; 
545139,4152232; 545045,4152561; 545162,4152689; 545119,4152768; 
544967,4152686; 544829,4152669; 544547,4152746; 544512,4152830; 
544364,4152830; 544364,4152771; 544293,4152771; 544180,4152639; 
544038,4152704; 544142,4152930; 544311,4153185; 544156,4153287; 
544080,4153433; 544149,4153570; 544393,4153570; 544485,4153677; 
544565,4153700; 544588,4153753; 544580,4153841; 544630,4153967; 
544630,4154063; 544668,4154154; 544760,4154211; 544817,4154345; 
544905,4154437; 545086,4154774; 545071,4154828; 545164,4154983; 
545146,4155048; 545261,4155381; 545249,4155667; 545130,4155810; 
544987,4155882; 544677,4155762; 544475,4155762; 544106,4156084; 
543951,4156132; 543449,4156020; 543397,4156101; 543389,4156189; 
543523,4156318; 543599,4156456; 543459,4156534; 543420,4156658; 
543305,4156704; 542962,4156704; 542937,4156752; 542916,4156749; 
542930,4156782; 542895,4156795; 542819,4156894; 542817,4156948; 
542765,4156966; 542785,4157009; 542868,4157065; 542903,4157143; 
542893,4157348; 542802,4157399; 542907,4157513; 542895,4157739; 
542833,4157933; 542666,4157923; 542564,4157986; 542570,4158056; 
542722,4158161; 542709,4158196; 542634,4158227; 542677,4158332; 
542661,4158362; 542619,4158385; 542554,4158357; 542535,4158387; 
542584,4158454; 542525,4158478; 542517,4158502; 542617,4158584; 
542522,4158643; 542474,4158625; 542477,4158680; 542392,4158652; 
542380,4158689; 542350,4158682; 542340,4158701; 542351,4158845; 
542427,4158879; 542466,4158938; 542528,4158923; 542559,4158993; 
542565,4159509; 542600,4159566; 542610,4159675; 542625,4160419; 
543175,4160488; 543288,4160561; 543385,4160746; 543618,4160791; 
543850,4160573; 543745,4160235; 543745,4160032; 543716,4159858; 
543798,4159828; 543811,4159739; 543854,4159671; 543953,4159732; 
544051,4159575; 544184,4159501; 544422,4159640; 544782,4159616; 
544869,4159575; 544937,4159454; 544810,4159267; 544533,4159230; 
544551,4159139; 544673,4159021; 544833,4158951; 545266,4159425; 
545695,4159321; 545741,4159230; 545893,4159196; 545893,4159339; 
546104,4159339; 546181,4159276; 546227,4159148; 546295,4159089; 
546381,4159126; 546454,4159207; 546617,4159207; 546745,4159239; 
546844,4159380; 546863,4159466; 546953,4159553; 547132,4159639; 
547181,4159793; 547312,4159893; 547408,4160034; 547408,4160143; 
547567,4160257; 547750,4160161; 547962,4160161; 547962,4160279; 
547732,4160430; 547716,4160623; 547789,4160793; 547950,4161034; 
547912,4161138; 547848,4161197; 547690,4161187; 547530,4161309; 
547494,4161406; 547403,4161442; 547218,4161411; 547153,4161524; 
547153,4161794; 547107,4161793; 547035,4161868; 546901,4161937; 
546709,4161990; 546327,4162012; 546123,4162126; 545964,4162141; 
545828,4162318; 546062,4162522; 546609,4162507; 546722,4162661; 
546651,4162755; 546754,4163009; 546697,4163100; 546713,4163192; 
546237,4163180; 545987,4163216; 545963,4163442; 545987,4163656; 
546201,4163847; 546189,4164061; 545892,4164323; 545856,4164478; 
545906,4164585; 546013,4164594; 546091,4164660; 546047,4164860; 
546120,4164926; 546518,4165095; 546525,4165068; 546587,4165032; 
546657,4164893; 546713,4164880; 546767,4164808; 546781,4164735; 
546869,4164661; 546939,4164544; 547189,4164361; 547346,4164169; 
547399,4164131; 547515,4164114; returning to 547630,4164045. Excluding: 
549620,4162507; 549728,4162401; 549733,4162310; 549683,4162274; 
549645,4162279;

[[Page 84]]

549425,4162399; 549337,4162318; 549333,4162206; 549471,4161976; 
549525,4161940; 549606,4161951; 549662,4161921; 549738,4161921; 
549790,4161808; 549961,4161760; 549981,4161667; 549936,4161577; 
550072,4161454; 550273,4161361; 550401,4161273; 550411,4161245; 
550383,4161187; 550284,4161178; 550229,4161142; 550232,4161107; 
550278,4161061; 550265,4160978; 550296,4160957; 550492,4160966; 
550678,4160838; 550717,4160754; 550720,4160671; 550687,4160604; 
550718,4160544; 550642,4160424; 550503,4160326; 550549,4160316; 
550788,4160361; 550839,4160318; 550799,4160219; 550867,4160247; 
551032,4160256; 551116,4160229; 551150,4160166; 551254,4160120; 
551344,4159994; 551357,4159933; 551294,4159806; 551508,4159782; 
551595,4159711; 551646,4159623; 551441,4159474; 551439,4159451; 
551668,4159445; 551731,4159463; 551897,4159386; 552018,4159435; 
552054,4159463; 552045,4159580; 552096,4159641; 552077,4159681; 
551989,4159676; 551861,4159820; 551881,4159858; 551964,4159881; 
551967,4159927; 551829,4159929; 551816,4160002; 551722,4159971; 
551646,4160052; 551643,4160146; 551561,4160173; 551525,4160211; 
551412,4160393; 551447,4160589; 551385,4160624; 551415,4160711; 
551397,4160774; 551341,4160817; 551329,4160715; 551311,4160685; 
551266,4160674; 551055,4160965; 551009,4161066; 551003,4161183; 
550912,4161188; 550873,4161215; 550765,4161415; 550679,4161473; 
550553,4161622; 550578,4161686; 550432,4161883; 550432,4161911; 
550307,4162062; 550094,4162246; 549866,4162573; 549757,4162635; 
549715,4162724; 549544,4162890; 549421,4163070; 549362,4163128; 
549301,4163145; 549351,4162963; 549402,4162869; 549563,4162687; 
returning to 549620,4162507.
    Excluding: 549220,4157011; 549541,4156838; 549722,4156775; 
549735,4156697; 549801,4156710; 549883,4156632; 549886,4156573; 
549977,4156553; 550000,4156528; 550158,4156504; 550288,4156436; 
550357,4156345; 550347,4156266; 550457,4156277; 550492,4156234; 
550495,4156194; 550420,4156053; 550582,4156065; 550631,4156017; 
550684,4156004; 550738,4155941; 550809,4155916; 550841,4155787; 
550925,4155803; 551002,4155930; 551019,4156093; 551077,4156152; 
551073,4156327; 551032,4156400; 551040,4156464; 550998,4156603; 
550857,4156826; 550788,4156876; 550768,4156856; 550806,4156762; 
550914,4156646; 550936,4156369; 550988,4156222; 550986,4156177; 
550940,4156123; 550708,4156302; 550626,4156334; 550616,4156367; 
550384,4156493; 550300,4156553; 550297,4156578; 550218,4156578; 
550172,4156621; 550063,4156618; 549941,4156723; 549933,4156777; 
549876,4156814; 549576,4156911; 549550,4156944; 549555,4157013; 
549474,4156969; 549416,4156974; 549204,4157059; returning to 
549220,4157011. Excluding: 554142,4155908; 554257,4155782; 
554311,4155675; 554264,4155586; 554381,4155549; 554414,4155493; 
554518,4155471; 554527,4155397; 554641,4155337; 554746,4155191; 
554701,4155114; 554798,4155071; 554842,4154935; 554782,4154761; 
554914,4154795; 554950,4154775; 554920,4154722; 555022,4154651; 
555084,4154509; 555230,4154328; 555279,4154214; 555309,4154193; 
555413,4154197; 555439,4154108; 555369,4154054; 555329,4153947; 
555293,4153942; 555250,4153982; 555184,4153984; 555094,4154029; 
555056,4154088; 554883,4154165; 554832,4154145; 554702,4154172; 
554646,4154240; 554336,4154291; 554257,4154362; 554255,4154245; 
554318,4154248; 554555,4154173; 554586,4154107; 554652,4154090; 
554841,4153964; 555218,4153835; 555223,4153761; 555356,4153696; 
555397,4153653; 555420,4153577; 555501,4153590; 555526,4153695; 
555693,4153711; 555904,4153415; 556072,4153271; 556063,4153182; 
555943,4153217; 556034,4152959; 556026,4152910; 555996,4152895; 
555856,4152935; 555854,4152909; 555992,4152788; 556078,4152756; 
556331,4152585; 556318,4152547; 556184,4152574; 556174,4152538; 
556235,4152493; 556286,4152488; 556279,4152435; 556373,4152428; 
556444,4152362; 556450,4152283; 556488,4152197; 556382,4152194; 
556425,4152138; 556499,4152098; 556517,4152025; 556574,4151989; 
556576,4151956; 556513,4151890; 556555,4151751; 556608,4151715; 
556681,4151881; 556790,4151955; 556861,4151946; 557012,4151776; 
557051,4151695; 557125,4151632; 557070,4151495; 557095,4151457; 
557133,4151460; 557224,4151552; 557295,4151667; 557302,4151720; 
557154,4151833; 557154,4151861; 557253,4151844; 557347,4151878; 
557346,4151923; 557269,4152007; 557112,4152067; 557104,4152095; 
556976,4152193; 556775,4152285; 556790,4152321; 556871,4152332; 
556871,4152367; 556827,4152405; 556850,4152446; 556842,4152489; 
556777,4152679; 556721,4152755; 556657,4152793; 556697,4152889; 
556634,4152881; 556593,4152919; 556600,4152998; 556529,4153023; 
556475,4153091; 556480,4153132; 556543,4153186; 556459,4153213; 
556382,4153312; 556394,4153456; 556363,4153502; 556380,4153596; 
556313,4153684; 556277,4153796; 555971,4153969; 555935,4154093; 
555871,4154136; 555878,4154256; 555852,4154271; 555753,4154255; 
555674,4154320; 555540,4154299; 555476,4154324; 555445,4154453; 
555381,4154478; 555383,4154504; 555457,4154527; 555454,4154563; 
555322,4154552; 555322,4154582; 555393,4154608; 555479,4154713; 
555435,4154756; 555392,4154715; 555273,4154671; 555237,4154721; 
555260,4154780; 555249,4154889; 555195,4154889; 555160,4154924; 
555144,4154972; 555073,4155038; 555031,4155149; 554868,4155306; 
554798,4155473; 554757,4155485; 554678,4155589; 554581,4155647; 
554540,4155725; 554443,4155780; 554312,4156018; 554212,4156101; 
554216,4156203; 554150,4156246; 554073,4156436; 553940,4156567; 
553911,4156648; 553816,4156762; 553750,4156804; 553769,4156678; 
553739,4156596; 553800,4156508; 553829,4156414; 553870,4156363; 
553957,4156321; 553927,4156252; 553988,4156194; returning to 
554142,4155908. Excluding: 557286,4151491; 557284,4151443; 
557322,4151364; 557308,4151220; 557354,4151200; 557448,4151241; 
557468,4151231; 557519,4151124; 557482,4151012; 557579,4150995; 
557549,4150901; 557402,4150804; 557674,4150729; 557846,4150565; 
558016,4150559; 558080,4150479; 558080,4150410; 558119,4150362; 
558354,4150158; 558464,4150021; 558452,4150001; 558511,4149920; 
558501,4149798; 558327,4149700; 558320,4149637; 558498,4149539; 
558528,4149270; 558566,4149227; 558752,4149193; 558763,4149353; 
558908,4149377; 559299,4148970; 559307,4148937; 559274,4148929; 
559116,4148982; 559081,4148918; 559133,4148840; 559171,4148845; 
559170,4148903; 559198,4148914; 559270,4148863; 559369,4148854; 
559494,4148740; 559616,4148761; 559674,4148739; 559731,4148633; 
559955,4148581; 559947,4148665; 560032,4148830; 560049,4148917; 
560013,4148990; 560025,4149077; 559906,4149091; 559778,4149222;

[[Page 85]]

559737,4149169; 559702,4149166; 559664,4149201; 559510,4149358; 
559532,4149444; 559656,4149488; 559592,4149635; 559506,4149650; 
559480,4149680; 559397,4149898; 559341,4149908; 559250,4149879; 
559191,4149907; 559193,4150034; 559128,4150206; 559186,4150267; 
559296,4150283; 559287,4150377; 559074,4150340; 558886,4150433; 
558753,4150470; 558712,4150521; 558673,4150642; 558549,4150664; 
558505,4150712; 558492,4150857; 558580,4150870; 558595,4150946; 
558493,4150945; 558405,4150912; 558170,4151042; 558170,4151088; 
558119,4151123; 557994,4151156; 557767,4151360; 557737,4151586; 
557620,4151648; 557584,4151709; 557594,4151780; 557444,4151759; 
557409,4151647; returning to 557286,4151491. Excluding: 553227,4150371; 
553132,4150480; 553085,4150414; 553085,4150180; 552935,4150096; 
553085,4150049; 553319,4149834; 553553,4149834; 553646,4150049; 
553581,4150264; returning to 553227,4150371. Excluding: 552570,4150315; 
552477,4150517; 552589,4150966; 552563,4151254; 552664,4151452; 
552664,4151733; 552524,4151686; 552222,4151263; 551991,4151097; 
551766,4150854; 551617,4150480; 551617,4150115; 551813,4149956; 
552165,4149863; 552374,4149890; returning to 552570,4150315.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units SNM-1 and SNM-2 for the California red-
legged frog follows:

[[Page 86]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.016

    (29) Unit SNM-2: San Mateo and Santa Cruz Counties, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Half Moon Bay, San Gregorio, Pigeon 
Point, Woodside, La Honda, Franklin Point, Mindego Hill and Big Basin.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):

[[Page 87]]

569250,4119121; 569151,4119022; 568939,4118954; 568881,4118980; 
568788,4118975; 568652,4118929; 568430,4118898; 568274,4118928; 
568169,4118976; 567965,4119114; 567911,4119100; 567778,4119012; 
567704,4118933; 567699,4118870; 567746,4118785; 567733,4118731; 
567590,4118548; 567499,4118333; 567262,4118281; 567036,4118184; 
566576,4117892; 566404,4117833; 566304,4117724; 566110,4117736; 
566051,4117615; 565927,4117536; 565921,4117260; 565894,4117190; 
565809,4117126; 565671,4117091; 565425,4116788; 565262,4116712; 
565091,4116711; 564995,4116680; 564832,4116671; 564749,4116592; 
564742,4116504; 564701,4116455; 564644,4116464; 564501,4116430; 
564414,4116466; 564140,4116453; 564134,4116372; 564048,4116217; 
564045,4116048; 563964,4115960; 563895,4115727; 563887,4115633; 
563931,4115559; 563879,4115420; 563915,4115297; 563902,4115237; 
563662,4115064; 563528,4115090; 563379,4115163; 563229,4115336; 
562888,4115441; 562826,4115435; 562679,4115366; 562397,4115352; 
562330,4115200; 562221,4115057; 562104,4114979; 561913,4114940; 
561755,4114828; 561485,4114784; 561007,4114774; 560798,4114607; 
560609,4114539; 560544,4114492; 560488,4114385; 560326,4114249; 
560225,4114086; 560107,4114183; 559833,4114260; 559745,4114221; 
559598,4114235; 559271,4114217; 559009,4114112; 558716,4114159; 
558594,4114259; 558599,4114458; 558403,4114681; 558300,4114736; 
558149,4114739; 558094,4114697; 558106,4114557; 558082,4114344; 
558025,4114287; 557832,4114201; 557729,4114128; 557684,4114059; 
557589,4113776; 556967,4113271; 556775,4113655; 557058,4114173; 
556966,4114389; 556734,4114563; 556508,4114673; 556108,4114673; 
555114,4115309; 554795,4115423; 554201,4115487; 554056,4115554; 
553898,4115745; 553421,4116519; 553230,4116879; 553163,4117510; 
552770,4118575; 552692,4118856; 552686,4119049; 552832,4119084; 
552843,4119062; 552934,4119077; 552906,4119209; 552957,4119263; 
552954,4119299; 552855,4119422; 552873,4119468; 552810,4119530; 
552696,4119536; 552696,4119628; 552630,4119861; 552479,4120102; 
552601,4120216; 552562,4120269; 552710,4120441; 552710,4120493; 
552762,4120561; 552759,4120761; 552813,4120881; 552780,4120929; 
552814,4120967; 552875,4121197; 553185,4120764; 553520,4121135; 
553141,4121621; 553303,4121748; 553326,4122001; 553167,4122381; 
552662,4122597; 552549,4122814; 552292,4123114; 552336,4123768; 
552151,4123874; 552044,4123874; 552129,4124397; 552171,4124534; 
552222,4124393; 552346,4124238; 552548,4124260; 552634,4124232; 
552655,4124255; 552563,4124291; 552555,4124315; 552426,4124340; 
552418,4124377; 552477,4124422; 552393,4124431; 552273,4124577; 
552197,4124591; 552230,4124662; 552166,4124704; 552274,4125178; 
552291,4125455; 552347,4125621; 552317,4125675; 552319,4125751; 
552347,4125785; 552344,4125868; 552389,4125921; 552414,4126094; 
552390,4126152; 552436,4126284; 552412,4126394; 552462,4126623; 
552465,4126765; 554285,4127045; 554348,4127299; 554393,4127347; 
554399,4127474; 554358,4127620; 554461,4127656; 554507,4127806; 
554561,4127851; 554634,4127852; 554769,4127802; 554769,4128072; 
555061,4128697; 555034,4129157; 554813,4129488; 554804,4129463; 
554758,4129459; 554489,4129518; 554419,4129543; 554218,4129684; 
554167,4129676; 553952,4129729; 553868,4129881; 553395,4130479; 
553250,4130564; 552869,4130621; 552881,4130661; 552821,4130823; 
552825,4130999; 552804,4131010; 552796,4131079; 552845,4131083; 
552876,4131131; 552876,4131326; 552915,4131403; 552997,4132106; 
553190,4132082; 553362,4132089; 553494,4132144; 553537,4132262; 
553547,4132490; 553647,4132612; 553602,4132871; 553641,4133060; 
553621,4133192; 553434,4133496; 553384,4133735; 553267,4134023; 
553259,4134239; 553421,4134628; 553399,4134765; 553360,4134855; 
553190,4135011; 552963,4135283; 553379,4135635; 553442,4135811; 
553540,4135865; 553572,4135910; 553583,4136045; 553659,4136295; 
553889,4136534; 553914,4136623; 553914,4136854; 553762,4136980; 
553783,4137262; 553803,4137293; 553858,4137341; 554197,4137481; 
554417,4137731; 554603,4137783; 554759,4137744; 554784,4137762; 
554822,4137868; 554817,4137996; 554676,4138273; 554618,4138521; 
554636,4138646; 554717,4138801; 554780,4138839; 554925,4138871; 
555392,4138909; 555441,4138984; 555413,4139214; 555601,4139415; 
555714,4139649; 555744,4139820; 555921,4139916; 556166,4139926; 
556259,4139976; 556361,4140244; 556432,4140290; 556490,4140404; 
556856,4140727; 556896,4140845; 556853,4140964; 556852,4141399; 
556768,4141545; 556803,4141754; 556775,4141867; 556791,4141902; 
557144,4142056; 557240,4142041; 557359,4142059; 557599,4142185; 
557662,4142195; 558052,4142061; 558192,4142080; 558311,4142057; 
558434,4142091; 558662,4141842; 559030,4141562; 559213,4141470; 
559357,4141505; 559519,4141690; 559601,4141712; 559697,4141693; 
559766,4141724; 559998,4141459; 560077,4141441; 560242,4141513; 
560283,4141428; 560430,4141372; 560668,4141190; 560841,4141136; 
560869,4141081; 560978,4140989; 561055,4140964; 561208,4141005; 
561240,4140993; 561287,4140875; 561213,4140727; 561244,4140388; 
561324,4140282; 561345,4140196; 561455,4140206; 561695,4140081; 
561800,4140000; 561921,4139872; 561966,4139724; 562132,4139625; 
562164,4139517; 562468,4139413; 562912,4139086; 563107,4139105; 
563367,4139057; 563389,4138904; 563426,4138850; 563543,4138782; 
563559,4138677; 563847,4138571; 563930,4138480; 564034,4138484; 
564190,4138558; 564420,4138510; 564471,4138435; 564901,4138198; 
564978,4138127; 565013,4137931; 565235,4137747; 565269,4137444; 
565376,4137337; 565423,4137076; 565479,4136982; 565649,4136858; 
565801,4136865; 565810,4136784; 565953,4136476; 566058,4136416; 
566222,4136370; 566306,4136066; 566457,4135889; 566638,4135815; 
566713,4135637; 566857,4135522; 566842,4135456; 566741,4135376; 
566689,4135303; 566712,4135121; 566695,4135021; 566730,4134874; 
566801,4134760; 566870,4134722; 567001,4134715; 567090,4134510; 
567085,4134394; 567120,4134277; 567218,4134215; 567352,4134023; 
567433,4133959; 567578,4133984; 567748,4133928; 567839,4133927; 
567848,4133880; 568085,4133744; 568241,4133501; 568306,4133355; 
568496,4133250; 568613,4133142; 568963,4132987; 569153,4132711; 
569145,4132474; 569183,4132325; 569280,4132219; 569383,4132175; 
569480,4131969; 569567,4131884; 569635,4131677; 569844,4131459; 
570128,4131314; 570217,4131198; 570529,4131030; 570685,4130832; 
570866,4130710; 571044,4130504; 571335,4130445; 571467,4130457; 
571512,4130484; 571705,4130457; 571800,4130420; 571950,4130253; 
572075,4130192; 572123,4130068; 572093,4129988; 572138,4129919; 
572137,4129832; 572182,4129734;

[[Page 88]]

572316,4129589; 572452,4129532; 572524,4129539; 572584,4129577; 
572687,4129727; 572903,4129865; 572960,4129877; 573189,4129891; 
573454,4129828; 573485,4129803; 573503,4129720; 573636,4129595; 
573679,4129407; 573842,4129125; 573907,4129100; 574000,4129102; 
574103,4129013; 574243,4128966; 574194,4128773; 574114,4128638; 
574207,4128564; 574090,4128354; 573981,4128215; 573971,4128066; 
573918,4128005; 573856,4127980; 573848,4127937; 573886,4127912; 
574082,4127916; 574174,4127800; 574360,4127750; 574473,4127756; 
574692,4127659; 574793,4127594; 574830,4127526; 575061,4127322; 
575108,4127212; 575118,4127007; 575136,4126998; 575179,4126705; 
575255,4126597; 575437,4126460; 575410,4126387; 575467,4126339; 
575475,4126295; 575404,4126223; 575393,4126180; 575407,4126024; 
575303,4125865; 575177,4125877; 575058,4126064; 574924,4126121; 
574868,4126079; 574396,4126151; 574316,4126210; 574241,4126336; 
574044,4126373; 573947,4126434; 573732,4126487; 573644,4126490; 
573453,4126448; 573399,4126414; 573365,4126319; 573310,4126282; 
573287,4126109; 573175,4126039; 573138,4125924; 573135,4125795; 
572745,4125424; 572663,4125396; 572596,4125240; 572556,4125206; 
572351,4125107; 572303,4125058; 572184,4125058; 572123,4125147; 
571999,4125201; 571796,4125373; 571688,4125399; 571660,4125374; 
571748,4124914; 571680,4124564; 571765,4124348; 571751,4124191; 
571517,4123697; 571295,4123494; 571261,4123425; 571173,4123391; 
570995,4123440; 570760,4123730; 570610,4123819; 570489,4123795; 
570363,4123620; 570048,4123496; 569605,4123239; 569361,4123062; 
569273,4122870; 569112,4122852; 569032,4122818; 568975,4122734; 
568938,4122606; 568845,4122510; 568674,4122381; 568330,4122199; 
568183,4122041; 568089,4121844; 567929,4121625; 567853,4121468; 
567753,4121359; 567886,4121202; 568114,4121033; 568268,4120983; 
568404,4120859; 568458,4120654; 568574,4120546; 568633,4120370; 
568729,4120202; 568777,4120032; 568801,4119737; 568882,4119643; 
568910,4119534; 568991,4119382; returning to 569250,4119121; Excluding: 
555483,4121713; 555388,4121749; 555388,4121320; 555235,4121428; 
555083,4121390; 554981,4121263; 554873,4121256; 554937,4121205; 
555387,4121177; 556034,4121027; 556340,4120843; 556518,4120862; 
556658,4120996; 556400,4121122; 556169,4121332; 556086,4121497; 
555687,4121566; 555584,4121675; returning to 555483,4121713.
Excluding: 556092,4122063; 556218,4122107; 556645,4122069; 
556727,4122152; 556746,4122317; 556816,4122418; 557032,4122456; 
557089,4122533; 556873,4122695; 556861,4122837; 556467,4122821; 
556281,4123125; 556289,4123256; 556226,4123422; 555497,4123687; 
555358,4123614; 555261,4123663; 555032,4123593; 554691,4123369; 
554690,4123310; 554656,4123262; 554596,4123352; 554359,4123364; 
554270,4123180; 553600,4123504; 553555,4123410; 553375,4123390; 
553635,4122920; 553644,4122708; 553715,4122548; 553839,4122460; 
554062,4122505; 554165,4122407; 554289,4122418; 554447,4122645; 
555312,4122656; 555578,4122761; 555705,4122761; 555756,4122507; 
556003,4122317; returning to 556092,4122063.
    (ii) Note: Unit SNM-2 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (28)(ii) of this entry.
    (30) Unit STC-1: Santa Clara County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Calaveras Reservoir, San Jose East, Mt. Day, Lick 
Observatory, Morgan Hill, Isabel Valley and Mt. Sizer.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 612040,4142329; 612059,4142174; 612136,4142137; 612243,4141962; 
612198,4141726; 612203,4141589; 612088,4141439; 612041,4141311; 
612049,4141259; 611960,4141119; 611893,4140940; 611969,4140675; 
611942,4140491; 611944,4140135; 611962,4140096; 612052,4140065; 
612152,4139946; 612275,4139957; 612334,4139915; 612459,4139974; 
612507,4139882; 612554,4139865; 612630,4139772; 612695,4139756; 
612795,4139794; 613168,4139551; 613274,4139569; 613392,4139510; 
613498,4139495; 613570,4139450; 613586,4139411; 613566,4139244; 
613666,4139098; 613611,4138948; 613591,4138643; 613645,4138499; 
613605,4138264; 613625,4138154; 613708,4137981; 613803,4137917; 
614063,4137873; 614140,4138041; 614249,4138124; 614319,4138132; 
614354,4138114; 614382,4137991; 614504,4137865; 614553,4137838; 
614650,4137844; 614894,4137745; 614981,4137741; 614951,4137541; 
614963,4137477; 615053,4137385; 615187,4137120; 615536,4136826; 
615623,4136654; 615694,4136571; 615811,4136523; 615823,4136452; 
615764,4136335; 615810,4136000; 615822,4135962; 615914,4135902; 
615928,4135865; 615873,4135230; 615957,4135094; 616080,4134655; 
616156,4134516; 616247,4134483; 616360,4134378; 616464,4134099; 
616515,4133842; 616638,4133676; 616670,4133559; 616644,4133379; 
616652,4133124; 616668,4133048; 616729,4132973; 616798,4132770; 
616852,4132690; 616866,4132313; 616973,4132054; 617051,4131999; 
617114,4131990; 617158,4131944; 617172,4131872; 617143,4131780; 
617178,4131687; 617302,4131573; 617591,4131501; 617635,4131459; 
617692,4131243; 617760,4131146; 617872,4131197; 618059,4131081; 
618145,4130995; 618281,4131037; 618511,4131004; 618693,4131033; 
618729,4130991; 618729,4130940; 618624,4130736; 618668,4130675; 
618718,4130655; 618787,4130644; 618878,4130668; 619015,4130511; 
618895,4130412; 618867,4130338; 618871,4130263; 618965,4130041; 
618965,4129916; 619031,4129801; 619135,4129762; 619298,4129777; 
619591,4129713; 619800,4129796; 619819,4129775; 619824,4129621; 
619925,4129584; 619976,4129526; 619994,4129332; 620075,4129282; 
620163,4129300; 620342,4129194; 620451,4129228; 620734,4129474; 
620830,4129720; 620871,4129653; 620969,4129299; 621072,4129096; 
621167,4129040; 621462,4129008; 621485,4128960; 621419,4128672; 
621449,4128541; 621515,4128408; 621545,4128096; 621521,4127932; 
621824,4127708; 621825,4127609; 621904,4127423; 622072,4127349; 
622113,4127288; 622112,4127201; 621723,4127166; 621691,4127088; 
621697,4126941; 621650,4126898; 621435,4126877; 621355,4126773; 
621352,4126717; 621480,4126534; 621560,4126366; 621611,4126292; 
621701,4126238; 621758,4126104; 621817,4126034; 621915,4125991; 
622028,4125979; 622113,4125901; 622192,4125876; 622370,4125910; 
622527,4125851; 622683,4125916; 622744,4125886; 622816,4125749; 
622945,4125721; 622982,4125621; 623173,4125332; 623145,4125105; 
623239,4125034; 623411,4124996; 623593,4124887; 623692,4124722; 
623802,4124609; 623880,4124572; 623985,4124559; 624046,4124365;

[[Page 89]]

624145,4124286; 624195,4124252; 624361,4124256; 624411,4124190; 
624452,4124030; 624562,4123896; 624594,4123769; 624742,4123605; 
624913,4123629; 624957,4123577; 625087,4123189; 625229,4123134; 
625306,4123035; 625227,4122866; 625180,4122564; 625202,4122504; 
625275,4122421; 625222,4122293; 625234,4122248; 625342,4122141; 
625364,4122036; 625346,4121976; 625367,4121815; 625296,4121673; 
625258,4121446; 625303,4121426; 625441,4121465; 625627,4121383; 
625769,4121370; 625971,4121269; 626170,4121031; 626405,4120805; 
626471,4120684; 626472,4120551; 626503,4120491; 626566,4120430; 
626791,4120430; 626832,4120387; 626874,4120188; 626849,4120116; 
626881,4120000; 626870,4119926; 626904,4119873; 627034,4119828; 
626989,4119737; 626974,4119631; 626831,4119564; 626781,4119494; 
626758,4119371; 626672,4119312; 626641,4119261; 626651,4119139; 
626716,4119059; 626751,4118956; 626941,4118796; 627043,4118585; 
627179,4118618; 627214,4118603; 627419,4118344; 627643,4118155; 
627808,4118083; 628001,4118038; 628093,4117865; 628134,4117680; 
628466,4117591; 628550,4117534; 628588,4117465; 628623,4117388; 
628615,4117346; 628459,4117262; 628356,4117170; 628395,4116980; 
628325,4116853; 628335,4116718; 628278,4116490; 628286,4116352; 
628103,4116255; 628031,4116109; 627889,4115942; 627682,4115852; 
627576,4115719; 627167,4115669; 627060,4115683; 626925,4115642; 
626870,4115565; 626869,4115368; 626923,4115263; 626960,4115056; 
626726,4114762; 626787,4114534; 626784,4114467; 626690,4114262; 
626423,4114125; 626434,4114068; 626578,4113887; 626623,4113725; 
626719,4113599; 626903,4113417; 627132,4113270; 627201,4113193; 
627261,4113097; 627291,4112961; 627358,4112811; 627557,4112743; 
627638,4112652; 627614,4112518; 627418,4112146; 627426,4111910; 
627385,4111753; 627480,4111507; 627394,4111334; 627391,4111261; 
627490,4111114; 627388,4110977; 627171,4111318; 627031,4111456; 
626862,4111748; 626633,4111951; 626547,4112092; 626333,4112335; 
626231,4112677; 626140,4112823; 625896,4112885; 625823,4112986; 
625726,4113043; 625560,4113050; 625410,4112881; 625270,4112901; 
624926,4113024; 624677,4113152; 624253,4113507; 624165,4113648; 
624216,4113793; 624195,4113833; 624061,4113788; 623966,4113838; 
623809,4113800; 623432,4113932; 623410,4113985; 623286,4113958; 
623227,4114020; 623221,4114114; 623177,4114172; 623162,4114299; 
623085,4114351; 622877,4114704; 622841,4114749; 622695,4114830; 
622668,4114942; 622581,4114938; 622535,4114970; 622431,4114946; 
622362,4114981; 622307,4115087; 622170,4115245; 622128,4115351; 
621954,4115628; 621964,4115651; 622248,4115647; 622368,4115618; 
622492,4115468; 622660,4115452; 622703,4115339; 622733,4115324; 
622753,4115332; 622724,4115461; 622756,4115515; 622735,4115580; 
622592,4115619; 622471,4115691; 622440,4115767; 622227,4115914; 
622180,4115994; 622111,4116019; 621959,4115986; 621770,4115884; 
621746,4115952; 621676,4116028; 621642,4116139; 621565,4116506; 
621607,4116593; 621533,4116615; 621477,4116672; 621501,4116205; 
621482,4116098; 621429,4116065; 621240,4116163; 621210,4116295; 
621169,4116348; 620911,4116453; 620819,4116645; 620818,4116696; 
620868,4116747; 620858,4116775; 620523,4116740; 620411,4116761; 
620380,4116984; 620270,4117039; 620133,4117214; 620181,4117375; 
620082,4117343; 620051,4117391; 620060,4117643; 620034,4117731; 
619920,4117869; 619919,4117897; 619855,4117932; 619923,4118019; 
619879,4118047; 619809,4117977; 619758,4117971; 619314,4118146; 
619080,4118189; 618997,4118316; 618794,4118278; 618707,4118371; 
618474,4118228; 618333,4118177; 618125,4118214; 617725,4118186; 
617578,4118212; 617492,4118311; 617333,4118207; 617237,4118176; 
617157,4118173; 617020,4118231; 616900,4118344; 616704,4118473; 
616652,4118594; 616528,4118721; 616301,4118690; 616109,4118847; 
615968,4119042; 615888,4119292; 615772,4119462; 615774,4119551; 
615497,4119806; 614886,4120144; 614835,4120223; 614849,4120390; 
614588,4120669; 614537,4120787; 614438,4120860; 614312,4120876; 
614093,4121043; 614103,4121315; 614181,4121415; 614309,4121481; 
614351,4121596; 614085,4121709; 613916,4121616; 613664,4121942; 
613577,4122207; 613738,4122279; 613758,4122421; 613798,4122514; 
613961,4122796; 613897,4122862; 613777,4122898; 613651,4122988; 
613589,4123089; 613606,4123223; 613756,4123389; 613900,4123394; 
613985,4123425; 614086,4123514; 614631,4123658; 614745,4123606; 
614794,4123628; 614874,4123785; 614706,4123888; 614703,4123913; 
614758,4123972; 614881,4123990; 615122,4123950; 615217,4123983; 
615371,4123965; 615542,4124082; 615597,4124166; 615590,4124203; 
615498,4124290; 615254,4124371; 615230,4124425; 615180,4124432; 
615125,4124496; 615112,4124679; 614993,4124738; 614872,4124894; 
614862,4124944; 614702,4125047; 614649,4125163; 614675,4125373; 
614584,4125586; 614620,4125652; 614694,4125654; 614749,4125701; 
614905,4126019; 614911,4126099; 614684,4126506; 614799,4126785; 
614809,4127047; 614798,4127098; 614657,4127186; 614631,4127335; 
614662,4127620; 614585,4127828; 614658,4128059; 614642,4128130; 
614542,4128151; 614464,4128227; 614391,4128346; 614203,4128535; 
614191,4128589; 614189,4128617; 614287,4128701; 614313,4128775; 
614295,4128959; 614225,4129047; 614367,4129352; 614175,4129502; 
614106,4129473; 613942,4129667; 613739,4129766; 613576,4130060; 
613498,4130094; 613472,4130071; 613441,4130080; 613508,4130573; 
613389,4130813; 613398,4130924; 613344,4131136; 613084,4131480; 
613020,4131548; 612886,4131629; 612798,4131727; 612715,4131842; 
612621,4132064; 612557,4132133; 612358,4132261; 612278,4132385; 
612259,4132633; 612067,4132743; 611994,4132736; 611912,4132787; 
611946,4132924; 611824,4133110; 611802,4133324; 611734,4133426; 
611635,4133479; 611655,4133578; 611647,4133759; 611623,4133842; 
611522,4133915; 611509,4133949; 611485,4134037; 611509,4134193; 
611493,4134315; 611388,4134536; 611342,4134597; 611161,4134610; 
611121,4134719; 610969,4134719; 610777,4134766; 610728,4134837; 
610731,4134969; 610564,4135011; 610426,4135080; 610356,4135221; 
610256,4135311; 610146,4135640; 610042,4135853; 609929,4135939; 
609729,4136000; 609508,4136147; 609270,4136458; 609113,4136872; 
609025,4136993; 608928,4137055; 608816,4137274; 608787,4137441; 
608638,4137595; 608537,4137760; 608444,4137816; 608346,4137829; 
608182,4137930; 607779,4137907; 607593,4137951; 607413,4138082; 
607351,4138218; 607210,4138322; 607157,4138501; 607091,4138579; 
606846,4138652; 606681,4138605; 606357,4138606; 606040,4138540; 
606025,4138608; 606045,4138787; 606102,4138827; 606098,4138947; 
605923,4138995; 605932,4139155;

[[Page 90]]

605426,4138980; 605234,4138972; 605121,4139012; 605059,4138971; 
604638,4139103; 604471,4139194; 604343,4139170; 604302,4139246; 
604183,4139305; 604159,4139363; 604133,4139467; 604133,4139623; 
604367,4139882; 604382,4140096; 604429,4140118; 604574,4140118; 
604608,4140376; 604783,4140578; 604789,4140721; 605055,4141023; 
605226,4141041; 605536,4141023; 605648,4141059; 605764,4141137; 
605993,4141092; 606071,4140988; 606145,4140955; 606317,4140970; 
606545,4141045; 606686,4141124; 606832,4141464; 606985,4141659; 
607076,4141722; 607213,4141750; 607541,4141680; 607785,4141734; 
608014,4141870; 608137,4142008; 608199,4142141; 608199,4142276; 
608300,4142611; 608587,4142636; 608715,4142602; 608815,4142474; 
608848,4142388; 608996,4142296; 609083,4142211; 609302,4142219; 
609329,4141976; 609375,4141928; 609532,4141860; 609743,4141951; 
609797,4142102; 609851,4142170; 610012,4142113; 610088,4142027; 
610194,4142032; 610315,4141978; 610415,4141989; 610614,4142075; 
610676,4142133; 610751,4142259; 610789,4142438; 610999,4142707; 
611151,4142845; 611372,4142893; 611408,4142925; 611459,4142899; 
611689,4142634; 612012,4142381; returning to 612040,4142329.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units STC-1 and STC-2 for the California red-
legged frog follows:

[[Page 91]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.017

    (31) Unit STC-2: Santa Clara, Merced, Stanislaus and San Benito 
Counties, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Mt. Sizer, 
Gilroy, Mt. Stakes, Mississippi Creek, Gilroy Hot Springs, San Felipe, 
Mustang Peak, Pacheco Peak, Three Sisters, Crevision Peak, Pacheco Pass 
and Mariposa Peak.

[[Page 92]]

    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 639546,4129203; 639759,4129165; 639715,4128997; 639730,4128920; 
639814,4128811; 639800,4128684; 640076,4128375; 640247,4128258; 
640263,4128178; 640404,4128055; 640398,4127894; 640352,4127793; 
640370,4127736; 640463,4127644; 640411,4127495; 640289,4127468; 
640187,4127396; 640115,4127138; 640124,4127070; 639872,4126828; 
639790,4126628; 639781,4126566; 639822,4126533; 639919,4126303; 
639913,4126193; 639952,4126120; 639995,4125882; 639899,4125877; 
639810,4125750; 639783,4125652; 639802,4125436; 639768,4125214; 
639801,4125194; 639938,4124903; 639862,4124823; 639908,4124715; 
640051,4124535; 640220,4124484; 640333,4124420; 640499,4124474; 
640725,4124443; 640792,4124455; 640856,4124419; 641092,4124427; 
641107,4124382; 641204,4124290; 641271,4124249; 641408,4124238; 
641528,4124098; 641601,4124055; 641721,4124007; 641859,4123990; 
642059,4123895; 642176,4123971; 642274,4124076; 642566,4124008; 
642555,4123944; 642576,4123896; 642678,4123832; 642719,4123708; 
642680,4123551; 642686,4123409; 642648,4123264; 642642,4123085; 
642659,4123024; 642855,4122810; 642935,4122612; 642852,4122462; 
642884,4122239; 642820,4122061; 642893,4121918; 643093,4121832; 
643145,4121777; 643238,4121663; 643304,4121372; 643482,4121318; 
643548,4121154; 643678,4121113; 643862,4120987; 643921,4120981; 
644067,4120714; 644130,4120656; 644208,4120619; 644302,4120637; 
644410,4120599; 644480,4120486; 644537,4120446; 644635,4120385; 
644798,4120337; 644928,4120161; 644785,4120082; 644735,4120009; 
644726,4119911; 644795,4119762; 644836,4119420; 644880,4119304; 
644819,4119024; 644731,4118907; 644614,4118818; 644597,4118746; 
644648,4118649; 644641,4118531; 644550,4118402; 644558,4118249; 
644671,4117859; 644817,4117669; 644845,4117469; 644830,4117384; 
644876,4117249; 644956,4117124; 644952,4116804; 645148,4116560; 
645251,4116554; 645459,4116653; 645589,4116638; 645629,4116612; 
645799,4116608; 646002,4116517; 646166,4116524; 646293,4116492; 
646513,4116343; 646614,4116175; 646819,4116004; 646877,4115890; 
646889,4115713; 646919,4115684; 647208,4115629; 647422,4115554; 
647567,4115404; 647743,4115280; 647895,4115311; 648096,4114850; 
648258,4114782; 648364,4114854; 648580,4114885; 648835,4114838; 
648907,4114848; 649102,4114906; 649148,4114957; 649317,4115041; 
649445,4115055; 649600,4115024; 649712,4115229; 649802,4115255; 
649842,4115247; 649965,4115124; 650026,4115004; 650225,4114906; 
650350,4114898; 650629,4114954; 650823,4114894; 650934,4114829; 
651130,4114887; 651390,4115111; 651418,4115179; 651536,4115308; 
651527,4115465; 651578,4115571; 651613,4115751; 651700,4115871; 
651837,4115947; 651905,4116122; 651999,4116243; 652104,4116446; 
652150,4116487; 652432,4116421; 652471,4116398; 652549,4116264; 
652772,4116134; 652916,4115926; 653129,4115700; 653239,4115464; 
653358,4115358; 653467,4115352; 653559,4115286; 653611,4115148; 
653854,4114719; 653904,4114492; 654076,4114354; 654154,4114176; 
654498,4114115; 654633,4114034; 654774,4114004; 654857,4114008; 
655084,4114077; 655313,4114095; 655350,4114084; 655410,4114016; 
655586,4113953; 655747,4114002; 655880,4113975; 656082,4113974; 
656238,4113932; 656261,4113878; 656227,4113738; 656237,4113694; 
656363,4113595; 656305,4113148; 656421,4112966; 656392,4112785; 
656408,4112685; 656467,4112649; 656553,4112512; 656647,4112455; 
656740,4112343; 656876,4112101; 656914,4111862; 657185,4111802; 
657347,4111649; 657481,4111581; 657438,4111410; 657466,4111281; 
657559,4111199; 657606,4111077; 657692,4111074; 657875,4110902; 
657875,4110795; 657822,4110684; 657943,4110519; 657956,4110410; 
658016,4110268; 658158,4110036; 658368,4109930; 658406,4109872; 
658456,4109856; 658675,4109867; 658784,4109812; 658830,4109758; 
658990,4109732; 659167,4109587; 659388,4109614; 659587,4109591; 
659800,4109501; 659869,4109644; 660043,4109710; 660096,4109764; 
660156,4109860; 660175,4110005; 660288,4110181; 660766,4110612; 
660839,4110744; 661182,4110999; 661438,4111148; 661548,4111124; 
661912,4111114; 662158,4111025; 662368,4111018; 662571,4110956; 
662702,4110886; 662805,4110782; 662997,4110666; 663135,4110548; 
663321,4110581; 663608,4110676; 663674,4110679; 663893,4110602; 
664202,4110318; 664236,4110242; 664404,4110042; 664461,4109741; 
664747,4109472; 664495,4109500; 664457,4109479; 664779,4109388; 
664916,4109298; 664972,4109201; 665017,4109218; 665133,4109177; 
665254,4109012; 665237,4108973; 665281,4108933; 665272,4108874; 
665347,4108815; 665257,4108753; 665352,4108727; 665337,4108600; 
665390,4108670; 665487,4108605; 665456,4108510; 665525,4108499; 
665525,4108436; 665581,4108391; 665624,4108286; 665613,4108263; 
665498,4108249; 665404,4108151; 665526,4108142; 665554,4108055; 
665647,4108062; 665680,4107934; 665577,4107863; 665424,4107821; 
665414,4107793; 665594,4107720; 665617,4107690; 665499,4107645; 
665366,4107665; 665216,4107636; 665184,4107590; 665262,4107584; 
665401,4107511; 665365,4107483; 665344,4107412; 665270,4107413; 
665223,4107358; 665172,4107371; 665127,4107420; 665043,4107405; 
664992,4107451; 664935,4107435; 664849,4107472; 664651,4107386; 
664809,4107285; 664812,4107229; 664962,4107231; 665013,4107195; 
665005,4107162; 664957,4107156; 664943,4107132; 665007,4107033; 
664999,4106988; 664947,4106982; 664901,4107065; 664833,4107080; 
664762,4106963; 664721,4106985; 664702,4107057; 664647,4107123; 
664595,4107081; 664542,4107086; 664523,4107057; 664529,4106947; 
664499,4106928; 664279,4107090; 664235,4107095; 664272,4106985; 
664160,4106935; 664173,4106881; 664068,4106863; 663981,4106778; 
663949,4106696; 663982,4106682; 664020,4106706; 664058,4106683; 
664101,4106714; 664198,4106695; 664216,4106572; 664268,4106637; 
664332,4106672; 664379,4106641; 664377,4106536; 664478,4106609; 
664608,4106638; 664642,4106620; 664659,4106583; 664503,4106517; 
664478,4106401; 664528,4106317; 664342,4106323; 664319,4106211; 
664210,4106245; 664183,4106203; 664117,4106188; 664110,4106148; 
664028,4106043; 663964,4106025; 663931,4106037; 663916,4106100; 
663813,4106108; 663864,4106244; 663783,4106232; 663722,4106292; 
663697,4106153; 663545,4106164; 663549,4106101; 663620,4106067; 
663513,4105861; 663513,4105809; 663550,4105752; 663535,4105727; 
663452,4105750; 663306,4105713; 663248,4105728; 663170,4105782; 
663119,4105892; 663095,4105732; 663012,4105662; 662888,4105748; 
662862,4105912; 662764,4105833; 662716,4105830; 662453,4105932; 
662453,4105961; 662401,4105940; 662270,4105987; 662200,4105960;

[[Page 93]]

662201,4105855; 662013,4105669; 662047,4105655; 662142,4105697; 
662342,4105669; 662482,4105617; 662541,4105568; 662592,4105572; 
662711,4105452; 662662,4105420; 662547,4105456; 662338,4105357; 
662238,4105344; 662130,4105244; 662009,4105247; 662066,4105171; 
662189,4105157; 662389,4105242; 662414,4105136; 662565,4105124; 
662683,4105177; 662796,4105179; 662816,4105152; 662723,4105055; 
662745,4104994; 662709,4104895; 662752,4104909; 662790,4104888; 
662852,4105023; 662917,4105007; 663044,4105197; 663045,4105230; 
663101,4105226; 663106,4105175; 663052,4105068; 663074,4104940; 
663168,4104980; 663211,4105030; 663327,4104919; 663367,4104918; 
663367,4104826; 663391,4104807; 663484,4104813; 663558,4104884; 
663608,4104811; 663664,4104811; 663761,4104766; 663852,4104771; 
663873,4104707; 663780,4104713; 663682,4104668; 663579,4104722; 
663441,4104687; 663349,4104708; 663330,4104748; 663226,4104798; 
663096,4104761; 662992,4104689; 662938,4104689; 662986,4104615; 
663124,4104676; 663237,4104624; 663418,4104447; 663346,4104380; 
663256,4104392; 662986,4104264; 662933,4104365; 662873,4104422; 
662832,4104425; 662768,4104378; 662606,4104510; 662593,4104558; 
662617,4104696; 662589,4104719; 662585,4104656; 662436,4104465; 
662481,4104247; 662444,4104227; 662366,4104266; 662399,4104377; 
662308,4104563; 662245,4104582; 662154,4104690; 662156,4104784; 
662059,4104770; 662035,4104802; 662004,4104905; 662040,4104941; 
662040,4105008; 661981,4105023; 661923,4104960; 661877,4104955; 
661672,4105035; 661496,4105065; 661429,4105117; 661419,4105070; 
661675,4104881; 661706,4104901; 661778,4104863; 661815,4104803; 
661816,4104736; 661875,4104680; 661866,4104579; 661983,4104499; 
662068,4104326; 662045,4104279; 661980,4104281; 661844,4104389; 
661873,4104279; 662085,4104161; 662069,4104129; 661884,4104095; 
661904,4104044; 661812,4103974; 661678,4103983; 661452,4104119; 
661348,4104203; 661331,4104257; 661286,4104213; 661154,4104209; 
661090,4104245; 661063,4104304; 660930,4104342; 660830,4104407; 
660631,4104460; 660872,4104326; 660926,4104258; 661016,4104230; 
660980,4104164; 661085,4104163; 661091,4104076; 661287,4104100; 
661371,4103978; 661411,4104027; 661518,4104007; 661576,4103932; 
661586,4103871; 661627,4103850; 661792,4103810; 661900,4103876; 
661945,4103876; 661967,4103808; 662027,4103893; 662129,4103943; 
662197,4103967; 662259,4103948; 662309,4103845; 662272,4103798; 
662312,4103767; 662315,4103649; 662352,4103660; 662387,4103732; 
662431,4103719; 662438,4103781; 662496,4103839; 662565,4103788; 
662902,4103841; 662991,4103820; 662997,4103763; 662950,4103713; 
662858,4103642; 662705,4103581; 662771,4103535; 662766,4103459; 
662755,4103442; 662653,4103462; 662617,4103422; 662613,4103349; 
662527,4103308; 662441,4103320; 662377,4103359; 662338,4103298; 
662164,4103304; 662075,4103266; 661910,4103262; 661924,4103236; 
661862,4103211; 662158,4103214; 662243,4103176; 662489,4103160; 
662519,4103097; 662372,4102996; 662374,4102975; 662520,4102986; 
662562,4102935; 662573,4102844; 662598,4102822; 662585,4102914; 
662620,4103011; 662663,4103029; 662660,4103110; 662704,4103156; 
662780,4103181; 662772,4103243; 662884,4103297; 662972,4103446; 
663040,4103465; 663143,4103410; 663159,4103486; 663117,4103575; 
663196,4103672; 663272,4103668; 663330,4103719; 663430,4103756; 
663528,4103774; 663588,4103750; 663676,4103796; 663735,4103700; 
663833,4103647; 663876,4103717; 663969,4103740; 663996,4103603; 
664079,4103590; 664140,4103642; 664151,4103492; 664395,4103184; 
664441,4103167; 664452,4103104; 664556,4103058; 664585,4102963; 
664581,4102736; 664523,4102552; 664454,4102487; 664601,4102421; 
664668,4102260; 664665,4102125; 664637,4102103; 664499,4102094; 
664625,4102033; 664745,4101930; 664754,4101895; 664659,4101863; 
664780,4101696; 664753,4101613; 664687,4101558; 664725,4101497; 
664698,4101461; 664636,4101434; 664586,4101443; 664516,4101341; 
664566,4101315; 664550,4101260; 664433,4101126; 664326,4101094; 
664216,4100939; 664344,4100957; 664387,4100928; 664404,4100966; 
664477,4100986; 664582,4100935; 664659,4100999; 664679,4100864; 
664747,4100840; 664848,4100720; 664663,4100710; 664613,4100663; 
664622,4100600; 664730,4100556; 664756,4100522; 664640,4100471; 
664691,4100390; 664599,4100268; 664569,4100037; 664598,4099951; 
664539,4099835; 664447,4099733; 664564,4099744; 664603,4099811; 
664719,4099914; 664774,4099939; 664817,4099896; 664935,4099996; 
665152,4099790; 665279,4100228; 665329,4100111; 665340,4099968; 
665366,4099938; 665474,4099980; 665548,4099917; 665537,4099810; 
665591,4099794; 665661,4099817; 665720,4099778; 665738,4099738; 
665683,4099612; 665789,4099585; 665811,4099445; 665886,4099466; 
665913,4099408; 666077,4099344; 666107,4099156; 665937,4099044; 
665913,4098986; 666029,4099035; 666072,4099031; 666085,4098989; 
666129,4099003; 666214,4099070; 666251,4099177; 666321,4099211; 
666385,4099172; 666399,4099088; 666461,4099043; 666482,4098810; 
666387,4098683; 666538,4098676; 666570,4098651; 666629,4098564; 
666621,4098502; 666579,4098478; 666625,4098384; 666507,4098305; 
666400,4098283; 666382,4098252; 666407,4098219; 666543,4098195; 
666692,4098200; 666760,4098135; 666811,4098223; 666893,4098240; 
666950,4098153; 666951,4098026; 667019,4098055; 667165,4097991; 
667164,4097968; 666966,4097881; 666922,4097835; 666986,4097799; 
667003,4097688; 667048,4097702; 667168,4097684; 667129,4097631; 
667116,4097561; 667020,4097558; 667008,4097537; 667099,4097487; 
667055,4097423; 667159,4097407; 667208,4097375; 667217,4097336; 
667188,4097304; 667079,4097302; 667121,4097256; 667108,4097215; 
667216,4097219; 667237,4097176; 667177,4096987; 667122,4096950; 
667138,4096910; 667123,4096867; 667055,4096761; 667019,4096757; 
666810,4096850; 666773,4096843; 666916,4096729; 666883,4096642; 
667035,4096604; 666974,4096532; 667032,4096458; 667002,4096421; 
667025,4096243; 667013,4096066; 666920,4096010; 666991,4095957; 
667008,4095843; 666942,4095750; 666914,4095640; 666804,4095656; 
666817,4095616; 666871,4095585; 666842,4095462; 666757,4095316; 
666703,4095057; 666629,4094973; 666476,4094963; 666151,4095087; 
666010,4095201; 665864,4095242; 665680,4095409; 665560,4095423; 
665646,4095354; 665628,4095281; 665133,4094656; 664629,4094273; 
664336,4094181; 663579,4094126; 662903,4094024; 662627,4093892; 
662114,4093272; 662002,4093094; 661985,4092928; 662017,4092804; 
661861,4092709; 661698,4092500; 661439,4092428; 661173,4092479; 
660937,4092480; 660867,4092456; 660778,4092369; 660653,4092059; 
660641,4091925; 660251,4091760;

[[Page 94]]

660162,4091782; 660033,4091877; 659967,4092014; 659578,4091748; 
659359,4091688; 659281,4091628; 659225,4091618; 659081,4091462; 
659012,4091243; 658823,4091051; 658811,4091000; 658834,4090938; 
658652,4090568; 658536,4090484; 658327,4090267; 658238,4090241; 
658097,4090251; 658003,4090204; 657809,4089947; 657778,4089851; 
657686,4089782; 657568,4089485; 657568,4089346; 657601,4089299; 
657587,4089210; 657511,4089045; 657334,4088785; 657337,4088609; 
656887,4088671; 656620,4088788; 656450,4088810; 656195,4088944; 
656116,4089065; 655798,4089159; 655705,4089250; 655627,4089232; 
655441,4089279; 655345,4089260; 655315,4089403; 655230,4089528; 
655106,4089558; 654939,4089501; 654853,4089597; 654740,4089673; 
654735,4089732; 654811,4089882; 654746,4090139; 654513,4090406; 
654546,4090496; 654519,4090556; 654368,4090555; 654207,4090684; 
654221,4090874; 654190,4091086; 654097,4091175; 654017,4091351; 
653970,4091584; 653873,4091763; 653690,4091867; 653524,4092207; 
653518,4092389; 653271,4092529; 653234,4092609; 653141,4092649; 
653024,4092881; 652991,4092920; 652907,4092947; 652783,4093103; 
652808,4093336; 652795,4093795; 652681,4093930; 652387,4094024; 
652281,4094100; 652277,4094330; 652176,4094616; 651578,4094413; 
651457,4094399; 651335,4094442; 651294,4094433; 651255,4094406; 
651200,4094306; 651041,4094194; 651004,4094103; 651021,4094006; 
650935,4093717; 650820,4093498; 650856,4093402; 650834,4093186; 
650770,4093055; 650719,4093016; 650679,4093015; 650618,4093083; 
650437,4093063; 650351,4093098; 650294,4093186; 650233,4093234; 
650039,4093208; 649927,4093137; 649797,4093136; 649758,4093257; 
649600,4093531; 649500,4093612; 649281,4093710; 649182,4093907; 
648947,4094034; 648767,4094350; 648648,4094405; 648465,4094423; 
648360,4094556; 648287,4094611; 648256,4094848; 648270,4095011; 
648182,4095217; 647955,4095237; 647499,4095104; 647399,4095096; 
647330,4095013; 647163,4094988; 647047,4094899; 647028,4094802; 
646891,4094825; 646858,4094755; 646811,4094723; 646791,4094618; 
646647,4094535; 646404,4094494; 646329,4094408; 646077,4094318; 
646043,4094286; 646032,4094221; 646117,4094190; 646315,4093942; 
646451,4093853; 646414,4093639; 646328,4093581; 646369,4093496; 
646469,4093433; 646498,4093347; 646509,4093052; 646435,4092908; 
646488,4092740; 646467,4092637; 646480,4092484; 646431,4092418; 
646345,4092375; 646012,4092339; 645936,4092310; 645651,4091987; 
645619,4091861; 645494,4091762; 645459,4091523; 645436,4091524; 
645381,4091594; 645227,4091970; 644956,4092226; 644889,4092333; 
644865,4092425; 644900,4092639; 645061,4092813; 645090,4092892; 
645133,4093347; 645063,4093671; 644895,4094099; 644836,4094483; 
644816,4095023; 644770,4095291; 644852,4095537; 644692,4095730; 
644622,4095672; 644540,4095771; 644385,4095788; 644150,4095515; 
643759,4094905; 643681,4094923; 643804,4094673; 643863,4094207; 
643947,4094039; 644036,4093946; 644082,4093749; 644036,4093485; 
643894,4093161; 643947,4092835; 643943,4092735; 643763,4092502; 
643778,4092414; 643858,4092250; 643907,4092011; 643904,4091716; 
643864,4091630; 643738,4091561; 643704,4091517; 643902,4091318; 
643926,4091254; 643919,4091216; 643876,4091197; 643682,4091200; 
643633,4091169; 643636,4091144; 643768,4091091; 643823,4090973; 
643903,4090941; 643992,4090806; 644009,4090683; 643980,4090610; 
643928,4090568; 643740,4090548; 643593,4090566; 643417,4090608; 
643221,4090701; 643062,4090726; 642950,4090790; 642814,4090752; 
642714,4090758; 642535,4090824; 642377,4090934; 642293,4091095; 
642036,4091324; 641838,4091579; 641651,4091653; 641587,4091704; 
641518,4091805; 641374,4091904; 641216,4091951; 641183,4091982; 
641176,4092144; 641094,4092352; 641090,4092438; 641157,4092493; 
641350,4092414; 641267,4092622; 641057,4092687; 641018,4092746; 
641017,4092811; 641180,4093187; 641149,4093270; 641050,4093294; 
640939,4093172; 640801,4093088; 640674,4093099; 640520,4093221; 
640465,4093228; 640439,4093188; 640438,4093107; 640365,4093044; 
640027,4093016; 639702,4092949; 639512,4092976; 639712,4093226; 
639850,4093586; 639939,4093906; 639973,4094495; 639965,4094799; 
640079,4095069; 640242,4095348; 640309,4095610; 640286,4095886; 
640254,4095996; 640262,4096145; 640232,4096219; 640073,4096388; 
639856,4096470; 639736,4096573; 639387,4096626; 639344,4096722; 
639215,4096834; 639155,4096827; 639083,4096737; 638998,4096692; 
638692,4096748; 638645,4096807; 638641,4096872; 638840,4097137; 
638618,4097256; 638400,4097265; 638146,4097414; 638111,4097528; 
637947,4097647; 637830,4097864; 637775,4098050; 637786,4098085; 
637902,4098238; 638059,4098263; 638111,4098409; 638007,4098366; 
637863,4098416; 637802,4098534; 637761,4098693; 637679,4098771; 
637605,4098767; 637237,4098867; 636845,4099033; 636776,4099040; 
636581,4099001; 636390,4099025; 636221,4099088; 636011,4099096; 
635725,4099252; 635680,4099316; 635619,4099720; 635663,4099862; 
635587,4099960; 635546,4100125; 635453,4100204; 635388,4100212; 
635302,4100179; 635251,4100208; 635125,4100421; 635087,4100546; 
634956,4100712; 634884,4100857; 634726,4100913; 634608,4101021; 
634551,4101110; 634485,4101292; 634392,4101417; 634028,4101603; 
633905,4101812; 633797,4101901; 633726,4102017; 633722,4102251; 
633521,4102565; 632829,4102548; 632606,4102597; 632783,4103163; 
632399,4104333; 632239,4104397; 631719,4104456; 631546,4104625; 
631213,4104741; 631161,4104817; 631157,4104921; 631069,4105021; 
630977,4105063; 630964,4105109; 630778,4105330; 630643,4105544; 
630607,4105579; 630482,4105607; 630435,4105645; 630468,4105831; 
630383,4105962; 630318,4106184; 630241,4106257; 630237,4106356; 
630165,4106449; 630003,4106545; 629870,4106820; 629714,4107029; 
629557,4107390; 629544,4107573; 629498,4107755; 629458,4107886; 
629394,4107941; 629373,4107994; 629353,4108126; 629308,4108227; 
629233,4108310; 629141,4108357; 629108,4108410; 629052,4108947; 
629083,4109024; 629149,4109061; 629183,4109142; 629062,4109075; 
628948,4109076; 628796,4108906; 628782,4108817; 628625,4108893; 
628568,4108994; 628416,4109039; 628402,4109420; 628321,4109540; 
628314,4109750; 628251,4109890; 628105,4109947; 628022,4110080; 
628010,4110233; 627933,4110391; 627469,4110933; 627423,4110926; 
627388,4110977; 627490,4111114; 627391,4111261; 627394,4111334; 
627480,4111507; 627385,4111753; 627426,4111910; 627418,4112146; 
627614,4112518; 627638,4112652; 627557,4112743; 627358,4112811; 
627291,4112961; 627261,4113097; 627201,4113193; 627132,4113270; 
626903,4113417; 626719,4113599; 626623,4113725; 626578,4113887; 
626434,4114068; 626423,4114125;

[[Page 95]]

626690,4114262; 626784,4114467; 626787,4114534; 626726,4114762; 
626960,4115056; 626923,4115263; 626869,4115368; 626870,4115565; 
626925,4115642; 627060,4115683; 627167,4115669; 627576,4115719; 
627682,4115852; 627889,4115942; 628031,4116109; 628103,4116255; 
628286,4116352; 628278,4116490; 628335,4116718; 628325,4116853; 
628395,4116980; 628356,4117170; 628459,4117262; 628615,4117346; 
628623,4117388; 628522,4117558; 628134,4117680; 628093,4117865; 
628001,4118038; 627808,4118083; 627643,4118155; 627419,4118344; 
627214,4118603; 627179,4118618; 627043,4118585; 626941,4118796; 
626751,4118956; 626716,4119059; 626651,4119139; 626641,4119261; 
626672,4119312; 626758,4119371; 626781,4119494; 626877,4119598; 
626974,4119631; 626989,4119737; 627034,4119828; 627247,4119851; 
627320,4119803; 627472,4119822; 627655,4119787; 627818,4119904; 
627861,4119981; 627933,4120021; 628181,4120054; 628259,4119984; 
628392,4120115; 628483,4120293; 628489,4120390; 628754,4120575; 
628774,4120652; 629144,4121010; 629269,4121094; 629803,4121223; 
629856,4121184; 629910,4121041; 629987,4120938; 630087,4120937; 
630186,4120882; 630395,4120831; 630565,4120699; 630924,4120570; 
630985,4120528; 631157,4120347; 631185,4120270; 631319,4120093; 
631417,4120048; 631500,4119910; 631714,4119996; 631853,4120126; 
631975,4120552; 632218,4120977; 632441,4121188; 632522,4121351; 
632708,4121430; 632859,4121567; 632993,4121415; 633176,4121419; 
633266,4121504; 633231,4121662; 633303,4121820; 633279,4121940; 
633319,4121985; 633314,4122039; 633253,4122087; 633190,4122214; 
633392,4122505; 633547,4122539; 633467,4122678; 633529,4122783; 
633641,4123102; 633616,4123188; 633489,4123308; 633465,4123374; 
633599,4123619; 633612,4123689; 633909,4123712; 634007,4123766; 
634079,4123760; 634185,4123709; 634520,4123699; 634693,4123562; 
634864,4123521; 634934,4123479; 635026,4123302; 635148,4123158; 
635412,4123050; 635511,4122886; 635585,4122811; 635688,4122750; 
635829,4122770; 635886,4122679; 635952,4122623; 636163,4122601; 
636333,4122655; 636481,4122645; 636610,4122687; 636711,4122672; 
636775,4122711; 636866,4122976; 636912,4123044; 637267,4123340; 
637206,4123572; 637205,4123665; 637101,4123719; 636988,4123848; 
636927,4123873; 636897,4123954; 636926,4124017; 637015,4124087; 
636986,4124222; 637063,4124300; 637122,4124411; 637054,4124511; 
637073,4124589; 637048,4124670; 636967,4124824; 636922,4124850; 
636878,4124925; 636899,4125004; 636960,4125046; 637017,4125045; 
637031,4125169; 637095,4125265; 637064,4125306; 637048,4125431; 
637005,4125514; 637040,4125617; 636963,4125702; 636959,4125785; 
637023,4125924; 637147,4125951; 637074,4126120; 637048,4126273; 
637002,4126331; 636998,4126418; 637063,4126493; 636964,4126727; 
636964,4126800; 636984,4126889; 637031,4126953; 637016,4127032; 
636944,4127069; 636843,4127169; 636793,4127268; 636643,4127421; 
636622,4127496; 636570,4127550; 636566,4127614; 636601,4127723; 
636638,4127786; 636721,4127842; 636831,4127793; 636864,4127754; 
636936,4127766; 637048,4127882; 637058,4128046; 637121,4128192; 
637273,4128338; 637371,4128367; 637439,4128360; 637491,4128395; 
637504,4128431; 637475,4128612; 637398,4128865; 637490,4128976; 
637616,4129021; 637667,4129080; 637899,4129178; 637943,4129175; 
638111,4129126; 638206,4129043; 638279,4129045; 638355,4128931; 
638612,4128834; 638846,4128930; 638909,4128934; 639057,4129011; 
639199,4129040; 639431,4129195; returning to 639546,4129203.
    (ii) Note: Unit STC-2 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (30)(ii) of this entry.
    (32) Unit SCZ-1: Santa Cruz and San Mateo Counties, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Franklin Point, Ano Nuevo, Big Basin, 
Davenport, Felton and Santa Cruz.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 563662,4115064; 563902,4115237; 563915,4115297; 563879,4115420; 
563931,4115559; 563887,4115633; 563895,4115727; 563964,4115960; 
564045,4116048; 564048,4116217; 564134,4116372; 564140,4116453; 
564414,4116466; 564501,4116430; 564644,4116464; 564701,4116455; 
564742,4116504; 564749,4116592; 564832,4116671; 564995,4116680; 
565091,4116711; 565262,4116712; 565425,4116788; 565671,4117091; 
565809,4117126; 565894,4117190; 565921,4117260; 565927,4117536; 
566051,4117615; 566110,4117736; 566304,4117724; 566404,4117833; 
566576,4117892; 567036,4118184; 567262,4118281; 567499,4118333; 
567590,4118548; 567733,4118731; 567746,4118785; 567699,4118870; 
567704,4118933; 567778,4119012; 567942,4119114; 568006,4119097; 
568067,4119030; 568274,4118928; 568430,4118898; 568652,4118929; 
568788,4118975; 568881,4118980; 568939,4118954; 569151,4119022; 
569218,4119108; 569260,4119124; 569422,4119083; 569476,4119040; 
569571,4118885; 569845,4118763; 569977,4118646; 570191,4118236; 
570505,4118044; 570662,4117740; 570849,4117476; 570922,4117312; 
571458,4117009; 571527,4116831; 571510,4116573; 571552,4116437; 
571546,4116349; 571667,4116105; 571672,4115971; 571624,4115844; 
571834,4115456; 572014,4114800; 571999,4114663; 571958,4114557; 
571724,4114348; 571686,4114278; 571692,4114244; 571770,4114100; 
571872,4114050; 571891,4113944; 571928,4113887; 572145,4113691; 
572238,4113541; 572410,4113497; 572422,4113471; 572383,4113428; 
572275,4113380; 572190,4113291; 571991,4112934; 571986,4112755; 
572028,4112600; 571938,4112494; 571948,4112437; 572018,4112345; 
572159,4112277; 572180,4112230; 572014,4112052; 571788,4111956; 
571722,4111803; 571522,4111664; 571456,4111512; 571426,4111382; 
571432,4111298; 571556,4111218; 571831,4111207; 571945,4111012; 
572126,4110986; 572296,4110916; 572355,4110861; 572400,4110669; 
572449,4110629; 572665,4110563; 573032,4110522; 573210,4110425; 
573396,4110412; 573515,4110339; 573552,4110252; 573551,4110105; 
573581,4110001; 574046,4109512; 574309,4109172; 574432,4109053; 
574685,4108907; 574846,4108732; 574881,4108547; 574995,4108383; 
575066,4107912; 575127,4107794; 575247,4107709; 575542,4107691; 
575616,4107666; 576142,4107244; 576342,4106833; 576364,4106472; 
576456,4106126; 576449,4106015; 576491,4105706; 576374,4105368; 
576464,4105110; 576710,4104644; 576898,4104558; 577006,4104480; 
577078,4104398; 577093,4104337; 577074,4104056; 576991,4103801; 
576995,4103644; 577561,4103149; 577688,4103089; 578028,4102717; 
578146,4102420; 578061,4102291; 578030,4102169; 578091,4102066; 
578087,4101987; 577874,4101885; 577887,4101790;

[[Page 96]]

578067,4101506; 578161,4101440; 578273,4101407; 578410,4101243; 
578482,4101025; 578546,4100957; 578637,4100917; 578682,4100701; 
578804,4100569; 578865,4100465; 579150,4100310; 579322,4100254; 
579434,4100153; 579480,4100023; 579488,4099773; 579469,4099660; 
579410,4099528; 579426,4099493; 579516,4099446; 579530,4099383; 
579486,4099239; 579486,4099152; 579561,4099035; 579589,4098829; 
579762,4098630; 579871,4098566; 579957,4098355; 580193,4098159; 
580330,4098160; 580426,4098102; 580669,4098106; 580861,4098168; 
581010,4098149; 581168,4098063; 581422,4097753; 581616,4097576; 
582018,4097337; 582277,4097203; 582555,4097250; 582592,4097218; 
582711,4096974; 582847,4096872; 582932,4096650; 583059,4096480; 
583210,4096352; 583304,4096109; 583288,4095861; 583390,4095602; 
583352,4095509; 583512,4095165; 583460,4094954; 583478,4094782; 
583513,4094670; 583568,4094655; 583615,4094582; 583597,4094481; 
583611,4094312; 583761,4093780; 583795,4093387; 583779,4093252; 
583722,4093092; 583703,4092859; 583747,4092502; 583832,4092321; 
583859,4091876; 583916,4091657; 584008,4091471; 583895,4091228; 
583898,4090922; 583863,4090799; 583829,4090470; 583901,4089880; 
583964,4089669; 583925,4089666; 583895,4089633; 583886,4089659; 
583936,4089703; 583760,4089751; 583724,4089721; 583649,4089715; 
583547,4089648; 583358,4089623; 583180,4089516; 583081,4089615; 
583042,4089610; 583007,4089546; 582975,4089594; 582813,4089599; 
582671,4089703; 582604,4089693; 582582,4089761; 582530,4089751; 
582479,4089676; 582440,4089713; 582427,4089770; 582389,4089724; 
582281,4089766; 582234,4090003; 582145,4090053; 581928,4090091; 
581851,4090055; 581845,4090012; 581791,4090029; 581786,4089986; 
581695,4089926; 581592,4089965; 581607,4090024; 581575,4090049; 
581529,4090027; 581471,4090045; 581411,4090017; 581401,4089979; 
581335,4089979; 581264,4090087; 581261,4090236; 581229,4090134; 
581105,4090195; 581133,4090145; 581084,4090138; 580919,4090222; 
580871,4090193; 580848,4090130; 580748,4090235; 580664,4090239; 
580628,4090279; 580569,4090242; 580550,4090291; 580521,4090303; 
580418,4090308; 580362,4090260; 580336,4090300; 580299,4090307; 
580259,4090269; 580230,4090305; 580123,4090237; 579966,4090344; 
579953,4090384; 579820,4090341; 579700,4090402; 579589,4090382; 
579486,4090486; 579316,4090558; 579273,4090666; 579000,4090846; 
578981,4090865; 579007,4090901; 578990,4090938; 578828,4091033; 
578781,4091096; 578675,4091097; 578500,4091040; 578416,4091089; 
578375,4091037; 578354,4091059; 578381,4091100; 578365,4091197; 
578228,4091379; 578098,4091453; 577985,4091489; 577834,4091436; 
577738,4091268; 577686,4091341; 577612,4091340; 577556,4091388; 
577512,4091517; 577440,4091551; 577421,4091538; 577371,4091579; 
577335,4091586; 577317,4091551; 577175,4091642; 577077,4091648; 
577020,4091551; 576976,4091638; 577014,4091727; 576938,4091669; 
576894,4091716; 576945,4091863; 576700,4092252; 576596,4092354; 
576574,4092349; 576563,4092394; 576457,4092499; 576277,4092618; 
576216,4092627; 576184,4092669; 576160,4092620; 576121,4092625; 
576115,4092672; 576060,4092706; 575884,4092731; 575837,4092713; 
575840,4092666; 575809,4092631; 575673,4092602; 575660,4092559; 
575626,4092611; 575584,4092625; 575572,4092591; 575563,4092631; 
575504,4092560; 575453,4092591; 575374,4092572; 575335,4092638; 
575329,4092757; 575274,4092795; 575283,4092861; 575188,4092917; 
575185,4093065; 575226,4093094; 575173,4093192; 575074,4093326; 
574933,4093458; 574867,4093473; 574882,4093428; 574850,4093425; 
574844,4093517; 574818,4093560; 574752,4093569; 574741,4093607; 
574666,4093619; 574626,4093760; 574596,4093767; 574561,4093847; 
574389,4093921; 574349,4093875; 574241,4093844; 574172,4093869; 
574138,4093844; 574136,4093908; 574075,4093876; 574064,4093933; 
573990,4093903; 573942,4093912; 573928,4093952; 573975,4093985; 
573984,4094021; 573964,4094025; 573975,4094061; 573927,4094092; 
573972,4094140; 573859,4094342; 573825,4094349; 573840,4094376; 
573789,4094445; 573731,4094460; 573683,4094403; 573661,4094522; 
573621,4094555; 573612,4094601; 573558,4094492; 573540,4094542; 
573510,4094544; 573493,4094515; 573426,4094611; 573409,4094570; 
573392,4094622; 573339,4094631; 573299,4094696; 573268,4094678; 
573240,4094853; 573077,4094856; 573053,4094831; 572925,4094895; 
572861,4094877; 572834,4094958; 572797,4094928; 572750,4094966; 
572749,4094931; 572641,4095014; 572697,4095147; 572810,4095121; 
572802,4095154; 572830,4095204; 572796,4095282; 572731,4095277; 
572748,4095311; 572733,4095321; 572626,4095287; 572617,4095351; 
572576,4095331; 572454,4095346; 572437,4095328; 572443,4095451; 
572503,4095519; 572491,4095591; 572418,4095635; 572356,4095569; 
572261,4095667; 572195,4095659; 572155,4095718; 572113,4095680; 
572096,4095708; 572111,4095761; 572055,4095848; 571897,4095903; 
571858,4095895; 571862,4096058; 571833,4096108; 571735,4096194; 
571603,4096258; 571538,4096257; 571484,4096218; 571458,4096323; 
571346,4096386; 571205,4096559; 570968,4096661; 570751,4096651; 
570681,4096720; 570624,4096707; 570527,4096949; 570465,4097003; 
570454,4097092; 570380,4097245; 570167,4097461; 570034,4097491; 
569849,4097588; 569789,4097746; 569698,4097893; 569649,4097909; 
569547,4097894; 569342,4097956; 569292,4097954; 569264,4097897; 
569117,4097936; 569039,4098135; 568968,4098244; 568946,4098368; 
568796,4098518; 568782,4098688; 568723,4098803; 568671,4098825; 
568612,4098978; 568622,4099028; 568559,4099178; 568553,4099243; 
568524,4099262; 568520,4099369; 568440,4099480; 568442,4099519; 
568406,4099530; 568395,4099594; 568420,4099626; 568367,4099718; 
568216,4099838; 568204,4099880; 568173,4099888; 568189,4099915; 
568101,4100032; 567885,4100202; 567744,4100433; 567607,4100545; 
567537,4100657; 567361,4100812; 567299,4100932; 567147,4101134; 
567057,4101210; 566910,4101434; 566611,4101575; 566544,4101699; 
566433,4101745; 566392,4101793; 566356,4101789; 566388,4101993; 
566333,4102062; 566275,4102212; 566136,4102401; 566118,4102589; 
566072,4102662; 565991,4102697; 565972,4102674; 565930,4102680; 
565946,4102626; 565924,4102615; 565900,4102670; 565929,4102740; 
565911,4102816; 565882,4102840; 565874,4102804; 565907,4102762; 
565887,4102715; 565825,4102792; 565801,4102878; 565810,4102908; 
565848,4102915; 565824,4102952; 565848,4102989; 565842,4103042; 
565791,4103033; 565738,4103204; 565680,4103206; 565625,4103159; 
565616,4103233; 565543,4103296; 565578,4103439; 565539,4103436; 
565501,4103492; 565401,4103720; 565199,4103831; 565126,4103806; 
565100,4103713; 565070,4103707;

[[Page 97]]

565066,4103772; 565155,4103883; 565098,4103970; 565096,4104075; 
564994,4104369; 564892,4104548; 564763,4104629; 564710,4104693; 
564574,4104758; 564473,4104867; 564416,4105008; 564358,4105381; 
564240,4105406; 564184,4105612; 563942,4105843; 563669,4106165; 
563521,4106429; 563361,4106551; 563285,4106671; 563211,4106722; 
563138,4106701; 562925,4106878; 562480,4107410; 562306,4107540; 
562271,4107521; 562216,4107548; 562083,4107641; 562077,4107679; 
561911,4107769; 561821,4107864; 561722,4107894; 561645,4108008; 
561537,4108019; 561445,4108083; 561130,4108181; 561017,4108187; 
560928,4108176; 560923,4108124; 560879,4108135; 560867,4108044; 
560816,4107990; 560796,4108002; 560827,4108043; 560791,4108076; 
560749,4108062; 560607,4108089; 560563,4108046; 560544,4108073; 
560449,4107983; 560460,4107949; 560283,4107949; 560184,4107924; 
560078,4107843; 560065,4107803; 560027,4107820; 559947,4107797; 
559821,4107696; 559712,4107652; 559614,4107545; 559570,4107533; 
559573,4107610; 559497,4107836; 559369,4108023; 559286,4108097; 
559097,4108143; 558914,4108084; 558854,4108125; 558777,4108324; 
558760,4108439; 558717,4108487; 558673,4108495; 558736,4108557; 
558824,4108945; 558881,4109532; 558866,4109698; 559083,4109688; 
559289,4109712; 559568,4109783; 559896,4109954; 560221,4110181; 
560498,4110229; 560995,4110456; 561449,4110728; 561786,4110867; 
561870,4111057; 561856,4111183; 561878,4111290; 561988,4111391; 
562032,4111463; 562215,4111525; 562363,4111535; 562547,4111655; 
562782,4111665; 562843,4111708; 562891,4111931; 562858,4112520; 
562897,4112658; 562880,4112848; 562925,4112913; 563028,4112916; 
563082,4112944; 563162,4113061; 563187,4113347; 563322,4113654; 
563392,4113759; 563426,4113985; 563507,4114141; 563510,4114309; 
563666,4114460; 563710,4114883; returning to 563662,4115064. Excluding: 
573194,4098886; 573212,4098861; 573233,4098878; 573215,4098903; 
returning to 573194,4098886. Excluding: 573580,4098341; 573624,4098338; 
573660,4098454; 573623,4098464; returning to 573580,4098341. Excluding: 
574941,4098271; 574925,4098209; 575067,4098224; returning to 
574941,4098271. Excluding: 573381,4098107; 573397,4098073; 
573480,4098118; 573464,4098150; returning to 573381,4098107. Excluding: 
575347,4097747; 575349,4097646; 575448,4097670; 575379,4097752; 
returning to 575347,4097747. Excluding: 575388,4097590; 575394,4097549; 
575456,4097559; 575440,4097610; returning to 575388,4097590. Excluding: 
574744,4097505; 574777,4097483; 574803,4097522; 574771,4097541; 
returning to 574744,4097505.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units SCZ-1 and SCZ-2 for the California red-
legged frog follows:

[[Page 98]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.018

    (33) Unit SCZ-2: Santa Cruz County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Watsonville West.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 607874,4086411; 608701,4084860; 608605,4084937; 608520,4084844; 
608271,4084560; 608221,4084334;

[[Page 99]]

607164,4083847; 606471,4082967; 606324,4083005; 605956,4083724; 
605973,4084135; 606148,4084358; 606145,4084654; 605804,4085090; 
605562,4085868; 605307,4086095; 604763,4086054; 604698,4086167; 
604132,4086258; 603520,4086848; 603133,4087000; 602103,4087771; 
601519,4088060; 601570,4088484; 602074,4088759; 602064,4088910; 
602395,4089247; 602360,4089344; 602512,4089607; 603336,4088906; 
604761,4088286; 606286,4087760; 607611,4086748; returning to 
607874,4086411.
    (ii) Note: Unit SCZ-2 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (32)(iii) of this entry.
    (34) Unit MNT-1: Monterey County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Prunedale.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 613002,4076673; 613380,4076378; 613142,4076444; 613147,4076371; 
613064,4076368; 613366,4076130; 613249,4075818; 613416,4075763; 
613219,4075623; 613496,4075230; 613600,4075201; 613180,4074959; 
612571,4074924; 612260,4075009; 612080,4075185; 612505,4076777; 
612513,4077290; 612970,4077581; 613035,4077429; 612824,4076812; 
returning to 613002,4076673.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units MNT-1, MNT-2, and MNT-3 for the California 
red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 100]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.019

    (35) Unit MNT-2: Monterey County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Monterey, Soberanes Point, Seaside, Mt. Carmel, Big 
Sur, Spreckles, Carmel Valley, Ventana Cones, Rana Creek, Chews Ridge, 
Palo Escrito Peak and Sycamore Flat.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):

[[Page 101]]

603442,4046923; 603634,4046726; 603827,4046640; 604472,4046893; 
604714,4046944; 605564,4046793; 605712,4046847; 605926,4046833; 
606069,4046665; 606157,4046466; 606345,4046146; 606452,4045750; 
606540,4045608; 606636,4045570; 606841,4045661; 607122,4045606; 
607261,4045631; 607468,4045737; 608030,4045720; 608776,4045973; 
609217,4046057; 609446,4046061; 609863,4046205; 610192,4046221; 
610407,4046185; 610485,4045965; 610423,4045760; 610412,4045576; 
610466,4045473; 611386,4045442; 611541,4045144; 611589,4044840; 
611518,4044364; 611959,4043678; 611994,4043566; 612003,4043265; 
612175,4043133; 612308,4043088; 612387,4042971; 612478,4042972; 
612536,4042934; 612508,4042779; 612596,4042586; 612760,4042422; 
612861,4042201; 612877,4042127; 612845,4042022; 612944,4041748; 
613081,4041815; 613348,4041756; 613487,4041676; 613625,4041668; 
613673,4041573; 613676,4041527; 613631,4041448; 613654,4041417; 
613773,4041356; 614082,4041366; 614257,4041330; 614298,4041299; 
614340,4041165; 614382,4041122; 614460,4041143; 614615,4041129; 
614653,4041057; 614608,4040970; 614716,4040830; 614844,4040739; 
615002,4040742; 615036,4040710; 615041,4040639; 615102,4040569; 
615163,4040569; 615284,4040647; 615344,4040596; 615413,4040347; 
615451,4040326; 616150,4040222; 616494,4040253; 616619,4040237; 
616706,4040177; 616870,4039959; 617177,4039761; 617246,4039782; 
617424,4039744; 617840,4039742; 618201,4039619; 618329,4039619; 
618508,4039714; 618668,4039905; 618722,4039906; 618758,4039902; 
619018,4039723; 619077,4039603; 619164,4039232; 619154,4039095; 
619090,4038964; 619029,4038906; 618864,4038851; 618726,4038618; 
618633,4038522; 618078,4038260; 618036,4038179; 618028,4038060; 
617998,4038000; 617586,4037827; 617334,4037641; 617132,4037387; 
616875,4037268; 616722,4037104; 616657,4036932; 616646,4036839; 
616856,4036613; 616918,4036460; 616859,4036232; 616878,4035933; 
616842,4035706; 616910,4035453; 616908,4035384; 616811,4034976; 
616709,4034737; 616665,4034280; 616712,4034004; 616891,4033622; 
616990,4033512; 617122,4033488; 617166,4033289; 617269,4033210; 
617342,4033209; 617494,4033258; 617598,4033106; 617681,4033062; 
617788,4033074; 617992,4033159; 618133,4033154; 618242,4033111; 
618341,4032792; 618408,4032738; 618585,4032665; 618691,4032391; 
618807,4032296; 619088,4032263; 619188,4032222; 619402,4032075; 
620095,4031886; 620229,4031783; 620465,4031658; 620518,4031654; 
620607,4031728; 620670,4031748; 620723,4031720; 620976,4031408; 
621208,4031299; 621259,4031289; 621331,4031316; 621430,4031421; 
621494,4031436; 621717,4031345; 622296,4031237; 622576,4031104; 
622852,4031014; 623171,4030831; 623221,4030722; 623398,4030535; 
623647,4030483; 623727,4030382; 623871,4030361; 623977,4030313; 
624380,4029981; 624430,4029990; 624457,4030027; 624520,4030231; 
624563,4030294; 624836,4030390; 625105,4030204; 625241,4029931; 
625424,4029846; 625459,4029793; 625485,4029615; 625529,4029587; 
625648,4029601; 625713,4029571; 625757,4029527; 625770,4029379; 
625816,4029330; 626161,4029238; 626225,4029345; 626422,4029516; 
626682,4029363; 626838,4029340; 626895,4029365; 626932,4029398; 
626951,4029471; 627197,4029695; 627279,4029824; 627278,4030080; 
627338,4030345; 627517,4030590; 627589,4030621; 627610,4030873; 
627666,4030985; 627771,4031084; 627879,4031068; 627921,4031084; 
628088,4031349; 628146,4031545; 628225,4031711; 628271,4031928; 
628342,4032031; 628643,4031999; 628741,4032100; 628792,4032123; 
628889,4032075; 629016,4031914; 629169,4031888; 629241,4031714; 
629786,4031660; 629889,4031683; 629978,4031828; 630029,4031864; 
630144,4031849; 630324,4031755; 630588,4031759; 630721,4031738; 
630873,4031783; 631037,4031935; 631103,4031969; 631187,4031969; 
631362,4031912; 631545,4031962; 631666,4031904; 631719,4031914; 
631824,4031971; 631988,4032135; 632333,4032266; 632436,4032280; 
632598,4032351; 632670,4032348; 632785,4032292; 632854,4032296; 
632999,4032401; 633161,4032698; 633203,4032904; 633305,4032747; 
633509,4032610; 633687,4032444; 633881,4032390; 633989,4032248; 
634176,4032162; 634238,4032107; 634371,4031889; 634449,4031824; 
634543,4031796; 634558,4031759; 634494,4031543; 634451,4031243; 
634777,4030901; 634786,4030866; 634707,4030670; 634723,4030500; 
634819,4030403; 635022,4030362; 635161,4030254; 635219,4030033; 
635380,4029868; 635391,4029771; 635367,4029626; 635507,4029368; 
635465,4029053; 635661,4028916; 635648,4028792; 635669,4028717; 
635628,4028410; 635704,4028076; 635661,4027903; 635645,4027680; 
635748,4027507; 635692,4027467; 635638,4027332; 635403,4027164; 
635327,4026784; 635209,4026720; 635153,4026605; 634935,4026365; 
634885,4026164; 634746,4026073; 634605,4025864; 634485,4025791; 
634314,4025609; 634137,4025576; 633961,4025508; 633803,4025351; 
633621,4025077; 633470,4024906; 633334,4024914; 633176,4024967; 
633100,4024946; 632947,4024982; 632656,4024913; 632376,4024790; 
632215,4024814; 632074,4024880; 632014,4024835; 631753,4024759; 
631588,4024812; 631388,4024924; 631186,4024929; 630863,4025141; 
630665,4025370; 630579,4025657; 630412,4025822; 630273,4025894; 
630032,4025962; 629846,4026111; 629730,4026172; 629445,4026240; 
629344,4026288; 629225,4026418; 629164,4026536; 629059,4026632; 
628888,4026886; 628747,4026741; 628675,4026605; 628643,4026187; 
628584,4025963; 628358,4025689; 628307,4025393; 628174,4025284; 
627998,4025199; 628029,4025111; 628026,4025024; 628140,4024783; 
628335,4024251; 628389,4023998; 628377,4023895; 628309,4023719; 
628101,4023443; 627887,4023248; 627725,4023146; 627633,4023016; 
627439,4022876; 627360,4022673; 627353,4022568; 627551,4022184; 
627645,4021935; 627588,4021694; 627588,4021602; 627644,4021271; 
627704,4021126; 627710,4020952; 627610,4020464; 627916,4019856; 
628015,4019764; 628098,4019620; 628414,4019415; 628524,4019377; 
628502,4019214; 628717,4018734; 628740,4018389; 628952,4018059; 
628948,4017989; 628809,4017716; 628702,4017635; 628622,4017516; 
628485,4017411; 628424,4017216; 628362,4017145; 628326,4017121; 
628275,4017130; 628194,4017232; 627991,4017342; 627829,4017481; 
627510,4017600; 627141,4017542; 626957,4017470; 626809,4017530; 
626208,4017534; 625892,4017716; 625820,4017733; 625596,4017728; 
625422,4017673; 625272,4017705; 625011,4018004; 624594,4018209; 
624501,4018462; 624370,4018688; 624143,4018882; 623947,4018959; 
623879,4019028; 623806,4019159; 623771,4019378; 623723,4019428; 
623335,4019450; 623190,4019397; 623113,4019411; 622897,4019551; 
622689,4019616; 622637,4019685; 622529,4019960; 622511,4020068; 
622280,4020117; 622014,4020120;

[[Page 102]]

621730,4020211; 621487,4020203; 621220,4020307; 620852,4020491; 
620440,4020541; 620255,4020500; 619864,4020642; 619558,4020690; 
619384,4020557; 619283,4020377; 618994,4020006; 618831,4019912; 
618452,4019804; 618262,4019677; 618175,4019691; 618011,4019667; 
617679,4019776; 617373,4019761; 617216,4019781; 617074,4019836; 
616927,4019996; 616712,4020069; 616584,4020161; 616524,4020153; 
616235,4020012; 616054,4020023; 615975,4020098; 615989,4020342; 
615968,4020439; 615912,4020528; 615839,4020572; 615614,4020619; 
615313,4020801; 615226,4020943; 615181,4021141; 615211,4021292; 
615340,4021492; 615378,4021666; 615716,4022234; 615868,4022438; 
616001,4022564; 615801,4022657; 615597,4022916; 615394,4023003; 
615011,4023268; 614758,4023392; 614492,4023578; 614346,4023799; 
614310,4023900; 614317,4024126; 614374,4024416; 614334,4024517; 
614283,4024557; 614115,4024594; 613982,4024719; 613776,4024812; 
613599,4025040; 613422,4025119; 613211,4025118; 613067,4025145; 
612979,4025131; 612641,4025030; 612463,4024877; 612363,4024948; 
612200,4024978; 612089,4024964; 611995,4024905; 611919,4024908; 
611750,4025038; 611669,4025235; 611427,4025539; 611195,4025651; 
610983,4025897; 610929,4025669; 610424,4025385; 609907,4025483; 
609861,4025531; 609755,4025743; 609518,4025859; 609331,4026006; 
609184,4026198; 608969,4026365; 608893,4026398; 608847,4027084; 
608781,4027218; 608655,4027332; 608691,4027442; 608591,4027629; 
608281,4027733; 607966,4028005; 607618,4028204; 607510,4028334; 
607410,4028507; 607348,4028553; 607041,4028534; 606965,4028573; 
606860,4028711; 606704,4028792; 606758,4028980; 606751,4029076; 
606697,4029275; 606622,4029420; 606586,4029580; 606601,4029897; 
606680,4030050; 606594,4030249; 606669,4030768; 606634,4030873; 
606555,4030916; 606409,4030916; 606346,4030941; 606134,4031115; 
605817,4031192; 605669,4031149; 605598,4031155; 605127,4031328; 
604955,4031445; 604869,4031534; 604796,4031662; 604766,4031875; 
604723,4031941; 604415,4032092; 604215,4032159; 604092,4032249; 
603955,4032221; 603767,4032244; 603363,4032526; 603205,4032571; 
603022,4032501; 602795,4032606; 602672,4032823; 602510,4032949; 
602608,4033063; 602616,4033255; 602683,4033401; 602750,4033661; 
602724,4033743; 602512,4033882; 602118,4034068; 601896,4034124; 
601700,4034112; 601556,4034329; 601369,4034418; 601232,4034611; 
601197,4035070; 601245,4035219; 601077,4035491; 601059,4035611; 
601168,4035752; 601185,4035813; 601206,4035964; 601181,4036068; 
601070,4036175; 600949,4036231; 600889,4036286; 600788,4036505; 
600672,4036675; 600429,4036795; 600160,4036993; 600082,4037119; 
600049,4037287; 599998,4037408; 599832,4037611; 599653,4037701; 
599529,4037728; 599442,4037802; 599471,4038184; 599464,4038233; 
599401,4038320; 599247,4038399; 599163,4038508; 599021,4038578; 
598986,4038663; 598904,4038731; 598573,4038761; 598492,4038813; 
598423,4038921; 598328,4038926; 598311,4039055; 598151,4039111; 
598160,4039243; 598250,4039388; 598249,4039431; 598173,4039551; 
598102,4039970; 597770,4040819; 597253,4041444; 596744,4041800; 
596252,4042301; 595916,4042481; 595975,4042509; 596125,4042675; 
596197,4042793; 596225,4042892; 596185,4042943; 596208,4042961; 
596173,4043038; 596113,4043052; 596153,4043238; 596139,4043326; 
596101,4043399; 596051,4043440; 596048,4043526; 595956,4043705; 
595922,4043841; 595913,4044017; 595803,4044251; 595980,4044472; 
596641,4044556; 597625,4043868; 598316,4044030; 598771,4043986; 
599109,4044228; 599364,4044256; 599492,4044450; 599412,4044472; 
599400,4044703; 598784,4044876; 598904,4045023; 598904,4045172; 
598777,4045395; 598977,4046334; 599354,4046979; 599608,4047352; 
599754,4047193; 600359,4046861; 600490,4046893; 600728,4047051; 
600829,4047075; 601344,4047023; 601618,4047106; 601836,4047123; 
601992,4046990; 602578,4046917; 602830,4047224; 603037,4047321; 
603207,4047358; 603370,4047112; returning to 603442,4046923.
    (ii) Note: Unit MNT-2 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (34)(ii) of this entry.
    (36) Unit MNT-3: Monterey County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Point Sur, Big Sur, Pfeiffer Point, Ventana Cones and 
Partington Ridge.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 599824,4020540; 600160,4020013; 600076,4019744; 600415,4019570; 
600658,4019298; 601003,4019253; 601097,4019279; 601189,4019357; 
601271,4019618; 601335,4019536; 601395,4019503; 601491,4019514; 
601773,4019469; 601816,4019444; 601850,4019407; 601902,4019246; 
602079,4019037; 602174,4019087; 602354,4019075; 602498,4019123; 
602702,4019137; 602825,4019084; 602973,4018931; 603092,4018962; 
603245,4019046; 603482,4019006; 603567,4018867; 603840,4018617; 
604071,4018329; 604181,4018122; 604235,4018085; 604468,4018037; 
604574,4017974; 604688,4017843; 604803,4017638; 604926,4017503; 
605196,4017452; 605294,4017407; 605379,4017319; 605744,4017255; 
605813,4017227; 605965,4017095; 606124,4017066; 606155,4017030; 
606166,4016909; 606220,4016829; 606378,4016938; 606473,4016954; 
606596,4017019; 606806,4016941; 607037,4016541; 607312,4016334; 
607422,4016280; 607466,4016273; 607542,4016318; 607672,4016600; 
607730,4016676; 607972,4016737; 608190,4016668; 608333,4016691; 
608446,4016682; 608613,4016563; 608672,4016546; 608817,4016537; 
609038,4016561; 609237,4016506; 609444,4016311; 609763,4016093; 
610060,4016011; 610232,4015866; 610291,4015914; 610533,4015955; 
610580,4015993; 610629,4016131; 610706,4016228; 611088,4016419; 
611215,4016453; 611713,4016508; 611928,4016439; 612229,4016515; 
612755,4016386; 612872,4016555; 612904,4016695; 613198,4016801; 
613349,4016887; 613426,4016961; 613551,4017247; 613574,4017598; 
613666,4017774; 613921,4017893; 614131,4018132; 614441,4018132; 
614554,4018208; 614737,4018259; 615012,4018206; 615190,4018072; 
615310,4018040; 615329,4017912; 615409,4017705; 615429,4017664; 
615508,4017610; 615985,4017571; 616026,4017571; 616123,4017631; 
616153,4017610; 616300,4017463; 616340,4017345; 616421,4017224; 
616429,4017144; 616304,4016940; 616254,4016812; 616135,4016696; 
616044,4016297; 615879,4016083; 615857,4015992; 615876,4015718; 
615853,4015622; 615696,4015504; 615510,4015239; 615494,4015109; 
615414,4014960; 615376,4014673; 615249,4014662; 615109,4014616; 
615036,4014560; 614950,4014399; 614781,4014347; 614752,4014291; 
614655,4014099; 614739,4014004; 614855,4013821; 614855,4013785; 
614785,4013714; 614438,4013524; 614323,4013384;

[[Page 103]]

614280,4013093; 614364,4012831; 614367,4012711; 614313,4012537; 
614173,4012413; 614090,4012181; 613737,4012003; 613631,4011981; 
613515,4012007; 613412,4011991; 613333,4011935; 613200,4011762; 
613020,4011699; 612955,4011506; 613025,4011319; 613058,4011125; 
613048,4011032; 613006,4010944; 613003,4010847; 613064,4010768; 
613313,4010708; 613515,4010494; 613581,4010470; 613645,4010394; 
613773,4010303; 613876,4010036; 613994,4009961; 614008,4009841; 
614125,4009767; 614153,4009680; 614331,4009440; 614483,4009353; 
614679,4009165; 614794,4009131; 614980,4009138; 615170,4009058; 
615209,4008838; 615240,4008803; 615637,4008698; 615852,4008576; 
615905,4008576; 615988,4008633; 616065,4008647; 616366,4008569; 
616490,4008477; 616550,4008474; 616643,4008518; 616821,4008290; 
617052,4008258; 617288,4008123; 618016,4008020; 618187,4007907; 
618327,4007851; 618375,4007850; 618482,4007931; 618583,4007951; 
618694,4007933; 619021,4007813; 619251,4007637; 619473,4007351; 
619646,4007177; 619758,4007001; 620061,4006831; 620156,4006669; 
620338,4006512; 620413,4006400; 620486,4006172; 620633,4005989; 
620556,4005825; 620401,4005636; 620082,4005388; 619827,4005255; 
619673,4005143; 619492,4005073; 619408,4004977; 619192,4004812; 
619116,4004691; 619165,4004312; 619270,4004107; 619333,4003893; 
619480,4003708; 619612,4003605; 619604,4003535; 619498,4003282; 
619617,4003037; 619574,4002927; 619548,4002555; 619466,4002366; 
619346,4002426; 619301,4002388; 619256,4002458; 619199,4002467; 
619208,4002531; 619282,4002593; 619267,4002635; 619217,4002647; 
619198,4002739; 619109,4002901; 618952,4002935; 618919,4002976; 
618923,4003038; 618883,4003081; 618585,4003204; 618524,4003175; 
618473,4003204; 618458,4003164; 618419,4003171; 618409,4003273; 
618358,4003318; 618351,4003365; 618312,4003369; 618278,4003329; 
618130,4003391; 618119,4003452; 618077,4003432; 618052,4003445; 
618039,4003506; 617967,4003578; 617892,4003603; 617837,4003691; 
617799,4003657; 617746,4003672; 617684,4003813; 617650,4003825; 
617569,4003753; 617528,4003753; 617488,4003792; 617476,4003879; 
617440,4003914; 617481,4003970; 617400,4004012; 617351,4004091; 
617297,4004096; 617274,4004180; 617244,4004160; 617263,4004053; 
617209,4004022; 617118,4004104; 617154,4004182; 617036,4004132; 
616954,4004221; 616910,4004342; 616933,4004372; 616934,4004461; 
616899,4004509; 616801,4004553; 616757,4004834; 616613,4004966; 
616572,4004981; 616539,4004948; 616521,4004987; 616543,4005024; 
616395,4005136; 616313,4005236; 616250,4005262; 616164,4005252; 
616219,4005329; 616183,4005349; 616175,4005470; 616117,4005578; 
616031,4005680; 615882,4005765; 615807,4005864; 615646,4005878; 
615577,4005977; 615499,4005993; 615495,4006036; 615528,4006041; 
615527,4006111; 615397,4006326; 615291,4006407; 615094,4006495; 
614997,4006583; 614689,4006742; 614392,4006843; 614356,4006848; 
614339,4006820; 614287,4006839; 614153,4006939; 614079,4007089; 
613956,4007187; 613801,4007223; 613765,4007211; 613596,4007282; 
613563,4007255; 613516,4007290; 613408,4007318; 613414,4007343; 
613314,4007439; 613323,4007520; 613248,4007644; 613160,4007717; 
612929,4007815; 612830,4007917; 612699,4008005; 612517,4008037; 
612471,4008066; 612410,4008024; 612385,4008031; 612390,4008062; 
612230,4008014; 612140,4008043; 612046,4008042; 612044,4008081; 
611984,4008101; 611910,4008207; 611844,4008224; 611858,4008256; 
611804,4008355; 611700,4008471; 611484,4008596; 611348,4008752; 
611225,4008800; 611166,4008891; 611047,4008924; 610973,4009055; 
610717,4009215; 610670,4009206; 610683,4009244; 610504,4009385; 
610321,4009432; 610175,4009532; 610133,4009493; 610081,4009514; 
610057,4009484; 610050,4009526; 610102,4009568; 610088,4009618; 
610031,4009671;609575,4009924; 609424,4009932; 609408,4009906; 
609370,4009902; 609297,4009953; 609174,4009944; 609118,4009982; 
609022,4009959; 609029,4010046; 608990,4010126; 608885,4010197; 
608720,4010216; 608718,4010302; 608597,4010401; 608480,4010412; 
608380,4010458; 608252,4010459; 608265,4010532; 608101,4010614; 
607847,4010675; 607718,4010660; 607324,4010462; 607203,4010448; 
607076,4010466; 607001,4010533; 606910,4010549; 606842,4010488; 
606830,4010541; 606818,4010510; 606792,4010571; 606722,4010574; 
606686,4010620; 606610,4010595; 606485,4010708; 606497,4010798; 
606473,4010807; 606463,4010861; 606491,4010869; 606512,4010925; 
606483,4011019; 606336,4011026; 606310,4011126; 606271,4011168; 
606185,4011210; 606122,4011205; 606073,4011354; 605882,4011402; 
605820,4011442; 605628,4011387; 605435,4011426; 605453,4011474; 
605308,4011669; 605314,4011753; 605282,4011836; 605138,4011994; 
604977,4012059; 604872,4012049; 604837,4012022; 604804,4012051; 
604809,4012107; 604683,4012161; 604635,4012238; 604589,4012266; 
604482,4012247; 604451,4012216; 604398,4012246; 604391,4012276; 
604584,4012327; 604612,4012386; 604570,4012775; 604476,4013033; 
604357,4013279; 604286,4013350; 604304,4013387; 604258,4013483; 
604156,4013597; 604133,4013722; 604086,4013832; 603972,4013977; 
603903,4014203; 603864,4014228; 603754,4014433; 603707,4014460; 
603698,4014498; 603666,4014502; 603687,4014552; 603673,4014633; 
603499,4014836; 603468,4014932; 603397,4015021; 603248,4015117; 
603138,4015361; 602995,4015419; 602937,4015544; 602866,4015567; 
602853,4015600; 602674,4015694; 602465,4015733; 602395,4015703; 
602420,4015744; 602545,4015778; 602566,4015839; 602507,4015784; 
602394,4015763; 602368,4015684; 602435,4015640; 602408,4015582; 
602283,4015671; 602108,4015686; 602012,4015882; 601790,4016158; 
601455,4016413; 601264,4016523; 601061,4016582; 600966,4016727; 
600883,4016754; 600876,4016914; 600764,4017075; 600694,4017047; 
600675,4017077; 600546,4017115; 600450,4017280; 600435,4017240; 
600335,4017393; 600370,4017419; 600340,4017482; 600110,4017821; 
600058,4017958; 599977,4018034; 599745,4018155; 599436,4018220; 
599387,4018198; 599233,4018251; 599165,4018322; 599049,4018370; 
599010,4018359; 598950,4018198; 598797,4018110; 598779,4018158; 
598743,4018168; 598738,4018239; 598674,4018299; 598660,4018350; 
598611,4018343; 598596,4018387; 598527,4018449; 598527,4018598; 
598574,4018594; 598600,4018560; 598612,4018579; 598630,4018560; 
598664,4018576; 598793,4018542; 599175,4019469; 599234,4019748; 
599232,4019918; 599208,4019976; 599211,4020120; 599161,4020249; 
599161,4020348; 599099,4020396; 599148,4020437; 599194,4020626; 
599110,4020756; 599034,4020793; 599033,4020829; 599130,4020915; 
599188,4021043; 599275,4021431; 599569,4021331;

[[Page 104]]

599671,4021054; 599706,4020790; returning to 599824,4020540.
    (ii) Note: Unit MNT-3 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (34)(ii) of this entry.
    (37) Unit SNB-1: San Benito County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles San Juan Bautista, Hollister, Mt. Harlan, Tres Pinos 
and Pacines.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 635964,4075794; 636333,4075764; 636809,4075566; 637368,4075520; 
637770,4075623; 638436,4075288; 639151,4074594; 639270,4074217; 
639547,4073979; 640024,4073740; 640877,4073582; 641790,4073621; 
642345,4072947; 642286,4072173; 642484,4071954; 642762,4071855; 
643099,4071915; 643635,4071756; 644786,4072133; 645168,4072165; 
645182,4072089; 645215,4072050; 645297,4072025; 645689,4072165; 
645970,4072109; 646564,4072409; 646718,4072467; 646868,4072460; 
646951,4072481; 647085,4072584; 647187,4072702; 647313,4072739; 
648149,4072394; 648592,4072283; 648891,4072233; 649177,4072132; 
649265,4072094; 649320,4072027; 649574,4072372; 649804,4072538; 
649950,4072309; 650247,4072695; 650886,4072656; 651305,4072378; 
651525,4072011; 651845,4071771; 652028,4071278; 652022,4070800; 
651786,4070356; 651865,4070144; 651782,4070129; 652109,4069671; 
652194,4069177; 652486,4069355; 652823,4069355; 653041,4069196; 
652962,4068740; 653765,4068035; 653589,4067442; 653597,4067238; 
653815,4066736; 653668,4066229; 653679,4065476; 653994,4063632; 
652942,4063283; 653031,4062765; 653530,4062965; 653541,4062532; 
653207,4062386; 653110,4062128; 653103,4061717; 652942,4061338; 
653312,4061251; 653249,4060324; 653353,4060150; 653604,4060053; 
653896,4059774; 654593,4058960; 654628,4058800; 654725,4058716; 
655240,4058549; 655507,4058397; 655372,4058208; 655192,4058144; 
654903,4058122; 654808,4058074; 654771,4058036; 654773,4057912; 
654719,4057732; 654495,4057373; 654408,4057408; 654191,4057584; 
654109,4057612; 653950,4057808; 653623,4057838; 653469,4057893; 
653343,4057879; 652921,4058001; 652855,4058037; 652805,4058100; 
652756,4058251; 652559,4058403; 652489,4058406; 652398,4058455; 
652215,4058434; 652118,4058516; 652009,4058520; 651772,4058471; 
651708,4058559; 651512,4058709; 651442,4058801; 651354,4058847; 
651244,4058860; 651121,4058794; 650965,4058759; 650906,4058835; 
650871,4058956; 650779,4058975; 650548,4058948; 650439,4058814; 
650333,4058793; 650227,4058820; 649962,4058666; 649849,4058672; 
649713,4058741; 649644,4058825; 649655,4058975; 649636,4059012; 
649490,4059171; 649577,4059272; 649600,4059590; 649670,4059721; 
649688,4059816; 649698,4060285; 649822,4060420; 649874,4060527; 
649860,4060682; 649961,4060946; 649961,4061111; 650024,4061281; 
649952,4061533; 650024,4061641; 650089,4061931; 649996,4062080; 
649966,4062184; 649831,4062318; 649807,4062398; 649832,4062527; 
649811,4062612; 649655,4062746; 649590,4062864; 649599,4062910; 
649922,4063061; 649992,4063123; 649750,4063250; 649827,4063402; 
649827,4063977; 649132,4064573; 648418,4064893; 648368,4065024; 
648317,4065022; 648117,4065116; 648001,4065215; 647583,4065483; 
647454,4065430; 647394,4065447; 647285,4065554; 647116,4065618; 
646912,4065745; 646608,4065846; 646285,4066090; 645890,4066269; 
645802,4066404; 645728,4066467; 645205,4066564; 645059,4066674; 
644800,4066725; 644714,4066864; 644542,4066904; 644324,4067042; 
644165,4067088; 644110,4067045; 643674,4067190; 643421,4067144; 
643165,4067133; 642961,4067068; 642635,4067037; 642422,4066906; 
642330,4066899; 642247,4066922; 642010,4067039; 641735,4067265; 
641420,4067377; 641253,4067521; 641226,4067664; 640958,4067776; 
640877,4067786; 640729,4067743; 640417,4067543; 640304,4067596; 
640247,4067603; 640191,4067576; 640033,4067428; 639981,4067234; 
639935,4067174; 639865,4067138; 639778,4067110; 639705,4067121; 
639549,4067218; 639471,4067237; 639342,4067194; 639081,4067022; 
638984,4066910; 638921,4066756; 638947,4066568; 638881,4066391; 
638891,4066275; 638850,4066215; 638511,4066154; 638256,4066043; 
638012,4066018; 637966,4066036; 637979,4066180; 637766,4066284; 
637719,4066357; 637576,4066468; 637525,4066563; 637527,4066631; 
637723,4066757; 637471,4066841; 637448,4066886; 637469,4067042; 
637440,4067180; 637470,4067249; 637302,4067389; 637268,4067461; 
637261,4067559; 637113,4067596; 637001,4067532; 636959,4067533; 
636925,4067569; 636870,4067747; 636753,4067684; 636659,4067737; 
636425,4067735; 636317,4067811; 636291,4067957; 636197,4068139; 
636158,4068159; 636073,4068136; 635961,4068564; 635992,4068667; 
636093,4068804; 636145,4068950; 636128,4069061; 636102,4069118; 
636022,4069185; 635904,4069401; 635755,4069435; 635690,4069477; 
635678,4069594; 635583,4069708; 635592,4069830; 635531,4069880; 
635662,4070360; 635762,4070572; 635979,4070786; 635805,4070815; 
635638,4070940; 635518,4071208; 635534,4071479; 635648,4071712; 
635628,4072017; 635727,4072560; 635705,4073010; 635815,4073223; 
635999,4073422; 636117,4073620; 636042,4073785; 635831,4073954; 
635602,4074066; 635336,4074121; 634457,4074523; 633815,4074869; 
633538,4074975; 633367,4075131; 633270,4075185; 633260,4075316; 
633189,4075401; 633021,4075473; 632885,4075595; 632764,4075650; 
632775,4075748; 632735,4075795; 633860,4075970; 634467,4075645; 
634857,4075991; returning to 635964,4075794.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units SNB-1, SNB-2, and SNB-3 for the California 
red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 105]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.020

    (38) Unit SNB-2: San Benito County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Cherry Peak, Panoche Pass, San Benito and Cerro 
Colorado.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 676029,4062601; 676230,4062578; 676483,4062490; 676510,4062448; 
676554,4062204; 676704,4061886;

[[Page 106]]

676692,4061546; 676790,4061442; 676820,4061061; 676804,4060981; 
676862,4060922; 676974,4060952; 677119,4061055; 677323,4061004; 
677447,4061014; 677774,4061125; 677852,4061182; 678022,4061438; 
678008,4061572; 677919,4061760; 677918,4061809; 677972,4061873; 
678139,4061952; 678262,4061930; 678408,4061970; 678512,4061969; 
678766,4061884; 679155,4061826; 679258,4061780; 679420,4061646; 
679485,4061625; 679889,4061630; 680240,4061551; 680325,4061484; 
680444,4061474; 680422,4061242; 680338,4061037; 680335,4060777; 
680268,4060568; 680276,4060473; 680347,4060282; 680344,4060098; 
680278,4059853; 680117,4059594; 680160,4059059; 680016,4058815; 
679949,4058582; 679944,4058267; 679972,4058198; 680064,4058089; 
679986,4057901; 679769,4057775; 679691,4057687; 679627,4057447; 
679640,4057235; 679455,4056952; 679404,4056741; 679241,4056434; 
679254,4056369; 679417,4056236; 679456,4056006; 679273,4055833; 
679122,4055575; 679023,4055587; 678850,4055678; 678685,4055607; 
678587,4055601; 678445,4055503; 678383,4055500; 678173,4055561; 
678035,4055573; 677873,4055670; 677800,4055642; 677692,4055517; 
677375,4055399; 677213,4055301; 677058,4055273; 677034,4055411; 
677123,4055589; 677082,4055816; 677080,4055937; 677128,4056087; 
677110,4056228; 677021,4056448; 676918,4056569; 676645,4056729; 
676541,4056588; 676603,4056341; 676570,4056235; 676487,4056162; 
676356,4056126; 676047,4055850; 675931,4055727; 675857,4055548; 
675714,4055436; 675690,4055386; 675698,4055277; 675758,4055161; 
675723,4054930; 675770,4054773; 675766,4054697; 675169,4054557; 
675036,4054641; 674682,4054689; 674510,4054761; 674416,4054839; 
674252,4054834; 674085,4054870; 673922,4054945; 673772,4054946; 
673664,4054828; 673621,4054810; 673503,4054822; 673276,4054751; 
673053,4054732; 673005,4054709; 672759,4054349; 672728,4054251; 
672763,4053963; 672594,4054069; 672241,4054145; 672092,4054148; 
671925,4054184; 671643,4054153; 671402,4054228; 671332,4054433; 
671105,4054658; 671026,4054901; 670928,4055057; 670847,4055121; 
670721,4055533; 670663,4055653; 670482,4055860; 670445,4056154; 
670393,4056277; 670502,4056463; 670493,4056600; 670462,4056643; 
670249,4056743; 670126,4056907; 670109,4056970; 670131,4057085; 
670107,4057225; 670068,4057295; 670019,4057322; 669844,4057338; 
669602,4057302; 669506,4057253; 669459,4057264; 669389,4057380; 
669177,4057496; 668976,4057461; 668834,4057516; 668659,4057467; 
668447,4057459; 668086,4057206; 667912,4057169; 667789,4057106; 
667618,4057125; 667416,4057334; 667469,4057389; 667516,4057510; 
667542,4057751; 667499,4057953; 667312,4058286; 667287,4058459; 
667323,4058648; 667507,4058762; 667531,4058809; 667486,4058914; 
667298,4059118; 667285,4059361; 667327,4059662; 667320,4059715; 
667248,4059838; 667276,4060161; 667420,4060361; 667588,4059980; 
667749,4059922; 667984,4059900; 668141,4059803; 668305,4059585; 
668442,4059453; 668427,4059331; 668450,4059302; 668559,4059267; 
668726,4059286; 669161,4059410; 669258,4059375; 669320,4059286; 
669377,4059247; 669746,4059144; 670294,4059563; 670453,4059748; 
670531,4059889; 670773,4060050; 670815,4060223; 670881,4060249; 
670961,4060245; 671185,4060195; 671331,4060210; 671460,4060163; 
671547,4060207; 671576,4060307; 671940,4060616; 671995,4060719; 
672085,4060743; 672152,4060888; 672221,4060958; 672258,4061070; 
672099,4061294; 672094,4061394; 672125,4061545; 672046,4061649; 
671976,4061960; 672066,4062276; 672210,4062447; 672317,4062472; 
672421,4062400; 672612,4062462; 672694,4062576; 672743,4062612; 
672792,4062606; 672999,4062387; 673187,4062313; 673395,4062325; 
673460,4062242; 673677,4062114; 673786,4062217; 673794,4062345; 
673763,4062494; 673843,4062570; 674152,4062720; 674205,4062627; 
674437,4062581; 674638,4062578; 674766,4062660; 675068,4063046; 
675164,4063105; 675321,4063155; 675373,4063154; 675452,4062990; 
675541,4062940; 675616,4062860; 675844,4062782; 675926,4062673; 
returning to 676029,4062601.
    (ii) Note: Unit SNB-2 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (37)(ii) of this entry.
    (39) Unit SNB-3: San Benito and Monterey Counties, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Mount Johnson, Bickmore Canyon, North 
Chalone Peak, San Benito and Topo Valley.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 667961,4051790; 668106,4051812; 668286,4051788; 668405,4051734; 
668529,4051611; 668730,4051545; 668794,4051501; 668881,4051383; 
669289,4051134; 669464,4050957; 669575,4050880; 669623,4050812; 
669742,4050747; 670106,4050415; 670363,4050329; 670573,4050143; 
670845,4050005; 670906,4049872; 670752,4049571; 670742,4049485; 
670673,4049309; 670676,4049267; 670761,4049165; 670856,4048941; 
670931,4048872; 671080,4048830; 671193,4048831; 671345,4048914; 
671408,4048916; 671785,4048650; 671892,4048493; 671889,4048376; 
671989,4048203; 671980,4048026; 672031,4047891; 672069,4047870; 
672119,4047880; 672582,4048045; 672695,4048107; 672752,4048122; 
672795,4048106; 672960,4047995; 673123,4047927; 673288,4047775; 
673445,4047669; 674242,4047306; 674399,4047188; 674466,4047097; 
675044,4046732; 675311,4046480; 675502,4046420; 675673,4046166; 
675794,4046074; 675874,4045960; 676119,4045781; 676078,4045736; 
676029,4045554; 675891,4045303; 675802,4045226; 675588,4045108; 
675460,4044844; 675366,4044549; 675429,4044427; 675420,4044259; 
675510,4044072; 675702,4043860; 675873,4043724; 676022,4043469; 
676125,4043365; 676186,4042894; 676150,4042557; 676179,4042466; 
676326,4042244; 676460,4042121; 676516,4041635; 676478,4041577; 
676340,4041478; 676285,4041379; 676314,4041108; 676367,4040942; 
676327,4040655; 676328,4040487; 676353,4040393; 676427,4040314; 
676424,4040257; 676276,4040145; 676166,4040095; 676151,4040034; 
676153,4039774; 676245,4039545; 676371,4039361; 676379,4039310; 
676343,4039253; 676176,4039111; 675991,4038844; 675900,4038970; 
675749,4039119; 675660,4039176; 675588,4039194; 675558,4039176; 
675289,4038881; 675003,4038721; 674969,4038682; 674974,4038537; 
675065,4038307; 675059,4038204; 675025,4038154; 674866,4038054; 
674741,4037929; 674550,4037791; 674388,4037719; 674240,4037693; 
673997,4037470; 673695,4037422; 673521,4037324; 673336,4037169; 
673138,4037115; 673030,4037113; 672780,4037264; 672552,4037674; 
672401,4037820; 672208,4038098; 672058,4038263; 671998,4038293; 
671947,4038274; 671879,4038120; 671724,4038008; 671635,4038205; 
671507,4038385;

[[Page 107]]

671357,4038342; 671187,4038241; 671074,4038139; 670967,4037982; 
670793,4037860; 670598,4037653; 670434,4037429; 670240,4037291; 
669864,4036914; 669527,4036650; 669388,4036434; 669214,4036273; 
669160,4036025; 669126,4035957; 669075,4035923; 668981,4035746; 
668756,4035520; 668595,4035459; 668527,4034981; 668439,4034908; 
668297,4034707; 668190,4034629; 668124,4034500; 668278,4034256; 
668253,4034044; 668222,4034002; 668061,4033952; 667958,4033874; 
667828,4033860; 667711,4033876; 667681,4033845; 667654,4033718; 
667713,4033572; 667720,4033441; 667556,4033219; 667480,4032952; 
667442,4032910; 667271,4032863; 666975,4032619; 666832,4032603; 
666753,4032494; 666585,4032485; 666436,4032574; 666092,4032562; 
665986,4032580; 665680,4032536; 665616,4032553; 665554,4032611; 
665469,4032750; 665427,4032772; 665393,4032867; 665368,4033081; 
665321,4033199; 665298,4033401; 665178,4033485; 665064,4033647; 
665003,4033697; 664800,4033749; 664632,4033710; 664319,4033689; 
664236,4033713; 664161,4033806; 664107,4033810; 663652,4033789; 
663442,4033723; 663280,4033713; 662986,4033790; 662763,4033807; 
662623,4033932; 662588,4034146; 662267,4034294; 662008,4034306; 
661907,4034272; 661793,4034199; 661746,4034200; 661709,4034260; 
661635,4034658; 661707,4035056; 661690,4035158; 661489,4035541; 
661526,4035890; 661410,4036077; 661231,4036171; 661106,4036282; 
661052,4036373; 660950,4036471; 660867,4036645; 660789,4036744; 
660478,4036933; 660395,4037013; 660261,4037211; 660210,4037355; 
660078,4037516; 659899,4037938; 659754,4038008; 659614,4037855; 
659565,4037841; 659456,4037977; 659296,4037977; 659230,4037948; 
659203,4037845; 659161,4037789; 659105,4037775; 659061,4037796; 
658987,4037768; 658814,4037927; 658769,4038012; 658630,4038115; 
658571,4038395; 658530,4038479; 658551,4038517; 658629,4038552; 
658747,4038697; 658748,4038725; 658654,4038859; 658706,4038991; 
658729,4039162; 658517,4039362; 658454,4039570; 658338,4039634; 
658341,4039702; 658468,4039922; 658467,4039964; 658286,4040094; 
658266,4040188; 658156,4040398; 657990,4040522; 657915,4040617; 
657806,4040906; 657749,4040980; 657659,4041366; 657498,4041432; 
657311,4041415; 657159,4041562; 657073,4041538; 656954,4041583; 
656933,4041519; 656788,4041430; 656756,4041317; 656595,4041436; 
656536,4041444; 656265,4041221; 656119,4041302; 655915,4041325; 
655751,4041245; 655570,4041203; 655490,4041252; 655421,4041245; 
655350,4041209; 655279,4041109; 655204,4041057; 655129,4041067; 
655042,4041034; 654801,4041055; 654747,4041137; 654588,4041162; 
654420,4041156; 654326,4041093; 654140,4041047; 653783,4041106; 
653659,4041227; 653588,4041406; 653456,4041371; 653389,4041304; 
653238,4041382; 653052,4041368; 652959,4041442; 652759,4041452; 
652563,4041309; 652515,4041200; 652379,4041252; 652239,4041389; 
652098,4041367; 652045,4041307; 652007,4041186; 651862,4041108; 
651839,4041009; 651675,4040963; 651545,4040697; 651499,4040667; 
651424,4040706; 651386,4040820; 651287,4040863; 651262,4040899; 
651194,4041019; 651161,4041252; 651205,4041323; 651353,4041394; 
651348,4041464; 651267,4041680; 651299,4041804; 651392,4041812; 
651482,4041906; 651498,4041967; 651608,4042074; 651602,4042262; 
651554,4042334; 651548,4042498; 651580,4042610; 651823,4042693; 
651912,4042762; 651924,4042796; 651879,4042853; 651950,4043006; 
652047,4043116; 652160,4043159; 652147,4043248; 652167,4043283; 
652328,4043355; 652421,4043430; 652463,4043510; 652463,4043625; 
652504,4043690; 652593,4043756; 652540,4044007; 652443,4044098; 
652501,4044186; 652448,4044367; 652864,4044432; 653134,4044389; 
653613,4044440; 653910,4044555; 654260,4044754; 654396,4044748; 
654472,4044774; 654568,4044864; 654632,4044871; 654666,4044900; 
654692,4045074; 654774,4045161; 655117,4045283; 655019,4045442; 
655012,4045625; 654950,4045852; 655027,4046199; 655145,4046256; 
655177,4046306; 655164,4046576; 655277,4046794; 655223,4047256; 
655236,4047279; 655479,4047444; 655594,4047473; 655745,4047425; 
655941,4047572; 656406,4047728; 656477,4047732; 656585,4047830; 
656675,4047974; 656781,4048017; 656933,4048176; 657046,4048165; 
657124,4048205; 657266,4048487; 657297,4048510; 657605,4048503; 
657703,4048554; 657707,4048650; 657791,4048739; 657956,4048770; 
658173,4048741; 658299,4048822; 658374,4048847; 658461,4048840; 
658653,4048961; 658762,4049086; 659023,4049113; 659286,4049021; 
659600,4049040; 659677,4048990; 659823,4049043; 660116,4048831; 
660244,4048828; 660318,4048878; 660427,4048890; 660688,4048763; 
660742,4048645; 660913,4048582; 661149,4048433; 661265,4048292; 
661560,4048228; 661690,4048291; 661863,4048334; 662393,4048927; 
662507,4049019; 662618,4049053; 662957,4048782; 663147,4048419; 
663401,4048230; 663534,4048164; 663696,4048213; 663818,4048193; 
663858,4048175; 664064,4047958; 664212,4048004; 664340,4048005; 
664593,4047746; 664625,4047777; 664762,4047778; 664912,4047853; 
664944,4047844; 665193,4047538; 665285,4047462; 665348,4047445; 
666403,4046360; 666738,4046119; 666885,4045932; 667099,4045921; 
667285,4046172; 667291,4046459; 667382,4046613; 667424,4046795; 
667398,4046955; 667437,4047135; 667424,4047203; 667362,4047288; 
667241,4047378; 667202,4047480; 667108,4047580; 667078,4047635; 
667081,4047810; 666953,4047917; 666899,4048099; 666774,4048291; 
666864,4048549; 666830,4048677; 666846,4048727; 667077,4049080; 
666957,4049470; 666936,4049730; 666331,4050181; 666286,4050223; 
666217,4050378; 665899,4050557; 665885,4050586; 666238,4050687; 
666655,4050936; 666764,4051033; 666857,4051048; 666893,4051082; 
666963,4051260; 667016,4051308; 667105,4051351; 667240,4051372; 
667340,4051578; 667492,4051738; 667615,4051971; 667711,4051907; 
667868,4051881; returning to 667961,4051790.
    (ii) Note: Unit SNB-3 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (37)(ii) of this entry.
    (40) Unit SLO-1: San Luis Obispo, Kings and Kern Counties, 
California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Cholame Valley, Tent 
Hills, Cholame and Orchard Peak.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 752130,3963634; 752268,3963595; 752394,3963470; 752407,3963405; 
752337,3963122; 752346,3963062; 752406,3962984; 752361,3962832; 
752393,3962782; 752588,3962626; 752678,3962626; 752775,3962577; 
752826,3962473; 753072,3962276; 753155,3962031; 753511,3961661; 
753685,3961512; 753754,3961493; 753848,3961519; 753876,3961497; 
753898,3961262; 753879,3961211; 753853,3961149; 753726,3961118;

[[Page 108]]

753700,3960932; 753593,3960808; 753587,3960682; 753454,3960429; 
753346,3960103; 753157,3960041; 753037,3960096; 752873,3959964; 
752717,3959922; 752584,3959853; 752489,3959848; 752439,3959886; 
752549,3959740; 752561,3959656; 752616,3959569; 752602,3959458; 
752635,3959370; 752581,3959240; 752629,3959088; 752625,3959024; 
752693,3958918; 752698,3958821; 752928,3958591; 753081,3958496; 
753277,3958434; 753384,3958236; 753360,3958091; 753139,3957977; 
753211,3957846; 753347,3957726; 753383,3957376; 753949,3957107; 
755936,3955917; 756434,3955534; 756685,3955378; 756712,3955383; 
756860,3954963; 756937,3954849; 757346,3954534; 757615,3954384; 
757806,3954309; 757985,3954183; 758132,3953974; 758226,3953688; 
758154,3953752; 758023,3953773; 757146,3954055; 757020,3954142; 
756930,3954253; 756863,3954257; 756530,3954175; 756254,3954059; 
755887,3954387; 755715,3954502; 755657,3954494; 755540,3954425; 
755295,3954246; 755281,3954215; 755299,3954110; 755212,3953999; 
755084,3953943; 755014,3953871; 755256,3953644; 755340,3953499; 
755434,3953418; 755534,3953372; 755679,3953185; 755837,3953057; 
755884,3952815; 755772,3952588; 755918,3952622; 756007,3952600; 
756033,3952551; 756006,3952390; 755863,3952018; 755696,3951981; 
755458,3951873; 755424,3951773; 755432,3951733; 755511,3951644; 
755507,3951608; 755206,3951465; 755086,3951288; 754952,3951245; 
754878,3951181; 754722,3950867; 754612,3950785; 754424,3950851; 
754358,3950847; 754245,3950810; 754180,3950747; 754222,3950590; 
754207,3950531; 754044,3950337; 753934,3950258; 753718,3949714; 
753969,3949413; 753904,3949255; 753850,3949020; 753846,3948668; 
753755,3948743; 753685,3949000; 753637,3949080; 753377,3949285; 
753232,3949478; 753036,3949656; 752666,3949923; 752612,3950029; 
752412,3950170; 752330,3950365; 752195,3950371; 751985,3950664; 
751801,3950759; 751769,3950792; 751748,3950875; 751675,3950945; 
751532,3951019; 751423,3951002; 751375,3951021; 751199,3951131; 
750972,3951432; 750879,3951603; 750606,3951894; 750465,3952104; 
750385,3952171; 750314,3952193; 750202,3952182; 750202,3952580; 
750094,3953028; 750327,3954015; 750668,3954626; 750740,3954967; 
750709,3955975; 750585,3956208; 750547,3956245; 750410,3956292; 
750382,3956351; 750422,3956497; 750315,3956542; 750164,3956674; 
749890,3956809; 749604,3957047; 749026,3957063; 748897,3957025; 
748668,3957036; 748483,3957205; 748346,3957421; 748265,3957501; 
748201,3957526; 748118,3957507; 748014,3957446; 747903,3957443; 
747729,3957588; 747410,3957621; 747147,3957833; 746949,3957941; 
746986,3958051; 746980,3958196; 746943,3958354; 746766,3958660; 
746756,3958787; 746857,3959111; 746903,3959687; 746844,3959774; 
746602,3959975; 746502,3960162; 746447,3960491; 746249,3960832; 
746115,3960992; 746275,3961146; 746729,3961287; 746987,3961257; 
747111,3961191; 747168,3961212; 747252,3961334; 747283,3961583; 
747374,3961734; 747443,3961733; 747595,3961650; 747697,3961709; 
747736,3961849; 747796,3961925; 747782,3962015; 747859,3962354; 
747907,3962505; 747966,3962593; 748060,3962654; 748175,3962794; 
748290,3962869; 748518,3963103; 748689,3963150; 748922,3963160; 
749031,3963210; 749087,3963366; 749147,3963426; 749271,3963424; 
749423,3963311; 749527,3963293; 749691,3963318; 749781,3963239; 
749819,3963084; 749862,3963037; 750137,3963026; 750160,3963114; 
750272,3963206; 750339,3963349; 750548,3963470; 750677,3963620; 
750913,3963709; 751032,3963973; 751112,3964028; 751238,3964071; 
751349,3964178; 751589,3964225; 751636,3964226; 751799,3964132; 
751942,3964094; 752044,3963957; 752125,3963905; 752170,3963839; 
752158,3963766; 752089,3963653; returning to 752130,3963634.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SLO-1 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 109]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.021

    (41) Unit SLO-2: San Luis Obispo County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles San Simeon, Pico Creek, Pebblestone Shut-In, 
Cambria, Cypress Mountain and Cayucos.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):

[[Page 110]]

667646,3942846; 667780,3942944; 667819,3942909; 667893,3942946; 
667863,3943128; 668006,3943148; 668053,3943117; 668518,3942425; 
668370,3942341; 669215,3941495; 669881,3942053; 669872,3943315; 
669526,3944081; 669634,3944182; 669652,3944280; 669742,3944335; 
669742,3944420; 669809,3944552; 669930,3944597; 669960,3944696; 
670083,3944774; 670218,3944786; 670393,3944860; 670453,3944967; 
670457,3944943; 670864,3944950; 670962,3944935; 671010,3944900; 
671119,3944931; 671156,3944924; 671248,3944833; 671398,3944889; 
671471,3944841; 671517,3944846; 671585,3944915; 671564,3944989; 
671863,3944992; 671926,3945102; 671935,3945574; 671795,3945579; 
671863,3945651; 671914,3945929; 671994,3946030; 672170,3946174; 
672407,3946184; 672634,3946417; 672754,3946748; 672983,3946940; 
673302,3947046; 673390,3947116; 674383,3947130; 674368,3947933; 
674770,3947939; 674755,3948747; 675161,3948754; 675154,3949156; 
675557,3949162; 675547,3949793; 675716,3949733; 675929,3949731; 
676107,3949680; 676264,3949546; 676384,3949387; 676641,3949239; 
676920,3949105; 677085,3949101; 677246,3949054; 677774,3948548; 
678045,3948421; 678198,3948303; 678424,3948060; 678776,3947744; 
679198,3947097; 679425,3946821; 679719,3946541; 679998,3946410; 
680162,3946414; 680440,3946355; 680848,3946366; 681036,3946274; 
681110,3946171; 681176,3946148; 681255,3946047; 681483,3945941; 
681617,3945812; 681774,3945712; 682301,3945669; 682404,3945544; 
682485,3945352; 682594,3945305; 682741,3945347; 682828,3945335; 
682925,3945202; 683053,3945148; 683095,3945105; 683234,3944890; 
683445,3944697; 683489,3944598; 683500,3944452; 683567,3944323; 
683585,3944107; 683800,3943846; 683934,3943771; 684122,3943864; 
684202,3943874; 684274,3943851; 684457,3943743; 684701,3943500; 
684801,3943497; 685090,3943246; 685088,3943113; 685046,3942988; 
684948,3942884; 684956,3942767; 684848,3942549; 684840,3942395; 
684873,3942269; 685216,3941891; 685287,3941688; 685471,3941484; 
685587,3941422; 685733,3941399; 685853,3941434; 685969,3941512; 
686151,3941583; 686223,3941529; 686533,3941409; 686636,3941331; 
686802,3941090; 687236,3940889; 687315,3940894; 687428,3940823; 
687576,3940777; 687624,3940682; 687613,3940492; 687772,3940210; 
687840,3939947; 688070,3939786; 688189,3939735; 688285,3939635; 
688507,3939593; 688798,3939579; 688909,3939512; 689130,3939463; 
689331,3939296; 689208,3939134; 689189,3938977; 689225,3938928; 
689500,3938800; 689593,3938724; 689632,3938551; 689727,3938412; 
689679,3938240; 689716,3938046; 689827,3937892; 689706,3937633; 
689618,3937503; 689608,3937407; 689459,3937318; 689358,3937136; 
689358,3937054; 689634,3936745; 689809,3936437; 690208,3935936; 
690246,3935844; 690498,3935624; 690590,3935513; 690748,3935450; 
690948,3935227; 690947,3934851; 690985,3934692; 691313,3934474; 
691375,3934470; 691512,3934531; 691637,3934527; 691696,3934422; 
691884,3934354; 691932,3934311; 691953,3934259; 691930,3934132; 
691959,3933965; 691989,3933928; 692105,3933917; 691911,3933481; 
691869,3933230; 691823,3933155; 691748,3933120; 691725,3933014; 
691543,3933011; 691149,3932867; 691002,3932752; 690868,3932586; 
690608,3932500; 690497,3932435; 690507,3932365; 690470,3932235; 
690493,3932016; 690433,3931813; 690433,3931677; 690399,3931557; 
690417,3931132; 690398,3931034; 690589,3930791; 690597,3930735; 
690595,3930398; 690626,3930270; 690571,3930159; 690613,3930029; 
690903,3929721; 691001,3929525; 691001,3929385; 691063,3929251; 
691105,3929212; 691363,3929098; 691606,3928512; 691844,3928446; 
691932,3928389; 691966,3928305; 692014,3927978; 692239,3927802; 
692395,3927729; 692486,3927572; 692486,3926967; 692399,3926751; 
692383,3926553; 692259,3926451; 692060,3926416; 691982,3926360; 
691807,3926130; 691720,3925873; 691681,3925827; 691537,3925756; 
691491,3925684; 691390,3924961; 691332,3924856; 691374,3924594; 
691381,3924344; 691143,3924531; 690940,3924652; 690790,3924810; 
690458,3925284; 690323,3925359; 690022,3925367; 689691,3925239; 
689375,3925036; 689097,3924974; 689126,3924791; 689019,3924733; 
688888,3924725; 688853,3924693; 688863,3924655; 688826,3924610; 
688839,3924639; 688707,3924698; 688652,3924632; 688627,3924691; 
688591,3924693; 688470,3924653; 688437,3924678; 688344,3924674; 
688317,3924624; 688020,3924640; 687910,3924700; 687792,3924675; 
687755,3924635; 687504,3924631; 687512,3924662; 687469,3924670; 
687408,3924631; 687275,3924616; 687266,3924575; 687062,3924547; 
686928,3924461; 686830,3924563; 686793,3924552; 686803,3924603; 
686729,3924638; 686651,3924629; 686504,3924534; 686433,3924524; 
686262,3924559; 686114,3924639; 686082,3924626; 685979,3924655; 
685966,3924750; 685882,3924809; 685927,3924817; 685962,3924916; 
685944,3924982; 685913,3925004; 685936,3925049; 685874,3925129; 
685627,3925195; 685549,3925271; 685435,3925294; 685357,3925382; 
685298,3925413; 685255,3925408; 685254,3925383; 685127,3925389; 
685092,3925477; 685002,3925567; 684847,3925535; 684740,3925627; 
684724,3925682; 684649,3925703; 684596,3925751; 684568,3925817; 
684439,3925919; 684329,3925959; 684189,3925969; 684151,3925900; 
684080,3925921; 684023,3925867; 683971,3925896; 683753,3925894; 
683658,3925840; 683508,3925826; 683480,3925861; 683385,3925844; 
683368,3925933; 683329,3925972; 683202,3925966; 683173,3925945; 
683146,3925967; 683105,3925936; 683078,3925956; 683005,3925927; 
682926,3925935; 682757,3926019; 682701,3926082; 682593,3926134; 
682574,3926106; 682556,3926166; 682525,3926183; 682494,3926190; 
682447,3926158; 682443,3926201; 682388,3926185; 682339,3926212; 
682333,3926184; 682308,3926184; 682256,3926270; 682164,3926322; 
682048,3926300; 681961,3926211; 681922,3926128; 681729,3925966; 
681618,3925945; 681619,3925976; 681589,3925951; 681586,3926005; 
681550,3925992; 681545,3925962; 681524,3925983; 681441,3925955; 
681344,3926007; 681333,3925965; 681277,3925943; 681250,3925961; 
681212,3925935; 681160,3925985; 681137,3925968; 681081,3926018; 
681080,3926049; 681059,3926032; 681057,3926064; 681004,3926084; 
680949,3926189; 680899,3926206; 680886,3926187; 680874,3926228; 
680823,3926263; 680823,3926304; 680732,3926383; 680742,3926442; 
680699,3926463; 680664,3926604; 680614,3926648; 680608,3926728; 
680582,3926742; 680568,3926714; 680468,3926860; 680427,3926862; 
680440,3926921; 680347,3926986; 680329,3927058; 680348,3927085; 
680312,3927087; 680324,3927103; 680278,3927123; 680217,3927246; 
680164,3927280; 680139,3927256; 680118,3927291; 680068,3927306; 
680053,3927406; 679951,3927471; 679958,3927499; 679815,3927652; 
679790,3927731; 679768,3927746;

[[Page 111]]

679736,3927723; 679719,3927794; 679689,3927798; 679599,3927918; 
679574,3927871; 679561,3927889; 679547,3927871; 679499,3927986; 
679423,3928069; 679358,3928089; 679343,3928165; 679293,3928177; 
679264,3928230; 679289,3928261; 679268,3928343; 679297,3928351; 
679349,3928432; 679335,3928504; 679268,3928514; 679261,3928539; 
679195,3928546; 679139,3928584; 679095,3928576; 679072,3928541; 
679026,3928541; 678937,3928638; 678870,3928592; 678783,3928709; 
678804,3928724; 678793,3928791; 678688,3928860; 678671,3928847; 
678611,3929026; 678486,3929044; 678477,3929065; 678501,3929076; 
678494,3929103; 678462,3929107; 678465,3929157; 678421,3929167; 
678342,3929138; 678308,3929087; 678171,3929047; 678135,3929085; 
678108,3929061; 678081,3929142; 678027,3929164; 678032,3929236; 
677976,3929253; 677927,3929222; 677914,3929262; 677962,3929344; 
677947,3929336; 677934,3929423; 677966,3929495; 677951,3929541; 
677864,3929607; 677805,3929544; 677732,3929673; 677661,3929694; 
677656,3929717; 677593,3929708; 677582,3929750; 677539,3929739; 
677566,3929848; 677517,3929923; 677555,3929943; 677572,3929994; 
677533,3930042; 677484,3930015; 677485,3930082; 677426,3930027; 
677393,3930049; 677390,3930076; 677351,3930082; 677340,3930196; 
677297,3930183; 677275,3930246; 677159,3930291; 677164,3930449; 
677124,3930487; 677130,3930610; 677049,3930658; 676969,3930809; 
676780,3930823; 676733,3930897; 676666,3930890; 676603,3931056; 
676369,3931151; 676273,3931120; 676226,3931133; 676139,3931214; 
676074,3931235; 676014,3931303; 675912,3931345; 675893,3931401; 
675789,3931473; 675748,3931613; 675701,3931641; 675677,3931699; 
675656,3931801; 675597,3931859; 675502,3931880; 675480,3931931; 
675363,3932014; 675360,3932046; 675246,3932191; 675214,3932192; 
675196,3932230; 675127,3932235; 675021,3932380; 675047,3932452; 
674992,3932523; 674774,3932670; 674741,3932739; 674614,3932849; 
674557,3932941; 674556,3933068; 674426,3933140; 674388,3933222; 
674312,3933300; 674252,3933325; 674215,3933415; 674074,3933470; 
674017,3933643; 673973,3933674; 673887,3933684; 673772,3933870; 
673524,3933940; 673426,3934125; 673415,3934300; 673256,3934367; 
673210,3934426; 673092,3934461; 673037,3934503; 673002,3934608; 
672914,3934625; 672901,3934724; 672780,3934823; 672766,3934929; 
672668,3935079; 672502,3935173; 672436,3935455; 672359,3935521; 
672145,3935533; 672094,3935583; 672072,3935687; 671982,3935774; 
671968,3935833; 671866,3935941; 671881,3936108; 671754,3936229; 
671768,3936279; 671853,3936282; 671904,3936337; 671918,3936422; 
671895,3936500; 671863,3936515; 671887,3936545; 671867,3936600; 
671751,3936665; 671664,3936811; 671554,3936872; 671515,3936948; 
671527,3936969; 671491,3936996; 671505,3937047; 671443,3937112; 
671439,3937181; 671366,3937229; 671365,3937305; 671312,3937446; 
671173,3937620; 671105,3937942; 670971,3938146; 670989,3938188; 
670979,3938295; 670856,3938570; 670801,3938643; 670687,3938696; 
670634,3938799; 670573,3938781; 670528,3938853; 670535,3938897; 
670500,3938993; 670418,3939122; 670364,3939134; 670302,3939112; 
670284,3939140; 670245,3939120; 670198,3939180; 670164,3939368; 
670092,3939477; 670048,3939779; 669987,3939914; 669934,3939974; 
669930,3940082; 669798,3940427; 669537,3940805; 669275,3941045; 
669151,3941212; 669002,3941308; 668918,3941287; 668728,3941358; 
668632,3941415; 668524,3941591; 668291,3941647; 668210,3941770; 
668141,3941956; 668086,3942007; 668058,3942124; 667959,3942264; 
667883,3942458; returning to 667646,3942846.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units SLO-2, SLO-3, and SLO-4 for the California 
red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 112]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.022

    (42) Unit SLO-3: San Luis Obispo County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles Cayucos, York Mountain, Morro Bay North, 
Morro Bay South, Atascadero, San Luis Obispo, Santa Margarita, Lopez 
Mtn., Arroyo Grande NE, Santa Margarita Lake and Tar Spring Ridge.

[[Page 113]]

    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 708480,3909559; 708441,3910955; 708953,3910998; 708951,3911126; 
709014,3911173; 709031,3911248; 709149,3911331; 709196,3911523; 
709379,3911869; 709720,3911825; 709690,3911905; 709706,3912082; 
709833,3912190; 709970,3912204; 710064,3912127; 710369,3911710; 
710470,3911835; 710784,3911745; 711191,3913933; 711878,3913934; 
711797,3914739; 712191,3914739; 712179,3915142; 711735,3915125; 
711736,3915563; 711304,3915547; 711301,3916366; 710414,3916357; 
710425,3915951; 710147,3915940; 710047,3915494; 710036,3916362; 
709640,3916335; 709639,3916723; 708842,3916668; 708873,3915470; 
708430,3915467; 708224,3914469; 708040,3914512; 706756,3911363; 
706360,3911808; 706227,3911922; 706084,3911995; 705844,3912068; 
705722,3911621; 705700,3911440; 705722,3911307; 705134,3911225; 
705096,3911346; 705495,3911457; 705535,3911575; 704722,3911846; 
704376,3911393; 704274,3911458; 703953,3910861; 703639,3911003; 
703480,3911034; 703382,3911091; 703163,3911297; 703032,3911484; 
702959,3911529; 702676,3911598; 702245,3911808; 702081,3911796; 
701929,3911752; 701839,3911772; 701727,3911897; 701655,3912079; 
701528,3912248; 701357,3912809; 701276,3912913; 701072,3912981; 
701034,3913017; 700904,3913017; 700792,3913073; 700488,3913155; 
700314,3913091; 700217,3913101; 700116,3913173; 699882,3913217; 
699835,3913247; 699721,3913403; 699336,3913304; 699129,3913322; 
699054,3913306; 699021,3913245; 699016,3913056; 698990,3912989; 
698913,3912885; 698739,3912799; 698225,3912640; 697879,3912645; 
697856,3912906; 697714,3913241; 697639,3913667; 697463,3914010; 
697354,3914345; 697145,3914487; 696811,3914604; 696660,3914964; 
696760,3915332; 696986,3915834; 696505,3915981; 696019,3916362; 
695814,3916551; 695600,3916847; 695394,3917201; 695295,3917588; 
695312,3917736; 695411,3917835; 695279,3919493; 694899,3919905; 
694734,3920136; 694668,3920318; 694420,3920565; 694255,3920582; 
694156,3920631; 693760,3920747; 693694,3920846; 693694,3921192; 
693595,3921324; 693397,3921423; 693034,3921704; 692886,3922084; 
692886,3922331; 692556,3922744; 692452,3922808; 692220,3923081; 
691953,3923266; 691735,3923774; 691714,3924444; 691730,3924609; 
691796,3924741; 692374,3924774; 692836,3924642; 693018,3924559; 
693133,3924757; 693265,3924873; 693265,3925087; 693496,3925467; 
693595,3925747; 693859,3926110; 693859,3926193; 693744,3926193; 
693678,3926077; 693414,3926143; 693414,3926342; 693562,3926540; 
693562,3926705; 693661,3926903; 693793,3927084; 693826,3927216; 
694056,3927463; 694099,3927483; 694020,3927619; 694019,3927738; 
694067,3927896; 694053,3927946; 693969,3928099; 693780,3928333; 
693734,3928506; 693843,3928738; 693802,3928968; 693816,3929091; 
693927,3929258; 694114,3929368; 694194,3929576; 694322,3929750; 
694327,3929777; 694266,3929869; 694296,3930070; 694246,3930584; 
694159,3930640; 694177,3930826; 694217,3931041; 694341,3931111; 
694484,3931101; 694554,3931166; 694482,3931458; 694589,3931548; 
694603,3931722; 694703,3931707; 694747,3931720; 694798,3931779; 
694834,3931782; 694942,3931688; 695135,3931627; 695402,3931814; 
695523,3931825; 695633,3931876; 695844,3932143; 695936,3932170; 
696026,3932152; 696092,3932066; 696135,3932049; 696282,3932083; 
696424,3932075; 696615,3931953; 696817,3931891; 696900,3932011; 
696918,3932132; 697057,3932241; 697387,3932375; 697480,3932369; 
697526,3932309; 697551,3932140; 697615,3932074; 697845,3931961; 
698044,3931962; 698191,3931901; 698375,3931774; 698514,3931744; 
698574,3931664; 698670,3931604; 698799,3931559; 698876,3931437; 
698884,3931292; 698962,3931265; 699068,3931089; 699170,3931010; 
699831,3930696; 699943,3930599; 700371,3930482; 700919,3930221; 
701143,3930162; 701600,3929922; 701747,3929883; 701884,3929680; 
701983,3929597; 701971,3929382; 702013,3929333; 702178,3929238; 
702242,3929124; 702361,3929011; 702467,3928991; 702571,3929001; 
702597,3928980; 702602,3928827; 702647,3928808; 702742,3928831; 
702831,3928812; 703038,3928640; 703191,3928594; 703283,3928632; 
703354,3928721; 703528,3928803; 703668,3928749; 703768,3928783; 
703842,3928751; 703959,3928631; 704182,3928558; 704620,3928592; 
704750,3928582; 705170,3928253; 705438,3928113; 705649,3927941; 
705804,3927729; 705971,3927586; 706777,3927329; 707148,3927150; 
707223,3927200; 707472,3927202; 707635,3926909; 707766,3926532; 
708005,3926362; 708346,3926329; 708628,3926423; 708831,3926689; 
709025,3926659; 709477,3926386; 709682,3926379; 709839,3926309; 
709890,3926133; 709871,3925716; 709903,3925585; 709960,3925472; 
710028,3925415; 710313,3925264; 710515,3925258; 710633,3925194; 
710877,3924934; 711040,3924873; 711223,3924880; 711562,3924974; 
711555,3922474; 711863,3922131; 711966,3922080; 712271,3922302; 
712493,3922380; 712815,3922394; 713109,3922340; 713722,3922339; 
714153,3922599; 714639,3922995; 714733,3923111; 714988,3922722; 
715536,3921353; 715565,3921060; 715643,3920678; 715927,3920248; 
715849,3919544; 716641,3917931; 718619,3919042; 718562,3919124; 
718547,3919198; 718681,3919575; 718668,3919654; 718624,3919708; 
718405,3919854; 718351,3920042; 718285,3919990; 718256,3919912; 
718218,3919883; 718135,3919906; 718091,3919972; 718098,3920082; 
718250,3920365; 718297,3920544; 718151,3920650; 718055,3920780; 
717989,3921009; 717841,3921343; 717700,3921810; 717618,3922169; 
717595,3922983; 717632,3923237; 717635,3923514; 717583,3923647; 
717426,3923886; 717304,3924311; 717151,3924640; 717307,3924635; 
717579,3924544; 717671,3924465; 717745,3924318; 717788,3924299; 
717966,3924252; 718153,3924236; 718271,3924345; 718521,3924211; 
718777,3923954; 718800,3923757; 718846,3923623; 719026,3923516; 
719142,3923488; 719132,3923307; 719500,3923114; 719591,3922829; 
719677,3922676; 719912,3922547; 719788,3922437; 719772,3922191; 
719517,3922138; 719184,3922112; 719146,3922046; 719145,3921917; 
719103,3921816; 719112,3921752; 719161,3921607; 719212,3921533; 
719290,3921182; 719428,3920885; 719817,3920442; 719938,3920210; 
720191,3919850; 720452,3919357; 720758,3918546; 720847,3918381; 
721019,3918136; 721329,3917763; 721851,3917236; 722148,3917189; 
722224,3917247; 722262,3917250; 722342,3917152; 722335,3917026; 
722469,3916881; 722639,3916799; 722746,3916774; 722908,3916673; 
722976,3916671; 723022,3916593; 722804,3916430; 722684,3916378; 
722296,3916403; 722210,3916383; 722157,3916329; 722004,3915966; 
722104,3915729; 722110,3915663; 722050,3915601; 721807,3915496; 
721609,3915336; 721768,3915128; 721889,3914914; 721932,3914745;

[[Page 114]]

721909,3914676; 721663,3914435; 721564,3914439; 721123,3914576; 
721075,3914497; 721068,3914361; 721169,3914080; 721170,3913922; 
721132,3913866; 720922,3913687; 720905,3913519; 720873,3913508; 
720586,3913645; 720534,3913636; 720417,3913512; 720345,3913368; 
720339,3913253; 720612,3913133; 720803,3912974; 720817,3912693; 
720846,3912657; 721158,3912460; 721225,3912369; 721189,3912299; 
720950,3912080; 720949,3911988; 720894,3911854; 720914,3911595; 
720830,3911364; 720927,3911342; 721047,3911351; 721178,3911099; 
721446,3911152; 721547,3911083; 721662,3911049; 721743,3910974; 
721802,3910823; 721896,3910698; 722203,3910574; 722603,3910321; 
722741,3910285; 723030,3910279; 723323,3910148; 723453,3910118; 
723661,3909983; 723804,3909975; 723919,3909931; 723993,3909885; 
724072,3909758; 724137,3909705; 724747,3909383; 725022,3909160; 
725074,3909140; 725326,3909138; 725430,3909040; 725505,3909010; 
725521,3908890; 725612,3908716; 725739,3908625; 725796,3908610; 
725904,3908770; 726129,3908837; 726277,3908677; 726457,3908556; 
726636,3908485; 726752,3908473; 726776,3908439; 726770,3908379; 
726708,3908145; 726648,3908048; 726648,3907910; 726696,3907824; 
726846,3907637; 726978,3907543; 727119,3907388; 727291,3907275; 
727425,3907223; 727640,3907040; 728374,3906795; 728489,3906794; 
728747,3906676; 728929,3906658; 728980,3906707; 729220,3907106; 
729314,3907079; 729467,3906881; 729503,3906858; 729674,3906855; 
729690,3906761; 729799,3906629; 730192,3906601; 730252,3906579; 
730431,3906423; 730510,3906299; 730769,3906227; 730871,3906096; 
731107,3905963; 731184,3905811; 731272,3905724; 731275,3905667; 
731156,3905397; 731047,3905296; 730794,3905215; 730606,3905082; 
730477,3904953; 730389,3904836; 730345,3904654; 730187,3904566; 
730153,3904516; 730134,3904423; 730021,3904202; 730162,3904059; 
730211,3903689; 730287,3903584; 730373,3903547; 730490,3903451; 
730539,3903274; 730597,3903164; 730610,3902884; 730543,3902705; 
730614,3902488; 730519,3902257; 730607,3902164; 730736,3901941; 
730765,3901763; 730699,3901689; 730478,3901593; 730379,3901601; 
730106,3901761; 729942,3901801; 729671,3901529; 729513,3901489; 
729400,3901579; 729276,3901770; 729156,3901881; 728841,3902051; 
728632,3902215; 728151,3902353; 727909,3902454; 727699,3902448; 
727523,3902583; 727399,3902582; 727229,3902525; 727108,3902547; 
726920,3902753; 726836,3902809; 726694,3902846; 726553,3902967; 
726426,3903012; 726094,3903062; 726005,3903099; 725732,3903388; 
725572,3903455; 725338,3903481; 724914,3903672; 724599,3903956; 
724555,3903984; 724428,3903995; 724295,3904068; 724185,3904176; 
724168,3904269; 724114,3904351; 723963,3904441; 723808,3904453; 
723797,3904679; 723624,3904870; 723562,3905071; 723551,3905135; 
723603,3905281; 723587,3905347; 723422,3905488; 723353,3905647; 
723284,3905714; 723134,3905742; 722948,3905662; 722906,3905652; 
722878,3905672; 722909,3905898; 722896,3906018; 722730,3906197; 
722616,3906427; 722554,3906476; 722373,3906541; 722333,3906527; 
722300,3906455; 722258,3906454; 722142,3906512; 721851,3906600; 
721764,3906592; 721611,3906629; 721534,3906774; 721311,3906977; 
721053,3907127; 720798,3907154; 720644,3907275; 720433,3907271; 
720237,3907346; 720169,3907336; 720027,3907209; 719827,3907099; 
719756,3906930; 719431,3906655; 719240,3906353; 719187,3906323; 
718920,3906286; 718724,3906291; 718631,3906271; 718587,3906229; 
718494,3906042; 718379,3905952; 718293,3905926; 718060,3906026; 
717993,3906029; 717766,3905967; 717546,3906007; 717397,3905986; 
717197,3905906; 717124,3905714; 716745,3905915; 716386,3905988; 
716172,3906099; 715943,3906264; 715852,3906428; 715633,3906476; 
715562,3906525; 715397,3906710; 715185,3906910; 715105,3906956; 
714760,3906971; 714467,3907048; 714135,3906821; 713349,3906677; 
712859,3906469; 712615,3906420; 712022,3906204; 711763,3906258; 
711574,3906375; 711350,3906610; 711235,3906824; 711031,3906871; 
710829,3906866; 710786,3906899; 710726,3907030; 710597,3907564; 
710591,3907823; 710629,3908101; 710599,3908139; 710063,3908380; 
709730,3908654; 709640,3908770; 709536,3908835; 709428,3908982; 
709183,3909029; 709087,3909114; 708906,3909193; 708654,3909438; 
returning to 708480,3909559.
    (ii) Note: Unit SLO-3 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (41)(ii) of this entry.
    (43) Unit SLO-4: San Luis Obispo County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles Santa Margarita Lake, Pozo Summit, Caldwell 
Mesa, La Panza and Los Machos Hills.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 749907,3913538; 750002,3913543; 750128,3913449; 750319,3913415; 
750490,3913308; 750641,3913287; 750712,3913239; 750794,3913147; 
750835,3913058; 750922,3912754; 751060,3912628; 751101,3912530; 
751221,3912434; 751273,3912405; 751444,3912377; 751664,3912250; 
751802,3912230; 751957,3912259; 751996,3912205; 752062,3911964; 
752230,3911722; 752364,3911453; 752356,3911404; 752251,3911305; 
752262,3911239; 752358,3911103; 752442,3910835; 752446,3910382; 
752573,3910109; 752526,3909867; 752560,3909649; 752605,3909602; 
752790,3909551; 753037,3909383; 753180,3909384; 753255,3909454; 
753407,3909398; 753470,3909334; 753311,3909007; 753069,3908811; 
752884,3908789; 752810,3908758; 752572,3908334; 752562,3908291; 
752675,3908051; 752782,3907694; 752823,3907652; 752921,3907655; 
753101,3907721; 753320,3907685; 753530,3907732; 753702,3907727; 
753920,3907683; 754044,3907566; 754247,3907555; 754484,3907365; 
754482,3907173; 754569,3907001; 754615,3906821; 754725,3906553; 
754701,3906327; 754614,3906193; 754667,3905923; 754588,3905557; 
754619,3905438; 754610,3905350; 754549,3905235; 754369,3905270; 
754182,3905177; 754112,3904920; 753979,3904798; 753954,3904740; 
753956,3904595; 754119,3904319; 754060,3904215; 753994,3903997; 
754040,3903708; 753956,3903558; 753871,3903284; 753829,3903239; 
753826,3902991; 753763,3902926; 753600,3902856; 753536,3902799; 
753435,3902578; 753506,3902482; 753528,3902392; 753394,3902280; 
753250,3902082; 753203,3902052; 753108,3902044; 753057,3902009; 
752996,3901873; 752981,3901741; 752924,3901603; 752920,3901473; 
753012,3901277; 753148,3901091; 753360,3900956; 753429,3900857; 
753444,3900768; 753352,3900652; 753160,3900670; 752897,3900587; 
752822,3900504; 752775,3900352; 752686,3900236; 752533,3900243; 
752480,3900225; 752337,3900019; 752208,3899942; 752182,3899738; 
752132,3899578; 752105,3899557;

[[Page 115]]

751924,3899589; 751610,3899752; 751389,3899731; 751189,3899746; 
751065,3899718; 750964,3899769; 750934,3899819; 750857,3900160; 
750665,3900271; 750626,3900350; 750471,3900376; 750382,3900434; 
750349,3900500; 750282,3900543; 750209,3900688; 750124,3900728; 
750000,3900718; 749877,3900774; 749682,3901061; 749382,3901213; 
749260,3901313; 749177,3901338; 748884,3901682; 748920,3901927; 
748877,3902111; 748835,3902149; 748687,3902166; 748448,3902277; 
748180,3902541; 748108,3902533; 747951,3902442; 747864,3902438; 
747663,3902536; 747627,3902669; 747516,3902788; 747152,3902956; 
747070,3902986; 746746,3902918; 746574,3902921; 746410,3902963; 
746251,3903088; 746081,3903296; 745991,3903320; 745896,3903308; 
745712,3903361; 745569,3903443; 745413,3903584; 745219,3903524; 
745169,3903525; 745107,3903563; 744979,3903744; 744861,3903832; 
744798,3903936; 744795,3904065; 744720,3904350; 744497,3904711; 
744449,3904751; 744375,3904777; 744063,3904723; 743688,3904760; 
743419,3904715; 743243,3904822; 743013,3904854; 742926,3904904; 
742803,3904918; 742676,3904893; 742711,3904973; 742673,3905196; 
742626,3905286; 742596,3905294; 742476,3905218; 742409,3905213; 
742343,3905238; 742182,3905238; 742114,3905274; 741988,3905239; 
741878,3905244; 741849,3905256; 741711,3905511; 741608,3905563; 
741497,3905662; 741283,3905727; 741120,3905669; 740989,3905505; 
740897,3905505; 740794,3905414; 740744,3905420; 740294,3905673; 
740118,3905737; 739997,3905754; 739685,3905901; 739602,3906049; 
739520,3906103; 739255,3906082; 739220,3906050; 739169,3906044; 
739077,3906055; 738965,3905991; 738784,3906000; 738673,3905949; 
738595,3905952; 738363,3906104; 738033,3906224; 737757,3906404; 
737383,3906506; 737241,3906485; 736986,3906510; 736802,3906437; 
736607,3906298; 736545,3906220; 736491,3906087; 736367,3906001; 
736263,3905828; 736195,3905762; 735997,3905718; 735767,3905603; 
735702,3905595; 735598,3905643; 735549,3905609; 735370,3905578; 
734922,3905593; 734659,3905354; 734433,3905034; 734196,3904906; 
734095,3904890; 733902,3904938; 733829,3904986; 733604,3905013; 
733343,3905169; 733401,3905374; 733478,3905494; 733763,3905679; 
733801,3905725; 733813,3905774; 733793,3905806; 733594,3905863; 
733554,3905901; 733542,3905992; 733679,3906178; 733707,3906287; 
733774,3906383; 733967,3906496; 734130,3906652; 734154,3906705; 
734065,3906902; 734057,3907080; 734071,3907152; 734192,3907341; 
734205,3907548; 734288,3907668; 734620,3907865; 734770,3908026; 
734933,3908282; 735187,3908977; 735513,3909188; 735579,3909254; 
735841,3909818; 736009,3909934; 736085,3910027; 736233,3910096; 
736259,3910138; 736248,3910221; 736296,3910263; 736401,3910275; 
736454,3910235; 736576,3910253; 736687,3910234; 736865,3910310; 
736967,3910281; 737076,3910217; 737122,3910218; 737142,3910241; 
737170,3910485; 737221,3910584; 737512,3910812; 737809,3910554; 
737867,3910471; 737880,3910367; 737839,3909987; 737860,3909731; 
737793,3909596; 737718,3909518; 737640,3909341; 737300,3908933; 
737303,3908909; 737373,3908891; 737487,3908803; 738037,3908768; 
738113,3908799; 738236,3908932; 738389,3908985; 738534,3909120; 
738597,3909125; 738706,3909077; 738768,3908903; 738802,3908864; 
739136,3908784; 739303,3908616; 739463,3908625; 739597,3908667; 
739820,3908802; 739812,3908974; 739831,3909034; 740090,3909098; 
740192,3909165; 740220,3909196; 740236,3909371; 740264,3909401; 
740424,3909492; 740561,3909461; 740682,3909500; 740740,3909546; 
740795,3909637; 740811,3909852; 740928,3909862; 741190,3910104; 
741281,3910150; 741351,3910302; 741407,3910358; 741670,3910357; 
741959,3910441; 742199,3910443; 742306,3910395; 742377,3910329; 
742528,3910268; 742672,3910122; 742859,3910036; 742896,3909995; 
742970,3910001; 743092,3910090; 743153,3910228; 743318,3910376; 
743394,3910551; 743835,3910776; 744032,3910815; 744050,3910885; 
744009,3911070; 744070,3911249; 744166,3911293; 744245,3911252; 
744345,3911264; 744407,3911307; 744507,3911289; 744587,3911245; 
744689,3911315; 744954,3911234; 745095,3911242; 745158,3911200; 
745181,3911213; 745284,3911320; 745273,3911537; 745306,3911578; 
745449,3911665; 745708,3911877; 745889,3911958; 746028,3912124; 
746184,3912386; 746363,3912491; 746552,3912551; 746747,3912476; 
746855,3912400; 747016,3912347; 747185,3912330; 747337,3912369; 
747613,3912532; 747712,3912640; 747890,3912758; 748104,3913019; 
748410,3913078; 748671,3913080; 748921,3913126; 748964,3913154; 
749120,3913374; 749162,3913394; 749336,3913362; 749471,3913395; 
749607,3913604; 749649,3913628; 749718,3913621; returning to 
749907,3913538.
    (ii) Note: Unit SLO-4 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (41)(ii) of this entry.
    (44) Unit STB-1: Santa Barbara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tepusquet Canyon, Foxen Canyon, Manzanita 
Mountain and Zaca Lake.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 760562,3876097; 760672,3876042; 761005,3876093; 761287,3875929; 
761484,3875882; 761676,3875762; 761783,3875634; 761915,3875540; 
762011,3875342; 762187,3875292; 762339,3875178; 762395,3875163; 
762518,3874997; 762670,3874870; 763079,3874758; 763145,3874919; 
763311,3875038; 763422,3875236; 763812,3875437; 764027,3875382; 
764181,3875309; 764363,3875306; 764567,3875164; 764684,3875040; 
764762,3875023; 764832,3875188; 764845,3875462; 764895,3875633; 
765728,3875247; 766130,3874926; 766773,3874765; 767375,3874303; 
767317,3874268; 767147,3874084; 767009,3874063; 766889,3873933; 
766692,3873794; 766680,3873615; 766866,3873352; 766878,3873053; 
766932,3872882; 767102,3872733; 767518,3872546; 767828,3872501; 
768022,3872422; 768333,3872362; 768617,3872174; 768753,3872050; 
768872,3871869; 768833,3871652; 768789,3871555; 768302,3871371; 
768233,3871304; 768179,3871202; 768119,3871167; 767914,3871161; 
767761,3871077; 767577,3871017; 767443,3871051; 767275,3871037; 
767170,3870973; 767012,3870794; 766969,3870783; 766959,3870591; 
767103,3870378; 767134,3870165; 767123,3870109; 766974,3870022; 
766841,3869893; 766810,3869721; 766702,3869630; 766590,3869471; 
766520,3869233; 766555,3869103; 766558,3868884; 766939,3868674; 
767035,3868506; 767084,3868355; 767080,3868253; 766843,3867945; 
766763,3867725; 766766,3867689; 766887,3867637; 766960,3867566; 
767061,3867318; 767038,3866988; 767083,3866672; 767053,3866343; 
766926,3866262; 766871,3866166; 766901,3865924; 766875,3865716; 
766912,3865624;

[[Page 116]]

766960,3865587; 766919,3865529; 766872,3865365; 766724,3865095; 
766449,3864834; 766178,3864457; 766115,3864280; 766071,3863939; 
765862,3863616; 765794,3863346; 765692,3863267; 765391,3863258; 
765364,3863228; 765331,3862966; 765225,3862803; 765140,3862612; 
764983,3862406; 764868,3862136; 764617,3862365; 764482,3862406; 
764224,3862343; 764032,3862342; 763590,3862178; 763547,3862176; 
763295,3862281; 762879,3862024; 762827,3861912; 762570,3861741; 
762469,3861631; 762204,3861602; 762136,3861666; 762105,3861666; 
761931,3861582; 761845,3861487; 761788,3861358; 761781,3861243; 
761844,3861084; 761850,3860994; 761785,3860737; 761750,3860680; 
761705,3860676; 761440,3860732; 761112,3860913; 760959,3860945; 
760807,3861013; 760636,3861043; 760598,3861036; 760566,3860969; 
760433,3861135; 759600,3861135; 758845,3862084; 758767,3862569; 
758748,3862937; 759290,3863518; 759639,3863731; 759813,3864060; 
759852,3864486; 760046,3865087; 759717,3865648; 759717,3866047; 
759659,3866170; 759601,3866415; 759655,3866528; 759581,3866701; 
759449,3866785; 759438,3866819; 759430,3867144; 759385,3867286; 
759402,3867508; 759383,3867543; 759254,3867630; 759240,3867665; 
759221,3867942; 759171,3868113; 759197,3868274; 759173,3868453; 
758987,3868651; 758941,3868990; 758822,3869188; 758919,3869389; 
759088,3869432; 759139,3869528; 759310,3869599; 759411,3869690; 
759610,3869788; 759707,3869963; 759731,3870118; 759685,3870224; 
759615,3870533; 759591,3870865; 759493,3871043; 759348,3871149; 
759266,3871363; 759205,3871457; 758906,3871763; 758719,3871858; 
758736,3872008; 758710,3872086; 758485,3872299; 758330,3872577; 
758384,3872761; 758541,3873023; 758697,3873177; 758755,3873396; 
758824,3873459; 759046,3873498; 759241,3873456; 759706,3873605; 
759884,3873711; 759924,3873760; 759967,3873943; 759864,3874007; 
759819,3874091; 760002,3874342; 760181,3874444; 760210,3874639; 
760333,3875007; 760311,3875096; 760185,3875250; 760134,3875544; 
760198,3875800; 760198,3876182; 760214,3876232; returning to 
760562,3876097.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units STB-1, STB-3, STB-6, and STB-7 for the 
California red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 117]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.023

    (45) Unit STB-2: Santa Barbara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles Guadalupe, Casmalia, Santa Maria and Orcutt.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 731166,3856983; 731162,3857181; 730322,3857168; 730135,3857420; 
729967,3857473; 729819,3857459;

[[Page 118]]

729578,3857568; 729443,3857667; 729376,3857635; 729296,3857555; 
729247,3857354; 729250,3857154; 726368,3857120; 726362,3857815; 
726173,3857740; 725905,3857679; 725880,3857563; 725691,3857512; 
725605,3857586; 725443,3857497; 725173,3857271; 724731,3857082; 
724478,3856821; 724238,3856699; 723676,3856260; 724048,3856812; 
722984,3858902; 720821,3862104; 720937,3862161; 721420,3862089; 
721742,3861874; 722117,3861535; 722510,3861123; 723011,3861088; 
723387,3861266; 723583,3861535; 723619,3861713; 723619,3862035; 
723780,3862429; 724352,3863055; 724444,3863044; 724504,3862997; 
724541,3862994; 724593,3863032; 724728,3863019; 724960,3862894; 
725461,3862876; 726659,3863663; 727070,3863359; 727589,3863037; 
728111,3862721; 728294,3862654; 728819,3862272; 729012,3862198; 
729234,3862071; 729404,3862017; 729132,3861318; 730520,3860854; 
730596,3861595; 731659,3861185; 732097,3860989; 732221,3860925; 
732166,3860903; 732254,3860823; 732289,3860843; 732494,3860743; 
732565,3860659; 732618,3860544; 732651,3860145; 732777,3859761; 
732883,3859161; 733046,3858083; 733169,3856993; 733069,3857088; 
732897,3857362; 732777,3857459; 732591,3857466; 732186,3857578; 
732036,3857709; 731830,3857930; 731144,3858960; 730876,3859226; 
730556,3859033; 730572,3858841; 730613,3858694; 730754,3858570; 
730770,3858404; 730861,3858147; 730876,3857961; 730938,3857800; 
730944,3857692; 731044,3857527; 731168,3857431; 731264,3857288; 
731268,3857183; 731237,3857088; returning to 731166,3856983.
(ii) Note: Map of Units STB-2, STB-4, and STB-5 for the California 
red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 119]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.024

    (46) Unit STB-3: Santa Barbara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Zaca Lake.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 230921,3859474; 231976,3855997; 231890,3855313; 232588,3855068; 
233102,3854919; 233630,3854805;

[[Page 120]]

234514,3854539; 235496,3854163; 236301,3853942; 236842,3853657; 
236927,3853500; 237181,3853315; 237201,3853245; 237165,3853055; 
237180,3853032; 237447,3852825; 237675,3852714; 237864,3852491; 
237792,3852298; 237820,3852284; 237420,3852151; 237364,3852097; 
237247,3851871; 237123,3851728; 237048,3851596; 236938,3851521; 
236777,3851481; 236707,3851497; 236552,3851576; 235953,3851788; 
235563,3851863; 234961,3851815; 234714,3851674; 234496,3851477; 
234358,3851045; 234322,3850773; 234404,3850093; 234486,3849740; 
234556,3849573; 234559,3849286; 234768,3848835; 234772,3848698; 
234832,3848438; 235000,3848176; 234956,3847963; 234849,3847731; 
234761,3847417; 234633,3847210; 234523,3846800; 234405,3846556; 
234430,3846444; 234496,3846274; 234641,3846127; 234655,3845801; 
234694,3845582; 235214,3845602; 235321,3845537; 235464,3845334; 
235486,3845216; 235556,3845096; 235837,3844795; 236063,3844620; 
236278,3844306; 236410,3844198; 236413,3844054; 236394,3843995; 
236297,3843925; 235968,3843843; 235779,3843622; 235745,3843441; 
235662,3843307; 235280,3843043; 235160,3842881; 235067,3842855; 
234986,3842797; 235124,3842405; 235154,3842214; 235095,3842078; 
235086,3841955; 235289,3841603; 235375,3841313; 235270,3841241; 
235220,3841130; 235208,3841018; 235232,3840799; 235099,3840596; 
235079,3840429; 234816,3840179; 234758,3840083; 234870,3839682; 
234863,3839626; 234569,3839466; 234548,3839402; 234596,3839216; 
234551,3839186; 234505,3839194; 234319,3839348; 234176,3839378; 
234045,3839362; 233722,3839230; 233594,3839090; 233445,3839043; 
233229,3838675; 233234,3838621; 233359,3838487; 233279,3838346; 
233241,3838166; 233011,3837900; 232617,3837779; 232545,3837783; 
232272,3837921; 232288,3837973; 232254,3838087; 231994,3838249; 
231644,3838529; 231401,3838550; 231311,3838536; 231264,3838496; 
231181,3838751; 230923,3838980; 229978,3839158; 229754,3839349; 
229620,3839728; 229455,3839945; 228963,3840302; 228573,3840711; 
228264,3841264; 228105,3841830; 227395,3841831; 227431,3841887; 
227464,3842078; 227693,3842420; 227853,3842961; 228003,3843254; 
228078,3843376; 228423,3843705; 228529,3843869; 228504,3843950; 
228575,3844048; 228576,3844116; 228495,3844458; 228496,3844558; 
228524,3844593; 228626,3844603; 228766,3844658; 228930,3844819; 
229008,3844936; 229104,3845002; 229142,3845053; 229223,3845301; 
229404,3845439; 229513,3845695; 229648,3845815; 229698,3845994; 
229487,3845995; 229240,3845960; 229184,3845966; 229017,3846048; 
228868,3846057; 228502,3846298; 228407,3846415; 228239,3846540; 
228076,3846793; 228032,3846948; 227986,3846998; 227964,3847211; 
227904,3847345; 227790,3847460; 227540,3847621; 227318,3847978; 
227223,3848077; 227052,3848344; 226763,3848565; 226719,3848644; 
226741,3848761; 226924,3849108; 226976,3849159; 226861,3849365; 
226919,3849445; 227014,3849486; 227022,3849580; 226902,3849798; 
226782,3849984; 225971,3850915; 225899,3851125; 225509,3851345; 
225373,3851455; 225113,3851261; 225053,3851329; 224898,3851410; 
224882,3851506; 224747,3851713; 224508,3852251; 224488,3852394; 
224552,3852530; 224542,3852640; 224016,3852942; 223678,3853077; 
223632,3853116; 223570,3853232; 223025,3853418; 222679,3853633; 
222574,3853728; 222305,3853820; 222120,3853982; 221910,3854075; 
221824,3854155; 221746,3854386; 221657,3854523; 221570,3854603; 
221584,3854837; 221549,3855036; 221605,3855355; 221598,3855473; 
221463,3855699; 221341,3855832; 221328,3855884; 221409,3856080; 
221396,3856343; 221472,3856459; 221578,3856531; 221619,3856596; 
221676,3856942; 221714,3857033; 222169,3857284; 222220,3857340; 
222216,3857368; 222066,3857560; 222045,3857682; 221936,3857856; 
221835,3857935; 221784,3858013; 221627,3858121; 221367,3858161; 
221040,3858136; 220936,3858215; 220841,3858253; 220491,3858351; 
220462,3858387; 220461,3858452; 220502,3858725; 220458,3858838; 
220301,3859033; 220205,3859317; 220278,3859409; 220331,3859562; 
220347,3859940; 220317,3860168; 220433,3860222; 220607,3860696; 
221104,3860908; 221424,3861398; 222280,3861540; 222792,3861831; 
222833,3861741; 223015,3861554; 223152,3861298; 223285,3861237; 
223409,3861128; 223602,3860830; 223799,3860733; 223824,3860428; 
223983,3860276; 223987,3860123; 223929,3859962; 223985,3859737; 
223955,3859619; 224001,3859242; 223893,3858913; 224209,3859091; 
224432,3859173; 224575,3859285; 224875,3859378; 225068,3859394; 
225363,3859267; 225438,3859274; 225607,3859382; 225709,3859505; 
225969,3859543; 226191,3859671; 226446,3859945; 226565,3860298; 
226779,3861260; 226929,3861740; 227069,3862025; 227271,3862117; 
227901,3862297; 228180,3862460; 228177,3862385; 228049,3862165; 
227859,3861928; 227736,3861694; 227674,3861404; 227811,3861121; 
228015,3860908; 228360,3860784; 228771,3860676; 229717,3860243; 
230217,3859946; 230582,3859682; returning to 230921,3859474.
    (ii) Note: Unit STB-3 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (44)(ii) of this entry.
    (47) Unit STB-4: Santa Barbara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tranquillon Mountain. and Lompoc Hills.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 729283,3821732; 729615,3821828; 729936,3821744; 729938,3821604; 
730174,3821644; 730245,3821754; 730255,3822019; 730366,3822066; 
730259,3822142; 730341,3824270; 730715,3824569; 730770,3824723; 
730794,3824914; 730779,3825134; 730844,3825381; 730814,3825588; 
730736,3825725; 730616,3825809; 730522,3825823; 730396,3825890; 
730447,3827602; 729977,3827620; 729742,3827441; 729579,3827448; 
729425,3827598; 729439,3827714; 729508,3827830; 729376,3827830; 
729116,3827765; 729064,3827885; 729135,3827930; 729256,3828084; 
729386,3828164; 729518,3828204; 729771,3828199; 730093,3828281; 
730162,3828390; 730232,3828426; 730845,3828360; 730910,3828407; 
730961,3828526; 731006,3828783; 731042,3828827; 731183,3828800; 
731631,3828340; 731725,3828302; 731970,3828271; 732151,3828210; 
732482,3828211; 733060,3827929; 733182,3827777; 733316,3827677; 
733373,3827572; 733460,3827544; 733774,3827615; 733955,3827496; 
734461,3827273; 734507,3827177; 734524,3827005; 734567,3826941; 
734659,3826858; 734799,3826810; 734874,3826750; 735013,3826386; 
735126,3825805; 735374,3825521; 735892,3825308; 736056,3825108; 
736068,3824966; 736047,3824895; 735860,3824725; 735579,3824624; 
735520,3824562; 735490,3824485; 735467,3824220; 735423,3824057; 
735383,3823999; 735307,3823965;

[[Page 121]]

735198,3823985; 735083,3824069; 735011,3824092; 734911,3823997; 
734837,3823821; 734439,3823681; 734370,3823633; 734340,3823582; 
734322,3823311; 734241,3823031; 734162,3822886; 733960,3822628; 
733859,3822409; 733764,3822290; 733592,3822135; 733620,3822078; 
733633,3821873; 733672,3821769; 733760,3821640; 734138,3821389; 
734241,3821294; 734349,3821148; 734434,3820848; 734439,3820745; 
734395,3820592; 734325,3820574; 734055,3820617; 733705,3820588; 
733328,3820601; 733075,3820689; 732779,3820930; 732606,3821109; 
732500,3821165; 732200,3821183; 731910,3821231; 731567,3821184; 
731053,3821259; 730834,3821228; 730572,3821371; 730442,3821394; 
730148,3821386; 730039,3821421; 729978,3821470; 729841,3821675; 
729724,3821725; 729488,3821739; 729344,3821701; 729276,3821629; 
returning to 729283,3821732.
    (ii) Note: Unit STB-4 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (45)(ii) of this entry.
    (48) Unit STB-5: Santa Barbara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles Santa Rosa Hills, Solvang and Gaviota.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 754082,3828621; 754220,3828624; 754353,3828538; 754484,3828518; 
754931,3828518; 755206,3828493; 755300,3828431; 755414,3828288; 
755575,3828212; 755742,3828169; 755779,3828121; 755879,3827637; 
755821,3827482; 755964,3827406; 756196,3827234; 756293,3827116; 
756595,3827008; 756601,3826836; 756743,3826460; 756612,3826255; 
756591,3826150; 756657,3826032; 756701,3825778; 756846,3825651; 
756876,3825582; 756798,3825268; 756716,3825102; 756670,3824819; 
756583,3824656; 756924,3824697; 757105,3824442; 757173,3824401; 
757409,3824289; 757802,3824191; 758062,3824046; 758418,3824147; 
758483,3824146; 758654,3824109; 758956,3824097; 759185,3823989; 
759313,3823888; 759356,3823826; 759476,3823527; 759563,3823388; 
759548,3823115; 759577,3822909; 759786,3822680; 759614,3822411; 
759491,3822264; 758838,3822045; 758378,3821985; 758063,3821887; 
757890,3821808; 757632,3821751; 757411,3821638; 757090,3821271; 
756817,3821205; 756808,3821052; 756686,3820890; 756722,3820735; 
756716,3820604; 756657,3820451; 756510,3820230; 756394,3820122; 
756216,3820140; 756146,3820057; 755960,3819953; 755931,3819925; 
755906,3819802; 755807,3819648; 755619,3819539; 755309,3819235; 
755176,3819185; 755084,3818876; 755126,3818560; 754978,3818336; 
754815,3817931; 754712,3817826; 754545,3817914; 754353,3818081; 
753795,3818299; 753620,3818490; 753474,3818553; 753200,3818625; 
753158,3818667; 753147,3818770; 753015,3819109; 753013,3819157; 
753096,3819346; 753342,3819518; 753385,3819620; 753341,3819734; 
753176,3819898; 753175,3819997; 753236,3820136; 752987,3820348; 
752979,3820397; 753010,3820486; 752957,3820648; 752961,3820749; 
753074,3820999; 753329,3821454; 753393,3821515; 753567,3821609; 
753614,3821664; 753589,3821730; 753478,3821799; 753341,3821827; 
753191,3822091; 753039,3822189; 752961,3822212; 752604,3822156; 
752336,3822171; 752121,3822276; 752044,3822295; 751885,3822284; 
751740,3822395; 751571,3822432; 751345,3822432; 750965,3822371; 
750711,3822281; 750371,3822319; 750231,3822360; 750179,3822461; 
750007,3822667; 750066,3822856; 750213,3822944; 750268,3823084; 
750434,3823080; 750652,3823110; 750716,3823220; 750690,3823335; 
750439,3823592; 750348,3823715; 750335,3823770; 750456,3823947; 
750488,3824163; 750596,3824256; 750780,3824259; 750839,3824376; 
750807,3824796; 750948,3825215; 750926,3825433; 750875,3825585; 
750875,3825695; 750964,3825912; 750994,3826175; 751047,3826363; 
751162,3826568; 751167,3826702; 751257,3826992; 751377,3827152; 
751406,3827294; 751444,3827363; 751566,3827409; 751732,3827410; 
752145,3827504; 752493,3827446; 752553,3827613; 752627,3827679; 
752750,3827870; 752841,3827943; 753043,3828218; 753153,3828494; 
753196,3828533; 753588,3828705; 753846,3828746; 753902,3828744; 
753974,3828673; returning to 754082,3828621.
    (ii) Note: Unit STB-5 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (45)(ii) of this entry.
    (49) Unit STB-6: Santa Barbara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles Solvang, Gaviota, Santa Ynez and Tajiguas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 770986,3825640; 771043,3825632; 771193,3825688; 771256,3825673; 
771613,3825452; 771858,3825355; 772104,3825203; 772038,3825075; 
771949,3824690; 771903,3824212; 771816,3824079; 771803,3823865; 
771692,3823753; 771692,3823706; 771632,3823581; 771652,3823204; 
771634,3823189; 771498,3823201; 771432,3823131; 771416,3822976; 
771341,3822894; 771241,3822586; 771136,3822552; 771008,3822571; 
770470,3822451; 770117,3822424; 770036,3822398; 769943,3822327; 
769948,3822289; 769999,3822245; 770022,3822094; 769939,3821829; 
770006,3821600; 769983,3821464; 770018,3820930; 769923,3820628; 
769971,3820303; 769911,3819814; 769993,3819678; 769983,3819612; 
769914,3819513; 769905,3819442; 769937,3819047; 769841,3818859; 
769822,3818655; 769729,3818476; 769776,3818105; 769624,3817885; 
769489,3817584; 769432,3817327; 769196,3817362; 769024,3817339; 
768821,3817242; 768814,3817204; 768841,3817147; 768738,3817108; 
768318,3817114; 767420,3817064; 766933,3817129; 766615,3817225; 
766263,3817429; 766217,3817432; 766161,3817398; 765917,3817529; 
765458,3817701; 765210,3817835; 764630,3818046; 764517,3818290; 
764347,3818877; 764207,3819094; 764111,3819628; 764032,3819796; 
763843,3819932; 763796,3820002; 763812,3820203; 763842,3820301; 
763838,3820456; 763604,3820619; 763553,3820667; 763531,3820731; 
763521,3820920; 763552,3821048; 763543,3821167; 763457,3821666; 
763548,3822045; 763452,3822372; 763447,3822459; 763519,3822629; 
763520,3822703; 763477,3822787; 763483,3822952; 763419,3823170; 
763460,3823351; 763410,3823628; 763849,3823641; 763990,3823602; 
764116,3823604; 764292,3823570; 764509,3823694; 764801,3823690; 
765027,3823718; 765650,3823931; 765792,3824005; 765966,3824135; 
766073,3824246; 766151,3824399; 766447,3824529; 766867,3824880; 
767108,3824934; 767278,3824884; 767313,3824958; 767394,3825330; 
767455,3825392; 767578,3825449; 767631,3825444; 767759,3825329; 
767841,3825153; 767882,3825112; 768167,3825010; 768209,3824974; 
768351,3824764; 768477,3824724; 768565,3824722; 768601,3824751; 
768596,3825042; 768631,3825100;

[[Page 122]]

768811,3825096; 769143,3824997; 769415,3825077; 769466,3825106; 
769584,3825243; 769700,3825210; 769833,3825128; 769903,3825144; 
770088,3825284; 770373,3825234; 770433,3825262; 770546,3825386; 
770688,3825762; 770837,3825767; returning to 770986,3825640.
    (ii) Note: Unit STB-6 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (44)(ii) of this entry.
    (50) Unit STB-7: Santa Barbara and Ventura Counties, California. 
From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Lake Cachuma, San Marcos Pass, Big 
Pine Mtn., Little Pine Mtn., Santa Barbara, Madulce Peak, Hildreth Peak, 
Carpinteria, Old Man Mountain, White Ledge Peak, Wheeler Springs and 
Matilija.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 254540,3837294; 254540,3837180; 254497,3837043; 254566,3836882; 
254581,3836738; 254782,3836768; 254873,3836753; 255119,3836601; 
255360,3836359; 255521,3836301; 255735,3836335; 255863,3836260; 
256174,3836436; 256296,3836531; 256438,3836538; 256491,3836507; 
256651,3836220; 256783,3836123; 256986,3835539; 257062,3835412; 
257089,3835374; 257253,3835359; 257309,3835319; 257387,3835238; 
257467,3835040; 257498,3835014; 257807,3835121; 257960,3835201; 
258010,3835198; 258024,3835173; 257996,3835061; 258053,3834932; 
258162,3834873; 258448,3834797; 258539,3834749; 258861,3834733; 
259140,3834782; 259464,3834910; 259623,3834923; 259715,3834972; 
259953,3835033; 260149,3835181; 260132,3835316; 260041,3835526; 
259880,3835721; 259854,3835844; 259772,3836021; 259853,3836267; 
259973,3836356; 260061,3836464; 260154,3836600; 260153,3836656; 
260571,3836498; 260883,3836462; 260926,3836446; 260984,3836352; 
261169,3836308; 261637,3836132; 261861,3835973; 261913,3835903; 
262036,3835614; 262101,3835385; 262252,3835290; 262379,3835171; 
262570,3835081; 262695,3834896; 262877,3834761; 263015,3834497; 
264086,3833813; 263942,3833612; 264011,3833435; 264042,3832876; 
264078,3832574; 264132,3832341; 264249,3832177; 264742,3831921; 
265047,3831721; 265159,3831737; 265707,3831674; 265937,3831581; 
266204,3831435; 266531,3831326; 266775,3831317; 267067,3831370; 
267284,3831475; 267432,3831620; 267715,3832013; 267906,3832157; 
268164,3832275; 268519,3832354; 268852,3832357; 269237,3832302; 
269816,3832166; 270132,3832189; 270699,3832099; 270796,3832147; 
270832,3832198; 270851,3832409; 270904,3832506; 271090,3832468; 
271225,3832410; 271347,3832401; 271538,3832296; 271612,3832200; 
271936,3832055; 272049,3832057; 272165,3832022; 272249,3832055; 
272343,3832167; 272468,3832155; 272803,3832025; 272886,3832020; 
272981,3832049; 273075,3832171; 273219,3832165; 273402,3832109; 
273691,3832133; 273786,3832161; 273841,3832151; 274145,3831930; 
274175,3831888; 274145,3831689; 274180,3831573; 274312,3831385; 
274495,3831313; 274472,3830803; 274735,3830604; 274923,3830509; 
274950,3830475; 275000,3830237; 275215,3829931; 275189,3829829; 
275022,3829639; 274884,3829593; 274732,3829496; 274514,3829480; 
274440,3829449; 274423,3829178; 274379,3829071; 274297,3829026; 
274076,3828968; 273924,3828817; 273928,3828779; 274026,3828715; 
274051,3828648; 274044,3828592; 273938,3828395; 273996,3828246; 
274086,3828111; 274124,3827961; 274204,3827810; 274189,3827776; 
274064,3827636; 274016,3827613; 273925,3827601; 273679,3827650; 
273568,3827578; 273465,3827558; 273309,3827578; 273175,3827533; 
273073,3827415; 273006,3827206; 273091,3826952; 273086,3826756; 
273055,3826698; 273062,3826558; 273122,3826408; 273286,3826390; 
273350,3826268; 273341,3826201; 273290,3826111; 273172,3826015; 
273142,3825760; 273226,3825584; 273405,3825435; 273576,3825350; 
273514,3825048; 273597,3824908; 273622,3824739; 273750,3824610; 
273950,3824613; 274071,3824571; 274399,3824322; 274474,3824221; 
274509,3824108; 274582,3824035; 274584,3823977; 274643,3823874; 
274642,3823813; 274565,3823647; 274562,3823391; 274524,3823253; 
274605,3823149; 274615,3823082; 274547,3822626; 274557,3822492; 
274533,3822311; 274570,3822222; 274649,3822184; 274891,3822164; 
275081,3822065; 275293,3822012; 275485,3821718; 275604,3821597; 
275756,3821502; 275840,3821481; 275996,3821521; 276142,3821520; 
276294,3821556; 276448,3821632; 276496,3821629; 276614,3821567; 
276686,3821556; 276788,3821424; 276974,3821303; 277234,3821282; 
277295,3821294; 277399,3821365; 277463,3821369; 277579,3821245; 
277631,3821224; 277957,3821265; 278134,3821231; 278284,3821250; 
278450,3821183; 278640,3820996; 278737,3820951; 279054,3820960; 
279277,3820931; 279357,3820940; 279433,3820982; 279540,3821079; 
279838,3821001; 280021,3821005; 280358,3821105; 280590,3821114; 
280836,3821172; 281343,3821213; 281559,3821306; 281763,3821360; 
281947,3821339; 282381,3821364; 282505,3821328; 282730,3821394; 
283119,3821455; 283320,3821615; 283376,3821632; 283771,3821627; 
284018,3821714; 284180,3821740; 284412,3821742; 284496,3821722; 
284830,3821570; 285082,3821552; 285216,3821502; 285434,3821504; 
285899,3821655; 286232,3821724; 286360,3821854; 286706,3822022; 
286736,3821889; 286745,3821494; 286798,3821405; 287000,3821226; 
287051,3821146; 287227,3821072; 287462,3821038; 287541,3820987; 
287656,3820733; 287660,3820524; 287683,3820483; 288081,3820234; 
288388,3820156; 288797,3819538; 289000,3819452; 289251,3819184; 
289681,3819065; 289848,3818992; 290238,3819105; 290385,3819028; 
290382,3818716; 290168,3818372; 289870,3818346; 289637,3817929; 
289617,3817336; 289730,3817002; 289419,3817006; 288934,3816842; 
288224,3816394; 287682,3816263; 287327,3816284; 287120,3816311; 
287012,3816496; 286768,3816629; 286380,3816607; 286341,3816936; 
286253,3816956; 286201,3817346; 286083,3817565; 285933,3817566; 
285618,3817694; 285261,3817655; 285106,3817671; 284668,3817915; 
284422,3817980; 284278,3817982; 284140,3818014; 283910,3817995; 
283708,3818098; 283570,3818117; 283424,3818062; 283229,3817896; 
282887,3817826; 282649,3817924; 282348,3817967; 282156,3817950; 
281929,3817838; 281874,3817832; 281706,3817868; 281526,3817856; 
281326,3817920; 281004,3817877; 280720,3817888; 280560,3817798; 
280101,3817710; 280011,3817658; 279748,3817416; 279464,3817570; 
279336,3817683; 279139,3817772; 278811,3817804; 278774,3817834; 
278704,3818030; 278568,3818099; 278478,3818096; 278376,3818000; 
278271,3817965; 277896,3818033; 277692,3818099; 277599,3818067; 
277313,3817879; 276989,3817794; 276849,3817824; 276679,3817905; 
276590,3818024;

[[Page 123]]

276531,3818028; 276318,3817972; 276171,3818135; 276016,3818039; 
275752,3817932; 275580,3817788; 275329,3817640; 275239,3817630; 
275033,3817696; 274672,3817765; 274361,3817785; 274177,3817748; 
273988,3817673; 273545,3817589; 273411,3817528; 273187,3817495; 
273082,3817503; 273017,3817448; 272814,3817057; 272730,3817005; 
272317,3817226; 272170,3817255; 272029,3817238; 271875,3817140; 
271764,3816994; 271767,3816670; 271736,3816646; 271471,3816630; 
271373,3816718; 271322,3816729; 270955,3816682; 270836,3816608; 
270548,3816633; 270351,3816594; 270259,3816681; 269908,3816794; 
269860,3816848; 269847,3817005; 269810,3817045; 269623,3817067; 
269187,3816972; 269067,3817076; 268936,3817144; 268898,3817143; 
268667,3816998; 268296,3816967; 267993,3816808; 267926,3816794; 
267819,3816849; 267466,3816959; 267332,3816970; 267212,3817022; 
266991,3817057; 266804,3817188; 266686,3817211; 266204,3817117; 
265863,3817006; 265825,3816977; 265776,3816853; 265811,3816615; 
265791,3816574; 265718,3816541; 265391,3816504; 265143,3816578; 
264835,3816581; 264574,3816674; 264406,3816799; 264238,3816829; 
264113,3816795; 264000,3816684; 263915,3816735; 263672,3816815; 
263457,3816823; 263337,3816857; 263134,3816853; 263079,3816905; 
263000,3817099; 263026,3817167; 263002,3817248; 263285,3817578; 
263293,3817628; 263262,3817696; 263237,3817744; 263190,3817770; 
263019,3817791; 262831,3817918; 262766,3817938; 262605,3817886; 
262451,3817874; 262337,3817947; 262249,3817939; 262215,3817955; 
262140,3818112; 262109,3818129; 261728,3818068; 261509,3817921; 
261334,3817842; 260950,3817918; 260876,3817961; 260815,3818136; 
260726,3818125; 260553,3818175; 260253,3818198; 260205,3818330; 
260098,3818305; 259936,3818370; 259858,3818493; 259531,3818714; 
259252,3818760; 259069,3818865; 258941,3818975; 258637,3819093; 
258540,3819090; 258368,3819021; 258272,3819019; 258101,3818939; 
257883,3818924; 257687,3819003; 257599,3819150; 257561,3819171; 
257423,3819179; 257230,3819280; 257088,3819310; 256977,3819391; 
256824,3819408; 256692,3819544; 256598,3819597; 256297,3819570; 
255871,3819586; 255750,3819629; 255526,3819650; 255285,3819731; 
254994,3819636; 254890,3819552; 254815,3819539; 254625,3819650; 
254496,3819787; 254356,3819826; 254059,3819976; 253697,3819985; 
253483,3820096; 253375,3820109; 253217,3820059; 253159,3820081; 
253063,3820162; 253090,3820326; 253047,3820414; 252961,3820418; 
252822,3820380; 252700,3820476; 252538,3820536; 252358,3820656; 
252297,3820667; 252196,3820643; 251992,3820449; 251722,3820286; 
251467,3820305; 251358,3820351; 251031,3820328; 250811,3820417; 
250713,3820585; 250561,3820724; 250485,3820859; 250320,3820945; 
250275,3820992; 249695,3821192; 249350,3821203; 249252,3821248; 
249166,3821338; 249091,3821617; 249023,3821758; 248720,3821831; 
248673,3821887; 248470,3821987; 248386,3822075; 248098,3822072; 
248023,3822013; 247958,3822010; 247889,3821942; 247768,3821921; 
247486,3821688; 247392,3821673; 247137,3821543; 247027,3821538; 
246986,3821551; 246904,3821651; 246799,3821673; 246686,3821760; 
246322,3821875; 245959,3821944; 245821,3822088; 245250,3822371; 
245177,3822481; 245065,3822564; 244920,3822851; 244797,3823012; 
244638,3823100; 244485,3823234; 244271,3823374; 243850,3823411; 
243668,3823320; 243599,3823229; 243464,3823136; 243465,3823063; 
243546,3822920; 243387,3822706; 243315,3822708; 243133,3822635; 
242986,3822717; 242833,3822681; 242700,3822758; 242612,3822771; 
242532,3822621; 242470,3822576; 242303,3822499; 242115,3822456; 
242050,3822399; 241886,3822357; 241772,3822278; 241670,3822316; 
241588,3822283; 241503,3822282; 241106,3822472; 240900,3822525; 
240457,3822494; 240372,3822504; 240165,3822597; 239997,3822610; 
239850,3822328; 239716,3822200; 239561,3822095; 239407,3822068; 
239240,3821999; 239154,3822034; 239005,3822198; 238444,3822170; 
237897,3822336; 237707,3822253; 237627,3822288; 237563,3822215; 
237449,3822159; 237263,3822135; 236948,3822019; 236835,3822039; 
236710,3822022; 236568,3822108; 236433,3822132; 236293,3822229; 
236200,3822247; 236138,3822331; 235983,3822328; 235776,3822468; 
235758,3822542; 235734,3822556; 235619,3822569; 235373,3822654; 
235297,3822741; 235218,3822899; 235106,3822889; 235052,3822908; 
234778,3823114; 234715,3823138; 234427,3823161; 234374,3823214; 
234298,3823472; 234147,3823601; 233915,3823565; 233755,3823642; 
233796,3823724; 233804,3823858; 233882,3823951; 234125,3824588; 
234206,3824685; 234342,3824947; 234393,3825120; 234385,3825208; 
234440,3825270; 234591,3825297; 234698,3825350; 234729,3825502; 
234789,3825611; 234859,3825997; 234827,3826189; 234659,3826365; 
234454,3826695; 234614,3826729; 234826,3826855; 235010,3827006; 
235118,3827131; 235119,3827330; 235036,3827911; 235082,3827996; 
235208,3828040; 235432,3828051; 235487,3828017; 235577,3827770; 
235625,3827765; 235725,3827817; 235783,3827815; 235943,3827959; 
235964,3828022; 235950,3828104; 235999,3828293; 235934,3828410; 
235816,3828518; 235853,3828550; 236001,3828574; 236111,3828562; 
236190,3828662; 236399,3828640; 236500,3828697; 236568,3828783; 
236692,3828825; 236817,3828826; 236957,3828794; 237099,3828810; 
237204,3828851; 237348,3828821; 237484,3828900; 237622,3829061; 
237662,3829062; 237770,3828960; 237843,3828941; 237881,3828975; 
237871,3829095; 237891,3829142; 238041,3829186; 238137,3829347; 
238282,3829440; 238267,3829680; 238308,3829762; 238310,3829906; 
238339,3829942; 238410,3829963; 238430,3830001; 238452,3830094; 
238499,3830156; 238520,3830301; 238597,3830307; 238764,3830408; 
238908,3830303; 239109,3830332; 239540,3830156; 239820,3830097; 
239988,3830132; 240198,3830138; 240411,3830212; 240439,3830243; 
240529,3830512; 240525,3830607; 240462,3830684; 240220,3830862; 
240034,3831068; 240049,3831110; 240282,3831207; 240008,3831458; 
239861,3831499; 239765,3831553; 239704,3831505; 239627,3831543; 
239575,3831705; 239611,3832096; 239735,3832199; 239861,3832391; 
239952,3832438; 240065,3832438; 240225,3832516; 240347,3832541; 
240476,3832763; 240723,3832920; 240836,3833060; 240937,3833243; 
241077,3833345; 241267,3833558; 241293,3833609; 241285,3833749; 
241327,3833813; 241559,3833911; 241731,3833897; 241849,3833939; 
242029,3833865; 242172,3833689; 242340,3833721; 242603,3833817; 
242702,3833818; 242874,3833678; 242970,3833655; 243089,3833479; 
243196,3833424; 243263,3833340; 243395,3833400; 243473,3833403; 
243509,3833380; 243562,3833233; 243625,3833156; 243744,3833095; 
244106,3833139; 244375,3833294; 244432,3833301; 244836,3833083; 
244947,3833000; 245139,3832953;

[[Page 124]]

245633,3832723; 245954,3832464; 246265,3832288; 246459,3832206; 
246603,3832073; 246901,3832087; 247075,3832003; 247264,3832004; 
247622,3832061; 247701,3832115; 247882,3832146; 248107,3832381; 
248227,3832416; 248362,3832377; 248691,3832174; 248834,3832167; 
248998,3832554; 249248,3832965; 249351,3833197; 249456,3833366; 
249522,3833581; 249557,3833616; 249673,3833656; 249932,3833622; 
250155,3833705; 250332,3833696; 250358,3834067; 250426,3834158; 
250462,3834305; 250428,3834435; 250458,3834745; 250520,3834837; 
250616,3834897; 250679,3835022; 250628,3835232; 250669,3835620; 
250711,3835667; 250848,3835722; 250902,3835771; 250969,3836076; 
250998,3836117; 251075,3836124; 251169,3835966; 251201,3835939; 
251226,3835953; 251278,3836099; 251351,3836170; 251381,3836254; 
251547,3836372; 251638,3836614; 251747,3836715; 251824,3836696; 
251875,3836712; 251924,3836866; 251939,3837038; 252086,3837351; 
252110,3837364; 252314,3837278; 252537,3837120; 252624,3837151; 
252747,3837270; 252925,3837331; 253269,3837357; 253466,3837333; 
253634,3837280; 253781,3837297; 254336,3837592; 254390,3837486; 
254516,3837387; and return 254540,3837294.
    (ii) Note: Unit STB-7 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (44)(ii) of this entry.
    (51) Unit VEN-1: Ventura County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Matilija, Ventura and Ojai.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 292389,3808989; 292269,3808813; 292067,3808838; 292001,3808540; 
291744,3808513; 291660,3808360; 291309,3808445; 291346,3808110; 
291188,3807970; 290857,3808078; 290683,3807876; 290516,3807881; 
290022,3807626; 289938,3807423; 289743,3807351; 289693,3807054; 
289556,3806919; 289357,3806257; 288924,3806106; 288596,3805768; 
288535,3805756; 288169,3806170; 288139,3806566; 288022,3806679; 
287922,3806605; 287842,3806111; 287702,3806086; 287770,3806708; 
287997,3806862; 288226,3806724; 288210,3807181; 288352,3807324; 
288495,3807334; 288507,3807633; 288897,3808046; 289299,3808143; 
289254,3808351; 289400,3808575; 289665,3808668; 289771,3808791; 
290075,3808823; 290121,3809125; 290398,3809519; 290426,3809709; 
290786,3809928; 291436,3811102; 291817,3811326; 291749,3811476; 
291788,3811585; 292474,3811706; 292581,3812127; 293112,3812393; 
293210,3812196; 293840,3812153; 294048,3811973; 294135,3811749; 
293856,3811194; 293598,3811103; 293155,3810614; 292790,3810406; 
292674,3810144; 292894,3809713; 292746,3809412; 292765,3809204; 
292611,3808985; returning to 292389,3808989.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit VEN-1 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 125]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.025

    (52) Unit VEN-2: Ventura and Los Angeles Counties, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Cobblestone Mountain and Whitaker Peak.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 339291,3827835; 339299,3827739; 339766,3827357; 340374,3827063; 
340544,3826712; 341072,3826348;

[[Page 126]]

340944,3826090; 340929,3825836; 341091,3825360; 340852,3824908; 
340799,3824021; 340501,3823636; 340142,3823657; 339877,3823482; 
339839,3822849; 339931,3822610; 340226,3822571; 340007,3822097; 
339952,3821528; 339632,3821505; 339211,3820830; 339197,3820598; 
338832,3820187; 338664,3820291; 338411,3820813; 338027,3821260; 
337668,3821358; 336304,3822097; 336529,3822597; 336713,3822708; 
336854,3823475; 335722,3824114; 335636,3824514; 335416,3824690; 
334902,3824748; 334557,3824905; 334507,3825194; 334331,3825218; 
334164,3825391; 334109,3825598; 333690,3825882; 333242,3826358; 
333195,3826701; 333300,3826871; 333037,3827486; 332830,3827662; 
333176,3827981; 333533,3828042; 335562,3827839; 336504,3827892; 
336890,3827733; 337083,3827558; 337171,3827662; 337429,3827646; 
337638,3827729; 337852,3827893; 338100,3827946; 338394,3827861; 
339081,3828201; 339230,3828192; 339304,3828065; returning to 
339291,3827835.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units VEN-2 and VEN-3 for the California red-
legged frog follows:

[[Page 127]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.026

    (53) Unit VEN-3: Ventura County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Calabasas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 341537,3788481; 341736,3788470; 341842,3788432; 341858,3788081; 
341901,3788038; 342052,3787988;

[[Page 128]]

342080,3787895; 342176,3787747; 342210,3787526; 342325,3787446; 
342313,3787400; 342378,3787252; 342363,3787000; 342383,3786937; 
342492,3786911; 342545,3786875; 342597,3786770; 342634,3786746; 
342707,3786761; 342888,3786729; 343046,3786812; 343143,3786802; 
343161,3786758; 343130,3786655; 343278,3786596; 343251,3786524; 
343000,3786409; 342966,3786345; 342975,3786301; 343006,3786284; 
343296,3786247; 343305,3786222; 343292,3786149; 343145,3786005; 
343137,3785867; 343075,3785758; 343017,3785458; 343022,3785370; 
343124,3785088; 343244,3785168; 343304,3785185; 343392,3785170; 
343545,3785240; 343902,3785199; 344046,3785251; 344362,3785450; 
344562,3785482; 344787,3785460; 345043,3785358; 345089,3785258; 
345088,3785192; 344991,3784960; 345067,3784928; 345213,3784807; 
345208,3784726; 345176,3784657; 345249,3784489; 345264,3784398; 
345436,3784371; 345443,3784242; 345485,3784237; 345615,3784301; 
345599,3784303; 345716,3784275; 345839,3784282; 345873,3784138; 
346114,3784037; 346167,3783879; 346139,3783739; 346236,3783615; 
346099,3783517; 346152,3783412; 346150,3783308; 346063,3783276; 
345893,3783321; 345819,3783163; 345605,3783068; 345245,3782745; 
345220,3782695; 345104,3782702; 344801,3782582; 344572,3782299; 
344257,3782149; 344007,3782227; 343959,3782314; 343835,3782353; 
343698,3782181; 343356,3782138; 342181,3782163; 342057,3782712; 
341965,3782823; 341986,3782835; 341836,3783224; 341806,3783464; 
341772,3783516; 341641,3783607; 341546,3783735; 341607,3783877; 
341570,3784109; 341607,3784403; 341593,3784510; 341540,3784612; 
341531,3784885; 341515,3784912; 341368,3784968; 341259,3785132; 
341152,3785246; 341070,3785275; 341005,3785362; 340989,3785425; 
341057,3785526; 341057,3785566; 340954,3785696; 340957,3785780; 
340780,3785859; 340677,3785955; 340594,3785969; 340410,3786065; 
340264,3786081; 340188,3786114; 340193,3786151; 340268,3786202; 
340309,3786268; 340212,3786516; 340138,3786536; 340081,3786597; 
340083,3786637; 340162,3786710; 340120,3786789; 339978,3786784; 
339833,3786860; 339561,3786931; 339264,3787091; 339199,3787176; 
338893,3787232; 338790,3787269; 338763,3787300; 338786,3787386; 
339019,3787565; 338966,3787714; 338890,3787787; 338789,3787984; 
338806,3788053; 338960,3788068; 339268,3788041; 339472,3788234; 
339521,3788249; 339968,3788206; 340122,3788237; 340306,3788353; 
340467,3788246; 340497,3788252; 340578,3788369; 340849,3788263; 
341244,3788275; 341326,3788322; 341389,3788507; returning to 
341537,3788481.
    (ii) Note: Unit VEN-3 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (52)(ii) of this entry.
    (54) Unit LOS-1: Los Angeles County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Warm Springs Mountain and Green Valley.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 359031,3819227; 358730,3819226; 357682,3819421; 357694,3819619; 
357819,3819717; 357871,3819926; 358218,3820421; 358455,3821056; 
358466,3821241; 358352,3821327; 358424,3821653; 358610,3821669; 
358704,3821902; 358598,3822345; 358987,3823103; 359060,3823442; 
359387,3823820; 359806,3824854; 360096,3825062; 361616,3825686; 
362356,3825881; 363057,3825879; 363330,3825796; 363930,3825191; 
363867,3824811; 363724,3824621; 361885,3823314; 361706,3822967; 
361437,3822679; 361231,3822109; 360167,3820914; 359852,3820073; 
359475,3819513; 359153,3819227; returning to 359031,3819227.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit LOS-1 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 129]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.027

           Chiricahua Leopard Frog (Lithobates chiricahuensis)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Apache, Cochise, Gila, 
Graham, Greenlee, Pima, Santa Cruz, and Yavapai Counties, Arizona; and 
Catron, Grant, Hidalgo, Sierra, and Socorro Counties, New Mexico, on the 
maps below.

[[Page 130]]

    (2) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements of the 
physical or biological features essential to the conservation of the 
Chiricahua leopard frog are:
    (i) Aquatic breeding habitat and immediately adjacent uplands 
exhibiting the following characteristics:
    (A) Standing bodies of fresh water (with salinities less than 5 
parts per thousand, pH greater than or equal to 5.6, and pollutants 
absent or minimally present), including natural and manmade (e.g., 
stock) ponds, slow-moving streams or pools within streams, off-channel 
pools, and other ephemeral or permanent water bodies that typically hold 
water or rarely dry for more than a month. During periods of drought, or 
less than average rainfall, these breeding sites may not hold water long 
enough for individuals to complete metamorphosis, but they would still 
be considered essential breeding habitat in non-drought years.
    (B) Emergent and or submerged vegetation, root masses, undercut 
banks, fractured rock substrates, or some combination thereof, but 
emergent vegetation does not completely cover the surface of water 
bodies.
    (C) Nonnative predators (e.g., crayfish (Orconectes virilis), 
bullfrogs (Lithobates catesbeianus), nonnative predatory fish) absent or 
occurring at levels that do not preclude presence of the Chiricahua 
leopard frog.
    (D) Absence of chytridiomycosis, or if present, then environmental, 
physiological, and genetic conditions are such that allow persistence of 
Chiricahua leopard frogs.
    (E) Upland habitats that provide opportunities for foraging and 
basking that are immediately adjacent to or surrounding breeding aquatic 
and riparian habitat.
    (ii) Dispersal and nonbreeding habitat, consisting of areas with 
ephemeral (present for only a short time), intermittent, or perennial 
water that are generally not suitable for breeding, and associated 
upland or riparian habitat that provides corridors (overland movement or 
along wetted drainages) for frogs among breeding sites in a 
metapopulation with the following characteristics:
    (A) Are not more than 1.0 mile (1.6 kilometers) overland, 3.0 miles 
(4.8 kilometers) along ephemeral or intermittent drainages, 5.0 miles 
(8.0 kilometers) along perennial drainages, or some combination thereof 
not to exceed 5.0 miles (8.0 kilometers).
    (B) In overland and nonwetted corridors, provide some vegetation 
cover or structural features (e.g., boulders, rocks, organic debris such 
as downed trees or logs, small mammal burrows, or leaf litter) for 
shelter, forage, and protection from predators; in wetted corridors, 
provide some ephemeral, intermittent, or perennial aquatic habitat.
    (C) Are free of barriers that block movement by Chiricahua leopard 
frogs, including, but not limited to, urban, industrial, or agricultural 
development; reservoirs that are 50 acres (20 hectares) or more in size 
and contain predatory nonnative fish, bullfrogs, or crayfish; highways 
that do not include frog fencing and culverts; and walls, major dams, or 
other structures that physically block movement.
    (3) With the exception of impoundments, livestock tanks and other 
constructed waters, critical habitat does not include manmade structures 
(such as buildings, aqueducts, runways, roads, and other paved areas) 
and the land on which they are located existing within the legal 
boundaries on the effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 7.5' quadrangles, the Service's online Lands 
Mapper, the U.S. Geological Survey National Hydrography Dataset, and 
imagery from Google Earth. Lentic water bodies were digitized from 
Google Earth imagery. Point locations for lentic water bodies (still or 
non-flowing water bodies) were calculated as the geographic centroids of 
the digitized polygons defining the critical habitat boundaries. Line 
locations for lotic streams (flowing water) and drainages are depicted 
as the ``Flowline'' feature class from the National Hydrography Dataset 
geodatabase. Overland connections were digitized from Google Earth 
imagery. Administrative boundaries for Arizona and New Mexico were 
obtained from the Arizona Land Resource Information Service and New 
Mexico Resource Geographic Information System, respectively. This 
includes the most current (as of the effective date of this rule) 
geospatial data available for land ownership, counties, States, and 
streets. Locations depicting critical habitat are expressed as decimal 
degree latitude and longitude in the World Geographic Coordinate System 
projection using the 1984 datum (WGS84). Information on Chiricahua 
leopard frog localities was derived from survey forms, reports, 
publications, field notes, and other sources, all of which reside in our 
files at the Arizona Ecological Services Field Office, 2321 West Royal 
Palm Road, Suite 103, Phoenix, AZ 85021. Coordinates given for tanks are 
the approximate center points of those tanks.
    (5) Note: Index,map of critical habitat units for the Chiricahua 
leopard frog follows:

[[Page 131]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.000

    (6) Twin Tanks and Ox Frame Tank Unit, Pima County, Arizona.
    (i) Twin Tanks, including the north tank (31.838230 N, 111.149875 W) 
and south tank (31.836031 N 111.149102 W), and the drainage running 
between them, a drainage distance of 979 feet (299 meters).
    (ii) Ox Frame Tank (31.881882 N, 111.200318 W).
    (iii) Note: Map of Twin Tanks and Ox Frame Tank Unit follows:

[[Page 132]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.001

    (7) Garcia Tank Unit, Pima County, Arizona.
    (i) Garcia Tank (31.477060 N, 111.454114 W).
    (ii) Note: Map of Garcia Tank Unit follows:

[[Page 133]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.002

    (8) Buenos Aires National Wildlife Refuge Central Tanks Unit, Pima 
County, Arizona.
    (i) Carpenter Tank (31.528748 N, 111.454642 W).
    (ii) Rock Tank (31.583905 N, 111.462366 W).
    (iii) State Tank (31.569254 N, 111.477114 W).
    (iv) Triangle Tank (31.576105 N, 111.510909 W).
    (v) New Round Hill Tank (31.613784 N, 111.489390 W).
    (vi) Banado Tank (31.532759 N, 111.474729 W).
    (vii) Choffo Tank (31.544627 N, 111.463126 W).

[[Page 134]]

    (viii) Barrel Cactus Tank (31.545284 N, 111.490310 W).
    (ix) Sufrido Tank (31.566364 N, 111.445892 W).
    (x) Hito Tank (31.579462 N, 111.446984 W).
    (xi) Morley Tank (31.599057 N, 111.489088 W).
    (xii) McKay Tank (31.605788 N, 111.474188 W).
    (xiii) Chongo Tank (31.64002 N, 111.50435 W).
    (xiv) Arroyo del Compartidero from Triangle Tank (31.576105 N, 
111.510909 W) downstream through and including Aguire Lake to an unnamed 
drainage (31.594035 N, 111.504265 W); then downstream in that unnamed 
drainage to its confluence with Bailey Wash (31.596674 N, 111.501912 W); 
then downstream in Bailey Wash to its confluence with Puertocito Wash 
(31.604618 N, 111.494127 W); then downstream in Puertocito Wash to its 
confluence with Las Moras Wash (31.636031 N, 111.471749 W), including 
New Round Hill Tank (31.613784 N, 111.489390 W); and upstream in Las 
Moras Wash to Chongo Tank (31.64002 N, 111.50435 W), a distance of 
approximately 8.52 drainage miles (13.70 kilometers).
    (xv) An unnamed drainage from its confluence with Puertocito Wash 
(31.619650 N, 111.483551 W) upstream to McKay Tank (31.605788 N, 
111.474188 W, which is a cluster of three tanks), a distance of 
approximately 1.55 drainage miles (2.50 kilometers).
    (xvi) Puertocito Wash from its confluence with Bailey Wash 
(31.604618 N, 111.494127 W) upstream to Sufrido Tank (31.566364 N, 
111.445892 W), including Morley Tank (31.599057 N, 111.489088 W), a 
distance of approximately 4.60 drainage miles (7.40 kilometers).
    (xvii) An innamed drainage from its confluence with Puertocito Wash 
upstream to Rock Tank (31.583905 N, 111.462366 W), then upstream in an 
unnamed drainage to the top of that drainage (31.582637 N, 111.456882 W) 
and directly overland to an unnamed drainage (31.583818 N, 111.455223 
W), and then upstream to Hito Tank (31.579462 N, 111.446984 W) and 
downstream to McKay Tank (31.605788 N, 111.474188 W), a distance of 
approximately 3.80 drainage miles (6.11 kilometers) and 580 feet (177 
meters) overland.
    (xviii) Lopez Wash from Carpenter Tank (31.528748 N, 111.454642 W) 
downstream to its confluence with Aguire Lake (31.590582 N, 111.499589 
W), a distance of approximately 6.75 drainage miles (10.87 kilometers).
    (xix) An unnamed drainage from its confluence with Lopez Wash 
(31.542605 N, 111.466699 W) upstream to Choffo Tank (31.544627 N, 
111.463126 W), a distance of approximately 1,549 drainage feet (472 
meters).
    (xx) An unnamed drainage from its confluence with Lopez Wash 
(31.569735 N, 111.482058 W) upstream to State Tank (31.569254 N, 
111.477114 W), a distance of approximately 1,613 drainage feet (492 
meters).
    (xxi) An unnamed drainage from Banado Tank (31.532759 N, 111.474729 
W) downstream to the confluence with an unnamed drainage (31.545399 N, 
111.496152 W), and then upstream in that drainage to Barrel Cactus Tank 
(31.545284 N, 111.490310 W), a distance of approximately 2.21 drainage 
miles (3.56 kilometers).
    (xxii) An unnamed drainage from Banado Tank (31.532759 N, 111.474729 
W) upstream to a saddle (31.530907 N, 111.463162 W), then directly 
downslope to Lopez Wash (31.532093 N, 111.462159 W), a distance of 
approximately 3,831 drainage feet (1,168 meters) and 808 feet (246 
meters) overland.
    (xxiii) Note: Map of Buenos Aires NWR Central Tanks Unit follows:

[[Page 135]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.003

    (9) Bonita, Upper Turner, and Mojonera Tanks Unit, Santa Cruz 
County, Arizona.
    (i) Bonita Tank (31.43525 N, 111.305505 W).
    (ii) Upper Turner Tank (31.429690 N, 111.318332 W).
    (iii) Mojonera Tank (31.464250 N, 111.320203 W).
    (iv) From Upper Turner Tank (31.429690 N, 111.318332 W) upstream in 
an unnamed drainage to its confluence with a minor drainage coming in 
from the east (31.431029 N,

[[Page 136]]

111.315846 W), then directly upslope in that drainage and east to a 
saddle (31.431015 N, 111.314770), and directly downslope through an 
unnamed drainage to Bonita Canyon (31.429806 N, 111.310325 W), and 
upstream in Bonita Canyon to Bonita Tank, a distance of approximately 
1.29 drainage miles (2.08 kilometers) and 150 feet (46 meters) overland.
    (v) From Mojonera Tank (31.464250 N, 111.320203 W) downstream in 
Mojonera Canyon to a sharp bend where the drainage turns west-northwest 
(31.445989 N, 111.343181 W); then southeast and upstream in an unnamed 
drainage to a saddle (31.443358 N, 111.340675 W) and downslope through 
an unnamed drainage to its confluence with another unnamed drainage 
(31.438637 N, 111.341044 W); then upstream in that unnamed drainage to a 
saddle (31.438497 N, 111.337639 W); then downstream in an unnamed 
drainage to Sierra Well (31.433012 N, 111.334709 W), to include Sierra 
Tank East (31.435488 N, 111.334736 W) and Sierra Tank West (31.435361 N, 
111.336103 W); then directly overland to Upper Turner Tank (31.429690 N, 
111.318332 W), a distance of approximately 3.45 drainage miles (5.56 
kilometers) and 5,270 feet (1,606 meters) overland.
    (vi) Note: Map of Bonita, Upper Turner, and Mojonera Tanks Unit 
follows:

[[Page 137]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.004

    (10) Sycamore Canyon Unit, Santa Cruz County, Arizona.
    (i) Sycamore Canyon from the Ruby Road bridge (31.434030 N, 
111.186537 W) south to the International Boundary (31.379952 N, 
111.222937 W), a distance of 6.35 stream miles (10.23 kilometers).
    (ii) Yank Tank (31.425426 N, 111.183289 W).
    (iii) North Mesa Tank (31.415697 N, 111.167584 W).

[[Page 138]]

    (iv) Horse Pasture Spring (31.406812 N, 111.184717 W).
    (v) Bear Valley Ranch Tank (31.413617 N, 111.176818 W).
    (vi) South Mesa Tank (31.406832 N, 111.164505 W).
    (vii) Rattlesnake Tank (31.400654 N, 111.163470 W).
    (viii) Yanks Canyon from Yank Tank (31.425426N, 111.183289W) 
downstream to its confluence with Sycamore Canyon (31.428987 N, 
111.190679 W), a distance of approximately 2,822 drainage feet (860 
meters).
    (ix) From North Mesa Tank (31.415697 N, 111.167584 W) downstream in 
Atascosa Canyon to its confluence with Pe[ntilde]asco Canyon (31.402594 
N, 111.186647 W), then from that confluence downstream in Pe[ntilde]asco 
Canyon to its confluence with Sycamore Canyon (31.407395 N, 111.195820 
W), a distance of approximately 2.91 drainage miles (4.69 kilometers).
    (x) From Horse Pasture Spring (31.406812 N, 111.184717 W) downstream 
to Pe[ntilde]asco Canyon, a drainage distance of approximately 1,759 
feet (536 meters).
    (xi) From Bear Valley Ranch Tank (31.413617 N, 111.176818 W) 
downstream in an unnamed drainage to its confluence with Atascosa Canyon 
(31.402583 N, 111.186593 W), a drainage distance of approximately 611 
stream feet (186 meters).
    (xii) From South Mesa Tank (31.406832 N, 111.164505 W) downstream in 
unnamed drainage to its confluence with another unnamed drainage 
(31.403615 N, 111.169213 W), then downstream in that unnamed drainage to 
its confluence with Pe[ntilde]asco Canyon (31.399519 N, 111.177701 W), 
then downstream in Pe[ntilde]asco Canyon to its confluence with Atascosa 
Canyon (31.402594 N, 111.186647 W), a drainage distance of approximately 
2.05 miles (3.30 kilometers).
    (xiii) From Rattlesnake Tank (31.400654 N, 111.163470 W) downstream 
in an unnamed drainage to its confluence with another unnamed drainage 
(31.403615 N, 111.169213 W), a drainage distance of approximately 2,274 
feet (693 meters).
    (xiv) Note: Map of Sycamore Canyon Unit follows:

[[Page 139]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.005

    (11) Pe[ntilde]a Blanca Lake and Spring and Associated Tanks Unit, 
Santa Cruz County, Arizona.
    (i) Pe[ntilde]a Blanca Lake (31.409091 N, 111.084971 W at the dam).
    (ii) Pe[ntilde]a Blanca Spring (31.388895 N, 111.092297 W).
    (iii) Summit Reservoir (31.396565 N, 111.141347 W).
    (iv) Tinker Tank (31.380107 N, 111.136359 W).
    (v) Coyote Tank (31.369894 N, 111.150751 W).

[[Page 140]]

    (vi) Thumb Butte Tank (31.388426 N, 111.118105 W).
    (vii) From Summit Reservoir directly southeast to a saddle on Summit 
Motorway (31.395580 N, 111.140552 W), then directly downslope to an 
unnamed drainage at (31.394133 N, 111.139450 W) and downstream in that 
drainage to its confluence with Alamo Canyon (31.384521 N, 111.121496 
W), then downstream in Alamo Canyon to its confluence with Pe[ntilde]a 
Blanca Canyon (31.388301 N, 111.093728 W), then downstream in 
Pe[ntilde]a Blanca Canyon to Pe[ntilde]a Blanca Lake (31.409091 N, 
111.084971 W at the dam) to include Pe[ntilde]a Blanca Spring (31.388895 
N, 111.092297 W), a distance of approximately 4.44 drainage miles (7.10 
kilometers) and 1,040 feet (317 meters) overland.
    (viii) From Thumb Butte Tank (31.388426 N, 111.118105 W) downstream 
in an unnamed drainage to its confluence with Alamo Canyon (31.385228 N, 
111.112132 W), a distance of approximately 2,494 drainage feet (760 
meters).
    (ix) From Tinker Tank (31.380107 N, 111.136359 W) downstream in an 
unnamed drainage to its confluence with Alamo Canyon (31.379693 N, 
111.126053 W), then downstream in Alamo Canyon to the confluence with 
the drainage from Summit Reservoir (31.384521 N, 111.121496 W), a 
distance of approximately 1.55 drainage miles (2.50 kilometers).
    (x) From Coyote Tank (31.369894 N, 111.150751 W) downstream in an 
unnamed drainage to its confluence with Alamo Canyon (31.365839 N, 
111.138388 W); then downstream in Alamo Canyon to the confluence with 
the drainage from Tinker Tank (31.379693 N, 111.126053 W), to include 
Alamo Spring (31.365993 N, 111.137171 W), a distance of approximately 
3.09 drainage miles (4.97 kilometers).
    (xi) Note: Map of Pe[ntilde]a Blanca Lake and Spring and Associated 
Tanks Unit follows:

[[Page 141]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.006

    (12) Florida Canyon Unit, Pima County, Arizona.
    (i) Florida Canyon from a silted-in dam (31.759444 N, 110.844095 W) 
downstream to just east of the Florida Workstation entrance gate 
(31.763186 N, 110.845511 W), a distance of approximately 1,521 stream 
feet (463 meters).
    (ii) Note: Map of Florida Canyon Unit follows:

[[Page 142]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.007

    (13) Eastern Slope of the Santa Rita Mountains Unit, Pima County, 
Arizona.
    (i) Two galvanized metal tanks in Louisiana Gulch (31.74865 N, 
110.72839 W).
    (ii) Greaterville Tank (31.767186 N, 110.759818 W).
    (iii) Los Posos Gulch Tank (31.768587 N, 110.731583 W).
    (iv) Upper Granite Mountain Tank (31.760914 N, 110.760186 W).
    (v) From Los Posos Gulch Tank (31.768587 N, 110.731583 W) upstream 
to a saddle

[[Page 143]]

(31.771463 N, 110.748676 W); then downslope in an unnamed drainage to 
the confluence with another unnamed drainage (31.772830 N, 110.752727 
W); then upstream and south in that drainage to a saddle (31.768245 N, 
110.752891 W); then downslope in an unnamed drainage to its confluence 
with Ophir Gulch (31.763978 N, 110.751312 W); then upstream in Ophir 
Gulch to Upper Granite Mountain Tank (31.760914 N, 110.760186 W), to 
include an ephemeral tank (31.761388 N, 110.759184 W) and a well 
(31.761584 N, 110.758169 W), a distance of approximately 2.59 drainage 
miles (4.17 kilometers) and 984 feet (300 meters) overland.
    (vi) From Greaterville Tank (31.767186 N, 110.759818 W) downstream 
in an unnamed drainage to its confluence with Ophir Gulch (31.763978 N, 
110.751312 W), a distance of approximately 3,446 drainage feet (1,050 
meters).
    (vii) Louisiana Gulch from the metal tanks (31.74865 N, 110.72839 W) 
upstream to the confluence with an unnamed drainage (31.756493 N, 
110.744175 W), then upstream in that drainage to its headwaters and 
across a saddle (31.759879 N, 110.748733 W) and downslope through an 
unnamed drainage to its confluence with Ophir Gulch (31.762953 N, 
110.749329 W), then upstream in Ophir Gulch to the confluence with an 
unnamed drainage (31.763978 N, 110.751312 W), a distance of 
approximately 1.98 drainage miles (3.19 kilometers) and 327 feet (100 
meters) overland.
    (viii) Note: Map of Eastern Slope of the Santa Rita Mountains Unit 
follows:

[[Page 144]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.008

    (14) Las Cienegas National Conservation Area Unit, Pima County, 
Arizona.
    (i) Empire Gulch near Empire Ranch, beginning at a pipeline access 
road crossing (31.787054 N, 110.648665 W) and continuing downstream to 
its confluence with Cienega Creek (31.808988 N, 110.589795 W), a 
distance of approximately 5.08 stream miles (8.18 kilometers).
    (ii) Cienega Creek from the Empire Gulch confluence (31.808988 N, 
110.589795 W) upstream to the approximate end of the wetted

[[Page 145]]

reach and where the creek bends hard to the east (31.776478 N, 
110.590382 W), to include Cinco Ponds (31.793066 N, 110.584422 W 
upstream to 31.788559 N, 110.584114 W), a distance of approximately 1.91 
stream miles (3.08 kilometers).
    (iii) Note: Map of Las Cienegas National Conservation Area Unit 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.009


[[Page 146]]


    (15) Scotia Canyon Unit, Cochise County, Arizona.
    (i) Peterson Ranch Pond (31.457016 N, 110.397724 W).
    (ii) Travertine Seep (31.453466 N, 110.399386 W).
    (iii) Creek in Scotia Canyon from just east of Peterson Ranch Pond 
(31.455723 N, 110.396124 W) downstream to the confluence of an unnamed 
drainage and a sharp bend in the canyon to the south (31.447598 N, 
110.409884 W), a distance of approximately 1.36 stream miles (2.19 
kilometers).
    (iv) Overland from Peterson Ranch Pond (31.457016 N, 110.397724 W) 
to the upper end of the Scotia Creek segment (31.455723 N, 110.396124 
W), to include an ephemeral pond (31.456929 N, 110.397120 W), an 
overland distance of approximately 671 feet (205 meters).
    (v) Overland from the Travertine Seep (31.453466 N, 110.399386 W) 
directly southeast to Scotia Creek (31.452720 N, 110.398117 W), an 
overland distance of approximately 348 feet (106 meters).
    (vi) Note: Map of Scotia Canyon Unit follows:

[[Page 147]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.010

    (16) Carr Barn Pond Unit, Cochise County, Arizona.
    (i) Carr Barn Pond (31.452461 N, 110.250355 W).
    (ii) Note: Map of Carr Barn Pond Unit follows:

[[Page 148]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.011

    (17) Ramsey and Brown Canyons Unit, Cochise County, Arizona.
    (i) Ramsey Canyon from the eastern boundary of The Nature 
Conservancy's Bledsoe Parcel in the Ramsey Canyon Preserve (31.448160 N, 
110.306993 W) downstream to a dirt road crossing at the mouth of Ramsey 
Canyon (31.462315 N, 110.291248 W), excluding The Nature Conservancy's 
University of Toronto Parcel in the Ramsey Canyon Preserve, an 
approximate stream distance of 1.29 miles (2.08 kilometers).

[[Page 149]]

    (ii) Brown Canyon from The Box (31.456016 N, 110.323853 W) 
downstream to the Wild Duck Pond (31.475355 N, 110.297592 W) and House 
Pond (31.474068 N, 110.297565 W) on the former Barchas Ranch, an 
approximate drainage distance of 2.26 miles (3.64 kilometers).
    (iii) From the dirt road crossing at the mouth of Ramsey Canyon 
(31.462315 N, 110.291248 W) directly overland to House Pond (31.474068 
N, 110.297565 W) on the former Barchas Ranch, a distance of 
approximately 4,594 feet (1,400 meters).
    (iv) Note: Map of Ramsey and Brown Canyons Unit follows:

[[Page 150]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.012

    (18) Peloncillo Mountains Tanks Unit, Hidalgo County, New Mexico.
    (i) Geronimo Tank (31.520685 N, 109.016775 W).
    (ii) State Line Tank (31.498451 N, 109.044940 W).
    (iii) Javelina Tank (31.484995 N, 109.024970 W).
    (iv) Canoncito Ranch Tank (31.449553 N, 109.986836 W).
    (v) Maverick Spring (31.469376 N, 109.011142 W).

[[Page 151]]

    (vi) Cloverdale Creek from the Canoncito Ranch Tank (31.449553 N, 
109.986836 W) downstream, including the cienega, to rock pools 
(31.432972 N, 108.966535 W) about 630 feet downstream of the Cloverdale 
road crossing of Cloverdale Creek, excluding portions of Cloverdale 
Creek and the cienega within private lands of Canoncito Ranch, an 
approximate stream distance of 3,711 feet (1,131 meters).
    (vii) From Geronimo Tank (31.520685 N, 109.016775 W) downstream in 
an unnamed drainage to its confluence with Clanton Draw (31.520590 N, 
109.012263 W), then upstream to the confluence with an unnamed drainage 
(31.515818 N, 109.018117 W), and upstream in that drainage to its 
headwaters (31.501854 N, 109.031898 W), across a mesa to the headwaters 
of an unnamed drainage (31.502220 N, 109.033839 W), then downslope 
through that drainage to State Line Tank (31.498451 N, 109.044940 W), an 
approximate drainage distance of 3.07 miles (4.94 kilometers) and 775 
feet (236 meters) overland.
    (viii) From State Line Tank upstream in an unnamed drainage to a 
mesa (31.488563 N, 109.036527 W), then directly overland to the 
headwaters of Cloverdale Creek (31.487477 N, 109.028002 W), and then 
downstream in Cloverdale Creek to Javelina Tank (31.484995 N, 109.024970 
W), an approximate drainage distance of 1.40 miles (2.26 kilometers) and 
2,245 feet (684 meters) overland.
    (ix) From Javelina Tank (31.484995 N, 109.024970 W) downstream in 
Cloverdale Creek to the Canoncito Ranch Tank (31.449553 N, 109.986836 
W), to include Maverick Spring (31.469376 N, 109.011142 W), and 
excluding portions of Cloverdale Creek within private lands of Canoncito 
Ranch, an approximate stream distance of 3.12 miles (5.02 kilometers).
    (x) Note: Map of Peloncillo Mountains Unit follows:

[[Page 152]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.013

    (19) Cave Creek Unit, Cochise County, Arizona.
    (i) Herb Martyr Pond (31.87243 N, 109.23418 W).
    (ii) John Hands Pond below the dam (31.87868 N, 109.20470 W).
    (iii) Cave Creek from Herb Martyr Pond (31.87243 N, 109.23418 W) 
downstream to the U.S. Forest Service boundary (31.899659 N, 109.159987 
W), to include John Hands Pond (31.87868 N, 109.20470 W), an approximate

[[Page 153]]

stream distance of 4.76 miles (7.67 kilometers).
    (iv) Note: Map of Cave Creek Unit follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.014
    
    (20) Leslie Creek Unit, Cochise County, Arizona.
    (i) Leslie Creek from the upstream National Wildlife Refuge boundary 
(31.591072 N,

[[Page 154]]

109.505311 W) downstream to the Leslie Canyon Road crossing (31.588510 
N, 109.511598 W), an approximate stream distance of 4,094 feet (1,248 
meters).
    (ii) Note: Map of Leslie Creek Unit follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.015
    

[[Page 155]]


    (21) Deer Creek Unit, Graham County, Arizona.
    (i) Home Ranch Tank (32.656879 N, 110.274556 W).
    (ii) Penney Mine Tanks, which includes a series of 10 small 
impoundments in a drainage from approximately 32.668795 N, 110.257763 W 
downstream to 32.670055 N, 110.257310 W.
    (iii) Clifford Tank (32.67130 N, 110.264877 W).
    (iv) Vermont Tank (32.676883 N, 110.262404 W).
    (v) Middle Tank (32.679691 N, 110.252180 W).
    (vi) Deer Creek from a point where it exits a canyon and turns 
abruptly to the east (32.683937 N, 110.255290 W) upstream to its 
confluence with an unnamed drainage (32.673318 N, 110.262748 W); then 
upstream in that drainage to a confluence with four other drainages 
(32.671318 N, 110.262600 W); then upstream from that confluence in the 
western drainage to Clifford Tank (32.67130 N, 110.264877 W); then 
upstream from that confluence in the west-central drainage to an unnamed 
tank (32.666108 N, 110.269204 W); then directly overland southeast to 
another unnamed tank (32.665124 N, 110.265580 W); then downstream from 
that tank in an unnamed drainage to the aforementioned confluence 
(32.671318 N, 110.262600 W), and upstream in that unnamed drainage to a 
saddle (32.662529 N, 110.265717 W); then downstream from that saddle in 
an unnamed drainage to its confluence with an unnamed tributary to 
Gardner Creek (32.660409 N, 110.265303 W); and upstream in that unnamed 
tributary to Home Ranch Tank (32.656879 N, 110.274556 W), a distance of 
approximately 3.28 drainage miles (5.27 kilometers) and 1,216 feet (371 
meters) overland.
    (vii) From the largest of the Penney Mine Tanks (32.669696 N, 
110.257652 W) directly overland to an unnamed tank (32.688150 N, 
110.260309 W), and downstream in an unnamed drainage to the 
aforementioned confluence (32.671318 N, 110.262600 W), including another 
unnamed tank (32.669324 N, 110.261672 W) situated in that drainage, a 
distance of approximately 948 drainage feet (289 meters) and 1,051 feet 
(320 meters) overland.
    (viii) From Vermont Tank (32.676883 N, 110.262404 W) directly 
overland for approximately 468 feet (143 meters) to Deer Creek 
(32.677037 N, 110.260815 W).
    (ix) From Middle Tank (32.679691 N, 110.252180 W) upstream in an 
unnamed drainage to a saddle (32.677989 N, 110.256915 W), then directly 
downslope to Deer Creek (32.678307 N, 110.258257 W), an approximate 
drainage distance of 1,530 feet (466 meters) and 436 feet (133 meters) 
overland.
    (x) Note: Map of Deer Creek Unit follows:

[[Page 156]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.016

    (22) Oak Spring and Oak Creek Unit, Graham County, Arizona.
    (i) Oak Creek from Oak Spring (32.673538 N, 110.293214 W) downstream 
to where a hiking trail intersects the creek (32.682618 N, 110.283915 
W), an approximate stream distance of 1.06 miles (1.71 kilometers).
    (ii) Note: Map of Oak Spring and Oak Creek Unit follows:

[[Page 157]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.017

    (23) Dragoon Mountains Unit, Cochise County, Arizona.
    (i) Shaw Tank (31.906230 N, 109.958350 W).
    (ii) Tunnel Spring (31.881018 N, 109.948182 W).
    (iii) Halfmoon Tank (31.912453 N, 109.977963 W).
    (iv) Stronghold Canyon from Halfmoon Tank (31.912453 N, 109.977963 
W) downstream to Cochise Spring (31.912026 N, 109.963266 W), then 
upstream in an unnamed canyon to

[[Page 158]]

Shaw Tank (31.906230 N, 109.958350 W), and continuing upstream to the 
headwaters of that unnamed canyon (31.898491 N, 109.956589 W), then 
across a saddle and directly downslope to Middlemarch Canyon (31.894591 
N, 109.956429 W), downstream in Middlemarch Canyon to its confluence 
with an unnamed drainage (31.883322 N, 109.949925 W), then upstream in 
that drainage to Tunnel Spring (31.881018 N, 109.948182 W), an 
approximate distance of 3.71 drainage miles (5.97 kilometers) and 1,300 
feet (396 meters) overland.
    (v) Note: Map of Dragoon Mountains Unit follows:

[[Page 159]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.018

    (24) Buckskin Hills Unit, Yavapai County, Arizona.
    (i) Sycamore Basin Tank (34.481619 N, 111.641676 W).
    (ii) Middle Tank (34.473076 N, 111.624488 W).
    (iii) Walt's Tank (34.455959 N, 111.638497 W).
    (iv) Partnership Tank (34.452241 N, 111.646271 W).
    (v) Black Tank (34.462968 N, 111.623554 W).
    (vi) Buckskin Tank (34.472660 N, 111.652468 W).

[[Page 160]]

    (vii) Doren's Defeat Tank (34.446271 N, 111.641269 W).
    (viii) Needed Tank (34.461023 N, 111.631271 W).
    (ix) From Middle Tank (34.473076 N, 111.624488 W) downstream in 
Boulder Canyon to its confluence with an unnamed drainage that comes in 
from the northwest (34.455688 N, 111.625895 W), to include Black Tank 
(34.462968 N, 111.623554 W); then upstream in that unnamed drainage to a 
saddle (34.464120 N, 111.633633 W), to include Needed Tank (34.461023 N, 
111.631271 W); then downstream from the saddle in an unnamed drainage to 
its confluence with another unnamed drainage (34.466209 N, 111.636096); 
then downstream in that drainage to the confluence with an unnamed 
drainage (34.450688 N, 111.638111 W), to include Walt's Tank (34.455959 
N, 111.638497 W), and upstream in that unnamed drainage to Partnership 
Tank (34.452241 N, 111.646271 W); then upstream from the aforementioned 
confluence (34.466209 N, 111.636096) in the unnamed drainage that 
includes Walt's Tank to a point where the drainage turns east towards 
Boulder Canyon (34.469911 N, 111.630080 W), an approximate distance of 
3.65 drainage miles (5.87 kilometers) and 425 feet (130 meters) 
overland.
    (x) From Doren's Defeat Tank (34.446271 N, 111.641269 W) upstream in 
an unnamed drainage to Partnership Tank (34.452241 N, 111.646271 W), an 
approximate drainage distance of 3,310 feet (1,009 meters).
    (xi) From the confluence of an unnamed drainage with Boulder Canyon 
(34.469515 N, 111.624979 W) west to a point where the drainage turns 
southwest (34.469911 N, 111.630080 W), then directly overland to the top 
of Sycamore Basin (34.473970 N, 111.633584 W), and then downstream in 
Sycamore Basin to Sycamore Basin Tank (34.481619 N, 111.641676 W), an 
approximate distance of 4,658 drainage feet (1,420 meters) and 1,827 
feet (557 meters) overland.
    (xii) From Buckskin Tank upstream in an unnamed drainage to the top 
of that drainage (34.465121 N, 111.641428 W), then directly overland to 
an unnamed drainage (34.462851 N, 111.637797 W) that contains Walt's 
Tank, an approximate distance of 1,109 drainage feet (338 meters) and 
1,429 feet (435 meters) overland.
    (xiii) Note: Map of Buckskin Hills Unit follows:

[[Page 161]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.019

    (25) Crouch, Gentry, and Cherry Creeks, and Parallel Canyon Unit, 
Gila County, Arizona.
    (i) Trail Tank (34.176747 N, 110.812383 W).
    (ii) HY Tank (34.148580 N, 110.831331 W).
    (iii) Carroll Spring (34.133090 N, 110.838673 W).
    (iv) West Prong of Gentry Creek from the confluence with an unnamed 
drainage (34.133243 N, 110.827755 W) downstream to a point (34.123475 N, 
110.827872 W) where the

[[Page 162]]

creek turns southwest and is directly east of a saddle, then west 
overland across that saddle to Cunningham Spring (34.121883 N, 
110.841424 W), an approximate distance of 3,837 drainage feet (1,169 
meters) and 1,883 feet (574 meters) overland.
    (v) Pine Spring (34.148580 N, 110.831331 W).
    (vi) Bottle Spring (34.145180 N, 110.837515 W).
    (vii) Cherry Creek from Rock Spring (34.155505 N, 110.852478 W) 
upstream to its confluence with an unnamed drainage (34.166956 N, 
110.815587 W), then upstream in that drainage and across a saddle 
(34.176129 N, 110.808920 W), then downstream in an unnamed drainage to 
Trail Tank (34.176747 N, 110.812383 W), an approximate distance of 3.77 
drainage miles (6.07 kilometers) and 975 feet (297 meters) overland.
    (viii) Crouch Creek from its headwaters just south of Highway 288 
(34.143151 N, 110.836876 W) downstream to an unnamed drainage leading to 
Pine Spring (34.102235 N, 110.864341 W), to include Cunningham Spring 
and Carroll Spring; then upstream in that unnamed drainage from Crouch 
Creek to Pine Spring (34.148580 N, 110.831331 W), an approximate 
drainage distance of 5.48 miles (8.82 kilometers).
    (ix) From HY Tank (34.176747 N, 110.812383 W) downstream in an 
unnamed drainage to its confluence with Cherry Creek (34.154309 N, 
110.85077 W), to include Bottle Spring (34.145180 N, 110.837515 W), an 
approximate stream distance of 1.66 miles (2.67 kilometers).
    (x) From Bottle Spring (34.145180 N, 110.837515 W) south over a low 
saddle to the headwaters of Crouch Creek (34.143151 N, 110.836876 W), an 
approximate distance of 762 feet (232 meters) overland.
    (xi) Note: Map of Crouch, Gentry, and Cherry Creeks, and Parallel 
Canyon Unit follows:

[[Page 163]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.020

    (26) Ellison and Lewis Creeks Unit, Gila County, Arizona.
    (i) Moore Saddle Tank <greek-i>2 (34.374063 N, 111.205040 W).
    (ii) Low Tank (34.36768 N, 111.19347 W).
    (iii) Unnamed tributary to Ellison Creek from its confluence with an 
unnamed drainage (34.371458 N, 111.169111 W) downstream to Ellison Creek 
below Pyle Ranch (34.364667 N, 111.179966 W), then directly west across 
the

[[Page 164]]

Ellison Creek floodplain and over a low saddle to Lewis Creek below Pyle 
Ranch (34.364391 N, 111.186742 W), then downstream in Lewis Creek to its 
confluence with an unnamed drainage (34.354912 N, 111.192547 W), and 
then upstream in that unnamed drainage to Low Tank (34.36768 N, 
111.19347 W), an approximate distance of 2.52 drainage miles (4.05 
kilometers) and 1,070 feet (326 meters) overland.
    (iv) Note: Map of Ellison and Lewis Creeks Unit follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.021
    

[[Page 165]]


    (27) Concho Bill and Deer Creek Unit, Apache County, Arizona.
    (i) From Concho Bill Spring (33.830088 N, 109.366540 W) downstream 
in Deer Creek to its confluence with an unnamed drainage (33.827115 N, 
109.359495 W), an approximate drainage distance of 2,667 feet (813 
meters).
    (ii) Note: Map of Concho Bill and Deer Creek Unit follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.022
    

[[Page 166]]


    (28) Campbell Blue and Coleman Creeks Unit, Greenlee County, 
Arizona.
    (i) Campbell Blue Creek from the upstream boundary of Luce Ranch 
(33.735956 N, 109.127746 W) upstream to its confluence with Coalman 
Creek (33.738560 N, 109158679 W), an approximate stream distance of 2.04 
miles (3.28 kilometers).
    (ii) Coleman Creek from its confluence with Campbell Blue Creek 
(33.738560 N, 109158679 W) upstream to its confluence with Canyon Creek 
(33.750139 N, 109.168850 W), an approximate stream distance of 1.04 
miles (1.68 kilometers).
    (iii) Note: Map of Campbell Blue and Coleman Creeks Unit follows:

[[Page 167]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.023

    (29) Kerr Canyon Unit, Catron County, New Mexico.
    (i) From Kerr Spring (33.900561 N, 108.664732 W) downstream in 
unnamed drainage in Kerr Canyon to Kerr Canyon Pond (33.649088 N, 
108.517011 W), a distance of approximately 0.98 drainage miles (1.58 
km).
    (ii) Note: Map of Kerr Canyon Unit follows:

[[Page 168]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.024

    (30) Tularosa River Unit, Catron County, New Mexico.
    (i) Tularosa River from the upper end of Tularosa Spring (33.903798 
N, 108.501926 W) downstream to the entrance to the canyon downstream of 
Hell Hole (33.762737 N, 108.681551 W), an approximate river distance of 
19.31 miles (31.08 kilometers).
    (ii) Note: Map of Tularosa River Unit follows:

[[Page 169]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.025

    (31) Deep Creek Divide Area Unit, Catron County, New Mexico.
    (i) Long Mesa Tank (33.551664 N, 108.686841 W).
    (ii) Cullum Tank (33.554864 N, 108.676961 W).
    (iii) Burro Tank (33.571146 N, 108.638682 W).
    (iv) North Fork of Negrito Creek from its confluence with South Fork 
of Negrito Creek (33.607082 N, 108.631340 W) upstream to its confluence 
with an unnamed drainage (33.612529 N, 108.614731 W), an approximate

[[Page 170]]

stream distance of 1.37 miles (2.20 kilometers).
    (v) South Fork of Negrito Creek from its confluence with North Fork 
of Negrito Creek (33.607082 N, 108.631340 E) upstream to an impoundment 
(33.599047 N, 108.621300 W), including three other impoundments along 
the channel (33.601890 N, 108.622227 W; 33.602845 N, 108.622764 W; and 
33.603810 N, 108.623971 W), an approximate stream distance of 4,821 feet 
(1,469 meters).
    (vi) From Burro Tank (33.571146 N, 108.638682 W) downstream in Burro 
Canyon to Negrito Creek (22.609589 N, 108.638448 W), then upstream in 
Negrito Creek to the confluence of North and South Forks of Negrito 
Creeks (33.607082 N, 108.631340 W), an approximate stream distance of 
3.80 miles (6.12 kilometers).
    (vii) From Long Mesa Tank (33.551664 N, 108.686841 W) directly 
overland and east to Shotgun Canyon (33.550816 N, 108.681110 W), then 
downstream in that canyon to Cullum Tank (33.554864 N, 108.676961 W), an 
approximate distance of 2,003 drainage feet (610 meters) and 1,801 feet 
(549 meters) overland.
    (viii) From Cullum Tank (33.554864 N, 108.676961 W) downstream in 
Shotgun and Bull Basin Canyons to a confluence with an unnamed drainage 
(33.581626 N, 108.663624 W), then upstream in that drainage to the 
confluence with a minor drainage leading off Rainy Mesa from the east-
northeast (33.567121 N, 108.646776 W), then upstream in that drainage 
and directly east-northeast across Rainy Mesa to Burro Tank (33.571146 
N, 108.638682 W), an approximate distance of 3.88 drainage miles (6.24 
kilometers) and 1,863 feet (568 meters) overland.
    (ix) Note: Map of Deep Creek Divide Area Unit follows:

[[Page 171]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.026

    (32) West Fork Gila River Unit, Catron County, New Mexico.
    (i) From Turkeyfeather Spring (33.337486 N, 108.528607 W) downstream 
in Turkeyfeather Creek to its confluence with West Fork Gila River 
(33.32593 N, 108.517011 W), then downstream and southeast in West Fork 
Gila River to its confluence with White Creek (33.3274675 N, 108.4925 
W), a distance of approximately 6.97 drainage miles (11.22 km).
    (ii) Note: Map of West Fork Gila River Unit follows:

[[Page 172]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.027

    (33) Main Diamond Creek Unit, Catron County, New Mexico.
    (i) Main Diamond Creek, from the downstream boundary of Links Ranch 
(33.269512 N, 108.105542 W) downstream to the confluence with an unnamed 
drainage that comes in from the south, which is also where Main Diamond 
Creek enters a canyon (33.264514 N, 108.116019 W), an approximate stream 
distance of 3,980 feet (1,213 meters).
    (ii) Note: Map of Main Diamond Creek Unit follows:

[[Page 173]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.028

    (34) Beaver Creek Unit, Catron County, New Mexico.
    (i) Beaver Creek from an unnamed warm spring (33.380952 N, 
108.111761 W) downstream to its confluence with Taylor Creek (33.334694 
N, 108.101543 W), an approximate stream distance of 5.59 miles (8.89 
kilometers).
    (ii) Note: Map of Beaver Creek Unit follows:

[[Page 174]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.029

    (35) Left Prong of Dix Creek Unit, Greenlee County, Arizona.
    (i) Left prong of Dix Creek from an unnamed warm spring (33.179413 
N, 109.149176 W) above ``The Hole'' downstream to its confluence with 
the right prong of Dix Creek (33.186657 N, 109.157754 W), an approximate 
stream distance of 4,248 feet (1,295 meters).
    (ii) Note: Map of Left Prong of Dix Creek Unit follows:

[[Page 175]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.030

    (36) Rattlesnake Pasture Tank and Associated Tanks Unit, Greenlee 
County, Arizona.
    (i) Rattlesnake Pasture Tank (33.093987 N, 109.151714 W).
    (ii) Rattlesnake Gap Tank (33.098497 N, 109.162152 W).
    (iii) Buckhorn Tank (33.105613 N, 109.155506 W).
    (iv) From Rattlesnake Pasture Tank (33.093987 N, 109.151714 W) 
downstream in an unnamed drainage to its confluence with Red Tank Canyon 
(33.109603 N, 109.155549 W), to

[[Page 176]]

include Buckhorn Tank (33.105613 N, 109.155506 W); then upstream in Red 
Tank Canyon to Rattlesnake Gap Tank (33.098497 N, 109.162152 W), an 
approximate drainage distance of 2.27 miles (3.65 kilometers).
    (v) From Rattlesnake Gap Tank (33.098497 N, 109.162152 W) upstream 
in an unnamed drainage to its confluence with a minor drainage 
(33.090898 N, 109.155386 W), then directly upslope to a saddle 
(33.091771 N, 109.152380), and across that saddle and directly downslope 
to Rattlesnake Pasture Tank (33.093987 N, 109.151714 W), an approximate 
distance of 3,722 drainage feet (1,134 meters) and 1,645 feet (501 
meters) overland.
    (vi) Note: Map of Rattlesnake Pasture Tank and Associated Tanks Unit 
follows:

[[Page 177]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.031

    (37) Coal Creek Unit, Greenlee County, Arizona.
    (i) Coal Creek from the Highway 78 crossing (33.103667 N, 109.062458 
W) downstream to the confluence with an unnamed drainage (33.110025 N, 
109.065847 W), an approximate stream distance of 3,447 feet (1,051 
meters).
    (ii) Note: Map of Coal Creek Unit follows:

[[Page 178]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.032

    (38) Blue Creek Unit, Grant County, New Mexico.
    (i) Blue Creek from just east of a corral on private lands 
(32.848702 N, 108.835761 W) downstream to its confluence with an unnamed 
drainage that comes in from the east (32.825785 N, 108.824742 W), an 
approximate stream distance of 2.37 miles (3.81 kilometers).
    (ii) Note: Map of Blue Creek Unit follows:

[[Page 179]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.033

    (39) South Fork Palomas Creek Unit, Sierra County, New Mexico.
    (i) From the confluence of an unnamed tributary in Wagonbed Canyon 
and South Fork Palomas Creek (33.164592 N, 107.723155 W), downstream in 
South Fork Palomas Creek to its confluence with an unnamed tributary in 
Dark Canyon (33.167074 N, 107.68853 W), excluding the portions of South 
Fork Palomas Creek on privately owned lands of the Ladder Ranch, a 
distance of approximately 2.32 drainage miles (3.73 km).

[[Page 180]]

    (ii) Note: Map of South Fork Palomas Creek Unit follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.034
    
    (40) Seco Creek Unit, Sierra County, New Mexico.
    (i) North Seco Creek from Sawmill Well (33.112052 N, 107.760165 W) 
downstream to the

[[Page 181]]

private land boundary of the Ladder Ranch (33.112689 N, 107.709554 W), 
to include Sawmill Well (33.112052 N, 107.760165 W), Sucker Ledge 
(33.113545 N, 107.747370 W), and Davis Well (33.112421 N 107.728650 W), 
an approximate drainage distance of 3.32 miles (5.35 kilometers).
    (ii) Note: Map of Seco Creek Unit follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.035
    

[[Page 182]]


    (41) Alamosa Warm Springs Unit, Socorro County, New Mexico.
    (i) From the confluence of Wildhorse Canyon and Alamosa Creek 
(33.570315 N, 107.608474 W) downstream in Alamosa Creek to the 
confluence with an unnamed drainage that comes in from the north 
(33.569199 N, 107.577137 W), to include Alamosa Warm Springs (33.572365 
N, 107.600153 W), an approximate stream distance of 4,974 feet (1,516 
meters).
    (ii) Note: Map of Alamosa Warm Springs Unit follows:

[[Page 183]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.036

    (42) Cuchillo Negro Warm Springs and Creek Unit, Sierra County, New 
Mexico.
    (i) From the upper of the two Cuchillo Negro Warm Springs (33.268403 
N, 107.563619 W) downstream in Cuchillo Negro Creek to its confluence 
with an unnamed drainage that comes in from the north (33.271386 N, 
107.557843 W), excluding the portions of Cuchillo Negro Creek on 
privately owned lands, an approximate stream distance of 2,518 feet (768 
meters).

[[Page 184]]

    (ii) Note: Map of Cuchillo Negro Warm Springs and Creek Unit 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.037

    (43) Ash and Bolton Springs Unit, Grant County, New Mexico.
    (i) Ash Spring (32.715625 N, 108.071980 W).

[[Page 185]]

    (ii) Unnamed spring in Bolton Canyon locally known as Bolton Springs 
(32.713419 N, 108.099679 W).
    (iii) From the spring box at Ash Spring (32.715625 N, 108.071980 W) 
downstream to a dirt road crossing of the drainage (32.708769 N, 
108.073579 W), an approximate stream distance of 2,830 feet (863 
meters).
    (iv) From the ruins of a house in the Ash Spring drainage (32.714562 
N, 108.072542 W) west to a low saddle (32.714373 N, 108.075263 W) and 
directly downslope into an unnamed drainage (32.713983 N, 108.076665 W), 
then downstream in that drainage to its confluence with another unnamed 
drainage (32.712829 N, 108.078131 W), then downstream in that unnamed 
drainage to its confluence with another unnamed drainage (32.708210 N, 
108.086360 W), then upstream in that unnamed drainage to the top of that 
drainage (32.715476 N, 108.087719 W) and directly downslope and west to 
another unnamed drainage (32.715207 N, 108.092094 W), then downstream in 
that unnamed drainage to its confluence with Bolton Canyon (32.707844 N, 
108.099267 W), and then upstream in Bolton Canyon to the locally known 
Bolton Springs (32.713419 N, 108.099679 W), an approximate distance of 
2.41 drainage miles (3.87 kilometers) and 2,650 feet (808 meters) 
overland.
    (v) Note: Map of Ash and Bolton Springs Unit follows:

[[Page 186]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.038

    (44) Mimbres River Unit, Grant County, New Mexico.
    (i) The Mimbres River from the northern boundary of The Nature 
Conservancy's Mimbres River Preserve property (32.912474 N, 108.004529 
W) downstream to its confluence with Bear Canyon (32.883926 N, 
107.988252 W), to include Moreno Spring (32.887107 N, 107.989492 W) and 
ponds at Milagros Ranch, an approximate river distance of 2.42 miles 
(3.89 kilometers).

[[Page 187]]

    (ii) The Mimbres River from the bridge just west of the town of San 
Lorenzo (32.808190 N, 107.924589 W) downstream to its intersection with 
the southern boundary of The Nature Conservancy's Disert property near 
Faywood (32.743884 N, 107.880297 W), an approximate river distance of 
5.82 miles (9.36 kilometers).
    (iii) Note: Map of Mimbres River Unit follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MR12.039
    

[[Page 188]]



                     Dusky Gopher Frog (Rana sevosa)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for St. Tammany Parish, 
Louisiana, and Forrest, Harrison, Jackson, and Perry Counties in 
Mississippi, on the maps below.
    (2) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements of the 
physical or biological features essential to the conservation of the 
dusky gopher frog are:
    (i) Ephemeral wetland habitat. Breeding ponds, geographically 
isolated from other waterbodies and embedded in forests historically 
dominated by longleaf pine communities, that are small (generally <0.4 
to 4.0 hectares (<1 to 10 acres)), ephemeral, and acidic. Specific 
conditions necessary in breeding ponds to allow for successful 
reproduction of dusky gopher frogs are:
    (A) An open canopy with emergent herbaceous vegetation for egg 
attachment;
    (B) An absence of large, predatory fish that prey on frog larvae;
    (C) Water quality such that frogs, their eggs, or larvae are not 
exposed to pesticides or chemicals and sediment associated with road 
runoff; and
    (D) Surface water that lasts for a minimum of 195 days during the 
breeding season to allow a sufficient period for larvae to hatch, 
mature, and metamorphose.
    (ii) Upland forested nonbreeding habitat. Forests historically 
dominated by longleaf pine, adjacent to and accessible to and from 
breeding ponds, that are maintained by fires frequent enough to support 
an open canopy and abundant herbaceous ground cover and gopher tortoise 
burrows, small mammal burrows, stump holes, or other underground habitat 
that the dusky gopher frog depends upon for food, shelter, and 
protection from the elements and predation.
    (iii) Upland connectivity habitat. Accessible upland habitat between 
breeding and nonbreeding habitats to allow for dusky gopher frog 
movements between and among such sites. This habitat is characterized by 
an open canopy, abundant native herbaceous species, and a subsurface 
structure that provides shelter for dusky gopher frogs during seasonal 
movements, such as that created by deep litter cover, clumps of grass, 
or burrows.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, runways, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat unit maps. Data layers defining map units were 
developed from USGS 7.5' quadrangles, and critical habitat units were 
then mapped using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates.
    (5)  Note: Index map of the critical habitat units for the dusky 
gopher frog follows:

[[Page 189]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JN12.000

    (6) Unit 1: St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle map Hickory, Louisiana. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD 83 coordinates, (E, N): 
228777, 3368004; 229406, 3365105; 229384, 3365104; 229362, 3365105; 
229339, 3365106; 229317, 365108; 229295, 3365110; 229273, 3365114; 
229252, 3365118; 229230, 3365123; 229209, 3365129; 229188, 3365136; 
229167, 3365143; 229146, 3365151; 229126, 3365160; 229106, 3365170; 
229086, 3365180; 229067, 3365191; 229048, 3365203; 229030, 3365215; 
229012, 3365228; 228994, 3365242; 228977, 3365256; 228961, 3365271; 
228945, 3365286; 228929, 3365302; 228914, 3365318; 228900, 3365335; 
228887, 3365353;

[[Page 190]]

228874, 3365371; 228861, 3365389; 228850, 3365408; 228839, 3365428; 
228828, 3365447; 228819, 3365467; 228810, 3365487; 228802, 3365508; 
228794, 3365529; 228788, 3365550; 228782, 3365572; 228777, 3365593; 
228773, 3365615; 228769, 3365637; 228766, 3365659; 228764, 3365681; 
228763, 3365700; 228688, 3366732; 228321, 3367548; 227537, 3368623; 
227307, 3368893; 227292, 3368909; 227278, 3368926; 227264, 3368944; 
227251, 3368962; 227239, 3368980; 227227, 3368999; 227216, 3369018; 
227206, 3369038; 227196, 3369058; 227187, 3369078; 227179, 3369099; 
227172, 3369120; 227165, 3369141; 227159, 3369163; 227154, 3369184; 
227150, 3369206; 227146, 3369228; 227144, 3369250; 227142, 3369272; 
227140, 3369294; 227140, 3369316; 227140, 3369338; 227142, 3369360; 
227144, 3369382; 227146, 3369404; 227150, 3369426; 227154, 3369448; 
227159, 3369470; 227165, 3369491; 227172, 3369512; 227179, 3369533; 
227187, 3369554; 227196, 3369574; 227206, 3369594; 227216, 3369614; 
227227, 3369633; 227239, 3369652; 227251, 3369670; 227264, 3369688; 
227278, 3369706; 227292, 3369723; 227307, 3369739; 227322, 3369755; 
227338, 3369771; 227354, 3369785; 227371, 3369800; 227389, 3369813; 
227407, 3369826; 227425, 3369839; 227444, 3369850; 227463, 3369861; 
227483, 3369871; 227503, 3369881; 227523, 3369890; 227544, 3369898; 
227565, 3369905; 227586, 3369912; 227608, 3369918; 227629, 3369923; 
227651, 3369927; 227673, 3369931; 227695, 3369934; 227717, 3369936; 
227739, 3369937; 227761, 3369937; 227783, 3369937; 227805, 3369936; 
227827, 3369934; 227849, 3369931; 227871, 3369927; 227893, 3369923; 
227915, 3369918; 227936, 3369912; 227957, 3369905; 227978, 3369898; 
227999, 3369890; 228019, 3369881; 228039, 3369871; 228059, 3369861; 
228078, 3369850; 228097, 3369839; 228115, 3369826; 228133, 3369813; 
228151, 3369800; 228168, 3369785; 228184, 3369771; 228200, 3369755; 
228216, 3369739; 228230, 3369723; 228245, 3369706; 228254, 3369693; 
228903, 3368930; 228918, 3368913; 228932, 3368896; 228946, 3368879; 
228959, 3368861; 228971, 3368843; 228983, 3368824; 229573, 3367995; 
229585, 3367977; 229597, 3367958; 229608, 3367938; 229618, 3367919; 
229628, 3367899; 229636, 3367878; 229645, 3367858; 229652, 3367837; 
229659, 3367816; 229664, 3367794; 229670, 3367773; 229674, 3367751; 
229677, 3367729; 229679, 3367716; 229989, 3365862; 229990, 3365857; 
229995, 3365835; 229998, 3365814; 230001, 3365792; 230003, 3365769; 
230004, 3365747; 230005, 3365725; 230004, 3365703; 230003, 3365681; 
230001, 3365659; 229998, 3365637; 229995, 3365615; 229990, 3365593; 
229985, 3365572; 229980, 3365550; 229973, 3365529; 229966, 3365508; 
229957, 3365487; 229949, 3365467; 229939, 3365447; 229929, 3365428; 
229918, 3365408; 229906, 3365389; 229894, 3365371; 229881, 3365353; 
229867, 3365335; 229853, 3365318; 229838, 3365302; 229823, 3365286; 
229807, 3365271; 229790, 3365256; 229773, 3365242; 229756, 3365228; 
229738, 3365215; 229719, 3365203; 229701, 3365191; 229681, 3365180; 
229662, 3365170; 229642, 3365160; 229621, 3365151; 229601, 3365143; 
229580, 3365136; 229559, 3365129; 229537, 3365123; 229516, 3365118; 
229494, 3365114; 229472, 3365110; 229450, 3365108; 229428, 3365106; 
229406, 3365105.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 1 follows:

[[Page 191]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JN12.001

    (7) Unit 2: Harrison County, Mississippi.
    (i) Subunit 2A, Harrison County, Mississippi. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle map Success, Mississippi. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 16N, NAD 83 coordinates, (E, N): 300727, 3382207; 300749, 
3381710; 300727, 3381710; 300705, 3381710; 300683, 3381711; 300661, 
3381713; 300639, 3381716; 300617, 3381720; 300595, 3381724; 300574, 
3381729; 300552, 3381735; 300531, 3381742; 300510, 3381749; 300490, 
3381757; 300469, 3381766; 300449, 3381775; 300430, 3381786; 300410, 
3381797; 300391, 3381808; 300373, 3381821; 300355, 3381834; 300338, 
3381847; 300321, 3381861; 300304, 3381876; 300288, 3381892;

[[Page 192]]

300273, 3381908; 300258, 3381924; 300244, 3381941; 300230, 3381959; 
300217, 3381977; 300205, 3381995; 300193, 3382014; 300182, 3382033; 
300172, 3382053; 300162, 3382073; 300153, 3382093; 300145, 3382114; 
300138, 3382135; 300131, 3382156; 300125, 3382177; 300120, 3382199; 
300116, 3382220; 300113, 3382242; 300110, 3382264; 300108, 3382286; 
300107, 3382309; 300106, 3382331; 300107, 3382353; 300108, 3382375; 
300110, 3382397; 300113, 3382419; 300116, 3382441; 300120, 3382463; 
300123, 3382473; 300125, 3382484; 300131, 3382506; 300138, 3382527; 
300145, 3382548; 300153, 3382568; 300162, 3382589; 300172, 3382609; 
300182, 3382628; 300193, 3382648; 300205, 3382666; 300217, 3382685; 
300230, 3382703; 300244, 3382720; 300258, 3382737; 300273, 3382754; 
300288, 3382770; 300304, 3382785; 300321, 3382800; 300338, 3382814; 
300355, 3382828; 300373, 3382841; 300391, 3382853; 300410, 3382865; 
300430, 3382876; 300449, 3382886; 300469, 3382896; 300490, 3382904; 
300510, 3382913; 300531, 3382920; 300552, 3382927; 300574, 3382932; 
300595, 3382938; 300617, 3382942; 300639, 3382945; 300661, 3382948; 
300661, 3382948; 300683, 3382950; 300705, 3382951; 300727, 3382952; 
300749, 3382951; 300772, 3382950; 300794, 3382948; 300816, 3382945; 
300837, 3382942; 300859, 3382938; 300881, 3382932; 300902, 3382927; 
300923, 3382920; 300944, 3382913; 300965, 3382904; 300985, 3382896; 
301005, 3382886; 301025, 3382876; 301044, 3382865; 301063, 3382853; 
301081, 3382841; 301099, 3382828; 301117, 3382814; 301134, 3382800; 
301150, 3382785; 301166, 3382770; 301182, 3382754; 301197, 3382737; 
301203, 3382729; 301211, 3382720; 301224, 3382703; 301237, 3382685; 
301250, 3382666; 301261, 3382648; 301272, 3382628; 301283, 3382609; 
301292, 3382589; 301301, 3382568; 301309, 3382548; 301316, 3382527; 
301317, 3382524; 301323, 3382506; 301329, 3382484; 301334, 3382463; 
301338, 3382441; 301342, 3382419; 301345, 3382397; 301347, 3382375; 
301348, 3382353; 301348, 3382331; 301348, 3382309; 301347, 3382286; 
301345, 3382264; 301342, 3382242; 301338, 3382220; 301334, 3382199; 
301329, 3382177; 301323, 3382156; 301316, 3382135; 301309, 3382114; 
301301, 3382093; 301292, 3382073; 301283, 3382053; 301272, 3382033; 
301261, 3382014; 301250, 3381995; 301237, 3381977; 301224, 3381959; 
301211, 3381941; 301197, 3381924; 301182, 3381908; 301166, 3381892; 
301150, 3381876; 301134, 3381861; 301117, 3381847; 301099, 3381834; 
301081, 3381821; 301063, 3381808; 301044, 3381797; 301025, 3381786; 
301005, 3381775; 300985, 3381766; 300965, 3381757; 300944, 3381749; 
300923, 3381742; 300902, 3381735; 300881, 3381729; 300859, 3381724; 
300837, 3381720; 300816, 3381716; 300794, 3381713; 300772, 3381711; 
300749, 3381710.
    (ii) Subunit 2B, Harrison County, Mississippi. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle map Success, Mississippi. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 16N, NAD 83 coordinates, (E, N): 301340, 3381104; 301399, 
3382522; 302686, 3381163; 302704, 3381151; 302722, 3381138; 302740, 
3381124; 302757, 3381110; 302773, 3381095; 302789, 3381080; 302804, 
3381064; 302819, 3381048; 302833, 3381031; 302847, 3381013; 302860, 
3380995; 302872, 3380977; 302884, 3380958; 302895, 3380939; 302905, 
3380919; 302915, 3380899; 302924, 3380879; 302932, 3380858; 302939, 
3380837; 302946, 3380816; 302952, 3380794; 302957, 3380773; 302961, 
3380751; 302965, 3380729; 302967, 3380707; 302969, 3380685; 302969, 
3380684; 302970, 3380663; 302971, 3380641; 302970, 3380619; 302969, 
3380597; 302967, 3380575; 302965, 3380553; 302961, 3380531; 302957, 
3380509; 302952, 3380487; 302950, 3380482; 302946, 3380466; 302939, 
3380445; 302932, 3380424; 302924, 3380403; 302915, 3380383; 302905, 
3380363; 302895, 3380343; 302884, 3380324; 302872, 3380305; 302860, 
3380287; 302847, 3380269; 302833, 3380251; 302819, 3380234; 302804, 
3380218; 302789, 3380202; 302773, 3380186; 302757, 3380172; 302740, 
3380157; 302722, 3380144; 302704, 3380131; 302686, 3380118; 302667, 
3380107; 302647, 3380096; 302628, 3380086; 302608, 3380076; 302588, 
3380067; 302567, 3380059; 302546, 3380052; 302525, 3380045; 302503, 
3380039; 302482, 3380034; 302460, 3380030; 302438, 3380026; 302416, 
3380023; 302394, 3380022; 302372, 3380020; 302350, 3380020; 302328, 
3380020; 302306, 3380022; 302283, 3380023; 302261, 3380026; 302240, 
3380030; 302218, 3380034; 302196, 3380039; 302175, 3380045; 302154, 
3380052; 302133, 3380059; 302112, 3380067; 302092, 3380076; 300268, 
3380807; 300247, 3380814; 300226, 3380822; 300206, 3380831; 300186, 
3380841; 300166, 3380851; 300147, 3380862; 300128, 3380873; 300110, 
3380886; 300092, 3380899; 300074, 3380912; 300057, 3380927; 300041, 
3380941; 300025, 3380957; 300009, 3380973; 299994, 3380989; 299980, 
3381006; 299967, 3381024; 299954, 3381042; 299941, 3381060; 299930, 
3381079; 299919, 3381098; 299908, 3381118; 299899, 3381138; 299890, 
3381158; 299882, 3381179; 299875, 3381200; 299868, 3381221; 299862, 
3381242; 299857, 3381264; 299853, 3381286; 299849, 3381307; 299846, 
3381329; 299844, 3381352; 299843, 3381374; 299843, 3381396; 299843, 
3381418; 299844, 3381440; 299846, 3381462; 299849, 3381484; 299853, 
3381506; 299857, 3381528; 299862, 3381549; 299868, 3381571; 299875, 
3381592; 299877, 3381598; 300078, 3382312; 300123, 3382473; 300120, 
3382463; 300116, 3382441; 300113, 3382419; 300110, 3382397; 300108, 
3382375; 300107, 3382353; 300106, 3382331; 300107, 3382309; 300108, 
3382286; 300110, 3382264; 300113, 3382242; 300116, 3382220; 300120, 
3382199; 300125, 3382177; 300131, 3382156; 300138, 3382135; 300145, 
3382114; 300153, 3382093; 300162, 3382073; 300172, 3382053; 300182, 
3382033; 300193, 3382014; 300205, 3381995; 300217, 3381977; 300230, 
3381959; 300244, 3381941; 300258, 3381924; 300273, 3381908; 300288, 
3381892; 300304, 3381876; 300321, 3381861; 300338, 3381847; 300355, 
3381834; 300373, 3381821; 300391, 3381808; 300410, 3381797; 300430, 
3381786; 300449, 3381775; 300469, 3381766; 300490, 3381757; 300510, 
3381749; 300531, 3381742; 300552, 3381735; 300574, 3381729; 300595, 
3381724; 300617, 3381720; 300639, 3381716; 300661, 3381713; 300683, 
3381711; 300705, 3381710; 300727, 3381710; 300749, 3381710; 300772, 
3381711; 300794, 3381713; 300816, 3381716; 300837, 3381720; 300859, 
3381724; 300881, 3381729; 300902, 3381735; 300923, 3381742; 300944, 
3381749; 300965, 3381757; 300985, 3381766; 301005, 3381775; 301025, 
3381786; 301044, 3381797; 301063, 3381808; 301081, 3381821; 301099, 
3381834; 301117, 3381847; 301134, 3381861; 301150, 3381876; 301166, 
3381892; 301182, 3381908; 301197, 3381924; 301211, 3381941; 301224, 
3381959; 301237, 3381977; 301250, 3381995; 301261, 3382014; 301272, 
3382033; 301283, 3382053; 301292, 3382073; 301301, 3382093; 301309, 
3382114; 301316, 3382135; 301323, 3382156; 301329, 3382177; 301334, 
3382199; 301338, 3382220; 301342, 3382242; 301345, 3382264;

[[Page 193]]

301347, 3382286; 301348, 3382309; 301348, 3382331; 301348, 3382353; 
301347, 3382375; 301345, 3382397; 301342, 3382419; 301338, 3382441; 
301334, 3382463; 301329, 3382484; 301323, 3382506; 301317, 3382524; 
301316, 3382527; 301309, 3382548; 301301, 3382568; 301292, 3382589; 
301283, 3382609; 301272, 3382628; 301261, 3382648; 301250, 3382666; 
301237, 3382685; 301224, 3382703; 301211, 3382720; 301203, 3382729; 
301399, 3382522.
    (iii) Note: Map of Units 2 and 3 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JN12.002
    

[[Page 194]]


    (8) Unit 3: Harrison County, Mississippi.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle map White Plains, 
Mississippi. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD 83 
coordinates, (E, N): 311835, 3385625; 311857, 3385128; 311835, 3385128; 
311812, 3385128; 311790, 3385130; 311768, 3385132; 311746, 3385134; 
311724, 3385138; 311703, 3385142; 311681, 3385147; 311660, 3385153; 
311639, 3385160; 311618, 3385167; 311597, 3385175; 311577, 3385184; 
311557, 3385194; 311537, 3385204; 311518, 3385215; 311499, 3385227; 
311480, 3385239; 311462, 3385252; 311445, 3385265; 311428, 3385280; 
311411, 3385295; 311396, 3385310; 311380, 3385326; 311365, 3385342; 
311351, 3385359; 311338, 3385377; 311325, 3385395; 311312, 3385413; 
311301, 3385432; 311290, 3385451; 311279, 3385471; 311270, 3385491; 
311261, 3385511; 311253, 3385532; 311245, 3385553; 311239, 3385574; 
311233, 3385595; 311228, 3385617; 311224, 3385639; 311220, 3385661; 
311217, 3385683; 311215, 3385705; 311214, 3385727; 311214, 3385749; 
311214, 3385771; 311215, 3385793; 311217, 3385815; 311220, 3385837; 
311224, 3385859; 311228, 3385881; 311233, 3385903; 311239, 3385924; 
311245, 3385945; 311253, 3385966; 311261, 3385987; 311270, 3386007; 
311279, 3386027; 311290, 3386047; 311301, 3386066; 311312, 3386085; 
311325, 3386103; 311338, 3386121; 311351, 3386139; 311365, 3386156; 
311380, 3386172; 311396, 3386188; 311411, 3386204; 311428, 3386218; 
311445, 3386233; 311462, 3386246; 311480, 3386259; 311499, 3386271; 
311518, 3386283; 311537, 3386294; 311557, 3386304; 311577, 3386314; 
311597, 3386323; 311618, 3386331; 311639, 3386338; 311660, 3386345; 
311681, 3386351; 311703, 3386356; 311724, 3386360; 311746, 3386364; 
311768, 3386366; 311790, 3386368; 311812, 3386370; 311835, 3386370; 
311857, 3386370; 311879, 3386368; 311901, 3386366; 311923, 3386364; 
311945, 3386360; 311967, 3386356; 311988, 3386351; 312010, 3386345; 
312031, 3386338; 312052, 3386331; 312072, 3386323; 312093, 3386314; 
312113, 3386304; 312132, 3386294; 312152, 3386283; 312170, 3386271; 
312189, 3386259; 312207, 3386246; 312224, 3386233; 312241, 3386218; 
312258, 3386204; 312274, 3386188; 312289, 3386172; 312304, 3386156; 
312318, 3386139; 312332, 3386121; 312345, 3386103; 312357, 3386085; 
312369, 3386066; 312380, 3386047; 312390, 3386027; 312400, 3386007; 
312408, 3385987; 312416, 3385966; 312424, 3385945; 312430, 3385924; 
312436, 3385903; 312441, 3385881; 312446, 3385859; 312449, 3385837; 
312452, 3385815; 312454, 3385793; 312455, 3385771; 312456, 3385749; 
312455, 3385727; 312454, 3385705; 312452, 3385683; 312449, 3385661; 
312446, 3385639; 312441, 3385617; 312436, 3385595; 312430, 3385574; 
312424, 3385553; 312416, 3385532; 312408, 3385511; 312400, 3385491; 
312390, 3385471; 312380, 3385451; 312369, 3385432; 312357, 3385413; 
312345, 3385395; 312332, 3385377; 312318, 3385359; 312304, 3385342; 
312289, 3385326; 312274, 3385310; 312258, 3385295; 312241, 3385280; 
312224, 3385265; 312207, 3385252; 312189, 3385239; 312170, 3385227; 
312152, 3385215; 312132, 3385204; 312113, 3385194; 312093, 3385184; 
312072, 3385175; 312052, 3385167; 312031, 3385160; 312010, 3385153; 
311988, 3385147; 311967, 3385142; 311945, 3385138; 311923, 3385134; 
311901, 3385132; 311879, 3385130; 311857, 3385128.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 3 is provided at paragraph (7)(iii) of this 
entry.
    (9) Unit 4: Jackson County, Mississippi.
    (i) Subunit 4A. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Gauthier 
North, Mississippi. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD 83 
coordinates, (E, N): 333109, 3370810; 333632, 3370599; 333619, 3370580; 
333606, 3370562; 333593, 3370545; 333579, 3370528; 333564, 3370511; 
333548, 3370495; 333532, 3370480; 333516, 3370465; 333499, 3370451; 
333481, 3370437; 333463, 3370425; 333445, 3370412; 333426, 3370401; 
333407, 3370390; 333387, 3370379; 333367, 3370370; 333347, 3370361; 
333326, 3370353; 333305, 3370345; 333284, 3370339; 333263, 3370333; 
333241, 3370328; 333220, 3370323; 333198, 3370320; 333176, 3370317; 
333154, 3370315; 333131, 3370314; 333109, 3370314; 333087, 3370314; 
333065, 3370315; 333043, 3370317; 333021, 3370320; 332999, 3370323; 
332977, 3370328; 332956, 3370333; 332934, 3370339; 332913, 3370345; 
332892, 3370353; 332872, 3370361; 332851, 3370370; 332831, 3370379; 
332812, 3370390; 332792, 3370401; 332774, 3370412; 332755, 3370425; 
332737, 3370437; 332720, 3370451; 332703, 3370465; 332686, 3370480; 
332670, 3370495; 332655, 3370511; 332640, 3370528; 332626, 3370545; 
332612, 3370562; 332599, 3370580; 332587, 3370599; 332575, 3370618; 
332564, 3370637; 332554, 3370657; 332544, 3370677; 332536, 3370697; 
332527, 3370718; 332520, 3370739; 332513, 3370760; 332508, 3370781; 
332502, 3370803; 332498, 3370824; 332495, 3370846; 332492, 3370868; 
332490, 3370890; 332489, 3370912; 332488, 3370935; 332489, 3370957; 
332490, 3370979; 332492, 3371001; 332495, 3371023; 332498, 3371045; 
332502, 3371067; 332508, 3371088; 332513, 3371110; 332520, 3371131; 
332527, 3371152; 332536, 3371172; 332544, 3371193; 332554, 3371213; 
332564, 3371232; 332575, 3371251; 332587, 3371270; 332599, 3371289; 
332612, 3371307; 332626, 3371324; 332640, 3371341; 332655, 3371358; 
332670, 3371374; 332686, 3371389; 332703, 3371404; 332720, 3371418; 
332737, 3371432; 332755, 3371445; 332766, 3371452; 332774, 3371457; 
332792, 3371469; 332812, 3371480; 332831, 3371490; 332851, 3371499; 
332872, 3371508; 332892, 3371516; 332913, 3371524; 332934, 3371530; 
332956, 3371536; 332977, 3371541; 332999, 3371546; 333021, 3371549; 
333043, 3371552; 333065, 3371554; 333087, 3371555; 333109, 3371556; 
333131, 3371555; 333154, 3371554; 333176, 3371552; 333198, 3371549; 
333220, 3371546; 333241, 3371541; 333263, 3371536; 333284, 3371530; 
333305, 3371524; 333326, 3371516; 333347, 3371508; 333367, 3371499; 
333387, 3371490; 333407, 3371480; 333426, 3371469; 333445, 3371457; 
333463, 3371445; 333481, 3371432; 333499, 3371418; 333516, 3371404; 
333532, 3371389; 333548, 3371374; 333564, 3371358; 333579, 3371341; 
333593, 3371324; 333606, 3371307; 333619, 3371289; 333632, 3371270; 
333643, 3371251; 333654, 3371232; 333665, 3371213; 333674, 3371193; 
333683, 3371172; 333691, 3371152; 333699, 3371131; 333705, 3371110; 
333711, 3371088; 333716, 3371067; 333720, 3371045; 333724, 3371023; 
333727, 3371001; 333729, 3370979; 333730, 3370957; 333730, 3370935; 
333730, 3370912; 333729, 3370890; 333727, 3370868; 333724, 3370846; 
333720, 3370824; 333716, 3370803; 333711, 3370781; 333705, 3370760; 
333699, 3370739; 333691, 3370718; 333683, 3370697; 333674, 3370677; 
333665, 3370657; 333654, 3370637; 333643, 3370618; 333632, 3370599.
    (ii) Subunit 4B. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Gauthier 
North and Ocean Springs, Mississippi. Land bounded by the

[[Page 195]]

following UTM Zone 16N, NAD 83 coordinates, (E, N): 332162, 3370411; 
332175, 3369717; 331717, 3369908; 331711, 3369915; 331696, 3369932; 
331682, 3369949; 331668, 3369966; 331655, 3369984; 331643, 3370003; 
331631, 3370021; 331621, 3370041; 331610, 3370060; 331601, 3370080; 
331592, 3370101; 331584, 3370121; 331576, 3370142; 331570, 3370163; 
331564, 3370185; 331559, 3370206; 331554, 3370228; 331551, 3370250; 
331548, 3370272; 331546, 3370294; 331545, 3370316; 331545, 3370338; 
331545, 3370360; 331546, 3370383; 331548, 3370405; 331551, 3370427; 
331554, 3370448; 331559, 3370470; 331564, 3370492; 331570, 3370513; 
331576, 3370534; 331584, 3370555; 331592, 3370576; 331601, 3370596; 
331610, 3370616; 331621, 3370636; 331631, 3370655; 331643, 3370674; 
331655, 3370692; 331668, 3370710; 331682, 3370728; 331696, 3370745; 
331711, 3370761; 331726, 3370777; 331742, 3370793; 331759, 3370808; 
331776, 3370822; 331793, 3370835; 331811, 3370848; 331830, 3370861; 
331849, 3370872; 332766, 3371452; 332755, 3371445; 332737, 3371432; 
332720, 3371418; 332703, 3371404; 332686, 3371389; 332670, 3371374; 
332655, 3371358; 332640, 3371341; 332626, 3371324; 332612, 3371307; 
332599, 3371289; 332587, 3371270; 332575, 3371251; 332564, 3371232; 
332554, 3371213; 332544, 3371193; 332536, 3371172; 332527, 3371152; 
332520, 3371131; 332513, 3371110; 332508, 3371088; 332502, 3371067; 
332498, 3371045; 332495, 3371023; 332492, 3371001; 332490, 3370979; 
332489, 3370957; 332488, 3370935; 332489, 3370912; 332490, 3370890; 
332492, 3370868; 332495, 3370846; 332498, 3370824; 332502, 3370803; 
332508, 3370781; 332513, 3370760; 332520, 3370739; 332527, 3370718; 
332536, 3370697; 332544, 3370677; 332554, 3370657; 332564, 3370637; 
332575, 3370618; 332587, 3370599; 332599, 3370580; 332612, 3370562; 
332626, 3370545; 332640, 3370528; 332655, 3370511; 332670, 3370495; 
332686, 3370480; 332703, 3370465; 332720, 3370451; 332737, 3370437; 
332755, 3370425; 332774, 3370412; 332792, 3370401; 332812, 3370390; 
332831, 3370379; 332851, 3370370; 332872, 3370361; 332892, 3370353; 
332913, 3370345; 332934, 3370339; 332956, 3370333; 332977, 3370328; 
332999, 3370323; 333021, 3370320; 333043, 3370317; 333065, 3370315; 
333087, 3370314; 333109, 3370314; 333131, 3370314; 333154, 3370315; 
333176, 3370317; 333198, 3370320; 333220, 3370323; 333241, 3370328; 
333263, 3370333; 333284, 3370339; 333305, 3370345; 333326, 3370353; 
333347, 3370361; 333367, 3370370; 333387, 3370379; 333407, 3370390; 
333426, 3370401; 333445, 3370412; 333463, 3370425; 333481, 3370437; 
333499, 3370451; 333516, 3370465; 333532, 3370480; 333548, 3370495; 
333564, 3370511; 333579, 3370528; 333593, 3370545; 333606, 3370562; 
333619, 3370580; 333632, 3370599; 333366, 3370173; 333359, 3370159; 
333348, 3370140; 333336, 3370121; 333324, 3370103; 333311, 3370085; 
333297, 3370067; 333283, 3370050; 333268, 3370034; 333253, 3370018; 
333237, 3370002; 333220, 3369987; 333203, 3369973; 333186, 3369960; 
333168, 3369947; 333149, 3369934; 333131, 3369923; 333111, 3369912; 
333092, 3369901; 333072, 3369892; 333051, 3369883; 333031, 3369875; 
333010, 3369868; 332989, 3369861; 332967, 3369855; 332946, 3369850; 
332924, 3369846; 332902, 3369842; 332880, 3369839; 332867, 3369838; 
332303, 3369733; 332298, 3369731; 332276, 3369727; 332254, 3369724; 
332232, 3369721; 332210, 3369719; 332188, 3369718; 332175, 3369717.
    (iii) Note: Map of Units 4, 5, and 6 follows:

[[Page 196]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JN12.003

    (10) Unit 5: Jackson County, Mississippi.
    (i) Subunit 5A. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Latimer, 
Mississippi. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD 83 
coordinates, (E, N): 331312, 3381629; 331800, 3382137; 331809, 3382125; 
331822, 3382107; 331834, 3382089; 331846, 3382070; 331857, 3382050; 
331867, 3382031; 331877, 3382011; 331886, 3381990; 331894, 3381970; 
331901, 3381949; 331908, 3381928; 331914, 3381906; 331919, 3381885; 
331923, 3381863; 331927, 3381841; 331929, 3381819; 331931, 3381797; 
331932, 3381775; 331933, 3381753; 331932, 3381731;

[[Page 197]]

331931, 3381708; 331929, 3381686; 331927, 3381664; 331923, 3381643; 
331919, 3381621; 331914, 3381599; 331908, 3381578; 331901, 3381557; 
331894, 3381536; 331886, 3381515; 331877, 3381495; 331867, 3381475; 
331857, 3381455; 331846, 3381436; 331834, 3381417; 331822, 3381399; 
331809, 3381381; 331795, 3381363; 331781, 3381346; 331766, 3381330; 
331751, 3381314; 331735, 3381298; 331719, 3381283; 331702, 3381269; 
331684, 3381256; 331666, 3381243; 331648, 3381230; 331629, 3381219; 
331610, 3381208; 331590, 3381197; 331570, 3381188; 331550, 3381179; 
331529, 3381171; 331508, 3381164; 331487, 3381157; 331465, 3381151; 
331444, 3381146; 331422, 3381142; 331400, 3381138; 331378, 3381135; 
331356, 3381133; 331334, 3381132; 331312, 3381132; 331290, 3381132; 
331268, 3381133; 331246, 3381135; 331224, 3381138; 331202, 3381142; 
331180, 3381146; 331158, 3381151; 331137, 3381157; 331116, 3381164; 
331095, 3381171; 331074, 3381179; 331054, 3381188; 331034, 3381197; 
331014, 3381208; 330995, 3381219; 330976, 3381230; 330958, 3381243; 
330940, 3381256; 330922, 3381269; 330905, 3381283; 330904, 3381284; 
330889, 3381298; 330873, 3381314; 330857, 3381330; 330843, 3381346; 
330828, 3381363; 330815, 3381381; 330802, 3381399; 330789, 3381417; 
330778, 3381436; 330767, 3381455; 330757, 3381475; 330747, 3381495; 
330738, 3381515; 330730, 3381536; 330723, 3381557; 330716, 3381578; 
330710, 3381599; 330705, 3381621; 330701, 3381643; 330697, 3381664; 
330694, 3381686; 330692, 3381708; 330691, 3381731; 330691, 3381753; 
330691, 3381775; 330692, 3381797; 330694, 3381819; 330697, 3381841; 
330701, 3381863; 330705, 3381885; 330710, 3381906; 330716, 3381928; 
330723, 3381949; 330730, 3381970; 330738, 3381990; 330747, 3382011; 
330757, 3382031; 330767, 3382050; 330778, 3382070; 330789, 3382089; 
330802, 3382107; 330815, 3382125; 330828, 3382142; 330843, 3382159; 
330857, 3382176; 330873, 3382192; 330889, 3382207; 330905, 3382222; 
330922, 3382236; 330940, 3382250; 330958, 3382263; 330976, 3382275; 
330995, 3382287; 331014, 3382298; 331034, 3382308; 331054, 3382318; 
331074, 3382327; 331095, 3382335; 331116, 3382342; 331137, 3382349; 
331158, 3382355; 331180, 3382360; 331202, 3382364; 331224, 3382367; 
331246, 3382370; 331268, 3382372; 331290, 3382373; 331312, 3382374; 
331334, 3382373; 331356, 3382372; 331378, 3382370; 331400, 3382367; 
331422, 3382364; 331444, 3382360; 331465, 3382355; 331487, 3382349; 
331508, 3382342; 331529, 3382335; 331550, 3382327; 331570, 3382318; 
331590, 3382308; 331610, 3382298; 331629, 3382287; 331648, 3382275; 
331666, 3382263; 331684, 3382250; 331702, 3382236; 331719, 3382222; 
331735, 3382207; 331751, 3382192; 331766, 3382176; 331781, 3382159; 
331795, 3382142; 331800, 3382137.
    (ii) Subunit 5B. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Latimer 
and Vancleave, Mississippi. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, 
NAD 83 coordinates, (E, N): 332002, 3381342; 330904, 3381284; 330905, 
3381283; 330922, 3381269; 330940, 3381256; 330958, 3381243; 330976, 
3381230; 330995, 3381219; 331014, 3381208; 331034, 3381197; 331054, 
3381188; 331074, 3381179; 331095, 3381171; 331116, 3381164; 331137, 
3381157; 331158, 3381151; 331180, 3381146; 331202, 3381142; 331224, 
3381138; 331246, 3381135; 331268, 3381133; 331290, 3381132; 331312, 
3381132; 331334, 3381132; 331356, 3381133; 331378, 3381135; 331400, 
3381138; 331422, 3381142; 331444, 3381146; 331465, 3381151; 331487, 
3381157; 331508, 3381164; 331529, 3381171; 331550, 3381179; 331570, 
3381188; 331590, 3381197; 331610, 3381208; 331629, 3381219; 331648, 
3381230; 331666, 3381243; 331684, 3381256; 331702, 3381269; 331719, 
3381283; 331735, 3381298; 331751, 3381314; 331766, 3381330; 331781, 
3381346; 331795, 3381363; 331809, 3381381; 331822, 3381399; 331834, 
3381417; 331846, 3381436; 331857, 3381455; 331867, 3381475; 331877, 
3381495; 331886, 3381515; 331894, 3381536; 331901, 3381557; 331908, 
3381578; 331914, 3381599; 331919, 3381621; 331923, 3381643; 331927, 
3381664; 331929, 3381686; 331931, 3381708; 331932, 3381731; 331933, 
3381753; 331932, 3381775; 331931, 3381797; 331929, 3381819; 331927, 
3381841; 331923, 3381863; 331919, 3381885; 331914, 3381906; 331908, 
3381928; 331901, 3381949; 331894, 3381970; 331886, 3381990; 331877, 
3382011; 331867, 3382031; 331857, 3382050; 331846, 3382070; 331834, 
3382089; 331822, 3382107; 331809, 3382125; 331800, 3382137; 332044, 
3381881; 332052, 3381873; 332067, 3381857; 332082, 3381840; 332096, 
3381823; 332110, 3381806; 332123, 3381788; 332135, 3381769; 332147, 
3381750; 332158, 3381731; 332168, 3381711; 332178, 3381691; 332187, 
3381671; 332195, 3381650; 332202, 3381630; 332209, 3381608; 332215, 
3381587; 332220, 3381565; 332224, 3381544; 332228, 3381522; 332230, 
3381500; 332232, 3381478; 332234, 3381456; 332234, 3381433; 332234, 
3381411; 332232, 3381389; 332230, 3381367; 332228, 3381345; 332224, 
3381323; 332220, 3381301; 332215, 3381280; 332209, 3381258; 332202, 
3381237; 332195, 3381216; 332187, 3381196; 332178, 3381175; 332168, 
3381155; 332158, 3381136; 332147, 3381117; 332135, 3381098; 332123, 
3381079; 332110, 3381061; 332096, 3381044; 332082, 3381027; 332067, 
3381010; 332052, 3380994; 332036, 3380979; 332020, 3380964; 332003, 
3380950; 331985, 3380936; 331967, 3380923; 331949, 3380911; 331930, 
3380899; 331911, 3380888; 331891, 3380878; 331871, 3380869; 331851, 
3380860; 331830, 3380852; 331809, 3380844; 331788, 3380838; 331767, 
3380832; 331745, 3380827; 331723, 3380822; 331701, 3380819; 331679, 
3380816; 331657, 3380814; 331635, 3380813; 331613, 3380812; 331591, 
3380813; 331569, 3380814; 331547, 3380816; 331525, 3380819; 331503, 
3380822; 331481, 3380827; 331459, 3380832; 331438, 3380838; 331417, 
3380844; 331396, 3380852; 331375, 3380860; 331355, 3380869; 331335, 
3380878; 331315, 3380888; 331296, 3380899; 331277, 3380911; 331259, 
3380923; 331241, 3380936; 331223, 3380950; 331206, 3380964; 331190, 
3380979; 331174, 3380994; 331158, 3381010; 331144, 3381027; 331143, 
3381027; 330904, 3381284.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 5 is provided at paragraph (9)(iii) of this 
entry.
    (11) Unit 6: Jackson County, Mississippi.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Vancleave, Mississippi. 
Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD 83 coordinates, (E, N): 
343468, 3381436; 343490, 3380939; 343468, 3380939; 343446, 3380939; 
343424, 3380940; 343402, 3380942; 343380, 3380945; 343358, 3380949; 
343336, 3380953; 343314, 3380958; 343293, 3380964; 343272, 3380971; 
343251, 3380978; 343230, 3380986; 343210, 3380995; 343190, 3381005; 
343170, 3381015; 343151, 3381026; 343132, 3381037; 343114, 3381050; 
343096, 3381063; 343078, 3381076; 343061, 3381091; 343045, 3381105; 
343029, 3381121; 343014, 3381137; 342999, 3381153; 342984, 3381170; 
342971, 3381188; 342958, 3381206; 342946, 3381224; 342934,

[[Page 198]]

3381243; 342923, 3381262; 342913, 3381282; 342903, 3381302; 342894, 
3381322; 342886, 3381343; 342879, 3381364; 342872, 3381385; 342866, 
3381406; 342861, 3381428; 342857, 3381450; 342853, 3381472; 342851, 
3381493; 342849, 3381516; 342847, 3381538; 342847, 3381560; 342847, 
3381582; 342849, 3381604; 342851, 3381626; 342853, 3381648; 342857, 
3381670; 342861, 3381692; 342866, 3381713; 342872, 3381735; 342879, 
3381756; 342886, 3381777; 342894, 3381798; 342903, 3381818; 342913, 
3381838; 342923, 3381857; 342934, 3381877; 342946, 3381896; 342958, 
3381914; 342971, 3381932; 342984, 3381950; 342999, 3381967; 343014, 
3381983; 343029, 3381999; 343045, 3382014; 343061, 3382029; 343078, 
3382043; 343096, 3382057; 343114, 3382070; 343132, 3382082; 343151, 
3382094; 343170, 3382105; 343190, 3382115; 343210, 3382125; 343230, 
3382134; 343251, 3382142; 343272, 3382149; 343293, 3382156; 343314, 
3382162; 343336, 3382167; 343358, 3382171; 343380, 3382175; 343402, 
3382177; 343424, 3382179; 343446, 3382180; 343468, 3382181; 343490, 
3382180; 343512, 3382179; 343534, 3382177; 343556, 3382175; 343578, 
3382171; 343600, 3382167; 343622, 3382162; 343643, 3382156; 343664, 
3382149; 343685, 3382142; 343706, 3382134; 343726, 3382125; 343746, 
3382115; 343766, 3382105; 343785, 3382094; 343804, 3382082; 343822, 
3382070; 343840, 3382057; 343858, 3382043; 343875, 3382029; 343891, 
3382014; 343907, 3381999; 343923, 3381983; 343937, 3381967; 343952, 
3381950; 343965, 3381932; 343978, 3381914; 343990, 3381896; 344002, 
3381877; 344013, 3381857; 344023, 3381838; 344033, 3381818; 344042, 
3381798; 344050, 3381777; 344057, 3381756; 344064, 3381735; 344070, 
3381713; 344075, 3381692; 344079, 3381670; 344083, 3381648; 344085, 
3381626; 344087, 3381604; 344089, 3381582; 344089, 3381560; 344089, 
3381538; 344087, 3381516; 344085, 3381493; 344083, 3381472; 344079, 
3381450; 344075, 3381428; 344070, 3381406; 344064, 3381385; 344057, 
3381364; 344050, 3381343; 344042, 3381322; 344033, 3381302; 344023, 
3381282; 344013, 3381262; 344002, 3381243; 343990, 3381224; 343978, 
3381206; 343965, 3381188; 343952, 3381170; 343937, 3381153; 343923, 
3381137; 343907, 3381121; 343891, 3381105; 343875, 3381091; 343858, 
3381076; 343840, 3381063; 343822, 3381050; 343804, 3381037; 343785, 
3381026; 343766, 3381015; 343746, 3381005; 343726, 3380995; 343706, 
3380986; 343685, 3380978; 343664, 3380971; 343643, 3380964; 343622, 
3380958; 343600, 3380953; 343578, 3380949; 343556, 3380945; 343534, 
3380942; 343512, 3380940; 343490, 3380939.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 6 is provided at paragraph (9)(iii) of this 
entry.
    (12) Unit 7: Jackson County, Mississippi.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Big Point, Mississippi. 
Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD 83 coordinates, (E, N): 
356810, 3377501; 356832, 3377004; 356810, 3377004; 356788, 3377004; 
356766, 3377006; 356744, 3377008; 356722, 3377010; 356700, 3377014; 
356678, 3377018; 356657, 3377023; 356635, 3377029; 356614, 3377036; 
356593, 3377043; 356573, 3377051; 356552, 3377060; 356532, 3377070; 
356513, 3377080; 356493, 3377091; 356474, 3377103; 356456, 3377115; 
356438, 3377128; 356421, 3377142; 356404, 3377156; 356387, 3377171; 
356371, 3377186; 356356, 3377202; 356341, 3377218; 356327, 3377235; 
356313, 3377253; 356300, 3377271; 356288, 3377289; 356276, 3377308; 
356265, 3377327; 356255, 3377347; 356245, 3377367; 356236, 3377387; 
356228, 3377408; 356221, 3377429; 356214, 3377450; 356208, 3377471; 
356203, 3377493; 356199, 3377515; 356196, 3377537; 356193, 3377559; 
356191, 3377581; 356190, 3377603; 356189, 3377625; 356190, 3377647; 
356191, 3377669; 356193, 3377691; 356196, 3377713; 356199, 3377735; 
356203, 3377757; 356208, 3377779; 356214, 3377800; 356221, 3377821; 
356228, 3377842; 356236, 3377863; 356245, 3377883; 356255, 3377903; 
356265, 3377923; 356276, 3377942; 356288, 3377961; 356300, 3377979; 
356313, 3377997; 356327, 3378015; 356341, 3378032; 356356, 3378048; 
356371, 3378064; 356387, 3378080; 356404, 3378094; 356421, 3378109; 
356438, 3378122; 356456, 3378135; 356474, 3378147; 356493, 3378159; 
356513, 3378170; 356532, 3378180; 356552, 3378190; 356573, 3378199; 
356593, 3378207; 356614, 3378214; 356635, 3378221; 356657, 3378227; 
356678, 3378232; 356700, 3378236; 356722, 3378240; 356744, 3378242; 
356766, 3378244; 356788, 3378246; 356810, 3378246; 356832, 3378246; 
356855, 3378244; 356877, 3378242; 356899, 3378240; 356920, 3378236; 
356942, 3378232; 356964, 3378227; 356985, 3378221; 357006, 3378214; 
357027, 3378207; 357048, 3378199; 357068, 3378190; 357088, 3378180; 
357108, 3378170; 357127, 3378159; 357146, 3378147; 357164, 3378135; 
357182, 3378122; 357200, 3378109; 357217, 3378094; 357233, 3378080; 
357249, 3378064; 357265, 3378048; 357280, 3378032; 357294, 3378015; 
357307, 3377997; 357320, 3377979; 357333, 3377961; 357344, 3377942; 
357355, 3377923; 357366, 3377903; 357375, 3377883; 357384, 3377863; 
357392, 3377842; 357399, 3377821; 357406, 3377800; 357412, 3377779; 
357417, 3377757; 357421, 3377735; 357425, 3377713; 357428, 3377691; 
357430, 3377669; 357431, 3377647; 357431, 3377625; 357431, 3377603; 
357430, 3377581; 357428, 3377559; 357425, 3377537; 357421, 3377515; 
357417, 3377493; 357412, 3377471; 357406, 3377450; 357399, 3377429; 
357392, 3377408; 357384, 3377387; 357375, 3377367; 357366, 3377347; 
357355, 3377327; 357344, 3377308; 357333, 3377289; 357320, 3377271; 
357307, 3377253; 357294, 3377235; 357280, 3377218; 357265, 3377202; 
357249, 3377186; 357233, 3377171; 357217, 3377156; 357200, 3377142; 
357182, 3377128; 357164, 3377115; 357146, 3377103; 357127, 3377091; 
357108, 3377080; 357088, 3377070; 357068, 3377060; 357048, 3377051; 
357027, 3377043; 357006, 3377036; 356985, 3377029; 356964, 3377023; 
356942, 3377018; 356920, 3377014; 356899, 3377010; 356877, 3377008; 
356855, 3377006; 356832, 3377004.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 7 follows:

[[Page 199]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JN12.004

    (13) Unit 8: Forrest County, Mississippi.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Brooklyn, Mississippi. 
Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD 83 coordinates, (E, N): 
292305, 3434903; 292328, 3434158; 292305, 3434157; 292283, 3434158; 
292261, 3434159; 292239, 3434161; 292217, 3434164; 292195, 3434167; 
292173, 3434172; 292152, 3434177; 292130, 3434183; 292109, 3434189; 
292088, 3434197; 292068, 3434205; 292047, 3434214; 292027, 3434223; 
292008, 3434233; 291989, 3434244; 291970, 3434256; 291951, 3434268; 
291933, 3434281; 291916, 3434295; 291899, 3434309;

[[Page 200]]

291882, 3434324; 291866, 3434339; 291851, 3434355; 291836, 3434372; 
291822, 3434389; 291808, 3434406; 291795, 3434424; 291783, 3434443; 
291771, 3434462; 291760, 3434481; 291750, 3434501; 291741, 3434521; 
291732, 3434541; 291724, 3434561; 291716, 3434582; 291710, 3434604; 
291704, 3434625; 291699, 3434646; 291694, 3434668; 291691, 3434690; 
291688, 3434712; 291686, 3434734; 291685, 3434756; 291684, 3434778; 
291685, 3434801; 291686, 3434823; 291688, 3434845; 291691, 3434867; 
291694, 3434889; 291699, 3434910; 291704, 3434932; 291710, 3434953; 
291716, 3434975; 291724, 3434996; 291732, 3435016; 291741, 3435036; 
291750, 3435056; 291760, 3435076; 291771, 3435095; 291783, 3435114; 
291795, 3435133; 291808, 3435151; 291822, 3435168; 291836, 3435185; 
291851, 3435202; 291866, 3435218; 291882, 3435233; 291899, 3435248; 
291916, 3435262; 291919, 3435265; 291922, 3435267; 291933, 3435276; 
291951, 3435289; 291970, 3435301; 291989, 3435313; 292008, 3435324; 
292027, 3435334; 292047, 3435343; 292068, 3435352; 292088, 3435360; 
292109, 3435368; 292130, 3435374; 292152, 3435380; 292173, 3435385; 
292195, 3435390; 292217, 3435393; 292239, 3435396; 292261, 3435398; 
292283, 3435399; 292305, 3435399; 292328, 3435399; 292350, 3435398; 
292372, 3435396; 292394, 3435393; 292416, 3435390; 292437, 3435385; 
292459, 3435380; 292480, 3435374; 292502, 3435368; 292522, 3435360; 
292543, 3435352; 292563, 3435343; 292583, 3435334; 292603, 3435324; 
292622, 3435313; 292641, 3435301; 292660, 3435289; 292678, 3435276; 
292695, 3435262; 292712, 3435248; 292729, 3435233; 292745, 3435218; 
292760, 3435202; 292775, 3435185; 292789, 3435168; 292803, 3435151; 
292816, 3435133; 292828, 3435114; 292839, 3435095; 292850, 3435076; 
292861, 3435056; 292870, 3435036; 292879, 3435016; 292887, 3434996; 
292895, 3434975; 292901, 3434953; 292907, 3434932; 292912, 3434910; 
292917, 3434889; 292920, 3434867; 292923, 3434845; 292925, 3434823; 
292926, 3434801; 292926, 3434778; 292926, 3434756; 292925, 3434734; 
292923, 3434712; 292920, 3434690; 292917, 3434668; 292912, 3434646; 
292907, 3434625; 292901, 3434604; 292895, 3434582; 292887, 3434561; 
292879, 3434541; 292870, 3434521; 292861, 3434501; 292850, 3434481; 
292839, 3434462; 292828, 3434443; 292816, 3434424; 292803, 3434406; 
292789, 3434389; 292775, 3434372; 292760, 3434355; 292745, 3434339; 
292729, 3434324; 292712, 3434309; 292695, 3434295; 292678, 3434281; 
292660, 3434268; 292641, 3434256; 292622, 3434244; 292603, 3434233; 
292583, 3434223; 292563, 3434214; 292543, 3434205; 292522, 3434197; 
292502, 3434189; 292480, 3434183; 292459, 3434177; 292437, 3434172; 
292416, 3434167; 292394, 3434164; 292372, 3434161; 292350, 3434159; 
292328, 3434158.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units 8 and 9 follows:

[[Page 201]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JN12.005

    (14) Unit 9: Forrest County, Mississippi.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Brooklyn, Mississippi. 
Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD 83 coordinates, (E, N): 
294462, 3432341; 294484, 3431844; 294462, 3431844; 294439, 3431844; 
294417, 3431845; 294395, 3431847; 294373, 3431850; 294351, 3431854; 
294330, 3431858; 294308, 3431863; 294287, 3431869; 294266, 3431876; 
294245, 3431883; 294224, 3431891; 294204, 3431900; 294184, 3431909; 
294164, 3431920; 294145, 3431931; 294126, 3431942; 294107, 3431955; 
294089, 3431968; 294072, 3431981; 294055, 3431995;

[[Page 202]]

294038, 3432010; 294023, 3432026; 294007, 3432042; 293992, 3432058; 
293978, 3432075; 293964, 3432093; 293952, 3432111; 293939, 3432129; 
293928, 3432148; 293917, 3432167; 293906, 3432187; 293897, 3432207; 
293888, 3432227; 293880, 3432248; 293872, 3432269; 293866, 3432290; 
293860, 3432311; 293855, 3432333; 293850, 3432355; 293847, 3432376; 
293844, 3432398; 293842, 3432420; 293841, 3432443; 293841, 3432465; 
293841, 3432487; 293842, 3432509; 293844, 3432531; 293847, 3432553; 
293850, 3432575; 293855, 3432597; 293860, 3432618; 293866, 3432640; 
293872, 3432661; 293880, 3432682; 293888, 3432702; 293897, 3432723; 
293906, 3432743; 293917, 3432762; 293928, 3432782; 293939, 3432801; 
293952, 3432819; 293964, 3432837; 293978, 3432854; 293992, 3432871; 
294007, 3432888; 294023, 3432904; 294038, 3432919; 294055, 3432934; 
294072, 3432948; 294089, 3432962; 294107, 3432975; 294126, 3432987; 
294145, 3432999; 294164, 3433010; 294184, 3433020; 294204, 3433030; 
294224, 3433039; 294245, 3433047; 294266, 3433054; 294287, 3433061; 
294308, 3433066; 294330, 3433072; 294351, 3433076; 294373, 3433079; 
294395, 3433082; 294417, 3433084; 294439, 3433085; 294462, 3433086; 
294484, 3433085; 294506, 3433084; 294528, 3433082; 294550, 3433079; 
294572, 3433076; 294594, 3433072; 294615, 3433066; 294637, 3433061; 
294658, 3433054; 294679, 3433047; 294699, 3433039; 294720, 3433030; 
294740, 3433020; 294759, 3433010; 294779, 3432999; 294797, 3432987; 
294816, 3432975; 294834, 3432962; 294851, 3432948; 294868, 3432934; 
294885, 3432919; 294901, 3432904; 294916, 3432888; 294931, 3432871; 
294945, 3432854; 294959, 3432837; 294972, 3432819; 294984, 3432801; 
294996, 3432782; 295007, 3432762; 295017, 3432743; 295027, 3432723; 
295035, 3432702; 295043, 3432682; 295051, 3432661; 295057, 3432640; 
295063, 3432618; 295068, 3432597; 295073, 3432575; 295076, 3432553; 
295079, 3432531; 295081, 3432509; 295082, 3432487; 295083, 3432465; 
295082, 3432443; 295081, 3432420; 295079, 3432398; 295076, 3432376; 
295073, 3432355; 295068, 3432333; 295063, 3432311; 295057, 3432290; 
295051, 3432269; 295043, 3432248; 295035, 3432227; 295027, 3432207; 
295017, 3432187; 295007, 3432167; 294996, 3432148; 294984, 3432129; 
294972, 3432111; 294959, 3432093; 294945, 3432075; 294931, 3432058; 
294916, 3432042; 294901, 3432026; 294885, 3432010; 294874, 3432000; 
294868, 3431995; 294851, 3431981; 294834, 3431968; 294816, 3431955; 
294797, 3431942; 294779, 3431931; 294759, 3431920; 294740, 3431909; 
294720, 3431900; 294699, 3431891; 294682, 3431884; 294679, 3431883; 
294658, 3431876; 294637, 3431869; 294615, 3431863; 294594, 3431858; 
294572, 3431854; 294550, 3431850; 294528, 3431847; 294506, 3431845; 
294484, 3431844.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 9 is provided at paragraph (13)(ii) of this 
entry.
    (15) Unit 10: Perry County, Mississippi.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Barbara, Mississippi. 
Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD 83 coordinates, (E, N): 
316810, 3422707; 317164, 3421954; 317142, 3421953; 317119, 3421954; 
317063, 3421956; 316926, 3421961; 316925, 3421961; 316735, 3421968; 
316713, 3421970; 316691, 3421972; 316669, 3421974; 316662, 3421976; 
316647, 3421978; 316626, 3421982; 316604, 3421987; 316583, 3421993; 
316561, 3422000; 316541, 3422007; 316520, 3422015; 316500, 3422024; 
316480, 3422034; 316460, 3422044; 316441, 3422055; 316422, 3422067; 
316403, 3422079; 316385, 3422092; 316368, 3422106; 316351, 3422120; 
316334, 3422135; 316318, 3422150; 316303, 3422166; 316288, 3422182; 
316274, 3422199; 316260, 3422217; 316247, 3422235; 316235, 3422253; 
316223, 3422272; 316212, 3422291; 316202, 3422311; 316193, 3422331; 
316184, 3422351; 316176, 3422372; 316168, 3422393; 316162, 3422414; 
316156, 3422436; 316151, 3422457; 316146, 3422479; 316143, 3422501; 
316140, 3422523; 316138, 3422545; 316137, 3422567; 316137, 3422589; 
316137, 3422611; 316138, 3422633; 316140, 3422655; 316143, 3422677; 
316146, 3422699; 316151, 3422721; 316156, 3422743; 316162, 3422764; 
316168, 3422785; 316176, 3422806; 316184, 3422827; 316193, 3422847; 
316202, 3422867; 316212, 3422887; 316223, 3422906; 316235, 3422925; 
316247, 3422943; 316260, 3422961; 316274, 3422979; 316288, 3422996; 
316303, 3423012; 316318, 3423028; 316334, 3423044; 316351, 3423058; 
316368, 3423073; 316385, 3423086; 316403, 3423099; 316422, 3423112; 
316441, 3423123; 316460, 3423134; 316480, 3423144; 316500, 3423154; 
316520, 3423163; 316541, 3423171; 316561, 3423178; 316583, 3423185; 
316604, 3423191; 316626, 3423196; 316647, 3423200; 316669, 3423204; 
316691, 3423207; 316713, 3423209; 316735, 3423210; 316758, 3423210; 
316780, 3423210; 316802, 3423209; 316804, 3423208; 317147, 3423195; 
317164, 3423195; 317186, 3423194; 317208, 3423192; 317230, 3423189; 
317252, 3423186; 317274, 3423181; 317295, 3423176; 317317, 3423170; 
317338, 3423164; 317359, 3423156; 317379, 3423148; 317400, 3423139; 
317420, 3423130; 317439, 3423119; 317458, 3423108; 317476, 3423097; 
317474, 3422836; 317472, 3422760; 317466, 3422451; 317463, 3422043; 
317458, 3422040; 317439, 3422029; 317420, 3422019; 317400, 3422010; 
317379, 3422001; 317359, 3421993; 317338, 3421985; 317317, 3421979; 
317295, 3421973; 317274, 3421968; 317252, 3421963; 317230, 3421960; 
317208, 3421957; 317186, 3421955; 317164, 3421954.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units 10, 11, and 12 follows:

[[Page 203]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JN12.006

    (16) Unit 11: Perry County, Mississippi.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Barbara and Avent, 
Mississippi. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD 83 
coordinates, (E, N): 320420, 3421781; 320442, 3421285; 320420, 3421284; 
320398, 3421285; 320376, 3421286; 320354, 3421288; 320332, 3421291; 
320310, 3421294; 320288, 3421298; 320267, 3421303; 320245, 3421309; 
320224, 3421316; 320203, 3421323; 320182, 3421331; 320162, 3421340; 
320142, 3421350; 320122, 3421360; 320103, 3421371; 320084, 3421383; 
320066, 3421395; 320048, 3421408; 320030, 3421422;

[[Page 204]]

320013, 3421436; 319997, 3421451; 319981, 3421466; 319966, 3421482; 
319951, 3421499; 319937, 3421516; 319923, 3421533; 319910, 3421551; 
319898, 3421569; 319886, 3421588; 319875, 3421607; 319875, 3421608; 
319865, 3421627; 319855, 3421647; 319846, 3421668; 319838, 3421688; 
319831, 3421709; 319824, 3421730; 319818, 3421752; 319813, 3421773; 
319809, 3421795; 319805, 3421817; 319803, 3421839; 319801, 3421861; 
319800, 3421883; 319799, 3421905; 319800, 3421927; 319801, 3421950; 
319803, 3421972; 319805, 3421994; 319808, 3422007; 319809, 3422015; 
319813, 3422037; 319818, 3422059; 319824, 3422080; 319831, 3422101; 
319838, 3422122; 319846, 3422143; 319855, 3422163; 319865, 3422183; 
319875, 3422203; 319886, 3422222; 319898, 3422241; 319910, 3422259; 
319923, 3422277; 319937, 3422295; 319951, 3422312; 319966, 3422328; 
319981, 3422344; 319997, 3422360; 320013, 3422375; 320030, 3422389; 
320048, 3422402; 320066, 3422415; 320084, 3422428; 320103, 3422439; 
320122, 3422450; 320142, 3422461; 320162, 3422470; 320182, 3422479; 
320203, 3422487; 320224, 3422494; 320245, 3422501; 320267, 3422507; 
320288, 3422512; 320310, 3422516; 320332, 3422520; 320354, 3422523; 
320376, 3422525; 320398, 3422526; 320420, 3422526; 320442, 3422526; 
320464, 3422525; 320486, 3422523; 320508, 3422520; 320530, 3422516; 
320552, 3422512; 320574, 3422507; 320595, 3422501; 320616, 3422494; 
320637, 3422487; 320658, 3422479; 320678, 3422470; 320698, 3422461; 
320718, 3422450; 320737, 3422439; 320756, 3422428; 320774, 3422415; 
320792, 3422402; 320810, 3422389; 320827, 3422375; 320843, 3422360; 
320859, 3422344; 320875, 3422328; 320889, 3422312; 320904, 3422295; 
320917, 3422277; 320930, 3422259; 320943, 3422241; 320954, 3422222; 
320965, 3422203; 320975, 3422183; 320985, 3422163; 320994, 3422143; 
321002, 3422122; 321009, 3422101; 321016, 3422080; 321022, 3422059; 
321027, 3422037; 321031, 3422015; 321035, 3421994; 321038, 3421972; 
321040, 3421950; 321041, 3421927; 321041, 3421905; 321041, 3421883; 
321040, 3421861; 321038, 3421839; 321035, 3421817; 321031, 3421795; 
321027, 3421773; 321022, 3421752; 321016, 3421730; 321009, 3421709; 
321002, 3421688; 320994, 3421668; 320985, 3421647; 320975, 3421627; 
320965, 3421608; 320954, 3421588; 320943, 3421569; 320930, 3421551; 
320917, 3421533; 320904, 3421516; 320889, 3421499; 320875, 3421482; 
320859, 3421466; 320843, 3421451; 320827, 3421436; 320810, 3421422; 
320792, 3421408; 320774, 3421395; 320756, 3421383; 320737, 3421371; 
320718, 3421360; 320698, 3421350; 320678, 3421340; 320658, 3421331; 
320637, 3421323; 320616, 3421316; 320595, 3421309; 320574, 3421303; 
320552, 3421298; 320530, 3421294; 320508, 3421291; 320486, 3421288; 
320464, 3421286; 320442, 3421285.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 11 is provided at paragraph (15)(ii) of this 
entry.
    (17) Unit 12: Perry County, Mississippi.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Barbara, Mississippi. 
Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD 83 coordinates, (E, N): 
320239, 3425675; 320261, 3425178; 320239, 3425178; 320216, 3425178; 
320194, 3425180; 320172, 3425182; 320150, 3425184; 320128, 3425188; 
320107, 3425192; 320085, 3425197; 320064, 3425203; 320042, 3425210; 
320021, 3425217; 320001, 3425225; 319981, 3425234; 319961, 3425244; 
319941, 3425254; 319922, 3425265; 319903, 3425277; 319884, 3425289; 
319866, 3425302; 319849, 3425315; 319832, 3425330; 319815, 3425344; 
319799, 3425360; 319784, 3425376; 319769, 3425392; 319755, 3425409; 
319741, 3425427; 319728, 3425445; 319716, 3425463; 319704, 3425482; 
319693, 3425501; 319683, 3425521; 319674, 3425541; 319665, 3425561; 
319657, 3425582; 319649, 3425603; 319643, 3425624; 319637, 3425645; 
319632, 3425667; 319627, 3425689; 319624, 3425711; 319621, 3425733; 
319619, 3425755; 319618, 3425777; 319618, 3425799; 319618, 3425821; 
319619, 3425843; 319621, 3425865; 319624, 3425887; 319627, 3425909; 
319632, 3425931; 319637, 3425953; 319643, 3425974; 319649, 3425995; 
319656, 3426015; 319657, 3426016; 319665, 3426037; 319674, 3426057; 
319683, 3426077; 319693, 3426097; 319704, 3426116; 319716, 3426135; 
319728, 3426153; 319741, 3426171; 319755, 3426189; 319769, 3426206; 
319784, 3426222; 319799, 3426238; 319815, 3426254; 319832, 3426268; 
319849, 3426283. 319866, 3426296; 319884, 3426309; 319903, 3426321; 
319922, 3426333; 319941, 3426344; 319952, 3426350; 319961, 3426354; 
319981, 3426364; 320001, 3426373; 320021, 3426381; 320042, 3426388; 
320064, 3426395; 320085, 3426401; 320107, 3426406; 320128, 3426410; 
320150, 3426414; 320172, 3426416; 320194, 3426418; 320216, 3426420; 
320239, 3426420; 320261, 3426420; 320283, 3426418; 320305, 3426416; 
320327, 3426414; 320349, 3426410; 320371, 3426406; 320392, 3426401; 
320413, 3426395; 320435, 3426388; 320456, 3426381; 320476, 3426373; 
320496, 3426364; 320516, 3426354; 320536, 3426344; 320555, 3426333; 
320574, 3426321; 320593, 3426309; 320611, 3426296; 320628, 3426283; 
320645, 3426268; 320662, 3426254; 320678, 3426238; 320693, 3426222; 
320708, 3426206; 320722, 3426189; 320736, 3426171; 320749, 3426153; 
320761, 3426135; 320773, 3426116; 320784, 3426097; 320794, 3426077; 
320803, 3426057; 320812, 3426037; 320820, 3426016; 320828, 3425995; 
320834, 3425974; 320840, 3425953; 320845, 3425931; 320850, 3425909; 
320853, 3425887; 320856, 3425865; 320858, 3425843; 320859, 3425821; 
320860, 3425799; 320859, 3425777; 320858, 3425755; 320856, 3425733; 
320853, 3425711; 320850, 3425689; 320845, 3425667; 320840, 3425645; 
320834, 3425624; 320828, 3425603; 320820, 3425582; 320812, 3425561; 
320803, 3425541; 320794, 3425521; 320784, 3425501; 320773, 3425482; 
320761, 3425463; 320749, 3425445; 320736, 3425427; 320722, 3425409; 
320708, 3425392; 320693, 3425376; 320678, 3425360; 320662, 3425344; 
320645, 3425330; 320628, 3425315; 320611, 3425302; 320593, 3425289; 
320574, 3425277; 320555, 3425265; 320536, 3425254; 320516, 3425244; 
320496, 3425234; 320476, 3425225; 320456, 3425217; 320435, 3425210; 
320413, 3425203; 320392, 3425197; 320371, 3425192; 320349, 3425188; 
320327, 3425184; 320305, 3425182; 320283, 3425180; 320261, 3425178.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 12 is provided at paragraph (15)(ii) of this 
entry.

   Mountain Yellow-legged Frog (Rana muscosa), Southern California DPS

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Los Angeles, San 
Bernardino, and Riverside Counties, California, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
mountain yellow-legged frog are:
    (i) Water source(s) found between 1,214 to 7,546 ft (370 to 2,300 m) 
in elevation that are permanent. Water sources include, but are

[[Page 205]]

not limited to, streams, rivers, perennial creeks (or permanent plunge 
pools within intermittent creeks), pools (i.e., a body of impounded 
water that is contained above a natural dam), and other forms of aquatic 
habitat. The water source should maintain a natural flow pattern 
including periodic natural flooding. Aquatic habitats that are used by 
mountain yellow-legged frog for breeding purposes must maintain water 
during the entire tadpole growth phase, which can be up to 2 years 
duration. During periods of drought, or less than average rainfall, 
these breeding sites may not hold water long enough for individuals to 
complete metamorphosis, but they would still be considered essential 
breeding habitat in wetter years. Further, the aquatic habitat includes:
    (A) Bank and pool substrates consisting of varying percentages of 
soil or silt, sand, gravel cobble, rock, and boulders;
    (B) Open gravel banks and rocks projecting above or just beneath the 
surface of the water for sunning posts;
    (C) Aquatic refugia, including pools with bank overhangs, downfall 
logs or branches, and/or rocks to provide cover from predators; and
    (D) Streams or stream reaches between known occupied sites that can 
function as corridors for adults and frogs for movement between aquatic 
habitats used as breeding and/or foraging sites.
    (ii) Riparian habitat and upland vegetation (e.g., ponderosa pine, 
montane hardwood-conifer, montane riparian woodlands, and chaparral) 
extending 262 feet (80 m) from each side of the centerline of each 
identified stream and its tributaries, that provides areas for feeding 
and movement of mountain yellow-legged frog, with a canopy overstory not 
exceeding 85 percent that allows sunlight to reach the stream and 
thereby provides basking areas for the species.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures existing on 
the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements, such as buildings, aqueducts, airports, 
and roads, and the land on which such structures are located.
    (4) Critical Habitat Map Units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 7.5' quadrangles, and critical habitat units 
were then mapped using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates. 
Note: Index map of critical habitat units for the southern California 
DPS of the mountain yellow-legged frog (Map 1) follows:

[[Page 206]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14SE06.000

    (5) Unit 1: San Gabriel Mountains Unit, Los Angeles and San 
Bernardino Counties, California. From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps 
Crystal Lake, Cucamonga Peak, Mount San Antonio Valyermo, and Waterman 
Mountain, California.
    (i) Subunit 1A: San Gabriel River, East Fork Angeles National 
Forest, Los Angeles County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM North American Datum of 1927 
(NAD27) coordinates (E, N): 434100, 3803300; 434400, 3803300; 434400, 
3803100; 434300, 3803100; 434300,

[[Page 207]]

3802900; 434200, 3802900; 434200, 3802800; 434100, 3802800; 434100, 
3802600; 434000, 3802600; 434000, 3802500; 433800, 3802500; 433800, 
3802200; 433700, 3802200; 433700, 3801900; 433600, 3801900; 433600, 
3801800; 433800, 3801800; 433800, 3801900; 434200, 3801900; 434200, 
3802000; 434400, 3802000; 434400, 3802100; 434500, 3802100; 434500, 
3802300; 434600, 3802300; 434600, 3802500; 434700, 3802500; 434700, 
3802800; 434800, 3802800; 434800, 3802900; 434900, 3802900; 434900, 
3803000; 435100, 3803000; 435100, 3802700; 435000, 3802700; 435000, 
3802600; 434900, 3802600; 434900, 3802200; 434800, 3802200; 434800, 
3802100; 434700, 3802100; 434700, 3801900; 434600, 3801900; 434600, 
3801800; 434400, 3801800; 434400, 3801700; 434000, 3801700; 434000, 
3801600; 433400, 3801600; 433400, 3801500; 433300, 3801500; 433300, 
3801400; 433400, 3801400; 433400, 3801300; 433500, 3801300; 433500, 
3800400; 433900, 3800400; 433900, 3800500; 434000, 3800500; 434000, 
3800600; 434200, 3800600; 434200, 3800500; 434300, 3800500; 434300, 
3800600; 434500, 3800600; 434500, 3800900; 434600, 3800900; 434600, 
3801200; 434700, 3801200; 434700, 3801500; 434800, 3801500; 434800, 
3801600; 434900, 3801600; 434900, 3801800; 435000, 3801800; 435000, 
3801900; 435100, 3801900; 435100, 3802000; 435200, 3802000; 435200, 
3802100; 435300, 3802100; 435300, 3802200; 435400, 3802200; 435400, 
3802300; 435500, 3802300; 435500, 3802400; 435800, 3802400; 435800, 
3802200; 435700, 3802200; 435700, 3802100; 435600, 3802100; 435600, 
3802000; 435500, 3802000; 435500, 3801900; 435400, 3801900; 435400, 
3801800; 435300, 3801800; 435300, 3801700; 435200, 3801700; 435200, 
3801600; 435100, 3801600; 435100, 3801500; 435000, 3801500; 435000, 
3801100; 434900, 3801100; 434900, 3800900; 435000, 3800900; 435000, 
3800800; 435100, 3800800; 435100, 3800700; 435200, 3800700; 435200, 
3800400; 435500, 3800400; 435500, 3800600; 435600, 3800600; 435600, 
3800800; 435700, 3800800; 435700, 3800900; 435900, 3800900; 435900, 
3801200; 436000, 3801200; 436000, 3801300; 436100, 3801300; 436100, 
3801600; 436400, 3801600; 436400, 3801700; 436800, 3801700; 436800, 
3801400; 436300, 3801400; 436300, 3801100; 436200, 3801100; 436200, 
3801000; 436100, 3801000; 436100, 3800900; 436200, 3800900; 436200, 
3800700; 436100, 3800700; 436100, 3800600; 435800, 3800600; 435800, 
3800300; 435900, 3800300; 435900, 3800200; 436100, 3800200; 436100, 
3800100; 436300, 3800100; 436300, 3800000; 436200, 3800000; 436200, 
3799800; 436100, 3799800; 436100, 3799900; 435900, 3799900; 435900, 
3800000; 435800, 3800000; 435800, 3800100; 435100, 3800100; 435100, 
3800200; 435000, 3800200; 435000, 3800300; 434900, 3800300; 434900, 
3800600; 434800, 3800600; 434800, 3800400; 434600, 3800400; 434600, 
3800300; 434100, 3800300; 434100, 3800100; 433200, 3800100; 433200, 
3800000; 433300, 3800000; 433300, 3799800; 433400, 3799800; 433400, 
3799200; 433600, 3799200; 433600, 3798800; 433500, 3798800; 433500, 
3798700; 433400, 3798700; 433400, 3798600; 433300, 3798600; 433300, 
3798500; 433200, 3798500; 433200, 3797600; 433100, 3797600; 433100, 
3797400; 433000, 3797400; 433000, 3797300; 432800, 3797300; 432800, 
3797200; 432900, 3797200; 432900, 3797000; 432800, 3797000; 432800, 
3796400; 433000, 3796400; 433000, 3796500; 433100, 3796500; 433100, 
3796600; 433200, 3796600; 433200, 3796700; 433400, 3796700; 433400, 
3796600; 433600, 3796600; 433600, 3796700; 433700, 3796700; 433700, 
3796800; 433800, 3796800; 433800, 3796900; 434200, 3796900; 434200, 
3797000; 434500, 3797000; 434500, 3796900; 434600, 3796900; 434600, 
3796700; 434000, 3796700; 434000, 3796500; 433800, 3796500; 433800, 
3796400; 434000, 3796400; 434000, 3796300; 434100, 3796300; 434100, 
3796200; 434300, 3796200; 434300, 3796100; 434400, 3796100; 434400, 
3796000; 434600, 3796000; 434600, 3795600; 434500, 3795600; 434500, 
3795800; 434300, 3795800; 434300, 3795900; 434100, 3795900; 434100, 
3796000; 433900, 3796000; 433900, 3796100; 433600, 3796100; 433600, 
3796200; 433500, 3796200; 433500, 3796300; 433200, 3796300; 433200, 
3796200; 433000, 3796200; 433000, 3796100; 432900, 3796100; 432900, 
3796000; 432800, 3796000; 432800, 3795900; 433000, 3795900; 433000, 
3795800; 433200, 3795800; 433200, 3795700; 433300, 3795700; 433300, 
3795600; 433600, 3795600; 433600, 3795500; 433800, 3795500; 433800, 
3795400; 433900, 3795400; 433900, 3795300; 434000, 3795300; 434000, 
3795200; 434100, 3795200; 434100, 3795100; 434200, 3795100; 434200, 
3795000; 434100, 3795000; 434100, 3794900; 434000, 3794900; 434000, 
3795000; 433800, 3795000; 433800, 3795100; 433700, 3795100; 433700, 
3795200; 433600, 3795200; 433600, 3795300; 433400, 3795300; 433400, 
3795400; 433100, 3795400; 433100, 3795500; 433000, 3795500; 433000, 
3795600; 432800, 3795600; 432800, 3795700; 432500, 3795700; 432500, 
3795500; 432400, 3795500; 432400, 3795400; 432500, 3795400; 432500, 
3795300; 432700, 3795300; 432700, 3795200; 432800, 3795200; 432800, 
3795100; 433100, 3795100; 433100, 3795000; 433200, 3795000; 433200, 
3794800; 433400, 3794800; 433400, 3794700; 433600, 3794700; 433600, 
3794600; 433500, 3794600; 433500, 3794400; 433400, 3794400; 433400, 
3794500; 433200, 3794500; 433200, 3794600; 433000, 3794600; 433000, 
3794800; 432900, 3794800; 432900, 3794900; 432600, 3794900; 432600, 
3795000; 432500, 3795000; 432500, 3795100; 432300, 3795100; 432300, 
3795200; 432000, 3795200; 432000, 3795100; 432100, 3795100; 432100, 
3795000; 432000, 3795000; 432000, 3794900; 431900, 3794900; 431900, 
3794800; 431800, 3794800; 431800, 3794500; 431600, 3794500; 431600, 
3794400; 431500, 3794400; 431500, 3794100; 431600, 3794100; 431600, 
3794000; 431700, 3794000; 431700, 3793600; 431600, 3793600; 431600, 
3793400; 431400, 3793400; 431400, 3793900; 431300, 3793900; 431300, 
3794600; 431400, 3794600; 431400, 3794700; 431500, 3794700; 431500, 
3795000; 431600, 3795000; 431600, 3795300; 431100, 3795300; 431100, 
3795100; 430600, 3795100; 430600, 3795200; 430200, 3795200; 430200, 
3795400; 430100, 3795400; 430100, 3795500; 430200, 3795500; 430200, 
3795600; 430400, 3795600; 430400, 3795500; 430700, 3795500; 430700, 
3795400; 430800, 3795400; 430800, 3795300; 430900, 3795300; 430900, 
3795600; 431100, 3795600; 431100, 3795900; 431000, 3795900; 431000, 
3796600; 431100, 3796600; 431100, 3796900; 431000, 3796900; 431000, 
3797000; 431100, 3797000; 431100, 3797200; 431200, 3797200; 431200, 
3797000; 431300, 3797000; 431300, 3796500; 431200, 3796500; 431200, 
3796100; 431300, 3796100; 431300, 3795700; 431400, 3795700; 431400, 
3795600; 431600, 3795600; 431600, 3795500; 431800, 3795500; 431800, 
3795300; 431900, 3795300; 431900, 3795400; 432000, 3795400; 432000, 
3795500; 432100, 3795500; 432100, 3795600; 432200, 3795600; 432200, 
3795700; 432300, 3795700; 432300, 3796000; 432500, 3796000; 432500, 
3796100; 432400, 3796100; 432400, 3796300; 432500, 3796300; 432500, 
3796400; 432600, 3796400; 432600,

[[Page 208]]

3796600; 432500, 3796600; 432500, 3796900; 432600, 3796900; 432600, 
3797100; 432500, 3797100; 432500, 3797400; 432600, 3797400; 432600, 
3797500; 432800, 3797500; 432800, 3797700; 432700, 3797700; 432700, 
3797800; 432300, 3797800; 432300, 3797900; 432200, 3797900; 432200, 
3798000; 432100, 3798000; 432100, 3798100; 432000, 3798100; 432000, 
3798200; 431700, 3798200; 431700, 3798300; 431600, 3798300; 431600, 
3798400; 431400, 3798400; 431400, 3798500; 431300, 3798500; 431300, 
3798600; 431200, 3798600; 431200, 3798900; 431400, 3798900; 431400, 
3798800; 431500, 3798800; 431500, 3798700; 431600, 3798700; 431600, 
3798600; 431800, 3798600; 431800, 3798500; 431900, 3798500; 431900, 
3798400; 432100, 3798400; 432100, 3798300; 432200, 3798300; 432200, 
3798200; 432300, 3798200; 432300, 3798100; 432400, 3798100; 432400, 
3798000; 432800, 3798000; 432800, 3797900; 432900, 3797900; 432900, 
3798200; 433000, 3798200; 433000, 3798700; 433100, 3798700; 433100, 
3798900; 433300, 3798900; 433300, 3799100; 433200, 3799100; 433200, 
3799300; 433100, 3799300; 433100, 3799900; 432900, 3799900; 432900, 
3800300; 433000, 3800300; 433000, 3800400; 432900, 3800400; 432900, 
3800500; 432600, 3800500; 432600, 3800600; 432400, 3800600; 432400, 
3800700; 432200, 3800700; 432200, 3800800; 431600, 3800800; 431600, 
3801000; 431700, 3801000; 431700, 3801100; 432000, 3801100; 432000, 
3801000; 432400, 3801000; 432400, 3800900; 432600, 3800900; 432600, 
3800800; 432700, 3800800; 432700, 3800700; 433100, 3800700; 433100, 
3800600; 433200, 3800600; 433200, 3800800; 433300, 3800800; 433300, 
3801200; 433100, 3801200; 433100, 3801300; 433000, 3801300; 433000, 
3801600; 433100, 3801600; 433100, 3802000; 433000, 3802000; 433000, 
3802100; 432800, 3802100; 432800, 3802200; 432600, 3802200; 432600, 
3802300; 432400, 3802300; 432400, 3802400; 432200, 3802400; 432200, 
3802500; 431900, 3802500; 431900, 3802700; 432200, 3802700; 432200, 
3803000; 432400, 3803000; 432400, 3802900; 432500, 3802900; 432500, 
3802800; 432600, 3802800; 432600, 3802700; 432700, 3802700; 432700, 
3802500; 432800, 3802500; 432800, 3802400; 433000, 3802400; 433000, 
3802300; 433200, 3802300; 433200, 3802100; 433300, 3802100; 433300, 
3802000; 433400, 3802000; 433400, 3802100; 433500, 3802100; 433500, 
3802500; 433600, 3802500; 433600, 3802700; 433800, 3802700; 433800, 
3802800; 433900, 3802800; 433900, 3802900; 434000, 3802900; 434000, 
3803100; 434100, 3803100; returning to 434100, 3803300.
    (B) Map depicting subunit 1A is located at paragraph (5)(vi)(B) of 
this section.
    (ii) Subunit 1B: Big Rock Creek, South Fork, Angeles National 
Forest, Los Angeles County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
424400, 3805700; 424600, 3805700; 424600, 3805400; 424500, 3805400; 
424500, 3805300; 424300, 3805300; 424300, 3805200; 424400, 3805200; 
424400, 3805000; 424300, 3805000; 424300, 3804900; 424100, 3804900; 
424100, 3804800; 424000, 3804800; 424000, 3804700; 423900, 3804700; 
423900, 3804500; 423800, 3804500; 423800, 3804400; 423700, 3804400; 
423700, 3804300; 424000, 3804300; 424000, 3804100; 424100, 3804100; 
424100, 3804000; 424200, 3804000; 424200, 3803900; 424300, 3803900; 
424300, 3803800; 425200, 3803800; 425200, 3803700; 425700, 3803700; 
425700, 3803400; 425400, 3803400; 425400, 3803500; 424400, 3803500; 
424400, 3803000; 424500, 3803000; 424500, 3802900; 425100, 3802900; 
425100, 3802800; 425300, 3802800; 425300, 3802600; 424500, 3802600; 
424500, 3802700; 424300, 3802700; 424300, 3802800; 424200, 3802800; 
424200, 3803000; 424100, 3803000; 424100, 3803700; 423900, 3803700; 
423900, 3803800; 423800, 3803800; 423800, 3804000; 423700, 3804000; 
423700, 3803700; 423500, 3803700; 423500, 3803600; 423400, 3803600; 
423400, 3803400; 423300, 3803400; 423300, 3803200; 423500, 3803200; 
423500, 3803000; 423600, 3803000; 423600, 3802600; 423700, 3802600; 
423700, 3802500; 423800, 3802500; 423800, 3802400; 424000, 3802400; 
424000, 3802300; 423500, 3802300; 423500, 3802400; 423400, 3802400; 
423400, 3802800; 423300, 3802800; 423300, 3802900; 423200, 3802900; 
423200, 3803000; 423100, 3803000; 423100, 3803100; 423000, 3803100; 
423000, 3803000; 422900, 3803000; 422900, 3802800; 422800, 3802800; 
422800, 3802700; 422700, 3802700; 422700, 3802800; 422600, 3802800; 
422600, 3803100; 422700, 3803100; 422700, 3803200; 422800, 3803200; 
422800, 3803300; 422900, 3803300; 422900, 3803400; 423000, 3803400; 
423000, 3803500; 423100, 3803500; 423100, 3803600; 423200, 3803600; 
423200, 3803900; 423400, 3803900; 423400, 3804500; 423500, 3804500; 
423500, 3804600; 423600, 3804600; 423600, 3804700; 423700, 3804700; 
423700, 3804900; 423800, 3804900; 423800, 3805000; 423900, 3805000; 
423900, 3805100; 424000, 3805100; 424000, 3805400; 424100, 3805400; 
424100, 3805500; 424200, 3805500; 424200, 3805600; 424400, 3805600; 
returning to 424400, 3805700.
    (B) Map depicting subunit 1B is located at paragraph (5)(vi)(B) of 
this entry.
    (iii) Subunit 1C: Little Rock Creek, Angeles National Forest, Los 
Angeles County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
419500, 3803800; 420000, 3803800; 420000, 3803600; 419700, 3803600; 
419700, 3803500; 419600, 3803500; 419600, 3803400; 419500, 3803400; 
419500, 3803300; 419600, 3803300; 419600, 3803200; 419700, 3803200; 
419700, 3802900; 420000, 3802900; 420000, 3803000; 420200, 3803000; 
420200, 3803100; 420400, 3803100; 420400, 3803200; 420500, 3803200; 
420500, 3803300; 420600, 3803300; 420600, 3803400; 420900, 3803400; 
420900, 3803200; 420800, 3803200; 420800, 3803100; 420700, 3803100; 
420700, 3803000; 420600, 3803000; 420600, 3802900; 420500, 3802900; 
420500, 3802800; 420100, 3802800; 420100, 3802700; 419900, 3802700; 
419900, 3802600; 419800, 3802600; 419800, 3802400; 419700, 3802400; 
419700, 3802300; 419500, 3802300; 419500, 3802400; 419400, 3802400; 
419400, 3802300; 419300, 3802300; 419300, 3802100; 419200, 3802100; 
419200, 3802000; 419100, 3802000; 419100, 3801900; 419000, 3801900; 
419000, 3801800; 418800, 3801800; 418800, 3801900; 418500, 3801900; 
418500, 3801800; 417900, 3801800; 417900, 3801900; 417800, 3801900; 
417800, 3802000; 417700, 3802000; 417700, 3802100; 417600, 3802100; 
417600, 3802300; 417500, 3802300; 417500, 3802400; 417300, 3802400; 
417300, 3802300; 417200, 3802300; 417200, 3802200; 417000, 3802200; 
417000, 3801400; 416900, 3801400; 416900, 3801300; 416800, 3801300; 
416800, 3801200; 416700, 3801200; 416700, 3801100; 416600, 3801100; 
416600, 3801200; 416500, 3801200; 416500, 3801400; 416700, 3801400; 
416700, 3802100; 416500, 3802100; 416500, 3802000; 416200, 3802000; 
416200, 3802100; 416100, 3802100; 416100, 3802200;

[[Page 209]]

416000, 3802200; 416000, 3802500; 416300, 3802500; 416300, 3802300; 
416500, 3802300; 416500, 3802400; 416900, 3802400; 416900, 3802500; 
417100, 3802500; 417100, 3802600; 417800, 3802600; 417800, 3802400; 
417900, 3802400; 417900, 3802300; 418000, 3802300; 418000, 3802100; 
418300, 3802100; 418300, 3802400; 418600, 3802400; 418600, 3802200; 
419000, 3802200; 419000, 3802400; 419100, 3802400; 419100, 3802500; 
419200, 3802500; 419200, 3802700; 419400, 3802700; 419400, 3803100; 
419300, 3803100; 419300, 3803600; 419400, 3803600; 419400, 3803700; 
419500, 3803700; returning to 419500, 3803800.
    (B) Map depicting subunit 1C is located at paragraph (5)(vi)(B) of 
this entry.
    (iv) Subunit 1D: Devil's Canyon, Angeles National Forest, Los 
Angeles County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
414500, 3799300; 414700, 3799300; 414700, 3798600; 414600, 3798600; 
414600, 3798500; 414500, 3798500; 414500, 3798400; 414300, 3798400; 
414300, 3798300; 413900, 3798300; 413900, 3798200; 413600, 3798200; 
413600, 3798100; 413400, 3798100; 413400, 3798000; 413000, 3798000; 
413000, 3797800; 412600, 3797800; 412600, 3797700; 412500, 3797700; 
412500, 3797600; 412300, 3797600; 412300, 3797700; 412100, 3797700; 
412100, 3797800; 411800, 3797800; 411800, 3797700; 411400, 3797700; 
411400, 3797800; 411300, 3797800; 411300, 3798100; 411500, 3798100; 
411500, 3798000; 411800, 3798000; 411800, 3798100; 412200, 3798100; 
412200, 3798000; 412300, 3798000; 412300, 3797900; 412400, 3797900; 
412400, 3798000; 412700, 3798000; 412700, 3798100; 412800, 3798100; 
412800, 3798200; 413100, 3798200; 413100, 3798300; 413400, 3798300; 
413400, 3798400; 413700, 3798400; 413700, 3798500; 414100, 3798500; 
414100, 3798600; 414200, 3798600; 414200, 3798700; 414400, 3798700; 
414400, 3798800; 414500, 3798800; returning to 414500, 3799300.
    (B) Map depicting subunit 1D is located at paragraph (5)(vi)(B) of 
this entry.
    (v) Subunit 1F: San Gabriel River, East Fork, Iron Fork, Los Angeles 
County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
429100, 3798400; 429400, 3798400; 429400, 3798000; 429500, 3798000; 
429500, 3797400; 429700, 3797400; 429700, 3797100; 429600, 3797100; 
429600, 3797000; 429700, 3797000; 429700, 3796800; 429800, 3796800; 
429800, 3796700; 429900, 3796700; 429900, 3796500; 430000, 3796500; 
430000, 3796000; 430100, 3796000; 430100, 3795800; 430200, 3795800; 
430200, 3795500; 430100, 3795500; 430100, 3795400; 430000, 3795400; 
430000, 3795600; 429600, 3795600; 429600, 3795500; 429300, 3795500; 
429300, 3795600; 429000, 3795600; 429000, 3795700; 428700, 3795700; 
428700, 3795800; 428600, 3795800; 428600, 3795700; 428300, 3795700; 
428300, 3795800; 428000, 3795800; 428000, 3796100; 428700, 3796100; 
428700, 3796000; 428900, 3796000; 428900, 3795900; 429400, 3795900; 
429400, 3795800; 429800, 3795800; 429800, 3796000; 429700, 3796000; 
429700, 3796400; 429600, 3796400; 429600, 3796600; 429500, 3796600; 
429500, 3796800; 429400, 3796800; 429400, 3797200; 429300, 3797200; 
429300, 3797300; 429200, 3797300; 429200, 3798000; 429000, 3798000; 
429000, 3798300; 429100, 3798300; returning to 429100, 3798400.
    (B) Map depicting subunit 1F is located at paragraph (5)(vi)(B) of 
this entry.
    (vi) Subunit 1G: Bear Creek, Angeles National Forest, Los Angeles 
County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
417500, 3797700; 417800, 3797700; 417800, 3797500; 417900, 3797500; 
417900, 3797300; 418000, 3797300; 418000, 3796800; 417900, 3796800; 
417900, 3796700; 418000, 3796700; 418000, 3796600; 418200, 3796600; 
418200, 3796500; 418300, 3796500; 418300, 3796300; 417900, 3796300; 
417900, 3796400; 417800, 3796400; 417800, 3796500; 417700, 3796500; 
417700, 3797200; 417600, 3797200; 417600, 3797500; 417500, 3797500; 
returning to 417500, 3797700.
    (B) Map of Unit 1, with subunits 1A, 1B, 1C, 1D, 1F, and 1G (Map 2), 
follows:

[[Page 210]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14SE06.001

    (vii) Subunit 1E: Day Canyon, San Bernardino National Forest, San 
Bernardino County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
446400, 3786900; 446700, 3786900; 446700, 3786800; 446900, 3786800; 
446900, 3786700; 447100, 3786700; 447100, 3786600; 447200, 3786600; 
447200, 3786500; 447300, 3786500; 447300, 3786400; 447400, 3786400; 
447400, 3786200; 447500, 3786200; 447500, 3786100; 447600, 3786100; 
447600, 3786000; 447700, 3786000; 447700, 3785900; 447900, 3785900; 
447900, 3785800; 448100, 3785800; 448100, 3785700; 448400, 3785700; 
448400, 3785600; 448600, 3785600; 448600, 3785500; 448800, 3785500;

[[Page 211]]

448800, 3785400; 448900, 3785400; 448900, 3785000; 449000, 3785000; 
449000, 3784900; 449200, 3784900; 449200, 3784800; 449300, 3784800; 
449300, 3784600; 449400, 3784600; 449400, 3784300; 449500, 3784300; 
449500, 3784400; 449700, 3784400; 449700, 3785100; 449800, 3785100; 
449800, 3785800; 450000, 3785800; 450000, 3784800; 449900, 3784800; 
449900, 3784700; 450000, 3784700; 450000, 3784500; 449900, 3784500; 
449900, 3783800; 450000, 3783800; 450000, 3783700; 450300, 3783700; 
450300, 3783800; 450400, 3783800; 450400, 3783900; 450500, 3783900; 
450500, 3784700; 450600, 3784700; 450600, 3784800; 450700, 3784800; 
450700, 3784900; 450800, 3784900; 450800, 3785100; 450900, 3785100; 
450900, 3785200; 451000, 3785200; 451000, 3785100; 451100, 3785100; 
451100, 3784800; 451000, 3784800; 451000, 3784700; 450900, 3784700; 
450900, 3784600; 450800, 3784600; 450800, 3783900; 450700, 3783900; 
450700, 3783700; 450600, 3783700; 450600, 3783600; 450500, 3783600; 
450500, 3783500; 450300, 3783500; 450300, 3783100; 450400, 3783100; 
450400, 3783000; 450500, 3783000; 450500, 3782800; 450200, 3782800; 
450200, 3782900; 450100, 3782900; 450100, 3783100; 450000, 3783100; 
450000, 3783200; 449900, 3783200; 449900, 3783500; 449800, 3783500; 
449800, 3783600; 449700, 3783600; 449700, 3783700; 449600, 3783700; 
449600, 3783900; 449700, 3783900; 449700, 3784100; 449200, 3784100; 
449200, 3784300; 449100, 3784300; 449100, 3784600; 449000, 3784600; 
449000, 3784700; 448800, 3784700; 448800, 3784800; 448700, 3784800; 
448700, 3785200; 448600, 3785200; 448600, 3785300; 448400, 3785300; 
448400, 3785400; 448300, 3785400; 448300, 3785500; 447900, 3785500; 
447900, 3785600; 447800, 3785600; 447800, 3785700; 447500, 3785700; 
447500, 3785800; 447400, 3785800; 447400, 3785900; 447300, 3785900; 
447300, 3786000; 447200, 3786000; 447200, 3786200; 447100, 3786200; 
447100, 3786300; 447000, 3786300; 447000, 3786400; 446900, 3786400; 
446900, 3786500; 446700, 3786500; 446700, 3786600; 446500, 3786600; 
446500, 3786700; 446400, 3786700; returning to 446400, 3786900.
    (B) Map of subunit 1E (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 212]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14SE06.002

    (6) Unit 2: San Bernardino Mountains, San Bernardino National 
Forest, San Bernardino County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle 
maps Big Bear Lake, Catclaw Flat and Harrison Mountain, California.
    (i) Subunit 2A: City Creek, East and West Forks, San Bernardino 
National Forest, San Bernardino County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
483800, 3785100; 483900, 3785100; 483900, 3785200; 484000, 3785200; 
484000, 3785400; 484100, 3785400; 484100, 3785600;

[[Page 213]]

484200, 3785600; 484200, 3785700; 484300, 3785700; 484300, 3785800; 
484400, 3785800; 484400, 3785900; 484600, 3785900; 484600, 3785600; 
484500, 3785600; 484500, 3785500; 484400, 3785500; 484400, 3785400; 
484300, 3785400; 484300, 3785200; 484200, 3785200; 484200, 3785000; 
484100, 3785000; 484100, 3784900; 484000, 3784900; 484000, 3784800; 
483900, 3784800; 483900, 3784700; 483800, 3784700; 483800, 3784400; 
483900, 3784400; 483900, 3784000; 483700, 3784000; 483700, 3783900; 
483900, 3783900; 483900, 3783800; 484000, 3783800; 484000, 3783400; 
483900, 3783400; 483900, 3783300; 483700, 3783300; 483700, 3782900; 
483900, 3782900; 483900, 3783100; 484000, 3783100; 484000, 3783200; 
484300, 3783200; 484300, 3783100; 484400, 3783100; 484400, 3783400; 
484500, 3783400; 484500, 3783500; 484400, 3783500; 484400, 3783900; 
484500, 3783900; 484500, 3784000; 484700, 3784000; 484700, 3784100; 
484800, 3784100; 484800, 3784700; 484900, 3784700; 484900, 3785000; 
485000, 3785000; 485000, 3785200; 485100, 3785200; 485100, 3785300; 
485200, 3785300; 485200, 3785400; 485400, 3785400; 485400, 3785800; 
485700, 3785800; 485700, 3785700; 485800, 3785700; 485800, 3785600; 
485600, 3785600; 485600, 3785200; 485400, 3785200; 485400, 3785100; 
485300, 3785100; 485300, 3785000; 485200, 3785000; 485200, 3784600; 
485100, 3784600; 485100, 3784200; 485000, 3784200; 485000, 3783900; 
484900, 3783900; 484900, 3783800; 484700, 3783800; 484700, 3783300; 
484800, 3783300; 484800, 3783100; 484700, 3783100; 484700, 3783000; 
484600, 3783000; 484600, 3782900; 484500, 3782900; 484500, 3782800; 
484200, 3782800; 484200, 3782900; 484100, 3782900; 484100, 3782700; 
483900, 3782700; 483900, 3782600; 483800, 3782600; 483800, 3782400; 
483700, 3782400; 483700, 3782200; 484000, 3782200; 484000, 3782000; 
484400, 3782000; 484400, 3782100; 484700, 3782100; 484700, 3782000; 
485000, 3782000; 485000, 3781900; 485200, 3781900; 485200, 3781800; 
485400, 3781800; 485400, 3781700; 485200, 3781700; 485200, 3781600; 
485000, 3781600; 485000, 3781700; 484800, 3781700; 484800, 3781800; 
484300, 3781800; 484300, 3781700; 483900, 3781700; 483900, 3781800; 
483800, 3781800; 483800, 3782000; 483600, 3782000; 483600, 3781800; 
483400, 3781800; 483400, 3781200; 483600, 3781200; 483600, 3780900; 
483500, 3780900; 483500, 3780500; 484200, 3780500; 484200, 3780600; 
484300, 3780600; 484300, 3780500; 484800, 3780500; 484800, 3780400; 
484900, 3780400; 484900, 3780300; 485000, 3780300; 485000, 3780100; 
484700, 3780100; 484700, 3780200; 484600, 3780200; 484600, 3780300; 
483700, 3780300; 483700, 3780200; 483500, 3780200; 483500, 3780100; 
483400, 3780100; 483400, 3780000; 483300, 3780000; 483300, 3779900; 
483400, 3779900; 483400, 3779500; 483300, 3779500; 483300, 3779000; 
483100, 3779000; 483100, 3778800; 482800, 3778800; 482800, 3778900; 
482700, 3778900; 482700, 3779000; 482900, 3779000; 482900, 3779200; 
483100, 3779200; 483100, 3779300; 483000, 3779300; 483000, 3779700; 
483100, 3779700; 483100, 3780100; 483200, 3780100; 483200, 3780300; 
483300, 3780300; 483300, 3780400; 483200, 3780400; 483200, 3780700; 
483300, 3780700; 483300, 3781100; 482900, 3781100; 482900, 3781200; 
482800, 3781200; 482800, 3781800; 482700, 3781800; 482700, 3781900; 
482800, 3781900; 482800, 3782600; 482900, 3782600; 482900, 3782800; 
483000, 3782800; 483000, 3782900; 483100, 3782900; 483100, 3783000; 
483000, 3783000; 483000, 3783100; 482900, 3783100; 482900, 3783200; 
482300, 3783200; 482300, 3783500; 482600, 3783500; 482600, 3783600; 
482700, 3783600; 482700, 3783500; 483000, 3783500; 483000, 3783400; 
483100, 3783400; 483100, 3783300; 483300, 3783300; 483300, 3783200; 
483500, 3783200; 483500, 3783500; 483700, 3783500; 483700, 3783700; 
483300, 3783700; 483300, 3784100; 483100, 3784100; 483100, 3784400; 
483300, 3784400; 483300, 3784300; 483500, 3784300; 483500, 3784200; 
483600, 3784200; 483600, 3784400; 483500, 3784400; 483500, 3784700; 
483400, 3784700; 483400, 3784900; 483500, 3784900; 483500, 3785100; 
483600, 3785100; 483600, 3785300; 483800, 3785300; returning to 483800, 
3785100; excluding land bounded by 483700, 3785100; 483800, 3785100; 
483800, 3785000; 483700, 3785000; 483700, 3785100; land bounded by 
483100, 3782700; 483600, 3782700; 483600, 3782600; 483500, 3782600; 
483500, 3782500; 483400, 3782500; 483400, 3782400; 483300, 3782400; 
483300, 3782300; 483200, 3782300; 483200, 3782100; 483100, 3782100; 
483100, 3782700; and land bounded by 483000, 3781800; 483100, 3781800; 
483100, 3781500; 483000, 3781500; 483000, 3781800.
    (B) Map of subunit 2A (Map 4) follows:


[[Page 214]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14SE06.003

    (ii) Subunit 2B: Barton Creek, East Fork, San Bernardino National 
Forest, San Bernardino County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
510000, 3781300; 510100, 3781300; 510100, 3781200; 510200, 3781200; 
510200, 3781100; 510400, 3781100; 510400, 3780700; 510500, 3780700; 
510500, 3780400; 510600, 3780400; 510600, 3780200; 510500, 3780200; 
510500, 3780100; 510600, 3780100; 510600, 3779800; 510700, 3779800; 
510700, 3779600; 510800, 3779600; 510800, 3779400; 510700, 3779400; 
510700, 3779300; 510800, 3779300; 510800, 3779000; 510900, 3779000; 
510900, 3778500; 510600, 3778500; 510600, 3779100; 510500, 3779100;

[[Page 215]]

510500, 3779600; 510400, 3779600; 510400, 3779900; 510300, 3779900; 
510300, 3780400; 510200, 3780400; 510200, 3780700; 510100, 3780700; 
510100, 3781000; 510000, 3781000; returning to 510000, 3781300.
    (B) Map depicting subunit 2B is located at paragraph (6)(iii)(B) of 
this entry.
    (iii) Subunit 2C: Whitewater River, North Fork, San Bernardino 
National Forest, San Bernardino County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
523300, 3769200; 523400, 3769200; 523400, 3769100; 523600, 3769100; 
523600, 3769000; 523800, 3769000; 523800, 3768900; 523900, 3768900; 
523900, 3768800; 524200, 3768800; 524200, 3768500; 523900, 3768500; 
523900, 3768600; 523700, 3768600; 523700, 3768700; 523600, 3768700; 
523600, 3768800; 523400, 3768800; 523400, 3768900; 523200, 3768900; 
523200, 3769100; 523300, 3769100; returning to 523300, 3769200.
    (B) Map of subunits 2B and 2C (Map 5) follows:

[[Page 216]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14SE06.004

    (7) Unit 3: San Jacinto Mountains, San Bernardino National Forest, 
Riverside County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Lake 
Fulmor, Palm Springs and San Jacinto Peak, California
    (i) Subunit 3A: San Jacinto River, North Fork, San Bernardino 
National Forest, Riverside County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
526400, 3743000; 526600, 3743000; 526600, 3742700; 526400, 3742700; 
526400, 3742600; 526300, 3742600; 526300, 3742500;

[[Page 217]]

526200, 3742500; 526200, 3742400; 526600, 3742400; 526600, 3742300; 
526900, 3742300; 526900, 3742200; 527000, 3742200; 527000, 3742000; 
526800, 3742000; 526800, 3742100; 526300, 3742100; 526300, 3742200; 
526100, 3742200; 526100, 3742800; 526200, 3742800; 526200, 3742900; 
526400, 3742900; returning to 526400, 3743000; land bounded by: 525000, 
3742100; 525200, 3742100; 525200, 3742000; 525400, 3742000; 525400, 
3741900; 525300, 3741900; 525300, 3741800; 525100, 3741800; 525100, 
3741700; 525000, 3741700; 525000, 3741600; 524900, 3741600; 524900, 
3741800; 524800, 3741800; 524800, 3741900; 524900, 3741900; 524900, 
3742000; 525000, 3742000; returning to 525000, 3742100; land bounded by: 
522600, 3741900; 522800, 3741900; 522800, 3741800; 522900, 3741800; 
522900, 3741600; 522800, 3741600; 522800, 3741400; 522600, 3741400; 
522600, 3741300; 522500, 3741300; 522500, 3741200; 522400, 3741200; 
522400, 3741100; 522300, 3741100; 522300, 3740700; 522200, 3740700; 
522200, 3740500; 522100, 3740500; 522100, 3740000; 522000, 3740000; 
522000, 3739500; 521900, 3739500; 521900, 3739200; 521800, 3739200; 
521800, 3739000; 522000, 3739000; 522000, 3739100; 522600, 3739100; 
522600, 3739200; 523000, 3739200; 523000, 3739300; 523100, 3739300; 
523100, 3739400; 523200, 3739400; 523200, 3739000; 522900, 3739000; 
522900, 3738900; 522600, 3738900; 522600, 3738800; 521800, 3738800; 
521800, 3738700; 521700, 3738700; 521700, 3738600; 521400, 3738600; 
521400, 3738800; 521500, 3738800; 521500, 3738900; 521600, 3738900; 
521600, 3739500; 521700, 3739500; 521700, 3739700; 521800, 3739700; 
521800, 3740300; 521900, 3740300; 521900, 3740700; 522000, 3740700; 
522000, 3740900; 522100, 3740900; 522100, 3741300; 522200, 3741300; 
522200, 3741400; 522400, 3741400; 522400, 3741600; 522600, 3741600; 
returning to 522600, 3741900; land bounded by: 525800, 3741200; 525900, 
3741200; 525900, 3740900; 525800, 3740900; 525800, 3740800; 525600, 
3740800; 525600, 3740700; 525500, 3740700; 525500, 3740600; 525400, 
3740600; 525400, 3740400; 525300, 3740400; 525300, 3740300; 525200, 
3740300; 525200, 3740200; 525100, 3740200; 525100, 3740100; 525000, 
3740100; 525000, 3740000; 525600, 3740000; 525600, 3740100; 525800, 
3740100; 525800, 3740000; 525900, 3740000; 525900, 3739700; 525800, 
3739700; 525800, 3739800; 525500, 3739800; 525500, 3739700; 525700, 
3739700; 525700, 3739600; 525800, 3739600; 525800, 3739500; 525900, 
3739500; 525900, 3739400; 526000, 3739400; 526000, 3739000; 525900, 
3739000; 525900, 3739100; 525800, 3739100; 525800, 3739200; 525700, 
3739200; 525700, 3739300; 525600, 3739300; 525600, 3739400; 525100, 
3739400; 525100, 3739500; 524800, 3739500; 524800, 3739600; 524600, 
3739600; 524600, 3739500; 524500, 3739500; 524500, 3739400; 524200, 
3739400; 524200, 3739300; 524100, 3739300; 524100, 3739600; 524200, 
3739600; 524200, 3739700; 524400, 3739700; 524400, 3739800; 524500, 
3739800; 524500, 3740000; 524600, 3740000; 524600, 3740100; 524700, 
3740100; 524700, 3740200; 524800, 3740200; 524800, 3740300; 524900, 
3740300; 524900, 3740400; 525000, 3740400; 525000, 3740500; 525100, 
3740500; 525100, 3740600; 525200, 3740600; 525200, 3740700; 525300, 
3740700; 525300, 3740800; 525400, 3740800; 525400, 3740900; 525500, 
3740900; 525500, 3741000; 525600, 3741000; 525600, 3741100; 525800, 
3741100; returning to 525800, 3741200; and land bounded by 523900, 
3741000; 524200, 3741000; 524200, 3740800; 524100, 3740800; 524100, 
3740700; 524000, 3740700; 524000, 3740600; 523900, 3740600; 523900, 
3740500; 523800, 3740500; 523800, 3740400; 523600, 3740400; 523600, 
3740300; 523500, 3740300; 523500, 3740100; 523400, 3740100; 523400, 
3739500; 523200, 3739500; 523200, 3739600; 523100, 3739600; 523100, 
3740000; 523200, 3740000; 523200, 3740300; 523300, 3740300; 523300, 
3740500; 523400, 3740500; 523400, 3740600; 523600, 3740600; 523600, 
3740700; 523800, 3740700; 523800, 3740900; 523900, 3740900; returning to 
523900, 3741000.
    (B) Map depicting subunit 3A is located at paragraph (7)(iv)(B) of 
this entry.
    (ii) Subunit 3B: Indian Creek at Hall Canyon, San Bernardino 
National Forest, Riverside County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
521600, 3742800; 521800, 3742800; 521800, 3742500; 521700, 3742500; 
521700, 3741700; 521600, 3741700; 521600, 3741500; 521500, 3741500; 
521500, 3741400; 521400, 3741400; 521400, 3741200; 521300, 3741200; 
521300, 3741100; 520900, 3741100; 520900, 3741200; 521000, 3741200; 
521000, 3741300; 521100, 3741300; 521100, 3741400; 521200, 3741400; 
521200, 3741600; 521300, 3741600; 521300, 3741700; 521400, 3741700; 
521400, 3742300; 521500, 3742300; 521500, 3742700; 521600, 3742700; 
returning to 521600, 3742800.
    (B) Map depicting subunit 3B is located at paragraph (7)(iv)(B) of 
this entry.
    (iii) Subunit 3C: Tahquitz Creek, San Bernardino National Forest, 
Riverside County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
529600, 3739000; 529900, 3739000; 529900, 3738900; 531000, 3738900; 
531000, 3738800; 531100, 3738800; 531100, 3738700; 531200, 3738700; 
531200, 3738600; 531300, 3738600; 531300, 3738500; 531400, 3738500; 
531400, 3738400; 531500, 3738400; 531500, 3738200; 531200, 3738200; 
531200, 3738300; 531100, 3738300; 531100, 3738400; 531000, 3738400; 
531000, 3738500; 530900, 3738500; 530900, 3738600; 530200, 3738600; 
530200, 3738700; 529600, 3738700; returning to 529600, 3739000; and land 
bounded by 532100, 3737000; 532400, 3737000; 532400, 3736900; 532600, 
3736900; 532600, 3736600; 532300, 3736600; 532300, 3736700; 532200, 
3736700; 532200, 3736500; 531800, 3736500; 531800, 3736300; 531700, 
3736300; 531700, 3736200; 531600, 3736200; 531600, 3736100; 531500, 
3736100; 531500, 3736000; 531400, 3736000; 531400, 3735700; 531300, 
3735700; 531300, 3735500; 531200, 3735500; 531200, 3735300; 531100, 
3735300; 531100, 3735100; 531000, 3735100; 531000, 3735000; 530900, 
3735000; 530900, 3734900; 530600, 3734900; 530600, 3735200; 530800, 
3735200; 530800, 3735300; 530900, 3735300; 530900, 3735500; 531000, 
3735500; 531000, 3735800; 531100, 3735800; 531100, 3735900; 531200, 
3735900; 531200, 3736200; 531300, 3736200; 531300, 3736300; 531400, 
3736300; 531400, 3736400; 531500, 3736400; 531500, 3736600; 531600, 
3736600; 531600, 3736700; 531700, 3736700; 531700, 3736800; 532000, 
3736800; 532000, 3736900; 532100, 3736900; returning to 532100, 3737000.
    (B) Map depicting subunit 3C is located at paragraph (7)(iv)(B) of 
this entry.

[[Page 218]]

    (iv) Subunit 3D: Andreas Creek, San Bernardino National Forest, 
Riverside County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
534300, 3735900; 534700, 3735900; 534700, 3735800; 535000, 3735800; 
535000, 3735700; 535100, 3735700; 535100, 3735600; 535300, 3735600; 
535300, 3735500; 535400, 3735500; 535400, 3735400; 535500, 3735400; 
535500, 3735300; 535700, 3735300; 535700, 3735000; 535500, 3735000; 
535500, 3735100; 535300, 3735100; 535300, 3735200; 535200, 3735200; 
535200, 3735300; 535100, 3735300; 535100, 3735400; 534900, 3735400; 
534900, 3735500; 534800, 3735500; 534800, 3735600; 534300, 3735600; 
returning to 534300, 3735900.
    (B) Map of Unit 3, with Subunits 3A, 3B, 3C, and 3D (Map 6), 
follows:

[[Page 219]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14SE06.005

                 Guaj[oacute]n (Eleutherodactylus cooki)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Humacao, Las Piedras, 
Maunabo, Patillas, and Yabucoa, Puerto Rico, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
guaj[oacute]n are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) Subtropical forest (which may include trees such as Cecropia 
schreberiana, Dendropanax arboreus, Guarea guidonia, Piper aduncum, 
Spathodea campanulata, Syzygium

[[Page 220]]

jambos, and Thespesia populnea) at elevations from 118 to 1,183 ft (36 
to 361 m) above sea level;
    (ii) Plutonic, granitic, or sedimentary rocks/boulders that form 
caves, crevices, and grottoes (interstitial spaces) in a streambed, and 
that are in proximity, or connected, to a permanent, ephemeral, or 
subterranean clear-water stream or water source. The interstitial spaces 
between or underneath rocks provide microenvironments characterized by 
generally higher humidity and cooler temperatures than outside the rock 
formations; and
    (iii) Vegetation-covered rocks (the vegetation typically includes 
moss, ferns, and hepatics such as Thuidium urceolatum, Taxilejeunea 
sulphurea, and Huokeria acutifolia) extending laterally to a maximum of 
99 feet (30 meters) on each bank of the stream. These rocks provide 
cover and foraging sites and help conserve humidity.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures existing on 
the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements, such as buildings, driveways, aqueducts, 
airports, and roads, and the land on which such structures are located.
    (4) Critical habitat maps. Data layers defining map units were 
created by delineating habitats that contain at least one or more of the 
PCEs defined in paragraph (2) of this entry, over United States 
Geological Survey topographic maps (UTM 19, NAD 83). USGS 1:20,000 
quadrangles used in the base map were: Humacao, Punta Guayan[eacute]s, 
Juncos, Yabucoa, Punta Tuna, and Patillas.
    (5) Note: Index map (Map 1) follows:

[[Page 221]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.000

    (6) Unit 1: Mariana, Humacao, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 1 consists of approximately 23.6 acres 
(ac) (9.6 hectares (ha)) located south of Road PR-909, west of Road PR-
3, and north of Quebrada Cata[ntilde]o within Mariana Ward, Humacao.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Humacao and Punta Guayan[eacute]s USGS 
1:20,000 quadrangle maps. Unit 1 bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 
coordinates (E, N):

833916.64, 2007339.77; 833916.67, 2007341.73; 833916.83, 2007343.69; 
833917.12, 2007345.64;

[[Page 222]]

833917.53, 2007347.56; 833918.07, 2007349.45; 833918.73, 2007351.30; 
833919.51, 2007353.10; 833920.41, 2007354.85; 833921.42, 2007356.54; 
833922.53, 2007358.15; 833923.65, 2007359.57; 833989.83, 2007438.54; 
833989.93, 2007438.66; 833991.25, 2007440.12; 833992.66, 2007441.48; 
833994.16, 2007442.76; 833995.73, 2007443.93; 833997.38, 2007444.99; 
833999.10, 2007445.95; 834000.88, 2007446.79; 834002.70, 2007447.51; 
834004.57, 2007448.12; 834006.48, 2007448.60; 834008.41, 2007448.95; 
834010.36, 2007449.18; 834012.33, 2007449.27; 834014.29, 2007449.24; 
834016.25, 2007449.08; 834018.19, 2007448.80; 834020.12, 2007448.38; 
834022.01, 2007447.85; 834023.86, 2007447.19; 834025.66, 2007446.41; 
834027.41, 2007445.51; 834029.10, 2007444.50; 834030.71, 2007443.38; 
834032.25, 2007442.16; 834033.71, 2007440.84; 834035.08, 2007439.43; 
834036.35, 2007437.94; 834037.52, 2007436.36; 834038.59, 2007434.71; 
834039.54, 2007432.99; 834040.38, 2007431.21; 834041.11, 2007429.39; 
834041.71, 2007427.52; 834042.19, 2007425.61; 834042.54, 2007423.68; 
834042.77, 2007421.73; 834042.87, 2007419.76; 834042.84, 2007417.80; 
834042.68, 2007415.84; 834042.39, 2007413.90; 834041.98, 2007411.98; 
834041.44, 2007410.09; 834040.78, 2007408.23; 834040.00, 2007406.43; 
834039.10, 2007404.68; 834038.09, 2007403.00; 834036.98, 2007401.38; 
834035.86, 2007399.96; 833985.64, 2007340.04; 834043.84, 2007268.82; 
834044.09, 2007268.50; 834045.27, 2007266.93; 834046.33, 2007265.28; 
834047.29, 2007263.56; 834048.13, 2007261.78; 834048.85, 2007259.96; 
834049.45, 2007258.09; 834049.93, 2007256.18; 834050.29, 2007254.25; 
834050.51, 2007252.30; 834050.61, 2007250.33; 834050.58, 2007248.37; 
834050.42, 2007246.41; 834050.14, 2007244.47; 834049.72, 2007242.54; 
834049.18, 2007240.65; 834048.52, 2007238.80; 834048.09, 2007237.77; 
834014.85, 2007161.84; 834040.05, 2007115.14; 834132.46, 2006989.50; 
834205.56, 2006931.14; 834206.23, 2006930.59; 834207.20, 2006929.73; 
834258.63, 2006882.21; 834374.13, 2006823.87; 834375.16, 2006823.33; 
834376.84, 2006822.32; 834378.46, 2006821.20; 834380.00, 2006819.98; 
834381.46, 2006818.67; 834382.83, 2006817.25; 834384.10, 2006815.76; 
834385.27, 2006814.18; 834386.34, 2006812.53; 834387.29, 2006810.81; 
834387.80, 2006809.77; 834412.77, 2006756.30; 834413.10, 2006755.56; 
834413.82, 2006753.74; 834414.42, 2006751.87; 834414.90, 2006749.96; 
834415.26, 2006748.03; 834415.48, 2006746.07; 834415.58, 2006744.11; 
834415.55, 2006742.15; 834415.39, 2006740.19; 834415.10, 2006738.24; 
834414.69, 2006736.32; 834414.15, 2006734.43; 834413.49, 2006732.58; 
834412.71, 2006730.78; 834411.82, 2006729.03; 834410.92, 2006727.51; 
834369.80, 2006662.68; 834367.07, 2006639.75; 834374.97, 2006627.50; 
834375.47, 2006626.69; 834376.43, 2006624.98; 834377.27, 2006623.20; 
834377.99, 2006621.37; 834378.59, 2006619.50; 834379.07, 2006617.60; 
834379.43, 2006615.66; 834379.65, 2006613.71; 834379.75, 2006611.75; 
834379.72, 2006609.78; 834379.56, 2006607.83; 834379.27, 2006605.88; 
834378.86, 2006603.96; 834378.32, 2006602.07; 834377.66, 2006600.22; 
834376.88, 2006598.42; 834375.98, 2006596.67; 834374.98, 2006594.98; 
834373.86, 2006593.36; 834372.64, 2006591.82; 834371.32, 2006590.37; 
834369.91, 2006589.00; 834368.41, 2006587.73; 834366.83, 2006586.56; 
834365.82, 2006585.88; 834340.63, 2006569.89; 834334.43, 2006549.03; 
834356.52, 2006506.35; 834356.55, 2006506.29; 834357.39, 2006504.51; 
834358.12, 2006502.69; 834358.72, 2006500.82; 834358.92, 2006500.08; 
834390.20, 2006379.42; 834390.48, 2006378.25; 834390.83, 2006376.32; 
834391.06, 2006374.36; 834391.16, 2006372.40; 834391.13, 2006370.44; 
834390.97, 2006368.48; 834390.68, 2006366.53; 834390.27, 2006364.61; 
834390.01, 2006363.66; 834382.32, 2006336.64; 834382.03, 2006335.70; 
834381.37, 2006333.85; 834380.59, 2006332.05; 834379.70, 2006330.30; 
834378.69, 2006328.61; 834377.57, 2006327.00; 834376.35, 2006325.46; 
834375.03, 2006324.00; 834373.62, 2006322.63; 834372.12, 2006321.36; 
834370.54, 2006320.19; 834368.89, 2006319.12; 834367.18, 2006318.17; 
834365.40, 2006317.32; 834363.57, 2006316.60; 834361.70, 2006316.00; 
834359.80, 2006315.52; 834357.87, 2006315.17; 834357.87, 2006315.17; 
834355.91, 2006314.94; 834353.95, 2006314.84; 834351.99, 2006314.87; 
834351.36, 2006314.91; 834303.63, 2006318.22; 834285.72, 2006292.67; 
834293.36, 2006231.63; 834293.49, 2006230.38; 834293.59, 2006228.41; 
834293.56, 2006226.45; 834293.40, 2006224.49; 834293.12, 2006222.55; 
834292.70, 2006220.62; 834292.16, 2006218.73; 834291.50, 2006216.88; 
834290.72, 2006215.08; 834289.83, 2006213.33; 834288.82, 2006211.65; 
834287.70, 2006210.03; 834286.48, 2006208.49; 834285.16, 2006207.03; 
834283.75, 2006205.66; 834282.25, 2006204.39; 834280.68, 2006203.22; 
834279.03, 2006202.15; 834277.31, 2006201.20; 834275.53, 2006200.36; 
834273.71, 2006199.63; 834271.84, 2006199.03; 834269.93, 2006198.55; 
834268.00, 2006198.20; 834266.05, 2006197.97; 834264.08, 2006197.87; 
834262.12, 2006197.90; 834260.16, 2006198.06; 834258.22, 2006198.35; 
834256.29, 2006198.76; 834254.40, 2006199.30; 834252.55, 2006199.96; 
834250.75, 2006200.74; 834249.00, 2006201.64; 834247.31, 2006202.65; 
834245.70, 2006203.76; 834244.16, 2006204.98; 834242.70, 2006206.30; 
834241.33, 2006207.71; 834240.06, 2006209.21; 834238.89, 2006210.79; 
834237.82, 2006212.44; 834236.87, 2006214.16; 834236.03, 2006215.93; 
834235.30, 2006217.76; 834234.70, 2006219.63; 834234.22, 2006221.54; 
834233.87, 2006223.47; 834233.77, 2006224.17; 834224.69, 2006296.70; 
834224.56, 2006297.95; 834224.46, 2006299.92; 834224.49, 2006301.88; 
834224.65, 2006303.84; 834224.65, 2006303.84; 834224.94, 2006305.78; 
834225.35, 2006307.70; 834225.89, 2006309.59; 834226.55, 2006311.45; 
834227.33, 2006313.25; 834228.22, 2006315.00, 834229.23, 2006316.68; 
834229.23, 2006316.68; 834229.90, 2006317.67; 834264.20, 2006366.59; 
834264.65, 2006367.22; 834265.87, 2006368.76; 834267.19, 2006370.22; 
834268.60, 2006371.58; 834270.10, 2006372.86; 834271.68, 2006374.03; 
834273.33, 2006375.09; 834275.05, 2006376.05; 834276.82, 2006376.89; 
834278.65, 2006377.61; 834280.52, 2006378.22; 834282.42, 2006378.70; 
834284.36, 2006379.05; 834286.31, 2006379.28; 834288.27, 2006379.37; 
834290.24, 2006379.34;

[[Page 223]]

834290.86, 2006379.31; 834328.87, 2006376.67; 834301.63, 2006481.74; 
834275.52, 2006532.18; 834275.49, 2006532.24; 834274.65, 2006534.02; 
834273.93, 2006535.85; 834273.33, 2006537.72; 834272.85, 2006539.62; 
834272.49, 2006541.56; 834272.27, 2006543.51; 834272.17, 2006545.47; 
834272.20, 2006547.43; 834272.36, 2006549.39; 834272.65, 2006551.34; 
834273.06, 2006553.26; 834273.41, 2006554.54; 834286.26, 2006597.78; 
834286.45, 2006598.39; 834287.11, 2006600.24; 834287.89, 2006602.04; 
834288.79, 2006603.79; 834289.80, 2006605.47; 834290.91, 2006607.09; 
834292.13, 2006608.63; 834293.45, 2006610.09; 834294.86, 2006611.46; 
834296.36, 2006612.73; 834297.94, 2006613.90; 834298.95, 2006614.58; 
834308.43, 2006620.59; 834308.43, 2006620.60; 834307.71, 2006622.43; 
834307.10, 2006624.30; 834306.62, 2006626.21; 834306.27, 2006628.14; 
834306.04, 2006630.09; 834305.95, 2006632.06; 834305.98, 2006634.02; 
834306.14, 2006635.98; 834306.15, 2006636.12; 834310.97, 2006676.56; 
834311.24, 2006678.36; 834311.66, 2006680.28; 834312.19, 2006682.17; 
834312.85, 2006684.02; 834313.63, 2006685.82; 834314.53, 2006687.57; 
834315.43, 2006689.09; 834351.39, 2006745.79; 834337.78, 2006774.95; 
834227.80, 2006830.50; 834226.78, 2006831.04; 834225.09, 2006832.05; 
834223.47, 2006833.17; 834221.93, 2006834.39; 834220.97, 2006835.25; 
834167.24, 2006884.88; 834091.89, 2006945.04; 834091.21, 2006945.59; 
834089.76, 2006946.91; 834088.39, 2006948.32; 834087.11, 2006949.82; 
834086.43, 2006950.72; 833990.42, 2007081.24; 833989.94, 2007081.92; 
833988.87, 2007083.58; 833988.19, 2007084.77; 833955.04, 2007146.21; 
833954.76, 2007146.73; 833953.92, 2007148.50; 833953.20, 2007150.33; 
833952.60, 2007152.20; 833952.12, 2007154.10; 833951.76, 2007156.04; 
833951.54, 2007157.99; 833951.44, 2007159.95; 833951.47, 2007161.92; 
833951.63, 2007163.88; 833951.92, 2007165.82; 833952.33, 2007167.74; 
833952.87, 2007169.63; 833953.53, 2007171.48; 833953.96, 2007172.51; 
833985.71, 2007245.04; 833923.41, 2007321.28; 833923.16, 2007321.60; 
833921.99, 2007323.18; 833920.92, 2007324.83; 833919.97, 2007326.54; 
833919.12, 2007328.32; 833918.40, 2007330.15; 833917.80, 2007332.02; 
833917.32, 2007333.92; 833916.97, 2007335.85; 833916.74, 2007337.81; 
833916.64, 2007339.77.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 1 (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 224]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.001

    (7) Unit 2: Montones, Las Piedras, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 2 consists of approximately 31.1 ac 
(12.6 ha) along the headwaters of the Valenciano River at PR 917 Km 9.7, 
Montones Ward, Las Piedras.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Juncos USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 2 
bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):
825191.05, 2008735.38; 825191.08, 2008737.35; 825191.17, 2008738.56; 
825197.07, 2008804.62; 825197.15, 2008805.37; 825197.43, 2008807.31; 
825197.85, 2008809.23; 825198.39, 2008811.12;

[[Page 225]]

825199.05, 2008812.97; 825199.83, 2008814.78; 825200.73, 2008816.52; 
825201.74, 2008818.21; 825202.09, 2008818.75; 825237.76, 2008871.58; 
825238.52, 2008872.65; 825239.74, 2008874.19; 825241.06, 2008875.65; 
825242.47, 2008877.02; 825243.97, 2008878.29; 825245.55, 2008879.46; 
825247.20, 2008880.53; 825248.91, 2008881.48; 825249.96, 2008881.99; 
825516.70, 2009006.30; 825517.43, 2009006.63; 825519.26, 2009007.35; 
825521.13, 2009007.95; 825523.03, 2009008.43; 825524.97, 2009008.78; 
825526.92, 2009009.01; 825528.88, 2009009.11; 825530.85, 2009009.08; 
825532.58, 2009008.94; 825607.77, 2009000.89; 825608.00, 2009000.86; 
825609.94, 2009000.58; 825611.86, 2009000.16; 825613.75, 2008999.62; 
825615.60, 2008998.96; 825617.41, 2008998.18; 825619.15, 2008997.28; 
825619.44, 2008997.12; 825657.84, 2008975.25; 825735.16, 2008935.69; 
825736.06, 2008935.21; 825737.74, 2008934.20; 825739.36, 2008933.08; 
825740.90, 2008931.86; 825742.35, 2008930.54; 825742.41, 2008930.48; 
825805.54, 2008869.09; 825875.41, 2008891.79; 825982.60, 2009016.88; 
826011.34, 2009100.61; 826011.81, 2009101.89; 826012.60, 2009103.69; 
826013.49, 2009105.44; 826014.50, 2009107.13; 826015.62, 2009108.74; 
826015.93, 2009109.15; 826234.92, 2009394.34; 826235.83, 2009395.46; 
826237.15, 2009396.92; 826238.56, 2009398.29; 826240.06, 2009399.56; 
826241.64, 2009400.73; 826243.28, 2009401.79; 826332.44, 2009455.31; 
826363.91, 2009522.58; 826363.96, 2009522.68; 826364.85, 2009524.43; 
826365.86, 2009526.12; 826366.98, 2009527.74; 826368.20, 2009529.27; 
826369.52, 2009530.73; 826370.93, 2009532.10; 826372.43, 2009533.37; 
826374.01, 2009534.54; 826375.66, 2009535.61; 826377.38, 2009536.56; 
826379.15, 2009537.40; 826380.92, 2009538.11; 826507.54, 2009583.75; 
826584.65, 2009645.47; 826584.74, 2009645.54; 826586.31, 2009646.72; 
826587.96, 2009647.78; 826589.68, 2009648.74; 826591.46, 2009649.58; 
826593.28, 2009650.30; 826595.15, 2009650.90; 826597.06, 2009651.38; 
826598.99, 2009651.73; 826600.95, 2009651.96; 826602.91, 2009652.05; 
826604.87, 2009652.02; 826606.83, 2009651.86; 826608.78, 2009651.58; 
826610.70, 2009651.16; 826612.59, 2009650.62; 826614.44, 2009649.96; 
826616.24, 2009649.18; 826617.99, 2009648.28; 826619.67, 2009647.27; 
826621.29, 2009646.16; 826622.83, 2009644.94; 826624.29, 2009643.62; 
826625.65, 2009642.21; 826626.92, 2009640.71; 826628.10, 2009639.13; 
826629.16, 2009637.48; 826630.12, 2009635.76; 826630.96, 2009633.99; 
826631.68, 2009632.16; 826632.28, 2009630.29; 826632.76, 2009628.38; 
826633.11, 2009626.45; 826633.34, 2009624.50; 826633.43, 2009622.53; 
826633.40, 2009620.57; 826633.24, 2009618.61; 826632.96, 2009616.67; 
826632.54, 2009614.75; 826632.00, 2009612.86; 826631.34, 2009611.01; 
826630.56, 2009609.20; 826629.66, 2009607.46; 826628.65, 2009605.77; 
826627.54, 2009604.15; 826626.32, 2009602.61; 826625.00, 2009601.16; 
826623.59, 2009599.79; 826622.18, 2009598.59; 826541.17, 2009533.75; 
826541.08, 2009533.68; 826539.51, 2009532.51; 826537.86, 2009531.45; 
826536.14, 2009530.49; 826534.36, 2009529.65; 826532.59, 2009528.95; 
826413.02, 2009485.84; 826382.96, 2009421.56; 826382.91, 2009421.45; 
826382.01, 2009419.71; 826381.00, 2009418.02; 826379.88, 2009416.40; 
826378.66, 2009414.86; 826377.34, 2009413.41; 826375.93, 2009412.04; 
826374.43, 2009410.77; 826372.86, 2009409.60; 826371.21, 2009408.54; 
826279.08, 2009353.24; 826066.55, 2009076.47; 826037.54, 2008991.95; 
826037.07, 2008990.68; 826036.29, 2008988.88; 826035.39, 2008987.13; 
826034.38, 2008985.44; 826033.26, 2008983.83; 826032.04, 2008982.29; 
826031.94, 2008982.17; 825915.52, 2008846.30; 825914.31, 2008844.97; 
825912.90, 2008843.60; 825911.40, 2008842.33; 825909.82, 2008841.16; 
825908.17, 2008840.09; 825906.45, 2008839.14; 825904.68, 2008838.30; 
825902.85, 2008837.57; 825902.00, 2008837.28; 825806.87, 2008806.38; 
825805.85, 2008806.07; 825803.94, 2008805.59; 825802.01, 2008805.24; 
825800.06, 2008805.01; 825798.10, 2008804.91; 825796.13, 2008804.95; 
825794.17, 2008805.11; 825792.23, 2008805.39; 825790.31, 2008805.81; 
825788.42, 2008806.35; 825786.57, 2008807.01; 825784.77, 2008807.79; 
825783.02, 2008808.69; 825781.33, 2008809.69; 825779.72, 2008810.81; 
825778.18, 2008812.03; 825776.72, 2008813.35; 825776.66, 2008813.41; 
825703.78, 2008884.28; 825629.89, 2008922.09; 825628.99, 2008922.57; 
825628.70, 2008922.73; 825595.16, 2008941.84; 825534.49, 2008948.34; 
825282.87, 2008831.08; 825256.20, 2008791.56; 825251.43, 2008738.26; 
825259.11, 2008707.57; 825284.21, 2008655.11; 825304.76, 2008631.14; 
825305.48, 2008630.28; 825306.65, 2008628.70; 825307.71, 2008627.05; 
825308.67, 2008625.33; 825309.51, 2008623.55; 825310.23, 2008621.73; 
825310.83, 2008619.86; 825311.31, 2008617.95; 825311.66, 2008616.02; 
825311.89, 2008614.06; 825311.99, 2008612.10; 825311.96, 2008610.14; 
825311.80, 2008608.18; 825311.51, 2008606.24; 825311.09, 2008604.31; 
825310.55, 2008602.43; 825309.89, 2008600.57; 825309.11, 2008598.77; 
825308.22, 2008597.02; 825307.21, 2008595.34; 825306.09, 2008593.72; 
825304.87, 2008592.18; 825303.55, 2008590.73; 825302.14, 2008589.36; 
825300.64, 2008588.09; 825299.06, 2008586.92; 825297.41, 2008585.85; 
825295.69, 2008584.90; 825293.92, 2008584.05; 825292.09, 2008583.33; 
825290.22, 2008582.73; 825288.31, 2008582.25; 825286.38, 2008581.90; 
825284.43, 2008581.67; 825282.47, 2008581.58; 825280.50, 2008581.61; 
825278.54, 2008581.77; 825276.60, 2008582.06; 825274.68, 2008582.47; 
825272.79, 2008583.01; 825270.94, 2008583.67; 825269.14, 2008584.45; 
825267.39, 2008585.35; 825265.70, 2008586.36; 825264.09, 2008587.47; 
825262.55, 2008588.70; 825261.09, 2008590.01; 825259.72, 2008591.43; 
825259.17, 2008592.06; 825236.04, 2008619.04; 825235.32, 2008619.90; 
825234.15, 2008621.48; 825233.09, 2008623.13; 825232.13, 2008624.85; 
825231.75, 2008625.62; 825203.63, 2008684.38; 825203.17, 2008685.39; 
825202.45, 2008687.22; 825201.84, 2008689.09; 825201.58, 2008690.06; 
825191.94, 2008728.60; 825191.73, 2008729.54; 825191.37, 2008731.47; 
825191.15, 2008733.42; 825191.05, 2008735.38.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 2 (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 226]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.002

    (8) Unit 3: Tejas, Las Piedras, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 3 consists of approximately 5.2 ac 
(2.1 ha) between Road PR-905 to the east, Road PR-908 to the west, Road 
PR-9921 to the north, and Road PR-9904 to the south within Tejas Ward, 
Las Piedras.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa, Humacao, Juncos, and Punta 
Guayan[eacute]s USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle maps. Unit 3 bounded by the 
following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):

829623.13, 2007423.98; 829623.16, 2007425.95; 829623.32, 2007427.91; 
829623.60, 2007429.85;

[[Page 227]]

829624.02, 2007431.77; 829624.56, 2007433.66; 829625.22, 2007435.51; 
829626.00, 2007437.32; 829626.90, 2007439.06; 829627.90, 2007440.75; 
829629.02, 2007442.37; 829629.38, 2007442.84; 829643.74, 2007461.45; 
829644.61, 2007462.52; 829645.93, 2007463.98; 829647.34, 2007465.35; 
829648.84, 2007466.62; 829650.41, 2007467.79; 829652.06, 2007468.86; 
829653.78, 2007469.81; 829654.23, 2007470.04; 829665.53, 2007475.61; 
829666.85, 2007476.23; 829668.68, 2007476.95; 829670.55, 2007477.55; 
829672.46, 2007478.03; 829674.39, 2007478.39; 829676.34, 2007478.61; 
829678.31, 2007478.71; 829680.27, 2007478.68; 829682.23, 2007478.52; 
829682.50, 2007478.49; 829698.24, 2007476.54; 829699.91, 2007476.28; 
829701.83, 2007475.87; 829703.72, 2007475.33; 829705.57, 2007474.67; 
829707.37, 2007473.89; 829709.12, 2007472.99; 829710.81, 2007471.98; 
829712.42, 2007470.87; 829713.96, 2007469.65; 829715.42, 2007468.33; 
829716.79, 2007466.92; 829718.06, 2007465.42; 829719.23, 2007463.84; 
829720.30, 2007462.19; 829721.25, 2007460.47; 829722.09, 2007458.70; 
829722.82, 2007456.87; 829723.42, 2007455.00; 829723.52, 2007454.66; 
829736.51, 2007407.12; 829744.37, 2007381.77; 829781.75, 2007394.68; 
829783.28, 2007395.17; 829785.19, 2007395.65; 829787.12, 2007396.00; 
829789.08, 2007396.22; 829791.04, 2007396.32; 829791.73, 2007396.33; 
829845.90, 2007396.00; 829847.17, 2007395.96; 829849.13, 2007395.80; 
829849.83, 2007395.71; 829881.85, 2007391.29; 829883.10, 2007391.09; 
829885.02, 2007390.67; 829886.91, 2007390.13; 829888.76, 2007389.47; 
829890.56, 2007388.69; 829892.31, 2007387.80; 829894.00, 2007386.79; 
829895.61, 2007385.67; 829897.15, 2007384.45; 829898.61, 2007383.13; 
829899.98, 2007381.72; 829901.25, 2007380.22; 829902.42, 2007378.64; 
829903.49, 2007376.99; 829904.44, 2007375.28; 829905.28, 2007373.50; 
829906.01, 2007371.67; 829906.61, 2007369.80; 829907.09, 2007367.90; 
829907.44, 2007365.96; 829907.67, 2007364.01; 829907.76, 2007362.05; 
829907.73, 2007360.08; 829907.57, 2007358.13; 829907.28, 2007356.18; 
829906.87, 2007354.26; 829906.33, 2007352.37; 829905.67, 2007350.52; 
829904.89, 2007348.72; 829903.99, 2007346.97; 829902.99, 2007345.28; 
829901.87, 2007343.67; 829900.65, 2007342.13; 829899.33, 2007340.67; 
829897.92, 2007339.30; 829896.42, 2007338.03; 829894.84, 2007336.86; 
829893.19, 2007335.79; 829891.47, 2007334.84; 829889.70, 2007334.00; 
829887.87, 2007333.27; 829886.00, 2007332.67; 829884.09, 2007332.19; 
829882.16, 2007331.84; 829880.21, 2007331.61; 829878.25, 2007331.52; 
829876.28, 2007331.55; 829874.32, 2007331.71; 829873.62, 2007331.80; 
829843.56, 2007335.95; 829796.50, 2007336.24; 829750.67, 2007320.42; 
829749.14, 2007319.93; 829747.23, 2007319.45; 829745.30, 2007319.10; 
829743.34, 2007318.87; 829741.38, 2007318.78; 829739.42, 2007318.81; 
829737.46, 2007318.97; 829735.51, 2007319.25; 829733.59, 2007319.67; 
829731.70, 2007320.21; 829729.98, 2007320.82; 829709.83, 2007328.66; 
829709.70, 2007328.71; 829707.90, 2007329.49; 829706.15, 2007330.39; 
829704.46, 2007331.40; 829702.85, 2007332.51; 829701.31, 2007333.73; 
829699.85, 2007335.05; 829698.48, 2007336.46; 829697.21, 2007337.96; 
829696.04, 2007339.54; 829694.98, 2007341.19; 829694.02, 2007342.91; 
829693.18, 2007344.68; 829692.46, 2007346.51; 829692.04, 2007347.75; 
829679.00, 2007389.82; 829678.81, 2007390.45; 829678.71, 2007390.79; 
829675.10, 2007404.00; 829674.74, 2007403.62 829673.33, 2007402.26; 
829671.83, 2007400.98; 829670.25, 2007399.81; 829668.60, 2007398.75; 
829666.89, 2007397.79; 829665.11, 2007396.95; 829663.28, 2007396.23; 
829661.41, 2007395.62; 829659.51, 2007395.15; 829657.57, 2007394.79; 
829655.62, 2007394.57; 829653.66, 2007394.47; 829651.69, 2007394.50; 
829649.74, 2007394.66; 829647.79, 2007394.95; 829645.87, 2007395.36; 
829643.98, 2007395.90; 829642.13, 2007396.56; 829640.33, 2007397.34; 
829638.58, 2007398.24; 829636.89, 2007399.25; 829635.28, 2007400.36; 
829633.74, 2007401.58; 829632.28, 2007402.90; 829630.91, 2007404.31; 
829629.64, 2007405.81; 829628.47, 2007407.39; 829627.40, 2007409.04; 
829626.45, 2007410.76; 829625.61, 2007412.53; 829624.88, 2007414.36; 
829624.28, 2007416.23; 829623.80, 2007418.14; 829623.45, 2007420.07; 
829623.22, 2007422.02; 829623.13, 2007423.98.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 3 (Map 4) follows:

[[Page 228]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.003

    (9) Unit 4: Emajagua, Maunabo, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 4 consists of approximately 33.0 ac 
(13.4 ha) between Quebrada Arenas and Quebrada Emajagua, north of Road 
PR-901 within Emajagua Ward, Maunabo.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa and Punta Guayan[eacute]s USGS 
1:20,000 quadrangle maps. Unit 4 bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 
coordinates (E, N):


[[Page 229]]


830301.03, 1993842.17; 830301.06, 1993844.14; 830301.22, 1993846.10; 
830301.51, 1993848.04; 830301.93, 1993849.96; 830302.46, 1993851.85; 
830303.12, 1993853.70; 830303.91, 1993855.50; 830304.80, 1993857.25; 
830305.10, 1993857.77; 830382.85, 1993991.51; 830383.56, 1993992.68; 
830384.68, 1993994.30; 830385.90, 1993995.83; 830387.22, 1993997.29; 
830388.63, 1993998.66; 830389.55, 1993999.46; 830491.53, 1994084.69; 
830602.31, 1994239.62; 830670.30, 1994401.70; 830645.67, 1994534.02; 
830645.49, 1994535.09; 830645.27, 1994537.04; 830645.17, 1994539.01; 
830645.20, 1994540.97; 830645.36, 1994542.93; 830645.65, 1994544.87; 
830646.06, 1994546.79; 830646.60, 1994548.68; 830647.26, 1994550.53; 
830648.04, 1994552.34; 830648.94, 1994554.09; 830649.02, 1994554.22; 
830603.53, 1994664.55; 830603.03, 1994665.86; 830602.43, 1994667.73; 
830601.95, 1994669.64; 830601.59, 1994671.57; 830601.37, 1994673.52; 
830601.27, 1994675.49; 830601.30, 1994677.45; 830601.46, 1994679.41; 
830601.75, 1994681.35; 830602.16, 1994683.28; 830602.70, 1994685.17; 
830603.36, 1994687.02; 830604.14, 1994688.82; 830605.04, 1994690.57; 
830606.05, 1994692.25; 830607.17, 1994693.87; 830608.39, 1994695.41; 
830609.71, 1994696.87; 830611.12, 1994698.23; 830612.62, 1994699.51; 
830614.19, 1994700.68; 830615.84, 1994701.74; 830617.56, 1994702.70; 
830619.34, 1994703.54; 830621.17, 1994704.26; 830623.04, 1994704.86; 
830624.94, 1994705.34; 830626.87, 1994705.70; 830628.83, 1994705.92; 
830630.79, 1994706.02; 830632.75, 1994705.99; 830634.71, 1994705.83; 
830636.66, 1994705.54; 830638.58, 1994705.13; 830640.47, 1994704.59; 
830642.32, 1994703.93; 830644.12, 1994703.15; 830645.87, 1994702.25; 
830647.56, 1994701.24; 830649.17, 1994700.12; 830650.71, 1994698.90; 
830652.17, 1994697.58; 830653.54, 1994696.17; 830654.81, 1994694.67; 
830655.98, 1994693.10; 830657.04, 1994691.45; 830658.00, 1994689.73; 
830658.84, 1994687.95; 830659.06, 1994687.44; 830706.46, 1994572.47; 
830780.50, 1994437.89; 830780.89, 1994437.15; 830781.73, 1994435.37; 
830782.46, 1994433.55; 830783.06, 1994431.68; 830783.54, 1994429.77; 
830783.89, 1994427.84; 830784.12, 1994425.89; 830784.19, 1994424.69; 
830784.37, 1994420.55; 830925.97, 1994319.54; 830926.41, 1994319.23; 
830927.95, 1994318.00; 830929.40, 1994316.69; 830929.47, 1994316.62; 
830981.02, 1994266.48; 830982.32, 1994265.13; 830983.59, 1994263.63; 
830984.76, 1994262.06; 830985.83, 1994260.41; 830986.78, 1994258.69; 
830987.63, 1994256.91; 830987.69, 1994256.77; 831019.16, 1994183.23; 
831048.99, 1994127.46; 831110.90, 1994086.77; 831152.31, 1994063.55; 
831153.89, 1994062.60; 831155.51, 1994061.48; 831157.05, 1994060.26; 
831158.50, 1994058.94; 831159.87, 1994057.53; 831161.14, 1994056.03; 
831162.31, 1994054.46; 831163.38, 1994052.81; 831164.33, 1994051.09; 
831165.17, 1994049.31; 831165.90, 1994047.48; 831166.50, 1994045.61; 
831166.98, 1994043.71; 831167.33, 1994041.78; 831167.56, 1994039.82; 
831167.65, 1994037.86; 831167.62, 1994035.90; 831167.46, 1994033.94; 
831167.18, 1994031.99; 831166.76, 1994030.07; 831166.22, 1994028.18; 
831165.56, 1994026.33; 831164.78, 1994024.53; 831163.88, 1994022.78; 
831162.88, 1994021.10; 831161.76, 1994019.48; 831160.54, 1994017.94; 
831159.22, 1994016.48; 831157.81, 1994015.11; 831156.31, 1994013.84; 
831154.73, 1994012.67; 831153.08, 1994011.61; 831151.36, 1994010.65; 
831149.59, 1994009.81; 831147.76, 1994009.09; 831145.89, 1994008.48; 
831143.98, 1994008.01; 831142.05, 1994007.65; 831140.10, 1994007.43; 
831138.14, 1994007.33; 831136.17, 1994007.36; 831134.21, 1994007.52; 
831132.27, 1994007.81; 831130.35, 1994008.22; 831128.46, 1994008.76; 
831126.61, 1994009.42; 831124.80, 1994010.20; 831123.06, 1994011.10; 
831122.95, 1994011.16; 831080.61, 1994034.90; 831079.03, 1994035.85; 
831078.79, 1994036.00; 831009.62, 1994081.48; 831008.24, 1994082.44; 
831006.70, 1994083.66; 831005.24, 1994084.98; 831003.88, 1994086.39; 
831002.61, 1994087.89; 831001.43, 1994089.47; 831000.37, 1994091.12; 
830999.64, 1994092.40; 830965.59, 1994156.06; 830965.37, 1994156.49; 
830964.52, 1994158.26; 830964.46, 1994158.40; 830934.84, 1994227.62; 
830889.23, 1994271.98; 830787.46, 1994344.57; 830787.30, 1994342.66; 
830787.30, 1994342.64; 830780.27, 1994281.48; 830832.47, 1994149.96; 
830832.83, 1994149.01; 830833.43, 1994147.14; 830833.91, 1994145.24; 
830834.26, 1994143.30; 830834.49, 1994141.35; 830834.58, 1994139.39; 
830834.55, 1994137.42; 830834.52, 1994136.87; 830829.02, 1994054.98; 
830828.89, 1994053.58; 830828.60, 1994051.63; 830828.19, 1994049.71; 
830827.65, 1994047.82; 830826.99, 1994045.97; 830826.21, 1994044.17; 
830825.31, 1994042.42; 830824.30, 1994040.73; 830823.19, 1994039.12; 
830822.35, 1994038.04; 830736.17, 1993932.11; 830714.39, 1993876.45; 
830714.36, 1993876.37; 830713.58, 1993874.57; 830712.68, 1993872.82; 
830711.67, 1993871.13; 830710.55, 1993869.52; 830709.33, 1993867.98; 
830708.01, 1993866.52; 830706.60, 1993865.15; 830705.11, 1993863.88; 
830703.53, 1993862.71; 830701.88, 1993861.64; 830700.16, 1993860.69; 
830698.38, 1993859.85; 830696.56, 1993859.12; 830694.69, 1993858.52; 
830692.78, 1993858.04; 830690.85, 1993857.69; 830688.90, 1993857.47; 
830686.93, 1993857.37; 830684.97, 1993857.40; 830683.01, 1993857.56; 
830681.07, 1993857.85; 830679.14, 1993858.26; 830677.26, 1993858.80; 
830675.40, 1993859.46; 830673.60, 1993860.24; 830671.85, 1993861.14; 
830670.17, 1993862.15; 830668.55, 1993863.26; 830667.01, 1993864.49; 
830665.55, 1993865.80; 830664.19, 1993867.22; 830662.91, 1993868.71; 
830661.74, 1993870.29; 830660.68, 1993871.94; 830659.72, 1993873.66; 
830658.88, 1993875.43; 830658.16, 1993877.26; 830657.56, 1993879.13; 
830657.08, 1993881.04; 830656.72, 1993882.97; 830656.50, 1993884.92; 
830656.40, 1993886.89; 830656.43, 1993888.85; 830656.59, 1993890.81; 
830656.88, 1993892.75; 830657.29, 1993894.67; 830657.83, 1993896.56; 
830658.46, 1993898.34; 830681.96, 1993958.36; 830681.99, 1993958.44; 
830682.77, 1993960.24; 830683.66, 1993961.99; 830684.67, 1993963.68; 
830685.79, 1993965.29; 830686.62, 1993966.37; 830769.74, 1994068.54; 
830774.14, 1994134.12; 830721.67, 1994266.34; 830721.31, 1994267.29; 
830720.71, 1994269.16; 830720.23, 1994271.07; 830719.88, 1994273.00; 
830719.65, 1994274.95;

[[Page 230]]

830719.55, 1994276.91; 830719.58, 1994278.88; 830719.74, 1994280.84; 
830719.74, 1994280.85; 830727.37, 1994347.16; 830726.01, 1994379.24; 
830656.38, 1994213.28; 830655.84, 1994212.07; 830654.95, 1994210.32; 
830653.94, 1994208.63; 830653.12, 1994207.43; 830538.15, 1994046.64; 
830537.86, 1994046.23; 830536.63, 1994044.69; 830535.32, 1994043.23; 
830533.90, 1994041.86; 830532.98, 1994041.06; 830432.11, 1993956.76; 
830357.02, 1993827.59; 830356.30, 1993826.42; 830355.19, 1993824.80; 
830353.96, 1993823.26; 830352.65, 1993821.81; 830351.23, 1993820.44; 
830349.74, 1993819.17; 830348.16, 1993818.00; 830346.51, 1993816.93; 
830344.79, 1993815.97; 830343.02, 1993815.13; 830341.19, 1993814.41; 
830339.32, 1993813.81; 830337.41, 1993813.33; 830335.48, 1993812.98; 
830333.53, 1993812.75; 830331.56, 1993812.65; 830329.60, 1993812.69; 
830327.64, 1993812.84; 830325.70, 1993813.13; 830323.78, 1993813.55; 
830321.89, 1993814.08; 830320.04, 1993814.75; 830318.23, 1993815.53; 
830316.48, 1993816.42; 830314.80, 1993817.43; 830313.18, 1993818.55; 
830311.64, 1993819.77; 830310.19, 1993821.09; 830308.82, 1993822.50; 
830307.55, 1993824.00; 830306.37, 1993825.58; 830305.31, 1993827.23; 
830304.35, 1993828.94; 830303.51, 1993830.72; 830302.79, 1993832.55; 
830302.19, 1993834.42; 830301.71, 1993836.32; 830301.36, 1993838.26; 
830301.13, 1993840.21; 830301.03, 1993842.17.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 4 (Map 5) follows:

[[Page 231]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.004

    (10) Unit 5: Jacaboa, Patillas, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 5 consists of approximately 10.3 ac 
(4.2 ha) northwest of road PR-758 within R[iacute]os Ward, Patillas.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa and Punta Tuna USGS 1:20,000 
quadrangle maps. Unit 5 bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 
coordinates (E, N):

820101.76, 1993627.91; 820101.80, 1993629.87; 820101.96, 1993631.83; 
820102.25, 1993633.77; 820102.66, 1993635.69; 820103.20, 1993637.58; 
820103.86, 1993639.43; 820104.64, 1993641.24;

[[Page 232]]

820105.54, 1993642.98; 820106.55, 1993644.67; 820107.67, 1993646.28; 
820108.89, 1993647.82; 820110.21, 1993649.28; 820111.62, 1993650.65; 
820113.12, 1993651.92; 820114.70, 1993653.09; 820116.35, 1993654.15; 
820118.07, 1993655.11; 820119.84, 1993655.95; 820121.67, 1993656.67; 
820123.54, 1993657.27; 820125.45, 1993657.75; 820127.38, 1993658.10; 
820129.33, 1993658.32; 820131.30, 1993658.42; 820133.26, 1993658.39; 
820135.22, 1993658.23; 820137.16, 1993657.94; 820139.08, 1993657.52; 
820140.97, 1993656.98; 820142.82, 1993656.32; 820144.62, 1993655.54; 
820146.37, 1993654.64; 820148.06, 1993653.63; 820149.67, 1993652.51; 
820149.79, 1993652.43; 820252.55, 1993575.46; 820252.92, 1993575.18; 
820351.83, 1993498.67; 820380.40, 1993494.03; 820380.96, 1993493.93; 
820382.88, 1993493.52; 820384.77, 1993492.98; 820386.62, 1993492.32; 
820388.43, 1993491.53; 820390.17, 1993490.64; 820391.86, 1993489.63; 
820393.47, 1993488.51; 820395.01, 1993487.29; 820396.47, 1993485.97; 
820397.77, 1993484.63; 820514.21, 1993356.97; 820592.94, 1993297.68; 
820655.33, 1993281.06; 820656.79, 1993280.63; 820658.64, 1993279.97; 
820660.44, 1993279.19; 820662.19, 1993278.29; 820663.87, 1993277.28; 
820665.49, 1993276.16; 820667.03, 1993274.94; 820668.48, 1993273.62; 
820669.85, 1993272.21; 820671.12, 1993270.71; 820672.29, 1993269.13; 
820673.36, 1993267.48; 820674.31, 1993265.76; 820675.15, 1993263.99; 
820675.87, 1993262.16; 820676.47, 1993260.29; 820676.95, 1993258.38; 
820677.30, 1993256.45; 820677.53, 1993254.50; 820677.62, 1993252.54; 
820677.59, 1993250.57; 820677.43, 1993248.61; 820677.14, 1993246.67; 
820676.73, 1993244.75; 820676.19, 1993242.86; 820675.53, 1993241.01; 
820674.74, 1993239.21; 820673.85, 1993237.46; 820672.84, 1993235.77; 
820671.72, 1993234.16; 820670.50, 1993232.62; 820669.18, 1993231.16; 
820667.76, 1993229.80; 820666.27, 1993228.53; 820664.69, 1993227.36; 
820663.04, 1993226.29; 820661.32, 1993225.34; 820659.54, 1993224.50; 
820657.72, 1993223.77; 820655.84, 1993223.17; 820653.94, 1993222.70; 
820652.01, 1993222.34; 820650.05, 1993222.12; 820648.09, 1993222.02; 
820646.13, 1993222.06; 820644.17, 1993222.22; 820642.22, 1993222.50; 
820640.30, 1993222.92; 820639.87, 1993223.03; 820571.82, 1993241.16; 
820570.37, 1993241.59; 820568.52, 1993242.25; 820566.71, 1993243.03; 
820564.97, 1993243.93; 820563.28, 1993244.94; 820561.66, 1993246.06; 
820561.49, 1993246.19; 820475.85, 1993310.68; 820474.48, 1993311.77; 
820473.03, 1993313.09; 820471.73, 1993314.43; 820360.45, 1993436.43; 
820334.68, 1993440.61; 820334.11, 1993440.71; 820332.19, 1993441.12; 
820330.30, 1993441.66; 820328.45, 1993442.32; 820326.65, 1993443.11; 
820324.90, 1993444.00; 820323.22, 1993445.01; 820321.60, 1993446.13; 
820321.12, 1993446.50; 820216.36, 1993527.53; 820113.79, 1993604.37; 
820112.36, 1993605.50; 820110.90, 1993606.82; 820109.54, 1993608.23; 
820108.27, 1993609.73; 820107.10, 1993611.31; 820106.03, 1993612.96; 
820105.08, 1993614.68; 820104.24, 1993616.46; 820103.52, 1993618.28; 
820102.91, 1993620.15; 820102.44, 1993622.06; 820102.09, 1993623.99; 
820101.86, 1993625.94; 820101.76, 1993627.91.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 5 (Map 6) follows:

[[Page 233]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.005

    (11) Unit 6: Calabazas, Yabucoa, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 6 consists of approximately 13.8 ac 
(5.6 ha), including lands northeast of road PR-900, between Quebrada 
Guayabo to the south and R[iacute]o Guayan[eacute]s to the north, and 
south of Guayan[eacute]s Unit, within Calabazas Ward, Yabucoa.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 6 
bounded by

[[Page 234]]

the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):

825303.81, 1999020.54; 825324.29, 1999071.68; 825361.95, 1999106.10; 
825427.53, 1999113.37; 825493.52, 1999090.98; 825544.83, 1999057.79; 
825546.92, 1999059.93; 825572.78, 1999028.51; 825577.55, 1998990.44; 
825576.37, 1998922.62; 825547.19, 1998888.32; 825518.03, 1998851.89; 
825465.30, 1998834.21; 825446.21, 1998836.06; 825416.29, 1998854.72; 
825377.77, 1998881.73; 825354.21, 1998900.47; 825325.99, 1998948.81; 
825303.81, 1999020.54.
    (iii) Note: The map depicting Unit 6 is provided at paragraph 
(12)(iii) of this entry.
    (12) Unit 7: Guayan[eacute]s, Yabucoa, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 7 consists of approximately 7.9 ac 
(3.2 ha) northeast of Road PR-900 between Quebrada Guayabo to the south 
and R[iacute]o Guayan[eacute]s to the north, and north of Unit 6, within 
Calabazas Ward, Yabucoa.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 7 
bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):

825269.89, 1999257.75; 825269.92, 1999259.72; 825270.08, 1999261.68; 
825270.37, 1999263.62; 825270.78, 1999265.54; 825271.32, 1999267.43; 
825271.98, 1999269.28; 825272.76, 1999271.09; 825273.66, 1999272.83; 
825274.67, 1999274.52; 825275.79, 1999276.13; 825277.01, 1999277.67; 
825278.33, 1999279.13; 825279.74, 1999280.50; 825281.24, 1999281.77; 
825282.82, 1999282.94; 825284.47, 1999284.01; 825286.19, 1999284.96; 
825287.96, 1999285.80; 825289.79, 1999286.52; 825291.66, 1999287.13; 
825293.57, 1999287.60; 825295.50, 1999287.96; 825297.45, 1999288.18; 
825299.41, 1999288.28; 825301.38, 1999288.25; 825303.34, 1999288.09; 
825305.28, 1999287.80; 825307.20, 1999287.38; 825309.09, 1999286.85; 
825310.94, 1999286.18; 825312.74, 1999285.40; 825314.49, 1999284.51; 
825316.18, 1999283.50; 825316.22, 1999283.47; 825459.03, 1999191.10; 
825625.66, 1999156.49; 825626.84, 1999156.22; 825628.73, 1999155.68; 
825629.63, 1999155.37; 825721.19, 1999122.74; 825722.14, 1999122.38; 
825723.95, 1999121.60; 825725.69, 1999120.71; 825727.38, 1999119.70; 
825728.99, 1999118.58; 825729.55, 1999118.16; 825761.67, 1999093.18; 
825762.66, 1999092.38; 825764.12, 1999091.06; 825765.49, 1999089.65; 
825766.76, 1999088.15; 825767.93, 1999086.57; 825768.99, 1999084.92; 
825769.95, 1999083.20; 825770.79, 1999081.43; 825771.51, 1999079.60; 
825772.11, 1999077.73; 825772.59, 1999075.82; 825772.94, 1999073.89; 
825773.17, 1999071.94; 825773.27, 1999069.98; 825773.23, 1999068.01; 
825773.07, 1999066.05; 825772.79, 1999064.11; 825772.37, 1999062.19; 
825771.83, 1999060.30; 825771.17, 1999058.45; 825770.39, 1999056.65; 
825769.49, 1999054.90; 825768.48, 1999053.21; 825767.37, 1999051.60; 
825766.15, 1999050.06; 825764.83, 1999048.60; 825763.41, 1999047.23; 
825761.92, 1999045.96; 825760.34, 1999044.79; 825758.69, 1999043.72; 
825756.97, 1999042.77; 825755.19, 1999041.93; 825753.37, 1999041.21; 
825751.50, 1999040.60; 825749.59, 1999040.13; 825747.66, 1999039.77; 
825745.71, 1999039.55; 825743.74, 1999039.45; 825741.78, 1999039.48; 
825739.82, 1999039.64; 825737.88, 1999039.93; 825735.96, 1999040.35; 
825734.07, 1999040.89; 825732.22, 1999041.55; 825730.41, 1999042.33; 
825728.66, 1999043.22; 825726.98, 1999044.23; 825725.36, 1999045.35; 
825724.81, 1999045.77; 825696.49, 1999067.79; 825611.42, 1999098.11; 
825441.33, 1999133.44; 825440.15, 1999133.71; 825438.26, 1999134.25; 
825436.41, 1999134.91; 825434.60, 1999135.69; 825432.86, 1999136.59; 
825431.17, 1999137.60; 825431.13, 1999137.62; 825283.60, 1999233.04; 
825282.03, 1999234.13; 825280.49, 1999235.35; 825279.04, 1999236.67; 
825277.67, 1999238.08; 825276.40, 1999239.58; 825275.23, 1999241.16; 
825274.16, 1999242.81; 825273.21, 1999244.53; 825272.37, 1999246.30; 
825271.64, 1999248.13; 825271.04, 1999250.00; 825270.56, 1999251.91; 
825270.21, 1999253.84; 825269.99, 1999255.79; 825269.89, 1999257.75.
    (iii) Note: Map of Units 6 and 7 (Map 7) follows:

[[Page 235]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.006

    (13) Unit 8: Panduras, Yabucoa, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 8 consists of approximately 28.6 ac 
(11.6 ha) to the northwest and southeast of Road PR-3 within Calabazas 
Ward, Yabucoa, and 18.2 ac (7.4 ha) of lands owned by the Puerto Rico 
Conservation Trust near the top of Cerro La Pandura.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 8 
bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):


[[Page 236]]


827566.07, 1997348.94; 827566.10, 1997350.90; 827566.26, 1997352.86; 
827566.55, 1997354.81; 827566.96, 1997356.73; 827567.50, 1997358.62; 
827568.16, 1997360.47; 827568.94, 1997362.27; 827569.84, 1997364.02; 
827570.13, 1997364.53; 827611.88, 1997436.35; 827612.60, 1997437.52; 
827613.72, 1997439.14; 827614.94, 1997440.68; 827616.26, 1997442.13; 
827617.67, 1997443.50; 827619.16, 1997444.77; 827620.74, 1997445.94; 
827622.39, 1997447.01; 827624.11, 1997447.96; 827625.89, 1997448.80; 
827627.71, 1997449.53; 827629.58, 1997450.13; 827631.49, 1997450.61; 
827633.42, 1997450.96; 827635.38, 1997451.18; 827637.34, 1997451.28; 
827639.30, 1997451.25; 827641.26, 1997451.09; 827643.20, 1997450.80; 
827645.13, 1997450.39; 827647.02, 1997449.85; 827648.87, 1997449.19; 
827650.67, 1997448.41; 827652.42, 1997447.51; 827654.10, 1997446.50; 
827655.72, 1997445.38; 827657.26, 1997444.16; 827658.72, 1997442.84; 
827660.08, 1997441.43; 827661.35, 1997439.93; 827662.53, 1997438.36; 
827663.59, 1997436.70; 827664.55, 1997434.99; 827665.39, 1997433.21; 
827666.11, 1997431.38; 827666.71, 1997429.51; 827667.19, 1997427.61; 
827667.54, 1997425.68; 827667.77, 1997423.72; 827667.86, 1997421.76; 
827667.83, 1997419.80; 827667.67, 1997417.84; 827667.39, 1997415.89; 
827666.97, 1997413.97; 827666.43, 1997412.08; 827665.77, 1997410.23; 
827664.99, 1997408.43; 827664.09, 1997406.68; 827663.80, 1997406.17; 
827627.55, 1997343.81; 827640.42, 1997269.96; 827711.77, 1997123.84; 
827786.66, 1997042.73; 827883.73, 1996967.26; 827884.71, 1996966.46; 
827886.17, 1996965.14; 827887.54, 1996963.73; 827888.44, 1996962.69; 
827912.27, 1996933.87; 827952.33, 1996988.85; 827952.47, 1996989.05; 
827953.69, 1996990.59; 827955.01, 1996992.05; 827956.43, 1996993.41; 
827957.92, 1996994.69; 827959.50, 1996995.86; 827961.15, 1996996.92; 
827962.87, 1996997.88; 827964.64, 1996998.72; 827966.47, 1996999.44; 
827968.34, 1997000.04; 827968.39, 1997000.06; 828042.04, 1997020.99; 
828043.90, 1997021.45; 828045.83, 1997021.80; 828047.79, 1997022.03; 
828049.75, 1997022.12; 828051.71, 1997022.09; 828053.67, 1997021.93; 
828055.62, 1997021.65; 828057.54, 1997021.23; 828059.35, 1997020.72; 
828145.05, 1996993.46; 828145.12, 1996993.44; 828146.97, 1996992.78; 
828148.78, 1996992.00; 828150.52, 1996991.10; 828152.21, 1996990.09; 
828153.83, 1996988.97; 828155.37, 1996987.75; 828156.82, 1996986.43; 
828158.19, 1996985.02; 828159.46, 1996983.52; 828160.63, 1996981.95; 
828161.06, 1996981.32; 828201.73, 1996919.32; 828202.37, 1996918.29; 
828203.33, 1996916.58; 828204.17, 1996914.80; 828204.82, 1996913.16; 
828225.52, 1996856.56; 828225.58, 1996856.38; 828226.18, 1996854.51; 
828226.66, 1996852.60; 828227.02, 1996850.67; 828227.24, 1996848.72; 
828227.28, 1996848.25; 828230.87, 1996794.26; 828230.93, 1996792.77; 
828230.90, 1996790.81; 828230.74, 1996788.85; 828230.45, 1996786.90; 
828230.04, 1996784.98; 828229.50, 1996783.09; 828228.84, 1996781.24; 
828228.06, 1996779.44; 828227.16, 1996777.69; 828226.15, 1996776.01; 
828225.03, 1996774.39; 828223.81, 1996772.85; 828222.49, 1996771.39; 
828221.16, 1996770.10; 828170.61, 1996723.90; 828170.53, 1996723.82; 
828169.03, 1996722.55; 828167.45, 1996721.38; 828165.80, 1996720.31; 
828164.09, 1996719.36; 828162.31, 1996718.52; 828162.31, 1996718.52; 
828160.48, 1996717.80; 828158.61, 1996717.19; 828156.71, 1996716.72; 
828154.77, 1996716.36; 828152.82, 1996716.14; 828150.86, 1996716.04; 
828149.74, 1996716.04; 828067.24, 1996717.74; 828066.40, 1996717.77; 
828064.44, 1996717.93; 828062.49, 1996718.22; 828060.57, 1996718.63; 
828058.68, 1996719.17; 828056.83, 1996719.83; 828055.03, 1996720.61; 
828054.09, 1996721.08; 827968.16, 1996765.39; 827967.35, 1996765.82; 
827965.66, 1996766.83; 827964.05, 1996767.95; 827962.51, 1996769.17; 
827961.05, 1996770.49; 827959.68, 1996771.90; 827958.41, 1996773.40; 
827957.24, 1996774.98; 827956.17, 1996776.63; 827955.26, 1996778.28; 
827922.76, 1996841.09; 827880.59, 1996878.48; 827879.64, 1996879.36; 
827878.28, 1996880.77; 827877.37, 1996881.82; 827844.26, 1996921.88; 
827747.85, 1996996.84; 827746.86, 1996997.64; 827745.40, 1996998.96; 
827744.22, 1997000.18; 827664.66, 1997086.34; 827664.48, 1997086.53; 
827663.21, 1997088.03; 827662.04, 1997089.61; 827660.97, 1997091.26; 
827660.02, 1997092.98; 827659.74, 1997093.53; 827584.59, 1997247.43; 
827584.03, 1997248.65; 827583.30, 1997250.48; 827582.70, 1997252.35; 
827582.22, 1997254.26; 827581.99, 1997255.45; 827566.51, 1997344.29; 
827566.39, 1997345.02; 827566.17, 1997346.98; 827566.07, 1997348.94.
    (iii) Note: The map depicting Unit 8 is provided at paragraph 
(14)(iii) of this entry.
    (14) Unit 9: Talante, Yabucoa-Maunabo, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 9 consists of approximately 23.5 ac 
(9.5 ha) east of Road PR-3, including the headwaters of the Talante 
Creek and five unnamed drainages. About 2.8 ac (1.1 ha) of Unit 9 are 
located within Calabazas Ward, Yabucoa, and the remaining 21.6 ac (8.7 
ha) are located within Talante Ward, Maunabo.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 9 
bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):

827501.36, 1996260.52; 827501.40, 1996262.48; 827501.41, 1996262.67; 
827503.20, 1996295.22; 827502.70, 1996331.19; 827502.73, 1996333.01; 
827504.51, 1996371.21; 827504.52, 1996371.27; 827504.68, 1996373.23; 
827504.96, 1996375.18; 827505.38, 1996377.10; 827505.92, 1996378.99; 
827506.58, 1996380.84; 827506.64, 1996380.97; 827506.08, 1996421.48; 
827506.11, 1996423.36; 827506.11, 1996423.48; 827507.89, 1996457.21; 
827507.49, 1996486.28; 827507.52, 1996488.16; 827507.68, 1996490.12; 
827507.97, 1996492.06; 827508.39, 1996493.99; 827508.93, 1996495.87; 
827509.59, 1996497.73; 827510.37, 1996499.53; 827511.26, 1996501.28; 
827512.08, 1996502.66; 827524.53, 1996522.50; 827524.72, 1996522.80; 
827525.84, 1996524.42; 827527.06, 1996525.96; 827528.38, 1996527.41; 
827529.79, 1996528.78; 827531.28, 1996530.04; 827548.77, 1996543.95; 
827551.50, 1996556.77; 827550.16, 1996581.70; 827550.12, 1996582.81; 
827550.15, 1996584.77;

[[Page 237]]

827550.31, 1996586.73; 827550.60, 1996588.68; 827551.01, 1996590.60; 
827551.01, 1996590.60; 827551.55, 1996592.49; 827552.11, 1996594.08; 
827562.90, 1996622.18; 827570.11, 1996645.71; 827570.06, 1996646.71; 
827570.05, 1996647.35; 827570.13, 1996664.90; 827554.06, 1996695.96; 
827554.02, 1996696.03; 827553.61, 1996696.87; 827529.60, 1996747.39; 
827529.18, 1996748.32; 827528.45, 1996750.15; 827527.85, 1996752.02; 
827527.37, 1996753.93; 827527.02, 1996755.86; 827526.80, 1996757.81; 
827526.70, 1996759.77; 827526.70, 1996761.01; 827528.06, 1996816.12; 
827528.09, 1996816.85; 827528.25, 1996818.81; 827528.53, 1996820.75; 
827528.95, 1996822.67; 827529.49, 1996824.56; 827529.57, 1996824.81; 
827547.87, 1996880.16; 827548.45, 1996881.75; 827549.23, 1996883.56; 
827550.13, 1996885.30; 827551.14, 1996886.99; 827552.25, 1996888.61; 
827553.48, 1996890.15; 827554.80, 1996891.60; 827554.86, 1996891.66; 
827590.37, 1996928.18; 827591.34, 1996929.13; 827639.45, 1996974.29; 
827639.83, 1996974.64; 827641.33, 1996975.92; 827642.90, 1996977.09; 
827644.56, 1996978.15; 827646.27, 1996979.11; 827648.05, 1996979.95; 
827649.88, 1996980.67; 827651.75, 1996981.27; 827653.65, 1996981.75; 
827655.58, 1996982.10; 827657.54, 1996982.33; 827659.50, 1996982.43; 
827661.46, 1996982.39; 827663.42, 1996982.23; 827665.37, 1996981.95; 
827667.29, 1996981.53; 827669.18, 1996980.99; 827671.03, 1996980.33; 
827672.83, 1996979.55; 827674.58, 1996978.65; 827676.26, 1996977.65; 
827677.88, 1996976.53; 827679.42, 1996975.31; 827680.88, 1996973.99; 
827682.24, 1996972.58; 827683.52, 1996971.08; 827684.69, 1996969.50; 
827685.75, 1996967.85; 827686.71, 1996966.13; 827687.55, 1996964.36; 
827688.27, 1996962.53; 827688.87, 1996960.66; 827689.35, 1996958.75; 
827689.70, 1996956.82; 827689.93, 1996954.87; 827690.03, 1996952.90; 
827689.99, 1996950.94; 827689.83, 1996948.98; 827689.55, 1996947.04; 
827689.13, 1996945.12; 827688.59, 1996943.23; 827687.93, 1996941.38; 
827687.15, 1996939.57; 827686.25, 1996937.83; 827685.25, 1996936.14; 
827684.13, 1996934.52; 827682.91, 1996932.98; 827681.59, 1996931.53; 
827680.55, 1996930.51; 827632.94, 1996885.81; 827602.72, 1996854.74; 
827587.99, 1996810.19; 827586.92, 1996766.70; 827607.63, 1996723.10; 
827620.43, 1996698.38; 827621.14, 1996697.71; 827622.51, 1996696.30; 
827623.78, 1996694.80; 827624.95, 1996693.22; 827626.01, 1996691.57; 
827626.97, 1996689.86; 827627.81, 1996688.08; 827628.53, 1996686.25; 
827629.14, 1996684.38; 827629.61, 1996682.48; 827629.97, 1996680.54; 
827630.19, 1996678.59; 827630.29, 1996676.63; 827630.29, 1996676.01; 
827684.67, 1996673.75; 827684.89, 1996673.74; 827686.84, 1996673.58; 
827688.79, 1996673.29; 827690.71, 1996672.87; 827692.60, 1996672.34; 
827694.45, 1996671.67; 827694.45, 1996671.67; 827696.25, 1996670.89; 
827698.00, 1996670.00; 827698.00, 1996670.00; 827699.69, 1996668.99; 
827701.30, 1996667.87; 827702.84, 1996666.65; 827704.30, 1996665.33; 
827705.66, 1996663.92; 827706.94, 1996662.42; 827708.11, 1996660.84; 
827709.17, 1996659.19; 827709.17, 1996659.19; 827710.13, 1996657.47; 
827710.97, 1996655.70; 827710.97, 1996655.70; 827711.69, 1996653.87; 
827712.29, 1996652.00; 827712.77, 1996650.09; 827713.12, 1996648.16; 
827713.35, 1996646.21; 827713.45, 1996644.25; 827713.42, 1996642.28; 
827713.26, 1996640.32; 827712.97, 1996638.38; 827712.55, 1996636.46; 
827712.01, 1996634.57; 827711.35, 1996632.72; 827711.35, 1996632.72; 
827710.57, 1996630.92; 827709.68, 1996629.17; 827709.68, 1996629.17; 
827708.67, 1996627.48; 827707.55, 1996625.87; 827706.33, 1996624.33; 
827705.01, 1996622.87; 827703.60, 1996621.50; 827702.10, 1996620.23; 
827700.52, 1996619.06; 827698.87, 1996617.99; 827698.87, 1996617.99; 
827697.15, 1996617.04; 827695.38, 1996616.20; 827695.38, 1996616.20; 
827693.55, 1996615.47; 827691.68, 1996614.87; 827689.77, 1996614.39; 
827687.84, 1996614.04; 827685.89, 1996613.82; 827683.93, 1996613.72; 
827682.99, 1996613.72; 827623.38, 1996614.57; 827620.02, 1996603.60; 
827619.90, 1996603.21; 827619.34, 1996601.62; 827610.47, 1996578.53; 
827611.68, 1996556.03; 827611.72, 1996554.91; 827611.69, 1996552.95; 
827611.53, 1996550.99; 827611.24, 1996549.05; 827611.07, 1996548.16; 
827610.79, 1996546.87; 827675.26, 1996519.57; 827676.37, 1996519.07; 
827678.12, 1996518.17; 827679.81, 1996517.16; 827681.42, 1996516.04; 
827682.96, 1996514.82; 827684.42, 1996513.50; 827685.79, 1996512.09; 
827687.06, 1996510.59; 827688.23, 1996509.01; 827689.30, 1996507.36; 
827690.25, 1996505.65; 827691.09, 1996503.87; 827691.81, 1996502.04; 
827692.42, 1996500.17; 827692.89, 1996498.27; 827693.25, 1996496.33; 
827693.47, 1996494.38; 827693.57, 1996492.42; 827693.54, 1996490.45; 
827693.38, 1996488.50; 827693.09, 1996486.55; 827692.68, 1996484.63; 
827692.14, 1996482.74; 827691.48, 1996480.89; 827690.69, 1996479.09; 
827689.80, 1996477.34; 827688.79, 1996475.65; 827687.67, 1996474.04; 
827686.45, 1996472.50; 827685.13, 1996471.04; 827683.72, 1996469.67; 
827682.22, 1996468.40; 827680.64, 1996467.23; 827678.99, 1996466.17; 
827677.27, 1996465.21; 827675.50, 1996464.37; 827673.67, 1996463.65; 
827671.80, 1996463.05; 827669.90, 1996462.57; 827667.96, 1996462.21; 
827666.01, 1996461.99; 827664.05, 1996461.89; 827662.08, 1996461.92; 
827660.12, 1996462.08; 827658.18, 1996462.37; 827656.26, 1996462.79; 
827654.37, 1996463.32; 827652.59, 1996463.96; 827580.29, 1996492.29; 
827572.67, 1996486.23; 827567.66, 1996478.25; 827567.96, 1996457.04; 
827567.93, 1996455.16; 827567.92, 1996455.04; 827566.14, 1996421.31; 
827566.34, 1996406.71; 827631.73, 1996413.78; 827632.50, 1996413.86; 
827634.46, 1996413.95; 827636.42, 1996413.92; 827638.38, 1996413.76; 
827640.33, 1996413.47; 827642.25, 1996413.06; 827644.14, 1996412.52; 
827645.99, 1996411.86; 827645.99, 1996411.86; 827647.79, 1996411.08; 
827649.54, 1996410.18; 827651.22, 1996409.17; 827652.84, 1996408.05; 
827654.38, 1996406.83; 827655.84, 1996405.51; 827657.20, 1996404.10; 
827658.48, 1996402.61; 827659.65, 1996401.03; 827660.71, 1996399.38; 
827661.67, 1996397.66; 827662.51, 1996395.88; 827662.51, 1996395.88; 
827663.23, 1996394.06; 827663.83, 1996392.19; 827664.31, 1996390.28; 
827664.66, 1996388.35; 827664.89, 1996386.39; 827664.99, 1996384.43; 
827664.95, 1996382.47;

[[Page 238]]

827664.79, 1996380.51; 827664.51, 1996378.57; 827664.09, 1996376.64; 
827663.55, 1996374.75; 827662.89, 1996372.90; 827662.89, 1996372.90; 
827662.11, 1996371.10; 827661.21, 1996369.35; 827661.21, 1996369.35; 
827660.20, 1996367.67; 827659.09, 1996366.05; 827657.87, 1996364.51; 
827656.55, 1996363.05; 827655.14, 1996361.69; 827653.64, 1996360.42; 
827652.06, 1996359.25; 827650.41, 1996358.18; 827648.69, 1996357.22; 
827646.92, 1996356.38; 827646.92, 1996356.38; 827645.09, 1996355.66; 
827643.22, 1996355.06; 827641.31, 1996354.58; 827639.38, 1996354.23; 
827639.14, 1996354.19; 827563.34, 1996343.54; 827562.76, 1996331.12; 
827563.26, 1996295.01; 827563.23, 1996293.13; 827563.22, 1996292.95; 
827561.59, 1996263.45; 827570.34, 1996223.52; 827594.25, 1996193.51; 
827594.27, 1996193.48; 827595.44, 1996191.90; 827596.51, 1996190.25; 
827597.46, 1996188.53; 827598.30, 1996186.75; 827599.03, 1996184.93; 
827599.63, 1996183.06; 827600.11, 1996181.15; 827600.46, 1996179.22; 
827600.69, 1996177.27; 827600.78, 1996175.30; 827600.79, 1996174.55; 
827600.57, 1996148.78; 827600.59, 1996148.79; 827607.79, 1996201.75; 
827608.00, 1996203.07; 827608.41, 1996204.99; 827608.95, 1996206.88; 
827609.61, 1996208.73; 827609.81, 1996209.22; 827634.31, 1996268.25; 
827650.95, 1996310.98; 827651.00, 1996311.11; 827651.78, 1996312.91; 
827652.68, 1996314.66; 827653.69, 1996316.35; 827654.80, 1996317.96; 
827656.02, 1996319.50; 827657.34, 1996320.96; 827657.40, 1996321.02; 
827719.64, 1996385.01; 827741.95, 1996410.24; 827742.86, 1996411.23; 
827744.27, 1996412.59; 827745.77, 1996413.86; 827747.35, 1996415.04; 
827749.00, 1996416.10; 827750.71, 1996417.06; 827752.49, 1996417.90; 
827754.32, 1996418.62; 827756.19, 1996419.22; 827758.09, 1996419.70; 
827760.03, 1996420.05; 827761.98, 1996420.28; 827763.94, 1996420.37; 
827765.91, 1996420.34; 827767.87, 1996420.18; 827769.81, 1996419.90; 
827771.73, 1996419.48; 827773.62, 1996418.94; 827775.47, 1996418.28; 
827777.27, 1996417.50; 827779.02, 1996416.60; 827780.71, 1996415.59; 
827782.32, 1996414.48; 827783.86, 1996413.25; 827785.32, 1996411.94; 
827786.69, 1996410.52; 827787.96, 1996409.03; 827789.13, 1996407.45; 
827790.19, 1996405.80; 827791.15, 1996404.08; 827791.99, 1996402.30; 
827792.71, 1996400.48; 827793.31, 1996398.61; 827793.79, 1996396.70; 
827794.15, 1996394.77; 827794.37, 1996392.82; 827794.47, 1996390.85; 
827794.44, 1996388.89; 827794.28, 1996386.93; 827793.99, 1996384.99; 
827793.58, 1996383.07; 827793.04, 1996381.18; 827792.37, 1996379.33; 
827791.59, 1996377.52; 827790.70, 1996375.77; 827789.69, 1996374.09; 
827788.57, 1996372.47; 827787.35, 1996370.93; 827786.94, 1996370.46; 
827764.16, 1996344.69; 827763.25, 1996343.71; 827763.19, 1996343.65; 
827704.70, 1996283.52; 827690.15, 1996246.15; 827690.10, 1996246.02; 
827689.90, 1996245.54; 827666.77, 1996189.80; 827657.85, 1996124.12; 
827657.64, 1996122.80; 827657.22, 1996120.88; 827656.68, 1996118.99; 
827656.02, 1996117.14; 827655.24, 1996115.33; 827654.34, 1996113.59; 
827653.34, 1996111.90; 827652.22, 1996110.28; 827651.00, 1996108.74; 
827649.68, 1996107.29; 827648.27, 1996105.92; 827646.77, 1996104.65; 
827645.19, 1996103.48; 827643.54, 1996102.41; 827641.82, 1996101.46; 
827640.30, 1996100.73; 827608.11, 1996086.40; 827607.85, 1996086.29; 
827607.85, 1996086.29; 827606.02, 1996085.57; 827604.15, 1996084.96; 
827604.15, 1996084.96; 827602.25, 1996084.49; 827600.31, 1996084.13; 
827598.36, 1996083.91; 827596.40, 1996083.81; 827594.44, 1996083.84; 
827592.48, 1996084.00; 827590.53, 1996084.29; 827588.61, 1996084.70; 
827588.61, 1996084.70; 827586.72, 1996085.24; 827586.03, 1996085.47; 
827560.45, 1996094.38; 827559.30, 1996094.80; 827557.49, 1996095.59; 
827555.75, 1996096.48; 827554.06, 1996097.49; 827552.44, 1996098.61; 
827550.90, 1996099.83; 827549.45, 1996101.15; 827548.08, 1996102.56; 
827546.81, 1996104.06; 827545.64, 1996105.64; 827544.57, 1996107.29; 
827543.62, 1996109.01; 827542.78, 1996110.78; 827542.05, 1996112.61; 
827541.45, 1996114.48; 827540.97, 1996116.38; 827540.62, 1996118.32; 
827540.40, 1996120.27; 827540.30, 1996122.23; 827540.30, 1996122.99; 
827540.64, 1996164.41; 827519.02, 1996191.56; 827518.99, 1996191.60; 
827517.82, 1996193.18; 827516.75, 1996194.83; 827515.80, 1996196.54; 
827514.96, 1996198.32; 827514.23, 1996200.15; 827513.63, 1996202.02; 
827513.17, 1996203.85; 827502.06, 1996254.60; 827502.04, 1996254.67; 
827501.69, 1996256.61; 827501.46, 1996258.56; 827501.36, 1996260.52.
    (iii) Note: Map of Units 8 and 9 (Map 8) follows:

[[Page 239]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.007

    (15) Unit 10: Guayabota, Yabucoa, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 10 consists of approximately 13.1 ac 
(5.3 ha) to the northeast of intersection of roads PR-181 to the east, 
and PR-182 and Rio Guayan[eacute]s to the south, and south of the 
municipal boundary with San Lorenzo, within Guayabota Ward, Yabucoa.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa and Patillas USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle 
maps. Unit 10 bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):


[[Page 240]]


818663.90, 2001950.98; 818669.55, 2002001.91; 818692.20, 2002048.84; 
818715.15, 2002074.58; 818757.13, 2002102.71; 818816.53, 2002097.18; 
818863.37, 2002080.88; 818903.97, 2002056.02; 818923.80, 2002001.21; 
818925.95, 2001999.12; 818936.95, 2001969.61; 818946.01, 2001927.36; 
818917.06, 2001876.11; 818883.41, 2001858.69; 818834.74, 2001853.78; 
818779.64, 2001855.13; 818739.10, 2001875.75; 818691.94, 2001915.35; 
818689.82, 2001915.32; 818663.90, 2001950.98.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 10 (Map 9) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.008
    

[[Page 241]]


    (16) Unit 11: Guayabito, Yabucoa, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 11 consists of approximately 17.3 ac 
(7.0 ha) south of Road PR-900 and north of the Maunabo boundary, within 
Guayabota Ward, Yabucoa.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 11 
bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):

822520.09, 1998835.84; 822520.13, 1998837.81; 822520.29, 1998839.76; 
822520.57, 1998841.71; 822520.99, 1998843.63; 822521.53, 1998845.52; 
822522.19, 1998847.37; 822522.97, 1998849.17; 822523.87, 1998850.92; 
822524.88, 1998852.61; 822526.00, 1998854.22; 822527.22, 1998855.76; 
822528.54, 1998857.22; 822529.95, 1998858.58; 822531.45, 1998859.85; 
822533.03, 1998861.02; 822534.68, 1998862.09; 822536.39, 1998863.04; 
822538.17, 1998863.88; 822540.00, 1998864.61; 822541.87, 1998865.21; 
822543.77, 1998865.69; 822545.32, 1998865.98; 822611.77, 1998876.73; 
822655.55, 1998901.23; 822685.38, 1998957.12; 822733.68, 1999416.01; 
822733.71, 1999416.30; 822734.00, 1999418.24; 822734.41, 1999420.16; 
822734.95, 1999422.05; 822735.61, 1999423.90; 822736.39, 1999425.71; 
822737.29, 1999427.45; 822738.30, 1999429.14; 822738.30, 1999429.14; 
822739.42, 1999430.76; 822740.64, 1999432.30; 822741.96, 1999433.75; 
822743.37, 1999435.12; 822744.87, 1999436.39; 822746.45, 1999437.56; 
822746.45, 1999437.56; 822748.10, 1999438.62; 822749.81, 1999439.58; 
822751.59, 1999440.42; 822753.42, 1999441.14; 822755.29, 1999441.74; 
822757.19, 1999442.22; 822759.13, 1999442.57; 822761.08, 1999442.80; 
822763.04, 1999442.89; 822765.01, 1999442.86; 822766.97, 1999442.70; 
822768.91, 1999442.41; 822770.83, 1999442.00; 822772.72, 1999441.46; 
822774.57, 1999440.80; 822776.37, 1999440.02; 822778.12, 1999439.12; 
822779.81, 1999438.11; 822779.81, 1999438.11; 822781.42, 1999436.99; 
822782.96, 1999435.77; 822783.85, 1999434.99; 822805.32, 1999415.26; 
822805.89, 1999414.73; 822807.26, 1999413.32; 822808.53, 1999411.82; 
822809.70, 1999410.24; 822810.76, 1999408.59; 822811.72, 1999406.87; 
822812.56, 1999405.10; 822813.28, 1999403.27; 822813.88, 1999401.40; 
822814.36, 1999399.49; 822814.71, 1999397.56; 822814.94, 1999395.61; 
822815.03, 1999393.64; 822815.04, 1999393.56; 822815.59, 1999353.44; 
822834.40, 1999326.93; 822859.47, 1999302.21; 822860.64, 1999300.99; 
822861.91, 1999299.49; 822863.08, 1999297.91; 822864.14, 1999296.26; 
822865.10, 1999294.55; 822865.94, 1999292.77; 822866.66, 1999290.94; 
822867.26, 1999289.07; 822867.74, 1999287.17; 822868.09, 1999285.23; 
822868.32, 1999283.28; 822868.41, 1999281.32; 822868.42, 1999280.68; 
822868.13, 1999220.49; 822872.70, 1999182.15; 822872.81, 1999181.05; 
822872.89, 1999179.72; 822875.48, 1999111.28; 822875.49, 1999110.64; 
822875.46, 1999108.68; 822875.30, 1999106.72; 822875.01, 1999104.77; 
822874.60, 1999102.85; 822874.06, 1999100.96; 822873.40, 1999099.11; 
822873.18, 1999098.57; 822846.96, 1999035.79; 822846.40, 1999034.52; 
822845.50, 1999032.78; 822844.49, 1999031.09; 822843.37, 1999029.48; 
822842.15, 1999027.94; 822840.83, 1999026.48; 822840.54, 1999026.18; 
822738.32, 1998923.47; 822737.20, 1998922.41; 822735.70, 1998921.14; 
822734.13, 1998919.96; 822733.36, 1998919.47; 822704.39, 1998865.19; 
822704.15, 1998864.75; 822703.14, 1998863.06; 822702.02, 1998861.45; 
822700.80, 1998859.91; 822699.48, 1998858.45; 822698.06, 1998857.09; 
822696.57, 1998855.82; 822694.99, 1998854.64; 822693.34, 1998853.58; 
822692.56, 1998853.13; 822636.47, 1998821.73; 822635.52, 1998821.22; 
822633.75, 1998820.38; 822631.92, 1998819.66; 822630.05, 1998819.06; 
822628.14, 1998818.58; 822626.59, 1998818.29; 822554.91, 1998806.70; 
822554.53, 1998806.64; 822552.57, 1998806.41; 822550.61, 1998806.31; 
822548.65, 1998806.35; 822546.69, 1998806.51; 822544.75, 1998806.80; 
822542.83, 1998807.21; 822540.94, 1998807.75; 822539.09, 1998808.41; 
822537.28, 1998809.19; 822535.53, 1998810.09; 822533.85, 1998811.10; 
822532.23, 1998812.22; 822530.69, 1998813.44; 822529.24, 1998814.76; 
822527.87, 1998816.17; 822526.60, 1998817.67; 822525.43, 1998819.25; 
822524.36, 1998820.90; 822523.41, 1998822.61; 822522.57, 1998824.39; 
822521.85, 1998826.22; 822521.25, 1998828.09; 822520.77, 1998829.99; 
822520.42, 1998831.93; 822520.19, 1998833.88; 822520.09, 1998835.84; 
822752.71, 1999023.06; 822781.60, 1999297.57; 822786.94, 1999290.03; 
822787.92, 1999288.73; 822789.19, 1999287.23; 822790.36, 1999286.02; 
822808.30, 1999268.32; 822808.06, 1999218.93; 822808.07, 1999218.29; 
822808.17, 1999216.32; 822808.28, 1999215.22; 822812.93, 1999176.24; 
822815.22, 1999115.62; 822793.82, 1999064.36; 822752.71, 1999023.06.
    (iii) Note: The map depicting Unit 11 is provided at paragraph 
(17)(iii) of this entry.
    (17) Unit 12: Guayabo, Yabucoa, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 12 consists of approximately 9.8 ac 
(3.9 ha) within Guayabota Ward, Yabucoa, crossing Road PR-900, north of 
the Maunabo boundary, and about 3,025 ft (922 m) west of Unit 11.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 12 
is bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):

821249.15, 1999215.02; 821249.18, 1999216.98; 821249.34, 1999218.94; 
821249.63, 1999220.88; 821250.04, 1999222.80; 821250.19, 1999223.36; 
821255.15, 1999241.68; 821255.54, 1999243.01; 821256.21, 1999244.86; 
821256.99, 1999246.67; 821257.88, 1999248.41; 821258.89, 1999250.10; 
821260.01, 1999251.72; 821261.23, 1999253.25; 821262.55, 1999254.71; 
821263.97, 1999256.08; 821265.46, 1999257.35; 821267.04, 1999258.52; 
821268.69, 1999259.58; 821270.41, 1999260.54; 821272.19, 1999261.38; 
821274.01, 1999262.10; 821275.88, 1999262.70; 821276.77, 1999262.94; 
821304.05, 1999269.84; 821305.07, 1999270.08; 821307.00, 1999270.43; 
821308.01, 1999270.56; 821349.11, 1999275.25; 821350.61, 1999289.71; 
821339.99, 1999325.55; 821339.91, 1999325.83; 821339.43, 1999327.74; 
821339.08, 1999329.67; 821338.85, 1999331.62; 821338.76, 1999333.59;

[[Page 242]]

821338.79, 1999335.55; 821338.95, 1999337.51; 821338.97, 1999337.72; 
821342.49, 1999366.45; 821342.75, 1999368.18; 821343.16, 1999370.10; 
821343.70, 1999371.99; 821344.36, 1999373.84; 821345.15, 1999375.64; 
821346.04, 1999377.39; 821347.05, 1999379.08; 821348.17, 1999380.69; 
821349.39, 1999382.23; 821350.71, 1999383.69; 821352.12, 1999385.05; 
821353.62, 1999386.32; 821355.20, 1999387.50; 821356.85, 1999388.56; 
821358.57, 1999389.51; 821359.49, 1999389.97; 821386.84, 1999402.86; 
821418.08, 1999420.93; 821419.39, 1999421.65; 821421.17, 1999422.49; 
821423.00, 1999423.21; 821424.87, 1999423.81; 821426.77, 1999424.29; 
821428.71, 1999424.64; 821430.66, 1999424.86; 821432.62, 1999424.96; 
821434.58, 1999424.93; 821436.54, 1999424.77; 821437.64, 1999424.62; 
821476.83, 1999418.65; 821477.68, 1999418.51; 821479.60, 1999418.09; 
821481.49, 1999417.55; 821483.34, 1999416.89; 821485.14, 1999416.11; 
821486.89, 1999415.21; 821488.57, 1999414.20; 821488.70, 1999414.12; 
821525.83, 1999389.92; 821527.32, 1999388.88; 821528.86, 1999387.66; 
821530.31, 1999386.34; 821531.68, 1999384.93; 821532.95, 1999383.43; 
821534.12, 1999381.85; 821535.19, 1999380.20; 821536.14, 1999378.48; 
821536.98, 1999376.71; 821537.70, 1999374.88; 821538.30, 1999373.01; 
821538.78, 1999371.10; 821539.13, 1999369.17; 821539.36, 1999367.22; 
821539.45, 1999365.26; 821539.42, 1999363.29; 821539.26, 1999361.33; 
821538.97, 1999359.39; 821538.56, 1999357.47; 821538.02, 1999355.58; 
821537.36, 1999353.73; 821536.58, 1999351.93; 821535.68, 1999350.18; 
821534.67, 1999348.49; 821533.55, 1999346.88; 821532.33, 1999345.34; 
821531.01, 1999343.88; 821529.60, 1999342.52; 821528.10, 1999341.24; 
821526.52, 1999340.07; 821524.87, 1999339.01; 821523.15, 1999338.05; 
821521.38, 1999337.21; 821519.55, 1999336.49; 821517.68, 1999335.89; 
821515.77, 1999335.41; 821513.84, 1999335.06; 821511.89, 1999334.84; 
821509.93, 1999334.74; 821507.96, 1999334.77; 821506.00, 1999334.93; 
821504.06, 1999335.22; 821502.14, 1999335.64; 821500.25, 1999336.17; 
821498.40, 1999336.84; 821496.60, 1999337.62; 821494.85, 1999338.52; 
821493.16, 1999339.53; 821493.04, 1999339.61; 821461.35, 1999360.26; 
821439.02, 1999363.66; 821415.82, 1999350.25; 821414.50, 1999349.53; 
821413.59, 1999349.08; 821400.08, 1999342.71; 821399.34, 1999336.63; 
821409.88, 1999301.06; 821409.96, 1999300.78; 821410.44, 1999298.88; 
821410.79, 1999296.94; 821411.01, 1999294.99; 821411.11, 1999293.03; 
821411.08, 1999291.06; 821410.95, 1999289.44; 821406.35, 1999245.05; 
821406.32, 1999244.72; 821406.03, 1999242.78; 821405.62, 1999240.85; 
821405.08, 1999238.97; 821404.41, 1999237.12; 821403.63, 1999235.31; 
821402.74, 1999233.56; 821401.73, 1999231.88; 821400.61, 1999230.26; 
821399.39, 1999228.72; 821398.07, 1999227.27; 821396.65, 1999225.90; 
821395.16, 1999224.63; 821393.58, 1999223.46; 821391.93, 1999222.39; 
821390.21, 1999221.44; 821388.43, 1999220.60; 821386.61, 1999219.88; 
821384.74, 1999219.28; 821382.83, 1999218.80; 821380.90, 1999218.45; 
821379.89, 1999218.32; 821331.62, 1999212.81; 821331.68, 1999212.76; 
821333.04, 1999211.35; 821334.31, 1999209.85; 821335.48, 1999208.27; 
821336.55, 1999206.62; 821337.50, 1999204.90; 821338.34, 1999203.13; 
821338.95, 1999201.61; 821353.85, 1999161.41; 821353.96, 1999161.09; 
821354.56, 1999159.22; 821355.04, 1999157.32; 821355.39, 1999155.41; 
821362.58, 1999107.28; 821362.58, 1999107.25; 821362.80, 1999105.30; 
821362.90, 1999103.34; 821362.87, 1999101.37; 821362.71, 1999099.41; 
821362.42, 1999097.47; 821362.01, 1999095.55; 821361.72, 1999094.50; 
821339.65, 1999018.19; 821340.99, 1999002.89; 821341.00, 1999002.72; 
821341.10, 1999000.76; 821341.07, 1998998.79; 821340.91, 1998996.83; 
821340.62, 1998994.89; 821340.20, 1998992.97; 821339.66, 1998991.08; 
821339.00, 1998989.23; 821338.22, 1998987.43; 821337.32, 1998985.68; 
821336.31, 1998983.99; 821335.20, 1998982.38; 821333.97, 1998980.84; 
821332.66, 1998979.38; 821331.24, 1998978.02; 821329.75, 1998976.75; 
821328.17, 1998975.58; 821326.52, 1998974.51; 821324.80, 1998973.56; 
821323.02, 1998972.72; 821321.19, 1998971.99; 821319.32, 1998971.39; 
821317.42, 1998970.91; 821315.49, 1998970.56; 821313.53, 1998970.34; 
821311.57, 1998970.24; 821309.61, 1998970.27; 821307.65, 1998970.43; 
821305.70, 1998970.72; 821303.78, 1998971.14; 821301.89, 1998971.68; 
821300.04, 1998972.34; 821298.24, 1998973.12; 821296.49, 1998974.02; 
821294.81, 1998975.03; 821293.19, 1998976.15; 821291.65, 1998977.37; 
821290.20, 1998978.69; 821288.83, 1998980.10; 821287.56, 1998981.60; 
821286.39, 1998983.17; 821285.32, 1998984.83; 821284.37, 1998986.54; 
821283.53, 1998988.32; 821282.81, 1998990.15; 821282.21, 1998992.02; 
821281.73, 1998993.92; 821281.38, 1998995.86; 821281.17, 1998997.64; 
821279.33, 1999018.53; 821279.32, 1999018.70; 821279.22, 1999020.66; 
821279.26, 1999022.62; 821279.42, 1999024.58; 821279.70, 1999026.53; 
821280.12, 1999028.45; 821280.40, 1999029.50; 821302.21, 1999104.89; 
821296.46, 1999143.46; 821285.64, 1999172.65; 821260.86, 1999191.71; 
821259.75, 1999192.61; 821258.29, 1999193.93; 821256.92, 1999195.35; 
821255.65, 1999196.84; 821254.48, 1999198.42; 821253.42, 1999200.07; 
821252.46, 1999201.79; 821251.62, 1999203.57; 821250.90, 1999205.39; 
821250.30, 1999207.26; 821249.82, 1999209.17; 821249.47, 1999211.10; 
821249.25, 1999213.06; 821249.15, 1999215.02.
    (iii) Note: Map of Units 11 and 12 (Map 10) follows:

[[Page 243]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.009

    (18) Unit 13: El Cielito, Maunabo, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 13 consists of approximately 7.84 ac 
(3.17 ha), between the municipal boundary of Yabucoa to the north, PR-
759 to the south and west, and PR-3 to the east, within Talante Ward, 
Maunabo.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 13 
bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):


[[Page 244]]


825982.02, 1996690.65; 825982.05, 1996692.62; 825982.22, 1996694.58; 
825982.51, 1996696.52; 825982.93, 1996698.44; 825983.48, 1996700.33; 
825984.14, 1996702.18; 825984.93, 1996703.98; 825985.83, 1996705.72; 
825986.85, 1996707.40; 825987.97, 1996709.02; 825989.19, 1996710.55; 
825990.52, 1996712.01; 825991.93, 1996713.37; 825993.43, 1996714.64; 
825995.01, 1996715.80; 825996.67, 1996716.86; 825998.39, 1996717.81; 
826000.17, 1996718.65; 826002.00, 1996719.37; 826003.87, 1996719.96; 
826005.78, 1996720.44; 826007.71, 1996720.78; 826009.66, 1996721.00; 
826011.63, 1996721.09; 826013.59, 1996721.06; 826015.55, 1996720.89; 
826017.49, 1996720.60; 826019.41, 1996720.18; 826021.30, 1996719.63; 
826023.15, 1996718.97; 826024.95, 1996718.18; 826026.69, 1996717.28; 
826028.38, 1996716.27; 826029.99, 1996715.14; 826031.53, 1996713.92; 
826032.98, 1996712.59; 826034.34, 1996711.18; 826035.61, 1996709.68; 
826036.77, 1996708.10; 826037.84, 1996706.44; 826038.79, 1996704.72; 
826039.62, 1996702.94; 826040.34, 1996701.11; 826040.80, 1996699.72; 
826058.80, 1996639.86; 826064.87, 1996626.21; 826065.02, 1996625.87; 
826065.62, 1996624.39; 826077.68, 1996591.67; 826117.27, 1996543.05; 
826117.56, 1996542.70; 826118.72, 1996541.12; 826119.34, 1996540.18; 
826137.43, 1996511.67; 826137.87, 1996510.96; 826138.82, 1996509.24; 
826139.63, 1996507.52; 826162.49, 1996454.74; 826162.51, 1996454.69; 
826163.23, 1996452.86; 826163.82, 1996450.98; 826164.30, 1996449.08; 
826164.64, 1996447.14; 826164.86, 1996445.19; 826164.96, 1996443.23; 
826165.66, 1996392.36; 826165.62, 1996390.40; 826165.46, 1996388.44; 
826165.16, 1996386.49; 826164.74, 1996384.58; 826164.20, 1996382.69; 
826163.81, 1996381.55; 826132.56, 1996296.82; 826120.53, 1996241.20; 
826120.29, 1996240.18; 826119.75, 1996238.29; 826119.08, 1996236.44; 
826118.30, 1996234.64; 826117.39, 1996232.89; 826116.38, 1996231.21; 
826115.26, 1996229.60; 826114.03, 1996228.06; 826112.71, 1996226.61; 
826111.29, 1996225.25; 826109.79, 1996223.98; 826108.21, 1996222.81; 
826106.56, 1996221.75; 826104.84, 1996220.80; 826103.06, 1996219.97; 
826101.23, 1996219.25; 826099.36, 1996218.65; 826097.45, 1996218.18; 
826095.51, 1996217.83; 826093.56, 1996217.61; 826091.60, 1996217.52; 
826089.63, 1996217.56; 826087.68, 1996217.72; 826085.73, 1996218.02; 
826083.81, 1996218.44; 826081.93, 1996218.98; 826080.08, 1996219.65; 
826078.28, 1996220.43; 826076.53, 1996221.34; 826074.85, 1996222.35; 
826073.24, 1996223.47; 826071.70, 1996224.70; 826070.25, 1996226.02; 
826068.88, 1996227.44; 826067.62, 1996228.94; 826066.45, 1996230.52; 
826065.39, 1996232.17; 826064.44, 1996233.89; 826063.60, 1996235.67; 
826062.89, 1996237.50; 826062.29, 1996239.37; 826061.82, 1996241.28; 
826061.47, 1996243.21; 826061.25, 1996245.17; 826061.16, 1996247.13; 
826061.20, 1996249.09; 826061.36, 1996251.05; 826061.65, 1996253.00; 
826061.83, 1996253.89; 826074.31, 1996311.58; 826074.55, 1996312.60; 
826075.09, 1996314.49; 826075.48, 1996315.62; 826105.53, 1996397.10; 
826104.99, 1996436.39; 826085.46, 1996481.49; 826069.59, 1996506.50; 
826027.95, 1996557.62; 826027.67, 1996557.98; 826026.50, 1996559.56; 
826025.44, 1996561.21; 826024.49, 1996562.93; 826023.65, 1996564.71; 
826023.06, 1996566.20; 826009.61, 1996602.69; 826003.16, 1996617.18; 
826003.01, 1996617.52; 826002.29, 1996619.34; 826001.84, 1996620.74; 
825983.29, 1996682.42; 825983.15, 1996682.90; 825982.68, 1996684.80; 
825982.33, 1996686.74; 825982.11, 1996688.69; 825982.02, 1996690.65.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 13 (Map 11) follows:

[[Page 245]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.010

    (19) Unit 14: Verraco, San Lorenzo, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 14 consists of approximately 8.9 ac 
(3.6 ha), between PR-181 to the north and west, R[iacute]o Grande de 
Lo[iacute]za to the east and south, and the municipal boundary of 
Yabucoa to the south, within Espino Ward, San Lorenzo.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa and Patillas USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle 
maps. Unit 14 bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):


[[Page 246]]


818021.78, 2003743.38; 818021.82, 2003745.35; 818021.98, 2003747.31; 
818022.27, 2003749.25; 818022.69, 2003751.17; 818023.24, 2003753.06; 
818023.90, 2003754.90; 818024.69, 2003756.71; 818025.59, 2003758.45; 
818026.61, 2003760.13; 818027.41, 2003761.31; 818041.40, 2003780.81; 
818041.72, 2003781.25; 818042.95, 2003782.78; 818044.27, 2003784.24; 
818045.68, 2003785.60; 818047.19, 2003786.87; 818048.77, 2003788.03; 
818050.42, 2003789.09; 818051.64, 2003789.78; 818072.66, 2003801.02; 
818073.16, 2003801.29; 818074.94, 2003802.12; 818076.77, 2003802.84; 
818078.64, 2003803.44; 818080.55, 2003803.91; 818082.48, 2003804.26; 
818084.44, 2003804.48; 818086.40, 2003804.57; 818088.36, 2003804.53; 
818089.35, 2003804.46; 818118.63, 2003801.99; 818119.61, 2003801.89; 
818121.55, 2003801.60; 818123.47, 2003801.18; 818125.20, 2003800.69; 
818179.90, 2003783.29; 818180.06, 2003783.24; 818181.91, 2003782.58; 
818183.71, 2003781.79; 818183.86, 2003781.72; 818240.72, 2003754.27; 
818242.32, 2003753.44; 818244.00, 2003752.42; 818245.61, 2003751.30; 
818247.15, 2003750.08; 818248.60, 2003748.75; 818249.96, 2003747.34; 
818251.23, 2003745.84; 818252.40, 2003744.26; 818253.46, 2003742.60; 
818254.41, 2003740.88; 818255.24, 2003739.10; 818255.96, 2003737.28; 
818256.56, 2003735.40; 818257.03, 2003733.50; 818257.38, 2003731.56; 
818257.60, 2003729.61; 818257.69, 2003727.65; 818257.65, 2003725.68; 
818257.49, 2003723.73; 818257.19, 2003721.78; 818256.77, 2003719.86; 
818256.23, 2003717.97; 818255.56, 2003716.13; 818254.78, 2003714.33; 
818253.88, 2003712.58; 818252.86, 2003710.90; 818251.74, 2003709.28; 
818250.51, 2003707.75; 818249.19, 2003706.30; 818247.78, 2003704.93; 
818246.27, 2003703.67; 818244.69, 2003702.50; 818243.04, 2003701.44; 
818241.32, 2003700.49; 818239.54, 2003699.65; 818237.71, 2003698.93; 
818235.84, 2003698.34; 818233.93, 2003697.87; 818232.00, 2003697.52; 
818230.05, 2003697.30; 818228.08, 2003697.21; 818226.12, 2003697.24; 
818224.16, 2003697.41; 818222.22, 2003697.70; 818220.30, 2003698.12; 
818218.41, 2003698.67; 818216.56, 2003699.33; 818214.76, 2003700.12; 
818214.61, 2003700.19; 818187.94, 2003713.06; 818216.83, 2003685.69; 
818233.41, 2003672.94; 818247.97, 2003666.94; 818249.43, 2003666.29; 
818251.18, 2003665.38; 818252.86, 2003664.37; 818254.47, 2003663.25; 
818256.01, 2003662.02; 818257.46, 2003660.70; 818258.83, 2003659.29; 
818260.09, 2003657.78; 818261.26, 2003656.20; 818262.32, 2003654.55; 
818263.27, 2003652.83; 818264.11, 2003651.05; 818264.82, 2003649.22; 
818265.42, 2003647.35; 818265.89, 2003645.44; 818266.24, 2003643.51; 
818266.46, 2003641.56; 818266.55, 2003639.59; 818266.51, 2003637.63; 
818266.35, 2003635.67; 818266.06, 2003633.73; 818265.64, 2003631.81; 
818265.09, 2003629.92; 818264.43, 2003628.07; 818263.64, 2003626.27; 
818262.74, 2003624.53; 818261.72, 2003622.84; 818260.60, 2003621.23; 
818259.38, 2003619.69; 818258.05, 2003618.24; 818256.64, 2003616.88; 
818255.14, 2003615.61; 818253.56, 2003614.44; 818251.90, 2003613.38; 
818250.18, 2003612.43; 818248.40, 2003611.60; 818246.57, 2003610.88; 
818244.70, 2003610.28; 818242.80, 2003609.81; 818240.86, 2003609.46; 
818238.91, 2003609.24; 818236.95, 2003609.15; 818236.49, 2003609.16; 
818236.87, 2003608.20; 818237.46, 2003606.33; 818237.94, 2003604.42; 
818238.28, 2003602.49; 818238.50, 2003600.54; 818238.59, 2003598.57; 
818238.56, 2003596.61; 818238.39, 2003594.65; 818238.10, 2003592.71; 
818237.68, 2003590.79; 818237.13, 2003588.90; 818236.47, 2003587.05; 
818235.68, 2003585.25; 818234.78, 2003583.51; 818233.77, 2003581.82; 
818232.64, 2003580.21; 818231.42, 2003578.67; 818230.10, 2003577.22; 
818229.24, 2003576.35; 818227.83, 2003574.98; 818226.33, 2003573.72; 
818224.75, 2003572.55; 818223.09, 2003571.49; 818221.37, 2003570.54; 
818219.59, 2003569.70; 818217.76, 2003568.98; 818215.89, 2003568.39; 
818213.99, 2003567.92; 818212.05, 2003567.57; 818210.10, 2003567.35; 
818208.14, 2003567.26; 818206.17, 2003567.29; 818204.21, 2003567.46; 
818202.27, 2003567.75; 818200.35, 2003568.17; 818198.46, 2003568.72; 
818196.62, 2003569.38; 818194.81, 2003570.17; 818193.07, 2003571.07; 
818191.39, 2003572.08; 818189.77, 2003573.21; 818188.24, 2003574.43; 
818186.87, 2003575.67; 818119.61, 2003627.58; 818118.47, 2003628.50; 
818117.02, 2003629.82; 818116.33, 2003630.51; 818088.04, 2003659.86; 
818054.31, 2003681.68; 818054.28, 2003681.70; 818052.67, 2003682.82; 
818051.13, 2003684.04; 818049.68, 2003685.37; 818048.32, 2003686.78; 
818047.05, 2003688.28; 818046.58, 2003688.89; 818030.14, 2003710.85; 
818029.44, 2003711.82; 818028.38, 2003713.48; 818027.43, 2003715.20; 
818026.59, 2003716.97; 818025.88, 2003718.80; 818025.28, 2003720.68; 
818024.81, 2003722.58; 818024.52, 2003724.15; 818022.15, 2003739.10; 
818022.09, 2003739.47; 818021.87, 2003741.42; 818021.78, 2003743.38;
    (iii) Note: The map depicting Unit 14 is provided at paragraph 
(20)(iii) of this entry.
    (20) Unit 15: Cueva Marcela Unit, San Lorenzo, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 15 consists of approximately 7.47 ac 
(3.02 ha), between PR-181 and Quebrada Verraco to the north, PR-181 to 
the west, and R[iacute]o Grande de Lo[iacute]za and the municipal 
boundary of Yabucoa to the south, within Espino Ward, San Lorenzo.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa and Patillas USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle 
maps. Unit 15 bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):

818171.51, 2003361.29; 818171.55, 2003363.25; 818171.72, 2003365.21; 
818172.01, 2003367.15; 818172.43, 2003369.07; 818172.97, 2003370.96; 
818173.64, 2003372.81; 818174.42, 2003374.61; 818175.33, 2003376.36; 
818176.34, 2003378.04; 818177.46, 2003379.65; 818178.69, 2003381.19; 
818180.01, 2003382.64; 818181.43, 2003384.00; 818182.93, 2003385.27; 
818184.51, 2003386.44; 818186.16, 2003387.50; 818187.88, 2003388.45; 
818189.66, 2003389.28; 818191.49, 2003390.00; 818193.36, 2003390.60; 
818195.27, 2003391.07; 818197.20, 2003391.42; 818199.16, 2003391.64; 
818201.12, 2003391.73; 818203.08, 2003391.69; 818205.04, 2003391.53; 
818206.98, 2003391.23; 818208.90, 2003390.81; 818210.79, 2003390.27; 
818212.64, 2003389.60; 818214.44, 2003388.82;

[[Page 247]]

818216.19, 2003387.92; 818217.87, 2003386.90; 818219.48, 2003385.78; 
818219.89, 2003385.47; 818287.51, 2003333.26; 818288.65, 2003332.34; 
818290.10, 2003331.02; 818291.46, 2003329.60; 818292.73, 2003328.10; 
818293.05, 2003327.68; 818343.46, 2003261.48; 818344.31, 2003260.32; 
818345.37, 2003258.66; 818346.32, 2003256.94; 818347.15, 2003255.17; 
818347.87, 2003253.34; 818348.47, 2003251.46; 818348.94, 2003249.56; 
818349.29, 2003247.62; 818349.51, 2003245.67; 818349.60, 2003243.71; 
818349.56, 2003241.74; 818349.40, 2003239.79; 818349.10, 2003237.84; 
818348.68, 2003235.92; 818348.14, 2003234.03; 818347.47, 2003232.19; 
818346.69, 2003230.39; 818345.79, 2003228.64; 818344.77, 2003226.96; 
818343.65, 2003225.34; 818342.42, 2003223.81; 818341.10, 2003222.36; 
818339.69, 2003220.99; 818338.18, 2003219.73; 818336.60, 2003218.56; 
818334.95, 2003217.50; 818333.23, 2003216.55; 818331.45, 2003215.71; 
818329.62, 2003214.99; 818327.75, 2003214.40; 818325.84, 2003213.93; 
818323.91, 2003213.58; 818321.96, 2003213.36; 818319.99, 2003213.27; 
818318.03, 2003213.30; 818316.07, 2003213.47; 818314.13, 2003213.76; 
818312.21, 2003214.18; 818310.32, 2003214.73; 818308.47, 2003215.39; 
818306.67, 2003216.18; 818304.93, 2003217.08; 818303.24, 2003218.09; 
818301.63, 2003219.22; 818300.09, 2003220.44; 818298.64, 2003221.77; 
818297.28, 2003223.18; 818296.01, 2003224.68; 818295.69, 2003225.10; 
818247.68, 2003288.15; 818183.19, 2003337.94; 818182.05, 2003338.86; 
818180.60, 2003340.18; 818179.24, 2003341.60; 818177.97, 2003343.10; 
818176.81, 2003344.68; 818175.74, 2003346.33; 818174.79, 2003348.05; 
818173.96, 2003349.83; 818173.24, 2003351.66; 818172.64, 2003353.53; 
818172.17, 2003355.44; 818171.82, 2003357.37; 818171.60, 2003359.33; 
818171.51, 2003361.29; 818164.80, 2003448.26; 818164.84, 2003450.23; 
818165.01, 2003452.18; 818165.30, 2003454.13; 818165.72, 2003456.05; 
818166.26, 2003457.93; 818166.93, 2003459.78; 818167.72, 2003461.58; 
818168.62, 2003463.33; 818169.63, 2003465.01; 818170.75, 2003466.62; 
818171.98, 2003468.16; 818173.30, 2003469.61; 818174.72, 2003470.98; 
818176.22, 2003472.24; 818177.80, 2003473.41; 818179.45, 2003474.47; 
818181.17, 2003475.42; 818182.95, 2003476.26; 818184.78, 2003476.97; 
818186.65, 2003477.57; 818188.15, 2003477.95; 818251.08, 2003492.29; 
818296.61, 2003523.57; 818376.74, 2003594.09; 818377.97, 2003595.11; 
818379.55, 2003596.27; 818381.20, 2003597.34; 818382.92, 2003598.29; 
818384.70, 2003599.12; 818386.53, 2003599.84; 818388.40, 2003600.44; 
818390.31, 2003600.91; 818392.24, 2003601.26; 818394.20, 2003601.48; 
818396.16, 2003601.57; 818398.12, 2003601.53; 818400.08, 2003601.36; 
818402.02, 2003601.07; 818403.94, 2003600.65; 818405.83, 2003600.11; 
818407.68, 2003599.44; 818409.48, 2003598.66; 818411.23, 2003597.75; 
818412.91, 2003596.74; 818414.52, 2003595.62; 818416.06, 2003594.39; 
818417.51, 2003593.07; 818418.87, 2003591.65; 818420.14, 2003590.15; 
818421.31, 2003588.57; 818422.37, 2003586.92; 818423.32, 2003585.20; 
818424.15, 2003583.42; 818424.87, 2003581.59; 818425.47, 2003579.72; 
818425.94, 2003577.81; 818426.29, 2003575.88; 818426.51, 2003573.92; 
818426.60, 2003571.96; 818426.56, 2003570.00; 818426.40, 2003568.04; 
818426.10, 2003566.10; 818425.68, 2003564.18; 818425.14, 2003562.29; 
818424.47, 2003560.44; 818423.69, 2003558.64; 818422.79, 2003556.89; 
818421.77, 2003555.21; 818420.65, 2003553.60; 818419.42, 2003552.06; 
818418.10, 2003550.61; 818416.69, 2003549.25; 818416.41, 2003549.00; 
818334.93, 2003477.30; 818333.70, 2003476.28; 818332.12, 2003475.11; 
818332.09, 2003475.09; 818280.35, 2003439.55; 818278.72, 2003438.50; 
818277.00, 2003437.55; 818275.22, 2003436.72; 818273.39, 2003436.00; 
818271.52, 2003435.40; 818270.02, 2003435.02; 818201.50, 2003419.40; 
818201.09, 2003419.31; 818199.16, 2003418.97; 818197.21, 2003418.75; 
818195.25, 2003418.66; 818193.28, 2003418.69; 818191.32, 2003418.86; 
818189.38, 2003419.15; 818187.46, 2003419.57; 818185.57, 2003420.11; 
818183.72, 2003420.78; 818181.92, 2003421.57; 818180.18, 2003422.47; 
818178.49, 2003423.48; 818176.88, 2003424.61; 818175.35, 2003425.83; 
818173.89, 2003427.15; 818172.53, 2003428.57; 818171.26, 2003430.07; 
818170.10, 2003431.65; 818169.04, 2003433.31; 818168.09, 2003435.03; 
818167.25, 2003436.80; 818166.53, 2003438.63; 818165.94, 2003440.50; 
818165.46, 2003442.41; 818165.12, 2003444.35; 818164.90, 2003446.30; 
818164.80, 2003448.26;
    (iii) Note: Map of Units 14 and 15 (Map 12) follows:

[[Page 248]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.011

    (21) Unit 16: Ceiba Sur Unit, Juncos, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 16 consists of approximately 13.92 ac 
(5.63 ha) between Road PR-9934 to the east, and Road PR-919 to the west 
within Ceiba Sur Ward, Juncos.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Juncos USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 16 
bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):

825495.74, 2015729.02; 825495.78, 2015730.98; 825495.94, 2015732.94; 
825496.23, 2015734.88; 825496.65, 2015736.80; 825497.20, 2015738.69;

[[Page 249]]

825497.86, 2015740.54; 825498.65, 2015742.34; 825499.55, 2015744.08; 
825500.57, 2015745.77; 825501.69, 2015747.38; 825502.91, 2015748.92; 
825504.24, 2015750.37; 825505.65, 2015751.73; 825507.15, 2015753.00; 
825508.73, 2015754.17; 825510.39, 2015755.23; 825512.11, 2015756.18; 
825513.89, 2015757.01; 825515.50, 2015757.66; 825623.97, 2015797.10; 
825686.46, 2015843.70; 825729.39, 2015913.29; 825728.50, 2015977.04; 
825714.36, 2016115.79; 825714.30, 2016116.45; 825714.21, 2016118.41; 
825714.25, 2016120.38; 825714.32, 2016121.45; 825728.89, 2016288.33; 
825712.58, 2016422.79; 825712.46, 2016424.02; 825712.36, 2016425.98; 
825712.40, 2016427.95; 825712.57, 2016429.90; 825712.65, 2016430.55; 
825721.59, 2016494.66; 825721.80, 2016495.95; 825722.22, 2016497.87; 
825722.77, 2016499.76; 825723.43, 2016501.61; 825724.22, 2016503.41; 
825725.12, 2016505.16; 825726.13, 2016506.84; 825727.26, 2016508.45; 
825728.48, 2016509.99; 825729.80, 2016511.44; 825731.22, 2016512.80; 
825732.72, 2016514.07; 825734.30, 2016515.24; 825735.96, 2016516.30; 
825737.68, 2016517.25; 825739.45, 2016518.09; 825741.28, 2016518.80; 
825743.16, 2016519.40; 825745.06, 2016519.87; 825747.00, 2016520.22; 
825748.95, 2016520.44; 825750.91, 2016520.53; 825752.88, 2016520.50; 
825754.83, 2016520.33; 825756.78, 2016520.04; 825758.70, 2016519.62; 
825760.59, 2016519.07; 825762.43, 2016518.41; 825764.24, 2016517.62; 
825765.98, 2016516.72; 825767.66, 2016515.71; 825769.28, 2016514.58; 
825770.81, 2016513.36; 825772.27, 2016512.04; 825773.63, 2016510.62; 
825774.90, 2016509.12; 825776.06, 2016507.54; 825777.12, 2016505.88; 
825778.08, 2016504.16; 825778.91, 2016502.39; 825779.63, 2016500.56; 
825780.23, 2016498.69; 825780.70, 2016496.78; 825781.05, 2016494.84; 
825781.27, 2016492.89; 825781.36, 2016490.93; 825781.32, 2016488.96; 
825781.16, 2016487.01; 825781.07, 2016486.36; 825772.67, 2016426.13; 
825788.89, 2016292.45; 825789.01, 2016291.22; 825789.11, 2016289.26; 
825789.07, 2016287.29; 825788.99, 2016286.22; 825774.40, 2016119.05; 
825788.38, 2015981.81; 825788.44, 2015981.16; 825788.53, 2015979.19; 
825789.56, 2015905.38; 825789.53, 2015903.42; 825789.36, 2015901.46; 
825789.07, 2015899.52; 825788.65, 2015897.60; 825788.10, 2015895.71; 
825787.44, 2015893.86; 825786.65, 2015892.06; 825785.75, 2015890.32; 
825785.09, 2015889.20; 825734.57, 2015807.29; 825734.21, 2015806.72; 
825733.09, 2015805.11; 825731.86, 2015803.57; 825730.54, 2015802.12; 
825729.12, 2015800.76; 825727.62, 2015799.49; 825726.96, 2015798.98; 
825656.34, 2015746.31; 825655.42, 2015745.66; 825653.76, 2015744.59; 
825652.04, 2015743.64; 825650.26, 2015742.81; 825648.65, 2015742.17; 
825536.03, 2015701.22; 825535.81, 2015701.14; 825533.94, 2015700.54; 
825532.03, 2015700.07; 825530.10, 2015699.72; 825528.15, 2015699.50; 
825526.19, 2015699.41; 825524.22, 2015699.45; 825522.26, 2015699.61; 
825520.32, 2015699.91; 825518.40, 2015700.33; 825516.51, 2015700.87; 
825514.66, 2015701.54; 825512.86, 2015702.32; 825511.12, 2015703.22; 
825509.43, 2015704.24; 825507.82, 2015705.36; 825506.28, 2015706.59; 
825504.83, 2015707.91; 825503.47, 2015709.32; 825502.20, 2015710.83; 
825501.03, 2015712.41; 825499.97, 2015714.06; 825499.02, 2015715.78; 
825498.19, 2015717.56; 825497.47, 2015719.39; 825496.87, 2015721.26; 
825496.40, 2015723.17; 825496.05, 2015725.10; 825495.83, 2015727.05; 
825495.74, 2015729.02
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 16 (Map 13) follows:

[[Page 250]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.012

    (22) Unit 17: Playita Unit, Yabucoa, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 17 consists of approximately 5.27 ac 
(2.13 ha), between PR-900 to the north and east and the municipal 
boundary of Maunabo to the south, within Calabazas Ward, Yabucoa.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 17 
bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):

[[Page 251]]

825120.79, 1998673.78; 825120.83, 1998675.74; 825121.00, 1998677.70; 
825121.29, 1998679.64; 825121.71, 1998681.56; 825122.25, 1998683.45; 
825122.92, 1998685.30; 825123.71, 1998687.10; 825124.61, 1998688.85; 
825125.62, 1998690.53; 825126.74, 1998692.14; 825127.97, 1998693.68; 
825129.29, 1998695.13; 825130.71, 1998696.49; 825132.21, 1998697.76; 
825133.79, 1998698.93; 825135.44, 1998699.99; 825137.16, 1998700.94; 
825138.94, 1998701.77; 825140.77, 1998702.49; 825142.64, 1998703.09; 
825144.55, 1998703.56; 825146.49, 1998703.91; 825148.44, 1998704.13; 
825150.40, 1998704.22; 825152.37, 1998704.18; 825154.32, 1998704.02; 
825156.27, 1998703.72; 825158.19, 1998703.30; 825160.07, 1998702.76; 
825161.92, 1998702.09; 825163.72, 1998701.31; 825165.47, 1998700.40; 
825167.15, 1998699.39; 825168.76, 1998698.27; 825170.30, 1998697.04; 
825171.75, 1998695.72; 825172.48, 1998694.98; 825196.33, 1998670.14; 
825233.38, 1998640.82; 825234.24, 1998640.12; 825235.69, 1998638.80; 
825237.05, 1998637.38; 825238.32, 1998635.88; 825239.49, 1998634.30; 
825240.24, 1998633.15; 825266.62, 1998590.83; 825266.93, 1998590.32; 
825267.88, 1998588.60; 825268.71, 1998586.82; 825269.43, 1998584.99; 
825270.03, 1998583.12; 825270.50, 1998581.21; 825270.83, 1998579.42; 
825279.64, 1998520.84; 825279.66, 1998520.70; 825279.88, 1998518.75; 
825279.96, 1998517.25; 825283.32, 1998403.46; 825283.33, 1998402.99; 
825283.29, 1998401.03; 825283.13, 1998399.07; 825282.84, 1998397.12; 
825282.42, 1998395.21; 825281.87, 1998393.32; 825281.20, 1998391.47; 
825280.42, 1998389.67; 825279.52, 1998387.92; 825278.50, 1998386.24; 
825277.38, 1998384.63; 825276.15, 1998383.09; 825274.83, 1998381.64; 
825273.42, 1998380.27; 825271.91, 1998379.01; 825270.33, 1998377.84; 
825268.68, 1998376.78; 825266.96, 1998375.83; 825265.18, 1998374.99; 
825263.35, 1998374.28; 825261.48, 1998373.68; 825259.57, 1998373.21; 
825257.64, 1998372.86; 825255.69, 1998372.64; 825253.72, 1998372.55; 
825251.76, 1998372.59; 825249.80, 1998372.75; 825247.86, 1998373.05; 
825245.94, 1998373.46; 825244.05, 1998374.01; 825242.20, 1998374.68; 
825240.40, 1998375.46; 825238.65, 1998376.36; 825236.97, 1998377.38; 
825235.36, 1998378.50; 825233.82, 1998379.73; 825232.37, 1998381.05; 
825231.01, 1998382.46; 825229.74, 1998383.97; 825228.57, 1998385.55; 
825227.51, 1998387.20; 825226.56, 1998388.92; 825225.73, 1998390.70; 
825225.01, 1998392.53; 825224.41, 1998394.40; 825223.94, 1998396.31; 
825223.59, 1998398.24; 825223.37, 1998400.19; 825223.29, 1998401.69; 
825219.99, 1998513.68; 825212.36, 1998564.33; 825192.03, 1998596.96; 
825157.45, 1998624.31; 825156.60, 1998625.01; 825155.15, 1998626.34; 
825154.42, 1998627.07; 825129.15, 1998653.40; 825128.52, 1998654.08; 
825127.25, 1998655.59; 825126.08, 1998657.17; 825125.02, 1998658.82; 
825124.07, 1998660.54; 825123.24, 1998662.32; 825122.52, 1998664.15; 
825121.92, 1998666.02; 825121.45, 1998667.93; 825121.10, 1998669.86; 
825120.88, 1998671.81; 825120.79, 1998673.78;
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 17 (Map 14) follows:

[[Page 252]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.013


[[Page 253]]



          California Tiger Salamander (Ambystoma californiense)

 California Tiger Salamander (Ambystoma californiense) in Santa Barbara 
                                 County

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Santa Barbara County, 
California, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements (PCEs) of critical habitat for 
the California tiger salamander in Santa Barbara County are the habitat 
components that provide:
    (i) Standing bodies of fresh water, including natural and man-made 
(e.g., stock) ponds, vernal pools, and dune ponds, and other ephemeral 
or permanent water bodies that typically become inundated during winter 
rains and hold water for a sufficient length of time (i.e., 12 weeks) 
necessary for the species to complete the aquatic portion of its life 
cycle (PCE 1).
    (ii) Barrier-free uplands adjacent to breeding ponds that contain 
small mammal burrows, including but not limited to burrows created by 
the California ground squirrel (Spermophilus beecheyi) and Botta's 
pocket gopher (Thommomys bottae). Small mammals are essential in 
creating the underground habitat that adult California tiger salamanders 
depend upon for food, shelter, and protection from the elements and 
predation (PCE 2).
    (iii) Upland areas between breeding locations (PCE 1) and areas with 
small mammal burrows (PCE 2) that allow for dispersal among such sites 
(PCE 3).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include existing features and 
structures, such as buildings, aqueducts, airports, roads and their 
rights of way, and other developed areas not containing one or more of 
the primary constituent elements.
    (4) Final critical habitat units are described below. Coordinate in 
UTM Zone 10 with units in meters using North American Datum of 1927 
(NAD27).
    (5) Note: Map 1 (Index map) follows:

[[Page 254]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR24NO04.001

    (6) Unit 1: Western Santa Maria/Orcutt Unit, Santa Barbara County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24, 000 scale quadrangle maps Guadalupe, Santa 
Maria, Orcutt and Casmalia. Lands bounded by UTM Zone 10, NAD 1927 
coordinates (E, N): 727389, 3864869; 727442, 3864843; 727875, 3864859; 
729380, 3864569; 729392, 3864085; 729538, 3864085; 729549, 3863963;

[[Page 255]]

729918, 3863978; 729917, 3864206; 729992, 3864189; 729994, 3864102; 
730189, 3864034; 730274, 3864033; 730349, 3864133; 730426, 3864139; 
730428, 3864131; 730875, 3864121; 730995, 3863984; 731124, 3863944; 
731211, 3863935; 731326, 3864047; 731326, 3864050; 731327, 3864050; 
731552, 3863889; 731688, 3863776; 731694, 3863667; 732718, 3863684; 
733501, 3863695; 733710, 3864115; 734321, 3864137; 734356, 3862460; 
734012, 3862472; 733226, 3862481; 733120, 3862472; 732971, 3862446; 
732961, 3862352; 732793, 3862347; 732789, 3862453; 732392, 3862448; 
731780, 3862433; 731777, 3862409; 731782, 3862099; 731782, 3862030; 
731972, 3862034; 731974, 3861846; 731788, 3861839; 731793, 3861647; 
731514, 3861520; 731262, 3861619; 731322, 3861818; 730590, 3862072; 
730517, 3861874; 730107, 3862013; 729738, 3862138; 729602, 3862197; 
729340, 3862322; 729093, 3862435; 728920, 3862517; 728803, 3862577; 
728697, 3862427; 728611, 3862313; 728499, 3862215; 728390, 3862156; 
728264, 3862119; 728151, 3862116; 728010, 3862126; 727823, 3862142; 
727665, 3862155; 727578, 3862147; 727520, 3862128; 727450, 3862077; 
727373, 3861996; 727263, 3861874; 726913, 3861473; 726869, 3861542; 
726733, 3861881; 726625, 3862026; 726543, 3862111; 726454, 3862257; 
726385, 3862323; 726312, 3862358; 726267, 3862377; 726195, 3862392; 
726144, 3862402; 726090, 3862433; 726030, 3862494; 725866, 3862781; 
725844, 3862860; 725847, 3862927; 725875, 3862987; 725916, 3863037; 
726214, 3863309; 726378, 3863531; 726419, 3863641; 726444, 3864049; 
726467, 3864173; 726511, 3864261; 726568, 3864745; 726596, 3864786; 
726638, 3864810; 726727, 3864827; 726866, 3864836; 727389, 3864850; 
returning to coordinates 727389, 3864869.
    (ii) Note: Unit 1 (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 256]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR24NO04.002

    (7) Unit 2: Eastern Santa Maria Unit, Santa Barbara County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Guadalupe, Santa Maria, 
Twitchell Dam, Orcutt and Sisquoc. Lands bounded by UTM Zone 10, NAD 
1927 coordinates (E, N): 737445, 3864756; 737472, 3864777; 737515, 
3864783; 737548, 3864786; 737572, 3864801; 737600, 3864838;

[[Page 257]]

737615, 3864865; 737648, 3864905; 737679, 3864932; 737706, 3864950; 
737727, 3864968; 737755, 3864987; 737776, 3865011; 737779, 3865041; 
738854, 3865078; 738849, 3865074; 739192, 3865081; 739600, 3865100; 
739600, 3864300; 742500, 3864300; 742836, 3864048; 742825, 3863984; 
742805, 3863899; 742825, 3863808; 742798, 3863736; 742798, 3863677; 
742838, 3863599; 742851, 3863501; 742890, 3863429; 742942, 3863357; 
742955, 3863266; 743020, 3863122; 743086, 3863004; 743164, 3862913; 
743256, 3862841; 743308, 3862763; 743308, 3862717; 743399, 3862573; 
743497, 3862417; 743536, 3862345; 743608, 3862286; 743608, 3862201; 
743703, 3861803; 743680, 3861801; 743607, 3861773; 743552, 3861732; 
743460, 3861709; 743363, 3861672; 743299, 3861589; 743194, 3861498; 
743115, 3861392; 743083, 3861277; 743028, 3861194; 742955, 3861153; 
742844, 3861112; 742794, 3861075; 742546, 3861098; 741338, 3861104; 
741329, 3861505; 740918, 3861507; 740918, 3861880; 740700, 3862100; 
740400, 3862500; 740300, 3862700; 740300, 3863100; 738600, 3863500; 
738531, 3863657; 738371, 3863925; 738322, 3863957; 738273, 3863974; 
738219, 3863986; 738136, 3864066; 738036, 3864163; 737987, 3864215; 
737938, 3864226; 737890, 3864212; 737838, 3864206; 737795, 3864232; 
737749, 3864266; 737718, 3864321; 737672, 3864378; 737595, 3864409; 
737512, 3864441; 737493, 3864445; 737485, 3864446; 737478, 3864479; 
737466, 3864522; 737472, 3864543; 737500, 3864555; 737536, 3864561; 
737576, 3864571; 737600, 3864589; 737594, 3864625; 737563, 3864640; 
737530, 3864668; 737487, 3864689; 737460, 3864701; 737448, 3864728; 
returning to coordinates 737445, 3864756
    (i) Note: Unit 2 (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 258]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR24NO04.003

    (8) Unit 3: Western Los Alamos/Careaga Unit, Santa Barbara County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Orcutt and Sisquoc. 
Lands bounded by UTM Zone 10, NAD 1927 coordinates (E, N): 739930, 
3852832; 739932, 3852861; 739942, 3852885; 739950, 3852898; 739953, 
3852908; 739948, 3852930; 739938, 3852953; 739930, 3852980; 739930, 
3853010;

[[Page 259]]

739934, 3853028; 739949, 3853035; 740004, 3853033; 740031, 3853036; 
740050, 3853048; 740057, 3853058; 740069, 3853085; 740079, 3853108; 
740089, 3853128; 740102, 3853145; 740129, 3853157; 740152, 3853178; 
740159, 3853196; 740161, 3853220; 740164, 3853243; 740194, 3853293; 
740204, 3853313; 740211, 3853337; 740215, 3853373; 740224, 3853418; 
740236, 3853465; 740233, 3853508; 740236, 3853551; 740232, 3853598; 
740212, 3853658; 740197, 3853710; 740189, 3853748; 740175, 3853778; 
740179, 3853818; 740189, 3853838; 740207, 3853850; 740227, 3853847; 
740249, 3853838; 740273, 3853833; 740288, 3853838; 740309, 3853865; 
740314, 3853898; 740309, 3853934; 740295, 3853970; 740295, 3854004; 
740301, 3854056; 740297, 3854108; 740284, 3854159; 740273, 3854198; 
740261, 3854241; 740233, 3854288; 740219, 3854318; 740219, 3854348; 
740201, 3854378; 740179, 3854408; 740175, 3854438; 740185, 3854482; 
740205, 3854528; 740210, 3854580; 740189, 3854598; 740138, 3854609; 
740067, 3854618; 740058, 3854630; 740057, 3854650; 740068, 3854705; 
740086, 3854764; 740122, 3854832; 740145, 3854873; 740171, 3854916; 
740200, 3854958; 740227, 3854990; 740246, 3855003; 740268, 3855011; 
740299, 3855016; 740327, 3855016; 740394, 3855002; 740463, 3854982; 
740529, 3854949; 740587, 3854907; 740667, 3854871; 740749, 3854847; 
740853, 3854820; 741014, 3854780; 741358, 3854674; 741546, 3854627; 
741695, 3854596; 741696, 3854596; 741734, 3854379; 741759, 3854299; 
741781, 3854220; 741811, 3854104; 741858, 3853961; 741870, 3853929; 
741886, 3853898; 741906, 3853865; 741932, 3853833; 741976, 3853784; 
742010, 3853736; 742033, 3853682; 742054, 3853628; 742075, 3853579; 
742092, 3853547; 742113, 3853517; 742142, 3853481; 742183, 3853444; 
742227, 3853411; 742263, 3853385; 742305, 3853361; 742316, 3853357; 
742332, 3853353; 742346, 3853356; 742362, 3853362; 742371, 3853371; 
742375, 3853385; 742374, 3853410; 742374, 3853450; 742374, 3853462; 
742379, 3853481; 742385, 3853496; 742392, 3853507; 742401, 3853515; 
742411, 3853518; 742433, 3853515; 742447, 3853508; 742463, 3853498; 
742486, 3853490; 742511, 3853490; 742525, 3853492; 742539, 3853496; 
742565, 3853509; 742580, 3853517; 742594, 3853520; 742605, 3853519; 
742616, 3853515; 742626, 3853502; 742634, 3853485; 742643, 3853466; 
742653, 3853451; 742664, 3853433; 742687, 3853414; 742700, 3853411; 
742712, 3853411; 742723, 3853417; 742734, 3853429; 742742, 3853451; 
742741, 3853472; 742735, 3853490; 742727, 3853511; 742719, 3853537; 
742718, 3853556; 742720, 3853577; 742741, 3853616; 742753, 3853632; 
742766, 3853645; 742786, 3853648; 742809, 3853648; 742820, 3853648; 
742834, 3853645; 742856, 3853634; 742980, 3853487; 742994, 3853477; 
743010, 3853470; 743024, 3853466; 743040, 3853463; 743058, 3853467; 
743068, 3853470; 743074, 3853474; 743082, 3853492; 743087, 3853504; 
743090, 3853519; 743092, 3853546; 743094, 3853569; 743097, 3853585; 
743100, 3853593; 743100, 3853606; 743090, 3853656; 743091, 3853667; 
743104, 3853684; 743125, 3853694; 743146, 3853691; 743171, 3853681; 
743201, 3853671; 743217, 3853677; 743229, 3853688; 743247, 3853721; 
743259, 3853762; 743269, 3853790; 743277, 3853849; 743300, 3853819; 
743300, 3853818; 743323, 3853777; 743397, 3853668; 743403, 3852407; 
743404, 3851838; 743379, 3851848; 743310, 3851856; 743246, 3851854; 
743210, 3851862; 743160, 3851881; 743107, 3851862; 743071, 3851848; 
743035, 3851839; 743001, 3851841; 742976, 3851860; 742953, 3851890; 
742771, 3852099; 742735, 3852126; 742695, 3852156; 742663, 3852192; 
742649, 3852236; 742651, 3852268; 742642, 3852300; 742625, 3852327; 
742598, 3852357; 742575, 3852378; 742539, 3852388; 742505, 3852386; 
742458, 3852350; 742323, 3852141; 742287, 3852122; 742251, 3852112; 
742211, 3852124; 742169, 3852135; 742123, 3852135; 742080, 3852131; 
742051, 3852137; 742006, 3852145; 741962, 3852148; 741932, 3852156; 
741901, 3852177; 741880, 3852198; 741859, 3852205; 741829, 3852198; 
741806, 3852207; 741774, 3852219; 741753, 3852232; 741730, 3852234; 
741709, 3852230; 741694, 3852238; 741683, 3852257; 741666, 3852279; 
741645, 3852298; 741540, 3852314; 741527, 3852333; 741521, 3852365; 
741485, 3852388; 741464, 3852395; 741430, 3852405; 741413, 3852426; 
741362, 3852448; 741324, 3852462; 741273, 3852494; 741240, 3852526; 
741056, 3852733; 740995, 3852819; 740969, 3852874; 740948, 3852919; 
740914, 3852929; 740739, 3852925; 740638, 3852914; 740536, 3852895; 
740395, 3852862; 740249, 3852823; 740205, 3852807; 740165, 3852787; 
740120, 3852761; 740076, 3852741; 740029, 3852725; 739996, 3852721; 
739966, 3852736; 739949, 3852758; 739935, 3852794; returning to 
coordinates 739930, 3852832.
    (ii) Note: Unit 3 (Map 4) follows:

[[Page 260]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR24NO04.004

    (9) Unit 4: Eastern Los Alamos Unit, Santa Barbara County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Los Alamos and Zaca 
Creek. Lands bounded by UTM Zone 10, NAD 1927 coordinates (E, N): 
751549, 3847022; 751555, 3846792; 751152, 3846766; 751147, 3847077; 
751215, 3847070; return to coordinates 751549, 3847022; 752562,

[[Page 261]]

3846818; 752566, 3846816; 752568, 3846815; 753162, 3846522; 753190, 
3846371; 753198, 3846259; 752581, 3846225; 752562, 3846811; returning to 
coordinates 752562, 3846818.
    (ii) Note: Unit 4 (Map 5) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR24NO04.005
    

[[Page 262]]


    (10) Unit 5 (Purisima Hills) and Unit 6 (Santa Rita Valley), Santa 
Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Lompoc and Los Alamos. 
Lands bounded by UTM Zone 10, NAD 1927 coordinates (E, N): 740315, 
3843441; 740315, 3843571; 740333, 3843694; 740344, 3843851; 740379, 
3844016; 740440, 3844211; 740465, 3844252; 740500, 3844403; 740514, 
3844454; 740523, 3844541; 740545, 3844615; 740543, 3844650; 740562, 
3844732; 740560, 3844813; 740574, 3844876; 740605, 3844928; 740632, 
3844951; 740687, 3844979; 740760, 3844996; 740805, 3845008; 740854, 
3845018; 740926, 3845027; 740998, 3845045; 741062, 3845070; 741215, 
3845097; 741303, 3845088; 741330, 3845084; 741406, 3845068; 741449, 
3845049; 741505, 3845008; 741534, 3844944; 741565, 3844878; 741622, 
3844831; 741696, 3844819; 741830, 3844848; 741927, 3844856; 742032, 
3844878; 742137, 3844897; 742187, 3844900; 743020, 3844746; 743600, 
3844639; 743544, 3845422; 743666, 3845536; 743782, 3845507; 743804, 
3845490; 743820, 3845487; 743817, 3845472; 743789, 3845364; 743754, 
3845216; 743731, 3845103; 743737, 3845037; 743766, 3844881; 743795, 
3844800; 743801, 3844755; 743885, 3844535; 743914, 3844487; 743935, 
3844452; 743955, 3844439; 743980, 3844433; 744015, 3844435; 744049, 
3844447; 744076, 3844462; 744101, 3844484; 744191, 3844607; 744256, 
3844716; 744267, 3844736; 744287, 3844751; 744316, 3844765; 744347, 
3844771; 744379, 3844771; 744398, 3844763; 744416, 3844745; 744431, 
3844716; 744453, 3844650; 744443, 3844611; 744459, 3844574; 744482, 
3844523; 744488, 3844488; 744482, 3844462; 744449, 3844433; 744425, 
3844386; 744406, 3844347; 744392, 3844304; 744379, 3844255; 744375, 
3844189; 744361, 3844156; 744334, 3844132; 744306, 3844106; 744283, 
3844062; 744275, 3844028; 744279, 3843987; 744291, 3843933; 744308, 
3843884; 744316, 3843839; 744320, 3843801; 744303, 3843764; 744258, 
3843733; 744257, 3843733; 744209, 3843711; 744131, 3843692; 744083, 
3843690; 744032, 3843674; 743962, 3843661; 743896, 3843643; 743768, 
3843616; 743739, 3843608; 743690, 3843610; 743673, 3843616; 743651, 
3843624; 743587, 3843624; 743548, 3843624; 743519, 3843624; 743488, 
3843616; 743467, 3843585; 743439, 3843558; 743414, 3843550; 743391, 
3843543; 743373, 3843538; 743327, 3843503; 743319, 3843489; 743303, 
3843462; 743280, 3843443; 743228, 3843421; 743222, 3843416; 743194, 
3843404; 743150, 3843392; 743095, 3843367; 743037, 3843328; 742969, 
3843276; 742924, 3843237; 742891, 3843194; 742856, 3843132; 742817, 
3843073; 742790, 3842998; 742767, 3842937; 742745, 3842914; 742741, 
3842893; 742755, 3842875; 742776, 3842844; 742796, 3842819; 742811, 
3842782; 742808, 3842754; 742808, 3842756; 742806, 3842745; 742724, 
3842689; 742714, 3842673; 742714, 3842654; 742699, 3842642; 742691, 
3842619; 742679, 3842599; 742658, 3842574; 742619, 3842523; 742600, 
3842496; 742580, 3842488; 742559, 3842481; 742528, 3842473; 742512, 
3842467; 742491, 3842453; 742469, 3842436; 742460, 3842407; 742452, 
3842376; 742446, 3842358; 742432, 3842352; 742423, 3842346; 742423, 
3842331; 742423, 3842321; 742415, 3842300; 742401, 3842292; 742382, 
3842284; 742366, 3842278; 742360, 3842263; 742347, 3842255; 742337, 
3842238; 742331, 3842214; 742325, 3842195; 742322, 3842177; 742333, 
3842156; 742333, 3842133; 742325, 3842113; 742308, 3842100; 742283, 
3842082; 742263, 3842053; 742215, 3842063; 742205, 3842084; 742199, 
3842144; 742189, 3842214; 742182, 3842267; 742162, 3842317; 742131, 
3842362; 742065, 3842407; 742020, 3842428; 741952, 3842434; 741925, 
3842430; 741907, 3842411; 741884, 3842343; 741859, 3842259; 741834, 
3842222; 741785, 3842199; 741678, 3842164; 741618, 3842152; 741524, 
3842191; 741449, 3842218; 741383, 3842245; 741322, 3842265; 741194, 
3842306; 741101, 3842329; 741029, 3842343; 740984, 3842374; 740953, 
3842407; 740908, 3842494; 740846, 3842572; 740805, 3842632; 740760, 
3842702; 740681, 3842796; 740578, 3842885; 740374, 3843079; 740346, 
3843118; 740329, 3843163; 740321, 3843192; 740323, 3843280; 740319, 
3843359; returning to coordinates 740315, 3843441.
    (ii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Los Alamos. Lands 
bounded by UTM Zone 10, NAD 1927 coordinates (E, N): 745831, 3837355; 
745836, 3837400; 745868, 3837517; 745882, 3837595; 745885, 3837796; 
745931, 3837850; 745943, 3837841; 746054, 3837754; 746086, 3837749; 
746174, 3837796; 746193, 3837805; 746210, 3837817; 746240, 3837814; 
746238, 3837834; 746237, 3837848; 746238, 3837859; 746246, 3837885; 
746252, 3837904; 746264, 3837925; 746270, 3837939; 746273, 3837961; 
746333, 3837969; 746362, 3837961; 746389, 3837952; 746410, 3837932; 
746447, 3837910; 746481, 3837886; 746510, 3837871; 746524, 3837871; 
746574, 3837901; 746641, 3837941; 746671, 3837958; 746698, 3837971; 
746711, 3837990; 746719, 3838016; 746722, 3838057; 746732, 3838099; 
746754, 3838127; 746774, 3838153; 746800, 3838178; 746812, 3838172; 
746830, 3838154; 746849, 3838139; 746872, 3838143; 746890, 3838153; 
746910, 3838175; 746936, 3838195; 746973, 3838226; 747007, 3838275; 
747028, 3838292; 747042, 3838295; 747065, 3838297; 747100, 3838307; 
747126, 3838325; 747165, 3838333; 747192, 3838314; 747175, 3838300; 
747164, 3838280; 747130, 3838159; 747094, 3838014; 746951, 3837865; 
746923, 3837601; 746880, 3837223; 746875, 3837182; 746875, 3837180; 
746819, 3837113; 747089, 3836795; 747166, 3836717; 747266, 3836621; 
747421, 3836483; 747555, 3836383; 747819, 3836198; 747789, 3836153; 
747755, 3836094; 747708, 3836034; 747619, 3836017; 747525, 3836009; 
747485, 3835980; 747470, 3835953; 747470, 3835945; 747428, 3835918; 
747391, 3835882; 747345, 3835822; 747298, 3835796; 747255, 3835776; 
747202, 3835757; 747159, 3835786; 747080, 3835838; 747045, 3835853; 
747015, 3835866; 746987, 3835870; 746960, 3835858; 746907, 3835796; 
746883, 3835755; 746875, 3835741; 746860, 3835729; 746841, 3835737; 
746825, 3835750; 746722, 3835836; 746666, 3835870; 746586, 3835909; 
746526, 3835966; 746474, 3836020; 746369, 3836096; 746284, 3836134; 
746251, 3836133; 746219, 3836119; 746195, 3836119; 746169, 3836122; 
746153, 3836147; 746086, 3836247; 746015, 3836335; 745961, 3836422; 
745892, 3836592; 745874, 3836696; 745868, 3836781; 745884, 3836906; 
745884, 3836988; 745866, 3837121; 745866, 3837174; 745855, 3837241; 
745837, 3837310; returning to coordinates 745831, 3837355.
    (iii) Note: Units 5 and 6 (Map 6) follow:

[[Page 263]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR24NO04.006


[[Page 264]]



    Central Population of the California Tiger Salamander (Ambystoma 
                             californiense)

    (11) Critical habitat units are depicted for the Central population 
of the California tiger salamander in California on the maps below.
    (12) The PCEs of critical habitat for the Central population of the 
California tiger salamander (Ambystoma californiense) are the habitat 
components that provide:
    (i) Standing bodies of fresh water (including natural and manmade 
(e.g., stock)) ponds, vernal pools, and other ephemeral or permanent 
water bodies which typically support inundation during winter rains and 
hold water for a minimum of 12 weeks in a year of average rainfall;
    (ii) Upland habitats adjacent and accessible to and from breeding 
ponds that contain small mammal burrows or other underground habitat 
that CTS depend upon for food, shelter, and protection from the elements 
and predation; and
    (iii) Accessible upland dispersal habitat between occupied locations 
that allow for movement between such sites.
    (13) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures existing 
on the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
PCEs, such as buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads, and the land on 
which such structures are located.
    (14) Critical habitat units are described below. Data layers 
defining map units were created by screen digitizing habitat boundaries 
using ArcMap GIS.
    (15) Note: Map 7 (Index map) follows:

[[Page 265]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.001

    (16) Central Valley Region: Unit 1, Yolo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Wildwood School, Dunnigan, 
Bird Valley, Zamora. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 
coordinates (E,N): 586407, 4303194; 585908, 4303117; 585550, 4303309; 
585255, 4303424; 584910, 4303603; 584500, 4303795; 584231,

[[Page 266]]

4303962; 583975, 4304179; 583783, 4304551; 583988, 4305229; 584116, 
4305537; 584321, 4305729; 584602, 4305997; 584615, 4306446; 584654, 
4306689; 584922, 4306830; 585089, 4306906; 585370, 4307047; 585486, 
4307355; 585914, 4307355; 586996, 4307355; 587000, 4306558; 587204, 
4306457; 587208, 4305759; 587600, 4305747; 587609, 4305701; 587617, 
4304857; 587488, 4304855; 587486, 4304740; 587486, 4304618; 586854, 
4304617; 586795, 4304534; 586983, 4304309; 586935, 4304197; 586912, 
4304035; 586970, 4303827; 586715, 4303400; returning to 586407, 4303194.
    (ii) Note: Map 8 (Central Valley Region, Unit 1) follows:

[[Page 267]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.002

    (17) Central Valley Region: Unit 2, Solano County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Dozier, and Birds Landing. 
Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
601869, 4237342; 601865, 4236938; 601654, 4236932; 601647, 4237125; 
601764, 4237131; 601764, 4237339; 601264, 4237328; 601264, 4237123;

[[Page 268]]

601288, 4237127; 601297, 4236925; 601267, 4236923; 601266, 4236556; 
601589, 4236551; 601590, 4236740; 601703, 4236734; 601710, 4236549; 
602349, 4236539; 602884, 4237289; 602883, 4237336; returning to 601869, 
4237342.; excluding land bounded by: 603666, 4238548; 604112, 4238500; 
604463, 4238516; 604510, 4237050; 604494, 4233370; 601674, 4233354; 
600161, 4233354; 599699, 4233386; 599667, 4238197; 602105, 4238197; 
602375, 4238548; 602822, 4238548; 603666, 4238548
    (ii) Note: Map 9 (Central Valley Region, Unit 2) follows:

[[Page 269]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.003

    (18) Central Valley Region: Unit 3, Sacramento County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Clay, and Goose Creek. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 664836, 
4248038; 665672, 4248010; 668028, 4248080; 667972, 4246477; 668014, 
4245543; 668070, 4244525; 668098, 4244093; 667735, 4243954; 667443,

[[Page 270]]

4243758; 667178, 4243424; 666927, 4242866; 666982, 4242588; 666885, 
4242323; 666718, 4242016; 666606, 4241667; 666216, 4241361; 665644, 
4241193; 665337, 4241207; 664947, 4241249; 664766, 4241124; 664362, 
4241138; 664125, 4241110; 663790, 4240970; 663246, 4242100; 663149, 
4242323; 662884, 4242936; 663316, 4243312; 663302, 4243758; 663051, 
4243898; 662633, 4243954; 662563, 4244121; 662563, 4244665; 662368, 
4244679; 661713, 4244706; 660626, 4244623; 660626, 4244804; 660723, 
4245013; 660514, 4245180; 660500, 4245613; 660514, 4245919; 660654, 
4246337; 660960, 4246672; 661072, 4247048; 660779, 4247146; 660695, 
4247369; 660793, 4247732; 660904, 4248219; 661211, 4248526; 661629, 
4248721; 664822, 4248735; 664905, 4248554; returning to 664836, 4248038; 
excluding land bounded by: 663699, 4245563; 663773, 4245470; 663872, 
4245529; 663908, 4245484; 664132, 4245487; 664193, 4245525; 664343, 
4245508; 664446, 4245534; 664455, 4245223; 664686, 4245225; 664681, 
4245603; 664669, 4245660; 664669, 4245731; 664793, 4245767; 664776, 
4245798; 664712, 4245836; 664686, 4245962; 664629, 4246000; 664643, 
4246107; 664517, 4246081; 664512, 4246171; 664315, 4246178; 664236, 
4246190; 663987, 4246188; 663813, 4245903; 663732, 4245860; and 
returning to 663699, 4245563.; and excluding land bounded by: 663893, 
4245225; 663790, 4245261; 663740, 4245213; 663759, 4244776; 663937, 
4244476; 664146, 4244482; 664133, 4245143; returning to 663893, 4245225.
    (ii) Note: Central Valley Region, Unit 3 is depicted on Map 10--
Units 3 and 4--see paragraph (19)(ii).
    (19) Central Valley Region: Unit 4, Amador County, California, and 
San Joaquin County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Goose Creek, Ione, 
Clements, and Wallace. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 
coordinates (E,N): 672313, 4240429; 672654, 4240270; 672756, 4240232; 
673017, 4240134; 673290, 4239940; 673438, 4239952; 673699, 4239838; 
674062, 4239736; 674380, 4239498; 674698, 4239304; 674925, 4239089; 
675039, 4238646; 675084, 4238248; 675039, 4237771; 675050, 4237658; 
675175, 4237396; 675130, 4236954; 675346, 4236613; 675323, 4236045; 
675198, 4235738; 675152, 4235409; 674653, 4235398; 674499, 4235346; 
674346, 4235295; 674119, 4235023; 673812, 4234989; 673449, 4234864; 
673188, 4234841; 673040, 4234455; 672961, 4234114; 672506, 4233944; 
672313, 4234069; 672154, 4234160; 671723, 4233910; 671257, 4233774; 
670905, 4233796; 670587, 4233830; 670246, 4233898; 670099, 4234160; 
669905, 4234455; 669656, 4234637; 669292, 4234682; 669054, 4234682; 
668883, 4234932; 668815, 4235295; 668747, 4235602; 668815, 4235977; 
668622, 4236227; 668281, 4236499; 668020, 4236613; 667736, 4236806; 
667566, 4237022; 667452, 4237408; 667566, 4237976; 667657, 4238135; 
667816, 4238328; 667861, 4238441; 667804, 4238623; 667589, 4238827; 
667555, 4239111; 667623, 4239339; 668009, 4239600; 668202, 4239827; 
668497, 4240134; 668940, 4240395; 669201, 4240372; 669440, 4240327; 
669803, 4240338; 670064, 4239906; 670269, 4239520; 670564, 4239463; 
670928, 4239657; 671212, 4240099; 671564, 4240429; 671916, 4240406; 
returning to 672313, 4240429.
    (ii) Note: Unit 4 is depicted on Map 10--Units 3 and 4--which 
follows:

[[Page 271]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.004

    (20) Central Valley Region: Unit 5, Calaveras County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Goose Creek, Ione, 
Clements, and Wallace. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 
coordinates (E,N): 683568, 4220263; 682958, 4220198; 682573, 4220519; 
682460, 4220664; 682316, 4221113; 682316, 4221499; 682348, 4221772;

[[Page 272]]

682508, 4222125; 682589, 4222494; 682974, 4222976; 683343, 4223345; 
683279, 4223762; 683375, 4224067; 683343, 4224501; 683183, 4224790; 
683086, 4225352; 683215, 4225657; 683456, 4225994; 683632, 4226170; 
683953, 4226283; 684114, 4226411; 684467, 4226411; 684804, 4226267; 
685157, 4226026; 685334, 4225496; 685350, 4224982; 685334, 4224549; 
685510, 4224115; 685494, 4223682; 685382, 4223297; 685173, 4222976; 
685029, 4222719; 684852, 4222205; 684772, 4221900; 684643, 4221483; 
684531, 4220985; 684306, 4220664; 683921, 4220391; returning to 683568, 
4220263.
    (ii) Note: Central Valley Region, Unit 5 is depicted on Map 11--
Units 5, 6, and 7--see paragraph (22)(ii).
    (21) Central Valley Region: Unit 6, Calaveras County, California, 
Stanislaus County, California, and San Joaquin County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Valley Springs SW, Jenny 
Lind, Farmington, and Bachelor Valley. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 686359, 4213033; 686987, 4212296; 
687479, 4211559; 687315, 4210958; 687542, 4210371; 687779, 4209756; 
687643, 4209128; 687725, 4208582; 688134, 4208308; 688544, 4207789; 
688844, 4207298; 688571, 4206424; 688349, 4206061; 688544, 4205714; 
688708, 4205277; 688372, 4204505; 686597, 4204505; 685277, 4204505; 
684693, 4204235; 684316, 4203393; 683884, 4202567; 683811, 4201719; 
683900, 4199972; 683710, 4199678; 683164, 4199104; 682563, 4198831; 
682285, 4198727; 682126, 4198667; 681470, 4198503; 680869, 4198858; 
680665, 4199223; 680627, 4200080; 679933, 4200062; 679777, 4200279; 
679777, 4201016; 679882, 4201242; 680596, 4201279; 680584, 4201670; 
680077, 4201672; 679832, 4202382; 679764, 4202757; 679752, 4203304; 
679504, 4203338; 679531, 4203829; 679149, 4204048; 678630, 4204212; 
678220, 4204649; 677810, 4204976; 677346, 4205495; 677264, 4206069; 
677264, 4206834; 677483, 4207817; 678329, 4208145; 678603, 4208308; 
678684, 4209100; 678821, 4209483; 680253, 4210794; 681850, 4211270; 
681985, 4211350; 682777, 4211817; 683589, 4212297; 684384, 4212766; 
685533, 4212474; 685557, 4212491; returning to 686359, 4213033.
    (ii) Note: Central Valley Region, Unit 6 is depicted on Map 11--
Units 5, 6, and 7--see paragraph (22)(ii).
    (22) Central Valley Region: Unit 7, Stanislaus County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Oakdale. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 693428, 4186960; 693463, 
4186942; 693504, 4186969; 693517, 4186960; 693709, 4186853; 693941, 
4186479; 694034, 4186323; 694003, 4186260; 693941, 4186198; 693900, 
4186166; 693816, 4186086; 693771, 4186059; 693646, 4186006; 693588, 
4185993; 693544, 4185975; 693544, 4185930; 693517, 4185877; 693526, 
4185792; 693495, 4185805; 693459, 4185836; 693423, 4185823; 693397, 
4185863; 693352, 4185859; 693330, 4185828; 693303, 4185756; 693298, 
4185712; 693218, 4185689; 693191, 4185645; 693138, 4185640; 693080, 
4185676; 693026, 4185671; 693000, 4185645; 692964, 4185582; 693000, 
4185511; 693049, 4185493; 693018, 4185440; 693022, 4185386; 692995, 
4185333; 692991, 4185284; 693058, 4185261; 693098, 4185243; 693093, 
4185168; 692986, 4185177; 692527, 4185172; 692514, 4185243; 692506, 
4185297; 692501, 4185303; 692478, 4185364; 692456, 4185413; 692420, 
4185449; 692456, 4185515; 692509, 4185627; 692523, 4185716; 692523, 
4185774; 692523, 4185823; 692433, 4185841; 692179, 4185850; 692152, 
4185903; 692157, 4185966; 691916, 4186028; 691925, 4186064; 692010, 
4186122; 692041, 4186175; 692090, 4186220; 692121, 4186260; 692179, 
4186327; 692246, 4186349; 692277, 4186389; 692291, 4186421; 692273, 
4186461; 692228, 4186470; 692144, 4186447; 692108, 4186434; 692108, 
4186376; 692099, 4186323; 692019, 4186314; 691987, 4186345; 691970, 
4186345; 691921, 4186345; 691880, 4186345; 691858, 4186385; 691858, 
4186434; 691840, 4186452; 691800, 4186470; 691782, 4186496; 691747, 
4186532; 691729, 4186568; 691738, 4186621; 691773, 4186675; 691818, 
4186719; 691858, 4186746; 691903, 4186764; 691947, 4186795; 691987, 
4186804; 692045, 4186804; 692144, 4186608; 692228, 4186626; 692326, 
4186639; 692398, 4186644; 692478, 4186644; 692540, 4186768; 692607, 
4186755; 692634, 4186786; 692670, 4186849; 692790, 4186933; 692848, 
4186969; 692911, 4187000; 693026, 4187005; 693067, 4186951; 693125, 
4186947; 693174, 4186951; 693200, 4187027; 693379, 4186987; returning to 
693428, 4186960.
    (ii) Note: Central Valley Region, Unit 7 is depicted on Map 11--
Units 5, 6, and 7--which follows:

[[Page 273]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.005

    (23) Central Valley Region: Unit 8, Stanislaus County, California, 
and Merced County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles La Grange, and Snelling. 
Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
725431, 4171496; 725601, 4170824;

[[Page 274]]

725374, 4170317; 725561, 4169703; 725374, 4168849; 725587, 4168488; 
725787, 4167394; 725257, 4165657; 725200, 4165472; 725093, 4164938; 
724466, 4164337; 724132, 4164284; 723759, 4164284; 723267, 4164611; 
723238, 4164631; 722571, 4165765; 722250, 4166366; 721817, 4167393; 
723498, 4167406; 723802, 4167803; 723935, 4168465; 724279, 4168677; 
724252, 4169047; 723894, 4169053; 723869, 4168849; 723432, 4168835; 
723458, 4168663; 722664, 4168650; 722651, 4169074; 722584, 4170027; 
723086, 4170091; 723352, 4169961; 723869, 4170371; 724200, 4170411; 
724133, 4170861; 724199, 4171065; 724438, 4171245; 724888, 4171192; 
724914, 4171391; 725153, 4171457; returning to 725431, 4171496.
    (ii) Note: Central Valley Region, Unit 8 is depicted on Map 12--
Units 8, 9, and 10--see paragraph (25)(ii).
    (24) Central Valley Region: Unit 9, Merced County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Yosemite Lake, Haystack 
Mtn., Merced, and Planada. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 737111, 4141220; 736885, 4140606; 736578, 
4140319; 735779, 4139868; 735411, 4139418; 735001, 4138885; 734755, 
4138516; 734345, 4138352; 733977, 4138291; 733198, 4137390; 732850, 
4137308; 732625, 4137738; 732707, 4138230; 732359, 4138414; 732133, 
4138373; 731990, 4138230; 731969, 4138127; 731744, 4137922; 731457, 
4137308; 731129, 4137082; 730904, 4137349; 730638, 4137697; 730310, 
4137656; 729900, 4137717; 729593, 4137758; 729409, 4138127; 729368, 
4138332; 729081, 4138516; 729224, 4138783; 729532, 4139008; 729511, 
4139315; 729204, 4139418; 728897, 4139520; 729429, 4140278; 729224, 
4140667; 728897, 4140933; 728692, 4140892; 728282, 4140708; 728118, 
4140667; 727914, 4140729; 727729, 4141077; 727606, 4141077; 727442, 
4141179; 727238, 4141282; 726848, 4141302; 726725, 4141445; 726643, 
4141753; 726725, 4141937; 726562, 4142654; 726562, 4142838; 726439, 
4142982; 726172, 4143084; 725660, 4143105; 725476, 4143187; 725599, 
4143412; 725476, 4143822; 725333, 4143965; 725087, 4144026; 724943, 
4144149; 724902, 4144477; 725066, 4144948; 725455, 4145235; 725968, 
4145399; 726193, 4145522; 726480, 4145890; 726930, 4146095; 727381, 
4146136; 727729, 4146485; 728180, 4146874; 728630, 4147263; 728897, 
4147591; 729388, 4147795; 729900, 4147816; 730392, 4147857; 730945, 
4148103; 731478, 4148021; 732010, 4147714; 732297, 4147283; 732338, 
4146915; 732625, 4146525; 733034, 4146157; 733260, 4145890; 733260, 
4145276; 733116, 4144784; 733362, 4144211; 733608, 4143801; 733854, 
4143514; 734120, 4143289; 734550, 4142982; 735370, 4142797; 736189, 
4142593; 736619, 4142470; 737111, 4141978; returning to 737111, 4141220.
    (ii) Note: Central Valley Region, Unit 9 is depicted on Map 12--
Units 8, 9, and 10--see paragraph (25)(ii):
    (25) Central Valley Region: Unit 10, Merced County, California, and 
Mariposa County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Planada, and Owens 
Reservoir. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 745886, 4137625; 746150, 4137196; 746265, 4136981; 746447, 
4136371; 746447, 4136305; 746529, 4136041; 746530, 4136009; 746546, 
4135595; 746645, 4135364; 746760, 4135315; 746880, 4135309; 747140, 
4135298; 747338, 4135067; 747519, 4134655; 747750, 4134226; 748031, 
4133945; 748229, 4133533; 748311, 4133170; 748353, 4132808; 748361, 
4132741; 748394, 4132625; 748394, 4132394; 748344, 4132047; 748328, 
4131750; 748212, 4131371; 748064, 4131123; 747866, 4130579; 747684, 
4130414; 747288, 4130232; 746826, 4130117; 746562, 4129952; 746100, 
4129589; 745820, 4129275; 745605, 4128978; 745292, 4128714; 744863, 
4128648; 744367, 4128632; 743856, 4128665; 743608, 4129209; 743608, 
4129572; 743608, 4130232; 743641, 4130579; 743493, 4130793; 743179, 
4130942; 743014, 4131107; 742684, 4131123; 742404, 4131255; 742288, 
4131684; 742024, 4131750; 741727, 4131783; 741628, 4131684; 741150, 
4131453; 741117, 4131932; 740820, 4132180; 740407, 4132163; 740061, 
4132444; 740358, 4132757; 740589, 4132922; 740919, 4133153; 741249, 
4133351; 741414, 4133417; 741826, 4133681; 742156, 4133929; 742585, 
4134308; 742618, 4134556; 742371, 4134721; 742437, 4134853; 742470, 
4135067; 742453, 4135331; 742486, 4135595; 742618, 4135727; 742668, 
4135859; 742684, 4136255; 742668, 4136437; 742585, 4136800; 742783, 
4136981; 742882, 4137097; 743146, 4137344; 743460, 4137410; 743740, 
4137460; 744103, 4137559; 744450, 4137542; 744632, 4137592; 744863, 
4137757; 745077, 4137790; 745393, 4137760; 745424, 4137757; returning to 
745886, 4137625.
    (ii) Note: Central Valley Region, Unit 10 is depicted on Map 12--
Units 8, 9, and 10--which follows:

[[Page 275]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.006

    (26) Central Valley Region: Unit 11, Madera County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Raymond. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 236646, 4118534; 236735, 
4119457; 236919, 4119535; 237364, 4119940; 237297, 4120289; 237671, 
4120535; 237749, 4120814; 237895, 4121224; 238305, 4121557;

[[Page 276]]

238526, 4121737; 238726, 4121829; 239329, 4121896; 239728, 4121811; 
240005, 4121943; 240340, 4122266; 240817, 4122475; 241265, 4122461; 
241503, 4122431; 241714, 4122463; 242088, 4122454; 242236, 4122430; 
242404, 4122240; 242517, 4121903; 242649, 4121386; 242729, 4121007; 
242656, 4120563; 242498, 4120423; 242265, 4120288; 242025, 4120049; 
241933, 4119770; 241837, 4119447; 241973, 4119229; 242224, 4118929; 
242164, 4118469; 242064, 4118071; 242454, 4117612; 242521, 4117249; 
242406, 4116852; 242463, 4116564; 242691, 4116146; 242868, 4115880; 
243004, 4115423; 242888, 4115011; 242718, 4114693; 241980, 4114620; 
241532, 4114633; 241135, 4114733; 240843, 4114856; 240549, 4115174; 
240283, 4115221; 239933, 4115138; 239492, 4115032; 239192, 4115021; 
238894, 4115279; 238776, 4115541; 238564, 4115973; 238623, 4116194; 
238668, 4116431; 238374, 4116988; 238226, 4117252; 237848, 4117650; 
237318, 4117788; 236903, 4118099; 236797, 4118315; returning to 236646, 
4118534.
    (ii) Note: Map 13 (Central Valley Region, Unit 11) follows:

[[Page 277]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.007

    (27) Central Valley Region: Unit 18, Alameda County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Tassajara, and Livermore. 
Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
606493, 4148131; 606445, 4148064; 606428, 4148018; 606432, 4147932; 
606450, 4147848; 606466, 4147818; 606558, 4147771; 606599, 4147772;

[[Page 278]]

606755, 4147834; 606834, 4147825; 606924, 4147745; 606959, 4147723; 
606992, 4147438; 606865, 4146951; 606716, 4146634; 606357, 4146443; 
606039, 4146380; 605807, 4146487; 605801, 4146507; 605762, 4146550; 
605680, 4146592; 605678, 4146593; 605573, 4146697; 605446, 4146951; 
605479, 4147194; 605495, 4147179; 605532, 4147116; 605552, 4147114; 
605551, 4147218; 605591, 4147274; 605593, 4147302; 605461, 4147339; 
605440, 4147342; 605404, 4147396; 605341, 4147607; 605300, 4147660; 
605329, 4147701; 605322, 4147708; 605273, 4147694; 605244, 4147731; 
605245, 4147738; 605236, 4147742; 605192, 4147798; 605044, 4148010; 
605102, 4148319; 605127, 4148265; 605220, 4148111; 605251, 4148083; 
605294, 4148086; 605431, 4148129; 605537, 4148188; 605655, 4148273; 
605680, 4148317; 605768, 4148412; 605818, 4148448; 605900, 4148447; 
605946, 4148417; 606075, 4148398; 606134, 4148371; 606201, 4148308; 
606331, 4148228; 606492, 4148189; 606500, 4148167; returning to 606493, 
4148131.
    (ii) Note: Map 14 (Central Valley Region, Unit 18) follows:

[[Page 279]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.008

    (28) Southern San Joaquin Region: Unit 1a, Madera County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Little Table Mtn., 
Millerton Lake West, Lanes Bridge, and Friant. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 253140, 4094581; 253210, 
4094842; 253281, 4095121; 253387, 4095398; 253645, 4095559;

[[Page 280]]

253861, 4095616; 253852, 4096041; 253748, 4096349; 253653, 4096816; 
253632, 4097047; 253685, 4097593; 253940, 4097984; 254341, 4098171; 
254443, 4098377; 254346, 4098808; 254531, 4099222; 254727, 4099510; 
254695, 4099849; 254591, 4100174; 254965, 4100204; 255341, 4100552; 
255900, 4100711; 256220, 4100727; 256431, 4101262; 256505, 4101877; 
256706, 4102254; 256840, 4102405; 257279, 4102626; 257811, 4102645; 
258162, 4102587; 258498, 4102301; 258635, 4101955; 258734, 4101560; 
258553, 4100933; 258138, 4100535; 257954, 4100347; 257908, 4100348; 
257918, 4100725; 257542, 4100727; 257557, 4101144; 257113, 4101161; 
256981, 4098268; 256639, 4098365; 255431, 4098363; 255427, 4097540; 
256213, 4097523; 256203, 4096729; 254978, 4096742; 254920, 4094736; 
254503, 4094762; 254503, 4094758; 253976, 4094771; 253976, 4094613; 
253892, 4094501; 253919, 4094443; 253916, 4094397; 253914, 4094362; 
253868, 4094365; 253822, 4094362; 253718, 4094252; 253710, 4094201; 
253710, 4094200; 253701, 4094209; 253429, 4094386; 253140, 4094581.
    (ii) Note: Southern San Joaquin Region, Unit 1a is depicted on--
Units 1a, 1b, and 2--see paragraph (30)(ii).
    (29) Southern San Joaquin Region: Unit 1b, Madera County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Lanes Bridge. Land bounded 
by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 251184, 4092207; 
251205, 4092542; 251262, 4093159; 252944, 4093159; 253152, 4093075; 
253259, 4093191; 253246, 4093164; 253246, 4092760; 253951, 4092757; 
254008, 4092773; 254065, 4092790; 254068, 4092831; 254018, 4092849; 
253977, 4092852; 253939, 4092895; 253937, 4092936; 253960, 4092986; 
253988, 4093030; 254024, 4093028; 254075, 4093024; 254098, 4092992; 
254134, 4092985; 254195, 4092981; 254190, 4092910; 254216, 4092832; 
254223, 4092791; 254226, 4092744; 254465, 4092734; 254461, 4092342; 
254633, 4092331; 254636, 4092535; 254698, 4092551; 254738, 4092615; 
254757, 4092670; 254772, 4092746; 254777, 4092832; 254817, 4092901; 
254877, 4092959; 254914, 4092978; 254971, 4092712; 254985, 4092375; 
254980, 4092021; 254713, 4091436; 254292, 4091214; 253805, 4091086; 
253542, 4090837; 253614, 4090584; 253836, 4090446; 253770, 4090238; 
253503, 4089936; 253348, 4089733; 253173, 4089528; 253141, 4089490; 
253105, 4089475; 252915, 4089348; 252875, 4089294; 252838, 4089192; 
252842, 4089126; 252835, 4089116; 252636, 4088822; 252641, 4088627; 
252573, 4088288; 252564, 4088242; 252170, 4087611; 251840, 4087437; 
251615, 4087239; 251458, 4087089; 251407, 4087039; 251122, 4087288; 
251185, 4087726; 251211, 4088132; 251215, 4088486; 251168, 4088861; 
251100, 4089184; 251100, 4089751; 251111, 4089927; 251999, 4089960; 
252301, 4089976; 252328, 4090400; 252364, 4090982; 252307, 4091198; 
251941, 4091292; 251477, 4091232; 251191, 4091481; 251185, 4091658; 
returning to 251184, 4092207.
    (ii) Note: Southern San Joaquin Region, Unit 1b is depicted on Map 
15--Units 1A, 1B, and 2--see paragraph (30)(ii).
    (30) Southern San Joaquin Region: Unit 2, Fresno County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Friant. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 259307, 4097734; 259442, 
4097902; 259483, 4097988; 259743, 4097901; 260153, 4097663; 260490, 
4097393; 260773, 4097110; 260916, 4096853; 261506, 4096656; 261810, 
4096708; 262107, 4097203; 262261, 4097388; 262718, 4097625; 263193, 
4097577; 263655, 4097318; 263988, 4096978; 264104, 4096298; 263703, 
4095827; 263821, 4095465; 264110, 4095270; 264211, 4095169; 264294, 
4094979; 264329, 4094398; 264769, 4094484; 264988, 4094446; 265443, 
4094298; 265672, 4094337; 266030, 4094264; 265865, 4093902; 265521, 
4093499; 265441, 4093345; 265199, 4093165; 264774, 4093047; 264401, 
4093181; 264044, 4093188; 263971, 4093270; 264002, 4093471; 263856, 
4093802; 263594, 4093711; 263462, 4093422; 263323, 4093192; 263373, 
4093166; 263222, 4092989; 262867, 4092976; 262704, 4093198; 262451, 
4093108; 262142, 4092986; 261885, 4092843; 261639, 4092593; 261510, 
4092512; 261139, 4092518; 260841, 4092572; 260715, 4092261; 260534, 
4092127; 260512, 4092123; 260039, 4092041; 259874, 4092120; 259842, 
4092143; 259838, 4092231; 259887, 4092407; 259978, 4092494; 260034, 
4092547; 260200, 4092731; 260241, 4092941; 260482, 4093245; 260433, 
4093402; 260625, 4093897; 260461, 4094183; 260327, 4094416; 260317, 
4094701; 260313, 4094838; 259541, 4096215; 259541, 4096227; 259623, 
4096279; 259542, 4096507; 259542, 4096570; 259485, 4096704; 259472, 
4096979; 259490, 4097262; 259412, 4097426; 259331, 4097555; returning to 
259307, 4097734.
    (ii) Note: Southern San Joaquin Valley Region, Unit 2 is depicted on 
Map 15--Units 1a, 1b, and 2--which follows:

[[Page 281]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.009

    (31) Southern San Joaquin Region: Unit 3a, Fresno County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Orange Cove North. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 290111, 
4064680; 291311, 4064655; 292277, 4064495; 292897, 4064406; 293304, 
4064906; 293877, 4065270; 294584, 4065309; 294577, 4064940; 294973,

[[Page 282]]

4064926; 294962, 4064261; 294150, 4064279; 294132, 4063716; 293340, 
4063754; 293311, 4063118; 292970, 4062774; 292103, 4062528; 291469, 
4062793; 291158, 4063413; 291086, 4063868; 290091, 4063956; returning to 
290111, 4064680.
    (ii) Note: Southern San Joaquin Region, Unit 3a is depicted on Map 
16--Units 3A and 3B--see paragraph (32)(ii).
    (32) Southern San Joaquin Region: Unit 3b, Fresno County, 
California, and Tulare County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Orange Cove North, and 
Tucker Mtn. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 296384, 4058957; 296398, 4059181; 296564, 4059658; 298431, 
4059652; 298432, 4059676; 298529, 4061925; 298738, 4062217; 298933, 
4062407; 299169, 4062400; 299471, 4062349; 299655, 4062030; 299619, 
4061457; 299860, 4060916; 299700, 4060350; 299740, 4059797; 300013, 
4059606; 300483, 4059275; 301039, 4058965; 301116, 4058185; 300650, 
4057538; 299855, 4057238; 299218, 4057453; 298847, 4057926; 298453, 
4058427; 297933, 4058509; 297411, 4058567; 297115, 4058636; 296596, 
4058743; returning to 296384, 4058957.
    (ii) Note: Southern San Joaquin Valley Region, Unit 3b is depicted 
on Map 16--Units 3a and 3b--which follows:

[[Page 283]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.010

    (33) Southern San Joaquin Region: Unit 5, Kings County, California, 
and Tulare County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Burris Park, Traver, 
Monson, and Remnoy. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 
coordinates (E,N): 274730, 4029784;

[[Page 284]]

275563, 4029744; 276147, 4030226; 276443, 4030631; 276461, 4031301; 
277082, 4031301; 277215, 4031301; 278021, 4031581; 278032, 4031768; 
279633, 4031751; 279157, 4032817; 280534, 4032802; 281370, 4033174; 
282087, 4033164; 282812, 4033837; 282978, 4034239; 283924, 4034298; 
284654, 4035065; 288568, 4034950; 288557, 4035728; 287806, 4035763; 
287831, 4036538; 289234, 4036569; 289420, 4036545; 289388, 4034511; 
288623, 4034511; 288596, 4034089; 287738, 4034107; 287670, 4034524; 
286957, 4034603; 286918, 4034358; 284966, 4034398; 284896, 4033837; 
283612, 4033835; 283601, 4033647; 283093, 4033631; 283051, 4033140; 
282531, 4033101; 282523, 4032784; 282074, 4032765; 282062, 4031058; 
280018, 4031127; 280070, 4030841; 278735, 4030571; 278537, 4030418; 
278407, 4030226; 278030, 4030026; 278008, 4030027; 276325, 4030062; 
276285, 4029617; 275634, 4029551; 275660, 4028843; 275341, 4028816; 
275122, 4028323; 274758, 4027969; 274702, 4028196; returning to 274730, 
4029784.
    (ii) Note: Map 17 (Southern San Joaquin Valley Region, Unit 5) 
follows:

[[Page 285]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.011

    (34) East Bay Region: Unit 3, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Calaveras Reservoir. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 606493, 
4148131; 606445, 4148064; 606428, 4148018; 606432, 4147932; 606450, 
4147848; 606466, 4147818; 606558, 4147771; 606599, 4147772; 606755,

[[Page 286]]

4147834; 606834, 4147825; 606924, 4147745; 606959, 4147723; 606992, 
4147438; 606865, 4146951; 606716, 4146634; 606357, 4146443; 606039, 
4146380; 605807, 4146487; 605801, 4146507; 605762, 4146550; 605680, 
4146592; 605678, 4146593; 605573, 4146697; 605446, 4146951; 605479, 
4147194; 605495, 4147179; 605532, 4147116; 605552, 4147114; 605551, 
4147218; 605591, 4147274; 605593, 4147302; 605461, 4147339; 605440, 
4147342; 605404, 4147396; 605341, 4147607; 605300, 4147660; 605329, 
4147701; 605322, 4147708; 605273, 4147694; 605244, 4147731; 605245, 
4147738; 605236, 4147742; 605192, 4147798; 605044, 4148010; 605102, 
4148319; 605127, 4148265; 605220, 4148111; 605251, 4148083; 605294, 
4148086; 605431, 4148129; 605537, 4148188; 605655, 4148273; 605680, 
4148317; 605768, 4148412; 605818, 4148448; 605900, 4148447; 605946, 
4148417; 606075, 4148398; 606134, 4148371; 606201, 4148308; 606331, 
4148228; 606492, 4148189; 606500, 4148167; returning to 606493, 4148131.
    (ii) Note: Map 18 (East Bay Region, Unit 3) follows:

[[Page 287]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.012

    (35) East Bay Region: Unit 5, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Calaveras Reservoir, and 
Mt. Day. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 611993, 4142407; 612080, 4142353; 612254, 4142429; 612417, 
4142559; 612570, 4142679; 612668, 4142744; 612896, 4142712;

[[Page 288]]

613157, 4142614; 613375, 4142483; 613560, 4142265; 613625, 4142113; 
613669, 4141950; 613778, 4141819; 613963, 4141656; 614180, 4141406; 
614246, 4141123; 614333, 4140851; 614267, 4140513; 614300, 4140296; 
614191, 4139991; 614061, 4139795; 613832, 4139599; 613691, 4139480; 
613527, 4139458; 613299, 4139534; 613081, 4139599; 612983, 4139686; 
612809, 4139774; 612613, 4139752; 612504, 4139861; 612439, 4139948; 
612254, 4139893; 612091, 4139991; 611971, 4140067; 610905, 4139741; 
610208, 4139850; 609588, 4140546; 609621, 4141188; 609936, 4141656; 
610415, 4141950; 610698, 4142026; 610763, 4142396; 610850, 4142570; 
611025, 4142777; 611177, 4142918; 611340, 4142951; 611612, 4142799; 
611884, 4142570; returning to 611993, 4142407.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 5 is depicted on Map 19--Units 5, 
6, 7, and 8--see paragraph (38)(ii).
    (36) East Bay Region: Unit 6, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Lick Observatory, and 
Isabel Valley. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 
coordinates (E,N): 622442, 4134132; 622178, 4133537; 621384, 4132677; 
620789, 4132346; 620326, 4131817; 619664, 4131156; 619003, 4131090; 
618341, 4130891; 617283, 4130957; 616688, 4131553; 616489, 4132413; 
615894, 4132876; 614769, 4133206; 613976, 4133008; 613248, 4133008; 
612520, 4133140; 611793, 4133537; 611197, 4134198; 611131, 4135058; 
612057, 4135654; 613050, 4135786; 613711, 4135852; 614637, 4135786; 
615629, 4135654; 616026, 4135257; 616158, 4134860; 616555, 4134397; 
617283, 4134198; 617746, 4133802; 618540, 4134000; 619069, 4134595; 
620061, 4135654; 620921, 4135852; 621847, 4135786; 622442, 4135455; 
622905, 4134661; returning to 622442, 4134132.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 6 is depicted on Map 19--Units 5, 
6, 7, and 8--see paragraph (38)(ii).
    (37) East Bay Region: Unit 7, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Lick Observatory, Isabel 
Valley, Morgan Hill, and Mt. Sizer. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 619400, 4126459; 619796, 4126327; 
621053, 4126459; 621582, 4126393; 622641, 4126592; 623434, 4126592; 
623964, 4126129; 624096, 4125467; 624096, 4124872; 623633, 4124277; 
623699, 4123681; 622575, 4123417; 621384, 4123747; 620656, 4124210; 
619796, 4124541; 619201, 4124078; 618540, 4123086; 618077, 4122094; 
618143, 4120837; 618010, 4119779; 617217, 4118919; 616555, 4118919; 
616158, 4119249; 615563, 4120043; 615100, 4121035; 614637, 4122028; 
614703, 4122755; 615232, 4123218; 615629, 4123681; 615894, 4124343; 
616026, 4124938; 616225, 4125070; 616489, 4126658; 616754, 4127187; 
617217, 4127650; 617878, 4127650; 618804, 4127121; returning to 619400, 
4126459.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 7 is depicted on Map 19--Units 5, 
6, 7, and 8--see paragraph (38)(ii).
    (38) East Bay Region: Unit 8, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Santa Teresa Hills. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 607465, 
4115477; 607584, 4115457; 607783, 4115457; 607902, 4115457; 608219, 
4115417; 608517, 4115913; 608735, 4115913; 608973, 4115834; 609112, 
4115695; 609291, 4115497; 609410, 4115338; 609529, 4115536; 609588, 
4115675; 609727, 4115715; 609707, 4115834; 609767, 4116052; 609866, 
4116211; 609927, 4116356; 609946, 4116348; 609990, 4116306; 610036, 
4116246; 610131, 4116099; 610087, 4116065; 609930, 4115808; 609958, 
4115742; 610012, 4115687; 610086, 4115410; 610096, 4115322; 610135, 
4115089; 610138, 4115056; 610146, 4114967; 610194, 4114679; 610388, 
4114391; 610474, 4114261; 610507, 4113796; 610840, 4113506; 610342, 
4113592; 610045, 4113770; 609807, 4113850; 609092, 4114485; 608239, 
4114068; 607584, 4114008; 606691, 4113909; 606036, 4114028; 605699, 
4114266; 605401, 4114763; 605421, 4115080; 605461, 4115556; 605401, 
4115715; 605123, 4115993; 605024, 4116152; 605084, 4116449; 605024, 
4116648; 604945, 4116767; 605123, 4117144; 605481, 4117223; 605758, 
4117104; 606076, 4116985; 606393, 4116826; 606671, 4116668; 606830, 
4116449; 607108, 4116072; 607306, 4115953; 607247, 4115775; 607247, 
4115695; 607346, 4115576; returning to 607465, 4115477.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 6 is depicted on Map 19--Units 5, 
6, 7, and 8--which follows:

[[Page 289]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.013

    (39) East Bay Region: Unit 9, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Gilroy. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 631716, 4102121; 631597, 
4102061; 631279, 4102081; 630982, 4102220; 630644, 4102478; 630466, 
4102915; 630466, 4103312; 630545, 4103669; 630823, 4103966; 631061,

[[Page 290]]

4104205; 631220, 4104324; 631418, 4104621; 631418, 4104760; 631101, 
4104978; 630922, 4105177; 630525, 4105673; 630347, 4106110; 630307, 
4106506; 630188, 4106784; 630029, 4107280; 630267, 4107558; 630466, 
4107657; 630704, 4107836; 631021, 4108015; 631299, 4108074; 631608, 
4108074; 632003, 4107936; 632368, 4107679; 632506, 4107363; 632605, 
4107017; 632921, 4105822; 632990, 4105289; 632704, 4104716; 632506, 
4104410; 632487, 4103985; 632704, 4103531; 632743, 4103156; 632664, 
4102879; 632566, 4102682; 632368, 4102405; 632093, 4102121; returning to 
631716, 4102121.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 9 is depicted on Map 20--Units 9, 
10a, 10b, 11, and 12--see paragraph (43)(ii).
    (40) East Bay Region: Unit 10a, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Mt. Madonna. Land bounded by 
the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 621036, 4103975; 
620814, 4103967; 620501, 4104023; 620498, 4104024; 620493, 4104030; 
620454, 4104197; 620640, 4104325; 620875, 4104403; 620983, 4104462; 
621101, 4104491; 621238, 4104580; 621415, 4104727; 621611, 4104854; 
621807, 4104903; 622072, 4104707; 622162, 4104667; 622146, 4104640; 
621926, 4104390; 621741, 4104273; 621587, 4104150; 621234, 4104025; 
returning to 621036, 4103975.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 10a is depicted on Map 20--Units 9, 
10a, 10b, 11, and 12--see paragraph (43)(ii).
    (41) East Bay Region: Unit 10b, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Gilroy, and Mt. Madonna. 
Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
623013, 4101932; 623082, 4101638; 623121, 4101363; 623131, 4100981; 
623033, 4100804; 622895, 4100755; 622758, 4100657; 622591, 4100500; 
622573, 4100477; 622408, 4100545; 622373, 4100472; 622228, 4100526; 
622167, 4100637; 622181, 4100752; 622102, 4100840; 621967, 4100895; 
621852, 4101162; 621524, 4101274; 621477, 4101239; 621444, 4101255; 
621189, 4101265; 621022, 4101353; 620787, 4101520; 620777, 4101706; 
620885, 4101922; 620910, 4101980; 620947, 4101966; 621114, 4101924; 
621263, 4101903; 621314, 4101852; 621397, 4101845; 621533, 4101885; 
621594, 4102028; 621627, 4102049; 621676, 4102210; 621751, 4102302; 
621833, 4102372; 621944, 4102424; 622126, 4102445; 622288, 4102596; 
622376, 4102520; 622601, 4102442; 622788, 4102334; 622935, 4102158; 
returning to 623013, 4101932.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 10b is depicted on Map 20--Units 9, 
10a, 10b, 11, and 12--see paragraph (43)(ii).
    (42) East Bay Region: Unit 11, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Gilroy Hot Springs. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N):639775, 
4106027; 640158, 4105923; 640506, 4105923; 641028, 4106271; 641272, 
4106062; 641550, 4105471; 641724, 4105192; 642385, 4105018; 642594, 
4104670; 642629, 4104183; 642803, 4103730; 642768, 4103138; 643221, 
4102616; 643847, 4102477; 644404, 4101676; 644056, 4101537; 643847, 
4101363; 643743, 4100632; 643256, 4100180; 642629, 4100180; 641968, 
4100388; 641376, 4100214; 640854, 4100075; 640088, 4100180; 639740, 
4100597; 639427, 4101259; 639531, 4101920; 639322, 4102268; 638905, 
4102686; 638417, 4102999; 637860, 4103521; 637129, 4103904; 636990, 
4104148; 636851, 4104983; 636920, 4105366; 637129, 4105679; 637582, 
4106271; 638139, 4106584; 638626, 4106445; 639009, 4106376; 639392, 
4106306; returning to 639775, 4106027.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 11 is depicted on Map 20--Units 9, 
10a, 10b, 11, and 12--see paragraph (43)(ii).
    (43) East Bay Region: Unit 12, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Gilroy Hot Springs, and San 
Felipe. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 643914, 4095004; 643892, 4094772; 643829, 4094369; 643956, 
4093946; 644013, 4093764; 644006, 4093721; 644006, 4093721; 643977, 
4093529; 643977, 4093529; 643891, 4092970; 643891, 4092969; 643891, 
4092969; 643890, 4092963; 643849, 4092776; 643849, 4092775; 643848, 
4092770; 643848, 4092768; 643832, 4092624; 643832, 4092620; 643832, 
4092615; 643832, 4092614; 643837, 4092282; 643838, 4092065; 643838, 
4091759; 643837, 4091756; 643835, 4091751; 643834, 4091746; 643832, 
4091741; 643832, 4091736; 643831, 4091731; 643831, 4091726; 643831, 
4091722; 643831, 4091719; 643842, 4091603; 643851, 4091516; 643851, 
4091516; 643854, 4091478; 643856, 4091367; 643856, 4091367; 643856, 
4091358; 643856, 4091355; 643857, 4091350; 643858, 4091345; 643858, 
4091342; 643929, 4091037; 643974, 4090778; 643946, 4090690; 643913, 
4090588; 643897, 4090567; 643894, 4090563; 643891, 4090559; 643889, 
4090555; 643887, 4090550; 643887, 4090549; 643885, 4090546; 643885, 
4090545; 643859, 4090480; 643830, 4090454; 643640, 4090475; 643365, 
4090560; 643069, 4090729; 642709, 4090729; 642497, 4090878; 642370, 
4091026; 642222, 4091216; 641989, 4091428; 641800, 4091569; 641735, 
4091618; 641418, 4091809; 641227, 4092063; 641312, 4092317; 641333, 
4092550; 641143, 4092656; 641164, 4092952; 640994, 4093079; 640993, 
4093078; 640782, 4092994; 640529, 4092994; 640528, 4092994; 640527, 
4092994; 640379, 4092846; 640042, 4092867; 639767, 4092888; 639534, 
4092922; 639470, 4092931; 639415, 4092984; 639320, 4093078; 639172, 
4093438; 639123, 4093490; 639085, 4093565; 639045, 4093645; 638953, 
4093932; 638852, 4094180; 638579, 4094348; 638410, 4094221; 638357, 
4094075; 638356, 4094072; 638325, 4093988; 638108, 4093823; 638054, 
4093568; 638023, 4093382; 637914, 4092762; 637744, 4092545; 637310, 
4092402; 636884, 4093142; 636699, 4093626; 636543, 4094032; 634886, 
4094373; 634553, 4094838; 635056, 4095202; 635335, 4095039; 635676, 
4095551; 635869, 4095659; 635916, 4095992; 636218, 4096062; 636815, 
4096054; 637246, 4095872; 637712, 4096063; 638093, 4096084; 638833, 
4095893; 639236, 4095724; 639553, 4095661; 639913, 4095512; 640146, 
4095428; 640590, 4095110; 640929, 4094877; 640930, 4094879; 640931, 
4094878; 641248, 4095217; 641481, 4095365; 641672, 4095513; 641968, 
4095767; 642307, 4096021; 642771, 4096190; 643342, 4096042; 643660, 
4095682; 643871, 4095280; returning to 643914, 4095004.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 12 is depicted on Map 20--Units 9, 
10a, 10b, 11, and 12--which follows:

[[Page 291]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.014

    (44) East Bay Region: Unit 13, Merced County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Mariposa Peak, and Los 
Banos Valley. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 
coordinates (E,N):670740, 4094185; 670879, 4093959; 670965, 4093691; 
671019, 4093455; 670890, 4093358; 670632, 4093262; 670450, 4093101;

[[Page 292]]

670299, 4093004; 670171, 4092864; 670010, 4092703; 669870, 4092242; 
669645, 4092038; 669387, 4091802; 669248, 4091609; 669140, 4091383; 
668947, 4091254; 668636, 4091233; 668314, 4091233; 668099, 4091169; 
667949, 4090868; 667756, 4090729; 667380, 4090611; 667090, 4090428; 
666886, 4090417; 666682, 4090568; 666210, 4090922; 666060, 4091104; 
665996, 4091437; 665963, 4091974; 666232, 4092285; 666457, 4092424; 
666800, 4092585; 667058, 4092661; 667273, 4092725; 667402, 4092832; 
667616, 4092940; 667874, 4092929; 668153, 4092875; 668357, 4093079; 
668421, 4093122; 668529, 4093326; 668400, 4093562; 668228, 4093669; 
668228, 4093809; 668357, 4093991; 668582, 4094120; 668786, 4094131; 
668872, 4094131; 668990, 4094152; 669173, 4094152; 669334, 4094152; 
669559, 4094142; 669763, 4094163; 669956, 4094313; 670181, 4094399; 
670439, 4094346; 670589, 4094292; returning to 670740, 4094185.
    (ii) Note: Map 21 (East Bay Region, Unit 13) follows:

[[Page 293]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.015

    (45) East Bay Region: Unit 14, Merced County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Ruby Canyon, and Ortigalita 
Peak. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 679370, 4078644; 679558, 4078303; 679567, 4078064; 679490, 
4077773; 679396, 4077671; 679149, 4077483; 678901, 4077253;

[[Page 294]]

679003, 4076945; 678799, 4076800; 678483, 4076536; 678295, 4076186; 
678184, 4075947; 678082, 4075537; 677894, 4075401; 677646, 4075162; 
677382, 4075042; 676989, 4075000; 676742, 4075017; 676409, 4075187; 
676161, 4075477; 676008, 4075682; 676213, 4075862; 676349, 4075964; 
676409, 4076143; 676366, 4076331; 676272, 4076442; 676119, 4076604; 
676085, 4076647; 676042, 4076707; 676042, 4076886; 675999, 4077031; 
675931, 4077210; 676025, 4077441; 676170, 4077475; 676469, 4077475; 
676665, 4077569; 676836, 4077705; 677015, 4077893; 677279, 4077970; 
677476, 4077927; 677732, 4078029; 677988, 4078234; 677954, 4078542; 
677663, 4078618; 677390, 4078593; 677365, 4078576; 677365, 4078695; 
677510, 4078968; 677595, 4079156; 677681, 4079233; 677826, 4079233; 
678022, 4079267; 678372, 4079335; 678585, 4079352; 678816, 4079386; 
679029, 4079327; 679353, 4079079; 679345, 4078926; 679336, 4078823; 
returning to 679370, 4078644.
    (ii) Note: Map 22 (East Bay Region, Unit 14) follows:

[[Page 295]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.016

    (46) East Bay Region: Unit 15a, San Benito County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tres Pinos. Land bounded by 
the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 648975, 4074659; 
648866, 4074439; 648756, 4074518; 648584, 4074486; 648443, 4074424; 
648345, 4074265; 647958, 4074729; 647957, 4074730; 647957, 4074730;

[[Page 296]]

647737, 4074980; 647737, 4074980; 647686, 4075039; 647685, 4075039; 
647683, 4075042; 647572, 4075156; 647267, 4075490; 647264, 4075493; 
647261, 4075496; 647260, 4075497; 647205, 4075544; 647201, 4075547; 
647197, 4075550; 647195, 4075551; 647136, 4075588; 647134, 4075589; 
647129, 4075592; 647128, 4075592; 647066, 4075622; 647062, 4075623; 
647059, 4075625; 646994, 4075648; 646992, 4075649; 646988, 4075650; 
646985, 4075651; 646870, 4075678; 646867, 4075679; 646866, 4075679; 
646057, 4075828; 646057, 4075828; 646015, 4075835; 646015, 4075836; 
646014, 4075836; 645999, 4075838; 645995, 4075946; 645992, 4076037; 
645986, 4076234; 645971, 4076906; 645969, 4077086; 645965, 4077530; 
645965, 4077566; 645956, 4077596; 645946, 4077933; 645946, 4077933; 
645953, 4077979; 645953, 4078182; 645953, 4078495; 645953, 4078809; 
645953, 4079075; 645796, 4079341; 645828, 4079686; 646109, 4079873; 
646313, 4080014; 646423, 4080265; 646517, 4080469; 646830, 4080672; 
647080, 4080656; 647487, 4080641; 647738, 4080343; 647926, 4079920; 
648036, 4079482; 647910, 4078903; 648004, 4078605; 648020, 4078245; 
647910, 4077932; 647738, 4077728; 647534, 4077493; 647441, 4077258; 
647503, 4077039; 647769, 4076929; 648145, 4076788; 648270, 4076679; 
648396, 4076381; 648458, 4076052; 648458, 4075739; 648490, 4075598; 
648662, 4075442; 648897, 4075175; returning to 648975, 4074659.
    (ii) East Bay Region, Unit 15a is depicted on Map 23--Units 15a and 
15b--see paragraph (47)(ii).
    (47) East Bay Region: Unit 15b, San Benito County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tres Pinos. Land bounded by 
the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 648559, 4073866; 
648564, 4073866; 648565, 4073866; 648646, 4073750; 648239, 4073453; 
647816, 4073500; 647566, 4073750; 647628, 4074283; 647628, 4074471; 
647613, 4074690; 647558, 4074952; 647572, 4074937; 647623, 4074880; 
647623, 4074880; 647623, 4074879; 647842, 4074630; 648249, 4074142; 
648251, 4074140; 648254, 4074137; 648366, 4074023; 648373, 4074013; 
648374, 4074012; 648377, 4074008; 648381, 4074004; 648384, 4074001; 
648513, 4073885; 648514, 4073885; 648518, 4073882; 648522, 4073879; 
648526, 4073876; 648530, 4073874; 648535, 4073872; 648540, 4073870; 
648544, 4073868; 648549, 4073867; 648554, 4073866; returning to 648559, 
4073866.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 15b is depicted on Map 23--Units 
15a and 15b--which follows:

[[Page 297]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.017

    (48) East Bay Region: Unit 16, San Benito County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles San Benito, Topo Valley, 
Rock Springs Peak, Pinalito Canyon, and Lonoak. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 674357, 4038468; 674568, 
4038151; 674859, 4038204; 675098, 4038733;

[[Page 298]]

675468, 4038944; 676050, 4038918; 676262, 4038547; 676341, 4038230; 
676791, 4038098; 677214, 4037965; 677664, 4037965; 678008, 4037965; 
678908, 4037674; 679252, 4037357; 679622, 4037357; 680310, 4037542; 
680813, 4037383; 681289, 4036881; 681448, 4036325; 681315, 4035822; 
681157, 4035108; 680892, 4034843; 679992, 4034896; 679622, 4035187; 
678961, 4035293; 678749, 4035029; 679490, 4034552; 679992, 4034129; 
680231, 4033732; 680231, 4033362; 679860, 4033044; 679754, 4032806; 
679754, 4032330; 679860, 4031854; 679754, 4031430; 679992, 4031060; 
680310, 4030636; 680866, 4030266; 681077, 4029869; 680892, 4029578; 
680601, 4029075; 680522, 4028705; 680866, 4028202; 681051, 4027832; 
680892, 4027144; 680680, 4026694; 680389, 4026350; 679887, 4026059; 
679728, 4025874; 679622, 4025477; 679199, 4025027; 678881, 4024763; 
678564, 4024339; 677982, 4024075; 677585, 4023863; 677082, 4023916; 
676764, 4024101; 676659, 4024525; 676421, 4024657; 676050, 4025001; 
675944, 4025398; 675997, 4025662; 676024, 4025874; 676500, 4026271; 
676738, 4026403; 676923, 4026668; 677056, 4026774; 677294, 4027065; 
677638, 4027197; 677876, 4027144; 678114, 4027356; 678220, 4027832; 
678061, 4028626; 677982, 4028996; 677532, 4029340; 677267, 4029763; 
676712, 4030319; 676526, 4030927; 676923, 4031298; 677611, 4031642; 
677849, 4032409; 677585, 4032912; 677214, 4033097; 676712, 4033282; 
676156, 4033626; 675706, 4034155; 675389, 4034685; 675071, 4035055; 
674542, 4035214; 674251, 4035452; 673933, 4035822; 673854, 4036007; 
673669, 4036695; 673325, 4036907; 673060, 4037119; 672690, 4037410; 
672452, 4037648; 672293, 4037912; 671658, 4038309; 671261, 4038759; 
671076, 4039394; 671102, 4039897; 671023, 4040214; 670600, 4040611; 
670176, 4040744; 669885, 4041167; 669674, 4041802; 669938, 4042384; 
670309, 4042754; 670600, 4042860; 671129, 4042860; 671579, 4042675; 
671790, 4042384; 671711, 4041908; 671499, 4041484; 671764, 4041193; 
672028, 4041167; 672346, 4040929; 672663, 4040717; 672928, 4040400; 
673060, 4040320; 673351, 4040109; 673854, 4039659; 674145, 4039288; 
674277, 4038891; returning to 674357, 4038468.
    (ii) Note: Map 24 (East Bay Region, Unit 16) follows:

[[Page 299]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.018

    (49) East Bay Region: Unit 17, San Benito County, California, and 
Monterey County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Mount Johnson. Land bounded 
by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 654222, 4043469; 
654725, 4043363; 655413,

[[Page 300]]

4043442; 655651, 4043072; 656048, 4042543; 656259, 4042331; 656392, 
4041617; 656074, 4041405; 655571, 4041511; 655148, 4041326; 654803, 
4041088; 654725, 4041035; 654381, 4041078; 654301, 4041087; 653719, 
4041220; 653713, 4041222; 653474, 4041307; 653349, 4041352; 653301, 
4041352; 653086, 4041352; 653060, 4041352; 652873, 4041352; 652555, 
4041167; 652479, 4041178; 652474, 4041179; 652049, 4041243; 652026, 
4041246; 651775, 4040954; 651708, 4040876; 651686, 4040872; 651417, 
4040823; 651285, 4041114; 651308, 4041306; 651338, 4041564; 651345, 
4041581; 651444, 4041828; 651444, 4041831; 651550, 4042252; 651593, 
4042303; 651973, 4042754; 651990, 4042771; 652003, 4042784; 652449, 
4043231; 652545, 4043638; 652555, 4043680; 651655, 4043866; 651364, 
4044315; 651259, 4044845; 650941, 4045347; 650968, 4045824; 651166, 
4045978; 651206, 4046009; 651232, 4046141; 651603, 4046353; 652079, 
4046538; 652608, 4046538; 653217, 4046168; 653481, 4045744; 653508, 
4045003; 653455, 4044342; 653587, 4043786; returning to 654222, 4043469.
    (ii) Note: Map 25 (East Bay Region, Unit 17) follows:

[[Page 301]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.019

    (50) Central Coast Region: Unit 3, Monterey County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Rana Creek. Land bounded by 
the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 627509, 4030548; 
627840, 4030382; 628072, 4030440; 628412, 4030573; 628645, 4030498; 
628902, 4030506; 629208, 4030564; 629590, 4030473; 630029, 4030282;

[[Page 302]]

630294, 4029984; 630361, 4029602; 630353, 4029296; 630278, 4028939; 
630236, 4028649; 630427, 4028450; 630610, 4028201; 630701, 4027903; 
630726, 4027588; 630684, 4027273; 630477, 4026991; 630319, 4026742; 
629623, 4026518; 629233, 4026560; 628926, 4026684; 628711, 4026825; 
628487, 4027074; 628155, 4027231; 627923, 4027463; 627650, 4027613; 
627252, 4027596; 626845, 4027687; 626456, 4027969; 626373, 4028218; 
626257, 4028591; 626074, 4028732; 625908, 4028906; 625784, 4029113; 
625701, 4029403; 625701, 4029694; 625751, 4030034; 625933, 4030299; 
626306, 4030606; 626688, 4030730; 627011, 4030763; 627301, 4030722; 
returning to 627509, 4030548.
    (ii) Note: Map 26 (Central Coast Region, Unit 3) follows:

[[Page 303]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.020

    (51) Central Coast Region: Unit 6, Kern County, California, and San 
Luis Obispo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Orchard Peak, and Holland 
Canyon. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 757032, 3945151;

[[Page 304]]

757374, 3944871; 757614, 3944675; 758116, 3944463; 758513, 3944172; 
758831, 3943590; 759016, 3943193; 759360, 3942929; 759519, 3942770; 
759545, 3942399; 759386, 3941950; 759254, 3941447; 758884, 3941076; 
758487, 3941156; 758090, 3941553; 757693, 3941711; 757561, 3941579; 
757481, 3941632; 757243, 3942002; 756873, 3942055; 756503, 3942241; 
756264, 3942505; 755920, 3942876; 755815, 3943114; 755709, 3943431; 
755497, 3943537; 755391, 3943616; 755180, 3943881; 754941, 3944093; 
754730, 3944331; 754439, 3944516; 754068, 3944569; 754015, 3944860; 
753724, 3944939; 753592, 3944860; 753275, 3945098; 752851, 3945151; 
752428, 3945204; 752084, 3945521; 751925, 3945760; 751819, 3946104; 
751793, 3946447; 751766, 3947030; 751608, 3947559; 751502, 3947903; 
751026, 3948061; 750840, 3948405; 750814, 3948776; 750814, 3949120; 
750523, 3949384; 750100, 3949622; 750047, 3949887; 750020, 3950152; 
749835, 3950734; 749650, 3951025; 749676, 3951342; 749756, 3951739; 
749888, 3952030; 750444, 3952295; 750840, 3952533; 751131, 3952718; 
751634, 3952586; 751899, 3952559; 752243, 3952480; 752613, 3952030; 
752878, 3951554; 752666, 3951051; 753063, 3950707; 753248, 3950390; 
753328, 3950046; 753566, 3949781; 753804, 3949411; 753777, 3949014; 
753804, 3948723; 754062, 3948505; 754306, 3948300; 754598, 3948035; 
754862, 3947717; 755418, 3947321; 755629, 3946924; 755868, 3946421; 
756238, 3946024; 756529, 3945680; 756820, 3945416; returning to 757032, 
3945151.
    (ii) Note: Map 27 (Central Coast Region, Unit 6) follows:

[[Page 305]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.021


[[Page 306]]



 California Tiger Salamander (Ambystoma californiense) in Sonoma County

    (52) The critical habitat unit for Sonoma County, CA, is depicted on 
the map at paragraph (56)(ii) of this entry.
    (53) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements of the 
physical and biological features essential to the conservation of the 
California tiger salamander in Sonoma County consist of three 
components:
    (i) Standing bodies of fresh water (including natural and manmade 
(e.g., stock)) ponds, vernal pools, and other ephemeral or permanent 
water bodies) that typically support inundation during winter and early 
spring, and hold water for a minimum of 12 consecutive weeks in a year 
of average rainfall.
    (ii) Upland habitats adjacent to and accessible from breeding ponds 
that contain small mammal burrows or other underground refugia that the 
species depends upon for food, shelter, and protection from the elements 
and predation.
    (iii) Accessible upland dispersal habitat between locations occupied 
by the species that allow for movement between such sites.
    (54) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, runways, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule.
    (55) Critical habitat map unit. Data layers defining the map unit 
were created on a base of USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles, and the critical 
habitat unit was then mapped using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) 
Zone 10N coordinates.
    (56) Santa Rosa Plain Unit, Sonoma County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle map Healdsburg, Sebastopol, Santa 
Rosa, Two Rock, Cotati, Petaluma, and Mark West Springs, California. 
Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10N, North American Datum of 1983 
(NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 515958, 4264938; 515962, 4264053; 515984, 
4264053; 516127, 4264065; 516297, 4264083; 516355, 4264107; 516437, 
4264134; 517201, 4264161; 517204, 4263316; 517184, 4263318; 517153, 
4263345; 517102, 4263370; 517041, 4263383; 517026, 4263378; 516978, 
4263360; 516950, 4263341; 516560, 4263330; 516550, 4263241; 516566, 
4263225; 516596, 4263103; 516603, 4262920; 516639, 4262756; 516882, 
4262184; 517289, 4261332; 517321, 4261275; 517412, 4261284; 517483, 
4261292; 517708, 4261351; 517696, 4261470; 517729, 4261546; 517837, 
4261601; 517897, 4261604; 518065, 4261551; 518158, 4261611; 518347, 
4261695; 518446, 4261706; 518489, 4261763; 518681, 4261928; 518753, 
4262034; 518804, 4262020; 518835, 4261981; 518917, 4261963; 519050, 
4261983; 519174, 4262054; 519258, 4262077; 519354, 4262188; 519440, 
4262142; 519490, 4262146; 519523, 4262261; 519601, 4262282; 519821, 
4262275; 520947, 4261147; 521211, 4260905; 521220, 4260905; 521224, 
4260890; 522751, 4259527; 522746, 4259517; 522746, 4259517; 522498, 
4259511; 522499, 4259466; 522269, 4259465; 522054, 4259463; 522053, 
4259665; 521895, 4259659; 521692, 4259652; 521697, 4259307; 521335, 
4259298; 521336, 4259239; 521137, 4259235; 521138, 4259168; 521074, 
4259170; 521166, 4259038; 521133, 4259035; 521189, 4258952; 521439, 
4258587; 521509, 4258484; 521488, 4258481; 521416, 4258480; 521319, 
4258480; 521182, 4258479; 521130, 4258476; 521104, 4258466; 521079, 
4258449; 521063, 4258423; 521031, 4258396; 521012, 4258374; 520991, 
4258352; 520960, 4258333; 520933, 4258341; 520923, 4258339; 520483, 
4258336; 520486, 4257976; 520286, 4257974; 520286, 4257923; 520076, 
4257921; 520076, 4257655; 520084, 4256913; 520089, 4255250; 519469, 
4255249; 519468, 4255235; 519494, 4255223; 519509, 4255204; 519606, 
4255119; 519608, 4254429; 519689, 4254430; 519681, 4253613; 519951, 
4253613; 519952, 4253112; 520124, 4253213; 520204, 4253261; 520317, 
4253313; 520424, 4253357; 520455, 4253364; 520495, 4253368; 520561, 
4253373; 520664, 4253381; 520882, 4253399; 521157, 4253422; 521721, 
4253471; 522039, 4253501; 522283, 4253533; 522398, 4253561; 522702, 
4253659; 522794, 4253687; 523132, 4253743; 523335, 4253777; 523620, 
4253831; 523903, 4253883; 523985, 4253642; 524334, 4253725; 524339, 
4253163; 524347, 4252679; 524679, 4252724; 524674, 4252887; 524869, 
4252913; 524860, 4252818; 524841, 4252674; 524824, 4252615; 524821, 
4252524; 524819, 4252424; 524804, 4252370; 524789, 4252322; 524786, 
4252230; 524785, 4252071; 524783, 4251757; 524782, 4251416; 524775, 
4250427; 524819, 4250415; 525034, 4250436; 525188, 4250226; 525230, 
4250293; 525249, 4250591; 525431, 4250592; 525427, 4251250; 525524, 
4251251; 525516, 4251382; 525608, 4251435; 525606, 4251596; 525590, 
4251596; 525585, 4251704; 525793, 4251706; 525799, 4251564; 525805, 
4251491; 525823, 4251438; 525853, 4251375; 525897, 4251317; 525955, 
4251247; 525991, 4251204; 526055, 4251122; 526081, 4251084; 526093, 
4251068; 526098, 4251059; 526187, 4250895; 526242, 4250791; 526303, 
4250656; 526414, 4250450; 526491, 4250305; 526565, 4250168; 526626, 
4250055; 526640, 4250027; 526668, 4249975; 526681, 4249951; 526739, 
4249844; 526883, 4249511; 527003, 4249235; 527144, 4248912; 527258, 
4248648; 527321, 4248504; 527380, 4248408; 527440, 4248306; 527498, 
4248233; 527541, 4248179; 527567, 4248146; 527591, 4248116; 527670, 
4248094; 528274, 4247630; 528624, 4247465; 528892, 4247336; 528892, 
4247336; 528934, 4247301; 528969, 4247271; 529006, 4247230; 528260, 
4247180; 527910, 4247172; 527460, 4247161; 527439, 4247159; 527057, 
4247158; 526768, 4247152; 526640, 4247144; 526240, 4247140; 526244, 
4246930; 526243, 4246848; 525406, 4246839; 525373, 4246838; 525370, 
4246838; 525128, 4246839; 525070, 4246841; 525090, 4246766; 525100, 
4246710; 525107, 4246661; 525111, 4246582; 525106, 4246526; 525103, 
4246500; 525097, 4246473; 525082, 4246451; 525067, 4246414; 525065, 
4246315; 525055, 4246235; 525037, 4246098; 525037, 4245942; 525017, 
4245837; 525022, 4245567; 525015, 4245313; 525028, 4245041; 525028, 
4245041; 525028, 4245040; 525023, 4244756; 525024, 4244737; 525018, 
4244737; 524971, 4244646; 524751, 4244643; 524749, 4244670; 524755, 
4244695; 524764, 4244722; 524369, 4244718; 524367, 4244750; 524362, 
4244781; 524342, 4244829; 524341, 4245039; 524330, 4245147; 524327, 
4245304; 524266, 4245304; 523930, 4245300; 523936, 4245291; 523897, 
4245221; 523830, 4245259; 523800, 4245206; 523740, 4245165;

[[Page 307]]

523901, 4245442; 524073, 4245457; 524091, 4245470; 524090, 4245550; 
524531, 4245557; 524528, 4245929; 524350, 4245930; 524349, 4246155; 
524005, 4246155; 524008, 4245557; 523064, 4245550; 523009, 4245549; 
522605, 4245550; 522607, 4245039; 522605, 4244956; 522642, 4244950; 
522752, 4244931; 522868, 4244924; 522938, 4244910; 523037, 4244867; 
523092, 4244862; 523170, 4244827; 523539, 4244841; 523486, 4244744; 
523526, 4244718; 523515, 4244700; 523503, 4244684; 523489, 4244674; 
523600, 4244617; 523686, 4244589; 523794, 4244556; 523847, 4244556; 
523927, 4244556; 523946, 4244554; 523963, 4244555; 523971, 4244550; 
523978, 4244550; 523983, 4244463; 523974, 4244457; 524015, 4244405; 
524037, 4244364; 524074, 4244278; 524112, 4244184; 524124, 4244185; 
524145, 4244134; 524133, 4244134; 524179, 4244019; 524229, 4243956; 
524256, 4243896; 524268, 4243881; 524311, 4243849; 524377, 4243813; 
524451, 4243774; 524531, 4243736; 524592, 4243702; 524672, 4243653; 
524733, 4243603; 524782, 4243553; 524832, 4243496; 524866, 4243439; 
524919, 4243340; 525003, 4243271; 525069, 4243234; 525096, 4243229; 
525119, 4243187; 525134, 4243089; 525146, 4243127; 525176, 4243074; 
525246, 4243058; 525344, 4243040; 525385, 4243015; 525463, 4242950; 
525479, 4242931; 525509, 4242834; 525460, 4242825; 525371, 4242803; 
525371, 4242802; 525379, 4242766; 525384, 4242743; 525383, 4242743; 
525329, 4242726; 525328, 4242725; 525328, 4242725; 525327, 4242702; 
525360, 4242636; 525303, 4242593; 525304, 4242592; 525343, 4242551; 
525427, 4242434; 525530, 4242293; 525529, 4242292; 525437, 4242100; 
525302, 4242095; 525148, 4242150; 525112, 4242171; 525113, 4242274; 
525119, 4242395; 525089, 4242387; 525049, 4242372; 524969, 4242324; 
524962, 4242281; 524947, 4242224; 524948, 4242224; 524947, 4242223; 
524994, 4242202; 525048, 4242178; 525049, 4242178; 525026, 4242101; 
525003, 4242023; 525002, 4242021; 525052, 4241984; 525054, 4241931; 
525126, 4241920; 525203, 4241893; 525277, 4241865; 525324, 4241932; 
525379, 4241928; 525379, 4241929; 525380, 4241956; 525380, 4241956; 
525554, 4241888; 525554, 4241888; 525539, 4241824; 525539, 4241823; 
525586, 4241824; 525627, 4241826; 525678, 4241828; 525726, 4241824; 
525790, 4241828; 525856, 4241844; 525937, 4241764; 525995, 4241707; 
526035, 4241679; 526122, 4241751; 526218, 4241829; 526262, 4241807; 
526337, 4241783; 526337, 4241783; 526330, 4241715; 526330, 4241714; 
526328, 4241646; 526326, 4241597; 526325, 4241545; 526322, 4241543; 
526196, 4241529; 526088, 4241515; 526058, 4241446; 525835, 4241237; 
525878, 4241186; 525929, 4241234; 526000, 4241164; 525944, 4241110; 
526019, 4241039; 526225, 4241236; 526254, 4241213; 526341, 4241295; 
526335, 4241343; 526362, 4241340; 526456, 4241156; 526583, 4241157; 
526586, 4241207; 526641, 4241208; 526600, 4241344; 526835, 4241346; 
526964, 4241346; 527206, 4241345; 527271, 4241234; 527694, 4241231; 
527592, 4241427; 527606, 4241441; 527762, 4241442; 527835, 4241474; 
527894, 4241465; 527957, 4241438; 527971, 4241442; 527990, 4241432; 
528042, 4241446; 528057, 4241467; 528090, 4241479; 528112, 4241514; 
528293, 4241521; 528334, 4241542; 528322, 4241944; 529126, 4241952; 
529136, 4242368; 529942, 4242371; 529961, 4241555; 530777, 4241576; 
531213, 4241584; 531213, 4241584; 531212, 4241577; 531212, 4241565; 
531213, 4241561; 531213, 4241549; 531214, 4241539; 531215, 4241530; 
531216, 4241522; 531218, 4241515; 531222, 4241496; 531224, 4241491; 
531235, 4241477; 531243, 4241467; 531247, 4241462; 531252, 4241459; 
531148, 4241274; 531128, 4241282; 531001, 4241056; 531012, 4241049; 
530840, 4240755; 530599, 4240752; 530599, 4240760; 530453, 4240760; 
530220, 4240758; 529960, 4240755; 529954, 4240737; 529962, 4240737; 
529964, 4240304; 529560, 4240298; 529560, 4240279; 529286, 4240278; 
529161, 4240277; 529138, 4240274; 529138, 4240269; 528996, 4240267; 
528747, 4240266; 528751, 4239945; 528653, 4239944; 528546, 4239942; 
528546, 4239933; 528471, 4239934; 528345, 4239934; 528210, 4239938; 
528211, 4239926; 528216, 4239911; 528224, 4239898; 528225, 4239884; 
528244, 4239861; 528263, 4239839; 528260, 4239802; 528257, 4239766; 
528281, 4239737; 528299, 4239674; 528329, 4239644; 528365, 4239626; 
528395, 4239588; 528396, 4239547; 528383, 4239522; 528383, 4239486; 
528467, 4239395; 528470, 4239382; 528523, 4239327; 528572, 4239220; 
528638, 4239134; 528715, 4239051; 528789, 4239013; 528842, 4238970; 
528867, 4238967; 528944, 4238985; 528977, 4238975; 529035, 4238937; 
529061, 4238859; 529089, 4238805; 529168, 4238719; 529186, 4238674; 
529202, 4238476; 529222, 4238445; 529288, 4238428; 529319, 4238410; 
529342, 4238380; 529390, 4238342; 529398, 4238248; 529355, 4238131; 
529353, 4238088; 529366, 4238055; 529366, 4237940; 529346, 4237894; 
529298, 4237833; 529298, 4237760; 529288, 4237747; 529227, 4237726; 
529225, 4237706; 529255, 4237671; 529266, 4237633; 529301, 4237587; 
529301, 4237556; 529301, 4237556; 529279, 4237513; 529274, 4237478; 
529243, 4237442; 529227, 4237415; 529195, 4237363; 529179, 4237303; 
529147, 4237180; 529122, 4237089; 529110, 4237044; 529098, 4236997; 
529075, 4236959; 528986, 4236865; 528941, 4236847; 528883, 4236797; 
528802, 4236726; 528710, 4236645; 528690, 4236643; 528624, 4236663; 
528504, 4236630; 528443, 4236614; 528428, 4236598; 528382, 4236524; 
528114, 4236779; 527845, 4237034; 527644, 4237225; 527577, 4237288; 
527528, 4237336; 527477, 4237364; 527408, 4237403; 527356, 4237414; 
527314, 4237418; 527267, 4237416; 527136, 4237408; 526957, 4237397; 
526778, 4237386; 526511, 4237369; 525796, 4237326; 525255, 4237292; 
525065, 4237280; 524935, 4237298; 524704, 4237329; 524459, 4237362; 
524276, 4237392; 524216, 4237396; 524156, 4237400; 524096, 4237396; 
523962, 4237391; 523863, 4237390; 523790, 4237390; 523736, 4237379; 
523735, 4237378; 523735, 4237378; 523701, 4237372; 523334, 4237331; 
523124, 4237315; 522752, 4237325; 522523, 4237483; 522330, 4237495; 
522203, 4237501; 522091, 4237502; 522019, 4237486; 521903, 4237456; 
521751, 4237374; 521416, 4237245; 520924, 4237058; 520715, 4236933; 
520469, 4236563; 519656, 4236570; 519591, 4236725; 519597, 4236804; 
519593, 4236893; 519534, 4236982; 519509, 4237065; 519513, 4237207; 
519519, 4237410; 519508, 4237513; 519513, 4237560; 519644, 4237689; 
519749, 4237854; 519828, 4238299; 519985, 4238796; 520064, 4239163; 
519666, 4239301; 519083, 4239251; 518726, 4239185; 518455, 4238949; 
518408, 4238918; 517833, 4238941; 517755, 4238933; 515591, 4239010; 
515470, 4239008; 515452, 4239009; 515449, 4239056; 515449, 4239057; 
515449, 4239057; 515450, 4239095; 515435, 4241446; 515745, 4241442; 
515750, 4241442; 515751, 4241441; 515960, 4241437; 515958, 4241650; 
515958, 4241650; 516184, 4241647; 516184, 4241649; 516476, 4241982; 
516591, 4242098; 516629, 4242123; 516629, 4242123; 516631, 4242125; 
516616, 4243019; 516964, 4243034; 516961, 4243299; 516961, 4243299; 
516957, 4243382; 518721, 4243366;

[[Page 308]]

519748, 4243368; 520411, 4243363; 520380, 4245219; 520274, 4245428; 
520129, 4245551; 520127, 4245552; 520176, 4245594; 520200, 4245630; 
520181, 4246130; 520221, 4246427; 520220, 4246428; 520222, 4246456; 
520222, 4246517; 520223, 4246579; 520222, 4246577; 520225, 4246616; 
520221, 4246774; 520214, 4246852; 520205, 4246990; 520193, 4247283; 
520121, 4247294; 519763, 4247380; 519748, 4247387; 519735, 4247394; 
519727, 4247398; 519712, 4247402; 519636, 4247424; 519580, 4247425; 
519530, 4247389; 519523, 4247381; 519515, 4247373; 519516, 4247360; 
519507, 4247387; 519510, 4247395; 519516, 4247404; 519492, 4247437; 
519486, 4247445; 519460, 4247491; 519453, 4247503; 519413, 4247571; 
519400, 4247572; 519392, 4247573; 519388, 4247574; 519381, 4247575; 
519366, 4247575; 519354, 4247574; 519339, 4247574; 519327, 4247575; 
519316, 4247573; 519308, 4247574; 519287, 4247574; 519270, 4247582; 
519252, 4247584; 519230, 4247590; 519203, 4247598; 519197, 4247600; 
519163, 4247609; 519146, 4247617; 519125, 4247627; 519108, 4247645; 
519097, 4247661; 519086, 4247673; 519070, 4247700; 519062, 4247717; 
519062, 4247719; 519048, 4247747; 519031, 4247780; 519020, 4247811; 
519005, 4247851; 519002, 4247866; 519000, 4247897; 519000, 4247919; 
519006, 4247954; 519015, 4247972; 519028, 4248004; 519034, 4248019; 
519043, 4248041; 519053, 4248080; 519061, 4248112; 519064, 4248129; 
519062, 4248151; 519062, 4248175; 519061, 4248206; 519062, 4248223; 
519065, 4248240; 519068, 4248257; 519071, 4248266; 519082, 4248290; 
519092, 4248307; 519105, 4248328; 519115, 4248342; 519121, 4248350; 
519133, 4248363; 519150, 4248374; 519173, 4248386; 519199, 4248394; 
519228, 4248404; 519259, 4248418; 519292, 4248430; 519316, 4248442; 
519340, 4248450; 519375, 4248465; 519399, 4248482; 519402, 4248484; 
519412, 4248498; 519413, 4248508; 519411, 4248514; 519407, 4248523; 
519400, 4248533; 519377, 4248549; 519369, 4248556; 519350, 4248568; 
519331, 4248574; 519311, 4248577; 519285, 4248588; 519259, 4248597; 
519238, 4248613; 519211, 4248626; 519200, 4248632; 519173, 4248642; 
519128, 4248660; 519102, 4248670; 519084, 4248674; 519051, 4248679; 
519033, 4248678; 519021, 4248676; 519003, 4248674; 518982, 4248668; 
518950, 4248662; 518918, 4248659; 518880, 4248664; 518859, 4248670; 
518849, 4248679; 518850, 4248689; 518854, 4248697; 518863, 4248703; 
518876, 4248715; 518888, 4248724; 518900, 4248738; 518912, 4248748; 
518935, 4248765; 518951, 4248781; 518967, 4248801; 518983, 4248821; 
518994, 4248838; 519000, 4248851; 519003, 4248869; 519003, 4248885; 
519003, 4248895; 519002, 4248911; 518997, 4248935; 518995, 4248960; 
518993, 4249001; 518994, 4249018; 518999, 4249034; 519006, 4249056; 
519018, 4249078; 519033, 4249094; 519052, 4249108; 519073, 4249118; 
519095, 4249127; 519122, 4249133; 519151, 4249136; 519182, 4249140; 
519203, 4249137; 519230, 4249137; 519257, 4249144; 519263, 4249153; 
519261, 4249160; 519257, 4249165; 519248, 4249176; 519236, 4249188; 
519223, 4249202; 519204, 4249216; 519188, 4249230; 519170, 4249239; 
519156, 4249244; 519133, 4249246; 519114, 4249245; 519101, 4249244; 
519078, 4249244; 519044, 4249248; 519006, 4249259; 518990, 4249263; 
518975, 4249271; 518960, 4249285; 518945, 4249303; 518925, 4249330; 
518918, 4249344; 518912, 4249356; 518904, 4249366; 518896, 4249372; 
518883, 4249382; 518860, 4249391; 518834, 4249400; 518813, 4249410; 
518796, 4249422; 518779, 4249435; 518756, 4249447; 518708, 4249473; 
518687, 4249484; 518674, 4249489; 518659, 4249491; 518647, 4249488; 
518627, 4249486; 518608, 4249488; 518588, 4249498; 518576, 4249507; 
518563, 4249519; 518557, 4249528; 518554, 4249536; 518549, 4249551; 
518543, 4249563; 518534, 4249575; 518519, 4249586; 518501, 4249598; 
518482, 4249605; 518468, 4249608; 518444, 4249616; 518420, 4249617; 
518400, 4249621; 518380, 4249625; 518365, 4249632; 518355, 4249641; 
518336, 4249649; 518300, 4249652; 518283, 4249657; 518256, 4249654; 
518226, 4249648; 518201, 4249643; 518179, 4249642; 518167, 4249643; 
518156, 4249646; 518147, 4249652; 518137, 4249663; 518126, 4249680; 
518118, 4249700; 518107, 4249723; 518096, 4249744; 518090, 4249766; 
518082, 4249783; 518078, 4249801; 518079, 4249819; 518081, 4249836; 
518087, 4249854; 518099, 4249867; 518116, 4249879; 518130, 4249882; 
518147, 4249886; 518168, 4249897; 518178, 4249912; 518181, 4249925; 
518182, 4249941; 518188, 4249951; 518194, 4249958; 518200, 4249963; 
518206, 4249973; 518209, 4249982; 518209, 4249993; 518209, 4250008; 
518213, 4250022; 518221, 4250029; 518228, 4250036; 518232, 4250050; 
518228, 4250060; 518224, 4250063; 518217, 4250066; 518207, 4250067; 
518190, 4250068; 518170, 4250070; 518153, 4250076; 518135, 4250081; 
518121, 4250090; 518111, 4250108; 518107, 4250122; 518105, 4250135; 
518102, 4250158; 518103, 4250172; 518107, 4250185; 518114, 4250209; 
518117, 4250226; 518122, 4250252; 518132, 4250277; 518132, 4250278; 
518112, 4250325; 518055, 4250363; 517988, 4250366; 517977, 4250346; 
517965, 4250330; 517948, 4250308; 517940, 4250287; 517937, 4250266; 
517933, 4250250; 517929, 4250224; 517924, 4250194; 517915, 4250171; 
517895, 4250133; 517879, 4250105; 517870, 4250095; 517843, 4250074; 
517822, 4250056; 517800, 4250030; 517751, 4249994; 517728, 4249974; 
517697, 4249961; 517677, 4249957; 517648, 4249949; 517633, 4249949; 
517612, 4249951; 517586, 4249958; 517574, 4249969; 517561, 4249984; 
517555, 4249996; 517542, 4250025; 517538, 4250043; 517527, 4250075; 
517524, 4250091; 517523, 4250104; 517527, 4250125; 517534, 4250146; 
517541, 4250174; 517544, 4250201; 517543, 4250225; 517538, 4250250; 
517529, 4250276; 517520, 4250301; 517506, 4250334; 517492, 4250364; 
517479, 4250404; 517472, 4250419; 517468, 4250433; 517459, 4250447; 
517449, 4250459; 517438, 4250461; 517428, 4250457; 517419, 4250450; 
517408, 4250441; 517394, 4250434; 517374, 4250425; 517349, 4250416; 
517330, 4250419; 517319, 4250428; 517303, 4250447; 517295, 4250457; 
517279, 4250480; 517274, 4250487; 517266, 4250499; 517256, 4250522; 
517253, 4250541; 517248, 4250557; 517244, 4250576; 517234, 4250597; 
517224, 4250626; 517220, 4250646; 517222, 4250669; 517237, 4250695; 
517254, 4250710; 517274, 4250721; 517290, 4250725; 517313, 4250729; 
517334, 4250731; 517366, 4250729; 517395, 4250729; 517426, 4250730; 
517453, 4250737; 517487, 4250743; 517508, 4250749; 517536, 4250763; 
517567, 4250782; 517596, 4250802; 517625, 4250823; 517660, 4250848; 
517683, 4250876; 517693, 4250895; 517699, 4250918; 517699, 4250918; 
517672, 4251014; 517615, 4251099; 517523, 4251133; 517519, 4251137; 
517499, 4251131; 517481, 4251127; 517469, 4251123; 517458, 4251121; 
517434, 4251121; 517420, 4251125; 517405, 4251128; 517393, 4251126; 
517383, 4251122; 517369, 4251114; 517354, 4251109; 517328, 4251099; 
517301, 4251096; 517282, 4251090; 517264, 4251082; 517245, 4251076; 
517219, 4251065; 517180, 4251059; 517157, 4251056; 517124, 4251047; 
517094, 4251042; 517082, 4251040;

[[Page 309]]

517065, 4251040; 517051, 4251044; 517034, 4251048; 517018, 4251048; 
517001, 4251047; 516975, 4251041; 516962, 4251037; 516950, 4251032; 
516931, 4251022; 516917, 4251017; 516898, 4251012; 516879, 4251011; 
516860, 4251009; 516837, 4251006; 516828, 4251012; 516822, 4251023; 
516819, 4251036; 516819, 4251049; 516820, 4251061; 516822, 4251076; 
516823, 4251089; 516821, 4251105; 516815, 4251120; 516805, 4251129; 
516792, 4251137; 516780, 4251137; 516757, 4251138; 516742, 4251141; 
516730, 4251137; 516712, 4251132; 516689, 4251125; 516660, 4251114; 
516647, 4251115; 516610, 4251118; 516579, 4251128; 516566, 4251138; 
516561, 4251150; 516559, 4251160; 516558, 4251172; 516560, 4251187; 
516560, 4251206; 516566, 4251226; 516564, 4251240; 516563, 4251242; 
516558, 4251252; 516551, 4251263; 516546, 4251280; 516545, 4251299; 
516549, 4251318; 516555, 4251333; 516565, 4251340; 516577, 4251350; 
516588, 4251363; 516589, 4251379; 516585, 4251390; 516577, 4251405; 
516567, 4251418; 516554, 4251433; 516538, 4251450; 516522, 4251474; 
516515, 4251493; 516508, 4251518; 516504, 4251543; 516501, 4251576; 
516499, 4251607; 516499, 4251634; 516507, 4251662; 516518, 4251678; 
516529, 4251689; 516547, 4251695; 516561, 4251699; 516579, 4251702; 
516595, 4251705; 516612, 4251712; 516622, 4251720; 516636, 4251733; 
516636, 4251735; 516639, 4251861; 516588, 4251964; 516582, 4251968; 
516572, 4251977; 516561, 4251993; 516558, 4251999; 516445, 4252055; 
516283, 4252064; 516281, 4252065; 516280, 4252065; 516274, 4252064; 
516264, 4252061; 516255, 4252058; 516243, 4252051; 516234, 4252042; 
516215, 4252023; 516202, 4252010; 516185, 4252002; 516177, 4252001; 
516156, 4251996; 516136, 4251991; 516115, 4251992; 516098, 4251999; 
516083, 4252014; 516073, 4252031; 516071, 4252047; 516071, 4252057; 
516070, 4252069; 516070, 4252083; 516067, 4252094; 516062, 4252102; 
516055, 4252112; 516048, 4252123; 516042, 4252140; 516039, 4252151; 
516036, 4252159; 516028, 4252165; 516025, 4252167; 516015, 4252170; 
516002, 4252171; 515992, 4252178; 515986, 4252185; 515980, 4252188; 
515968, 4252186; 515964, 4252180; 515963, 4252182; 515936, 4252199; 
515936, 4252199; 515936, 4252212; 515932, 4252230; 515931, 4252247; 
515938, 4252261; 515952, 4252274; 515967, 4252289; 515985, 4252310; 
515998, 4252330; 516007, 4252353; 516024, 4252380; 516033, 4252395; 
516034, 4252408; 516034, 4252417; 516031, 4252429; 516026, 4252444; 
516022, 4252463; 516020, 4252487; 516022, 4252496; 516027, 4252519; 
516036, 4252541; 516038, 4252554; 516033, 4252557; 516024, 4252554; 
516019, 4252552; 516008, 4252545; 515999, 4252536; 515990, 4252528; 
515979, 4252523; 515963, 4252524; 515949, 4252528; 515933, 4252533; 
515923, 4252536; 515913, 4252534; 515901, 4252528; 515890, 4252521; 
515871, 4252513; 515855, 4252502; 515830, 4252490; 515807, 4252484; 
515786, 4252478; 515766, 4252478; 515757, 4252479; 515743, 4252490; 
515732, 4252506; 515728, 4252515; 515723, 4252529; 515715, 4252540; 
515708, 4252546; 515697, 4252548; 515681, 4252549; 515668, 4252554; 
515652, 4252574; 515644, 4252590; 515630, 4252614; 515614, 4252640; 
515606, 4252661; 515603, 4252673; 515604, 4252687; 515607, 4252699; 
515613, 4252724; 515612, 4252731; 515607, 4252735; 515601, 4252735; 
515592, 4252734; 515582, 4252731; 515567, 4252724; 515553, 4252716; 
515533, 4252705; 515515, 4252701; 515500, 4252704; 515485, 4252707; 
515461, 4252728; 515444, 4252747; 515435, 4252761; 515426, 4252780; 
515426, 4252793; 515429, 4252808; 515436, 4252825; 515445, 4252845; 
515457, 4252861; 515474, 4252882; 515479, 4252889; 515485, 4252899; 
515485, 4252909; 515484, 4252920; 515480, 4252935; 515480, 4252952; 
515480, 4252967; 515483, 4252984; 515485, 4252998; 515484, 4253007; 
515480, 4253016; 515474, 4253025; 515465, 4253032; 515453, 4253041; 
515438, 4253056; 515425, 4253070; 515415, 4253085; 515414, 4253100; 
515418, 4253116; 515424, 4253124; 515439, 4253136; 515453, 4253141; 
515467, 4253144; 515489, 4253149; 515503, 4253160; 515504, 4253160; 
515515, 4253170; 515543, 4253187; 515558, 4253194; 515575, 4253200; 
515595, 4253206; 515624, 4253211; 515643, 4253214; 515651, 4253220; 
515662, 4253226; 515674, 4253223; 515684, 4253221; 515701, 4253215; 
515720, 4253203; 515726, 4253194; 515733, 4253184; 515740, 4253174; 
515750, 4253165; 515760, 4253155; 515773, 4253144; 515784, 4253130; 
515788, 4253118; 515790, 4253106; 515793, 4253086; 515802, 4253078; 
515811, 4253075; 515822, 4253066; 515834, 4253066; 515838, 4253074; 
515838, 4253090; 515840, 4253109; 515845, 4253135; 515851, 4253152; 
515858, 4253162; 515862, 4253170; 515864, 4253178; 515862, 4253190; 
515860, 4253206; 515863, 4253236; 515864, 4253240; 515864, 4253241; 
515852, 4253247; 515890, 4253375; 515895, 4253512; 515833, 4253674; 
515615, 4253915; 515550, 4253943; 515510, 4253975; 515446, 4254021; 
515445, 4254020; 515422, 4254013; 515412, 4254013; 515393, 4254017; 
515376, 4254015; 515368, 4254008; 515357, 4253999; 515341, 4253984; 
515321, 4253972; 515300, 4253973; 515276, 4253969; 515247, 4253971; 
515218, 4253979; 515211, 4253986; 515196, 4254001; 515168, 4254022; 
515157, 4254027; 515129, 4254028; 515119, 4254024; 515112, 4254016; 
515109, 4254006; 515103, 4253995; 515096, 4253991; 515081, 4253984; 
515063, 4253968; 515053, 4253954; 515044, 4253944; 515036, 4253938; 
515020, 4253936; 515011, 4253928; 515002, 4253919; 514993, 4253922; 
514992, 4253932; 514995, 4253940; 515002, 4253955; 515014, 4253976; 
515033, 4254014; 515039, 4254041; 515035, 4254059; 515028, 4254072; 
515021, 4254081; 515012, 4254095; 515001, 4254116; 514996, 4254132; 
514985, 4254167; 514979, 4254189; 514974, 4254250; 514974, 4254251; 
514969, 4254293; 514967, 4254336; 514967, 4254353; 514967, 4254355; 
514969, 4254364; 514973, 4254371; 514981, 4254384; 514991, 4254417; 
514991, 4254420; 514992, 4254436; 515007, 4254505; 515007, 4254506; 
515010, 4254572; 515021, 4254618; 515026, 4254626; 515031, 4254634; 
515035, 4254638; 515047, 4254648; 515061, 4254655; 515070, 4254658; 
515087, 4254666; 515129, 4254691; 515186, 4254727; 515192, 4254727; 
515198, 4254728; 515205, 4254729; 515212, 4254730; 515221, 4254731; 
515233, 4254729; 515241, 4254725; 515245, 4254722; 515273, 4254690; 
515286, 4254673; 515292, 4254659; 515294, 4254649; 515302, 4254594; 
515343, 4254545; 515354, 4254540; 515361, 4254536; 515375, 4254534; 
515384, 4254535; 515393, 4254536; 515406, 4254537; 515424, 4254537; 
515431, 4254535; 515433, 4254537; 515511, 4254552; 515636, 4254618; 
515647, 4254623; 515743, 4254736; 515838, 4254873; 515882, 4255052; 
515848, 4255178; 515768, 4255382; 515630, 4255716; 515550, 4255895; 
515549, 4255895; 515500, 4255889; 515476, 4255900; 515466, 4255906; 
515457, 4255918; 515461, 4255934; 515466, 4255947; 515469, 4255965; 
515471, 4255995; 515468, 4256021; 515463, 4256038; 515457, 4256050; 
515446, 4256057; 515440, 4256058; 515425, 4256063; 515365, 4256069; 
515344, 4256075; 515316, 4256070;

[[Page 310]]

515296, 4256067; 515283, 4256060; 515267, 4256045; 515247, 4256030; 
515233, 4256017; 515222, 4256003; 515197, 4255966; 515180, 4255943; 
515177, 4255940; 515170, 4255942; 515167, 4255946; 515156, 4255985; 
515154, 4256029; 515135, 4256077; 515129, 4256089; 515127, 4256106; 
515126, 4256114; 515115, 4256136; 515108, 4256145; 515103, 4256148; 
515081, 4256161; 515074, 4256166; 515057, 4256176; 515051, 4256185; 
515049, 4256190; 515053, 4256194; 515061, 4256197; 515081, 4256199; 
515103, 4256193; 515140, 4256193; 515152, 4256197; 515162, 4256201; 
515164, 4256202; 515176, 4256209; 515196, 4256223; 515209, 4256237; 
515216, 4256252; 515230, 4256281; 515233, 4256288; 515240, 4256293; 
515240, 4256294; 515240, 4256295; 515234, 4256307; 515262, 4256367; 
515287, 4256447; 515317, 4256636; 515277, 4256836; 515187, 4256950; 
515103, 4257015; 515056, 4257056; 515055, 4257055; 515041, 4257062; 
515028, 4257079; 515003, 4257133; 514992, 4257150; 514981, 4257158; 
514968, 4257161; 514962, 4257161; 514956, 4257162; 514938, 4257158; 
514927, 4257153; 514908, 4257151; 514893, 4257157; 514886, 4257159; 
514879, 4257160; 514871, 4257158; 514858, 4257150; 514853, 4257146; 
514798, 4257089; 514791, 4257082; 514779, 4257074; 514764, 4257068; 
514747, 4257070; 514736, 4257073; 514721, 4257078; 514708, 4257080; 
514690, 4257080; 514682, 4257080; 514669, 4257085; 514661, 4257093; 
514659, 4257099; 514657, 4257115; 514661, 4257126; 514671, 4257143; 
514695, 4257166; 514697, 4257169; 514701, 4257175; 514702, 4257180; 
514701, 4257187; 514699, 4257196; 514697, 4257203; 514688, 4257224; 
514685, 4257227; 514667, 4257248; 514633, 4257306; 514630, 4257309; 
514630, 4257318; 514631, 4257319; 514630, 4257320; 514589, 4257648; 
514590, 4257650; 514585, 4257653; 514575, 4257659; 514567, 4257671; 
514564, 4257685; 514566, 4257699; 514567, 4257709; 514573, 4257722; 
514582, 4257738; 514606, 4257759; 514629, 4257780; 514641, 4257795; 
514666, 4257821; 514671, 4257825; 514680, 4257829; 514694, 4257834; 
514706, 4257838; 514715, 4257846; 514742, 4257871; 514762, 4257894; 
514773, 4257904; 514779, 4257911; 514788, 4257926; 514791, 4257939; 
514792, 4257950; 514792, 4257961; 514791, 4257970; 514790, 4257973; 
514784, 4257986; 514762, 4258024; 514758, 4258032; 514751, 4258044; 
514749, 4258053; 514746, 4258070; 514744, 4258109; 514741, 4258113; 
514740, 4258115; 514736, 4258119; 514726, 4258123; 514716, 4258129; 
514702, 4258135; 514683, 4258152; 514673, 4258169; 514666, 4258182; 
514659, 4258218; 514654, 4258240; 514652, 4258263; 514654, 4258288; 
514660, 4258327; 514666, 4258351; 514667, 4258352; 514674, 4258359; 
514684, 4258363; 514684, 4258364; 514695, 4258407; 514648, 4258566; 
514610, 4258593; 514601, 4258599; 514585, 4258604; 514566, 4258610; 
514560, 4258613; 514550, 4258620; 514521, 4258654; 514510, 4258660; 
514487, 4258673; 514468, 4258680; 514451, 4258690; 514423, 4258704; 
514390, 4258726; 514288, 4258813; 514257, 4258854; 514255, 4258861; 
514256, 4258869; 514259, 4258873; 514264, 4258876; 514288, 4258880; 
514309, 4258876; 514318, 4258877; 514327, 4258884; 514331, 4258894; 
514335, 4258909; 514335, 4258928; 514326, 4258967; 514326, 4258972; 
514326, 4258977; 514326, 4258981; 514329, 4258985; 514332, 4258989; 
514338, 4258992; 514345, 4258995; 514362, 4258998; 514375, 4258999; 
514396, 4258996; 514412, 4258988; 514428, 4258979; 514443, 4258973; 
514445, 4258969; 514445, 4258971; 514509, 4258998; 514583, 4259053; 
514724, 4259187; 514918, 4259367; 514980, 4259423; 514981, 4259423; 
514986, 4259428; 514996, 4259435; 515007, 4259441; 515055, 4259449; 
515253, 4259636; 515352, 4259727; 515469, 4259814; 515449, 4259933; 
515509, 4260017; 515554, 4260058; 515588, 4260202; 515675, 4260407; 
515718, 4260481; 515786, 4260513; 515861, 4260579; 515811, 4260636; 
515735, 4260659; 515658, 4260661; 515576, 4260573; 515542, 4260544; 
515472, 4260588; 515442, 4260639; 515456, 4260710; 515458, 4260810; 
515460, 4260832; 515426, 4260827; 515389, 4260814; 515375, 4260804; 
515324, 4260841; 515255, 4260882; 515194, 4260867; 515155, 4260862; 
515038, 4260902; 515012, 4260823; 515013, 4260796; 515029, 4260774; 
515027, 4260705; 515014, 4260674; 514940, 4260630; 514892, 4260623; 
514835, 4260654; 514756, 4260727; 514744, 4260762; 514750, 4260796; 
514717, 4260820; 514692, 4260866; 514669, 4260918; 514635, 4260934; 
514639, 4260868; 514609, 4260810; 514558, 4260789; 514487, 4260775; 
514427, 4260798; 514400, 4260838; 514405, 4260874; 514405, 4260928; 
514370, 4260973; 514279, 4261001; 514279, 4260943; 514235, 4260852; 
514170, 4260856; 514119, 4260881; 514041, 4260879; 513959, 4260877; 
513923, 4260905; 513886, 4260952; 513851, 4260948; 513805, 4260907; 
513772, 4260900; 513712, 4260878; 513681, 4260842; 513622, 4260828; 
513581, 4260813; 513551, 4260793; 513503, 4260810; 513453, 4260859; 
513409, 4260927; 513442, 4260967; 513481, 4261058; 513497, 4261140; 
513489, 4261235; 513540, 4261320; 513742, 4261320; 513871, 4261328; 
513976, 4261347; 514035, 4261369; 514145, 4261324; 514252, 4261335; 
514358, 4261296; 514356, 4261220; 514383, 4261174; 514410, 4261122; 
514465, 4261138; 514508, 4261148; 514504, 4261185; 514510, 4261238; 
514506, 4261297; 514520, 4261365; 514652, 4261443; 514815, 4261561; 
514761, 4261649; 514648, 4261587; 514607, 4261642; 514543, 4261651; 
514484, 4261608; 514460, 4261560; 514393, 4261525; 514248, 4261599; 
514131, 4261568; 514011, 4261546; 514025, 4261626; 513938, 4261628; 
513832, 4261588; 513781, 4261620; 513759, 4261696; 513825, 4261766; 
513817, 4261822; 513869, 4261898; 513979, 4261912; 514059, 4261890; 
514126, 4261931; 514130, 4262043; 514129, 4262149; 514147, 4262235; 
514128, 4262311; 514178, 4262445; 514235, 4262548; 514275, 4262607; 
514318, 4262658; 514400, 4262694; 514456, 4262745; 514385, 4262802; 
514383, 4262890; 514370, 4262964; 514448, 4263138; 514593, 4263244; 
514650, 4263341; 514707, 4263450; 514720, 4263519; 514893, 4263564; 
515032, 4263626; 515101, 4263688; 515209, 4263765; 515238, 4263930; 
515138, 4264007; 515187, 4264092; 515197, 4264212; 515223, 4264267; 
515321, 4264382; 515314, 4264453; 515310, 4264485; 515399, 4264533; 
515507, 4264589; 515545, 4264608; 515604, 4264714; 515632, 4264739; 
515712, 4264751; 515794, 4264773; 515853, 4264796; 515859, 4264834; 
515872, 4264900; returning to 515958, 4264938.
    (ii) Note: Map of Santa Rosa Plain Unit, follows:

[[Page 311]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU11.000

              California Tiger Salamander in Sonoma County

    Pursuant to section 4(b)(2) of the Act, we have excluded all areas 
determined to meet the definition of critical habitat under section 
4(b)(2) of the Act for California tiger salamander in Sonoma County. 
Therefore, no

[[Page 312]]

specific areas are designated as critical habitat for this species.

           Frosted Flatwoods Salamander (Ambystoma cingulatum)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Baker, Franklin, 
Jefferson, Liberty, and Wakulla Counties in Florida; and Berkeley, 
Charleston, and Jasper Counties in South Carolina on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
frosted flatwoods salamander are:
    (i) Breeding habitat. Small (generally less than 1 to 10 ac (less 
than 0.4 to 4.0 ha)), acidic, depressional standing bodies of freshwater 
(wetlands) that:
    (A) Are seasonally flooded by rainfall in late fall or early winter 
and dry in late spring or early summer;
    (B) Are geographically isolated from other water bodies;
    (C) Occur within pine flatwoods-savanna communities;
    (D) Are dominated by grasses and grass-like species in the ground 
layer and overstories of pond-cypress, blackgum, and slash pine;
    (E) Have a relatively open canopy, necessary to maintain the 
herbaceous component that serves as cover for flatwoods salamander 
larvae and their aquatic invertebrate prey; and
    (F) Typically have a burrowing crayfish fauna, but, due to periodic 
drying, the breeding ponds typically lack large, predatory fish (for 
example, Lepomis (sunfish), Micropterus (bass), Amia calva (bowfin)).
    (ii) Non-breeding habitat. Upland pine flatwoods-savanna habitat 
that is open, mesic woodland maintained by frequent fires and that:
    (A) Is within 1,500 ft (457 m) of adjacent and accessible breeding 
ponds;
    (B) Contains crayfish burrows or other underground habitat that the 
flatwoods salamander depends upon for food, shelter, and protection from 
the elements and predation;
    (C) Has an organic hardpan in the soil profile, which inhibits 
subsurface water penetration and typically results in moist soils with 
water often at or near the surface under normal conditions; and
    (D) Often has wiregrasses as the dominant grasses in the abundant 
herbaceous ground cover, which supports the rich herbivorous 
invertebrates that serve as a food source for the frosted flatwoods 
salamander.
    (iii) Dispersal habitat. Upland habitat areas between nonbreeding 
and breeding habitat that allows for salamander movement between such 
sites and that is characterized by:
    (A) A mix of vegetation types representing a transition between 
wetland and upland vegetation (ecotone);
    (B) An open canopy and abundant native herbaceous species;
    (C) Moist soils as described in paragraph (2)(ii); and
    (D) Subsurface structure, such as that provided by deep litter cover 
or burrows, that provides shelter for salamanders during seasonal 
movements.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, runways, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles, and critical habitat 
units were then mapped using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) 
coordinates.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat for the frosted flatwoods 
salamander follows:

[[Page 313]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.000

    (6) Frosted flatwood salamander--Baker, Franklin, Jefferson, 
Liberty, and Wakulla Counties, Florida.
    (i) Unit FFS-1, Subunit A--Liberty County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Estiffanulga and Woods, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 691617.99, 3350707.71; 693095.71, 3348233.03; 692983.53, 
3348209.57; 692897.48, 3348210.76; 692828.41, 3348229.52; 692759.43, 
3348248.25; 692691.40, 3348292.76; 692639.72, 3348326.57; 690393.30, 
3350136.47; 690313.39, 3350218.63;

[[Page 314]]

690268.29, 3350291.92; 690230.96, 3350400.29; 690221.36, 3350485.81; 
690241.25, 3350627.47; 690274.03, 3350707.04; 690333.43, 3350797.24; 
690401.06, 3350865.47; 690279.29, 3350935.03; 690182.82, 3351040.66; 
690111.95, 3351227.14; 690119.70, 3351398.31; 690131.84, 3352855.50; 
690169.32, 3352993.56; 690267.58, 3353133.94; 690384.46, 3353216.42; 
690549.65, 3353261.95; 690664.14, 3353256.77; 690773.74, 3353223.27; 
690871.58, 3353163.57; 690968.05, 3353057.95; 692565.25, 3351422.56; 
692602.62, 3351378.97; 692634.23, 3351331.03; 692669.80, 3351252.67; 
692690.04, 3351169.02; 693379.09, 3348814.26; 693399.33, 3348730.61; 
693403.55, 3348644.66; 693391.58, 3348559.43; 693363.86, 3348477.96; 
693321.37, 3348403.12; 693265.60, 3348337.58; 693174.08, 3348268.59; 
693095.71, 3348233.03.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-1, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (6)(x)(B) of this entry.
    (ii) Unit FFS-1, Subunit B--Liberty County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Orange, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 689802.94, 3340960.90; 689428.14, 3339447.54; 689123.11, 
3339393.72; 688873.13, 3339525.49; 688743.74, 3339836.26; 688831.13, 
3340169.91; 689917.07, 3342147.02; 690004.49, 3342326.33; 690240.38, 
3342481.91; 690522.67, 3342469.12; 690726.97, 3342316.32; 690843.40, 
3342033.33; 690847.40, 3341805.94; 690741.36, 3341604.76; 689705.63, 
3339902.63; 689617.94, 3339656.89; 689428.14, 3339447.54.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-1, Subunit B is provided at 
paragraph (6)(x)(B) of this entry.
    (iii) Unit FFS-1, Subunit C--Liberty County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Wilma, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 695595.00, 3340429.07; 695320.75, 3338608.68; 695308.16, 
3338582.86; 695293.97, 3338557.88; 695278.24, 3338533.84; 695261.04, 
3338510.84; 695242.42, 3338488.97; 695222.47, 3338468.30; 695201.27, 
3338448.93; 695178.88, 3338430.93; 695155.41, 3338414.37; 695130.95, 
3338399.31; 695105.59, 3338385.83; 695079.43, 3338373.95; 695052.58, 
3338363.76; 695025.14, 3338355.26; 694997.23, 3338348.50; 694968.94, 
3338343.51; 694940.40, 3338340.31; 694911.71, 3338338.90; 694882.99, 
3338339.30; 694854.35, 3338341.50; 694825.90, 3338345.50; 694797.76, 
3338351.27; 694770.05, 3338358.80; 694742.85, 3338368.06; 694709.40, 
3338382.20; 694683.58, 3338394.79; 694658.61, 3338408.98; 694634.57, 
3338424.71; 694611.57, 3338441.91; 694589.69, 3338460.52; 694569.03, 
3338480.47; 694549.66, 3338501.69; 694531.66, 3338524.07; 694515.10, 
3338547.54; 694500.05, 3338572.01; 694486.56, 3338597.37; 694474.69, 
3338623.53; 694464.49, 3338650.38; 694455.99, 3338677.82; 694449.24, 
3338705.74; 694444.25, 3338734.03; 694441.05, 3338762.57; 694439.64, 
3338791.26; 694440.04, 3338819.98; 694442.24, 3338848.63; 694446.23, 
3338877.07; 694452.01, 3338905.21; 694459.53, 3338932.93; 694468.79, 
3338960.12; 694479.73, 3338986.68; 695846.37, 3342195.36; 695866.57, 
3342249.11; 695909.07, 3342323.95; 695944.89, 3342368.83; 696008.43, 
3342426.87; 696081.72, 3342471.97; 696134.73, 3342494.04; 696218.37, 
3342514.28; 696304.32, 3342518.50; 696399.96, 3342505.83; 696481.43, 
3342478.10; 696532.23, 3342451.33; 696601.14, 3342399.78; 696659.17, 
3342336.24; 696716.14, 3342236.78; 696741.60, 3342154.57; 696751.20, 
3342069.05; 696748.60, 3342011.68; 696738.84, 3341955.10; 696711.11, 
3341873.63; 695320.75, 3338608.68.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-1, Subunit C is provided at 
paragraph (6)(x)(B) of this entry.
    (iv) Unit FFS-1, Subunit D--Liberty County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Wilma, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 698315.71, 3338507.25; 697480.52, 3338897.39; 697508.44, 
3338904.15; 699107.25, 3339112.64; 699249.88, 3339101.68; 699357.17, 
3339061.36; 699491.10, 3338954.46; 699566.06, 3338832.62; 699600.72, 
3338636.16; 699571.97, 3338496.02; 699501.32, 3338371.62; 699419.16, 
3338291.70; 699319.85, 3338227.75; 699161.66, 3338161.88; 697647.47, 
3337884.31; 697505.31, 3337868.36; 697338.62, 3337908.06; 697240.79, 
3337967.76; 697160.88, 3338049.93; 697093.71, 3338176.24; 697068.86, 
3338317.12; 697081.23, 3338431.07; 697135.72, 3338563.34; 697197.51, 
3338669.79; 697283.19, 3338784.36; 697400.08, 3338866.83; 697480.52, 
3338897.39.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-1, Subunit D is provided at 
paragraph (6)(x)(B) of this entry.
    (v) Unit FFS-1, Subunit E--Liberty County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Orange and Kennedy Creek, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 686367.53, 3332295.84; 686431.12, 3334276.72; 686521.73, 
3334038.23; 686486.41, 3333905.93; 686456.16, 3333792.66; 686384.37, 
3333673.40; 686529.54, 3333545.42; 686684.99, 3333670.42; 686821.64, 
3333712.74; 686964.68, 3333710.75; 689322.67, 3333980.79; 689576.20, 
3334009.24; 689736.59, 3333948.97; 689863.53, 3333833.87; 689945.95, 
3333652.21; 689948.95, 3333480.88; 689888.68, 3333320.48; 689773.58, 
3333193.53; 688133.75, 3332060.68; 687963.85, 3331956.15; 687770.73, 
3331922.03; 687750.83, 3331780.36; 687652.31, 3331606.91; 687435.02, 
3331473.21; 686480.70, 3331191.98; 686369.22, 3331102.34; 685860.73, 
3329667.19; 685722.17, 3329523.69; 685535.70, 3329452.84; 685421.11, 
3329450.84; 685283.06, 3329488.34; 685142.70, 3329586.62; 685038.17, 
3329756.51; 684075.02, 3330678.79; 683908.10, 3330788.01; 683825.64, 
3330904.90; 683780.13, 3331070.10; 683798.63, 3331240.45; 683861.33, 
3331369.02; 685068.99, 3333929.17; 685144.99, 3334113.61; 685267.82, 
3334233.07; 685426.00, 3334298.93; 685697.77, 3334272.20; 685864.11, 
3334411.77; 686057.99, 3334458.69; 686253.39, 3334418.58; 686431.12, 
3334276.72.

[[Page 315]]

    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-1, Subunit E is provided at 
paragraph (6)(x)(B) of this entry.
    (vi) Unit FFS-1, Subunit F--Liberty County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Kennedy Creek, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 686994.66, 3327715.03; 687031.71, 3327259.31; 687003.02, 
3327257.90; 686974.30, 3327258.30; 686945.66, 3327260.51; 686917.22, 
3327264.50; 686889.08, 3327270.28; 686861.36, 3327277.81; 686834.17, 
3327287.06; 686781.80, 3327310.60; 686756.83, 3327324.79; 686718.31, 
3327349.17; 686687.92, 3327376.34; 686647.89, 3327417.50; 686629.89, 
3327439.88; 686598.28, 3327487.82; 686584.79, 3327513.18; 686562.73, 
3327566.19; 686547.48, 3327621.55; 686539.29, 3327678.38; 686538.28, 
3327735.79; 686544.48, 3327792.87; 686557.79, 3327848.73; 686577.99, 
3327902.48; 686604.76, 3327953.27; 686627.73, 3327993.87; 686676.26, 
3328042.84; 686697.47, 3328062.21; 686719.85, 3328080.21; 686767.79, 
3328111.82; 686819.30, 3328137.17; 686873.59, 3328155.87; 686929.80, 
3328167.62; 686987.03, 3328172.22; 687072.83, 3328165.62; 687128.68, 
3328152.32; 687182.43, 3328132.12; 687233.22, 3328105.34; 687280.26, 
3328072.41; 687342.16, 3328012.63; 687391.77, 3327942.31; 687417.12, 
3327890.79; 687435.81, 3327836.50; 687447.56, 3327780.29; 687450.76, 
3327751.75; 687451.76, 3327694.34; 687445.57, 3327637.25; 687432.26, 
3327581.40; 687423.01, 3327554.21; 687385.28, 3327476.86; 687352.35, 
3327429.82; 687292.58, 3327367.91; 687222.26, 3327318.30; 687143.89, 
3327282.75; 687116.45, 3327274.26; 687088.54, 3327267.50; 687060.25, 
3327262.51; 687031.71, 3327259.31.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-1, Subunit F is provided at 
paragraph (6)(x)(B) of this entry.
    (vii) Unit FFS-1, Subunit G--Liberty County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Kennedy Creek and Sumatra, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 692743.43, 3325970.41; 690511.49, 3328333.04; 690352.62, 
3327300.27; 690398.82, 3327359.05; 690435.78, 3327418.40; 690476.94, 
3327458.44; 690522.80, 3327492.99; 690572.10, 3327512.25; 690653.06, 
3327552.10; 690737.82, 3327567.04; 690852.31, 3327561.85; 690961.91, 
3327528.34; 691036.74, 3327485.83; 691102.27, 3327430.06; 691139.64, 
3327386.47; 691184.74, 3327313.17; 691206.80, 3327260.16; 691226.10, 
3327181.87; 691285.53, 3327253.00; 691352.60, 3327306.93; 691428.57, 
3327347.33; 691510.78, 3327372.78; 691596.30, 3327382.38; 691653.66, 
3327379.78; 691709.33, 3327370.19; 691748.27, 3327399.19; 691798.09, 
3327427.72; 691851.10, 3327449.80; 691906.46, 3327465.04; 691963.28, 
3327473.24; 691991.97, 3327474.64; 692049.33, 3327472.04; 692105.91, 
3327462.27; 692160.82, 3327445.48; 692197.42, 3327442.46; 692254.00, 
3327432.70; 692315.34, 3327416.01; 692284.77, 3327496.45; 692273.03, 
3327552.66; 692268.42, 3327609.90; 692271.03, 3327667.26; 692288.33, 
3327751.56; 692308.53, 3327805.31; 692351.03, 3327880.14; 692388.83, 
3327927.78; 692448.61, 3327989.69; 692518.93, 3328039.30; 692570.45, 
3328064.66; 692624.74, 3328083.35; 692709.48, 3328098.30; 692766.90, 
3328099.31; 692823.98, 3328093.10; 694135.90, 3328069.14; 694193.26, 
3328066.53; 694249.84, 3328056.76; 694304.75, 3328039.98; 694357.13, 
3328016.44; 694406.14, 3327986.52; 694451.01, 3327950.70; 694491.04, 
3327909.54; 694525.60, 3327863.68; 694554.14, 3327813.85; 694576.20, 
3327760.84; 694591.45, 3327705.48; 694596.44, 3327677.19; 694601.05, 
3327619.96; 694598.45, 3327562.59; 694588.68, 3327506.01; 694571.89, 
3327451.10; 694548.36, 3327398.72; 694518.44, 3327349.71; 693770.98, 
3326221.08; 693868.81, 3326161.37; 693948.72, 3326079.20; 694005.68, 
3325979.75; 694036.11, 3325869.25; 694038.12, 3325754.65; 695152.74, 
3325675.90; 695209.97, 3325680.51; 695267.33, 3325677.91; 695323.91, 
3325668.13; 695378.82, 3325651.35; 695431.20, 3325627.81; 695480.21, 
3325597.89; 695525.08, 3325562.07; 695565.11, 3325520.90; 695581.45, 
3325500.59; 695608.30, 3325493.29; 695629.02, 3325486.24; 695635.41, 
3325556.71; 695657.97, 3325639.76; 695695.70, 3325717.11; 695728.63, 
3325764.15; 695767.20, 3325806.69; 695810.79, 3325844.06; 695864.85, 
3325870.66; 695911.78, 3325893.76; 695964.54, 3325919.72; 696020.74, 
3325931.47; 696077.98, 3325936.07; 696135.33, 3325933.47; 696219.63, 
3325916.16; 696273.38, 3325895.96; 696324.17, 3325869.18; 696371.21, 
3325836.25; 696413.74, 3325797.68; 696467.67, 3325730.61; 697336.67, 
3324321.07; 697362.02, 3324269.54; 697380.72, 3324215.25; 697392.46, 
3324159.04; 697397.07, 3324101.80; 697394.46, 3324044.44; 697384.69, 
3323987.86; 697367.90, 3323932.94; 697344.37, 3323880.57; 697314.45, 
3323831.55; 697258.68, 3323766.01; 697215.08, 3323728.64; 697167.14, 
3323697.03; 697115.63, 3323671.68; 697061.33, 3323652.99; 697005.13, 
3323641.24; 696947.90, 3323636.64; 696890.54, 3323639.24; 696806.24, 
3323656.54; 696752.49, 3323676.75; 696677.66, 3323719.26; 695425.27, 
3324601.45; 694686.48, 3324259.64; 694636.66, 3324231.10; 694583.65, 
3324209.03; 694528.29, 3324193.78; 694471.46, 3324185.59; 694414.05, 
3324184.59; 694356.97, 3324190.79; 694304.17, 3324203.26; 694297.65, 
3324123.23; 694284.34, 3324067.37; 694264.14, 3324013.62; 694237.37, 
3323962.82; 694185.82, 3323893.91; 694144.65, 3323853.88; 694084.93, 
3323810.79; 694067.06, 3323750.57; 694043.52, 3323698.19; 694010.56, 
3323625.86; 693968.05, 3323551.04; 693932.23, 3323506.16; 693868.68, 
3323448.13; 693820.75, 3323416.52; 693769.23, 3323391.17; 693714.94, 
3323372.47; 693658.74, 3323360.73; 693601.51, 3323356.12; 693544.15, 
3323358.72; 693487.56, 3323368.50; 693432.65, 3323385.28; 693380.29, 
3323408.82; 693331.27, 3323438.74; 693286.40, 3323474.56; 693246.37, 
3323515.72; 693224.54, 3323543.55; 693210.13, 3323497.41; 693186.60, 
3323445.03; 693156.69, 3323396.02; 693120.86, 3323351.14; 693079.70, 
3323311.11; 693033.84, 3323276.55; 692984.02, 3323248.02; 692931.01, 
3323225.95; 692875.65, 3323210.70; 692818.82, 3323202.51; 692761.42, 
3323201.50; 692704.33, 3323207.71; 692648.47, 3323221.01;

[[Page 316]]

692608.55, 3323235.51; 692570.41, 3323187.10; 692529.25, 3323147.06; 
692458.93, 3323097.45; 692407.41, 3323072.10; 692325.20, 3323046.65; 
692268.37, 3323038.46; 692210.96, 3323037.46; 692125.74, 3323049.44; 
692070.83, 3323066.22; 692011.40, 3323093.76; 691923.51, 3323089.22; 
691866.43, 3323095.42; 691810.57, 3323108.73; 691731.01, 3323141.52; 
691682.00, 3323171.44; 691637.13, 3323207.26; 691597.10, 3323248.43; 
691562.54, 3323294.28; 691534.00, 3323344.11; 691503.44, 3323424.56; 
691491.70, 3323480.77; 691487.09, 3323538.00; 691489.70, 3323595.37; 
691507.00, 3323679.67; 691539.79, 3323759.24; 692318.77, 3325166.83; 
692288.21, 3325247.29; 692273.27, 3325332.04; 692269.31, 3326096.13; 
692212.73, 3326105.90; 692165.53, 3326127.24; 692126.83, 3326144.74; 
692092.01, 3326160.48; 692049.42, 3326179.73; 692011.56, 3326211.96; 
691971.53, 3326253.13; 691936.98, 3326298.98; 691908.44, 3326348.81; 
691872.05, 3326393.76; 691837.49, 3326439.61; 691816.22, 3326475.77; 
691767.03, 3326455.43; 691711.68, 3326440.18; 691654.84, 3326431.99; 
691626.16, 3326430.59; 691568.79, 3326433.19; 691512.21, 3326442.96; 
691457.31, 3326459.75; 691390.25, 3326491.62; 691353.93, 3326429.48; 
691298.16, 3326363.94; 691231.09, 3326310.01; 691155.11, 3326269.60; 
691072.90, 3326244.15; 689760.49, 3325296.16; 689712.55, 3325264.55; 
689661.04, 3325239.20; 689606.75, 3325220.50; 689550.54, 3325208.76; 
689493.31, 3325204.15; 689407.51, 3325210.75; 689324.46, 3325233.31; 
689247.12, 3325271.04; 689157.55, 3325342.54; 689103.62, 3325409.61; 
689063.22, 3325485.59; 689044.52, 3325539.88; 689032.78, 3325596.09; 
689028.17, 3325653.33; 689034.77, 3325739.13; 689233.31, 3327105.96; 
689637.00, 3328600.37; 689861.46, 3329635.49; 689894.25, 3329715.06; 
689924.16, 3329764.07; 689959.98, 3329808.95; 690001.15, 3329848.98; 
690047.00, 3329883.54; 690096.82, 3329912.08; 690149.83, 3329934.15; 
690205.19, 3329949.40; 690262.02, 3329957.59; 690319.43, 3329958.59; 
690404.65, 3329946.62; 690457.17, 3329926.88; 690511.93, 3329906.30; 
690560.94, 3329876.39; 690626.48, 3329820.61; 690663.84, 3329777.02; 
690695.45, 3329729.08; 690720.81, 3329677.56; 690739.50, 3329623.27; 
690751.25, 3329567.06; 690755.85, 3329509.83; 690749.26, 3329424.02; 
690735.95, 3329368.16; 690529.29, 3328448.39; 690524.80, 3328388.90; 
690511.49, 3328333.04.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-1, Subunit G is provided at 
paragraph (6)(x)(B) of this entry.
    (viii) Unit FFS-1, Subunit H--Liberty County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Sumatra and Owens Bridge, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 705290.30, 3325041.96; 706646.10, 3324321.38; 706503.21, 
3324314.39; 704109.35, 3324557.65; 703953.05, 3324627.90; 703833.59, 
3324750.75; 703782.98, 3324853.59; 703758.14, 3324994.48; 703787.30, 
3325163.35; 703857.96, 3325287.74; 703940.13, 3325367.66; 704025.87, 
3325418.40; 704016.83, 3325569.76; 704034.13, 3325654.07; 704096.85, 
3325782.66; 704196.22, 3325885.57; 704322.53, 3325952.74; 704463.41, 
3325977.58; 704605.08, 3325957.68; 706601.96, 3325223.59; 706713.46, 
3325197.03; 706859.72, 3325107.75; 706949.37, 3324996.25; 707005.16, 
3324834.22; 707007.16, 3324719.61; 706989.86, 3324635.31; 706942.88, 
3324530.75; 706871.37, 3324441.17; 706796.16, 3324398.25; 706728.31, 
3324346.84; 706646.10, 3324321.38.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-1, Subunit H is provided at 
paragraph (6)(x)(B) of this entry.
    (ix) Unit FFS-1, Subunit I--Liberty County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Owens Bridge, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 712262.72, 3326181.63; 712356.33, 3325733.94; 712270.80, 
3325724.34; 712213.44, 3325726.95; 712129.13, 3325744.25; 712101.94, 
3325753.51; 712024.58, 3325791.24; 711977.54, 3325824.17; 711955.67, 
3325842.79; 711915.63, 3325883.96; 711881.07, 3325929.82; 711852.53, 
3325979.66; 711830.47, 3326032.67; 711815.21, 3326088.04; 711807.02, 
3326144.87; 711805.62, 3326173.57; 711808.22, 3326230.94; 711817.99, 
3326287.52; 711834.78, 3326342.44; 711858.32, 3326394.82; 711888.24, 
3326443.84; 711905.44, 3326466.84; 711944.01, 3326509.39; 711965.23, 
3326528.76; 711987.61, 3326546.76; 712011.09, 3326563.32; 712060.92, 
3326591.86; 712087.08, 3326603.73; 712113.93, 3326613.93; 712169.29, 
3326629.18; 712226.13, 3326637.37; 712254.82, 3326638.78; 712312.18, 
3326636.17; 712368.77, 3326626.40; 712423.68, 3326609.61; 712476.06, 
3326586.07; 712525.08, 3326556.15; 712590.62, 3326500.37; 712644.55, 
3326433.30; 712684.96, 3326357.30; 712703.65, 3326303.01; 712715.40, 
3326246.79; 712720.00, 3326189.55; 712717.40, 3326132.18; 712707.63, 
3326075.60; 712700.10, 3326047.87; 712674.07, 3325977.60; 712653.11, 
3325943.32; 712601.56, 3325874.40; 712560.39, 3325834.36; 712538.01, 
3325816.36; 712514.54, 3325799.80; 712464.71, 3325771.26; 712411.69, 
3325749.19; 712356.33, 3325733.94.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-1, Subunit I is provided at 
paragraph (6)(x)(B) of this entry.
    (x) Unit FFS-1, Subunit J--Franklin County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Fort Gadsen, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 696448.29, 3312586.05; 697417.53, 3311729.38; 697304.09, 
3311713.04; 697218.29, 3311719.64; 697135.24, 3311742.21; 697057.90, 
3311779.94; 695449.24, 3312550.89; 695396.87, 3312574.43; 695324.87, 
3312621.56; 695282.33, 3312660.13; 695228.41, 3312727.20; 695188.01, 
3312803.20; 695162.57, 3312885.41; 695152.98, 3312970.93; 695159.58, 
3313056.74; 695182.15, 3313139.79; 695219.88, 3313217.14; 695271.43, 
3313286.05; 695335.05, 3313350.76; 695405.38, 3313400.37; 695456.90, 
3313425.72; 695511.18, 3313444.41; 695595.94, 3313459.35; 695710.43, 
3313454.14; 695820.03, 3313420.63; 697427.52, 3312615.68; 697509.40, 
3312574.69; 697581.41, 3312527.56; 697643.31, 3312467.77; 697706.40, 
3312372.08;

[[Page 317]]

697743.71, 3312263.71; 697752.89, 3312149.46; 697733.38, 3312036.51; 
697686.39, 3311931.97; 697653.45, 3311884.93; 697593.67, 3311823.03; 
697523.35, 3311773.42; 697417.53, 3311729.38.
    (B) Note: Map of Unit FFS-1 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.001
    

[[Page 318]]


    (xi) Unit FFS-3, Subunit A--Wakulla County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps St. Marks and St. Marks NE, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 775789.22, 3340665.92; 778066.61, 3340484.87; 777670.88, 
3338778.31; 777533.15, 3338184.41; 777525.56, 3338156.70; 777516.42, 
3338129.40; 777505.42, 3338102.83; 777492.86, 3338076.99; 777478.74, 
3338052.00; 777471.13, 3338040.27; 777482.70, 3338036.35; 777509.30, 
3338025.48; 777535.17, 3338012.93; 777560.12, 3337998.80; 777584.24, 
3337982.99; 777607.24, 3337965.82; 777629.12, 3337947.29; 777649.88, 
3337927.29; 777669.21, 3337906.14; 777687.24, 3337883.74; 777703.84, 
3337860.31; 777714.90, 3337842.39; 777724.48, 3337852.29; 777745.69, 
3337871.69; 777768.09, 3337889.78; 777791.49, 3337906.35; 777815.99, 
3337921.39; 777841.30, 3337934.91; 777867.51, 3337946.89; 777894.35, 
3337957.11; 777921.81, 3337965.57; 777949.70, 3337972.38; 777978.02, 
3337977.42; 777990.29, 3337977.52; 778007.58, 3337977.78; 778035.40, 
3337978.19; 778064.31, 3337978.62; 778092.26, 3337979.03; 778121.08, 
3337975.61; 778149.29, 3337969.88; 778177.06, 3337962.38; 778204.20, 
3337953.08; 778230.80, 3337942.21; 778256.67, 3337929.67; 778281.62, 
3337915.43; 778305.74, 3337899.73; 778328.75, 3337882.56; 778350.72, 
3337863.93; 778371.38, 3337844.03; 778390.82, 3337822.89; 778408.84, 
3337800.49; 778425.45, 3337776.95; 778440.53, 3337752.59; 778454.00, 
3337727.19; 778465.95, 3337700.97; 778476.17, 3337674.16; 778484.68, 
3337646.75; 778491.46, 3337618.85; 778496.52, 3337590.46; 778499.75, 
3337561.92; 778501.16, 3337533.22; 778500.82, 3337504.47; 778498.66, 
3337475.90; 778494.65, 3337447.40; 778488.90, 3337419.29; 778481.41, 
3337391.48; 778472.17, 3337364.28; 778461.27, 3337337.71; 778448.71, 
3337311.87; 778434.49, 3337286.88; 778418.81, 3337262.74; 778401.64, 
3337239.78; 778383.01, 3337217.89; 778363.09, 3337197.19; 778341.88, 
3337177.80; 778319.48, 3337159.70; 778296.08, 3337143.13; 778271.58, 
3337128.08; 778246.27, 3337114.46; 778220.05, 3337102.59; 778193.21, 
3337092.37; 778165.75, 3337083.80; 778137.85, 3337077.10; 778109.53, 
3337072.05; 778080.97, 3337068.78; 778052.27, 3337067.39; 778023.61, 
3337067.77; 777994.91, 3337069.93; 777966.46, 3337073.87; 777938.25, 
3337079.59; 777910.58, 3337087.10; 777883.34, 3337096.29; 777856.73, 
3337107.26; 777830.96, 3337119.82; 777805.91, 3337133.94; 777781.88, 
3337149.75; 777758.79, 3337166.92; 777736.91, 3337185.45; 777716.25, 
3337205.45; 777696.81, 3337226.60; 777678.79, 3337249.00; 777662.19, 
3337272.43; 777651.12, 3337290.35; 777641.54, 3337280.46; 777620.33, 
3337261.06; 777598.03, 3337242.96; 777574.53, 3337226.39; 777550.03, 
3337211.35; 777524.72, 3337197.84; 777498.59, 3337185.86; 777471.75, 
3337175.64; 777444.29, 3337167.07; 777416.30, 3337160.37; 777410.25, 
3337159.33; 777411.85, 3337145.51; 777413.25, 3337116.80; 777412.92, 
3337088.06; 777410.75, 3337059.38; 777406.74, 3337030.88; 777400.99, 
3337002.77; 777393.49, 3336975.07; 777384.25, 3336947.76; 777373.35, 
3336921.19; 777360.79, 3336895.35; 777346.57, 3336870.36; 777330.87, 
3336846.33; 777313.71, 3336823.27; 777295.07, 3336801.38; 777275.15, 
3336780.69; 777253.94, 3336761.29; 777231.63, 3336743.20; 777208.13, 
3336726.63; 777183.73, 3336711.59; 777158.32, 3336698.08; 777132.19, 
3336686.10; 777105.35, 3336675.88; 777077.88, 3336667.42; 777049.99, 
3336660.62; 777021.67, 3336655.58; 776993.11, 3336652.30; 776964.40, 
3336650.92; 776935.65, 3336651.30; 776907.05, 3336653.46; 776878.50, 
3336657.40; 776850.38, 3336663.13; 776822.61, 3336670.64; 776795.47, 
3336679.83; 776768.87, 3336690.81; 776742.99, 3336703.36; 776718.05, 
3336717.49; 776693.93, 3336733.19; 776670.93, 3336750.37; 776648.95, 
3336769.01; 776628.29, 3336788.90; 776608.85, 3336810.16; 776590.83, 
3336832.56; 776574.23, 3336856.00; 776570.11, 3336862.66; 776553.01, 
3336856.13; 776525.55, 3336847.67; 776497.65, 3336840.87; 776469.33, 
3336835.83; 776440.77, 3336832.56; 776412.07, 3336831.17; 776383.32, 
3336831.56; 776354.72, 3336833.72; 776326.26, 3336837.66; 776298.05, 
3336843.39; 776270.38, 3336850.90; 776243.14, 3336860.09; 776216.54, 
3336871.08; 776190.67, 3336883.63; 776165.72, 3336897.76; 776141.60, 
3336913.46; 776118.60, 3336930.63; 776096.72, 3336949.28; 776075.97, 
3336969.17; 776056.63, 3336990.43; 776038.52, 3337012.83; 776021.92, 
3337036.27; 776006.84, 3337060.74; 775993.38, 3337086.03; 775981.43, 
3337112.25; 775971.21, 3337139.07; 775962.71, 3337166.48; 775955.93, 
3337194.49; 775950.88, 3337222.77; 775947.66, 3337251.31; 775946.17, 
3337280.01; 775946.60, 3337308.76; 775948.78, 3337337.32; 775952.69, 
3337365.83; 775958.44, 3337394.04; 775965.94, 3337421.74; 775975.19, 
3337448.94; 775986.10, 3337475.51; 775998.66, 3337501.34; 776012.79, 
3337526.33; 776028.58, 3337550.47; 776045.74, 3337573.53; 776064.28, 
3337595.41; 776084.30, 3337616.11; 776105.42, 3337635.50; 776127.82, 
3337653.48; 776151.32, 3337670.16; 776175.72, 3337685.20; 776201.13, 
3337698.71; 776227.26, 3337710.57; 776244.06, 3337717.09; 776242.57, 
3337718.94; 776232.10, 3337713.35; 776205.89, 3337701.38; 776179.04, 
3337691.16; 776151.58, 3337682.70; 776123.69, 3337675.90; 776095.37, 
3337670.86; 776066.81, 3337667.59; 776038.11, 3337666.20; 776009.36, 
3337666.59; 775980.76, 3337668.76; 775952.31, 3337672.70; 775924.10, 
3337678.43; 775896.43, 3337685.94; 775869.20, 3337695.13; 775842.60, 
3337706.12; 775816.73, 3337718.67; 775791.78, 3337732.80; 775767.66, 
3337748.50; 775744.67, 3337765.68; 775722.70, 3337784.32; 775702.04, 
3337804.22; 775682.61, 3337825.48; 775664.59, 3337847.77; 775648.00, 
3337871.32; 775632.92, 3337895.68; 775619.36, 3337921.08; 775607.52, 
3337947.30; 775597.30, 3337974.11; 775588.70, 3338001.52; 775581.93, 
3338029.42; 775576.97, 3338057.81; 775573.65, 3338086.36; 775572.26, 
3338115.06; 775572.59, 3338143.80; 775574.77, 3338172.37; 775578.78, 
3338200.87; 775584.54, 3338228.98; 775592.03, 3338256.79; 775601.19, 
3338283.98; 775612.19, 3338310.55; 775624.75, 3338336.39; 775638.88, 
3338361.37; 775654.57, 3338385.51; 775671.73, 3338408.46; 775690.37, 
3338430.46; 775710.29, 3338451.15;

[[Page 319]]

775731.50, 3338470.54; 775753.90, 3338488.52; 775777.31, 3338505.09; 
775801.80, 3338520.24; 775827.21, 3338533.75; 775853.33, 3338545.61; 
775880.17, 3338555.94; 775907.63, 3338564.39; 775935.52, 3338571.20; 
775963.84, 3338576.23; 775992.39, 3338579.50; 776021.09, 3338580.89; 
776049.84, 3338580.50; 776078.53, 3338578.34; 776106.98, 3338574.40; 
776135.09, 3338568.67; 776162.85, 3338561.16; 776190.08, 3338551.97; 
776216.69, 3338540.99; 776242.46, 3338528.43; 776267.50, 3338514.30; 
776291.52, 3338498.60; 776314.61, 3338481.43; 776336.49, 3338462.78; 
776357.24, 3338442.89; 776376.58, 3338421.63; 776392.70, 3338401.62; 
776403.17, 3338407.21; 776429.29, 3338419.08; 776456.13, 3338429.40; 
776483.59, 3338437.86; 776511.57, 3338444.67; 776539.80, 3338449.71; 
776568.35, 3338452.98; 776597.05, 3338454.37; 776625.80, 3338453.98; 
776654.49, 3338451.82; 776660.01, 3338451.07; 776670.54, 3338476.85; 
776827.26, 3339164.36; 777053.70, 3340157.85; 775510.45, 3340235.09; 
775168.35, 3339961.10; 775144.54, 3339940.36; 775091.43, 3339897.57; 
774949.30, 3339783.09; 774965.89, 3339759.65; 774980.97, 3339735.17; 
774994.43, 3339709.77; 775006.36, 3339683.66; 775016.58, 3339656.74; 
775025.08, 3339629.33; 775031.95, 3339601.43; 775036.90, 3339573.15; 
775039.60, 3339549.86; 775040.22, 3339544.61; 775041.61, 3339515.91; 
775041.27, 3339487.16; 775041.13, 3339484.94; 775057.54, 3339480.47; 
775084.67, 3339471.27; 775111.27, 3339460.29; 775137.13, 3339447.74; 
775162.17, 3339433.61; 775186.18, 3339417.90; 775209.27, 3339400.73; 
775231.15, 3339382.08; 775251.80, 3339362.18; 775271.23, 3339340.93; 
775289.24, 3339318.63; 775305.83, 3339295.08; 775321.00, 3339270.72; 
775334.47, 3339245.32; 775346.40, 3339219.21; 775356.62, 3339192.29; 
775365.12, 3339164.87; 775371.89, 3339136.97; 775376.94, 3339108.70; 
775380.17, 3339080.04; 775381.66, 3339051.34; 775381.32, 3339022.71; 
775379.14, 3338994.03; 775375.13, 3338965.53; 775369.38, 3338937.42; 
775361.88, 3338909.61; 775352.63, 3338882.42; 775341.73, 3338855.85; 
775329.16, 3338830.02; 775315.04, 3338805.03; 775299.35, 3338780.89; 
775282.09, 3338757.94; 775263.54, 3338735.95; 775243.62, 3338715.26; 
775222.41, 3338695.86; 775200.01, 3338677.88; 775176.51, 3338661.32; 
775152.11, 3338646.17; 775126.70, 3338632.67; 775100.58, 3338620.80; 
775073.74, 3338610.48; 775046.28, 3338602.03; 775018.39, 3338595.22; 
774990.07, 3338590.19; 774961.52, 3338586.92; 774932.82, 3338585.54; 
774904.08, 3338585.82; 774875.38, 3338588.09; 774846.93, 3338592.04; 
774818.83, 3338597.77; 774791.06, 3338605.29; 774763.83, 3338614.48; 
774737.24, 3338625.35; 774711.37, 3338638.02; 774686.43, 3338652.15; 
774662.31, 3338667.86; 774639.71, 3338684.71; 774638.37, 3338684.57; 
774609.67, 3338683.18; 774582.28, 3338683.50; 774581.67, 3338680.60; 
774574.17, 3338652.89; 774564.92, 3338625.59; 774554.01, 3338599.02; 
774541.45, 3338573.19; 774527.32, 3338548.21; 774511.63, 3338524.18; 
774494.37, 3338501.12; 774475.82, 3338479.24; 774455.89, 3338458.55; 
774434.69, 3338439.05; 774412.28, 3338421.07; 774388.88, 3338404.51; 
774364.38, 3338389.36; 774338.97, 3338375.86; 774312.85, 3338364.00; 
774286.01, 3338353.68; 774258.55, 3338345.22; 774230.66, 3338338.43; 
774202.34, 3338333.39; 774173.78, 3338330.13; 774145.08, 3338328.74; 
774116.34, 3338329.03; 774087.74, 3338331.20; 774059.19, 3338335.25; 
774031.09, 3338340.99; 774003.32, 3338348.51; 773976.09, 3338357.70; 
773949.59, 3338368.58; 773923.73, 3338381.14; 773898.69, 3338395.38; 
773874.67, 3338411.09; 773851.58, 3338428.26; 773829.72, 3338446.80; 
773808.97, 3338466.81; 773789.64, 3338487.96; 773771.53, 3338510.37; 
773754.94, 3338533.81; 773739.86, 3338558.28; 773726.41, 3338583.58; 
773714.47, 3338609.79; 773704.26, 3338636.61; 773695.67, 3338664.02; 
773688.90, 3338692.03; 773683.85, 3338720.31; 773680.63, 3338748.86; 
773679.24, 3338777.56; 773679.59, 3338806.30; 773681.77, 3338834.98; 
773685.69, 3338863.37; 773691.44, 3338891.58; 773698.95, 3338919.28; 
773708.20, 3338946.47; 773719.11, 3338973.04; 773731.67, 3338998.98; 
773745.80, 3339023.97; 773761.50, 3339047.99; 773778.76, 3339071.05; 
773797.31, 3339092.93; 773817.23, 3339113.62; 773838.44, 3339133.01; 
773860.84, 3339151.10; 773884.34, 3339167.66; 773908.74, 3339182.80; 
773934.15, 3339196.31; 773960.27, 3339208.16; 773987.11, 3339218.38; 
774014.57, 3339226.94; 774042.46, 3339233.74; 774070.77, 3339238.77; 
774099.33, 3339242.04; 774128.03, 3339243.42; 774155.42, 3339242.99; 
774156.02, 3339246.00; 774163.52, 3339273.71; 774172.77, 3339301.01; 
774174.22, 3339304.59; 774174.02, 3339304.92; 774162.19, 3339331.03; 
774151.88, 3339357.85; 774143.38, 3339385.37; 774136.61, 3339413.27; 
774131.56, 3339441.55; 774128.34, 3339470.09; 774126.85, 3339498.79; 
774127.29, 3339527.54; 774129.37, 3339556.21; 774133.39, 3339584.61; 
774139.14, 3339612.82; 774146.65, 3339640.52; 774150.33, 3339651.49; 
774130.27, 3339662.97; 774106.16, 3339678.68; 774083.17, 3339695.85; 
774061.21, 3339714.39; 774040.56, 3339734.40; 774021.14, 3339755.55; 
774003.13, 3339777.95; 773986.54, 3339801.39; 773971.46, 3339825.87; 
773957.91, 3339851.27; 773945.98, 3339877.38; 773935.76, 3339904.19; 
773927.27, 3339931.72; 773926.18, 3339936.26; 773926.14, 3339936.25; 
773920.50, 3339959.62; 773915.45, 3339987.90; 773912.23, 3340016.44; 
773910.75, 3340045.14; 773910.93, 3340060.90; 773909.63, 3340058.87; 
773892.47, 3340035.81; 773873.92, 3340013.93; 773853.91, 3339993.24; 
773832.70, 3339973.85; 773810.39, 3339955.76; 773786.90, 3339939.20; 
773777.78, 3339933.61; 773777.91, 3339933.62; 773762.40, 3339924.06; 
773737.09, 3339910.55; 773710.97, 3339898.70; 773684.04, 3339888.48; 
773656.68, 3339879.92; 773628.70, 3339873.12; 773600.38, 3339868.09; 
773571.83, 3339864.83; 773543.13, 3339863.45; 773514.39, 3339863.73; 
773485.80, 3339865.90; 773476.45, 3339867.03; 773476.45, 3339867.18; 
773457.35, 3339869.96; 773429.15, 3339875.70; 773401.39, 3339883.21; 
773374.17, 3339892.41; 773347.58, 3339903.29; 773321.81, 3339915.85; 
773296.78, 3339930.09; 773272.67, 3339945.80; 773249.68, 3339962.98; 
773227.82, 3339981.52; 773207.07, 3340001.53; 773187.65, 3340022.68; 
773169.64, 3340045.08; 773153.05, 3340068.52; 773137.98, 3340093.00; 
773124.43, 3340118.29;

[[Page 320]]

773112.50, 3340144.51; 773102.29, 3340171.33; 773093.80, 3340198.74; 
773086.93, 3340226.64; 773081.99, 3340255.03; 773078.67, 3340283.58; 
773077.28, 3340312.28; 773077.63, 3340341.02; 773079.81, 3340369.59; 
773083.82, 3340398.09; 773089.48, 3340426.30; 773096.99, 3340454.00; 
773106.24, 3340481.19; 773117.15, 3340507.76; 773129.71, 3340533.59; 
773143.94, 3340558.68; 773159.63, 3340582.71; 773176.80, 3340605.77; 
773195.44, 3340627.64; 773215.36, 3340648.33; 773236.57, 3340667.72; 
773240.54, 3340670.93; 774190.69, 3341600.54; 774207.73, 3341623.69; 
774226.19, 3341645.71; 774245.99, 3341666.54; 774267.06, 3341686.08; 
774289.32, 3341704.26; 774312.67, 3341721.00; 774337.03, 3341736.25; 
774362.30, 3341749.94; 774388.38, 3341762.01; 774415.16, 3341772.42; 
774442.55, 3341781.13; 774470.43, 3341788.10; 774498.69, 3341793.31; 
774527.22, 3341796.73; 774555.91, 3341798.36; 774584.65, 3341798.18; 
774613.32, 3341796.20; 774641.80, 3341792.42; 774670.00, 3341786.86; 
774697.79, 3341779.54; 774725.06, 3341770.48; 774751.71, 3341759.74; 
774777.64, 3341747.34; 774802.74, 3341733.34; 774826.90, 3341717.79; 
774850.05, 3341700.75; 774872.07, 3341682.30; 774892.90, 3341662.49; 
774912.44, 3341641.42; 775378.58, 3341173.26; 775544.57, 3341006.80; 
777609.30, 3341044.76; 777638.03, 3341044.58; 777666.70, 3341042.60; 
777680.70, 3341040.35; 777695.19, 3341038.82; 777723.39, 3341033.26; 
777751.18, 3341025.93; 777778.45, 3341016.88; 777805.10, 3341006.14; 
777831.03, 3340993.74; 777856.13, 3340979.74; 777880.29, 3340964.19; 
777903.44, 3340947.15; 777925.47, 3340928.69; 777946.29, 3340908.89; 
777965.83, 3340887.82; 777984.01, 3340865.56; 778000.76, 3340842.21; 
778016.00, 3340817.85; 778029.69, 3340792.58; 778041.76, 3340766.50; 
778052.18, 3340739.71; 778060.89, 3340712.33; 778067.86, 3340684.45; 
778073.07, 3340656.19; 778076.49, 3340627.65; 778078.11, 3340598.96; 
778077.93, 3340570.22; 778075.95, 3340541.55; 778072.17, 3340513.07; 
778066.61, 3340484.87.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-3, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (6)(xiii)(B) of this entry.
    (xii) Unit FFS-3, Subunit B--Wakulla and Jefferson Counties, 
Florida. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle map St. Marks NE, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 781813.02, 3338564.97; 780854.75, 3336748.56; 780826.19, 
3336745.28; 780797.49, 3336743.88; 780768.74, 3336744.25; 780751.83, 
3336745.48; 780740.73, 3336730.55; 780722.10, 3336708.66; 780702.18, 
3336687.96; 780680.97, 3336668.56; 780658.57, 3336650.57; 780635.18, 
3336633.88; 780610.68, 3336618.83; 780585.37, 3336605.31; 780559.15, 
3336593.44; 780532.31, 3336583.21; 780504.85, 3336574.63; 780476.95, 
3336567.82; 780448.63, 3336562.88; 780420.07, 3336559.60; 780391.36, 
3336558.20; 780362.71, 3336558.58; 780334.01, 3336560.73; 780305.55, 
3336564.66; 780277.43, 3336570.38; 780249.66, 3336577.88; 780222.42, 
3336587.17; 780195.81, 3336598.03; 780170.02, 3336610.69; 780144.97, 
3336624.81; 780120.94, 3336640.51; 780097.94, 3336657.67; 780075.95, 
3336676.31; 780055.29, 3336696.20; 780035.94, 3336717.45; 780017.82, 
3336739.85; 780001.31, 3336763.28; 779986.22, 3336787.75; 779972.64, 
3336813.14; 779960.79, 3336839.25; 779950.56, 3336866.06; 779941.95, 
3336893.58; 779935.16, 3336921.48; 779930.20, 3336949.76; 779926.96, 
3336978.30; 779925.49, 3337005.78; 779913.72, 3337013.47; 779890.72, 
3337030.63; 779868.74, 3337049.27; 779848.07, 3337069.16; 779828.63, 
3337090.41; 779810.60, 3337112.81; 779794.09, 3337136.24; 779779.00, 
3337160.71; 779765.43, 3337186.11; 779753.58, 3337212.21; 779743.35, 
3337239.02; 779734.74, 3337266.54; 779727.96, 3337294.44; 779722.99, 
3337322.72; 779719.76, 3337351.26; 779718.26, 3337379.96; 779718.68, 
3337408.71; 779720.84, 3337437.39; 779724.75, 3337465.89; 779730.49, 
3337494.00; 779738.08, 3337521.71; 779747.22, 3337548.90; 779758.21, 
3337575.59; 779770.77, 3337601.43; 779784.89, 3337626.42; 779800.67, 
3337650.46; 779817.83, 3337673.53; 779836.46, 3337695.42; 779856.38, 
3337716.12; 779877.58, 3337735.52; 779899.88, 3337753.51; 779923.38, 
3337770.08; 779947.87, 3337785.24; 779973.18, 3337798.76; 779999.40, 
3337810.63; 780026.23, 3337820.86; 780046.61, 3337827.26; 780031.54, 
3337835.75; 780007.52, 3337851.45; 779984.42, 3337868.61; 779962.53, 
3337887.25; 779941.87, 3337907.14; 779922.43, 3337928.39; 779904.40, 
3337950.79; 779887.80, 3337974.22; 779872.71, 3337998.69; 779859.23, 
3338024.09; 779859.02, 3338024.55; 779847.29, 3338050.19; 779837.06, 
3338077.00; 779828.54, 3338104.52; 779821.76, 3338132.42; 779816.70, 
3338160.70; 779813.46, 3338189.24; 779812.06, 3338217.94; 779812.38, 
3338246.69; 779814.55, 3338275.37; 779818.54, 3338303.87; 779824.29, 
3338331.98; 779831.78, 3338359.69; 779841.02, 3338386.88; 779851.91, 
3338413.57; 779864.56, 3338439.41; 779878.68, 3338464.40; 779894.36, 
3338488.43; 779911.61, 3338511.51; 779930.15, 3338533.40; 779950.16, 
3338554.10; 779971.36, 3338573.50; 779993.66, 3338591.49; 780017.15, 
3338608.07; 780041.65, 3338623.23; 780066.95, 3338636.74; 780093.17, 
3338648.62; 780120.00, 3338658.84; 780147.46, 3338667.42; 780175.35, 
3338674.13; 780203.67, 3338679.18; 780232.22, 3338682.46; 780260.92, 
3338683.85; 780289.67, 3338683.48; 780318.27, 3338681.32; 781659.28, 
3338623.11; 783371.06, 3341075.49; 783388.08, 3341098.65; 783406.52, 
3341120.69; 783426.31, 3341141.53; 783447.37, 3341161.09; 783469.61, 
3341179.28; 783492.96, 3341196.05; 783517.31, 3341211.31; 783542.57, 
3341225.02; 783568.64, 3341237.11; 783595.42, 3341247.54; 783622.80, 
3341256.27; 783650.68, 3341263.26; 783678.94, 3341268.49; 783707.47, 
3341271.93; 783736.16, 3341273.58; 783764.90, 3341273.42; 783793.57, 
3341271.45; 783822.06, 3341267.69; 783850.26, 3341262.15; 783878.06, 
3341254.85; 783905.34, 3341245.82; 783932.00, 3341235.09; 783957.94, 
3341222.71; 783983.05, 3341208.72; 784007.23, 3341193.19; 784030.38, 
3341176.17; 784052.42, 3341157.73; 784073.27, 3341137.94; 784092.82, 
3341116.88; 784111.02, 3341094.63; 784127.78, 3341071.29; 784143.04, 
3341046.94; 784156.75, 3341021.68; 784168.84, 3340995.61;

[[Page 321]]

784179.27, 3340968.83; 784188.00, 3340941.45; 784194.99, 3340913.57; 
784200.22, 3340885.31; 784203.67, 3340856.78; 784205.31, 3340828.09; 
784205.15, 3340799.35; 784203.19, 3340770.67; 784199.43, 3340742.18; 
784193.88, 3340713.98; 784186.58, 3340686.19; 784177.55, 3340658.90; 
784166.82, 3340632.24; 784154.44, 3340606.31; 784140.46, 3340581.20; 
784124.92, 3340557.02; 782277.60, 3337914.11; 782294.12, 3337890.57; 
782309.21, 3337866.10; 782322.78, 3337840.82; 782334.64, 3337814.60; 
782344.88, 3337787.79; 782353.40, 3337760.27; 782360.19, 3337732.38; 
782365.26, 3337704.10; 782368.50, 3337675.56; 782369.91, 3337646.86; 
782369.59, 3337618.11; 782367.34, 3337589.43; 782363.44, 3337561.03; 
782357.70, 3337532.81; 782350.22, 3337505.10; 782340.98, 3337477.90; 
782330.00, 3337451.33; 782317.45, 3337425.48; 782303.24, 3337400.49; 
782287.56, 3337376.34; 782270.41, 3337353.37; 782251.78, 3337331.48; 
782231.86, 3337310.77; 782210.66, 3337291.37; 782188.27, 3337273.26; 
782164.78, 3337256.68; 782140.38, 3337241.63; 782114.97, 3337228.11; 
781683.92, 3337059.84; 780938.43, 3336768.89; 780910.97, 3336760.31; 
780883.08, 3336753.50; 780854.75, 3336748.56.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-3, Subunit B is located at 
paragraph (6)(xiii)(B) of this entry.
    (xiii) Unit FFS-3, Subunit C--Jefferson County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Cody, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 784571.80, 3351736.64; 784608.07, 3351280.60; 784579.36, 
3351279.22; 784554.83, 3351279.59; 784550.62, 3351279.65; 784521.97, 
3351281.88; 784493.51, 3351285.91; 784465.37, 3351291.71; 784437.64, 
3351299.27; 784410.44, 3351308.56; 784383.88, 3351319.54; 784358.06, 
3351332.16; 784333.09, 3351346.38; 784309.05, 3351362.14; 784286.06, 
3351379.37; 784264.19, 3351398.02; 784243.53, 3351418.00; 784224.17, 
3351439.25; 784206.19, 3351461.66; 784189.64, 3351485.16; 784174.61, 
3351509.65; 784161.14, 3351535.04; 784149.29, 3351561.22; 784139.11, 
3351588.10; 784130.64, 3351615.56; 784123.90, 3351643.50; 784118.94, 
3351671.81; 784115.76, 3351700.37; 784114.38, 3351729.08; 784114.81, 
3351757.81; 784117.04, 3351786.47; 784121.07, 3351814.92; 784126.87, 
3351843.07; 784134.43, 3351870.80; 784143.72, 3351897.99; 784154.70, 
3351924.55; 784167.32, 3351950.37; 784181.54, 3351975.35; 784197.30, 
3351999.38; 784214.53, 3352022.38; 784233.18, 3352044.25; 784253.16, 
3352064.90; 784274.40, 3352084.26; 784296.82, 3352102.25; 784320.32, 
3352118.79; 784344.81, 3352133.83; 784370.20, 3352147.30; 784396.38, 
3352159.15; 784423.26, 3352169.33; 784450.72, 3352177.80; 784478.66, 
3352184.53; 784506.97, 3352189.50; 784535.53, 3352192.68; 784558.55, 
3352193.78; 784564.24, 3352194.05; 784592.97, 3352193.63; 784621.63, 
3352191.40; 784650.08, 3352187.37; 784678.23, 3352181.56; 784705.96, 
3352174.00; 784733.15, 3352164.72; 784759.71, 3352153.74; 784785.53, 
3352141.12; 784810.51, 3352126.90; 784834.54, 3352111.14; 784857.54, 
3352093.90; 784879.41, 3352075.26; 784900.06, 3352055.27; 784919.42, 
3352034.03; 784937.41, 3352011.62; 784953.96, 3351988.12; 784968.99, 
3351963.63; 784982.46, 3351938.24; 784994.31, 3351912.06; 785004.49, 
3351885.18; 785012.96, 3351857.72; 785019.70, 3351829.78; 785024.66, 
3351801.47; 785027.84, 3351772.91; 785029.21, 3351744.20; 785028.79, 
3351715.46; 785026.56, 3351686.81; 785022.53, 3351658.36; 785016.72, 
3351630.21; 785009.16, 3351602.48; 784999.88, 3351575.28; 784988.90, 
3351548.72; 784976.28, 3351522.90; 784962.06, 3351497.93; 784946.30, 
3351473.89; 784929.06, 3351450.90; 784910.42, 3351429.03; 784890.43, 
3351408.37; 784869.19, 3351389.01; 784846.78, 3351371.03; 784823.28, 
3351354.48; 784798.79, 3351339.44; 784773.40, 3351325.98; 784747.21, 
3351314.13; 784720.34, 3351303.95; 784692.88, 3351295.47; 784664.94, 
3351288.74; 784636.63, 3351283.78; 784608.07, 3351280.60.
    (B) Note: Map of Unit FFS-3 follows:

[[Page 322]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.002

    (xiv) Unit FFS-4, Subunit A--Baker County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Big Gum Swamp and Sanderson North, 
Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 17N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 367084.38, 3347273.00; 367857.36, 3347865.13; 367885.57, 
3347850.05; 367910.67, 3347848.97;

[[Page 323]]

367939.21, 3347845.97; 367967.54, 3347841.08; 367995.46, 3347834.54; 
368022.88, 3347826.11; 368076.03, 3347804.41; 368126.01, 3347776.10; 
368149.58, 3347759.63; 368172.08, 3347741.85; 368213.36, 3347702.00; 
368249.49, 3347657.34; 368279.60, 3347608.54; 368303.41, 3347556.26; 
368320.55, 3347501.41; 368326.47, 3347473.30; 368330.56, 3347444.98; 
368333.52, 3347387.64; 368329.18, 3347330.38; 368324.31, 3347302.07; 
368309.40, 3347246.60; 368287.59, 3347193.55; 368274.29, 3347168.10; 
368242.92, 3347120.04; 368205.82, 3347076.15; 368163.49, 3347037.42; 
368116.61, 3347004.29; 368066.05, 3346977.19; 368012.39, 3346956.67; 
367956.61, 3346943.15; 366301.34, 3346652.76; 366243.94, 3346653.45; 
366187.08, 3346661.34; 366131.66, 3346676.29; 366078.54, 3346698.07; 
366028.58, 3346726.33; 365982.55, 3346760.63; 365941.18, 3346800.43; 
365889.28, 3346869.05; 365862.23, 3346919.69; 365841.75, 3346973.32; 
365828.15, 3347029.09; 365821.64, 3347086.12; 365822.34, 3347143.52; 
365830.23, 3347200.39; 365845.18, 3347255.81; 365866.95, 3347308.92; 
365895.22, 3347358.89; 365948.77, 3347426.23; 365991.09, 3347465.01; 
366037.94, 3347498.19; 366088.58, 3347525.23; 366142.20, 3347545.72; 
367577.52, 3347903.88; 367634.57, 3347910.39; 367692.00, 3347909.70; 
367748.88, 3347901.80; 367804.22, 3347886.84; 367857.36, 3347865.13.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-3, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (6)(xv)(B) of this entry.
    (xv) Unit FFS-4, Subunit B: Baker County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Sanderson North, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 17N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 372674.15, 3352411.84; 372686.30, 3351954.90; 372657.58, 
3351955.03; 372628.93, 3351956.98; 372600.46, 3351960.71; 372572.28, 
3351966.23; 372544.50, 3351973.51; 372517.23, 3351982.51; 372490.58, 
3351993.21; 372464.66, 3352005.56; 372439.56, 3352019.52; 372415.39, 
3352035.02; 372392.24, 3352052.02; 372370.20, 3352070.43; 372349.36, 
3352090.19; 372329.81, 3352111.21; 372311.61, 3352133.43; 372294.84, 
3352156.74; 372279.57, 3352181.06; 372265.86, 3352206.29; 372253.76, 
3352232.34; 372243.32, 3352259.09; 372234.58, 3352286.44; 372227.57, 
3352314.29; 372222.33, 3352342.52; 372218.86, 3352371.03; 372217.20, 
3352399.70; 372217.34, 3352428.41; 372219.28, 3352457.06; 372223.02, 
3352485.54; 372228.54, 3352513.72; 372235.81, 3352541.50; 372244.82, 
3352568.77; 372255.52, 3352595.41; 372267.87, 3352621.34; 372281.83, 
3352646.43; 372297.33, 3352670.61; 372314.32, 3352693.76; 372332.73, 
3352715.79; 372352.49, 3352736.63; 372373.52, 3352756.19; 372395.74, 
3352774.38; 372419.05, 3352791.15; 372443.37, 3352806.42; 372468.60, 
3352820.13; 372494.64, 3352832.23; 372521.39, 3352842.68; 372548.75, 
3352851.42; 372576.60, 3352858.42; 372604.83, 3352863.67; 372633.34, 
3352867.13; 372662.00, 3352868.79; 372690.72, 3352868.66; 372719.37, 
3352866.71; 372747.84, 3352862.98; 372776.02, 3352857.46; 372803.80, 
3352850.18; 372831.07, 3352841.18; 372857.72, 3352830.48; 372883.64, 
3352818.12; 372908.74, 3352804.17; 372932.91, 3352788.66; 372956.06, 
3352771.67; 372978.10, 3352753.26; 372998.94, 3352733.50; 373018.49, 
3352712.47; 373036.69, 3352690.26; 373053.46, 3352666.95; 373068.73, 
3352642.63; 373082.44, 3352617.40; 373094.54, 3352591.35; 373104.98, 
3352564.60; 373113.72, 3352537.25; 373120.73, 3352509.40; 373125.97, 
3352481.17; 373129.43, 3352452.66; 373131.10, 3352423.99; 373130.96, 
3352395.28; 373129.02, 3352366.63; 373125.28, 3352338.15; 373119.76, 
3352309.97; 373112.49, 3352282.19; 373103.48, 3352254.92; 373092.78, 
3352228.28; 373080.43, 3352202.35; 373066.47, 3352177.26; 373050.97, 
3352153.08; 373033.98, 3352129.93; 373015.57, 3352107.90; 372995.81, 
3352087.06; 372974.78, 3352067.50; 372952.56, 3352049.31; 372929.25, 
3352032.54; 372904.93, 3352017.27; 372879.70, 3352003.56; 372853.66, 
3351991.46; 372826.91, 3351981.01; 372799.55, 3351972.27; 372771.70, 
3351965.27; 372743.47, 3351960.02; 372714.96, 3351956.56; 372686.30, 
3351954.90.
    (B) Note: Map of Unit FFS-4 follows:

[[Page 324]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.003

    (7) Frosted flatwood salamander--Berkeley, Charleston, and Jasper 
Counties, South Carolina.
    (i) Unit FFS-5, Subunit A--Jasper County, South Carolina. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Limehouse, South Carolina.

[[Page 325]]

    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 17N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 497847.74, 3566350.32; 498446.09, 3566295.60; 498439.16, 
3566219.48; 498471.15, 3566178.02; 498514.08, 3566169.34; 498465.77, 
3566061.18; 498347.55, 3566000.50; 498335.98, 3566046.55; 498253.70, 
3566211.29; 498242.87, 3566287.84; 498145.31, 3566241.91; 498093.47, 
3566197.40; 497998.76, 3566059.86; 497934.00, 3565901.25; 497898.67, 
3565909.74; 497750.14, 3565959.14; 497684.01, 3565953.12; 497606.99, 
3565916.86; 497442.74, 3566050.55; 497406.11, 3566214.18; 497415.01, 
3566475.87; 497493.26, 3566667.21; 497540.65, 3566737.25; 497620.82, 
3566798.86; 497732.91, 3566816.47; 497862.02, 3566803.14; 497974.49, 
3566781.53; 497979.42, 3566780.58; 497992.64, 3566773.81; 497990.36, 
3566773.41; 497991.28, 3566768.03; 497987.84, 3566757.91; 497989.91, 
3566748.69; 497989.47, 3566747.94; 497988.60, 3566711.90; 497989.72, 
3566675.82; 498042.65, 3566632.46; 498093.51, 3566608.11; 498098.16, 
3566599.05; 498150.81, 3566572.33; 498174.50, 3566503.10; 498224.43, 
3566468.83; 498297.24, 3566436.54; 498367.33, 3566396.68; 498406.68, 
3566344.87; 498446.09, 3566295.60.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-5, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (7)(ii)(B) of this entry.
    (ii) Unit FFS-5, Subunit B--Jasper County, South Carolina. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Hardeeville, South Carolina.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 17N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 489561.94, 3573503.59; 489722.85, 3573967.97; 489813.22, 
3573903.16; 489904.81, 3573840.10; 489926.27, 3573824.52; 489946.02, 
3573806.80; 489963.82, 3573787.14; 489979.50, 3573765.74; 489992.88, 
3573742.83; 490003.82, 3573718.67; 490012.20, 3573693.50; 490017.94, 
3573667.60; 490016.20, 3573652.66; 490013.19, 3573637.92; 490015.98, 
3573632.12; 490025.87, 3573604.58; 490032.87, 3573576.16; 490036.91, 
3573547.18; 490037.03, 3573543.60; 490041.81, 3573520.55; 490043.92, 
3573497.11; 490043.41, 3573474.57; 490040.43, 3573452.23; 490035.01, 
3573430.36; 490027.22, 3573409.21; 490026.77, 3573385.43; 490023.98, 
3573361.81; 490018.89, 3573338.58; 490011.54, 3573315.96; 490002.00, 
3573294.17; 489990.37, 3573273.42; 489980.99, 3573259.55; 489970.67, 
3573246.37; 489959.67, 3573227.66; 489937.65, 3573195.84; 489913.35, 
3573165.71; 489886.91, 3573137.45; 489858.47, 3573111.20; 489828.18, 
3573087.11; 489796.21, 3573065.31; 489762.72, 3573045.91; 489727.90, 
3573029.02; 489644.36, 3573024.70; 489560.73, 3573022.61; 489477.08, 
3573022.74; 489393.46, 3573025.10; 489359.85, 3573040.41; 489327.69, 
3573058.58; 489297.23, 3573079.47; 489268.70, 3573102.92; 489242.31, 
3573128.77; 489218.27, 3573156.80; 489196.75, 3573186.82; 489177.92, 
3573218.59; 489161.92, 3573251.88; 489148.87, 3573286.44; 489138.87, 
3573321.99; 489085.29, 3573601.84; 489092.79, 3573641.38; 489103.20, 
3573680.27; 489116.45, 3573718.27; 489132.48, 3573755.19; 489151.20, 
3573790.83; 489172.50, 3573824.98; 489196.26, 3573857.47; 489214.53, 
3573880.49; 489235.17, 3573901.42; 489257.94, 3573920.01; 489282.57, 
3573936.04; 489308.78, 3573949.34; 489336.26, 3573959.75; 489364.71, 
3573967.15; 489393.78, 3573971.44; 489423.15, 3573972.59; 489452.47, 
3573970.58; 489453.58, 3573970.39; 489507.35, 3573975.17; 489561.29, 
3573977.32; 489615.28, 3573976.84; 489669.17, 3573973.72; 489722.85, 
3573967.97.
    (B) Note: Map of Unit FFS-5 follows:

[[Page 326]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.004

    (iii) Unit FFS-6--Berkeley County, South Carolina. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Cainhoy, South Carolina.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 17N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 611278.81, 3648848.98; 613513.07, 3649951.18; 613527.98, 
3649895.75; 613535.82, 3649838.89;

[[Page 327]]

613536.47, 3649781.49; 613529.62, 3649718.85; 613516.29, 3649668.71; 
613495.76, 3649615.10; 613468.68, 3649564.49; 613435.47, 3649517.67; 
613416.73, 3649495.91; 613396.66, 3649475.38; 613352.85, 3649438.29; 
613304.74, 3649406.98; 613265.68, 3649387.26; 613198.69, 3649363.59; 
613142.44, 3649352.20; 613087.44, 3649348.04; 613094.83, 3649293.89; 
613095.48, 3649236.49; 613088.93, 3649179.46; 613075.29, 3649123.71; 
613054.77, 3649070.10; 613042.02, 3649044.36; 613027.69, 3649019.49; 
612994.47, 3648972.67; 612955.66, 3648930.38; 612911.85, 3648893.29; 
612888.28, 3648876.88; 612863.74, 3648861.98; 612812.08, 3648836.95; 
609500.97, 3647503.91; 609474.07, 3647493.88; 609446.58, 3647485.56; 
609418.63, 3647478.99; 609390.32, 3647474.18; 609361.76, 3647471.16; 
609333.08, 3647469.94; 609304.37, 3647470.53; 609275.75, 3647472.91; 
609247.34, 3647477.09; 609219.25, 3647483.04; 609191.59, 3647490.74; 
609164.46, 3647500.17; 609137.99, 3647511.28; 609112.26, 3647524.03; 
609087.38, 3647538.37; 609063.45, 3647554.25; 609040.57, 3647571.59; 
609018.82, 3647590.34; 608998.29, 3647610.42; 608979.07, 3647631.75; 
608961.22, 3647654.24; 608944.81, 3647677.81; 608929.92, 3647702.36; 
608916.60, 3647727.80; 608904.91, 3647754.02; 608894.88, 3647780.93; 
608886.56, 3647808.42; 608879.99, 3647836.37; 608875.18, 3647864.68; 
608872.16, 3647893.23; 608870.94, 3647921.92; 608871.52, 3647950.63; 
608873.91, 3647979.25; 608878.08, 3648007.66; 608884.04, 3648035.75; 
608891.74, 3648063.41; 608901.17, 3648090.53; 608912.28, 3648117.01; 
608925.03, 3648142.74; 608939.37, 3648167.62; 608955.25, 3648191.54; 
608972.59, 3648214.43; 608991.34, 3648236.18; 609011.42, 3648256.70; 
609032.74, 3648275.93; 609055.24, 3648293.78; 609078.81, 3648310.18; 
609103.36, 3648325.08; 612197.25, 3649979.02; 612248.91, 3650004.05; 
612275.81, 3650014.08; 612331.23, 3650028.99; 612359.55, 3650033.80; 
612416.80, 3650038.06; 612474.12, 3650035.11; 612502.53, 3650030.94; 
612558.29, 3650017.30; 612611.90, 3649996.77; 612655.36, 3649973.81; 
612691.29, 3650045.52; 612724.50, 3650092.34; 612743.24, 3650114.09; 
612784.64, 3650153.86; 612830.69, 3650188.12; 612855.24, 3650203.02; 
612906.90, 3650228.05; 612961.29, 3650246.41; 613025.74, 3650257.06; 
613074.79, 3650262.06; 613103.50, 3650261.49; 613160.52, 3650254.94; 
613216.28, 3650241.30; 613269.89, 3650220.78; 613295.63, 3650208.03; 
613320.51, 3650193.70; 613367.33, 3650160.49; 613409.62, 3650121.67; 
613428.85, 3650100.35; 613463.11, 3650054.30; 613491.34, 3650004.31; 
613513.07, 3649951.18.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-6 is provided at paragraph 
(7)(iv)(B) of this entry.
    (iv) Unit FFS-7--Charleston County, South Carolina. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map, Santee, South Carolina.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 17N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 648576.17, 3668543.24; 648579.86, 3668086.10; 648551.15, 
3668086.77; 648522.54, 3668089.24; 648494.14, 3668093.50; 648466.06, 
3668099.54; 648438.42, 3668107.33; 648411.32, 3668116.84; 648384.87, 
3668128.03; 648359.18, 3668140.86; 648334.34, 3668155.28; 648310.46, 
3668171.23; 648287.62, 3668188.65; 648265.93, 3668207.47; 648245.46, 
3668227.61; 648226.29, 3668249.00; 648208.50, 3668271.55; 648192.17, 
3668295.17; 648177.35, 3668319.77; 648164.11, 3668345.25; 648152.49, 
3668371.52; 648142.54, 3668398.46; 648134.31, 3668425.97; 648127.82, 
3668453.95; 648123.09, 3668482.28; 648120.16, 3668510.84; 648119.03, 
3668539.54; 648119.70, 3668568.25; 648122.17, 3668596.86; 648126.43, 
3668625.26; 648132.47, 3668653.34; 648140.26, 3668680.98; 648149.77, 
3668708.08; 648160.96, 3668734.53; 648173.79, 3668760.22; 648188.21, 
3668785.06; 648204.16, 3668808.94; 648221.58, 3668831.78; 648240.40, 
3668853.47; 648260.54, 3668873.94; 648281.93, 3668893.11; 648304.48, 
3668910.89; 648328.10, 3668927.23; 648352.70, 3668942.05; 648378.18, 
3668955.29; 648404.45, 3668966.91; 648431.39, 3668976.86; 648458.90, 
3668985.09; 648486.88, 3668991.58; 648515.21, 3668996.30; 648543.77, 
3668999.24; 648572.47, 3669000.37; 648601.18, 3668999.70; 648629.80, 
3668997.23; 648658.20, 3668992.97; 648686.27, 3668986.93; 648713.92, 
3668979.14; 648741.02, 3668969.63; 648767.46, 3668958.44; 648793.16, 
3668945.61; 648818.00, 3668931.19; 648841.88, 3668915.24; 648864.71, 
3668897.82; 648886.41, 3668879.00; 648906.88, 3668858.86; 648926.04, 
3668837.47; 648943.83, 3668814.92; 648960.16, 3668791.30; 648974.98, 
3668766.70; 648988.23, 3668741.22; 648999.85, 3668714.96; 649009.79, 
3668688.01; 649018.03, 3668660.50; 649024.52, 3668632.53; 649029.24, 
3668604.20; 649032.17, 3668575.63; 649033.31, 3668546.93; 649032.64, 
3668518.22; 649030.17, 3668489.61; 649025.90, 3668461.21; 649019.86, 
3668433.13; 649012.08, 3668405.49; 649002.57, 3668378.39; 648991.37, 
3668351.94; 648978.54, 3668326.25; 648964.12, 3668301.41; 648948.17, 
3668277.53; 648930.76, 3668254.69; 648911.94, 3668233.00; 648891.79, 
3668212.53; 648870.41, 3668193.36; 648847.86, 3668175.58; 648824.23, 
3668159.24; 648799.63, 3668144.42; 648774.15, 3668131.18; 648747.89, 
3668119.56; 648720.94, 3668109.62; 648693.43, 3668101.38; 648665.46, 
3668094.89; 648637.13, 3668090.17; 648608.56, 3668087.23; 648579.86, 
3668086.10.
    (B) Note: Map of Units FFS-6 and FFS-7 follows:

[[Page 328]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.005

          Reticulated Flatwoods Salamander (Ambystoma bishopi)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Calhoun, Holmes, 
Jackson, Santa Rosa, Walton, and Washington Counties in Florida; and 
Baker and Miller Counties in Georgia on the maps below.

[[Page 329]]

    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
reticulated flatwoods salamander are the habitat components that 
provide:
    (i) Breeding habitat. Small (generally less than 1 to 10 ac (less 
than 0.4 to 4.0 ha)), acidic, depressional standing bodies of freshwater 
(wetlands) that:
    (A) Are seasonally flooded by rainfall in late fall or early winter 
and dry in late spring or early summer;
    (B) Are geographically isolated from other water bodies;
    (C) Occur within pine flatwoods-savanna communities;
    (D) Are dominated by grasses and grass-like species in the ground 
layer and overstories of pond-cypress, blackgum, and slash pine;
    (E) Have a relatively open canopy, necessary to maintain the 
herbaceous component that serves as cover for flatwoods salamander 
larvae and their aquatic invertebrate prey; and
    (F) Typically have a burrowing crayfish fauna, but, due to periodic 
drying, the breeding ponds typically lack large, predatory fish (for 
example, Lepomis (sunfish), Micropterus (bass), Amia calva (bowfin)).
    (ii) Non-breeding habitat. Upland pine flatwoods-savanna habitat 
that is open, mesic woodland maintained by frequent fires and that:
    (A) Is within 1,500 ft (457 m) of adjacent and accessible breeding 
ponds;
    (B) Contains crayfish burrows or other underground habitat that the 
flatwoods salamander depends upon for food, shelter, and protection from 
the elements and predation;
    (C) Has an organic hardpan in the soil profile, which inhibits 
subsurface water penetration and typically results in moist soils with 
water often at or near the surface under normal conditions; and
    (D) Often has wiregrasses as the dominant grasses in the abundant 
herbaceous ground cover, which supports the rich herbivorous 
invertebrates that serve as a food source for the reticulated flatwoods 
salamander.
    (iii) Dispersal habitat. Upland habitat areas between nonbreeding 
and breeding habitat that allows for salamander movement between such 
sites and that is characterized by:
    (A) A mix of vegetation types representing a transition between 
wetland and upland vegetation (ecotone);
    (B) An open canopy and abundant native herbaceous species;
    (C) Moist soils as described in paragraph (2)(ii); and
    (D) Subsurface structure, such as deep litter cover or burrows that 
provide shelter for salamanders during seasonal movements.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, runways, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles, and critical habitat 
units were then mapped using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) 
coordinates.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat for the reticulated 
flatwoods salamander follows:

[[Page 330]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.006

    (6) Reticulated flatwood salamander--Calhoun, Holmes, Jackson, Santa 
Rosa, Walton and Washington Counties, Florida.
    (i) Unit RFS-1--Santa Rosa County, Florida. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle map Garcon Point, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates, (E, N): 492983.94, 3372029.94; 493099.21, 
3373387.45; 493154.87, 3373453.03; 493198.40, 3373490.44; 493271.61, 
3373535.60; 493351.98, 3373566.25; 493436.67,

[[Page 331]]

3373581.30; 493522.69, 3373580.20; 493551.12, 3373576.25; 493606.97, 
3373563.02; 493686.54, 3373530.34; 493735.56, 3373500.50; 493801.14, 
3373444.83; 493838.55, 3373401.30; 493870.20, 3373353.43; 493905.84, 
3373275.14; 493921.15, 3373219.82; 493930.85, 3373134.35; 493928.32, 
3373077.01; 493918.62, 3373020.45; 493901.91, 3372965.54; 492974.90, 
3370886.40; 492965.68, 3370859.21; 492954.77, 3370832.65; 492942.22, 
3370806.83; 492928.07, 3370781.84; 492912.38, 3370757.80; 492895.22, 
3370734.79; 492876.64, 3370712.90; 492856.72, 3370692.22; 492835.54, 
3370672.83; 492813.19, 3370654.81; 492789.75, 3370638.23; 492765.32, 
3370623.16; 492739.98, 3370609.64; 492713.85, 3370597.75; 492687.03, 
3370587.52; 492659.61, 3370578.99; 492631.71, 3370572.21; 492603.45, 
3370567.18; 492574.92, 3370563.95; 492546.24, 3370562.51; 492517.54, 
3370562.87; 492488.91, 3370565.04; 492460.47, 3370568.99; 492432.34, 
3370574.73; 492404.62, 3370582.22; 492377.43, 3370591.44; 492350.87, 
3370602.35; 492320.06, 3370618.11; 492291.54, 3370614.88; 492262.86, 
3370613.44; 492234.15, 3370613.80; 492205.52, 3370615.97; 492177.09, 
3370619.93; 492148.96, 3370625.66; 492121.24, 3370633.16; 492094.05, 
3370642.37; 492067.49, 3370653.28; 492041.67, 3370665.83; 492016.69, 
3370679.98; 491992.64, 3370695.67; 491969.63, 3370712.84; 491947.74, 
3370731.42; 491927.07, 3370751.34; 491907.68, 3370772.52; 491889.66, 
3370794.87; 491873.08, 3370818.31; 491858.01, 3370842.75; 491850.37, 
3370857.07; 491865.61, 3370901.72; 491918.43, 3370965.16; 491965.55, 
3371021.75; 492011.53, 3371083.74; 492053.38, 3371140.16; 492103.93, 
3371212.08; 492141.72, 3371264.53; 492176.37, 3371309.64; 492207.14, 
3371351.35; 492243.74, 3371397.83; 492283.27, 3371453.23; 492331.51, 
3371520.83; 493069.37, 3373338.43; 493099.21, 3373387.45.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-1 is provided at paragraph 
(6)(v)(B) of this entry.
    (ii) Unit RFS-2, Subunit A--Santa Rosa County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Harold, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates, (E, N): 501542.20, 3392876.13; 501578.50, 
3392420.55; 501549.82, 3392419.17; 501521.11, 3392419.59; 501492.49, 
3392421.82; 501464.06, 3392425.84; 501435.94, 392431.63; 501408.24, 
3392439.18; 501381.07, 3392448.45; 501354.53, 3392459.42; 501328.74, 
3392472.02; 501303.78, 3392486.22; 501279.77, 3392501.96; 501256.80, 
392519.18; 501234.95, 3392537.80; 501214.31, 3392557.76; 501194.97, 
3392578.98; 501176.99, 3392601.37; 501160.46, 3392624.84; 501145.44, 
3392649.31; 501131.98, 392674.67; 501120.14, 3392700.83; 501109.96, 
3392727.67; 501101.49, 3392755.11; 501094.76, 3392783.02; 501089.80, 
3392811.30; 501086.62, 3392839.83; 501085.24, 392868.51; 501085.25, 
3392868.93; 501085.66, 3392897.21; 501086.27, 3392904.98; 501087.89, 
3392925.84; 501091.91, 3392954.27; 501097.70, 3392982.39; 501105.25, 
393010.09; 501114.52, 3393037.26; 501125.49, 3393063.80; 501138.09, 
3393089.59; 501152.29, 3393114.54; 501168.03, 3393138.56; 501185.25, 
3393161.53; 501203.87, 393183.38; 501223.83, 3393204.02; 501245.05, 
3393223.36; 501267.44, 3393241.33; 501290.91, 3393257.87; 501315.38, 
3393272.89; 501340.74, 3393286.35; 501366.90, 393298.19; 501393.74, 
3393308.36; 501421.18, 3393316.83; 501449.09, 3393323.56; 501477.37, 
3393328.53; 501505.90, 3393331.70; 501534.58, 3393333.08; 501563.29, 
393332.66; 501584.95, 3393330.98; 501591.91, 3393330.44; 501613.98, 
3393327.32; 501620.34, 3393326.42; 501648.46, 3393320.62; 501676.16, 
3393313.07; 501703.33, 393303.80; 501729.87, 3393292.84; 501755.66, 
3393280.23; 501780.61, 3393266.03; 501804.63, 3393250.29; 501827.60, 
3393233.08; 501849.45, 3393214.45; 501870.09, 393194.49; 501889.43, 
3393173.27; 501907.41, 3393150.89; 501923.94, 3393127.41; 501938.96, 
3393102.95; 501952.42, 3393077.59; 501964.26, 3393051.43; 501974.44, 
393024.58; 501982.91, 3392997.15; 501989.64, 3392969.24; 501994.60, 
3392940.96; 501997.78, 3392912.43; 501999.16, 3392883.75; 501998.73, 
3392855.04; 501996.51, 392826.42; 501992.49, 3392797.99; 501986.70, 
3392769.87; 501979.15, 3392742.17; 501969.87, 3392715.00; 501958.91, 
3392688.46; 501946.31, 3392662.66; 501932.11, 392637.71; 501916.37, 
3392613.70; 501899.15, 3392590.72; 501880.52, 3392568.87; 501860.56, 
3392548.24; 501839.35, 3392528.89; 501816.96, 3392510.92; 501793.48, 
392494.39; 501769.02, 3392479.36; 501743.66, 3392465.90; 501717.50, 
3392454.06; 501690.66, 3392443.89; 501663.22, 3392435.42; 501635.31, 
3392428.69; 501607.03, 3392423.73; 501578.50, 3392420.55.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-2, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (6)(v)(B) of this entry.
    (iii) Unit RFS-2, Subunit B--Santa Rosa County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Floridale, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 518978.93, 3390847.46; 519015.23, 3390391.88; 518986.55, 
3390390.50; 518957.84, 3390390.92; 518929.22, 3390393.14; 518900.79, 
3390397.16; 518872.67, 390402.96; 518844.97, 3390410.51; 518817.80, 
3390419.78; 518791.26, 3390430.74; 518765.46, 3390443.35; 518740.51, 
3390457.55; 518716.50, 3390473.29; 518693.52, 3390490.50; 518671.67, 
3390509.13; 518651.04, 3390529.09; 518631.69, 3390550.31; 518613.72, 
3390572.70; 518597.19, 3390596.17; 518582.16, 3390620.64; 518568.70, 
3390646.00; 518556.86, 3390672.15; 518546.69, 3390699.00; 518538.22, 
3390726.43; 518531.49, 3390754.34; 518526.53, 3390782.62; 518523.35, 
3390811.16; 518521.97, 3390839.83; 518522.39, 3390868.54; 518524.62, 
3390897.17; 518528.63, 3390925.59; 518534.43, 3390953.71; 518541.98, 
3390981.41; 518551.25, 3391008.59; 518562.21, 3391035.12; 518574.82, 
3391060.92; 518589.02, 3391085.87; 518604.76, 3391109.88; 518621.98, 
3391132.86; 518640.60, 3391154.71; 518660.56, 3391175.35; 518681.78, 
3391194.69; 518704.17, 3391212.66; 518727.64, 3391229.19; 518752.11, 
3391244.22; 518777.47, 3391257.68; 518803.62, 3391269.52; 518830.47, 
3391279.69; 518857.91, 3391288.16; 518885.82, 3391294.89; 518914.10, 
3391299.86; 518942.63, 3391303.03;

[[Page 332]]

518971.31, 3391304.41; 519000.02, 3391303.99; 519028.64, 3391301.77; 
519057.07, 3391297.75; 519085.19, 3391291.95; 519112.89, 3391284.40; 
519140.06, 3391275.13; 519166.60, 3391264.17; 519192.39, 3391251.56; 
519217.35, 3391237.36; 519241.36, 3391221.62; 519264.33, 3391204.41; 
519286.18, 3391185.78; 519306.82, 3391165.82; 519326.16, 3391144.60; 
519344.14, 3391122.21; 519360.67, 3391098.74; 519375.69, 3391074.28; 
519389.16, 3391048.92; 519401.00, 3391022.77; 519410.33, 3390998.13; 
519411.17, 3390995.92; 519419.64, 3390968.48; 519426.37, 3390940.57; 
519431.34, 3390912.29; 519434.51, 3390883.76; 519435.89, 3390855.08; 
519435.47, 3390826.37; 519433.25, 3390797.7493; 519429.2274, 
3390769.3210; 519423.4325, 3390741.2012; 519415.8831, 3390713.50; 
519406.61, 3390686.33; 519395.65, 3390659.79; 519383.04, 3390634.00; 
519368.84, 3390609.04; 519353.10, 3390585.03; 519335.89, 3390562.06; 
519317.26, 3390540.21; 519297.30, 3390519.57; 519276.08, 3390500.23; 
519253.69, 3390482.25; 519230.22, 3390465.72; 519205.75, 3390450.70; 
519180.39, 3390437.24; 519154.24, 3390425.40; 519127.39, 3390415.22; 
519099.96, 3390406.75; 519072.05, 3390400.02; 519043.77, 3390395.06; 
519025.17, 3390392.99; 519015.23, 3390391.88.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-2, Subunit B is provided at 
paragraph (6)(v)(B) of this entry.
    (iv) Unit RFS-3, Subunit A--Santa Rosa County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Holley, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 503177.78, 3363967.21; 503665.03, 3364056.93; 503673.05, 
3364029.36; 503679.32, 3364001.35; 503683.82, 3363972.99; 503686.53, 
3363944.41; 503687.44, 3363915.71; 503694.98, 3363896.36; 503703.23, 
3363884.01; 503713.36, 3363875.67; 503720.87, 3363866.60; 503726.39, 
3363857.48; 503733.34, 3363843.78; 503741.25, 3363818.20; 503752.72, 
3363782.15; 503757.95, 3363757.83; 503766.30, 3363741.51; 503653.07, 
3363742.06; 503644.01, 3363721.11; 503630.98, 3363695.52; 503615.44, 
3363669.75; 503614.55, 3363724.18; 503603.43, 3363777.35; 503601.27, 
3363799.83; 503594.64, 3363834.69; 503563.00, 3363831.09; 503563.97, 
3363824.67; 503558.81, 3363820.93; 503559.46, 3363811.37; 503555.68, 
3363800.73; 503543.49, 3363787.96; 503527.75, 3363771.89; 503514.02, 
3363772.76; 503464.40, 3363773.57; 503448.85, 3363749.85; 503448.44, 
3363558.27; 503320.62, 3363559.79; 503273.43, 3363560.71; 503273.49, 
3363572.75; 503279.14, 3363573.95; 503279.03, 3363592.72; 503284.42, 
3363598.55; 503277.70, 3363622.86; 503272.12, 3363658.96; 503257.00, 
3363659.53; 503220.26, 3363657.70; 503211.46, 3363656.94; 503211.34, 
3363632.86; 503198.99, 3363600.69; 503189.65, 3363605.42; 503175.37, 
3363661.31; 503174.55, 3363690.00; 503175.30, 3363735.30; 503170.12, 
3363757.64; 503161.91, 3363768.67; 503127.37, 3363773.12; 503100.70, 
3363791.93; 503033.44, 3363790.29; 502978.97, 3363827.84; 502954.55, 
3363827.72; 502938.01, 3363827.31; 502928.95, 3363818.51; 502929.56, 
3363685.06; 502929.74, 3363569.45; 502821.80, 3363570.13; 502821.27, 
3363591.92; 502814.36, 3363603.64; 502789.75, 3363608.33; 502751.22, 
3363613.34; 502704.61, 3363624.01; 502670.48, 3363639.13; 502640.35, 
3363788.37; 502630.38, 3363844.28; 502624.76, 3363884.45; 502620.15, 
3363937.85; 502612.79, 3363995.15; 502605.87, 3364010.90; 502632.10, 
3364030.43; 502667.63, 3364049.11; 502682.24, 3364047.48; 502713.23, 
3364052.86; 502771.52, 3364051.63; 502794.68, 3364052.20; 502805.45, 
3364083.69; 502816.85, 3364110.04; 502829.87, 3364135.63; 502844.48, 
3364160.34; 502860.61, 3364184.09; 502878.20, 3364206.79; 502897.18, 
3364228.33; 502917.48, 3364248.63; 502939.01, 3364267.63; 502961.69, 
3364285.23; 502985.43, 3364301.38; 503010.14, 3364316.00; 503035.71, 
3364329.04; 503062.06, 3364340.45; 503089.07, 3364350.18; 503116.64, 
3364358.20; 503144.65, 3364364.47; 503173.01, 3364368.97; 503201.59, 
3364371.69; 503230.29, 3364372.60; 503258.99, 3364371.70; 503287.57, 
3364369.01; 503315.93, 3364364.53; 503343.95, 3364358.27; 503371.52, 
3364350.27; 503398.54, 3364340.55; 503424.89, 3364329.16; 503450.47, 
3364316.13; 503475.19, 3364301.52; 503498.94, 3364285.39; 503521.63, 
3364267.80; 503543.18, 3364248.82; 503563.48, 3364228.53; 503582.48, 
3364207.00; 503600.08, 3364184.32; 503616.23, 3364160.57; 503630.85, 
3364135.87; 503643.89, 3364110.29; 503655.30, 3364083.94; 503665.03, 
3364056.93.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-3, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (6)(v)(B) of this entry.
    (v) Unit RFS-3, Subunit B--Santa Rosa County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Holley, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 507814.78, 3364090.74; 508038.93, 3364260.63; 508159.63, 
3364258.28; 508158.08, 3364132.67; 508156.37, 3364018.27; 508155.42, 
3363957.25; 508106.06, 3363958.06; 508068.35, 3363958.68; 508035.07, 
3363959.24; 507887.21, 3363961.45; 507885.38, 3363855.42; 507685.15, 
3363855.35; 507684.90, 3363837.37; 507612.21, 3363836.12; 507612.77, 
3363907.73; 507612.90, 3363927.61; 507638.84, 3363928.05; 507638.99, 
3363940.21; 507583.59, 3364018.73; 507491.86, 3364016.60; 507493.27, 
3364096.55; 507471.91, 3364096.05; 507455.12, 3364095.65; 507457.47, 
3364243.92; 507529.64, 3364243.19; 507566.34, 3364270.07; 507830.20, 
3364271.25; 507890.35, 3364271.37; 507890.09, 3364262.80; 507967.94, 
3364261.67; 508038.93, 3364260.63.
    (B) Note: Map of Units RFS-1, RFS-2, and RFS-3 follows:

[[Page 333]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.007

    (vi) Unit RFS-6, Subunit A--Walton County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Bruce, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 601647.75, 3373576.77; 601493.33, 3374109.03; 601522.04, 
3374108.60; 601550.67, 3374106.38; 601579.10, 3374102.36; 601607.23, 
3374096.56; 601634.93, 3374089.01; 601662.11, 3374079.74; 601688.65, 
3374068.77; 601714.44, 3374056.17; 601739.40, 3374041.96; 601763.41, 
3374026.22; 601786.39, 3374009.00; 601808.25, 3373990.37;

[[Page 334]]

601828.89, 3373970.41; 601848.23, 3373949.19; 601866.21, 3373926.80; 
601882.74, 3373903.32; 601897.76, 3373878.85; 601911.23, 3373853.49; 
601923.07, 3373827.33; 601933.24, 3373800.48; 601941.71, 3373773.04; 
601948.44, 3373745.13; 601953.40, 3373716.84; 601956.58, 3373688.31; 
601957.96, 3373659.62; 601957.54, 3373630.91; 601955.31, 3373602.29; 
601951.29, 3373573.85; 601945.50, 3373545.73; 601937.95, 3373518.03; 
601932.81, 3373498.30; 602077.97, 3373412.75; 602148.71, 3373370.38; 
602189.04, 3373346.29; 602226.02, 3373324.08; 602242.81, 3373314.59; 
602251.57, 3373308.87; 602249.73, 3373302.87; 602248.52, 3373298.22; 
602244.07, 3373290.84; 602232.30, 3373285.25; 602226.49, 3373279.16; 
602219.36, 3373273.03; 602212.40, 3373260.30; 602203.50, 3373245.54; 
602189.89, 3373207.54; 602185.07, 3373188.25; 602182.00, 3373178.92; 
602174.92, 3373170.82; 602167.16, 3373163.35; 602161.52, 3373150.66; 
602159.44, 3373128.14; 602152.20, 3373073.77; 602147.72, 3373041.28; 
602068.26, 3373014.83; 602046.87, 3372996.45; 602018.93, 3372975.27; 
601977.95, 3372972.42; 601920.70, 3372984.20; 601893.12, 3373001.35; 
601867.36, 3373025.15; 601844.26, 3373048.36; 601816.50, 3373072.78; 
601799.99, 3373071.04; 601789.68, 3373059.55; 601764.95, 3373042.41; 
601751.13, 3373012.99; 601725.10, 3372994.49; 601700.34, 3373005.10; 
601680.55, 3373028.40; 601659.92, 3373058.94; 601630.17, 3373083.30; 
601595.72, 3373083.76; 601568.63, 3373081.76; 601562.85, 3373153.48; 
601546.32, 3373152.40; 601512.87, 3373139.67; 601482.57, 3373133.62; 
601457.54, 3373128.37; 601443.06, 3373124.70; 601441.20, 3373198.67; 
601422.79, 3373201.67; 601394.66, 3373207.46; 601366.96, 3373215.01; 
601339.78, 3373224.29; 601313.25, 3373235.25; 601287.45, 3373247.86; 
601262.49, 3373262.06; 601238.48, 3373277.81; 601215.50, 3373295.02; 
601193.65, 3373313.65; 601173.01, 3373333.62; 601153.66, 3373354.84; 
601135.69, 3373377.23; 601119.15, 3373400.70; 601104.13, 3373425.17; 
601090.67, 3373450.54; 601078.83, 3373476.70; 601068.65, 3373503.55; 
601060.18, 3373530.98; 601053.45, 3373558.90; 601048.49, 3373587.18; 
601045.31, 3373615.72; 601043.93, 3373644.40; 601044.35, 3373673.11; 
601046.58, 3373701.74; 601050.60, 3373730.17; 601056.39, 3373758.30; 
601063.95, 3373786.00; 601073.22, 3373813.17; 601084.18, 3373839.71; 
601096.79, 3373865.51; 601111.00, 3373890.47; 601126.74, 3373914.48; 
601143.96, 3373937.46; 601162.58, 3373959.31; 601182.55, 3373979.95; 
601203.77, 3373999.30; 601226.16, 3374017.27; 601249.64, 3374033.81; 
601274.11, 3374048.83; 601299.47, 3374062.29; 601325.63, 3374074.13; 
601352.48, 3374084.31; 601379.92, 3374092.78; 601407.83, 3374099.51; 
601436.11, 3374104.47; 601464.65, 3374107.65; 601493.33, 3374109.03.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-6, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (6)(ix)(B) of this entry.
    (vii) Unit RFS-6, Subunit B--Washington County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Bruce, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 607444.16, 3365585.74; 607435.59, 3366042.75; 607464.30, 
3366042.38; 607492.93, 3366040.22; 607521.37, 3366036.26; 607549.51, 
3366030.52; 607577.23, 3366023.03; 607604.42, 3366013.81; 607630.98, 
3366002.90; 607656.81, 3365990.35; 607681.79, 3365976.20; 607705.84, 
3365960.50; 607728.86, 3365943.33; 607750.75, 3365924.75; 607771.43, 
3365904.83; 607790.82, 3365883.65; 607808.84, 3365861.30; 607825.42, 
3365837.85; 607840.50, 3365813.42; 607854.02, 3365788.08; 607865.91, 
3365761.94; 607876.14, 3365735.11; 607884.67, 3365707.70; 607891.46, 
3365679.79; 607896.48, 3365651.52; 607899.72, 3365622.99; 607901.16, 
3365594.31; 607900.79, 3365565.60; 607898.63, 3365536.97; 607894.67, 
3365508.53; 607888.93, 3365480.39; 607881.44, 3365452.67; 607872.22, 
3365425.48; 607861.31, 3365398.91; 607848.76, 3365373.09; 607834.61, 
3365348.10; 607818.91, 3365324.06; 607801.74, 3365301.04; 607783.16, 
3365279.15; 607763.24, 3365258.47; 607742.06, 3365239.08; 607719.71, 
3365221.06; 607696.26, 3365204.48; 607671.83, 3365189.40; 607646.49, 
3365175.88; 607620.36, 3365163.99; 607593.53, 3365153.76; 607566.11, 
3365145.23; 607538.21, 3365138.44; 607509.93, 3365133.42; 607481.40, 
3365130.18; 607452.72, 3365128.74; 607424.01, 3365129.11; 607395.38, 
3365131.27; 607366.94, 3365135.23; 607338.80, 3365140.97; 607311.08, 
3365148.46; 607283.89, 3365157.68; 607257.33, 3365168.59; 607231.50, 
3365181.14; 607206.52, 3365195.29; 607182.47, 3365210.99; 607159.45, 
3365228.16; 607137.56, 3365246.74; 607116.88, 3365266.66; 607097.49, 
3365287.84; 607079.47, 3365310.19; 607062.89, 3365333.64; 607047.81, 
3365358.07; 607034.30, 3365383.41; 607022.40, 3365409.54; 607012.17, 
3365436.37; 607003.64, 3365463.79; 606996.85, 3365491.69; 606991.83, 
3365519.97; 606988.59, 3365548.50; 606987.15, 3365577.18; 606987.52, 
3365605.89; 606989.68, 3365634.52; 606993.64, 3365662.96; 606999.38, 
3365691.10; 607006.87, 3365718.82; 607016.09, 3365746.01; 607027.00, 
3365772.57; 607039.55, 3365798.40; 607053.70, 3365823.38; 607069.40, 
3365847.43; 607086.57, 3365870.45; 607105.15, 3365892.34; 607125.07, 
3365913.02; 607146.25, 3365932.41; 607168.60, 3365950.43; 607192.05, 
3365967.01; 607216.48, 3365982.09; 607241.82, 3365995.60; 607267.95, 
3366007.50; 607294.78, 3366017.73; 607322.20, 3366026.26; 607350.10, 
3366033.05; 607378.38, 3366038.07; 607406.91, 3366041.31; 607435.59, 
3366042.75.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-6, Subunit B is provided at 
paragraph (6)(ix)(B) of this entry.
    (viii) Unit RFS-7, Subunit A--Holmes County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Bonifay, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 630429.91, 3415116.39; 630422.24, 3415573.43; 630450.95, 
3415573.01; 630479.58, 3415570.79; 630508.01, 3415566.77; 630536.14, 
3415560.98; 630563.84, 3415553.43; 630591.02, 3415544.16; 630617.56, 
3415533.20; 630643.36, 3415520.59; 630668.32, 3415506.39; 630692.34, 
3415490.65; 630715.32, 3415473.44; 630737.18, 3415454.81; 630757.82, 
3415434.85; 630777.17, 3415413.63;

[[Page 335]]

630795.15, 3415391.24; 630811.68, 3415367.76; 630826.71, 3415343.29; 
630840.18, 3415317.93; 630852.02, 3415291.77; 630862.20, 3415264.92; 
630870.67, 3415237.48; 630877.41, 3415209.57; 630882.38, 3415181.28; 
630885.56, 3415152.74; 630886.94, 3415124.06; 630886.52, 3415095.35; 
630884.30, 3415066.72; 630880.28, 3415038.28; 630874.49, 3415010.16; 
630866.94, 3414982.45; 630857.67, 3414955.27; 630846.71, 3414928.73; 
630834.11, 3414902.93; 630819.91, 3414877.97; 630804.17, 3414853.95; 
630786.95, 3414830.97; 630768.32, 3414809.11; 630748.36, 3414788.47; 
630727.15, 3414769.12; 630704.75, 3414751.14; 630681.28, 3414734.60; 
630656.81, 3414719.57; 630631.45, 3414706.11; 630605.29, 3414694.26; 
630578.44, 3414684.08; 630551.00, 3414675.61; 630523.09, 3414668.88; 
630494.81, 3414663.91; 630466.27, 3414660.73; 630437.59, 3414659.34; 
630408.87, 3414659.76; 630380.24, 3414661.99; 630351.81, 3414666.00; 
630323.69, 3414671.79; 630295.98, 3414679.34; 630268.80, 3414688.61; 
630242.26, 3414699.58; 630216.46, 3414712.18; 630191.50, 3414726.38; 
630167.49, 3414742.12; 630144.51, 3414759.34; 630122.65, 3414777.97; 
630102.01, 3414797.93; 630082.66, 3414819.15; 630064.68, 3414841.54; 
630048.14, 3414865.01; 630033.11, 3414889.48; 630019.65, 3414914.85; 
630007.80, 3414941.01; 629997.63, 3414967.86; 629989.15, 3414995.29; 
629982.42, 3415023.21; 629977.45, 3415051.49; 629974.27, 3415080.03; 
629972.89, 3415108.72; 629973.31, 3415137.43; 629975.53, 3415166.06; 
629979.54, 3415194.49; 629985.34, 3415222.62; 629992.88, 3415250.32; 
630002.16, 3415277.50; 630013.12, 3415304.04; 630025.72, 3415329.85; 
630039.92, 3415354.81; 630055.66, 3415378.82; 630072.88, 3415401.81; 
630091.50, 3415423.66; 630111.46, 3415444.31; 630132.68, 3415463.65; 
630155.07, 3415481.63; 630178.55, 3415498.17; 630203.02, 3415513.20; 
630228.38, 3415526.67; 630254.54, 3415538.51; 630281.39, 3415548.69; 
630308.82, 3415557.16; 630336.74, 3415563.90; 630365.02, 3415568.87; 
630393.56, 3415572.05; 630422.24, 3415573.43.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-7, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (6)(ix)(B) of this entry.
    (ix) Unit RFS-7, Subunit B--Washington County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 quadrangle map Millers Ferry, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 618603.41, 3387429.45; 618699.68, 3387966.18; 618708.26, 
3387969.49; 618723.71, 3387970.50; 618726.33, 3387965.00; 618725.78, 
3387937.80; 618728.76, 3387918.09; 618732.40, 3387896.55; 618738.22, 
3387886.81; 618755.97, 3387870.57; 618776.73, 3387857.50; 618803.06, 
3387844.57; 618839.32, 3387830.66; 618872.53, 3387815.43; 618904.43, 
3387802.63; 618918.85, 3387795.58; 618926.43, 3387789.59; 618930.96, 
3387781.67; 618931.79, 3387748.94; 618930.13, 3387716.76; 618932.43, 
3387674.79; 618932.53, 3387646.37; 618934.03, 3387611.79; 618948.87, 
3387588.07; 618962.97, 3387569.26; 618980.28, 3387545.60; 618995.92, 
3387515.09; 619007.01, 3387492.50; 619018.24, 3387464.98; 619025.65, 
3387441.06; 619035.64, 3387413.50; 619042.95, 3387393.91; 619052.14, 
3387373.13; 619059.11, 3387348.17; 619055.09, 3387319.74; 619049.30, 
3387291.61; 619041.75, 3387263.91; 619032.48, 3387236.73; 619021.51, 
3387210.19; 619008.91, 3387184.39; 618994.70, 3387159.43; 618978.96, 
3387135.42; 618961.74, 3387112.44; 618943.12, 3387090.58; 618923.15, 
3387069.94; 618901.93, 3387050.59; 618879.54, 3387032.62; 618856.06, 
3387016.08; 618831.60, 3387001.05; 618806.23, 3386987.59; 618780.07, 
3386975.75; 618753.22, 3386965.57; 618725.78, 3386957.10; 618697.87, 
3386950.37; 618669.59, 3386945.41; 618641.05, 3386942.23; 618612.37, 
3386940.85; 618583.65, 3386941.27; 618555.02, 3386943.49; 618526.59, 
3386947.51; 618498.47, 3386953.31; 618470.76, 3386960.86; 618443.59, 
3386970.13; 618417.05, 3386981.10; 618391.25, 3386993.70; 618366.29, 
3387007.91; 618342.28, 3387023.65; 618319.30, 3387040.87; 618297.44, 
3387059.49; 618276.80, 3387079.46; 618257.46, 3387100.68; 618239.48, 
3387123.07; 618222.95, 3387146.55; 618207.92, 3387171.02; 618194.46, 
3387196.38; 618182.61, 3387222.54; 618172.44, 3387249.39; 618163.97, 
3387276.83; 618157.24, 3387304.75; 618152.27, 3387333.03; 618149.09, 
3387361.57; 618147.71, 3387390.25; 618148.13, 3387418.97; 618150.36, 
3387447.59; 618154.38, 3387476.03; 618160.17, 3387504.15; 618167.72, 
3387531.86; 618177.00, 3387559.03; 618187.96, 3387585.58; 618200.57, 
3387611.37; 618214.77, 3387636.33; 618230.51, 3387660.35; 618247.73, 
3387683.33; 618266.36, 3387705.18; 618286.32, 3387725.82; 618307.54, 
3387745.17; 618329.93, 3387763.15; 618353.41, 3387779.68; 618377.88, 
3387794.71; 618403.24, 3387808.17; 618429.40, 3387820.02; 618456.25, 
3387830.19; 618483.69, 3387838.66; 618511.60, 3387845.39; 618552.33, 
3387867.90; 618598.24, 3387912.94; 618635.11, 3387948.48; 618647.90, 
3387956.84; 618666.90, 3387964.74; 618689.14, 3387966.53; 618699.68, 
3387966.18.
    (B) Note: Map of Units RFS-6 and RFS-7 follows:

[[Page 336]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.008

    (x) Unit RFS-8, Subunit A--Jackson County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 quadrangle map Cottondale West, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 652825.49, 3407068.83; 652825.48, 3407068.83; 653303.68, 
3406605.29; 653038.02, 3406583.61;

[[Page 337]]

653039.18, 3406691.92; 653028.57, 3406721.18; 653006.55, 3406734.40; 
652986.39, 3406751.60; 652981.54, 3406786.91; 652980.43, 3406830.19; 
652979.67, 3406859.70; 652965.63, 3406869.19; 652941.78, 3406876.45; 
652916.11, 3406877.76; 652884.59, 3406876.95; 652859.18, 3406868.42; 
652831.89, 3406855.91; 652800.52, 3406849.20; 652767.02, 3406848.34; 
652747.17, 3406853.74; 652732.87, 3406873.06; 652724.33, 3406898.44; 
652743.83, 3406906.81; 652763.39, 3406913.22; 652758.74, 3406940.66; 
652753.99, 3406972.04; 652760.86, 3407011.59; 652764.09, 3407039.23; 
652761.57, 3407060.82; 652749.49, 3407070.36; 652725.65, 3407077.62; 
652709.68, 3407085.09; 652701.20, 3407108.49; 652698.57, 3407134.02; 
652696.09, 3407153.64; 652674.12, 3407164.89; 652656.23, 3407170.34; 
652642.04, 3407185.72; 652620.14, 3407175.05; 652594.55, 3407165.80; 
652583.46, 3407159.57; 652578.33, 3407152.82; 652573.28, 3407143.44; 
652569.58, 3407132.77; 652565.24, 3407121.42; 652555.67, 3407107.29; 
652545.45, 3407092.48; 652535.85, 3407079.68; 652526.16, 3407070.17; 
652517.58, 3407069.29; 652507.43, 3407077.62; 652495.88, 3407089.23; 
652486.90, 3407103.54; 652483.22, 3407117.99; 652480.80, 3407135.12; 
652478.24, 3407157.53; 652480.37, 3407177.42; 652480.51, 3407197.92; 
652475.78, 3407201.76; 652465.72, 3407206.79; 652458.25, 3407213.87; 
652449.33, 3407226.21; 652438.05, 3407227.24; 652428.85, 3407224.36; 
652417.75, 3407218.12; 652411.37, 3407208.70; 652407.64, 3407199.35; 
652404.20, 3407178.77; 652402.01, 3407160.86; 652397.94, 3407138.94; 
652395.00, 3407124.32; 652386.76, 3407110.23; 652373.71, 3407102.62; 
652360.44, 3407103.60; 652343.53, 3407117.72; 652333.43, 3407124.07; 
652322.15, 3407125.10; 652314.14, 3407127.54; 652305.95, 3407137.25; 
652296.58, 3407140.97; 652287.20, 3407145.36; 652274.56, 3407147.68; 
652268.06, 3407142.89; 652261.53, 3407139.41; 652255.03, 3407134.62; 
652248.60, 3407127.18; 652243.50, 3407119.78; 652238.44, 3407110.39; 
652237.44, 3407097.81; 652241.12, 3407083.36; 652242.82, 3407068.86; 
652245.24, 3407051.73; 652244.24, 3407039.14; 652236.01, 3407024.39; 
652221.05, 3407014.09; 652203.25, 3407010.99; 652190.56, 3407015.29; 
652182.47, 3407021.03; 652175.50, 3407034.74; 652172.53, 3407047.22; 
652173.53, 3407059.81; 652170.75, 3407065.03; 652164.64, 3407070.82; 
652155.26, 3407075.21; 652145.32, 3407075.61; 652133.44, 3407073.99; 
652119.02, 3407068.33; 652106.60, 3407062.06; 652100.97, 3407049.36; 
652097.32, 3407036.70; 652077.38, 3407039.50; 652052.56, 3407052.08; 
652042.52, 3407056.45; 652034.12, 3407074.09; 652048.98, 3407088.35; 
652061.11, 3407105.85; 652085.32, 3407117.05; 652106.16, 3407130.80; 
652105.19, 3407142.68; 652106.02, 3407161.87; 652112.91, 3407177.25; 
652135.31, 3407181.79; 652182.83, 3407187.64; 652215.86, 3407190.47; 
652257.41, 3407196.82; 652295.04, 3407201.09; 652314.35, 3407205.65; 
652308.49, 3407218.63; 652292.89, 3407233.43; 652266.52, 3407254.57; 
652238.70, 3407280.96; 652220.19, 3407305.61; 652212.44, 3407323.92; 
652210.01, 3407341.05; 652209.77, 3407350.30; 652210.11, 3407362.87; 
652213.26, 3407375.54; 652299.80, 3407383.66; 652374.80, 3407395.52; 
652472.45, 3407408.60; 652594.12, 3407426.43; 652663.66, 3407439.95; 
652719.80, 3407445.35; 652756.73, 3407450.93; 652822.76, 3407457.91; 
652861.06, 3407462.20; 652917.52, 3407467.64; 652905.20, 3407362.30; 
652901.54, 3407298.74; 652968.31, 3407276.65; 653003.40, 3407251.11; 
653001.57, 3407219.33; 652994.98, 3407166.27; 653006.18, 3407142.76; 
653022.74, 3407116.74; 653023.96, 3407069.17; 653009.23, 3407023.84; 
653002.04, 3406994.56; 653028.78, 3406984.67; 653046.56, 3407014.22; 
653069.77, 3407038.61; 653101.19, 3407052.64; 653145.98, 3407061.72; 
653188.39, 3407060.16; 653209.09, 3407079.20; 653227.21, 3407095.54; 
653233.05, 3407074.53; 653231.22, 3407042.75; 653237.12, 3407019.10; 
653258.77, 3407001.15; 653290.87, 3406988.75; 653294.33, 3406957.10; 
653292.43, 3406927.97; 653290.39, 3406904.11; 653290.87, 3406885.61; 
653306.88, 3406880.74; 653330.43, 3406891.92; 653353.91, 3406905.74; 
653377.80, 3406903.71; 653389.13, 3406874.91; 653395.38, 3406838.05; 
653396.39, 3406798.41; 653397.07, 3406771.98; 653400.40, 3406745.62; 
653413.97, 3406732.75; 653440.50, 3406730.79; 653454.01, 3406720.56; 
653454.42, 3406704.70; 653438.67, 3406699.01; 653411.87, 3406711.54; 
653393.20, 3406716.35; 653374.68, 3406715.88; 653358.93, 3406710.18; 
653341.08, 3406683.28; 653331.11, 3406659.23; 653321.06, 3406637.81; 
653308.37, 3406616.33; 653303.68, 3406605.29.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-8, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (6)(xiv)(B) of this entry.
    (xi) Unit RFS-8, Subunit B--Jackson County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Oakdale, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 674995.60, 3401690.28; 673875.85, 3402158.93; 674341.17, 
3402164.28; 674675.84, 3402154.41; 674910.48, 3402162.13; 675034.90, 
3402087.99; 675083.93, 3402061.49; 675233.86, 3401974.12; 675401.89, 
3401877.97; 675485.18, 3401832.51; 675531.62, 3401803.30; 675583.62, 
3401764.31; 675781.28, 3401546.61; 675851.43, 3401471.73; 675878.14, 
3401437.38; 675932.68, 3401376.64; 675959.66, 3401349.36; 675970.87, 
3401333.99; 675981.97, 3401314.44; 676115.36, 3401200.87; 676086.59, 
3401161.12; 676052.69, 3401114.62; 676041.90, 3401096.49; 676016.12, 
3401069.38; 675998.03, 3401051.73; 675964.86, 3401028.39; 675934.93, 
3401007.79; 675918.10, 3400992.81; 675908.38, 3400984.62; 675897.49, 
3400970.46; 675889.97, 3400953.73; 675879.31, 3400879.41; 675844.53, 
3400893.06; 675327.40, 3401121.69; 674861.39, 3401328.81; 674684.03, 
3401401.59; 674391.31, 3401530.89; 673876.29, 3401753.54; 673877.85, 
3402081.41; 673875.85, 3402158.93.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-8, Subunit B is provided at 
paragraph (6)(xiv)(B) of this entry.
    (xii) Unit RFS-8, Subunit C--Jackson County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Cypress, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 683829.73, 3393074.70; 684023.32, 3393574.80;

[[Page 338]]

684052.04, 3393574.38; 684080.68, 3393572.16; 684109.12, 3393568.14; 
684137.25, 3393562.34; 684164.96, 3393554.79; 684192.15, 3393545.52; 
684218.69, 3393534.55; 684244.50, 3393521.94; 684269.46, 3393507.74; 
684293.49, 3393491.99; 684316.47, 3393474.77; 684338.33, 3393456.14; 
684358.98, 3393436.17; 684378.33, 3393414.95; 684396.32, 3393392.55; 
684412.86, 3393369.07; 684427.89, 3393344.60; 684441.36, 3393319.23; 
684453.20, 3393293.06; 684463.38, 3393266.20; 684471.86, 3393238.76; 
684478.59, 3393210.84; 684483.56, 3393182.55; 684486.74, 3393154.00; 
684488.12, 3393125.31; 684487.70, 3393096.59; 684485.48, 3393067.96; 
684481.46, 3393039.52; 684475.66, 3393011.38; 684468.11, 3392983.67; 
684458.84, 3392956.49; 684447.87, 3392929.94; 684435.27, 3392904.13; 
684421.06, 3392879.17; 684405.32, 3392855.15; 684388.09, 3392832.16; 
684369.46, 3392810.30; 684349.50, 3392789.65; 684328.27, 3392770.30; 
684305.87, 3392752.32; 684282.39, 3392735.78; 684257.92, 3392720.75; 
684232.55, 3392707.28; 684206.38, 3392695.43; 684179.52, 3392685.25; 
684152.08, 3392676.78; 684124.16, 3392670.04; 684095.87, 3392665.08; 
684067.32, 3392661.89; 684038.63, 3392660.51; 684009.91, 3392660.93; 
683981.28, 3392663.16; 683966.02, 3392656.75; 683947.05, 3392647.66; 
683923.43, 3392639.12; 683903.85, 3392628.04; 683886.86, 3392619.00; 
683867.12, 3392613.87; 683843.82, 3392618.55; 683819.20, 3392623.21; 
683789.11, 3392634.33; 683770.46, 3392638.47; 683744.30, 3392651.02; 
683720.12, 3392664.28; 683706.10, 3392668.55; 683685.47, 3392672.64; 
683658.43, 3392667.97; 683632.03, 3392664.65; 683606.95, 3392661.36; 
683585.89, 3392656.18; 683542.11, 3392633.24; 683512.11, 3392615.27; 
683479.46, 3392597.24; 683450.00, 3392583.92; 683423.91, 3392568.70; 
683385.42, 3392545.89; 683371.14, 3392534.94; 683348.35, 3392519.81; 
683332.69, 3392510.81; 683315.62, 3392505.08; 683294.59, 3392498.59; 
683272.28, 3392490.74; 683253.15, 3392487.60; 683203.24, 3392496.89; 
683207.64, 3392582.95; 683209.99, 3392696.72; 683212.45, 3392729.84; 
683218.34, 3392783.54; 683218.66, 3392796.77; 683214.15, 3392817.81; 
683194.50, 3392886.06; 683182.83, 3392927.40; 683174.68, 3392960.91; 
683171.34, 3392987.93; 683171.38, 3393011.73; 683174.93, 3393028.35; 
683181.19, 3393042.39; 683179.64, 3393050.95; 683179.13, 3393070.77; 
683177.70, 3393100.48; 683176.50, 3393146.73; 683179.16, 3393171.92; 
683183.14, 3393197.15; 683188.54, 3393219.10; 683190.03, 3393238.31; 
683189.67, 3393252.19; 683214.05, 3393256.78; 683227.92, 3393258.46; 
683266.03, 3393270.03; 683309.50, 3393279.08; 683347.79, 3393284.04; 
683367.66, 3393283.89; 683389.34, 3393286.52; 683469.22, 3393300.40; 
683524.08, 3393304.46; 683580.93, 3393308.57; 683593.71, 3393300.97; 
683608.59, 3393292.07; 683614.08, 3393305.37; 683626.69, 3393331.18; 
683640.90, 3393356.14; 683656.64, 3393380.17; 683673.86, 3393403.15; 
683692.49, 3393425.01; 683712.46, 3393445.66; 683733.68, 3393465.01; 
683756.08, 3393482.99; 683779.56, 3393499.53; 683804.04, 3393514.57; 
683829.41, 3393528.03; 683855.57, 3393539.88; 683882.43, 3393550.06; 
683909.88, 3393558.54; 683937.80, 3393565.27; 683966.09, 3393570.24; 
683994.63, 3393573.42; 684023.32, 3393574.80.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-8, Subunit C is provided at 
paragraph (6)(xiv)(B) of this entry.
    (xiii) Unit RFS-9, Subunit A--Calhoun County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Broad Branch, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 664818.75, 3351879.40; 664810.75, 3352336.50; 664839.47, 
3352336.10; 664868.11, 3352333.90; 664896.55, 3352329.90; 664924.68, 
3352324.13; 664952.40, 3352316.60; 664979.59, 3352307.34; 665006.14, 
3352296.40; 665031.95, 3352283.81; 665056.93, 3352269.63; 665080.96, 
3352253.90; 665103.96, 3352236.70; 665125.83, 3352218.08; 665146.49, 
3352198.13; 665165.86, 3352176.93; 665183.85, 3352154.54; 665200.41, 
3352131.08; 665215.46, 3352106.61; 665228.94, 3352081.26; 665240.81, 
3352055.10; 665251.01, 3352028.25; 665259.50, 3352000.82; 665266.26, 
3351972.90; 665271.25, 3351944.62; 665274.45, 3351916.08; 665275.85, 
3351887.39; 665275.45, 3351858.67; 665273.25, 3351830.04; 665269.26, 
3351801.60; 665263.48, 3351773.46; 665255.95, 3351745.75; 665246.70, 
3351718.56; 665235.75, 3351692.00; 665223.16, 3351666.19; 665208.98, 
3351641.22; 665193.25, 3351617.18; 665176.05, 3351594.19; 665157.44, 
3351572.31; 665137.49, 3351551.65; 665116.28, 3351532.29; 665093.90, 
3351514.29; 665070.43, 3351497.73; 665045.97, 3351482.68; 665020.61, 
3351469.20; 664994.45, 3351457.33; 664967.61, 3351447.13; 664940.17, 
3351438.64; 664912.26, 3351431.89; 664883.97, 3351426.90; 664855.43, 
3351423.70; 664826.74, 3351422.29; 664798.03, 3351422.69; 664769.39, 
3351424.89; 664740.95, 3351428.89; 664712.82, 3351434.66; 664685.10, 
3351442.19; 664657.91, 3351451.45; 664631.36, 3351462.39; 664605.54, 
3351474.98; 664580.57, 3351489.17; 664556.54, 3351504.89; 664533.54, 
3351522.09; 664511.67, 3351540.71; 664491.01, 3351560.66; 664471.64, 
3351581.87; 664453.64, 3351604.25; 664437.09, 3351627.72; 664422.04, 
3351652.18; 664408.55, 3351677.53; 664396.69, 3351703.69; 664386.49, 
3351730.54; 664377.99, 3351757.97; 664371.24, 3351785.89; 664366.25, 
3351814.17; 664363.05, 3351842.71; 664361.65, 3351871.40; 664362.05, 
3351900.12; 664364.25, 3351928.75; 664368.24, 3351957.19; 664374.02, 
3351985.33; 664381.55, 3352013.04; 664390.80, 3352040.23; 664401.74, 
3352066.79; 664414.33, 3352092.60; 664428.52, 3352117.57; 664444.24, 
3352141.60; 664461.45, 3352164.60; 664480.06, 3352186.47; 664500.01, 
3352207.14; 664521.22, 3352226.50; 664543.60, 3352244.50; 664567.07, 
3352261.06; 664591.53, 3352276.11; 664616.89, 3352289.59; 664643.04, 
3352301.46; 664669.89, 3352311.66; 664697.33, 3352320.15; 664725.24, 
3352326.90; 664753.53, 3352331.89; 664782.07, 3352335.09; 664810.75, 
3352336.50.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-9, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (6)(xiv)(B) of this entry.
    (xiv) Unit RFS-9, Subunit B--Calhoun County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Dead Lake, Florida.

[[Page 339]]

    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 677786.48, 3346665.69; 676322.21, 3345710.86; 676293.52, 
3345709.49; 676264.80, 3345709.91; 676236.17, 3345712.14; 676207.73, 
3345716.17; 676179.60, 3345721.97; 676151.89, 3345729.52; 676124.71, 
3345738.80; 676098.16, 3345749.77; 676072.36, 3345762.39; 676047.40, 
3345776.60; 676023.38, 3345792.34; 676000.40, 3345809.57; 675978.54, 
3345828.20; 675957.90, 3345848.17; 675938.55, 3345869.40; 675920.57, 
3345891.80; 675904.04, 3345915.28; 675889.01, 3345939.76; 675875.55, 
3345965.13; 675863.71, 3345991.30; 675853.53, 3346018.16; 675845.07, 
3346045.60; 675838.34, 3346073.52; 675833.38, 3346101.81; 675830.20, 
3346130.36; 675828.82, 3346159.05; 675829.25, 3346187.76; 675831.48, 
3346216.40; 675835.50, 3346244.84; 675841.31, 3346272.97; 675848.86, 
3346300.67; 675858.14, 3346327.85; 675869.11, 3346354.40; 675881.73, 
3346380.20; 675895.94, 3346405.16; 675911.69, 3346429.18; 675928.91, 
3346452.16; 675947.55, 3346474.02; 675967.52, 3346494.66; 675988.75, 
3346514.01; 676011.15, 3346531.98; 676034.63, 3346548.52; 676059.11, 
3346563.55; 676084.48, 3346577.01; 676110.65, 3346588.85; 676137.51, 
3346599.02; 679138.53, 3347597.18; 679165.98, 3347605.65; 679193.90, 
3347612.37; 679222.19, 3347617.34; 679250.74, 3347620.51; 679279.43, 
3347621.89; 679308.15, 3347621.46; 679336.78, 3347619.23; 679365.22, 
3347615.21; 679393.35, 3347609.41; 679421.06, 3347601.85; 679448.25, 
3347592.57; 679474.79, 3347581.60; 679500.60, 3347568.99; 679525.56, 
3347554.78; 679549.58, 3347539.03; 679572.56, 3347521.81; 679594.42, 
3347503.17; 679615.06, 3347483.20; 679634.41, 3347461.97; 679652.39, 
3347439.57; 679668.92, 3347416.09; 679683.95, 3347391.61; 679697.41, 
3347366.24; 679709.25, 3347340.07; 679719.43, 3347313.22; 679727.89, 
3347285.77; 679734.62, 3347257.85; 679739.58, 3347229.56; 679742.76, 
3347201.01; 679744.14, 3347172.32; 679743.71, 3347143.61; 679741.48, 
3347114.97; 679737.46, 3347086.53; 679731.66, 3347058.40; 679724.10, 
3347030.69; 679714.82, 3347003.51; 679703.85, 3346976.97; 679691.23, 
3346951.16; 679677.02, 3346926.20; 679661.27, 3346902.19; 679644.05, 
3346879.20; 679625.41, 3346857.35; 679605.44, 3346836.70; 679584.21, 
3346817.36; 679561.81, 3346799.38; 679538.33, 3346782.84; 679513.85, 
3346767.82; 679488.47, 3346754.36; 679462.31, 3346742.52; 679435.45, 
3346732.34; 676434.42, 3345734.20; 676406.97, 3345725.73; 676379.05, 
3345719.00; 676350.76, 3345714.04; 676322.21, 3345710.86.
    (B) Note: Map of Units RFS-8 and RFS-9 follows:

[[Page 340]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.009

    (7) Reticulated flatwood salamander--Baker and Miller Counties, 
Georgia.
    (i) Unit RFS-10, Subunit A--Miller County, Georgia. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Donalsonville NE, Georgia.

[[Page 341]]

    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 709773.06, 3456290.97; 709801.78, 3456290.64; 709830.43, 
3456288.51; 709858.89, 3456284.58; 709887.04, 3456278.87; 709914.78, 
3456271.41; 709942.00, 3456262.22; 709968.58, 3456251.34; 709994.43, 
3456238.81; 710019.45, 3456224.68; 710043.52, 3456209.01; 710066.57, 
3456191.86; 710088.49, 3456173.30; 710109.20, 3456153.39; 710128.62, 
3456132.23; 710146.68, 3456109.89; 710163.30, 3456086.45; 710178.41, 
3456062.02; 710191.96, 3456036.69; 710203.89, 3456010.56; 710214.16, 
3455983.73; 710222.72, 3455956.31; 710229.54, 3455928.41; 710234.60, 
3455900.13; 710237.88, 3455871.59; 710239.35, 3455842.91; 710239.02, 
3455814.18; 710236.89, 3455785.53; 710232.96, 3455757.08; 710227.25, 
3455728.92; 710219.79, 3455701.18; 710210.60, 3455673.97; 710199.72, 
3455647.38; 710187.19, 3455621.53; 710173.06, 3455596.52; 710157.39, 
3455572.44; 710140.24, 3455549.40; 710121.68, 3455527.48; 710101.77, 
3455506.76; 710080.61, 3455487.34; 710058.27, 3455469.29; 710034.83, 
3455452.67; 710010.40, 3455437.56; 709985.07, 3455424.01; 709958.94, 
3455412.08; 709932.11, 3455401.81; 709904.69, 3455393.25; 709876.79, 
3455386.42; 709848.51, 3455381.36; 709819.97, 3455378.09; 709791.29, 
3455376.62; 709762.56, 3455376.95; 709733.91, 3455379.08; 709705.46, 
3455383.01; 709677.30, 3455388.71; 709649.56, 3455396.18; 709622.35, 
3455405.37; 709595.76, 3455416.25; 709569.91, 3455428.78; 709544.90, 
3455442.90; 709520.82, 3455458.57; 709497.78, 3455475.73; 709475.86, 
3455494.29; 709455.15, 3455514.19; 709435.72, 3455535.36; 709417.67, 
3455557.70; 709401.05, 3455581.13; 709385.94, 3455605.56; 709372.39, 
3455630.89; 709360.46, 3455657.02; 709350.19, 3455683.85; 709341.63, 
3455711.27; 709334.80, 3455739.18; 709329.75, 3455767.45; 709326.47, 
3455795.99; 709325.00, 3455824.68; 709325.33, 3455853.40; 709327.46, 
3455882.05; 709331.39, 3455910.51; 709337.10, 3455938.66; 709344.56, 
3455966.40; 709353.75, 3455993.62; 709364.63, 3456020.20; 709377.16, 
3456046.05; 709391.29, 3456071.07; 709406.96, 3456095.14; 709424.11, 
3456118.19; 709442.67, 3456140.11; 709462.57, 3456160.82; 709483.74, 
3456180.24; 709506.08, 3456198.30; 709529.51, 3456214.92; 709553.94, 
3456230.03; 709579.27, 3456243.58; 709605.40, 3456255.51; 709632.23, 
3456265.78; 709659.65, 3456274.34; 709687.56, 3456281.16; 709715.83, 
3456286.22; 709744.37, 3456289.49; 709773.06, 3456290.97.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-10, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (7)(ii)(B) of this entry.
    (ii) Unit RFS-10, Subunit B--Baker County, Georgia. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Bethany, Georgia.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 734799.11, 3462120.86; 735025.60, 3462958.51; 735075.16, 
3462764.67; 735444.38, 3461469.20; 735412.19, 3461400.33; 735420.28, 
3461310.28; 735420.28, 3461223.05; 735430.58, 3461136.30; 735479.60, 
3461141.39; 735578.13, 3461132.68; 735613.43, 3461091.58; 735650.82, 
3461010.58; 735669.51, 3460923.35; 735703.92, 3460811.06; 735756.74, 
3460736.42; 735800.35, 3460649.19; 735744.28, 3460624.27; 735432.74, 
3460624.27; 735021.51, 3460618.04; 735040.20, 3460767.58; 734952.97, 
3460823.66; 734840.82, 3460861.04; 734812.02, 3460938.41; 734541.74, 
3461658.58; 734504.36, 3461783.19; 734301.81, 3462565.34; 734165.92, 
3462612.37; 734048.55, 3462652.99; 733925.73, 3462646.35; 733818.44, 
3462640.54; 733818.98, 3462680.42; 733831.44, 3462724.03; 733831.91, 
3462789.15; 733887.18, 3462970.92; 733929.82, 3463111.13; 733981.10, 
3463244.98; 734029.39, 3463371.05; 734111.12, 3463466.09; 734161.67, 
3463534.03; 734214.05, 3463602.19; 734302.98, 3463595.69; 734405.69, 
3463535.78; 734460.75, 3463434.34; 734585.36, 3463428.11; 734697.51, 
3463384.49; 734766.02, 3463372.96; 734844.43, 3463268.82; 734936.26, 
3463146.86; 735025.60, 3462958.51.
    (B) Note: Map of Unit RFS-10 follows:

[[Page 342]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.010

                  San Marcos Salamander (Eurycea nana)

    Texas. Hays County--Spring Lake and its outflow, the San Marcos 
River, downstream approximately 50 meters from the Spring Lake Dam.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 343]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.082

                  Arroyo Toad (Anaxyrus californicus).

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Los Angeles, Orange, 
Riverside, San Bernardino, San Diego, Santa Barbara, and Ventura 
Counties, California, on the maps below.
    (2) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements for the 
arroyo toad consist of four components:
    (i) Rivers or streams with hydrologic regimes that supply water to 
provide space, food, and cover needed to sustain eggs, tadpoles, 
metamorphosing juveniles, and adult breeding toads. Breeding pools must 
persist a minimum of 2 months for the completion of larval development. 
However, due to the dynamic nature of southern California riparian 
systems and flood regimes, the location of suitable breeding pools may 
vary from year to year. Specifically, the conditions necessary to allow 
for successful reproduction of arroyo toads are:
    (A) Breeding pools that are less than 6 inches (15 centimeters) 
deep;
    (B) Areas of flowing water with current velocities less than 1.3 
feet per second (40 centimeters per second); and
    (C) Surface water that lasts for a minimum of 2 months during the 
breeding season (a sufficient wet period in the spring months to allow 
arroyo toad larvae to hatch, mature, and metamorphose).
    (ii) Riparian and adjacent upland habitats, particularly low-
gradient (typically less than 6 percent) stream segments and alluvial 
streamside terraces with sandy or fine gravel substrates that support 
the formation of shallow pools and sparsely vegetated sand and gravel 
bars for breeding and rearing of tadpoles and juveniles; and adjacent 
valley bottomlands that include areas of loose soil where toads can 
burrow underground, to provide foraging and living areas for juvenile 
and adult arroyo toads.
    (iii) A natural flooding regime, or one sufficiently corresponding 
to natural, that:
    (A) Is characterized by intermittent or near-perennial flow that 
contributes to the persistence of shallow pools into at least mid-
summer;
    (B) Maintains areas of open, sparsely vegetated, sandy stream 
channels and terraces by periodically scouring riparian vegetation; and
    (C) Also modifies stream channels and terraces and redistributes 
sand and sediment, such that breeding pools and terrace habitats with 
scattered vegetation are maintained.
    (iv) Stream channels and adjacent upland habitats that allow for 
movement to breeding pools, foraging areas, overwintering sites, 
upstream and downstream dispersal, and connectivity to areas that 
contain suitable habitat.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 7.5' quadrangles using USDA National 
Agricultural Imagery Program (NAIP) county-wide MrSID compressed mosaics 
of 1 meter resolution and natural color aerial photography from summer 
2009. Except where otherwise noted, critical habitat units were mapped 
using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) zone 11, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates.
    (5) Note: Index map 1 of Units of Critical Habitat for Arroyo Toad 
(Anaxyrus californicus) follows:

[[Page 344]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09FE11.000

    (6) Note: Index map 2 of Units of Critical Habitat for Arroyo Toad 
(Anaxyrus californicus) follows:

[[Page 345]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09FE11.001

    (7) Unit 2: Sisquoc River, Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Foxen Canyon, Zaca Lake, Bald 
Mtn., and Hurricane Deck. Beginning at 120 degrees West Longitude at UTM 
zone 10, NAD83 y coordinate 3858106, land bounded by the following UTM 
zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,

[[Page 346]]

N): 774369, 3858136; 774379, 3857806; 774379, 3857806; 774151, 3857792; 
774149, 3857822; 773999, 3857813; 773997, 3857843; 773937, 3857839; 
773936, 3857869; 773876, 3857866; 773874, 3857896; 773844, 3857894; 
773842, 3857924; 773812, 3857922; 773810, 3857952; 773780, 3857950; 
773779, 3857980; 773749, 3857978; 773740, 3858128; 773710, 3858126; 
773708, 3858156; 773678, 3858154; 773676, 3858184; 773646, 3858183; 
773644, 3858213; 773615, 3858211; 773613, 3858241; 773583, 3858239; 
773581, 3858269; 773521, 3858265; 773519, 3858295; 773459, 3858292; 
773458, 3858322; 773248, 3858309; 773246, 3858339; 773156, 3858334; 
773155, 3858364; 773095, 3858360; 773093, 3858390; 773033, 3858386; 
773031, 3858416; 772941, 3858411; 772940, 3858441; 772850, 3858435; 
772852, 3858405; 772792, 3858402; 772784, 3858522; 772755, 3858520; 
772753, 3858550; 772723, 3858548; 772719, 3858608; 772659, 3858604; 
772658, 3858634; 772628, 3858632; 772626, 3858662; 772566, 3858659; 
772564, 3858689; 772444, 3858682; 772443, 3858712; 772263, 3858701; 
772261, 3858731; 772111, 3858722; 772110, 3858752; 772050, 3858748; 
772048, 3858778; 772018, 3858776; 772016, 3858806; 771926, 3858801; 
771923, 3858861; 771893, 3858859; 771880, 3859069; 771850, 3859067; 
771848, 3859097; 771818, 3859095; 771817, 3859125; 771787, 3859123; 
771783, 3859183; 771753, 3859181; 771750, 3859241; 771720, 3859239; 
771718, 3859269; 771688, 3859267; 771686, 3859297; 771656, 3859296; 
771654, 3859325; 771624, 3859324; 771623, 3859354; 771563, 3859350; 
771561, 3859380; 771531, 3859378; 771529, 3859408; 771499, 3859406; 
771497, 3859436; 771438, 3859433; 771436, 3859463; 771406, 3859461; 
771404, 3859491; 771374, 3859489; 771372, 3859519; 771312, 3859515; 
771311, 3859545; 771221, 3859540; 771224, 3859480; 771194, 3859478; 
771196, 3859448; 771136, 3859445; 771135, 3859475; 771045, 3859469; 
771043, 3859499; 770923, 3859492; 770921, 3859522; 770832, 3859517; 
770830, 3859547; 770650, 3859536; 770648, 3859566; 770618, 3859564; 
770617, 3859594; 770557, 3859590; 770555, 3859620; 770495, 3859617; 
770493, 3859647; 770463, 3859645; 770461, 3859675; 770431, 3859673; 
770430, 3859703; 770370, 3859699; 770368, 3859729; 770338, 3859727; 
770336, 3859757; 770007, 3859738; 770005, 3859768; 769945, 3859764; 
769943, 3859794; 769913, 3859792; 769912, 3859822; 769882, 3859820; 
769880, 3859850; 769820, 3859847; 769818, 3859877; 769788, 3859875; 
769786, 3859905; 769757, 3859903; 769755, 3859933; 769665, 3859928; 
769667, 3859898; 769637, 3859896; 769635, 3859926; 769455, 3859915; 
769457, 3859885; 769427, 3859883; 769429, 3859853; 769399, 3859851; 
769401, 3859822; 769371, 3859820; 769373, 3859790; 769343, 3859788; 
769344, 3859758; 769315, 3859756; 769316, 3859726; 769256, 3859723; 
769258, 3859693; 769168, 3859687; 769167, 3859717; 769137, 3859716; 
769135, 3859745; 769105, 3859744; 769103, 3859774; 769073, 3859772; 
769071, 3859802; 769041, 3859800; 769040, 3859830; 769010, 3859828; 
769004, 3859918; 769034, 3859920; 769031, 3859980; 769001, 3859978; 
768999, 3860008; 768969, 3860006; 768967, 3860036; 768877, 3860031; 
768876, 3860061; 768846, 3860059; 768844, 3860089; 768754, 3860083; 
768745, 3860233; 768715, 3860231; 768712, 3860291; 768682, 3860289; 
768678, 3860349; 768588, 3860344; 768590, 3860314; 768560, 3860312; 
768562, 3860282; 768412, 3860273; 768410, 3860303; 768201, 3860291; 
768202, 3860261; 768173, 3860259; 768174, 3860229; 768144, 3860227; 
768150, 3860137; 768180, 3860139; 768196, 3859869; 768166, 3859868; 
768168, 3859838; 768138, 3859836; 768140, 3859806; 768080, 3859802; 
768081, 3859772; 768022, 3859769; 768023, 3859739; 767963, 3859735; 
767962, 3859765; 767722, 3859751; 767720, 3859781; 767451, 3859765; 
767453, 3859735; 767423, 3859733; 767424, 3859703; 767215, 3859690; 
767213, 3859720; 767093, 3859713; 767095, 3859683; 767005, 3859678; 
767007, 3859648; 766887, 3859641; 766889, 3859611; 766829, 3859607; 
766831, 3859577; 766771, 3859574; 766773, 3859544; 766713, 3859540; 
766715, 3859510; 766655, 3859507; 766657, 3859477; 766627, 3859475; 
766629, 3859445; 766359, 3859429; 766363, 3859369; 766333, 3859367; 
766335, 3859337; 766305, 3859335; 766306, 3859305; 766247, 3859302; 
766248, 3859272; 766188, 3859268; 766190, 3859238; 765951, 3859224; 
765952, 3859194; 765893, 3859191; 765894, 3859161; 765864, 3859159; 
765866, 3859129; 765836, 3859127; 765838, 3859097; 765808, 3859095; 
765810, 3859065; 765780, 3859064; 765782, 3859034; 765752, 3859032; 
765754, 3859002; 765724, 3859000; 765727, 3858940; 765697, 3858938; 
765699, 3858908; 765669, 3858907; 765673, 3858847; 765703, 3858849; 
765706, 3858789; 765676, 3858787; 765678, 3858757; 765648, 3858755; 
765650, 3858725; 765620, 3858723; 765622, 3858693; 765592, 3858692; 
765599, 3858572; 765629, 3858574; 765631, 3858544; 765661, 3858546; 
765664, 3858486; 765575, 3858480; 765576, 3858450; 765546, 3858449; 
765550, 3858389; 765490, 3858385; 765492, 3858355; 765432, 3858352; 
765434, 3858322; 765344, 3858316; 765342, 3858346; 765282, 3858343; 
765222, 3858339; 765224, 3858309; 765045, 3858298; 765043, 3858328; 
764983, 3858325; 764981, 3858355; 764921, 3858351; 764919, 3858381; 
764830, 3858376; 764831, 3858346; 764771, 3858342; 764773, 3858312; 
764683, 3858307; 764685, 3858277; 763967, 3858234; 763965, 3858264; 
763935, 3858262; 763937, 3858232; 763847, 3858227; 763849, 3858197; 
763729, 3858189; 763731, 3858159; 763671, 3858156; 763669, 3858186; 
763549, 3858179; 763547, 3858209; 763517, 3858207; 763514, 3858267; 
763544, 3858268; 763542, 3858298; 763537, 3858388; 763507, 3858386; 
763503, 3858446; 763473, 3858445; 763471, 3858474; 763441, 3858473; 
763440, 3858503; 763380, 3858499; 763378, 3858529; 763348, 3858527; 
763346, 3858557; 763316, 3858555; 763315, 3858585; 763285, 3858583; 
763283, 3858613; 763253, 3858612; 763251, 3858642; 763131, 3858634; 
763129, 3858664; 762980, 3858655; 762982, 3858625; 762892, 3858620; 
762802, 3858615; 762800, 3858645; 762680, 3858637; 762682, 3858607; 
762652, 3858606; 762654, 3858576; 762624, 3858574; 762631, 3858454; 
762601, 3858452; 762603, 3858422; 762573, 3858421; 762575, 3858391; 
762545, 3858389; 762547, 3858359; 762517, 3858357; 762519, 3858327; 
762189, 3858307; 762187, 3858337; 762008, 3858327; 762013, 3858237; 
761983, 3858235; 761987, 3858175; 761957, 3858173; 761959, 3858143; 
761899, 3858140; 761901, 3858110; 761871, 3858108; 761872, 3858078; 
761813, 3858075; 761811, 3858105; 761751, 3858101; 761749, 3858131; 
761659, 3858125; 761661, 3858096; 761631, 3858094; 761635, 3858034; 
761605, 3858032; 761608, 3857972; 761519, 3857967; 761520, 3857937; 
761490, 3857935; 761492, 3857905; 761462, 3857903; 761464, 3857873; 
761434, 3857872; 761432, 3857902; 761193, 3857887; 761195, 3857857; 
761075, 3857850; 761077, 3857820; 760747, 3857800; 760746, 3857830; 
760716, 3857829; 760714, 3857858; 760654, 3857855; 760652, 3857885; 
760622, 3857883; 760620,

[[Page 347]]

3857913; 760650, 3857915; 760640, 3858094; 760610, 3858093; 760608, 
3858123; 760578, 3858121; 760576, 3858151; 760606, 3858153; 760602, 
3858212; 760572, 3858211; 760574, 3858181; 760514, 3858177; 760516, 
3858147; 760456, 3858144; 760455, 3858173; 760305, 3858165; 760303, 
3858194; 760243, 3858191; 760241, 3858221; 760181, 3858217; 760180, 
3858247; 760150, 3858245; 760148, 3858275; 760058, 3858270; 760056, 
3858300; 760026, 3858298; 760025, 3858328; 759995, 3858326; 759993, 
3858356; 759933, 3858353; 759931, 3858383; 759871, 3858379; 759869, 
3858409; 759840, 3858407; 759838, 3858437; 759778, 3858433; 759776, 
3858463; 759746, 3858462; 759744, 3858492; 759714, 3858490; 759713, 
3858520; 759683, 3858518; 759681, 3858548; 759651, 3858546; 759649, 
3858576; 759619, 3858574; 759612, 3858694; 759582, 3858692; 759578, 
3858752; 759549, 3858750; 759547, 3858780; 759487, 3858777; 759485, 
3858807; 759425, 3858803; 759423, 3858833; 759393, 3858831; 759392, 
3858861; 759362, 3858859; 759360, 3858889; 759300, 3858886; 759298, 
3858915; 759059, 3858901; 759061, 3858871; 759031, 3858869; 759032, 
3858839; 758973, 3858836; 758974, 3858806; 758944, 3858804; 758946, 
3858774; 758916, 3858772; 758918, 3858742; 758888, 3858741; 758890, 
3858711; 758860, 3858709; 758862, 3858679; 758832, 3858677; 758835, 
3858617; 758865, 3858619; 758872, 3858499; 758843, 3858498; 758844, 
3858468; 758814, 3858466; 758818, 3858406; 758788, 3858404; 758792, 
3858344; 758762, 3858342; 758763, 3858313; 758734, 3858311; 758737, 
3858251; 758647, 3858245; 758649, 3858216; 758529, 3858208; 758531, 
3858178; 758441, 3858173; 758440, 3858203; 758110, 3858183; 758108, 
3858213; 758049, 3858210; 758047, 3858240; 757987, 3858236; 757985, 
3858266; 757925, 3858262; 757923, 3858292; 757834, 3858287; 757832, 
3858317; 757772, 3858313; 757770, 3858343; 757740, 3858341; 757737, 
3858401; 757707, 3858399; 757705, 3858429; 757675, 3858428; 757673, 
3858458; 757643, 3858456; 757641, 3858486; 757611, 3858484; 757610, 
3858514; 757580, 3858512; 757578, 3858542; 757458, 3858535; 757456, 
3858565; 757426, 3858563; 757423, 3858623; 757393, 3858621; 757391, 
3858651; 757361, 3858649; 757359, 3858679; 757329, 3858677; 757328, 
3858707; 757298, 3858705; 757296, 3858735; 757266, 3858734; 757262, 
3858793; 757232, 3858792; 757231, 3858822; 757171, 3858818; 757165, 
3858908; 757135, 3858906; 757132, 3858966; 757102, 3858964; 757100, 
3858994; 757010, 3858989; 757012, 3858959; 756952, 3858955; 756954, 
3858925; 756864, 3858920; 756866, 3858890; 756776, 3858885; 756778, 
3858855; 756688, 3858849; 756686, 3858879; 756507, 3858868; 756505, 
3858898; 756385, 3858891; 756383, 3858921; 756294, 3858916; 756292, 
3858946; 756262, 3858944; 756260, 3858974; 756200, 3858970; 756198, 
3859000; 756185, 3859042; 756163, 3859153; 756137, 3859208; 756100, 
3859252; 756031, 3859305; 755958, 3859355; 755884, 3859380; 755832, 
3859387; 755789, 3859366; 755738, 3859312; 755688, 3859269; 755668, 
3859225; 755676, 3859155; 755652, 3859088; 755656, 3859028; 755626, 
3859026; 755597, 3859047; 755592, 3859084; 755591, 3859114; 755600, 
3859174; 755580, 3859248; 755631, 3859307; 755637, 3859355; 755625, 
3859379; 755576, 3859399; 755502, 3859438; 755446, 3859448; 755302, 
3859453; 755236, 3859475; 755121, 3859518; 754957, 3859487; 754745, 
3859445; 754665, 3859413; 754520, 3859352; 754518, 3859645; 754595, 
3859689; 754685, 3859785; 754743, 3859833; 754874, 3859896; 755036, 
3859965; 755130, 3860004; 755197, 3860023; 755244, 3860037; 755280, 
3860045; 755310, 3860056; 755346, 3860062; 755378, 3860072; 755417, 
3860083; 755451, 3860087; 755503, 3860083; 755527, 3860084; 755542, 
3860083; 755555, 3860076; 755569, 3860059; 755591, 3860047; 755630, 
3860040; 755726, 3860058; 755839, 3860103; 755911, 3860141; 755958, 
3860208; 756003, 3860252; 756083, 3860313; 756146, 3860379; 756144, 
3860409; 756234, 3860414; 756232, 3860444; 756262, 3860446; 756260, 
3860476; 756293, 3860511; 756328, 3860531; 756376, 3860553; 756431, 
3860562; 756489, 3860553; 756556, 3860554; 756586, 3860556; 756584, 
3860586; 756614, 3860587; 756612, 3860617; 756642, 3860619; 756651, 
3860470; 756621, 3860468; 756627, 3860378; 756543, 3860373; 756527, 
3860382; 756494, 3860393; 756447, 3860388; 756403, 3860370; 756372, 
3860335; 756339, 3860257; 756325, 3860147; 756318, 3860037; 756301, 
3859954; 756294, 3859907; 756236, 3859874; 756238, 3859844; 756278, 
3859794; 756310, 3859765; 756367, 3859701; 756398, 3859673; 756432, 
3859615; 756468, 3859589; 756494, 3859600; 756555, 3859649; 756633, 
3859716; 756884, 3859777; 756962, 3859797; 757141, 3859808; 757140, 
3859838; 757200, 3859841; 757198, 3859871; 757347, 3859880; 757349, 
3859850; 757379, 3859852; 757381, 3859822; 757441, 3859826; 757443, 
3859796; 757473, 3859798; 757474, 3859768; 757534, 3859771; 757536, 
3859741; 757566, 3859743; 757571, 3859653; 757601, 3859655; 757603, 
3859625; 757633, 3859627; 757635, 3859597; 757665, 3859599; 757668, 
3859539; 757698, 3859541; 757700, 3859511; 757730, 3859513; 757732, 
3859483; 757762, 3859484; 757764, 3859455; 757526, 3859156; 757976, 
3858832; 758041, 3858795; 758125, 3858750; 758198, 3858670; 758305, 
3858638; 758476, 3858662; 758509, 3858721; 758556, 3858740; 758637, 
3858750; 758672, 3858797; 758700, 3858830; 758708, 3858864; 758716, 
3858879; 758744, 3858900; 758784, 3858921; 758823, 3858952; 758825, 
3858982; 758796, 3859059; 758794, 3859124; 758844, 3859135; 758900, 
3859091; 758934, 3859097; 759054, 3859172; 759050, 3859201; 759039, 
3859230; 759037, 3859260; 759067, 3859262; 759064, 3859322; 759094, 
3859324; 759092, 3859354; 759122, 3859356; 759120, 3859386; 759240, 
3859393; 759241, 3859363; 759391, 3859372; 759393, 3859342; 759423, 
3859344; 759425, 3859314; 759485, 3859317; 759486, 3859287; 759516, 
3859289; 759520, 3859229; 759550, 3859231; 759552, 3859201; 759582, 
3859203; 759585, 3859143; 759705, 3859150; 759707, 3859120; 759677, 
3859118; 759682, 3859029; 759772, 3859034; 759774, 3859004; 759804, 
3859006; 759805, 3858976; 759835, 3858978; 759837, 3858948; 759807, 
3858946; 759809, 3858916; 759749, 3858912; 759751, 3858883; 759781, 
3858884; 759788, 3858765; 759818, 3858766; 759823, 3858677; 759913, 
3858682; 759915, 3858652; 760035, 3858659; 760037, 3858629; 760067, 
3858631; 760070, 3858571; 760100, 3858573; 760102, 3858543; 760132, 
3858545; 760134, 3858515; 760164, 3858517; 760167, 3858457; 760197, 
3858459; 760199, 3858429; 760229, 3858430; 760231, 3858400; 760290, 
3858404; 760292, 3858374; 760352, 3858378; 760350, 3858408; 760380, 
3858409; 760378, 3858439; 760498, 3858447; 760496, 3858476; 760526, 
3858478; 760525, 3858508; 760555, 3858510; 760553, 3858540; 760643, 
3858545; 760644, 3858515; 760704, 3858519; 760711, 3858399; 760741, 
3858401; 760743, 3858371; 760773, 3858373; 760775, 3858343; 760805, 
3858345; 760812, 3858225; 760842, 3858227; 760844, 3858197; 760874, 
3858199; 760875, 3858169; 760905,

[[Page 348]]

3858170; 760907, 3858141; 760937, 3858142; 760939, 3858112; 761029, 
3858118; 761031, 3858088; 761240, 3858100; 761238, 3858130; 761358, 
3858137; 761356, 3858167; 761386, 3858169; 761384, 3858199; 761414, 
3858201; 761413, 3858231; 761443, 3858233; 761441, 3858263; 761531, 
3858268; 761529, 3858298; 761589, 3858302; 761587, 3858331; 761647, 
3858335; 761643, 3858395; 761673, 3858397; 761670, 3858457; 761699, 
3858458; 761698, 3858488; 761728, 3858490; 761722, 3858580; 761752, 
3858582; 761747, 3858672; 761777, 3858673; 761775, 3858703; 761835, 
3858707; 761833, 3858737; 761893, 3858740; 761891, 3858770; 761921, 
3858772; 761919, 3858802; 761949, 3858804; 761947, 3858834; 762217, 
3858850; 762215, 3858880; 762245, 3858882; 762243, 3858912; 762273, 
3858914; 762275, 3858884; 762754, 3858912; 762756, 3858882; 762786, 
3858884; 762788, 3858854; 762967, 3858865; 762969, 3858835; 763029, 
3858839; 763027, 3858869; 763147, 3858876; 763149, 3858846; 763179, 
3858848; 763209, 3858849; 763207, 3858879; 763297, 3858885; 763327, 
3858886; 763328, 3858857; 763448, 3858864; 763450, 3858834; 763480, 
3858836; 763483, 3858776; 763573, 3858781; 763575, 3858751; 763605, 
3858753; 763607, 3858723; 763637, 3858725; 763640, 3858665; 763610, 
3858663; 763614, 3858603; 763644, 3858605; 763646, 3858575; 763706, 
3858579; 763704, 3858609; 763764, 3858612; 763767, 3858552; 763737, 
3858551; 763739, 3858521; 763709, 3858519; 763711, 3858489; 763681, 
3858487; 763683, 3858457; 763713, 3858459; 763715, 3858429; 763744, 
3858431; 763743, 3858461; 763803, 3858464; 763806, 3858404; 763776, 
3858403; 763778, 3858373; 763868, 3858378; 763866, 3858408; 763896, 
3858410; 763894, 3858440; 764014, 3858447; 764016, 3858417; 764195, 
3858428; 764194, 3858458; 764463, 3858474; 764465, 3858444; 764615, 
3858453; 764613, 3858483; 764643, 3858485; 764641, 3858515; 764731, 
3858520; 764729, 3858550; 764909, 3858561; 764907, 3858591; 764937, 
3858592; 764939, 3858562; 765028, 3858568; 765027, 3858598; 765057, 
3858600; 765053, 3858659; 765083, 3858661; 765081, 3858691; 765111, 
3858693; 765109, 3858723; 765139, 3858725; 765137, 3858755; 765167, 
3858756; 765166, 3858786; 765255, 3858792; 765254, 3858822; 765343, 
3858827; 765342, 3858857; 765372, 3858859; 765370, 3858889; 765400, 
3858891; 765398, 3858920; 765458, 3858924; 765456, 3858954; 765486, 
3858956; 765484, 3858986; 765514, 3858988; 765512, 3859017; 765572, 
3859021; 765570, 3859051; 765600, 3859053; 765597, 3859113; 765627, 
3859114; 765625, 3859144; 765655, 3859146; 765653, 3859176; 765683, 
3859178; 765681, 3859208; 765711, 3859210; 765709, 3859240; 765769, 
3859243; 765764, 3859333; 765854, 3859338; 765852, 3859368; 765972, 
3859376; 765970, 3859406; 766060, 3859411; 766056, 3859471; 766086, 
3859473; 766082, 3859532; 766142, 3859536; 766141, 3859566; 766170, 
3859568; 766167, 3859628; 766347, 3859638; 766345, 3859668; 766554, 
3859681; 766553, 3859711; 766612, 3859714; 766611, 3859744; 766641, 
3859746; 766639, 3859776; 766669, 3859778; 766667, 3859808; 766757, 
3859813; 766755, 3859843; 766815, 3859847; 766813, 3859877; 766963, 
3859886; 766961, 3859916; 767230, 3859932; 767229, 3859962; 767289, 
3859965; 767287, 3859995; 767347, 3859999; 767348, 3859969; 767408, 
3859973; 767407, 3860002; 767496, 3860008; 767495, 3860038; 767525, 
3860040; 767523, 3860070; 767613, 3860075; 767611, 3860105; 767760, 
3860114; 767762, 3860084; 767822, 3860088; 767815, 3860207; 767845, 
3860209; 767841, 3860269; 767840, 3860299; 767810, 3860297; 767801, 
3860447; 767861, 3860450; 767859, 3860480; 767889, 3860482; 767887, 
3860512; 767917, 3860514; 767910, 3860634; 767940, 3860635; 767947, 
3860516; 767977, 3860517; 767978, 3860488; 768188, 3860500; 768186, 
3860530; 768246, 3860534; 768244, 3860564; 768274, 3860565; 768273, 
3860595; 768302, 3860597; 768301, 3860627; 768331, 3860629; 768327, 
3860689; 768357, 3860691; 768355, 3860720; 768625, 3860737; 768626, 
3860707; 768656, 3860708; 768658, 3860679; 768688, 3860680; 768690, 
3860650; 768720, 3860652; 768722, 3860622; 768752, 3860624; 768755, 
3860564; 768785, 3860566; 768789, 3860506; 768819, 3860508; 768822, 
3860448; 768852, 3860450; 768856, 3860390; 768886, 3860392; 768888, 
3860362; 768918, 3860364; 768919, 3860334; 768949, 3860335; 768951, 
3860305; 769071, 3860313; 769069, 3860343; 769099, 3860344; 769097, 
3860374; 769127, 3860376; 769125, 3860406; 769155, 3860408; 769153, 
3860438; 769183, 3860440; 769187, 3860380; 769217, 3860381; 769226, 
3860232; 769256, 3860234; 769259, 3860174; 769289, 3860175; 769297, 
3860056; 769327, 3860057; 769325, 3860087; 769385, 3860091; 769381, 
3860151; 769441, 3860154; 769439, 3860184; 769469, 3860186; 769467, 
3860216; 769497, 3860218; 769495, 3860248; 769705, 3860260; 769703, 
3860290; 769853, 3860299; 769855, 3860269; 769915, 3860273; 769916, 
3860243; 769976, 3860247; 769978, 3860217; 770008, 3860219; 770010, 
3860189; 770040, 3860190; 770042, 3860160; 770221, 3860171; 770219, 
3860201; 770249, 3860203; 770309, 3860207; 770311, 3860177; 770461, 
3860186; 770463, 3860156; 770493, 3860157; 770496, 3860098; 770526, 
3860099; 770528, 3860069; 770558, 3860071; 770560, 3860041; 770620, 
3860045; 770621, 3860015; 770711, 3860020; 770713, 3859990; 770773, 
3859994; 770775, 3859964; 770805, 3859966; 770806, 3859936; 770896, 
3859941; 770898, 3859911; 770958, 3859915; 770960, 3859885; 771289, 
3859905; 771291, 3859875; 771351, 3859878; 771353, 3859848; 771412, 
3859852; 771414, 3859822; 771444, 3859824; 771446, 3859794; 771506, 
3859797; 771508, 3859767; 771538, 3859769; 771539, 3859739; 771599, 
3859743; 771601, 3859713; 771691, 3859718; 771695, 3859658; 771724, 
3859660; 771726, 3859630; 771756, 3859632; 771758, 3859602; 771788, 
3859604; 771790, 3859574; 771850, 3859578; 771851, 3859548; 771911, 
3859551; 771913, 3859521; 771943, 3859523; 771945, 3859493; 771975, 
3859495; 771977, 3859465; 772007, 3859467; 772014, 3859347; 772044, 
3859349; 772049, 3859259; 772079, 3859261; 772083, 3859201; 772053, 
3859199; 772054, 3859169; 772084, 3859171; 772093, 3859021; 772123, 
3859023; 772125, 3858993; 772155, 3858995; 772157, 3858965; 772217, 
3858969; 772213, 3859028; 772243, 3859030; 772241, 3859060; 772331, 
3859066; 772329, 3859095; 772359, 3859097; 772361, 3859067; 772421, 
3859071; 772423, 3859041; 772483, 3859045; 772484, 3859015; 772514, 
3859016; 772513, 3859046; 772662, 3859055; 772661, 3859085; 772720, 
3859089; 772719, 3859119; 772749, 3859121; 772747, 3859151; 772777, 
3859152; 772782, 3859062; 772752, 3859061; 772756, 3859001; 772759, 
3858941; 772789, 3858943; 772793, 3858883; 772853, 3858886; 772855, 
3858856; 772944, 3858862; 772946, 3858832; 773006, 3858835; 773008, 
3858806; 773068, 3858809; 773070, 3858779; 773129, 3858783; 773131, 
3858753; 773191, 3858756; 773193, 3858726; 773253, 3858730; 773255, 
3858700; 773315, 3858704; 773316, 3858674; 773436, 3858681; 773438, 
3858651; 773618, 3858662; 773619,

[[Page 349]]

3858632; 773649, 3858634; 773651, 3858604; 773741, 3858609; 773743, 
3858579; 773773, 3858581; 773774, 3858551; 773834, 3858555; 773836, 
3858525; 773896, 3858528; 773898, 3858498; 773928, 3858500; 773935, 
3858380; 773965, 3858382; 773970, 3858292; 774000, 3858294; 774007, 
3858174; 774037, 3858176; 774039, 3858146; 774099, 3858150; 774097, 
3858180; 774187, 3858185; 774189, 3858155; 774249, 3858159; 774251, 
3858129; 774368, 3858136; 774368, 3858136; returning to 774369, 3858136; 
thence from 120 degrees West Longitude at UTM zone 11, NAD83 y 
coordinate 3857806; land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, 
N): 225627, 3857806; 225636, 3858106; 225693, 3858106; 225693, 3858136; 
225723, 3858136; 225723, 3858166; 225873, 3858166; 225873, 3858136; 
225993, 3858136; 225993, 3858106; 226053, 3858106; 226053, 3858076; 
226413, 3858076; 226413, 3858106; 226473, 3858106; 226473, 3858076; 
226533, 3858076; 226533, 3858046; 226593, 3858046; 226593, 3858016; 
226833, 3858016; 226833, 3858046; 226893, 3858046; 226893, 3858016; 
226953, 3858016; 226953, 3857986; 226983, 3857986; 226983, 3857956; 
227013, 3857956; 227013, 3857926; 227343, 3857926; 227343, 3857956; 
227433, 3857956; 227433, 3857986; 227703, 3857986; 227703, 3858016; 
227733, 3858016; 227733, 3857986; 227763, 3857986; 227763, 3858016; 
227823, 3858016; 227823, 3858046; 227913, 3858046; 227913, 3858076; 
227973, 3858076; 227973, 3858106; 228033, 3858106; 228033, 3858136; 
228093, 3858136; 228093, 3858166; 228183, 3858166; 228183, 3858196; 
228213, 3858196; 228213, 3858226; 228303, 3858226; 228303, 3858256; 
228363, 3858256; 228363, 3858226; 228393, 3858226; 228393, 3858196; 
228453, 3858196; 228453, 3858166; 228603, 3858166; 228603, 3858106; 
228573, 3858106; 228573, 3858016; 228603, 3858016; 228603, 3857986; 
228753, 3857986; 228753, 3858016; 228813, 3858016; 228813, 3857986; 
228843, 3857986; 228843, 3858016; 229023, 3858016; 229023, 3858046; 
229053, 3858046; 229053, 3858076; 229083, 3858076; 229083, 3858046; 
229173, 3858046; 229173, 3858076; 229203, 3858076; 229203, 3858106; 
229323, 3858106; 229323, 3858136; 229353, 3858136; 229353, 3858196; 
229473, 3858196; 229473, 3858226; 229563, 3858226; 229563, 3858256; 
229623, 3858256; 229623, 3858286; 229713, 3858286; 229713, 3858256; 
229743, 3858256; 229743, 3858226; 229773, 3858226; 229773, 3858196; 
229803, 3858196; 229803, 3858166; 229893, 3858166; 229893, 3858226; 
229923, 3858226; 229923, 3858256; 229953, 3858256; 229953, 3858286; 
229983, 3858286; 229983, 3858316; 230013, 3858316; 230013, 3858346; 
230043, 3858346; 230043, 3858376; 230103, 3858376; 230103, 3858406; 
230163, 3858406; 230163, 3858436; 230223, 3858436; 230223, 3858466; 
230253, 3858466; 230253, 3858436; 230283, 3858436; 230283, 3858406; 
230373, 3858406; 230373, 3858526; 230343, 3858526; 230343, 3858556; 
230313, 3858556; 230313, 3858706; 230343, 3858706; 230343, 3858766; 
230373, 3858766; 230373, 3858796; 230403, 3858796; 230403, 3858856; 
230433, 3858856; 230433, 3858886; 230493, 3858886; 230493, 3858916; 
230523, 3858916; 230523, 3858946; 230553, 3858946; 230553, 3858976; 
230583, 3858976; 230583, 3859006; 230613, 3859006; 230613, 3859036; 
230583, 3859036; 230583, 3859126; 230613, 3859126; 230613, 3859216; 
230643, 3859216; 230643, 3859276; 230613, 3859276; 230613, 3859366; 
230583, 3859366; 230583, 3859546; 230613, 3859546; 230613, 3859516; 
230643, 3859516; 230643, 3859486; 230733, 3859486; 230733, 3859516; 
230763, 3859516; 230763, 3859546; 230793, 3859546; 230793, 3859606; 
230823, 3859606; 230823, 3859696; 230793, 3859696; 230793, 3859756; 
230763, 3859756; 230763, 3859816; 230793, 3859816; 230793, 3859876; 
230823, 3859876; 230823, 3859906; 230913, 3859906; 230913, 3859936; 
230973, 3859936; 230973, 3859906; 231033, 3859906; 231033, 3859876; 
231063, 3859876; 231063, 3859846; 231213, 3859846; 231213, 3859876; 
231273, 3859876; 231273, 3859906; 231303, 3859906; 231303, 3859936; 
231393, 3859936; 231393, 3859906; 231423, 3859906; 231423, 3859876; 
231453, 3859876; 231453, 3859906; 231483, 3859906; 231483, 3859966; 
231513, 3859966; 231513, 3859996; 231543, 3859996; 231543, 3860026; 
231573, 3860026; 231573, 3860056; 231633, 3860056; 231633, 3860086; 
231663, 3860086; 231663, 3860116; 231693, 3860116; 231693, 3860146; 
231783, 3860146; 231783, 3860176; 231813, 3860176; 231813, 3860206; 
231903, 3860206; 231903, 3860236; 231933, 3860236; 231933, 3860206; 
231963, 3860206; 231963, 3860176; 231993, 3860176; 231993, 3860146; 
232023, 3860146; 232023, 3860056; 232053, 3860056; 232053, 3860026; 
232083, 3860026; 232083, 3859906; 232173, 3859906; 232173, 3859876; 
232263, 3859876; 232263, 3859816; 232293, 3859816; 232293, 3859786; 
232323, 3859786; 232323, 3859756; 232353, 3859756; 232353, 3859726; 
232383, 3859726; 232383, 3859666; 232413, 3859666; 232413, 3859576; 
232443, 3859576; 232443, 3859516; 232473, 3859516; 232473, 3859396; 
232503, 3859396; 232503, 3859366; 232533, 3859366; 232533, 3859336; 
232563, 3859336; 232563, 3859186; 232533, 3859186; 232533, 3859096; 
232713, 3859096; 232713, 3859066; 232743, 3859066; 232743, 3859036; 
232773, 3859036; 232773, 3858856; 232893, 3858856; 232893, 3858886; 
232923, 3858886; 232923, 3858916; 232953, 3858916; 232953, 3858856; 
232983, 3858856; 232983, 3858886; 233013, 3858886; 233013, 3858856; 
233193, 3858856; 233193, 3858826; 233223, 3858826; 233223, 3858766; 
233253, 3858766; 233253, 3858736; 233343, 3858736; 233343, 3858766; 
233373, 3858766; 233373, 3858796; 233403, 3858796; 233403, 3858826; 
233433, 3858826; 233433, 3858856; 233463, 3858856; 233463, 3858886; 
233553, 3858886; 233553, 3858916; 233643, 3858916; 233643, 3858946; 
233673, 3858946; 233673, 3858916; 233733, 3858916; 233733, 3858946; 
233853, 3858946; 233853, 3858916; 233883, 3858916; 233883, 3858886; 
233853, 3858886; 233853, 3858826; 233913, 3858826; 233913, 3858796; 
233943, 3858796; 233943, 3858676; 234003, 3858676; 234003, 3858706; 
234033, 3858706; 234033, 3858736; 234063, 3858736; 234063, 3858706; 
234093, 3858706; 234093, 3858676; 234123, 3858676; 234123, 3858616; 
234153, 3858616; 234153, 3858556; 234093, 3858556; 234093, 3858496; 
234123, 3858496; 234123, 3858466; 234153, 3858466; 234153, 3858376; 
234183, 3858376; 234183, 3858346; 234213, 3858346; 234213, 3858316; 
234273, 3858316; 234273, 3858346; 234333, 3858346; 234333, 3858376; 
234363, 3858376; 234363, 3858406; 234393, 3858406; 234393, 3858466; 
234423, 3858466; 234423, 3858496; 234573, 3858496; 234573, 3858526; 
234603, 3858526; 234603, 3858556; 234633, 3858556; 234633, 3858586; 
234693, 3858586; 234693, 3858556; 234813, 3858556; 234813, 3858526; 
234903, 3858526; 234903, 3858496; 234963, 3858496; 234963, 3858376; 
234993, 3858376; 234993, 3858346; 235023, 3858346; 235023, 3858316; 
235083, 3858316; 235083, 3858286; 235113, 3858286; 235113, 3858256; 
235143, 3858256; 235143, 3858226; 235173, 3858226; 235173,

[[Page 350]]

3858196; 235263, 3858196; 235263, 3858166; 235293, 3858166; 235293, 
3858136; 235323, 3858136; 235323, 3858166; 235443, 3858166; 235443, 
3858046; 235533, 3858046; 235533, 3858016; 235593, 3858016; 235593, 
3857986; 235653, 3857986; 235653, 3858016; 235743, 3858016; 235743, 
3858046; 235773, 3858046; 235773, 3858076; 235803, 3858076; 235803, 
3858106; 235893, 3858106; 235893, 3858136; 235953, 3858136; 235953, 
3858166; 235983, 3858166; 235983, 3858136; 236193, 3858136; 236193, 
3858106; 236253, 3858106; 236253, 3858016; 236283, 3858016; 236283, 
3857926; 236253, 3857926; 236253, 3857836; 236283, 3857836; 236283, 
3857806; 236313, 3857806; 236313, 3857716; 236343, 3857716; 236343, 
3857746; 236403, 3857746; 236403, 3857776; 236493, 3857776; 236493, 
3857746; 236553, 3857746; 236553, 3857776; 236643, 3857776; 236643, 
3857746; 236703, 3857746; 236703, 3857716; 236793, 3857716; 236793, 
3857686; 236823, 3857686; 236823, 3857656; 236853, 3857656; 236853, 
3857626; 236973, 3857626; 236973, 3857596; 237033, 3857596; 237033, 
3857626; 237063, 3857626; 237063, 3857656; 237093, 3857656; 237093, 
3857746; 237123, 3857746; 237123, 3857776; 237153, 3857776; 237153, 
3857806; 237183, 3857806; 237183, 3857836; 237213, 3857836; 237213, 
3857896; 237243, 3857896; 237243, 3857866; 237273, 3857866; 237273, 
3857806; 237303, 3857806; 237303, 3857776; 237333, 3857776; 237333, 
3857716; 237423, 3857716; 237423, 3857686; 237453, 3857686; 237453, 
3857656; 237543, 3857656; 237543, 3857596; 237513, 3857596; 237513, 
3857566; 237543, 3857566; 237543, 3857536; 237573, 3857536; 237573, 
3857506; 237603, 3857506; 237603, 3857416; 237633, 3857416; 237633, 
3857356; 237663, 3857356; 237663, 3857326; 237843, 3857326; 237843, 
3857296; 237903, 3857296; 237903, 3857266; 237933, 3857266; 237933, 
3857296; 237993, 3857296; 237993, 3857326; 238053, 3857326; 238053, 
3857296; 238083, 3857296; 238083, 3857236; 238143, 3857236; 238143, 
3857206; 238203, 3857206; 238203, 3857176; 238383, 3857176; 238383, 
3857206; 238413, 3857206; 238413, 3857176; 238803, 3857176; 238803, 
3857206; 238863, 3857206; 238863, 3857146; 238893, 3857146; 238893, 
3857116; 239013, 3857116; 239013, 3857086; 239073, 3857086; 239073, 
3857056; 239133, 3857056; 239133, 3857026; 239163, 3857026; 239163, 
3856996; 239193, 3856996; 239193, 3856906; 239223, 3856906; 239223, 
3856876; 239283, 3856876; 239283, 3856846; 239313, 3856846; 239313, 
3856816; 239373, 3856816; 239373, 3856846; 239433, 3856846; 239433, 
3856876; 239493, 3856876; 239493, 3856906; 239523, 3856906; 239523, 
3856816; 239553, 3856816; 239553, 3856786; 239583, 3856786; 239583, 
3856726; 239613, 3856726; 239613, 3856666; 239643, 3856666; 239643, 
3856636; 239673, 3856636; 239673, 3856606; 239703, 3856606; 239703, 
3856576; 239733, 3856576; 239733, 3856546; 239763, 3856546; 239763, 
3856456; 239793, 3856456; 239793, 3856426; 239823, 3856426; 239823, 
3856396; 239883, 3856396; 239883, 3856336; 239913, 3856336; 239913, 
3856306; 239973, 3856306; 239973, 3856276; 240063, 3856276; 240063, 
3856306; 240093, 3856306; 240093, 3856336; 240123, 3856336; 240123, 
3856396; 240153, 3856396; 240153, 3856426; 240273, 3856426; 240273, 
3856396; 240243, 3856396; 240243, 3856366; 240213, 3856366; 240213, 
3856336; 240243, 3856336; 240243, 3856306; 240273, 3856306; 240273, 
3856276; 240333, 3856276; 240333, 3856246; 240393, 3856246; 240393, 
3856216; 240453, 3856216; 240453, 3856186; 240483, 3856186; 240483, 
3856156; 240513, 3856156; 240513, 3856096; 240543, 3856096; 240543, 
3856066; 240513, 3856066; 240513, 3856006; 240543, 3856006; 240543, 
3855976; 240573, 3855976; 240573, 3856006; 240603, 3856006; 240603, 
3856096; 240633, 3856096; 240633, 3856186; 240663, 3856186; 240663, 
3856246; 240693, 3856246; 240693, 3856276; 240753, 3856276; 240753, 
3856306; 240783, 3856306; 240783, 3856336; 240843, 3856336; 240843, 
3856366; 240903, 3856366; 240903, 3856336; 240963, 3856336; 240963, 
3856306; 241023, 3856306; 241023, 3856276; 241053, 3856276; 241053, 
3856156; 241023, 3856156; 241023, 3856006; 241083, 3856006; 241083, 
3855976; 241293, 3855976; 241293, 3855946; 241353, 3855946; 241353, 
3855916; 241383, 3855916; 241383, 3855946; 241443, 3855946; 241443, 
3855976; 241563, 3855976; 241563, 3855946; 241623, 3855946; 241623, 
3855916; 241653, 3855916; 241653, 3855886; 241683, 3855886; 241683, 
3855856; 241713, 3855856; 241713, 3855826; 241743, 3855826; 241743, 
3855796; 241773, 3855796; 241773, 3855826; 241803, 3855826; 241803, 
3855856; 241833, 3855856; 241833, 3855886; 241863, 3855886; 241863, 
3855916; 241923, 3855916; 241923, 3855946; 242043, 3855946; 242043, 
3855916; 242133, 3855916; 242133, 3855886; 242253, 3855886; 242253, 
3855856; 242283, 3855856; 242283, 3855826; 242343, 3855826; 242343, 
3855796; 242373, 3855796; 242373, 3855766; 242403, 3855766; 242403, 
3855736; 242433, 3855736; 242433, 3855706; 242463, 3855706; 242463, 
3855676; 242493, 3855676; 242493, 3855646; 242643, 3855646; 242643, 
3855556; 242703, 3855556; 242703, 3855526; 242733, 3855526; 242733, 
3855496; 242763, 3855496; 242763, 3855466; 242883, 3855466; 242883, 
3855436; 242973, 3855436; 242973, 3855466; 243003, 3855466; 243003, 
3855436; 243063, 3855436; 243063, 3855406; 243243, 3855406; 243243, 
3855436; 243303, 3855436; 243303, 3855406; 243393, 3855406; 243393, 
3855436; 243423, 3855436; 243423, 3855466; 243453, 3855466; 243453, 
3855256; 243423, 3855256; 243423, 3855166; 243393, 3855166; 243393, 
3855136; 243363, 3855136; 243363, 3855106; 243393, 3855106; 243393, 
3855016; 243483, 3855016; 243483, 3854986; 243573, 3854986; 243573, 
3854956; 243603, 3854956; 243603, 3854926; 243633, 3854926; 243633, 
3854776; 243603, 3854776; 243603, 3854836; 243543, 3854836; 243543, 
3854866; 243483, 3854866; 243483, 3854836; 243393, 3854836; 243393, 
3854806; 243303, 3854806; 243303, 3854836; 243243, 3854836; 243243, 
3854866; 243183, 3854866; 243183, 3854896; 243123, 3854896; 243123, 
3855076; 243153, 3855076; 243153, 3855196; 243123, 3855196; 243123, 
3855226; 242853, 3855226; 242853, 3855256; 242793, 3855256; 242793, 
3855286; 242733, 3855286; 242733, 3855316; 242643, 3855316; 242643, 
3855346; 242613, 3855346; 242613, 3855376; 242583, 3855376; 242583, 
3855406; 242523, 3855406; 242523, 3855436; 242463, 3855436; 242463, 
3855466; 242403, 3855466; 242403, 3855496; 242343, 3855496; 242343, 
3855526; 242283, 3855526; 242283, 3855556; 242253, 3855556; 242253, 
3855586; 242223, 3855586; 242223, 3855616; 242163, 3855616; 242163, 
3855646; 242103, 3855646; 242103, 3855676; 241983, 3855676; 241983, 
3855646; 241953, 3855646; 241953, 3855616; 241923, 3855616; 241923, 
3855556; 241863, 3855556; 241863, 3855526; 241833, 3855526; 241833, 
3855496; 241713, 3855496; 241713, 3855526; 241653, 3855526; 241653, 
3855586; 241623, 3855586; 241623, 3855616; 241593, 3855616; 241593, 
3855646; 241563, 3855646; 241563, 3855676; 241533, 3855676; 241533, 
3855706; 241173, 3855706; 241173,

[[Page 351]]

3855796; 241083, 3855796; 241083, 3855826; 240993, 3855826; 240993, 
3855856; 240963, 3855856; 240963, 3855886; 240903, 3855886; 240903, 
3855946; 240873, 3855946; 240873, 3856066; 240753, 3856066; 240753, 
3856006; 240723, 3856006; 240723, 3855976; 240693, 3855976; 240693, 
3855886; 240663, 3855886; 240663, 3855796; 240633, 3855796; 240633, 
3855736; 240663, 3855736; 240663, 3855706; 240693, 3855706; 240693, 
3855616; 240663, 3855616; 240663, 3855586; 240633, 3855586; 240633, 
3855556; 240603, 3855556; 240603, 3855646; 240573, 3855646; 240573, 
3855676; 240543, 3855676; 240543, 3855706; 240453, 3855706; 240453, 
3855736; 240423, 3855736; 240423, 3855796; 240393, 3855796; 240393, 
3855856; 240363, 3855856; 240363, 3855886; 240303, 3855886; 240303, 
3856006; 240273, 3856006; 240273, 3856036; 240243, 3856036; 240243, 
3856066; 240183, 3856066; 240183, 3856096; 239943, 3856096; 239943, 
3856156; 239883, 3856156; 239883, 3856186; 239853, 3856186; 239853, 
3856216; 239823, 3856216; 239823, 3856246; 239793, 3856246; 239793, 
3856276; 239763, 3856276; 239763, 3856306; 239733, 3856306; 239733, 
3856336; 239673, 3856336; 239673, 3856366; 239643, 3856366; 239643, 
3856396; 239613, 3856396; 239613, 3856426; 239583, 3856426; 239583, 
3856396; 239553, 3856396; 239553, 3856426; 239493, 3856426; 239493, 
3856456; 239433, 3856456; 239433, 3856636; 239313, 3856636; 239313, 
3856666; 239223, 3856666; 239223, 3856696; 239163, 3856696; 239163, 
3856726; 239133, 3856726; 239133, 3856756; 239103, 3856756; 239103, 
3856786; 239073, 3856786; 239073, 3856816; 239043, 3856816; 239043, 
3856846; 239013, 3856846; 239013, 3856876; 238863, 3856876; 238863, 
3856906; 238803, 3856906; 238803, 3856936; 238743, 3856936; 238743, 
3856966; 238683, 3856966; 238683, 3856996; 238623, 3856996; 238623, 
3857026; 238593, 3857026; 238593, 3856996; 238533, 3856996; 238533, 
3856966; 238473, 3856966; 238473, 3856936; 238263, 3856936; 238263, 
3856966; 238173, 3856966; 238173, 3856996; 238113, 3856996; 238113, 
3857026; 238083, 3857026; 238083, 3857056; 238053, 3857056; 238053, 
3857086; 237843, 3857086; 237843, 3857116; 237543, 3857116; 237543, 
3857146; 237483, 3857146; 237483, 3857176; 237453, 3857176; 237453, 
3857206; 237423, 3857206; 237423, 3857296; 237393, 3857296; 237393, 
3857416; 237423, 3857416; 237423, 3857476; 237393, 3857476; 237393, 
3857536; 237363, 3857536; 237363, 3857566; 237333, 3857566; 237333, 
3857596; 237243, 3857596; 237243, 3857506; 237213, 3857506; 237213, 
3857476; 237183, 3857476; 237183, 3857446; 237153, 3857446; 237153, 
3857416; 237123, 3857416; 237123, 3857386; 236883, 3857386; 236883, 
3857416; 236823, 3857416; 236823, 3857446; 236763, 3857446; 236763, 
3857476; 236643, 3857476; 236643, 3857506; 236133, 3857506; 236133, 
3857536; 236043, 3857536; 236043, 3857566; 235983, 3857566; 235983, 
3857596; 235953, 3857596; 235953, 3857686; 235983, 3857686; 235983, 
3857746; 236013, 3857746; 236013, 3857776; 235983, 3857776; 235983, 
3857836; 235893, 3857836; 235893, 3857806; 235863, 3857806; 235863, 
3857776; 235833, 3857776; 235833, 3857716; 235803, 3857716; 235803, 
3857656; 235773, 3857656; 235773, 3857746; 235743, 3857746; 235743, 
3857776; 235713, 3857776; 235713, 3857806; 235443, 3857806; 235443, 
3857836; 235383, 3857836; 235383, 3857866; 235293, 3857866; 235293, 
3857896; 235263, 3857896; 235263, 3857926; 235203, 3857926; 235203, 
3857956; 235113, 3857956; 235113, 3857986; 235083, 3857986; 235083, 
3858016; 235023, 3858016; 235023, 3858046; 234963, 3858046; 234963, 
3858076; 234933, 3858076; 234933, 3858106; 234903, 3858106; 234903, 
3858136; 234873, 3858136; 234873, 3858166; 234813, 3858166; 234813, 
3858196; 234783, 3858196; 234783, 3858226; 234663, 3858226; 234663, 
3858196; 234573, 3858196; 234573, 3858226; 234543, 3858226; 234543, 
3858196; 234513, 3858196; 234513, 3858166; 234483, 3858166; 234483, 
3858106; 234453, 3858106; 234453, 3858016; 234423, 3858016; 234423, 
3857986; 234393, 3857986; 234393, 3857956; 234273, 3857956; 234273, 
3857926; 234183, 3857926; 234183, 3857986; 234153, 3857986; 234153, 
3858046; 234123, 3858046; 234123, 3858106; 234093, 3858106; 234093, 
3858196; 234063, 3858196; 234063, 3858226; 234033, 3858226; 234033, 
3858256; 234003, 3858256; 234003, 3858286; 233973, 3858286; 233973, 
3858316; 233943, 3858316; 233943, 3858346; 233883, 3858346; 233883, 
3858376; 233853, 3858376; 233853, 3858436; 233823, 3858436; 233823, 
3858526; 233793, 3858526; 233793, 3858556; 233733, 3858556; 233733, 
3858586; 233523, 3858586; 233523, 3858556; 233463, 3858556; 233463, 
3858526; 233433, 3858526; 233433, 3858496; 233403, 3858496; 233403, 
3858466; 233373, 3858466; 233373, 3858436; 233343, 3858436; 233343, 
3858376; 233283, 3858376; 233283, 3858346; 233253, 3858346; 233253, 
3858376; 233163, 3858376; 233163, 3858406; 233103, 3858406; 233103, 
3858436; 233073, 3858436; 233073, 3858466; 233043, 3858466; 233043, 
3858496; 233013, 3858496; 233013, 3858526; 232863, 3858526; 232863, 
3858496; 232713, 3858496; 232713, 3858526; 232623, 3858526; 232623, 
3858556; 232593, 3858556; 232593, 3858586; 232533, 3858586; 232533, 
3858616; 232503, 3858616; 232503, 3858736; 232473, 3858736; 232473, 
3858766; 232443, 3858766; 232443, 3858826; 232473, 3858826; 232473, 
3858886; 232443, 3858886; 232443, 3858916; 232413, 3858916; 232413, 
3858976; 232383, 3858976; 232383, 3859126; 232353, 3859126; 232353, 
3859366; 232323, 3859366; 232323, 3859456; 232293, 3859456; 232293, 
3859546; 232233, 3859546; 232233, 3859576; 232203, 3859576; 232203, 
3859606; 232113, 3859606; 232113, 3859636; 232053, 3859636; 232053, 
3859666; 231993, 3859666; 231993, 3859696; 231963, 3859696; 231963, 
3859756; 231933, 3859756; 231933, 3859816; 231903, 3859816; 231903, 
3859846; 231873, 3859846; 231873, 3859906; 231843, 3859906; 231843, 
3859936; 231813, 3859936; 231813, 3859906; 231723, 3859906; 231723, 
3859876; 231693, 3859876; 231693, 3859846; 231663, 3859846; 231663, 
3859816; 231603, 3859816; 231603, 3859786; 231573, 3859786; 231573, 
3859756; 231543, 3859756; 231543, 3859726; 231453, 3859726; 231453, 
3859696; 231123, 3859696; 231123, 3859666; 231033, 3859666; 231033, 
3859636; 231003, 3859636; 231003, 3859546; 230973, 3859546; 230973, 
3859486; 230943, 3859486; 230943, 3859456; 230913, 3859456; 230913, 
3859426; 230883, 3859426; 230883, 3859366; 230853, 3859366; 230853, 
3859276; 230883, 3859276; 230883, 3859246; 230943, 3859246; 230943, 
3859066; 230883, 3859066; 230883, 3859006; 230853, 3859006; 230853, 
3858976; 230823, 3858976; 230823, 3858916; 230793, 3858916; 230793, 
3858856; 230763, 3858856; 230763, 3858826; 230733, 3858826; 230733, 
3858796; 230703, 3858796; 230703, 3858736; 230643, 3858736; 230643, 
3858706; 230613, 3858706; 230613, 3858676; 230583, 3858676; 230583, 
3858646; 230613, 3858646; 230613, 3858616; 230643, 3858616; 230643, 
3858586; 230703, 3858586; 230703, 3858556; 230733, 3858556; 230733, 
3858526; 230763, 3858526; 230763,

[[Page 352]]

3858496; 230793, 3858496; 230793, 3858376; 230763, 3858376; 230763, 
3858346; 230703, 3858346; 230703, 3858316; 230673, 3858316; 230673, 
3858256; 230613, 3858256; 230613, 3858226; 230553, 3858226; 230553, 
3858196; 230523, 3858196; 230523, 3858166; 230463, 3858166; 230463, 
3858136; 230223, 3858136; 230223, 3858106; 230163, 3858106; 230163, 
3858016; 230133, 3858016; 230133, 3857986; 230013, 3857986; 230013, 
3857956; 229983, 3857956; 229983, 3857926; 229893, 3857926; 229893, 
3857956; 229833, 3857956; 229833, 3857986; 229743, 3857986; 229743, 
3858016; 229683, 3858016; 229683, 3858046; 229593, 3858046; 229593, 
3858016; 229563, 3858016; 229563, 3857986; 229533, 3857986; 229533, 
3857956; 229443, 3857956; 229443, 3857926; 229383, 3857926; 229383, 
3857896; 229353, 3857896; 229353, 3857866; 229323, 3857866; 229323, 
3857836; 229293, 3857836; 229293, 3857806; 229233, 3857806; 229233, 
3857776; 229083, 3857776; 229083, 3857746; 228993, 3857746; 228993, 
3857776; 228513, 3857776; 228513, 3857806; 228483, 3857806; 228483, 
3857836; 228423, 3857836; 228423, 3857866; 228393, 3857866; 228393, 
3857896; 228303, 3857896; 228303, 3857866; 228273, 3857866; 228273, 
3857836; 228243, 3857836; 228243, 3857866; 228063, 3857866; 228063, 
3857836; 228033, 3857836; 228033, 3857776; 228003, 3857776; 228003, 
3857746; 227973, 3857746; 227973, 3857716; 227943, 3857716; 227943, 
3857686; 227913, 3857686; 227913, 3857656; 227883, 3857656; 227883, 
3857596; 227853, 3857596; 227853, 3857566; 227823, 3857566; 227823, 
3857536; 227643, 3857536; 227643, 3857566; 227523, 3857566; 227523, 
3857596; 227223, 3857596; 227223, 3857626; 226863, 3857626; 226863, 
3857656; 226683, 3857656; 226683, 3857626; 226653, 3857626; 226653, 
3857656; 226623, 3857656; 226623, 3857686; 226593, 3857686; 226593, 
3857716; 226623, 3857716; 226623, 3857746; 226593, 3857746; 226593, 
3857776; 226563, 3857776; 226563, 3857806; 226533, 3857806; 226533, 
3857776; 226413, 3857776; 226413, 3857746; 226263, 3857746; 226263, 
3857716; 226233, 3857716; 226233, 3857686; 226203, 3857686; 226203, 
3857656; 226173, 3857656; 226173, 3857596; 226113, 3857596; 226113, 
3857566; 226083, 3857566; 226083, 3857506; 226053, 3857506; 226053, 
3857446; 225963, 3857446; 225963, 3857476; 225903, 3857476; 225903, 
3857506; 225843, 3857506; 225843, 3857566; 225873, 3857566; 225873, 
3857596; 225903, 3857596; 225903, 3857746; 225873, 3857746; 225873, 
3857776; 225843, 3857776; 225843, 3857806; returning to 225627, 3857806.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 2 is provided at paragraph (8)(ii) of this 
entry.
    (8) Unit 3: Upper Santa Ynez River Basin, Santa Barbara County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Little Pine Mtn., Hildreth 
Peak, and Carpinteria, land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, 
N): 262233, 3833176; 262233, 3833146; 262263, 3833146; 262263, 3833116; 
262293, 3833116; 262293, 3833086; 262323, 3833086; 262323, 3833026; 
262203, 3833026; 262203, 3832996; 262113, 3832996; 262113, 3832966; 
262083, 3832966; 262083, 3832936; 261963, 3832936; 261963, 3832876; 
261993, 3832876; 261993, 3832846; 261963, 3832846; 261963, 3832786; 
261993, 3832786; 261993, 3832666; 261933, 3832666; 261933, 3832636; 
261843, 3832636; 261843, 3832666; 261753, 3832666; 261753, 3832636; 
261723, 3832636; 261723, 3832576; 261753, 3832576; 261753, 3832486; 
261723, 3832486; 261723, 3832456; 261693, 3832456; 261693, 3832426; 
261663, 3832426; 261663, 3832396; 261693, 3832396; 261693, 3832336; 
261753, 3832336; 261753, 3832306; 261723, 3832306; 261723, 3832276; 
261663, 3832276; 261663, 3832246; 261633, 3832246; 261633, 3832216; 
261663, 3832216; 261663, 3832186; 261693, 3832186; 261693, 3832066; 
261663, 3832066; 261663, 3832006; 261633, 3832006; 261633, 3831976; 
261603, 3831976; 261603, 3831916; 261543, 3831916; 261543, 3831886; 
261513, 3831886; 261513, 3831916; 261393, 3831916; 261393, 3831946; 
261363, 3831946; 261363, 3831976; 261333, 3831976; 261333, 3831856; 
261363, 3831856; 261363, 3831706; 261333, 3831706; 261333, 3831676; 
261303, 3831676; 261303, 3831616; 261333, 3831616; 261333, 3831556; 
261213, 3831556; 261213, 3831496; 261183, 3831496; 261183, 3831466; 
261153, 3831466; 261153, 3831436; 261123, 3831436; 261123, 3831376; 
261063, 3831376; 261063, 3831346; 260973, 3831346; 260973, 3831316; 
260823, 3831316; 260823, 3831256; 260793, 3831256; 260793, 3831226; 
260823, 3831226; 260823, 3831196; 260853, 3831196; 260853, 3831166; 
260733, 3831166; 260733, 3831106; 260703, 3831106; 260703, 3831046; 
260583, 3831046; 260583, 3831016; 260523, 3831016; 260523, 3830926; 
260553, 3830926; 260553, 3830896; 260613, 3830896; 260613, 3830866; 
260643, 3830866; 260643, 3830806; 260673, 3830806; 260673, 3830746; 
260703, 3830746; 260703, 3830656; 260673, 3830656; 260673, 3830596; 
260643, 3830596; 260643, 3830536; 260613, 3830536; 260613, 3830506; 
260583, 3830506; 260583, 3830476; 260523, 3830476; 260523, 3830416; 
260493, 3830416; 260493, 3830356; 260523, 3830356; 260523, 3830296; 
260553, 3830296; 260553, 3830236; 260583, 3830236; 260583, 3830206; 
260553, 3830206; 260553, 3830176; 260583, 3830176; 260583, 3830146; 
260613, 3830146; 260613, 3830116; 260643, 3830116; 260643, 3830086; 
260673, 3830086; 260673, 3829996; 260553, 3829996; 260553, 3829966; 
260523, 3829966; 260523, 3829936; 260493, 3829936; 260493, 3829876; 
260523, 3829876; 260523, 3829786; 260493, 3829786; 260493, 3829606; 
260463, 3829606; 260463, 3829546; 260433, 3829546; 260433, 3829516; 
260403, 3829516; 260403, 3829486; 260373, 3829486; 260373, 3829456; 
260343, 3829456; 260343, 3829426; 260313, 3829426; 260313, 3829246; 
260343, 3829246; 260343, 3829216; 260373, 3829216; 260373, 3829186; 
260343, 3829186; 260343, 3829096; 260313, 3829096; 260313, 3829066; 
260283, 3829066; 260283, 3829036; 260253, 3829036; 260253, 3829006; 
260223, 3829006; 260223, 3828976; 260193, 3828976; 260193, 3828946; 
260163, 3828946; 260163, 3828796; 260193, 3828796; 260193, 3828766; 
260223, 3828766; 260223, 3828736; 260313, 3828736; 260313, 3828676; 
260343, 3828676; 260343, 3828616; 260373, 3828616; 260373, 3828556; 
260403, 3828556; 260403, 3828526; 260433, 3828526; 260433, 3828496; 
260523, 3828496; 260523, 3828466; 260643, 3828466; 260643, 3828436; 
260613, 3828436; 260613, 3828406; 260583, 3828406; 260583, 3828376; 
260403, 3828376; 260403, 3828346; 260253, 3828346; 260253, 3828316; 
260223, 3828316; 260223, 3828286; 260193, 3828286; 260193, 3828256; 
260163, 3828256; 260163, 3828196; 260193, 3828196; 260193, 3828166; 
260223, 3828166; 260223, 3828136; 260253, 3828136; 260253, 3828046; 
260283, 3828046; 260283, 3827986; 260253, 3827986; 260253, 3827926; 
260223, 3827926; 260223, 3827866; 260193, 3827866; 260193, 3827806; 
260253, 3827806; 260253, 3827776; 260343, 3827776; 260343, 3827746;

[[Page 353]]

260403, 3827746; 260403, 3827716; 260373, 3827716; 260373, 3827686; 
260343, 3827686; 260343, 3827566; 260313, 3827566; 260313, 3827536; 
260223, 3827536; 260223, 3827506; 260193, 3827506; 260193, 3827476; 
260163, 3827476; 260163, 3827356; 260133, 3827356; 260133, 3827326; 
260163, 3827326; 260163, 3827236; 260283, 3827236; 260283, 3827206; 
260253, 3827206; 260253, 3827176; 260223, 3827176; 260223, 3827116; 
260133, 3827116; 260133, 3827086; 260103, 3827086; 260103, 3827056; 
260073, 3827056; 260073, 3826936; 259983, 3826936; 259983, 3826906; 
259953, 3826906; 259953, 3826846; 259833, 3826846; 259833, 3826816; 
259803, 3826816; 259803, 3826786; 259773, 3826786; 259773, 3826756; 
259563, 3826756; 259563, 3826576; 259593, 3826576; 259593, 3826546; 
259623, 3826546; 259623, 3826516; 259653, 3826516; 259653, 3826426; 
259683, 3826426; 259683, 3826306; 259623, 3826306; 259623, 3826276; 
259563, 3826276; 259563, 3826246; 259473, 3826246; 259473, 3826216; 
259413, 3826216; 259413, 3825826; 259443, 3825826; 259443, 3825796; 
259413, 3825796; 259413, 3825766; 259383, 3825766; 259383, 3825736; 
259113, 3825736; 259113, 3825766; 259053, 3825766; 259053, 3825796; 
259023, 3825796; 259023, 3825826; 258963, 3825826; 258963, 3825856; 
258843, 3825856; 258843, 3825736; 258873, 3825736; 258873, 3825706; 
258903, 3825706; 258903, 3825676; 259023, 3825676; 259023, 3825646; 
259113, 3825646; 259113, 3825616; 259143, 3825616; 259143, 3825586; 
259173, 3825586; 259173, 3825526; 259203, 3825526; 259203, 3825466; 
259233, 3825466; 259233, 3825436; 259293, 3825436; 259293, 3825376; 
259323, 3825376; 259323, 3825346; 259353, 3825346; 259353, 3825286; 
259383, 3825286; 259383, 3825166; 259353, 3825166; 259353, 3825106; 
259323, 3825106; 259323, 3825076; 259293, 3825076; 259293, 3825046; 
259053, 3825046; 259053, 3825076; 259023, 3825076; 259023, 3825046; 
258783, 3825046; 258783, 3825076; 258633, 3825076; 258633, 3825016; 
258603, 3825016; 258603, 3824956; 258633, 3824956; 258633, 3824896; 
258663, 3824896; 258663, 3824866; 258693, 3824866; 258693, 3824836; 
258723, 3824836; 258723, 3824806; 258753, 3824806; 258753, 3824776; 
258813, 3824776; 258813, 3824746; 258843, 3824746; 258843, 3824716; 
258903, 3824716; 258903, 3824686; 258933, 3824686; 258933, 3824656; 
258963, 3824656; 258963, 3824626; 258993, 3824626; 258993, 3824596; 
258963, 3824596; 258963, 3824536; 258933, 3824536; 258933, 3824416; 
258903, 3824416; 258903, 3824266; 258873, 3824266; 258873, 3824236; 
258843, 3824236; 258843, 3824206; 258813, 3824206; 258813, 3824296; 
258753, 3824296; 258753, 3824326; 258663, 3824326; 258663, 3824296; 
258633, 3824296; 258633, 3824206; 258603, 3824206; 258603, 3824176; 
258633, 3824176; 258633, 3824086; 258663, 3824086; 258663, 3824056; 
258753, 3824056; 258753, 3823996; 258783, 3823996; 258783, 3823876; 
258843, 3823876; 258843, 3823846; 258903, 3823846; 258903, 3823816; 
258873, 3823816; 258873, 3823786; 258903, 3823786; 258903, 3823756; 
258933, 3823756; 258933, 3823726; 258963, 3823726; 258963, 3823666; 
258993, 3823666; 258993, 3823636; 258963, 3823636; 258963, 3823546; 
258993, 3823546; 258993, 3823366; 259023, 3823366; 259023, 3823246; 
258993, 3823246; 258993, 3823186; 258963, 3823186; 258963, 3823156; 
258903, 3823156; 258903, 3823126; 258723, 3823126; 258723, 3823096; 
258633, 3823096; 258633, 3823066; 258513, 3823066; 258513, 3823036; 
258483, 3823036; 258483, 3822886; 258513, 3822886; 258513, 3822826; 
258543, 3822826; 258543, 3822736; 258423, 3822736; 258423, 3822706; 
258393, 3822706; 258393, 3822646; 258303, 3822646; 258303, 3822616; 
258333, 3822616; 258333, 3822586; 258303, 3822586; 258303, 3822526; 
258333, 3822526; 258333, 3822466; 258363, 3822466; 258363, 3822436; 
258393, 3822436; 258393, 3822376; 258453, 3822376; 258453, 3822346; 
258483, 3822346; 258483, 3822316; 258513, 3822316; 258513, 3822286; 
258573, 3822286; 258573, 3822256; 258603, 3822256; 258603, 3822226; 
258633, 3822226; 258633, 3822196; 258693, 3822196; 258693, 3822166; 
258843, 3822166; 258843, 3822136; 258963, 3822136; 258963, 3822166; 
258993, 3822166; 258993, 3822136; 259023, 3822136; 259023, 3822106; 
259083, 3822106; 259083, 3822076; 259113, 3822076; 259113, 3822016; 
259173, 3822016; 259173, 3821986; 259383, 3821986; 259383, 3821956; 
259413, 3821956; 259413, 3821896; 259443, 3821896; 259443, 3821926; 
259503, 3821926; 259503, 3821956; 259563, 3821956; 259563, 3821986; 
259623, 3821986; 259623, 3822016; 259653, 3822016; 259653, 3822046; 
259683, 3822046; 259683, 3822076; 259743, 3822076; 259743, 3822106; 
259893, 3822106; 259893, 3822076; 259923, 3822076; 259923, 3822016; 
259953, 3822016; 259953, 3821986; 259983, 3821986; 259983, 3821956; 
260013, 3821956; 260013, 3821926; 260043, 3821926; 260043, 3821866; 
260073, 3821866; 260073, 3821836; 260103, 3821836; 260103, 3821806; 
260133, 3821806; 260133, 3821776; 260223, 3821776; 260223, 3821806; 
260253, 3821806; 260253, 3821836; 260313, 3821836; 260313, 3821746; 
260343, 3821746; 260343, 3821686; 260493, 3821686; 260493, 3821716; 
260643, 3821716; 260643, 3821746; 260673, 3821746; 260673, 3821806; 
260733, 3821806; 260733, 3821836; 260793, 3821836; 260793, 3821866; 
260823, 3821866; 260823, 3821896; 260973, 3821896; 260973, 3821926; 
261033, 3821926; 261033, 3821956; 261063, 3821956; 261063, 3821986; 
261093, 3821986; 261093, 3822016; 261123, 3822016; 261123, 3822076; 
261093, 3822076; 261093, 3822136; 261153, 3822136; 261153, 3822166; 
261273, 3822166; 261273, 3822196; 261333, 3822196; 261333, 3822226; 
261363, 3822226; 261363, 3822346; 261393, 3822346; 261393, 3822316; 
261453, 3822316; 261453, 3822286; 261483, 3822286; 261483, 3822256; 
261603, 3822256; 261603, 3822226; 261813, 3822226; 261813, 3822196; 
261873, 3822196; 261873, 3822226; 261903, 3822226; 261903, 3822256; 
261933, 3822256; 261933, 3822316; 261963, 3822316; 261963, 3822376; 
261993, 3822376; 261993, 3822406; 262023, 3822406; 262023, 3822466; 
262083, 3822466; 262083, 3822436; 262113, 3822436; 262113, 3822376; 
262143, 3822376; 262143, 3822346; 262203, 3822346; 262203, 3822316; 
262263, 3822316; 262263, 3822286; 262293, 3822286; 262293, 3822256; 
262323, 3822256; 262323, 3822226; 262353, 3822226; 262353, 3822196; 
262383, 3822196; 262383, 3822166; 262413, 3822166; 262413, 3822136; 
262533, 3822136; 262533, 3822196; 262563, 3822196; 262563, 3822226; 
262623, 3822226; 262623, 3822136; 262653, 3822136; 262653, 3822046; 
262683, 3822046; 262683, 3822016; 262713, 3822016; 262713, 3822046; 
262773, 3822046; 262773, 3822076; 262803, 3822076; 262803, 3822106; 
262863, 3822106; 262863, 3822076; 263073, 3822076; 263073, 3822046; 
263103, 3822046; 263103, 3822016; 263133, 3822016; 263133, 3821956; 
263163, 3821956; 263163, 3821926; 263193, 3821926; 263193, 3821896; 
263223, 3821896; 263223, 3821866; 263253, 3821866; 263253, 3821896; 
263283, 3821896; 263283, 3821986; 263313, 3821986; 263313, 3822016; 
263373, 3822016; 263373, 3822046;

[[Page 354]]

263433, 3822046; 263433, 3822076; 263463, 3822076; 263463, 3822106; 
263493, 3822106; 263493, 3822136; 263553, 3822136; 263553, 3822106; 
263523, 3822106; 263523, 3822046; 263493, 3822046; 263493, 3821896; 
263523, 3821896; 263523, 3821776; 263493, 3821776; 263493, 3821656; 
263523, 3821656; 263523, 3821596; 263553, 3821596; 263553, 3821506; 
263583, 3821506; 263583, 3821446; 263613, 3821446; 263613, 3821416; 
263643, 3821416; 263643, 3821356; 263673, 3821356; 263673, 3821326; 
263703, 3821326; 263703, 3821296; 263793, 3821296; 263793, 3821266; 
263823, 3821266; 263823, 3821206; 263853, 3821206; 263853, 3821176; 
263883, 3821176; 263883, 3821146; 263943, 3821146; 263943, 3821116; 
263973, 3821116; 263973, 3821086; 264033, 3821086; 264033, 3821116; 
264063, 3821116; 264063, 3821146; 264093, 3821146; 264093, 3821116; 
264123, 3821116; 264123, 3821086; 264153, 3821086; 264153, 3821026; 
264213, 3821026; 264213, 3820996; 264273, 3820996; 264273, 3821026; 
264363, 3821026; 264363, 3820996; 264393, 3820996; 264393, 3820966; 
264423, 3820966; 264423, 3820936; 264513, 3820936; 264513, 3820906; 
264573, 3820906; 264573, 3820876; 264633, 3820876; 264633, 3820846; 
264753, 3820846; 264753, 3820816; 264783, 3820816; 264783, 3820756; 
264813, 3820756; 264813, 3820666; 264843, 3820666; 264843, 3820606; 
264873, 3820606; 264873, 3820576; 264933, 3820576; 264933, 3820546; 
264963, 3820546; 264963, 3820486; 264933, 3820486; 264933, 3820456; 
264963, 3820456; 264963, 3820396; 264993, 3820396; 264993, 3820366; 
264963, 3820366; 264963, 3820336; 264933, 3820336; 264933, 3820156; 
264903, 3820156; 264903, 3820096; 264933, 3820096; 264933, 3820126; 
264963, 3820126; 264963, 3820096; 265233, 3820096; 265233, 3820066; 
265263, 3820066; 265263, 3820036; 265203, 3820036; 265203, 3819946; 
265233, 3819946; 265233, 3819916; 265293, 3819916; 265293, 3819976; 
265323, 3819976; 265323, 3820036; 265353, 3820036; 265353, 3820066; 
265383, 3820066; 265383, 3820096; 265443, 3820096; 265443, 3820126; 
265473, 3820126; 265473, 3820156; 265503, 3820156; 265503, 3820186; 
265533, 3820186; 265533, 3820216; 265563, 3820216; 265563, 3820186; 
265593, 3820186; 265593, 3820156; 265563, 3820156; 265563, 3820006; 
265593, 3820006; 265593, 3819976; 265623, 3819976; 265623, 3819946; 
265653, 3819946; 265653, 3819916; 265683, 3819916; 265683, 3819826; 
265653, 3819826; 265653, 3819796; 265623, 3819796; 265623, 3819766; 
265563, 3819766; 265563, 3819736; 265533, 3819736; 265533, 3819706; 
265503, 3819706; 265503, 3819676; 265473, 3819676; 265473, 3819646; 
265533, 3819646; 265533, 3819616; 265563, 3819616; 265563, 3819586; 
265623, 3819586; 265623, 3819616; 265683, 3819616; 265683, 3819646; 
265713, 3819646; 265713, 3819676; 265773, 3819676; 265773, 3819706; 
265833, 3819706; 265833, 3819676; 265863, 3819676; 265863, 3819646; 
266043, 3819646; 266043, 3819616; 266103, 3819616; 266103, 3819646; 
266163, 3819646; 266163, 3819676; 266373, 3819676; 266373, 3819646; 
266403, 3819646; 266403, 3819586; 266433, 3819586; 266433, 3819466; 
266463, 3819466; 266463, 3819376; 266493, 3819376; 266493, 3819346; 
266523, 3819346; 266523, 3819316; 266553, 3819316; 266553, 3819286; 
266613, 3819286; 266613, 3819256; 266643, 3819256; 266643, 3819226; 
266703, 3819226; 266703, 3819196; 266733, 3819196; 266733, 3819256; 
266763, 3819256; 266763, 3819286; 266823, 3819286; 266823, 3819316; 
266853, 3819316; 266853, 3819346; 266883, 3819346; 266883, 3819376; 
266913, 3819376; 266913, 3819346; 266943, 3819346; 266943, 3819256; 
267003, 3819256; 267003, 3819226; 267063, 3819226; 267063, 3819196; 
267183, 3819196; 267183, 3819226; 267483, 3819226; 267483, 3819196; 
267663, 3819196; 267663, 3819166; 267723, 3819166; 267723, 3819136; 
267843, 3819136; 267843, 3819106; 267933, 3819106; 267933, 3819076; 
268023, 3819076; 268023, 3819106; 268143, 3819106; 268143, 3819136; 
268353, 3819136; 268353, 3819166; 268533, 3819166; 268533, 3819196; 
268563, 3819196; 268563, 3819226; 268593, 3819226; 268593, 3819256; 
268623, 3819256; 268623, 3819286; 268653, 3819286; 268653, 3819316; 
268713, 3819316; 268713, 3819346; 268773, 3819346; 268773, 3819376; 
268803, 3819376; 268803, 3819406; 268833, 3819406; 268833, 3819496; 
268803, 3819496; 268803, 3819556; 268773, 3819556; 268773, 3819586; 
268743, 3819586; 268743, 3819616; 268713, 3819616; 268713, 3819706; 
268683, 3819706; 268683, 3819826; 268773, 3819826; 268773, 3819856; 
268893, 3819856; 268893, 3819826; 268953, 3819826; 268953, 3819796; 
268983, 3819796; 268983, 3819826; 269043, 3819826; 269043, 3819856; 
269163, 3819856; 269163, 3819826; 269193, 3819826; 269193, 3819796; 
269223, 3819796; 269223, 3819766; 269253, 3819766; 269253, 3819736; 
269283, 3819736; 269283, 3819706; 269313, 3819706; 269313, 3819676; 
269343, 3819676; 269343, 3819556; 269283, 3819556; 269283, 3819586; 
269253, 3819586; 269253, 3819616; 269223, 3819616; 269223, 3819646; 
269193, 3819646; 269193, 3819676; 269163, 3819676; 269163, 3819736; 
269073, 3819736; 269073, 3819706; 269013, 3819706; 269013, 3819676; 
268953, 3819676; 268953, 3819586; 268983, 3819586; 268983, 3819466; 
268953, 3819466; 268953, 3819406; 268983, 3819406; 268983, 3819346; 
269013, 3819346; 269013, 3819286; 269043, 3819286; 269043, 3819166; 
269013, 3819166; 269013, 3819136; 268983, 3819136; 268983, 3819106; 
268923, 3819106; 268923, 3819076; 268893, 3819076; 268893, 3819046; 
268743, 3819046; 268743, 3819016; 268683, 3819016; 268683, 3818986; 
268653, 3818986; 268653, 3818866; 268563, 3818866; 268563, 3818896; 
268323, 3818896; 268323, 3818866; 268293, 3818866; 268293, 3818836; 
268173, 3818836; 268173, 3818806; 268053, 3818806; 268053, 3818776; 
267963, 3818776; 267963, 3818746; 267933, 3818746; 267933, 3818776; 
267873, 3818776; 267873, 3818806; 267783, 3818806; 267783, 3818746; 
267723, 3818746; 267723, 3818806; 267693, 3818806; 267693, 3818836; 
267663, 3818836; 267663, 3818866; 267423, 3818866; 267423, 3818896; 
267393, 3818896; 267393, 3818926; 267243, 3818926; 267243, 3818896; 
267093, 3818896; 267093, 3818926; 267003, 3818926; 267003, 3818896; 
266943, 3818896; 266943, 3818866; 266913, 3818866; 266913, 3818896; 
266853, 3818896; 266853, 3818866; 266733, 3818866; 266733, 3818896; 
266613, 3818896; 266613, 3818926; 266553, 3818926; 266553, 3818956; 
266463, 3818956; 266463, 3818986; 266433, 3818986; 266433, 3819016; 
266373, 3819016; 266373, 3819046; 266343, 3819046; 266343, 3819106; 
266313, 3819106; 266313, 3819166; 266253, 3819166; 266253, 3819196; 
266223, 3819196; 266223, 3819256; 266193, 3819256; 266193, 3819286; 
266133, 3819286; 266133, 3819346; 266103, 3819346; 266103, 3819376; 
266073, 3819376; 266073, 3819346; 265863, 3819346; 265863, 3819376; 
265803, 3819376; 265803, 3819406; 265773, 3819406; 265773, 3819436; 
265653, 3819436; 265653, 3819406; 265623, 3819406; 265623, 3819376; 
265593, 3819376; 265593, 3819346; 265563, 3819346; 265563, 3819286; 
265503, 3819286; 265503, 3819256;

[[Page 355]]

265443, 3819256; 265443, 3819226; 265383, 3819226; 265383, 3819256; 
265323, 3819256; 265323, 3819316; 265293, 3819316; 265293, 3819406; 
265263, 3819406; 265263, 3819556; 265233, 3819556; 265233, 3819586; 
265263, 3819586; 265263, 3819616; 265293, 3819616; 265293, 3819646; 
265323, 3819646; 265323, 3819736; 265143, 3819736; 265143, 3819766; 
265113, 3819766; 265113, 3819796; 265083, 3819796; 265083, 3819826; 
265053, 3819826; 265053, 3819856; 265023, 3819856; 265023, 3819886; 
264993, 3819886; 264993, 3819916; 264933, 3819916; 264933, 3819886; 
264873, 3819886; 264873, 3819916; 264813, 3819916; 264813, 3819976; 
264783, 3819976; 264783, 3820276; 264753, 3820276; 264753, 3820396; 
264723, 3820396; 264723, 3820426; 264693, 3820426; 264693, 3820456; 
264663, 3820456; 264663, 3820486; 264453, 3820486; 264453, 3820516; 
264423, 3820516; 264423, 3820546; 264393, 3820546; 264393, 3820576; 
264333, 3820576; 264333, 3820606; 264303, 3820606; 264303, 3820636; 
264273, 3820636; 264273, 3820666; 264243, 3820666; 264243, 3820696; 
264183, 3820696; 264183, 3820726; 264153, 3820726; 264153, 3820756; 
264123, 3820756; 264123, 3820786; 264063, 3820786; 264063, 3820816; 
264003, 3820816; 264003, 3820846; 263943, 3820846; 263943, 3820876; 
263883, 3820876; 263883, 3820906; 263823, 3820906; 263823, 3820936; 
263793, 3820936; 263793, 3820966; 263673, 3820966; 263673, 3820996; 
263613, 3820996; 263613, 3821026; 263553, 3821026; 263553, 3821056; 
263493, 3821056; 263493, 3821116; 263463, 3821116; 263463, 3821146; 
263433, 3821146; 263433, 3821176; 263373, 3821176; 263373, 3821206; 
263343, 3821206; 263343, 3821236; 263313, 3821236; 263313, 3821296; 
263253, 3821296; 263253, 3821326; 263223, 3821326; 263223, 3821356; 
263163, 3821356; 263163, 3821386; 263133, 3821386; 263133, 3821416; 
263103, 3821416; 263103, 3821446; 263073, 3821446; 263073, 3821596; 
263013, 3821596; 263013, 3821626; 262953, 3821626; 262953, 3821656; 
262923, 3821656; 262923, 3821686; 262863, 3821686; 262863, 3821716; 
262803, 3821716; 262803, 3821746; 262743, 3821746; 262743, 3821776; 
262683, 3821776; 262683, 3821806; 262563, 3821806; 262563, 3821836; 
262473, 3821836; 262473, 3821866; 262323, 3821866; 262323, 3821896; 
262263, 3821896; 262263, 3821926; 262233, 3821926; 262233, 3821956; 
262053, 3821956; 262053, 3821926; 261963, 3821926; 261963, 3821896; 
261813, 3821896; 261813, 3821926; 261753, 3821926; 261753, 3821956; 
261603, 3821956; 261603, 3821926; 261543, 3821926; 261543, 3821896; 
261513, 3821896; 261513, 3821866; 261393, 3821866; 261393, 3821836; 
261363, 3821836; 261363, 3821806; 261333, 3821806; 261333, 3821776; 
261303, 3821776; 261303, 3821746; 261243, 3821746; 261243, 3821716; 
261213, 3821716; 261213, 3821686; 261153, 3821686; 261153, 3821656; 
261123, 3821656; 261123, 3821626; 261093, 3821626; 261093, 3821596; 
261063, 3821596; 261063, 3821566; 261003, 3821566; 261003, 3821536; 
260943, 3821536; 260943, 3821506; 260913, 3821506; 260913, 3821476; 
260883, 3821476; 260883, 3821446; 260853, 3821446; 260853, 3821416; 
260823, 3821416; 260823, 3821386; 260793, 3821386; 260793, 3821356; 
260763, 3821356; 260763, 3821326; 260733, 3821326; 260733, 3821266; 
260703, 3821266; 260703, 3821236; 260673, 3821236; 260673, 3821206; 
260643, 3821206; 260643, 3821176; 260613, 3821176; 260613, 3821146; 
260583, 3821146; 260583, 3821116; 260553, 3821116; 260553, 3821086; 
260583, 3821086; 260583, 3821026; 260613, 3821026; 260613, 3820936; 
260553, 3820936; 260553, 3820906; 260523, 3820906; 260523, 3820876; 
260463, 3820876; 260463, 3820846; 260403, 3820846; 260403, 3820816; 
260343, 3820816; 260343, 3820876; 260373, 3820876; 260373, 3820936; 
260403, 3820936; 260403, 3821056; 260373, 3821056; 260373, 3821086; 
260313, 3821086; 260313, 3821116; 260253, 3821116; 260253, 3821146; 
260223, 3821146; 260223, 3821176; 260193, 3821176; 260193, 3821206; 
260163, 3821206; 260163, 3821236; 260073, 3821236; 260073, 3821266; 
259983, 3821266; 259983, 3821296; 259923, 3821296; 259923, 3821326; 
259863, 3821326; 259863, 3821446; 259833, 3821446; 259833, 3821476; 
259803, 3821476; 259803, 3821566; 259833, 3821566; 259833, 3821716; 
259803, 3821716; 259803, 3821746; 259773, 3821746; 259773, 3821806; 
259653, 3821806; 259653, 3821776; 259623, 3821776; 259623, 3821746; 
259563, 3821746; 259563, 3821716; 259503, 3821716; 259503, 3821686; 
259473, 3821686; 259473, 3821626; 259413, 3821626; 259413, 3821596; 
259323, 3821596; 259323, 3821566; 259293, 3821566; 259293, 3821536; 
259203, 3821536; 259203, 3821566; 259143, 3821566; 259143, 3821596; 
259113, 3821596; 259113, 3821626; 259083, 3821626; 259083, 3821686; 
259053, 3821686; 259053, 3821716; 258993, 3821716; 258993, 3821776; 
258963, 3821776; 258963, 3821866; 258933, 3821866; 258933, 3821896; 
258903, 3821896; 258903, 3821926; 258873, 3821926; 258873, 3821956; 
258843, 3821956; 258843, 3821926; 258813, 3821926; 258813, 3821956; 
258663, 3821956; 258663, 3821986; 258603, 3821986; 258603, 3821956; 
258543, 3821956; 258543, 3821926; 258483, 3821926; 258483, 3821956; 
258513, 3821956; 258513, 3822046; 258483, 3822046; 258483, 3822076; 
258453, 3822076; 258453, 3822106; 258393, 3822106; 258393, 3822136; 
258303, 3822136; 258303, 3822166; 258243, 3822166; 258243, 3822196; 
258183, 3822196; 258183, 3822226; 258153, 3822226; 258153, 3822256; 
258063, 3822256; 258063, 3822376; 258033, 3822376; 258033, 3822406; 
257973, 3822406; 257973, 3822436; 257943, 3822436; 257943, 3822466; 
257973, 3822466; 257973, 3822646; 257943, 3822646; 257943, 3822676; 
257973, 3822676; 257973, 3822736; 258003, 3822736; 258003, 3822826; 
257883, 3822826; 257883, 3822856; 257793, 3822856; 257793, 3822886; 
257733, 3822886; 257733, 3822916; 257703, 3822916; 257703, 3822946; 
257553, 3822946; 257553, 3822916; 257493, 3822916; 257493, 3823006; 
257403, 3823006; 257403, 3822976; 257163, 3822976; 257163, 3823006; 
257103, 3823006; 257103, 3823066; 257073, 3823066; 257073, 3823126; 
257043, 3823126; 257043, 3823156; 257013, 3823156; 257013, 3823186; 
256983, 3823186; 256983, 3823246; 256953, 3823246; 256953, 3823276; 
256923, 3823276; 256923, 3823336; 256893, 3823336; 256893, 3823396; 
256863, 3823396; 256863, 3823426; 256833, 3823426; 256833, 3823456; 
256863, 3823456; 256863, 3823516; 256893, 3823516; 256893, 3823606; 
256923, 3823606; 256923, 3823666; 256893, 3823666; 256893, 3823756; 
256863, 3823756; 256863, 3823786; 256923, 3823786; 256923, 3823756; 
256983, 3823756; 256983, 3823726; 257013, 3823726; 257013, 3823696; 
257043, 3823696; 257043, 3823666; 257103, 3823666; 257103, 3823636; 
257133, 3823636; 257133, 3823606; 257163, 3823606; 257163, 3823576; 
257193, 3823576; 257193, 3823486; 257223, 3823486; 257223, 3823456; 
257253, 3823456; 257253, 3823366; 257283, 3823366; 257283, 3823336; 
257463, 3823336; 257463, 3823306; 257703, 3823306; 257703, 3823276; 
257793, 3823276; 257793, 3823246; 257853, 3823246; 257853, 3823216; 
257943, 3823216; 257943, 3823186;

[[Page 356]]

257973, 3823186; 257973, 3823156; 258003, 3823156; 258003, 3823126; 
258213, 3823126; 258213, 3823156; 258243, 3823156; 258243, 3823336; 
258363, 3823336; 258363, 3823366; 258393, 3823366; 258393, 3823396; 
258423, 3823396; 258423, 3823456; 258483, 3823456; 258483, 3823486; 
258543, 3823486; 258543, 3823516; 258573, 3823516; 258573, 3823546; 
258603, 3823546; 258603, 3823576; 258633, 3823576; 258633, 3823756; 
258603, 3823756; 258603, 3823786; 258573, 3823786; 258573, 3823816; 
258543, 3823816; 258543, 3823846; 258513, 3823846; 258513, 3823906; 
258483, 3823906; 258483, 3823966; 258453, 3823966; 258453, 3824086; 
258213, 3824086; 258213, 3824056; 258153, 3824056; 258153, 3824086; 
258093, 3824086; 258093, 3824116; 258063, 3824116; 258063, 3824146; 
258003, 3824146; 258003, 3824176; 257973, 3824176; 257973, 3824206; 
257943, 3824206; 257943, 3824266; 257913, 3824266; 257913, 3824386; 
257883, 3824386; 257883, 3824416; 257853, 3824416; 257853, 3824476; 
257883, 3824476; 257883, 3824506; 257913, 3824506; 257913, 3824536; 
257973, 3824536; 257973, 3824566; 258003, 3824566; 258003, 3824596; 
258033, 3824596; 258033, 3824656; 257943, 3824656; 257943, 3824686; 
257823, 3824686; 257823, 3824716; 257793, 3824716; 257793, 3824746; 
257853, 3824746; 257853, 3824776; 257883, 3824776; 257883, 3824806; 
257913, 3824806; 257913, 3824896; 257943, 3824896; 257943, 3824956; 
257973, 3824956; 257973, 3824986; 258003, 3824986; 258003, 3825016; 
258063, 3825016; 258063, 3825046; 258093, 3825046; 258093, 3825106; 
258003, 3825106; 258003, 3825136; 257913, 3825136; 257913, 3825196; 
257883, 3825196; 257883, 3825256; 257853, 3825256; 257853, 3825226; 
257763, 3825226; 257763, 3825196; 257733, 3825196; 257733, 3825166; 
257703, 3825166; 257703, 3825136; 257643, 3825136; 257643, 3825166; 
257583, 3825166; 257583, 3825196; 257553, 3825196; 257553, 3825226; 
257523, 3825226; 257523, 3825256; 257493, 3825256; 257493, 3825286; 
257463, 3825286; 257463, 3825376; 257433, 3825376; 257433, 3825436; 
257403, 3825436; 257403, 3825466; 257373, 3825466; 257373, 3825526; 
257343, 3825526; 257343, 3825556; 257313, 3825556; 257313, 3825586; 
257283, 3825586; 257283, 3825616; 257403, 3825616; 257403, 3825826; 
257373, 3825826; 257373, 3825886; 257343, 3825886; 257343, 3825946; 
257313, 3825946; 257313, 3826006; 257343, 3826006; 257343, 3826036; 
257403, 3826036; 257403, 3826006; 257463, 3826006; 257463, 3826036; 
257493, 3826036; 257493, 3826066; 257553, 3826066; 257553, 3826156; 
257583, 3826156; 257583, 3826186; 257643, 3826186; 257643, 3826216; 
257613, 3826216; 257613, 3826246; 257583, 3826246; 257583, 3826276; 
257553, 3826276; 257553, 3826246; 257463, 3826246; 257463, 3826216; 
257403, 3826216; 257403, 3826186; 257343, 3826186; 257343, 3826216; 
257283, 3826216; 257283, 3826186; 257223, 3826186; 257223, 3826216; 
257193, 3826216; 257193, 3826246; 257163, 3826246; 257163, 3826276; 
257133, 3826276; 257133, 3826336; 257103, 3826336; 257103, 3826366; 
257043, 3826366; 257043, 3826336; 256983, 3826336; 256983, 3826366; 
256953, 3826366; 256953, 3826396; 256893, 3826396; 256893, 3826426; 
256773, 3826426; 256773, 3826456; 256713, 3826456; 256713, 3826426; 
256443, 3826426; 256443, 3826456; 256563, 3826456; 256563, 3826486; 
256593, 3826486; 256593, 3826516; 256623, 3826516; 256623, 3826576; 
256653, 3826576; 256653, 3826666; 256623, 3826666; 256623, 3826696; 
256593, 3826696; 256593, 3826726; 256563, 3826726; 256563, 3826756; 
256533, 3826756; 256533, 3826786; 256503, 3826786; 256503, 3826816; 
256473, 3826816; 256473, 3826846; 256413, 3826846; 256413, 3826906; 
256383, 3826906; 256383, 3826966; 256353, 3826966; 256353, 3827026; 
256323, 3827026; 256323, 3827056; 256173, 3827056; 256173, 3827086; 
256143, 3827086; 256143, 3827116; 256113, 3827116; 256113, 3827416; 
256083, 3827416; 256083, 3827536; 256053, 3827536; 256053, 3827596; 
256023, 3827596; 256023, 3827626; 255993, 3827626; 255993, 3827656; 
255963, 3827656; 255963, 3827686; 255933, 3827686; 255933, 3827716; 
255903, 3827716; 255903, 3827746; 255873, 3827746; 255873, 3827806; 
255843, 3827806; 255843, 3827836; 255753, 3827836; 255753, 3827866; 
255633, 3827866; 255633, 3827896; 255603, 3827896; 255603, 3827926; 
255573, 3827926; 255573, 3827986; 255543, 3827986; 255543, 3828166; 
255513, 3828166; 255513, 3828196; 255483, 3828196; 255483, 3828226; 
255453, 3828226; 255453, 3828256; 255423, 3828256; 255423, 3828286; 
255393, 3828286; 255393, 3828316; 255363, 3828316; 255363, 3828346; 
255333, 3828346; 255333, 3828406; 255303, 3828406; 255303, 3828466; 
255273, 3828466; 255273, 3828496; 255183, 3828496; 255183, 3828526; 
254973, 3828526; 254973, 3828556; 254913, 3828556; 254913, 3828616; 
254883, 3828616; 254883, 3828676; 254853, 3828676; 254853, 3828706; 
254823, 3828706; 254823, 3828766; 254853, 3828766; 254853, 3828796; 
254823, 3828796; 254823, 3828856; 254853, 3828856; 254853, 3828886; 
255003, 3828886; 255003, 3828916; 255033, 3828916; 255033, 3829036; 
255003, 3829036; 255003, 3829126; 254973, 3829126; 254973, 3829156; 
254943, 3829156; 254943, 3829186; 254913, 3829186; 254913, 3829216; 
254853, 3829216; 254853, 3829276; 254823, 3829276; 254823, 3829426; 
254853, 3829426; 254853, 3829486; 254883, 3829486; 254883, 3829516; 
254913, 3829516; 254913, 3829546; 254883, 3829546; 254883, 3829606; 
254853, 3829606; 254853, 3829666; 254973, 3829666; 254973, 3829636; 
255033, 3829636; 255033, 3829666; 255153, 3829666; 255153, 3829696; 
255273, 3829696; 255273, 3829726; 255303, 3829726; 255303, 3829786; 
255333, 3829786; 255333, 3829756; 255363, 3829756; 255363, 3829636; 
255333, 3829636; 255333, 3829606; 255273, 3829606; 255273, 3829576; 
255183, 3829576; 255183, 3829546; 255123, 3829546; 255123, 3829516; 
255093, 3829516; 255093, 3829456; 255063, 3829456; 255063, 3829396; 
255093, 3829396; 255093, 3829336; 255123, 3829336; 255123, 3829306; 
255153, 3829306; 255153, 3829276; 255183, 3829276; 255183, 3829246; 
255213, 3829246; 255213, 3829216; 255243, 3829216; 255243, 3829186; 
255213, 3829186; 255213, 3829096; 255183, 3829096; 255183, 3829036; 
255213, 3829036; 255213, 3828976; 255243, 3828976; 255243, 3828886; 
255213, 3828886; 255213, 3828826; 255183, 3828826; 255183, 3828766; 
255213, 3828766; 255213, 3828736; 255243, 3828736; 255243, 3828766; 
255333, 3828766; 255333, 3828736; 255423, 3828736; 255423, 3828706; 
255453, 3828706; 255453, 3828676; 255483, 3828676; 255483, 3828646; 
255513, 3828646; 255513, 3828586; 255543, 3828586; 255543, 3828526; 
255513, 3828526; 255513, 3828436; 255543, 3828436; 255543, 3828406; 
255573, 3828406; 255573, 3828376; 255633, 3828376; 255633, 3828346; 
255723, 3828346; 255723, 3828316; 255753, 3828316; 255753, 3828346; 
255783, 3828346; 255783, 3828286; 255813, 3828286; 255813, 3828316; 
255873, 3828316; 255873, 3828196; 255843, 3828196; 255843, 3828136; 
255813, 3828136; 255813, 3828076; 255783, 3828076; 255783, 3828046; 
255813, 3828046; 255813, 3828016;

[[Page 357]]

255873, 3828016; 255873, 3827986; 255963, 3827986; 255963, 3827956; 
256023, 3827956; 256023, 3827926; 256053, 3827926; 256053, 3827956; 
256083, 3827956; 256083, 3827926; 256113, 3827926; 256113, 3827896; 
256143, 3827896; 256143, 3827836; 256173, 3827836; 256173, 3827806; 
256203, 3827806; 256203, 3827776; 256233, 3827776; 256233, 3827746; 
256263, 3827746; 256263, 3827716; 256293, 3827716; 256293, 3827686; 
256263, 3827686; 256263, 3827656; 256233, 3827656; 256233, 3827536; 
256263, 3827536; 256263, 3827506; 256293, 3827506; 256293, 3827416; 
256353, 3827416; 256353, 3827236; 256413, 3827236; 256413, 3827206; 
256473, 3827206; 256473, 3827236; 256533, 3827236; 256533, 3827206; 
256563, 3827206; 256563, 3827116; 256593, 3827116; 256593, 3827056; 
256623, 3827056; 256623, 3827026; 256653, 3827026; 256653, 3826966; 
256623, 3826966; 256623, 3826846; 256653, 3826846; 256653, 3826816; 
256683, 3826816; 256683, 3826786; 256713, 3826786; 256713, 3826756; 
256773, 3826756; 256773, 3826726; 256833, 3826726; 256833, 3826696; 
256863, 3826696; 256863, 3826756; 256893, 3826756; 256893, 3826816; 
256923, 3826816; 256923, 3826846; 256983, 3826846; 256983, 3826876; 
257103, 3826876; 257103, 3826906; 257163, 3826906; 257163, 3826846; 
257223, 3826846; 257223, 3826786; 257313, 3826786; 257313, 3826816; 
257373, 3826816; 257373, 3826876; 257403, 3826876; 257403, 3826846; 
257433, 3826846; 257433, 3826816; 257463, 3826816; 257463, 3826846; 
257493, 3826846; 257493, 3826876; 257523, 3826876; 257523, 3826846; 
257583, 3826846; 257583, 3826876; 257643, 3826876; 257643, 3826726; 
257673, 3826726; 257673, 3826696; 257733, 3826696; 257733, 3826666; 
257763, 3826666; 257763, 3826576; 257733, 3826576; 257733, 3826516; 
257763, 3826516; 257763, 3826456; 257793, 3826456; 257793, 3826426; 
257853, 3826426; 257853, 3826486; 257943, 3826486; 257943, 3826456; 
257973, 3826456; 257973, 3826426; 258003, 3826426; 258003, 3826366; 
257973, 3826366; 257973, 3826246; 258003, 3826246; 258003, 3826216; 
257973, 3826216; 257973, 3826186; 257943, 3826186; 257943, 3826126; 
257973, 3826126; 257973, 3826096; 258063, 3826096; 258063, 3826066; 
258003, 3826066; 258003, 3826036; 257883, 3826036; 257883, 3825976; 
257913, 3825976; 257913, 3825886; 257883, 3825886; 257883, 3825796; 
257853, 3825796; 257853, 3825766; 257823, 3825766; 257823, 3825736; 
257853, 3825736; 257853, 3825706; 257823, 3825706; 257823, 3825646; 
257853, 3825646; 257853, 3825676; 257913, 3825676; 257913, 3825646; 
257973, 3825646; 257973, 3825616; 258033, 3825616; 258033, 3825586; 
258093, 3825586; 258093, 3825556; 258123, 3825556; 258123, 3825466; 
258153, 3825466; 258153, 3825316; 258183, 3825316; 258183, 3825286; 
258213, 3825286; 258213, 3825256; 258243, 3825256; 258243, 3825196; 
258273, 3825196; 258273, 3825136; 258303, 3825136; 258303, 3825076; 
258333, 3825076; 258333, 3825046; 258393, 3825046; 258393, 3825136; 
258423, 3825136; 258423, 3825166; 258453, 3825166; 258453, 3825196; 
258483, 3825196; 258483, 3825226; 258543, 3825226; 258543, 3825346; 
258753, 3825346; 258753, 3825316; 258813, 3825316; 258813, 3825286; 
258873, 3825286; 258873, 3825316; 258903, 3825316; 258903, 3825376; 
258753, 3825376; 258753, 3825436; 258723, 3825436; 258723, 3825466; 
258693, 3825466; 258693, 3825496; 258663, 3825496; 258663, 3825556; 
258633, 3825556; 258633, 3825616; 258573, 3825616; 258573, 3825646; 
258513, 3825646; 258513, 3825676; 258423, 3825676; 258423, 3825736; 
258393, 3825736; 258393, 3825766; 258423, 3825766; 258423, 3825796; 
258453, 3825796; 258453, 3825826; 258483, 3825826; 258483, 3825856; 
258543, 3825856; 258543, 3825886; 258603, 3825886; 258603, 3825916; 
258633, 3825916; 258633, 3825976; 258663, 3825976; 258663, 3826006; 
258693, 3826006; 258693, 3826066; 258783, 3826066; 258783, 3826096; 
258843, 3826096; 258843, 3826126; 258873, 3826126; 258873, 3826096; 
258903, 3826096; 258903, 3826066; 258993, 3826066; 258993, 3826036; 
259143, 3826036; 259143, 3826006; 259203, 3826006; 259203, 3826126; 
259233, 3826126; 259233, 3826186; 259263, 3826186; 259263, 3826216; 
259293, 3826216; 259293, 3826276; 259323, 3826276; 259323, 3826306; 
259353, 3826306; 259353, 3826336; 259413, 3826336; 259413, 3826366; 
259443, 3826366; 259443, 3826456; 259413, 3826456; 259413, 3826486; 
259383, 3826486; 259383, 3826546; 259353, 3826546; 259353, 3826576; 
259323, 3826576; 259323, 3826606; 259293, 3826606; 259293, 3826636; 
259323, 3826636; 259323, 3826696; 259353, 3826696; 259353, 3826756; 
259383, 3826756; 259383, 3826876; 259353, 3826876; 259353, 3827056; 
259443, 3827056; 259443, 3827026; 259503, 3827026; 259503, 3827056; 
259563, 3827056; 259563, 3827086; 259593, 3827086; 259593, 3827116; 
259623, 3827116; 259623, 3827146; 259653, 3827146; 259653, 3827176; 
259683, 3827176; 259683, 3827206; 259833, 3827206; 259833, 3827176; 
259863, 3827176; 259863, 3827206; 259893, 3827206; 259893, 3827266; 
259863, 3827266; 259863, 3827386; 259833, 3827386; 259833, 3827446; 
259803, 3827446; 259803, 3827536; 259833, 3827536; 259833, 3827506; 
259893, 3827506; 259893, 3827536; 259923, 3827536; 259923, 3827566; 
259953, 3827566; 259953, 3827626; 259983, 3827626; 259983, 3827656; 
259953, 3827656; 259953, 3827746; 259923, 3827746; 259923, 3827806; 
259893, 3827806; 259893, 3828016; 259923, 3828016; 259923, 3828046; 
259893, 3828046; 259893, 3828076; 259863, 3828076; 259863, 3828136; 
259833, 3828136; 259833, 3828226; 259803, 3828226; 259803, 3828256; 
259773, 3828256; 259773, 3828286; 259743, 3828286; 259743, 3828346; 
259713, 3828346; 259713, 3828376; 259683, 3828376; 259683, 3828436; 
259713, 3828436; 259713, 3828496; 259743, 3828496; 259743, 3828526; 
259773, 3828526; 259773, 3828556; 259803, 3828556; 259803, 3828616; 
259833, 3828616; 259833, 3828406; 259953, 3828406; 259953, 3828436; 
259983, 3828436; 259983, 3828466; 260013, 3828466; 260013, 3828796; 
259983, 3828796; 259983, 3828856; 259953, 3828856; 259953, 3828886; 
259923, 3828886; 259923, 3829036; 259953, 3829036; 259953, 3829096; 
259983, 3829096; 259983, 3829126; 260073, 3829126; 260073, 3829156; 
260103, 3829156; 260103, 3829216; 260073, 3829216; 260073, 3829276; 
260043, 3829276; 260043, 3829306; 259983, 3829306; 259983, 3829336; 
259923, 3829336; 259923, 3829486; 259893, 3829486; 259893, 3829576; 
259863, 3829576; 259863, 3829606; 259833, 3829606; 259833, 3829666; 
259863, 3829666; 259863, 3829696; 259893, 3829696; 259893, 3829786; 
259953, 3829786; 259953, 3829816; 260013, 3829816; 260013, 3829876; 
260223, 3829876; 260223, 3829906; 260253, 3829906; 260253, 3829936; 
260283, 3829936; 260283, 3830116; 260253, 3830116; 260253, 3830206; 
260223, 3830206; 260223, 3830236; 260193, 3830236; 260193, 3830296; 
260163, 3830296; 260163, 3830356; 260193, 3830356; 260193, 3830416; 
260223, 3830416; 260223, 3830446; 260253, 3830446; 260253, 3830476; 
260283, 3830476; 260283, 3830506; 260313, 3830506; 260313, 3830536; 
260343, 3830536; 260343, 3830566;

[[Page 358]]

260403, 3830566; 260403, 3830596; 260463, 3830596; 260463, 3830626; 
260493, 3830626; 260493, 3830716; 260463, 3830716; 260463, 3830746; 
260433, 3830746; 260433, 3830776; 260373, 3830776; 260373, 3830806; 
260313, 3830806; 260313, 3830836; 260283, 3830836; 260283, 3830926; 
260253, 3830926; 260253, 3831046; 260223, 3831046; 260223, 3831196; 
260253, 3831196; 260253, 3831226; 260283, 3831226; 260283, 3831256; 
260373, 3831256; 260373, 3831286; 260403, 3831286; 260403, 3831316; 
260463, 3831316; 260463, 3831286; 260553, 3831286; 260553, 3831316; 
260583, 3831316; 260583, 3831466; 260613, 3831466; 260613, 3831616; 
260583, 3831616; 260583, 3831676; 260643, 3831676; 260643, 3831646; 
260703, 3831646; 260703, 3831616; 260793, 3831616; 260793, 3831646; 
260823, 3831646; 260823, 3831676; 260853, 3831676; 260853, 3831706; 
260883, 3831706; 260883, 3831736; 260913, 3831736; 260913, 3831796; 
260943, 3831796; 260943, 3831826; 260973, 3831826; 260973, 3831856; 
261003, 3831856; 261003, 3831916; 260973, 3831916; 260973, 3832036; 
261003, 3832036; 261003, 3832066; 261033, 3832066; 261033, 3832096; 
261063, 3832096; 261063, 3832126; 261093, 3832126; 261093, 3832156; 
261153, 3832156; 261153, 3832186; 261363, 3832186; 261363, 3832156; 
261393, 3832156; 261393, 3832126; 261423, 3832126; 261423, 3832096; 
261453, 3832096; 261453, 3832036; 261513, 3832036; 261513, 3832066; 
261543, 3832066; 261543, 3832126; 261513, 3832126; 261513, 3832156; 
261483, 3832156; 261483, 3832246; 261453, 3832246; 261453, 3832276; 
261423, 3832276; 261423, 3832336; 261393, 3832336; 261393, 3832426; 
261423, 3832426; 261423, 3832456; 261483, 3832456; 261483, 3832486; 
261513, 3832486; 261513, 3832516; 261543, 3832516; 261543, 3832546; 
261573, 3832546; 261573, 3832606; 261603, 3832606; 261603, 3832636; 
261633, 3832636; 261633, 3832756; 261603, 3832756; 261603, 3832786; 
261633, 3832786; 261633, 3832816; 261693, 3832816; 261693, 3832786; 
261723, 3832786; 261723, 3832816; 261813, 3832816; 261813, 3832906; 
261783, 3832906; 261783, 3832936; 261753, 3832936; 261753, 3832966; 
261783, 3832966; 261783, 3832996; 261813, 3832996; 261813, 3833056; 
261843, 3833056; 261843, 3833086; 261963, 3833086; 261963, 3833116; 
261993, 3833116; 261993, 3833086; 262083, 3833086; 262083, 3833116; 
262143, 3833116; 262143, 3833146; 262203, 3833146; 262203, 3833176; 
returning to 262233, 3833176.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units 2 and 3 follows:

[[Page 359]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09FE11.002

    (9) Unit 4: Sespe Creek, Ventura County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Wheeler Springs, Lion Canyon, 
Topatopa Mts., and Devil's Heart Peak, land bounded by the following UTM 
coordinates (E, N): 292923, 3828526; 292923, 3828496; 292953, 3828496; 
292953, 3828376; 292923, 3828376; 292923, 3828316;

[[Page 360]]

292893, 3828316; 292893, 3828256; 292863, 3828256; 292863, 3828226; 
292833, 3828226; 292833, 3828166; 292803, 3828166; 292803, 3828046; 
292923, 3828046; 292923, 3828016; 292953, 3828016; 292953, 3827986; 
292923, 3827986; 292923, 3827956; 292893, 3827956; 292893, 3827926; 
292863, 3827926; 292863, 3827836; 292833, 3827836; 292833, 3827776; 
292803, 3827776; 292803, 3827716; 292773, 3827716; 292773, 3827686; 
292743, 3827686; 292743, 3827626; 292713, 3827626; 292713, 3827416; 
292683, 3827416; 292683, 3827386; 292653, 3827386; 292653, 3827356; 
292623, 3827356; 292623, 3827326; 292593, 3827326; 292593, 3827236; 
292563, 3827236; 292563, 3827176; 292533, 3827176; 292533, 3827116; 
292503, 3827116; 292503, 3827056; 292473, 3827056; 292473, 3826996; 
292443, 3826996; 292443, 3826936; 292473, 3826936; 292473, 3826876; 
292533, 3826876; 292533, 3826816; 292503, 3826816; 292503, 3826756; 
292473, 3826756; 292473, 3826726; 292443, 3826726; 292443, 3826606; 
292413, 3826606; 292413, 3826576; 292383, 3826576; 292383, 3826546; 
292353, 3826546; 292353, 3826516; 292263, 3826516; 292263, 3826486; 
292143, 3826486; 292143, 3826456; 292053, 3826456; 292053, 3826366; 
292233, 3826366; 292233, 3826396; 292443, 3826396; 292443, 3826366; 
292533, 3826366; 292533, 3826396; 292623, 3826396; 292623, 3826426; 
292713, 3826426; 292713, 3826456; 292743, 3826456; 292743, 3826486; 
292833, 3826486; 292833, 3826516; 292863, 3826516; 292863, 3826546; 
292893, 3826546; 292893, 3826576; 292923, 3826576; 292923, 3826606; 
292983, 3826606; 292983, 3826636; 293073, 3826636; 293073, 3826666; 
293133, 3826666; 293133, 3826696; 293253, 3826696; 293253, 3826576; 
293223, 3826576; 293223, 3826516; 293193, 3826516; 293193, 3826426; 
293283, 3826426; 293283, 3826396; 293553, 3826396; 293553, 3826426; 
293583, 3826426; 293583, 3826456; 293643, 3826456; 293643, 3826486; 
293613, 3826486; 293613, 3826546; 293583, 3826546; 293583, 3826576; 
293373, 3826576; 293373, 3826606; 293343, 3826606; 293343, 3826636; 
293313, 3826636; 293313, 3826666; 293343, 3826666; 293343, 3826756; 
293373, 3826756; 293373, 3826786; 293433, 3826786; 293433, 3826816; 
293553, 3826816; 293553, 3826846; 293583, 3826846; 293583, 3826876; 
293733, 3826876; 293733, 3826696; 293763, 3826696; 293763, 3826666; 
293793, 3826666; 293793, 3826636; 293913, 3826636; 293913, 3826606; 
293973, 3826606; 293973, 3826576; 294003, 3826576; 294003, 3826516; 
294093, 3826516; 294093, 3826486; 294123, 3826486; 294123, 3826516; 
294153, 3826516; 294153, 3826546; 294213, 3826546; 294213, 3826576; 
294243, 3826576; 294243, 3826606; 294333, 3826606; 294333, 3826636; 
294513, 3826636; 294513, 3826666; 294633, 3826666; 294633, 3826606; 
294603, 3826606; 294603, 3826576; 294543, 3826576; 294543, 3826546; 
294513, 3826546; 294513, 3826516; 294453, 3826516; 294453, 3826486; 
294423, 3826486; 294423, 3826426; 294393, 3826426; 294393, 3826366; 
294363, 3826366; 294363, 3826306; 294393, 3826306; 294393, 3826246; 
294423, 3826246; 294423, 3826216; 294453, 3826216; 294453, 3826186; 
294483, 3826186; 294483, 3826156; 294543, 3826156; 294543, 3826126; 
294573, 3826126; 294573, 3826096; 294603, 3826096; 294603, 3826066; 
294633, 3826066; 294633, 3826036; 294663, 3826036; 294663, 3825976; 
294693, 3825976; 294693, 3825946; 294753, 3825946; 294753, 3825916; 
294873, 3825916; 294873, 3825946; 294903, 3825946; 294903, 3825976; 
294933, 3825976; 294933, 3826006; 294963, 3826006; 294963, 3826036; 
295143, 3826036; 295143, 3826066; 295203, 3826066; 295203, 3826096; 
295233, 3826096; 295233, 3826126; 295263, 3826126; 295263, 3826156; 
295323, 3826156; 295323, 3826186; 295353, 3826186; 295353, 3826246; 
295293, 3826246; 295293, 3826276; 295233, 3826276; 295233, 3826306; 
295173, 3826306; 295173, 3826336; 295143, 3826336; 295143, 3826516; 
295173, 3826516; 295173, 3826606; 295203, 3826606; 295203, 3826636; 
295233, 3826636; 295233, 3826576; 295263, 3826576; 295263, 3826516; 
295293, 3826516; 295293, 3826456; 295323, 3826456; 295323, 3826426; 
295413, 3826426; 295413, 3826456; 295473, 3826456; 295473, 3826426; 
295563, 3826426; 295563, 3826456; 295623, 3826456; 295623, 3826486; 
295683, 3826486; 295683, 3826516; 295743, 3826516; 295743, 3826486; 
295773, 3826486; 295773, 3826516; 295833, 3826516; 295833, 3826456; 
295863, 3826456; 295863, 3826426; 295893, 3826426; 295893, 3826396; 
295953, 3826396; 295953, 3826366; 296013, 3826366; 296013, 3826336; 
296073, 3826336; 296073, 3826306; 296163, 3826306; 296163, 3826276; 
296193, 3826276; 296193, 3826246; 296283, 3826246; 296283, 3826216; 
296313, 3826216; 296313, 3826186; 296343, 3826186; 296343, 3826156; 
296373, 3826156; 296373, 3826126; 296403, 3826126; 296403, 3826066; 
296433, 3826066; 296433, 3826006; 296463, 3826006; 296463, 3825976; 
296493, 3825976; 296493, 3825946; 296523, 3825946; 296523, 3825886; 
296553, 3825886; 296553, 3825856; 296583, 3825856; 296583, 3825826; 
296613, 3825826; 296613, 3825796; 296643, 3825796; 296643, 3825766; 
296703, 3825766; 296703, 3825736; 296733, 3825736; 296733, 3825766; 
296763, 3825766; 296763, 3825946; 296793, 3825946; 296793, 3826036; 
296823, 3826036; 296823, 3826096; 296853, 3826096; 296853, 3826156; 
296883, 3826156; 296883, 3826186; 296943, 3826186; 296943, 3826216; 
297153, 3826216; 297153, 3826186; 297183, 3826186; 297183, 3826156; 
297273, 3826156; 297273, 3826126; 297363, 3826126; 297363, 3826096; 
297393, 3826096; 297393, 3826126; 297453, 3826126; 297453, 3826156; 
297513, 3826156; 297513, 3826126; 297543, 3826126; 297543, 3826156; 
297573, 3826156; 297573, 3826186; 297603, 3826186; 297603, 3826216; 
297633, 3826216; 297633, 3826276; 297663, 3826276; 297663, 3826216; 
297693, 3826216; 297693, 3826126; 297723, 3826126; 297723, 3826096; 
297783, 3826096; 297783, 3826006; 297873, 3826006; 297873, 3826036; 
297903, 3826036; 297903, 3826066; 297933, 3826066; 297933, 3826126; 
297963, 3826126; 297963, 3826186; 297993, 3826186; 297993, 3826216; 
298023, 3826216; 298023, 3826246; 298053, 3826246; 298053, 3826276; 
298113, 3826276; 298113, 3826306; 298173, 3826306; 298173, 3826336; 
298203, 3826336; 298203, 3826366; 298233, 3826366; 298233, 3826396; 
298323, 3826396; 298323, 3826366; 298383, 3826366; 298383, 3826456; 
298413, 3826456; 298413, 3826486; 298443, 3826486; 298443, 3826516; 
298503, 3826516; 298503, 3826546; 298563, 3826546; 298563, 3826576; 
298653, 3826576; 298653, 3826606; 298743, 3826606; 298743, 3826576; 
298773, 3826576; 298773, 3826546; 298863, 3826546; 298863, 3826516; 
298893, 3826516; 298893, 3826486; 298923, 3826486; 298923, 3826456; 
298983, 3826456; 298983, 3826426; 299013, 3826426; 299013, 3826396; 
299103, 3826396; 299103, 3826426; 299163, 3826426; 299163, 3826456; 
299223, 3826456; 299223, 3826486; 299253, 3826486; 299253, 3826456; 
299403, 3826456; 299403, 3826426; 299433, 3826426; 299433, 3826396; 
299463, 3826396; 299463, 3826366; 299493, 3826366; 299493, 3826306; 
299523, 3826306; 299523, 3826246;

[[Page 361]]

299553, 3826246; 299553, 3826186; 299583, 3826186; 299583, 3826156; 
299673, 3826156; 299673, 3826186; 299703, 3826186; 299703, 3826156; 
299733, 3826156; 299733, 3826216; 299763, 3826216; 299763, 3826246; 
299793, 3826246; 299793, 3826276; 299853, 3826276; 299853, 3826306; 
299883, 3826306; 299883, 3826396; 299853, 3826396; 299853, 3826426; 
299973, 3826426; 299973, 3826486; 300003, 3826486; 300003, 3826576; 
300033, 3826576; 300033, 3826666; 300063, 3826666; 300063, 3826696; 
300123, 3826696; 300123, 3826726; 300243, 3826726; 300243, 3826756; 
300333, 3826756; 300333, 3826726; 300393, 3826726; 300393, 3826666; 
300453, 3826666; 300453, 3826696; 300603, 3826696; 300603, 3826666; 
300663, 3826666; 300663, 3826606; 300693, 3826606; 300693, 3826546; 
300783, 3826546; 300783, 3826576; 300813, 3826576; 300813, 3826606; 
300843, 3826606; 300843, 3826756; 300903, 3826756; 300903, 3826726; 
300933, 3826726; 300933, 3826756; 300993, 3826756; 300993, 3826786; 
301053, 3826786; 301053, 3826756; 301083, 3826756; 301083, 3826726; 
301143, 3826726; 301143, 3826756; 301203, 3826756; 301203, 3826786; 
301263, 3826786; 301263, 3826756; 301293, 3826756; 301293, 3826726; 
301383, 3826726; 301383, 3826756; 301443, 3826756; 301443, 3826786; 
301533, 3826786; 301533, 3826756; 301563, 3826756; 301563, 3826726; 
301593, 3826726; 301593, 3826696; 301623, 3826696; 301623, 3826636; 
301683, 3826636; 301683, 3826606; 301743, 3826606; 301743, 3826576; 
301863, 3826576; 301863, 3826516; 301893, 3826516; 301893, 3826396; 
301923, 3826396; 301923, 3826366; 302073, 3826366; 302073, 3826396; 
302313, 3826396; 302313, 3826366; 302403, 3826366; 302403, 3826396; 
302433, 3826396; 302433, 3826426; 302403, 3826426; 302403, 3826546; 
302493, 3826546; 302493, 3826516; 302583, 3826516; 302583, 3826396; 
302553, 3826396; 302553, 3826276; 302583, 3826276; 302583, 3826246; 
302613, 3826246; 302613, 3826216; 302733, 3826216; 302733, 3826186; 
302823, 3826186; 302823, 3826216; 302883, 3826216; 302883, 3826246; 
302913, 3826246; 302913, 3826276; 302943, 3826276; 302943, 3826306; 
302973, 3826306; 302973, 3826336; 303003, 3826336; 303003, 3826366; 
303033, 3826366; 303033, 3826396; 303093, 3826396; 303093, 3826426; 
303123, 3826426; 303123, 3826456; 303363, 3826456; 303363, 3826486; 
303423, 3826486; 303423, 3826426; 303453, 3826426; 303453, 3826306; 
303483, 3826306; 303483, 3826276; 303513, 3826276; 303513, 3826246; 
303573, 3826246; 303573, 3826216; 303693, 3826216; 303693, 3826186; 
303753, 3826186; 303753, 3826156; 303813, 3826156; 303813, 3826126; 
303903, 3826126; 303903, 3826096; 303933, 3826096; 303933, 3826156; 
303993, 3826156; 303993, 3826216; 304053, 3826216; 304053, 3826246; 
304083, 3826246; 304083, 3826306; 304113, 3826306; 304113, 3826396; 
304143, 3826396; 304143, 3826426; 304173, 3826426; 304173, 3826486; 
304203, 3826486; 304203, 3826546; 304173, 3826546; 304173, 3826636; 
304203, 3826636; 304203, 3826666; 304233, 3826666; 304233, 3826696; 
304263, 3826696; 304263, 3826726; 304323, 3826726; 304323, 3826756; 
304353, 3826756; 304353, 3826786; 304383, 3826786; 304383, 3826756; 
304533, 3826756; 304533, 3826786; 304563, 3826786; 304563, 3826756; 
304653, 3826756; 304653, 3826696; 304713, 3826696; 304713, 3826666; 
304743, 3826666; 304743, 3826636; 304773, 3826636; 304773, 3826576; 
304923, 3826576; 304923, 3826546; 304953, 3826546; 304953, 3826516; 
304983, 3826516; 304983, 3826486; 305073, 3826486; 305073, 3826456; 
305103, 3826456; 305103, 3826426; 305133, 3826426; 305133, 3826396; 
305163, 3826396; 305163, 3826336; 305283, 3826336; 305283, 3826306; 
305313, 3826306; 305313, 3826366; 305343, 3826366; 305343, 3826396; 
305493, 3826396; 305493, 3826426; 305523, 3826426; 305523, 3826396; 
305643, 3826396; 305643, 3826366; 305793, 3826366; 305793, 3826396; 
305823, 3826396; 305823, 3826366; 305853, 3826366; 305853, 3826276; 
305913, 3826276; 305913, 3826246; 305943, 3826246; 305943, 3826216; 
305973, 3826216; 305973, 3826276; 306123, 3826276; 306123, 3826306; 
306153, 3826306; 306153, 3826336; 306243, 3826336; 306243, 3826366; 
306453, 3826366; 306453, 3826396; 306513, 3826396; 306513, 3826456; 
306543, 3826456; 306543, 3826396; 306603, 3826396; 306603, 3826426; 
306723, 3826426; 306723, 3826396; 306783, 3826396; 306783, 3826366; 
306903, 3826366; 306903, 3826336; 306993, 3826336; 306993, 3826306; 
307023, 3826306; 307023, 3826336; 307083, 3826336; 307083, 3826366; 
307113, 3826366; 307113, 3826426; 307173, 3826426; 307173, 3826486; 
307203, 3826486; 307203, 3826576; 307263, 3826576; 307263, 3826546; 
307293, 3826546; 307293, 3826516; 307353, 3826516; 307353, 3826546; 
307383, 3826546; 307383, 3826576; 307503, 3826576; 307503, 3826606; 
307653, 3826606; 307653, 3826576; 307713, 3826576; 307713, 3826546; 
307743, 3826546; 307743, 3826516; 307773, 3826516; 307773, 3826486; 
307803, 3826486; 307803, 3826456; 307863, 3826456; 307863, 3826396; 
307953, 3826396; 307953, 3826366; 308073, 3826366; 308073, 3826396; 
308133, 3826396; 308133, 3826426; 308163, 3826426; 308163, 3826456; 
308193, 3826456; 308193, 3826486; 308223, 3826486; 308223, 3826516; 
308253, 3826516; 308253, 3826546; 308283, 3826546; 308283, 3826576; 
308313, 3826576; 308313, 3826606; 308373, 3826606; 308373, 3826636; 
308403, 3826636; 308403, 3826606; 308493, 3826606; 308493, 3826576; 
308583, 3826576; 308583, 3826546; 308673, 3826546; 308673, 3826516; 
308823, 3826516; 308823, 3826486; 309033, 3826486; 309033, 3826456; 
309093, 3826456; 309093, 3826426; 309123, 3826426; 309123, 3826396; 
309183, 3826396; 309183, 3826366; 309213, 3826366; 309213, 3826336; 
309243, 3826336; 309243, 3826246; 309273, 3826246; 309273, 3826066; 
309243, 3826066; 309243, 3825886; 309303, 3825886; 309303, 3825916; 
309333, 3825916; 309333, 3825946; 309363, 3825946; 309363, 3825976; 
309393, 3825976; 309393, 3825946; 309423, 3825946; 309423, 3825976; 
309513, 3825976; 309513, 3825946; 309663, 3825946; 309663, 3825976; 
309753, 3825976; 309753, 3825946; 309843, 3825946; 309843, 3825976; 
309873, 3825976; 309873, 3826096; 309843, 3826096; 309843, 3826126; 
309813, 3826126; 309813, 3826156; 309963, 3826156; 309963, 3826126; 
309993, 3826126; 309993, 3826066; 309963, 3826066; 309963, 3826006; 
309993, 3826006; 309993, 3825976; 310023, 3825976; 310023, 3825946; 
310053, 3825946; 310053, 3826036; 310083, 3826036; 310083, 3826066; 
310143, 3826066; 310143, 3826036; 310173, 3826036; 310173, 3826156; 
310203, 3826156; 310203, 3826246; 310233, 3826246; 310233, 3826306; 
310263, 3826306; 310263, 3826336; 310293, 3826336; 310293, 3826366; 
310353, 3826366; 310353, 3826396; 310533, 3826396; 310533, 3826366; 
310563, 3826366; 310563, 3826456; 310593, 3826456; 310593, 3826516; 
310623, 3826516; 310623, 3826546; 310653, 3826546; 310653, 3826636; 
310683, 3826636; 310683, 3826696; 310713, 3826696; 310713, 3826726; 
310743, 3826726; 310743, 3826756; 310773, 3826756; 310773, 3826816; 
310833, 3826816; 310833, 3826936;

[[Page 362]]

310803, 3826936; 310803, 3826966; 310923, 3826966; 310923, 3826996; 
311043, 3826996; 311043, 3827026; 311373, 3827026; 311373, 3826966; 
311403, 3826966; 311403, 3826846; 311433, 3826846; 311433, 3826786; 
311463, 3826786; 311463, 3826816; 311493, 3826816; 311493, 3827056; 
311523, 3827056; 311523, 3827116; 311553, 3827116; 311553, 3827146; 
311613, 3827146; 311613, 3827176; 311733, 3827176; 311733, 3827146; 
311763, 3827146; 311763, 3827116; 311793, 3827116; 311793, 3827086; 
311853, 3827086; 311853, 3827026; 311883, 3827026; 311883, 3826966; 
311913, 3826966; 311913, 3826936; 311943, 3826936; 311943, 3826906; 
312033, 3826906; 312033, 3826876; 312063, 3826876; 312063, 3826846; 
312093, 3826846; 312093, 3826816; 312123, 3826816; 312123, 3826786; 
312153, 3826786; 312153, 3826816; 312213, 3826816; 312213, 3826786; 
312243, 3826786; 312243, 3826816; 312273, 3826816; 312273, 3826966; 
312243, 3826966; 312243, 3826996; 312213, 3826996; 312213, 3827026; 
312183, 3827026; 312183, 3827056; 312153, 3827056; 312153, 3827086; 
312123, 3827086; 312123, 3827146; 312093, 3827146; 312093, 3827176; 
312063, 3827176; 312063, 3827206; 312033, 3827206; 312033, 3827326; 
312003, 3827326; 312003, 3827476; 311973, 3827476; 311973, 3827566; 
312003, 3827566; 312003, 3827656; 312033, 3827656; 312033, 3827686; 
312093, 3827686; 312093, 3827716; 312213, 3827716; 312213, 3827746; 
312363, 3827746; 312363, 3827776; 312423, 3827776; 312423, 3827806; 
312513, 3827806; 312513, 3827776; 312693, 3827776; 312693, 3827746; 
312783, 3827746; 312783, 3827716; 312873, 3827716; 312873, 3827686; 
312903, 3827686; 312903, 3827656; 313023, 3827656; 313023, 3827626; 
313083, 3827626; 313083, 3827596; 313143, 3827596; 313143, 3827566; 
313173, 3827566; 313173, 3827536; 313203, 3827536; 313203, 3827476; 
313233, 3827476; 313233, 3827416; 313263, 3827416; 313263, 3827386; 
313323, 3827386; 313323, 3827326; 313353, 3827326; 313353, 3827356; 
313383, 3827356; 313383, 3827386; 313413, 3827386; 313413, 3827416; 
313443, 3827416; 313443, 3827446; 313563, 3827446; 313563, 3827416; 
313743, 3827416; 313743, 3827446; 313893, 3827446; 313893, 3827416; 
314043, 3827416; 314043, 3827476; 314073, 3827476; 314073, 3827446; 
314133, 3827446; 314133, 3827416; 314193, 3827416; 314193, 3827386; 
314253, 3827386; 314253, 3827416; 314643, 3827416; 314643, 3827386; 
314763, 3827386; 314763, 3827416; 314793, 3827416; 314793, 3827386; 
314913, 3827386; 314913, 3827416; 315003, 3827416; 315003, 3827476; 
315033, 3827476; 315033, 3827596; 315123, 3827596; 315123, 3827656; 
315153, 3827656; 315153, 3827716; 315183, 3827716; 315183, 3827806; 
315213, 3827806; 315213, 3827836; 315243, 3827836; 315243, 3827866; 
315273, 3827866; 315273, 3827896; 315363, 3827896; 315363, 3827926; 
315393, 3827926; 315393, 3827896; 315543, 3827896; 315543, 3827866; 
315693, 3827866; 315693, 3827836; 315753, 3827836; 315753, 3827806; 
315843, 3827806; 315843, 3827776; 315873, 3827776; 315873, 3827746; 
315903, 3827746; 315903, 3827716; 315933, 3827716; 315933, 3827566; 
315963, 3827566; 315963, 3827536; 316053, 3827536; 316053, 3827506; 
316143, 3827506; 316143, 3827476; 316203, 3827476; 316203, 3827416; 
316233, 3827416; 316233, 3827356; 316263, 3827356; 316263, 3827326; 
316293, 3827326; 316293, 3827296; 316383, 3827296; 316383, 3827266; 
316413, 3827266; 316413, 3827236; 316563, 3827236; 316563, 3827206; 
316623, 3827206; 316623, 3827236; 316683, 3827236; 316683, 3827266; 
316713, 3827266; 316713, 3827416; 316683, 3827416; 316683, 3827626; 
316713, 3827626; 316713, 3827716; 316743, 3827716; 316743, 3827776; 
316803, 3827776; 316803, 3827896; 316833, 3827896; 316833, 3827956; 
316863, 3827956; 316863, 3827986; 316893, 3827986; 316893, 3828046; 
316923, 3828046; 316923, 3828106; 317193, 3828106; 317193, 3828136; 
317283, 3828136; 317283, 3828106; 317373, 3828106; 317373, 3828076; 
317403, 3828076; 317403, 3828046; 317433, 3828046; 317433, 3828016; 
317463, 3828016; 317463, 3827956; 317493, 3827956; 317493, 3827926; 
317523, 3827926; 317523, 3827896; 317553, 3827896; 317553, 3827866; 
317643, 3827866; 317643, 3827806; 317673, 3827806; 317673, 3827776; 
317763, 3827776; 317763, 3827806; 317793, 3827806; 317793, 3827866; 
317673, 3827866; 317673, 3827896; 317643, 3827896; 317643, 3827986; 
317793, 3827986; 317793, 3828016; 317853, 3828016; 317853, 3828046; 
317883, 3828046; 317883, 3828076; 317913, 3828076; 317913, 3828106; 
317943, 3828106; 317943, 3828136; 317973, 3828136; 317973, 3828166; 
318273, 3828166; 318273, 3828136; 318363, 3828136; 318363, 3828106; 
318423, 3828106; 318423, 3828076; 318483, 3828076; 318483, 3828016; 
318513, 3828016; 318513, 3827986; 318543, 3827986; 318543, 3827956; 
318603, 3827956; 318603, 3827926; 318663, 3827926; 318663, 3827896; 
318693, 3827896; 318693, 3827866; 318723, 3827866; 318723, 3827836; 
318753, 3827836; 318753, 3827776; 318783, 3827776; 318783, 3827716; 
318813, 3827716; 318813, 3827536; 318843, 3827536; 318843, 3827506; 
318873, 3827506; 318873, 3827476; 318993, 3827476; 318993, 3827506; 
319023, 3827506; 319023, 3827536; 319053, 3827536; 319053, 3827686; 
319083, 3827686; 319083, 3827776; 319113, 3827776; 319113, 3827836; 
319143, 3827836; 319143, 3827866; 319173, 3827866; 319173, 3827896; 
319203, 3827896; 319203, 3827926; 319383, 3827926; 319383, 3827896; 
319413, 3827896; 319413, 3827866; 319443, 3827866; 319443, 3827806; 
319473, 3827806; 319473, 3827746; 319503, 3827746; 319503, 3827656; 
319533, 3827656; 319533, 3827446; 319653, 3827446; 319653, 3827476; 
319743, 3827476; 319743, 3827506; 319773, 3827506; 319773, 3827476; 
319863, 3827476; 319863, 3827416; 319893, 3827416; 319893, 3827296; 
319863, 3827296; 319863, 3827116; 319893, 3827116; 319893, 3827056; 
319923, 3827056; 319923, 3827026; 319983, 3827026; 319983, 3826996; 
320103, 3826996; 320103, 3826966; 320163, 3826966; 320163, 3826936; 
320223, 3826936; 320223, 3826906; 320283, 3826906; 320283, 3826876; 
320313, 3826876; 320313, 3826846; 320343, 3826846; 320343, 3826816; 
320373, 3826816; 320373, 3826756; 320403, 3826756; 320403, 3826696; 
320433, 3826696; 320433, 3826666; 320493, 3826666; 320493, 3826636; 
320523, 3826636; 320523, 3826606; 320703, 3826606; 320703, 3826636; 
320733, 3826636; 320733, 3826606; 320763, 3826606; 320763, 3826546; 
320793, 3826546; 320793, 3826486; 320823, 3826486; 320823, 3826366; 
320793, 3826366; 320793, 3826336; 320763, 3826336; 320763, 3826306; 
320733, 3826306; 320733, 3826276; 320703, 3826276; 320703, 3826426; 
320673, 3826426; 320673, 3826456; 320613, 3826456; 320613, 3826486; 
320553, 3826486; 320553, 3826516; 320463, 3826516; 320463, 3826546; 
320433, 3826546; 320433, 3826576; 320403, 3826576; 320403, 3826606; 
320373, 3826606; 320373, 3826636; 320343, 3826636; 320343, 3826696; 
320313, 3826696; 320313, 3826726; 320283, 3826726; 320283, 3826756; 
320223, 3826756; 320223, 3826786; 320163, 3826786; 320163, 3826816; 
319923, 3826816; 319923, 3826846;

[[Page 363]]

319863, 3826846; 319863, 3826876; 319833, 3826876; 319833, 3826906; 
319773, 3826906; 319773, 3826936; 319743, 3826936; 319743, 3827116; 
319713, 3827116; 319713, 3827266; 319653, 3827266; 319653, 3827296; 
319623, 3827296; 319623, 3827266; 319503, 3827266; 319503, 3827236; 
319473, 3827236; 319473, 3827266; 319413, 3827266; 319413, 3827326; 
319383, 3827326; 319383, 3827386; 319353, 3827386; 319353, 3827536; 
319323, 3827536; 319323, 3827596; 319293, 3827596; 319293, 3827626; 
319263, 3827626; 319263, 3827656; 319203, 3827656; 319203, 3827446; 
319173, 3827446; 319173, 3827356; 319143, 3827356; 319143, 3827326; 
319113, 3827326; 319113, 3827296; 319083, 3827296; 319083, 3827266; 
318933, 3827266; 318933, 3827296; 318813, 3827296; 318813, 3827326; 
318783, 3827326; 318783, 3827386; 318753, 3827386; 318753, 3827416; 
318723, 3827416; 318723, 3827446; 318693, 3827446; 318693, 3827506; 
318663, 3827506; 318663, 3827596; 318633, 3827596; 318633, 3827626; 
318573, 3827626; 318573, 3827656; 318543, 3827656; 318543, 3827686; 
318513, 3827686; 318513, 3827716; 318483, 3827716; 318483, 3827746; 
318453, 3827746; 318453, 3827776; 318423, 3827776; 318423, 3827806; 
318393, 3827806; 318393, 3827836; 318303, 3827836; 318303, 3827866; 
318273, 3827866; 318273, 3827896; 318243, 3827896; 318243, 3827926; 
318213, 3827926; 318213, 3827956; 318183, 3827956; 318183, 3827986; 
318123, 3827986; 318123, 3827956; 318063, 3827956; 318063, 3827926; 
318033, 3827926; 318033, 3827896; 318003, 3827896; 318003, 3827866; 
317973, 3827866; 317973, 3827746; 318003, 3827746; 318003, 3827656; 
317913, 3827656; 317913, 3827626; 317853, 3827626; 317853, 3827596; 
317793, 3827596; 317793, 3827566; 317523, 3827566; 317523, 3827596; 
317463, 3827596; 317463, 3827626; 317403, 3827626; 317403, 3827656; 
317373, 3827656; 317373, 3827686; 317343, 3827686; 317343, 3827716; 
317313, 3827716; 317313, 3827746; 317163, 3827746; 317163, 3827776; 
317043, 3827776; 317043, 3827746; 316983, 3827746; 316983, 3827716; 
316923, 3827716; 316923, 3827686; 316893, 3827686; 316893, 3827656; 
316863, 3827656; 316863, 3827506; 316833, 3827506; 316833, 3827326; 
316863, 3827326; 316863, 3827266; 316833, 3827266; 316833, 3827176; 
316803, 3827176; 316803, 3827146; 316773, 3827146; 316773, 3827116; 
316713, 3827116; 316713, 3827086; 316593, 3827086; 316593, 3827056; 
316563, 3827056; 316563, 3827086; 316383, 3827086; 316383, 3827116; 
316263, 3827116; 316263, 3827176; 316203, 3827176; 316203, 3827206; 
316173, 3827206; 316173, 3827236; 316143, 3827236; 316143, 3827266; 
316083, 3827266; 316083, 3827296; 315993, 3827296; 315993, 3827326; 
315903, 3827326; 315903, 3827356; 315783, 3827356; 315783, 3827416; 
315753, 3827416; 315753, 3827446; 315723, 3827446; 315723, 3827476; 
315693, 3827476; 315693, 3827506; 315663, 3827506; 315663, 3827536; 
315633, 3827536; 315633, 3827566; 315603, 3827566; 315603, 3827596; 
315543, 3827596; 315543, 3827626; 315453, 3827626; 315453, 3827596; 
315423, 3827596; 315423, 3827566; 315393, 3827566; 315393, 3827506; 
315363, 3827506; 315363, 3827446; 315333, 3827446; 315333, 3827416; 
315303, 3827416; 315303, 3827386; 315243, 3827386; 315243, 3827356; 
315213, 3827356; 315213, 3827326; 315153, 3827326; 315153, 3827296; 
315123, 3827296; 315123, 3827266; 315033, 3827266; 315033, 3827236; 
314973, 3827236; 314973, 3827206; 314403, 3827206; 314403, 3827176; 
314343, 3827176; 314343, 3827146; 314253, 3827146; 314253, 3827116; 
314223, 3827116; 314223, 3827086; 314193, 3827086; 314193, 3827056; 
314163, 3827056; 314163, 3827086; 314133, 3827086; 314133, 3827116; 
314103, 3827116; 314103, 3827146; 314073, 3827146; 314073, 3827116; 
314013, 3827116; 314013, 3827086; 313983, 3827086; 313983, 3827026; 
313953, 3827026; 313953, 3827056; 313923, 3827056; 313923, 3827086; 
313893, 3827086; 313893, 3827146; 313803, 3827146; 313803, 3827116; 
313773, 3827116; 313773, 3827146; 313743, 3827146; 313743, 3827176; 
313713, 3827176; 313713, 3827206; 313653, 3827206; 313653, 3827176; 
313593, 3827176; 313593, 3827146; 313563, 3827146; 313563, 3827116; 
313503, 3827116; 313503, 3827086; 313413, 3827086; 313413, 3827056; 
313323, 3827056; 313323, 3827026; 313263, 3827026; 313263, 3827056; 
313173, 3827056; 313173, 3827086; 313113, 3827086; 313113, 3827116; 
313083, 3827116; 313083, 3827146; 313053, 3827146; 313053, 3827176; 
313023, 3827176; 313023, 3827236; 312993, 3827236; 312993, 3827356; 
312963, 3827356; 312963, 3827386; 312933, 3827386; 312933, 3827416; 
312903, 3827416; 312903, 3827446; 312843, 3827446; 312843, 3827476; 
312723, 3827476; 312723, 3827506; 312483, 3827506; 312483, 3827536; 
312333, 3827536; 312333, 3827506; 312243, 3827506; 312243, 3827476; 
312213, 3827476; 312213, 3827446; 312273, 3827446; 312273, 3827416; 
312303, 3827416; 312303, 3827356; 312333, 3827356; 312333, 3827266; 
312303, 3827266; 312303, 3827176; 312333, 3827176; 312333, 3827116; 
312363, 3827116; 312363, 3827086; 312393, 3827086; 312393, 3827056; 
312423, 3827056; 312423, 3827026; 312453, 3827026; 312453, 3826966; 
312483, 3826966; 312483, 3826816; 312453, 3826816; 312453, 3826696; 
312423, 3826696; 312423, 3826666; 312273, 3826666; 312273, 3826636; 
312033, 3826636; 312033, 3826666; 312003, 3826666; 312003, 3826696; 
311973, 3826696; 311973, 3826726; 311913, 3826726; 311913, 3826756; 
311883, 3826756; 311883, 3826786; 311853, 3826786; 311853, 3826816; 
311793, 3826816; 311793, 3826846; 311733, 3826846; 311733, 3826666; 
311703, 3826666; 311703, 3826606; 311673, 3826606; 311673, 3826486; 
311613, 3826486; 311613, 3826516; 311343, 3826516; 311343, 3826546; 
311313, 3826546; 311313, 3826606; 311283, 3826606; 311283, 3826636; 
311253, 3826636; 311253, 3826696; 311223, 3826696; 311223, 3826816; 
311073, 3826816; 311073, 3826786; 311013, 3826786; 311013, 3826756; 
310983, 3826756; 310983, 3826696; 310953, 3826696; 310953, 3826666; 
310923, 3826666; 310923, 3826606; 310893, 3826606; 310893, 3826576; 
310863, 3826576; 310863, 3826546; 310833, 3826546; 310833, 3826486; 
310803, 3826486; 310803, 3826426; 310773, 3826426; 310773, 3826366; 
310743, 3826366; 310743, 3826336; 310713, 3826336; 310713, 3826186; 
310683, 3826186; 310683, 3826156; 310623, 3826156; 310623, 3826126; 
310593, 3826126; 310593, 3826096; 310563, 3826096; 310563, 3826066; 
310473, 3826066; 310473, 3826036; 310413, 3826036; 310413, 3826006; 
310353, 3826006; 310353, 3825946; 310383, 3825946; 310383, 3825886; 
310413, 3825886; 310413, 3825856; 310383, 3825856; 310383, 3825826; 
310353, 3825826; 310353, 3825796; 310323, 3825796; 310323, 3825766; 
310263, 3825766; 310263, 3825736; 309993, 3825736; 309993, 3825676; 
309963, 3825676; 309963, 3825736; 309933, 3825736; 309933, 3825766; 
309903, 3825766; 309903, 3825796; 309753, 3825796; 309753, 3825766; 
309573, 3825766; 309573, 3825736; 309453, 3825736; 309453, 3825706; 
309333, 3825706; 309333, 3825676; 309243, 3825676; 309243, 3825706; 
309093, 3825706; 309093, 3825736;

[[Page 364]]

309063, 3825736; 309063, 3825826; 309033, 3825826; 309033, 3826006; 
309063, 3826006; 309063, 3826126; 309033, 3826126; 309033, 3826156; 
309003, 3826156; 309003, 3826216; 308973, 3826216; 308973, 3826246; 
308943, 3826246; 308943, 3826276; 308883, 3826276; 308883, 3826306; 
308763, 3826306; 308763, 3826276; 308523, 3826276; 308523, 3826246; 
308193, 3826246; 308193, 3826216; 308103, 3826216; 308103, 3826186; 
308043, 3826186; 308043, 3826156; 307923, 3826156; 307923, 3826186; 
307833, 3826186; 307833, 3826216; 307773, 3826216; 307773, 3826246; 
307713, 3826246; 307713, 3826276; 307563, 3826276; 307563, 3826306; 
307353, 3826306; 307353, 3826276; 307323, 3826276; 307323, 3826246; 
307293, 3826246; 307293, 3826216; 307263, 3826216; 307263, 3826186; 
307233, 3826186; 307233, 3826156; 307143, 3826156; 307143, 3826126; 
307113, 3826126; 307113, 3826096; 307083, 3826096; 307083, 3826066; 
307053, 3826066; 307053, 3826036; 307023, 3826036; 307023, 3826006; 
306933, 3826006; 306933, 3825976; 306903, 3825976; 306903, 3825946; 
306873, 3825946; 306873, 3825916; 306783, 3825916; 306783, 3825976; 
306723, 3825976; 306723, 3826006; 306543, 3826006; 306543, 3826036; 
306423, 3826036; 306423, 3826066; 306303, 3826066; 306303, 3826096; 
306243, 3826096; 306243, 3826066; 306213, 3826066; 306213, 3826006; 
306123, 3826006; 306123, 3825976; 306003, 3825976; 306003, 3825946; 
305853, 3825946; 305853, 3825916; 305673, 3825916; 305673, 3825946; 
305583, 3825946; 305583, 3825976; 305493, 3825976; 305493, 3826006; 
305343, 3826006; 305343, 3825976; 305313, 3825976; 305313, 3826006; 
305283, 3826006; 305283, 3826036; 305193, 3826036; 305193, 3826066; 
305013, 3826066; 305013, 3826096; 304983, 3826096; 304983, 3826126; 
304833, 3826126; 304833, 3826156; 304803, 3826156; 304803, 3826186; 
304773, 3826186; 304773, 3826246; 304713, 3826246; 304713, 3826276; 
304683, 3826276; 304683, 3826366; 304653, 3826366; 304653, 3826396; 
304593, 3826396; 304593, 3826456; 304563, 3826456; 304563, 3826486; 
304533, 3826486; 304533, 3826516; 304503, 3826516; 304503, 3826456; 
304413, 3826456; 304413, 3826396; 304383, 3826396; 304383, 3826216; 
304353, 3826216; 304353, 3826066; 304323, 3826066; 304323, 3826036; 
304293, 3826036; 304293, 3825976; 304263, 3825976; 304263, 3825916; 
304173, 3825916; 304173, 3825886; 304083, 3825886; 304083, 3825856; 
304053, 3825856; 304053, 3825826; 303993, 3825826; 303993, 3825796; 
303963, 3825796; 303963, 3825826; 303753, 3825826; 303753, 3825856; 
303663, 3825856; 303663, 3825886; 303573, 3825886; 303573, 3825916; 
303543, 3825916; 303543, 3825946; 303453, 3825946; 303453, 3825976; 
303423, 3825976; 303423, 3826006; 303363, 3826006; 303363, 3826036; 
303333, 3826036; 303333, 3826066; 303243, 3826066; 303243, 3826096; 
303183, 3826096; 303183, 3826066; 303093, 3826066; 303093, 3826036; 
303063, 3826036; 303063, 3826006; 302943, 3826006; 302943, 3825976; 
302763, 3825976; 302763, 3825946; 302703, 3825946; 302703, 3825916; 
302523, 3825916; 302523, 3825946; 302493, 3825946; 302493, 3825976; 
302463, 3825976; 302463, 3826006; 302433, 3826006; 302433, 3826036; 
302373, 3826036; 302373, 3826066; 302343, 3826066; 302343, 3826096; 
302283, 3826096; 302283, 3826126; 302223, 3826126; 302223, 3826156; 
302043, 3826156; 302043, 3826186; 301803, 3826186; 301803, 3826216; 
301593, 3826216; 301593, 3826186; 301503, 3826186; 301503, 3826246; 
301533, 3826246; 301533, 3826276; 301503, 3826276; 301503, 3826306; 
301473, 3826306; 301473, 3826336; 301413, 3826336; 301413, 3826366; 
301383, 3826366; 301383, 3826426; 301233, 3826426; 301233, 3826396; 
301143, 3826396; 301143, 3826426; 300993, 3826426; 300993, 3826396; 
300903, 3826396; 300903, 3826366; 300843, 3826366; 300843, 3826336; 
300663, 3826336; 300663, 3826306; 300573, 3826306; 300573, 3826276; 
300483, 3826276; 300483, 3826306; 300393, 3826306; 300393, 3826276; 
300363, 3826276; 300363, 3826246; 300303, 3826246; 300303, 3826216; 
300243, 3826216; 300243, 3826186; 300183, 3826186; 300183, 3826156; 
300093, 3826156; 300093, 3826126; 300003, 3826126; 300003, 3826096; 
299973, 3826096; 299973, 3826066; 299913, 3826066; 299913, 3826036; 
299883, 3826036; 299883, 3826006; 299853, 3826006; 299853, 3825976; 
299823, 3825976; 299823, 3825946; 299763, 3825946; 299763, 3825916; 
299703, 3825916; 299703, 3825886; 299553, 3825886; 299553, 3825916; 
299493, 3825916; 299493, 3825946; 299463, 3825946; 299463, 3825976; 
299433, 3825976; 299433, 3826006; 299373, 3826006; 299373, 3826096; 
299343, 3826096; 299343, 3826066; 299223, 3826066; 299223, 3826036; 
299103, 3826036; 299103, 3826006; 299043, 3826006; 299043, 3826036; 
298923, 3826036; 298923, 3826066; 298863, 3826066; 298863, 3826096; 
298803, 3826096; 298803, 3826126; 298713, 3826126; 298713, 3826096; 
298623, 3826096; 298623, 3826066; 298503, 3826066; 298503, 3826036; 
298383, 3826036; 298383, 3826006; 298353, 3826006; 298353, 3825976; 
298293, 3825976; 298293, 3825946; 298233, 3825946; 298233, 3825916; 
298173, 3825916; 298173, 3825886; 297993, 3825886; 297993, 3825856; 
297903, 3825856; 297903, 3825826; 297483, 3825826; 297483, 3825796; 
297453, 3825796; 297453, 3825766; 297423, 3825766; 297423, 3825736; 
297393, 3825736; 297393, 3825676; 297363, 3825676; 297363, 3825616; 
297333, 3825616; 297333, 3825556; 297273, 3825556; 297273, 3825676; 
297243, 3825676; 297243, 3825736; 297273, 3825736; 297273, 3825796; 
297243, 3825796; 297243, 3825826; 297213, 3825826; 297213, 3825856; 
297183, 3825856; 297183, 3825886; 297153, 3825886; 297153, 3825916; 
297123, 3825916; 297123, 3825946; 297093, 3825946; 297093, 3825976; 
297063, 3825976; 297063, 3826006; 296973, 3826006; 296973, 3825946; 
296943, 3825946; 296943, 3825706; 296913, 3825706; 296913, 3825676; 
296883, 3825676; 296883, 3825646; 296853, 3825646; 296853, 3825616; 
296763, 3825616; 296763, 3825586; 296673, 3825586; 296673, 3825616; 
296613, 3825616; 296613, 3825646; 296553, 3825646; 296553, 3825676; 
296523, 3825676; 296523, 3825706; 296463, 3825706; 296463, 3825736; 
296433, 3825736; 296433, 3825766; 296403, 3825766; 296403, 3825826; 
296373, 3825826; 296373, 3825856; 296343, 3825856; 296343, 3825886; 
296313, 3825886; 296313, 3825916; 296283, 3825916; 296283, 3825946; 
296253, 3825946; 296253, 3825976; 296193, 3825976; 296193, 3826006; 
296163, 3826006; 296163, 3826036; 296043, 3826036; 296043, 3826006; 
295983, 3826006; 295983, 3826036; 295803, 3826036; 295803, 3826006; 
295743, 3826006; 295743, 3825976; 295653, 3825976; 295653, 3825946; 
295623, 3825946; 295623, 3825886; 295593, 3825886; 295593, 3825856; 
295563, 3825856; 295563, 3825886; 295473, 3825886; 295473, 3825856; 
295413, 3825856; 295413, 3825886; 295353, 3825886; 295353, 3825856; 
295323, 3825856; 295323, 3825826; 295263, 3825826; 295263, 3825796; 
295173, 3825796; 295173, 3825766; 295143, 3825766; 295143, 3825736; 
295113, 3825736; 295113, 3825706; 295083, 3825706; 295083, 3825676; 
295053, 3825676; 295053, 3825646;

[[Page 365]]

295023, 3825646; 295023, 3825616; 294993, 3825616; 294993, 3825586; 
294963, 3825586; 294963, 3825466; 294903, 3825466; 294903, 3825496; 
294873, 3825496; 294873, 3825526; 294783, 3825526; 294783, 3825556; 
294723, 3825556; 294723, 3825586; 294633, 3825586; 294633, 3825616; 
294603, 3825616; 294603, 3825646; 294573, 3825646; 294573, 3825676; 
294543, 3825676; 294543, 3825706; 294483, 3825706; 294483, 3825766; 
294453, 3825766; 294453, 3825796; 294393, 3825796; 294393, 3825856; 
294363, 3825856; 294363, 3825886; 294303, 3825886; 294303, 3825916; 
294243, 3825916; 294243, 3825886; 294093, 3825886; 294093, 3825946; 
294063, 3825946; 294063, 3826006; 294033, 3826006; 294033, 3826066; 
294003, 3826066; 294003, 3826096; 293973, 3826096; 293973, 3826126; 
293943, 3826126; 293943, 3826156; 293913, 3826156; 293913, 3826186; 
293883, 3826186; 293883, 3826246; 293703, 3826246; 293703, 3826216; 
293643, 3826216; 293643, 3826186; 293523, 3826186; 293523, 3826156; 
293403, 3826156; 293403, 3826186; 293253, 3826186; 293253, 3826156; 
293223, 3826156; 293223, 3826186; 293073, 3826186; 293073, 3826216; 
292983, 3826216; 292983, 3826186; 292893, 3826186; 292893, 3826156; 
292863, 3826156; 292863, 3826126; 292833, 3826126; 292833, 3826096; 
292683, 3826096; 292683, 3826066; 292353, 3826066; 292353, 3826096; 
292203, 3826096; 292203, 3826066; 292083, 3826066; 292083, 3826096; 
291993, 3826096; 291993, 3826126; 291963, 3826126; 291963, 3826156; 
291933, 3826156; 291933, 3826216; 291903, 3826216; 291903, 3826246; 
291873, 3826246; 291873, 3826276; 291813, 3826276; 291813, 3826336; 
291843, 3826336; 291843, 3826396; 291813, 3826396; 291813, 3826426; 
291663, 3826426; 291663, 3826456; 291573, 3826456; 291573, 3826486; 
291543, 3826486; 291543, 3826516; 291513, 3826516; 291513, 3826576; 
291483, 3826576; 291483, 3826606; 291423, 3826606; 291423, 3826636; 
291483, 3826636; 291483, 3826666; 291543, 3826666; 291543, 3826636; 
291573, 3826636; 291573, 3826606; 291633, 3826606; 291633, 3826576; 
291843, 3826576; 291843, 3826606; 291933, 3826606; 291933, 3826636; 
291993, 3826636; 291993, 3826666; 292053, 3826666; 292053, 3826696; 
292143, 3826696; 292143, 3826726; 292173, 3826726; 292173, 3826816; 
292143, 3826816; 292143, 3826846; 292083, 3826846; 292083, 3826876; 
292053, 3826876; 292053, 3826906; 292023, 3826906; 292023, 3826966; 
291993, 3826966; 291993, 3827026; 291963, 3827026; 291963, 3827086; 
291993, 3827086; 291993, 3827146; 292023, 3827146; 292023, 3827206; 
292053, 3827206; 292053, 3827236; 292083, 3827236; 292083, 3827266; 
292143, 3827266; 292143, 3827296; 292203, 3827296; 292203, 3827326; 
292293, 3827326; 292293, 3827356; 292353, 3827356; 292353, 3827386; 
292383, 3827386; 292383, 3827416; 292413, 3827416; 292413, 3827446; 
292443, 3827446; 292443, 3827476; 292473, 3827476; 292473, 3827506; 
292503, 3827506; 292503, 3827596; 292533, 3827596; 292533, 3827746; 
292503, 3827746; 292503, 3827776; 292473, 3827776; 292473, 3827806; 
292413, 3827806; 292413, 3827866; 292533, 3827866; 292533, 3827896; 
292593, 3827896; 292593, 3827926; 292623, 3827926; 292623, 3827956; 
292653, 3827956; 292653, 3827986; 292683, 3827986; 292683, 3828106; 
292653, 3828106; 292653, 3828136; 292623, 3828136; 292623, 3828196; 
292593, 3828196; 292593, 3828226; 292563, 3828226; 292563, 3828286; 
292593, 3828286; 292593, 3828316; 292653, 3828316; 292653, 3828346; 
292683, 3828346; 292683, 3828376; 292713, 3828376; 292713, 3828406; 
292773, 3828406; 292773, 3828436; 292863, 3828436; 292863, 3828466; 
292893, 3828466; 292893, 3828526; returning to 292923, 3828526.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 4 is provided at paragraph (10)(iii) of this 
entry.
    (10) Unit 5: Piru Creek, Ventura and Los Angeles Counties, 
California.
    (i) Subunit 5a: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Lockwood Valley, 
Alamo Mtn., and Black Mtn., land upstream from Pyramid Lake bounded by 
the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 319293, 3842776; 319293, 3842746; 
319353, 3842746; 319353, 3842716; 319383, 3842716; 319383, 3842626; 
319413, 3842626; 319413, 3842536; 319443, 3842536; 319443, 3842506; 
319473, 3842506; 319473, 3842446; 319503, 3842446; 319503, 3842476; 
319533, 3842476; 319533, 3842536; 319623, 3842536; 319623, 3842506; 
319683, 3842506; 319683, 3842476; 319713, 3842476; 319713, 3842446; 
319773, 3842446; 319773, 3842476; 319803, 3842476; 319803, 3842536; 
319833, 3842536; 319833, 3842596; 319863, 3842596; 319863, 3842686; 
319923, 3842686; 319923, 3842716; 319953, 3842716; 319953, 3842746; 
320013, 3842746; 320013, 3842716; 320073, 3842716; 320073, 3842686; 
320103, 3842686; 320103, 3842626; 320163, 3842626; 320163, 3842656; 
320193, 3842656; 320193, 3842686; 320283, 3842686; 320283, 3842656; 
320313, 3842656; 320313, 3842686; 320403, 3842686; 320403, 3842716; 
320433, 3842716; 320433, 3842686; 320463, 3842686; 320463, 3842596; 
320523, 3842596; 320523, 3842566; 320613, 3842566; 320613, 3842596; 
320643, 3842596; 320643, 3842626; 320703, 3842626; 320703, 3842596; 
320733, 3842596; 320733, 3842566; 320793, 3842566; 320793, 3842506; 
320823, 3842506; 320823, 3842446; 320853, 3842446; 320853, 3842356; 
320883, 3842356; 320883, 3842326; 320913, 3842326; 320913, 3842296; 
320973, 3842296; 320973, 3842326; 321063, 3842326; 321063, 3842356; 
321123, 3842356; 321123, 3842386; 321153, 3842386; 321153, 3842356; 
321213, 3842356; 321213, 3842386; 321273, 3842386; 321273, 3842356; 
321363, 3842356; 321363, 3842326; 321693, 3842326; 321693, 3842356; 
321723, 3842356; 321723, 3842416; 321753, 3842416; 321753, 3842356; 
321783, 3842356; 321783, 3842326; 321903, 3842326; 321903, 3842296; 
321933, 3842296; 321933, 3842236; 321963, 3842236; 321963, 3842206; 
321993, 3842206; 321993, 3842236; 322053, 3842236; 322053, 3842266; 
322143, 3842266; 322143, 3842296; 322233, 3842296; 322233, 3842326; 
322293, 3842326; 322293, 3842356; 322353, 3842356; 322353, 3842326; 
322413, 3842326; 322413, 3842296; 322443, 3842296; 322443, 3842266; 
322473, 3842266; 322473, 3842206; 322503, 3842206; 322503, 3842086; 
322473, 3842086; 322473, 3842056; 322503, 3842056; 322503, 3841966; 
322563, 3841966; 322563, 3841936; 322623, 3841936; 322623, 3841906; 
322713, 3841906; 322713, 3841846; 322743, 3841846; 322743, 3841816; 
322773, 3841816; 322773, 3841726; 322833, 3841726; 322833, 3841696; 
322863, 3841696; 322863, 3841576; 322893, 3841576; 322893, 3841456; 
322953, 3841456; 322953, 3841426; 322983, 3841426; 322983, 3841276; 
323013, 3841276; 323013, 3841186; 323043, 3841186; 323043, 3841156; 
323103, 3841156; 323103, 3841126; 323223, 3841126; 323223, 3841096; 
323253, 3841096; 323253, 3841066; 323283, 3841066; 323283, 3841006; 
323313, 3841006; 323313, 3840976; 323373, 3840976; 323373, 3840886; 
323433, 3840886; 323433, 3840916; 323583, 3840916; 323583, 3840946; 
323613,

[[Page 366]]

3840946; 323613, 3840976; 323673, 3840976; 323673, 3841006; 323763, 
3841006; 323763, 3841036; 323913, 3841036; 323913, 3841006; 323973, 
3841006; 323973, 3840976; 324033, 3840976; 324033, 3840946; 324063, 
3840946; 324063, 3840916; 324093, 3840916; 324093, 3840886; 324243, 
3840886; 324243, 3840916; 324363, 3840916; 324363, 3840946; 324483, 
3840946; 324483, 3840976; 324633, 3840976; 324633, 3840946; 324783, 
3840946; 324783, 3840916; 324843, 3840916; 324843, 3840886; 324873, 
3840886; 324873, 3840856; 324903, 3840856; 324903, 3840826; 324933, 
3840826; 324933, 3840736; 324963, 3840736; 324963, 3840646; 324993, 
3840646; 324993, 3840586; 325023, 3840586; 325023, 3840496; 324993, 
3840496; 324993, 3840466; 324963, 3840466; 324963, 3840436; 324933, 
3840436; 324933, 3840406; 324903, 3840406; 324903, 3840346; 324873, 
3840346; 324873, 3840316; 324963, 3840316; 324963, 3840286; 324993, 
3840286; 324993, 3840256; 325053, 3840256; 325053, 3840226; 325173, 
3840226; 325173, 3840196; 325233, 3840196; 325233, 3840166; 325263, 
3840166; 325263, 3840136; 325293, 3840136; 325293, 3840106; 325383, 
3840106; 325383, 3840166; 325533, 3840166; 325533, 3840196; 325563, 
3840196; 325563, 3840256; 325533, 3840256; 325533, 3840406; 325563, 
3840406; 325563, 3840436; 325593, 3840436; 325593, 3840466; 325653, 
3840466; 325653, 3840436; 325683, 3840436; 325683, 3840406; 325713, 
3840406; 325713, 3840376; 325803, 3840376; 325803, 3840406; 325833, 
3840406; 325833, 3840436; 325893, 3840436; 325893, 3840466; 326013, 
3840466; 326013, 3840496; 326073, 3840496; 326073, 3840526; 326103, 
3840526; 326103, 3840496; 326133, 3840496; 326133, 3840466; 326163, 
3840466; 326163, 3840436; 326193, 3840436; 326193, 3840406; 326223, 
3840406; 326223, 3840346; 326253, 3840346; 326253, 3840316; 326283, 
3840316; 326283, 3840106; 326253, 3840106; 326253, 3840046; 326313, 
3840046; 326313, 3840016; 326343, 3840016; 326343, 3840046; 326373, 
3840046; 326373, 3840076; 326403, 3840076; 326403, 3840106; 326433, 
3840106; 326433, 3840166; 326403, 3840166; 326403, 3840316; 326463, 
3840316; 326463, 3840376; 326523, 3840376; 326523, 3840406; 326553, 
3840406; 326553, 3840436; 326613, 3840436; 326613, 3840466; 326703, 
3840466; 326703, 3840436; 326823, 3840436; 326823, 3840406; 326913, 
3840406; 326913, 3840376; 326973, 3840376; 326973, 3840256; 327003, 
3840256; 327003, 3840196; 327033, 3840196; 327033, 3840256; 327063, 
3840256; 327063, 3840466; 327123, 3840466; 327123, 3840496; 327153, 
3840496; 327153, 3840526; 327273, 3840526; 327273, 3840496; 327303, 
3840496; 327303, 3840376; 327333, 3840376; 327333, 3840346; 327393, 
3840346; 327393, 3840376; 327453, 3840376; 327453, 3840406; 327483, 
3840406; 327483, 3840496; 327513, 3840496; 327513, 3840556; 327543, 
3840556; 327543, 3840586; 327603, 3840586; 327603, 3840616; 327633, 
3840616; 327633, 3840586; 327723, 3840586; 327723, 3840556; 327753, 
3840556; 327753, 3840586; 327783, 3840586; 327783, 3840646; 327813, 
3840646; 327813, 3840676; 327843, 3840676; 327843, 3840706; 327873, 
3840706; 327873, 3840736; 327903, 3840736; 327903, 3840766; 327993, 
3840766; 327993, 3840796; 328143, 3840796; 328143, 3840826; 328293, 
3840826; 328293, 3840886; 328323, 3840886; 328323, 3840916; 328293, 
3840916; 328293, 3840976; 328263, 3840976; 328263, 3841006; 328233, 
3841006; 328233, 3841036; 328203, 3841036; 328203, 3841126; 328233, 
3841126; 328233, 3841186; 328263, 3841186; 328263, 3841216; 328293, 
3841216; 328293, 3841246; 328323, 3841246; 328323, 3841276; 328473, 
3841276; 328473, 3841456; 328443, 3841456; 328443, 3841486; 328413, 
3841486; 328413, 3841546; 328533, 3841546; 328533, 3841576; 328563, 
3841576; 328563, 3841666; 328593, 3841666; 328593, 3841726; 328623, 
3841726; 328623, 3841756; 328683, 3841756; 328683, 3841786; 328863, 
3841786; 328863, 3841846; 328893, 3841846; 328893, 3841906; 328923, 
3841906; 328923, 3841936; 328953, 3841936; 328953, 3841966; 328983, 
3841966; 328983, 3841996; 329013, 3841996; 329013, 3841936; 329043, 
3841936; 329043, 3841906; 329073, 3841906; 329073, 3841786; 329103, 
3841786; 329103, 3841756; 329133, 3841756; 329133, 3841696; 329103, 
3841696; 329103, 3841666; 329073, 3841666; 329073, 3841606; 329043, 
3841606; 329043, 3841546; 329073, 3841546; 329073, 3841486; 329103, 
3841486; 329103, 3841426; 329133, 3841426; 329133, 3841396; 329163, 
3841396; 329163, 3841336; 329193, 3841336; 329193, 3841276; 329253, 
3841276; 329253, 3841216; 329283, 3841216; 329283, 3841066; 329313, 
3841066; 329313, 3841006; 329343, 3841006; 329343, 3840976; 329373, 
3840976; 329373, 3840946; 329403, 3840946; 329403, 3840916; 329433, 
3840916; 329433, 3840856; 329463, 3840856; 329463, 3840736; 329493, 
3840736; 329493, 3840706; 329523, 3840706; 329523, 3840736; 329613, 
3840736; 329613, 3840766; 329643, 3840766; 329643, 3840796; 329673, 
3840796; 329673, 3840826; 329763, 3840826; 329763, 3840856; 329883, 
3840856; 329883, 3840766; 329913, 3840766; 329913, 3840826; 329943, 
3840826; 329943, 3840886; 329973, 3840886; 329973, 3840976; 330033, 
3840976; 330033, 3841066; 330063, 3841066; 330063, 3841036; 330093, 
3841036; 330093, 3841006; 330123, 3841006; 330123, 3840976; 330213, 
3840976; 330213, 3840946; 330243, 3840946; 330243, 3840916; 330273, 
3840916; 330273, 3840736; 330243, 3840736; 330243, 3840676; 330273, 
3840676; 330273, 3840646; 330303, 3840646; 330303, 3840616; 330333, 
3840616; 330333, 3840586; 330363, 3840586; 330363, 3840556; 330393, 
3840556; 330393, 3840526; 330423, 3840526; 330423, 3840496; 330483, 
3840496; 330483, 3840526; 330513, 3840526; 330513, 3840556; 330543, 
3840556; 330543, 3840586; 330573, 3840586; 330573, 3840616; 330633, 
3840616; 330633, 3840586; 330603, 3840586; 330603, 3840466; 330663, 
3840466; 330663, 3840436; 330723, 3840436; 330723, 3840466; 330783, 
3840466; 330783, 3840316; 330813, 3840316; 330813, 3840286; 330873, 
3840286; 330873, 3840256; 330903, 3840256; 330903, 3840226; 330933, 
3840226; 330933, 3840196; 330963, 3840196; 330963, 3840136; 330993, 
3840136; 330993, 3840076; 330963, 3840076; 330963, 3840046; 330993, 
3840046; 330993, 3839956; 331053, 3839956; 331053, 3839986; 331143, 
3839986; 331143, 3839896; 331113, 3839896; 331113, 3839836; 331083, 
3839836; 331083, 3839746; 331113, 3839746; 331113, 3839716; 331143, 
3839716; 331143, 3839686; 331173, 3839686; 331173, 3839656; 331203, 
3839656; 331203, 3839596; 331353, 3839596; 331353, 3839566; 331383, 
3839566; 331383, 3839536; 331353, 3839536; 331353, 3839506; 331323, 
3839506; 331323, 3839446; 331293, 3839446; 331293, 3839386; 331323, 
3839386; 331323, 3839356; 331353, 3839356; 331353, 3839326; 331413, 
3839326; 331413, 3839356; 331533, 3839356; 331533, 3839326; 331563, 
3839326; 331563, 3839266; 331593, 3839266; 331593, 3839236; 331653, 
3839236; 331653, 3839296; 331713, 3839296; 331713, 3839086; 331683, 
3839086; 331683, 3838906; 331713, 3838906; 331713, 3838816; 331683, 
3838816; 331683, 3838756; 331713,

[[Page 367]]

3838756; 331713, 3838696; 331743, 3838696; 331743, 3838666; 331773, 
3838666; 331773, 3838606; 331803, 3838606; 331803, 3838576; 331833, 
3838576; 331833, 3838546; 331893, 3838546; 331893, 3838516; 331923, 
3838516; 331923, 3838486; 331953, 3838486; 331953, 3838456; 331983, 
3838456; 331983, 3838426; 332013, 3838426; 332013, 3838366; 332043, 
3838366; 332043, 3838276; 332073, 3838276; 332073, 3838246; 332133, 
3838246; 332133, 3838276; 332163, 3838276; 332163, 3838306; 332193, 
3838306; 332193, 3838186; 332223, 3838186; 332223, 3838126; 332253, 
3838126; 332253, 3838006; 332283, 3838006; 332283, 3837976; 332313, 
3837976; 332313, 3837916; 332343, 3837916; 332343, 3837856; 332373, 
3837856; 332373, 3837826; 332433, 3837826; 332433, 3837796; 332493, 
3837796; 332493, 3837706; 332523, 3837706; 332523, 3837676; 332583, 
3837676; 332583, 3837616; 332613, 3837616; 332613, 3837586; 332643, 
3837586; 332643, 3837556; 332673, 3837556; 332673, 3837526; 332703, 
3837526; 332703, 3837496; 332733, 3837496; 332733, 3837466; 332793, 
3837466; 332793, 3837496; 332823, 3837496; 332823, 3837526; 332853, 
3837526; 332853, 3837556; 332883, 3837556; 332883, 3837616; 332913, 
3837616; 332913, 3837706; 332943, 3837706; 332943, 3837766; 332973, 
3837766; 332973, 3837796; 333003, 3837796; 333003, 3837826; 333033, 
3837826; 333033, 3837796; 333093, 3837796; 333093, 3837766; 333153, 
3837766; 333153, 3837676; 333183, 3837676; 333183, 3837556; 333213, 
3837556; 333213, 3837586; 333303, 3837586; 333303, 3837556; 333363, 
3837556; 333363, 3837526; 333393, 3837526; 333393, 3837496; 333423, 
3837496; 333423, 3837466; 333453, 3837466; 333453, 3837376; 333423, 
3837376; 333423, 3837316; 333483, 3837316; 333483, 3837166; 333453, 
3837166; 333453, 3837076; 333483, 3837076; 333483, 3837016; 333693, 
3837016; 333693, 3836986; 333723, 3836986; 333723, 3836956; 333753, 
3836956; 333753, 3836926; 333903, 3836926; 333903, 3836866; 333873, 
3836866; 333873, 3836896; 333813, 3836896; 333813, 3836866; 333693, 
3836866; 333693, 3836956; 333663, 3836956; 333663, 3836986; 333543, 
3836986; 333543, 3836926; 333453, 3836926; 333453, 3836956; 333423, 
3836956; 333423, 3836986; 333393, 3836986; 333393, 3837016; 333363, 
3837016; 333363, 3837196; 333333, 3837196; 333333, 3837316; 333303, 
3837316; 333303, 3837406; 333153, 3837406; 333153, 3837436; 333093, 
3837436; 333093, 3837466; 333063, 3837466; 333063, 3837496; 333033, 
3837496; 333033, 3837466; 332943, 3837466; 332943, 3837436; 332913, 
3837436; 332913, 3837406; 332853, 3837406; 332853, 3837376; 332823, 
3837376; 332823, 3837316; 332793, 3837316; 332793, 3837226; 332763, 
3837226; 332763, 3837166; 332733, 3837166; 332733, 3837136; 332703, 
3837136; 332703, 3837106; 332673, 3837106; 332673, 3837166; 332643, 
3837166; 332643, 3837286; 332613, 3837286; 332613, 3837346; 332583, 
3837346; 332583, 3837376; 332553, 3837376; 332553, 3837406; 332493, 
3837406; 332493, 3837436; 332433, 3837436; 332433, 3837466; 332343, 
3837466; 332343, 3837556; 332313, 3837556; 332313, 3837586; 332283, 
3837586; 332283, 3837616; 332253, 3837616; 332253, 3837646; 332223, 
3837646; 332223, 3837676; 332193, 3837676; 332193, 3837706; 332133, 
3837706; 332133, 3837736; 332073, 3837736; 332073, 3837856; 332043, 
3837856; 332043, 3837886; 332013, 3837886; 332013, 3837976; 331983, 
3837976; 331983, 3838066; 331923, 3838066; 331923, 3838096; 331833, 
3838096; 331833, 3838126; 331803, 3838126; 331803, 3838186; 331773, 
3838186; 331773, 3838216; 331683, 3838216; 331683, 3838246; 331653, 
3838246; 331653, 3838276; 331623, 3838276; 331623, 3838306; 331593, 
3838306; 331593, 3838336; 331563, 3838336; 331563, 3838366; 331533, 
3838366; 331533, 3838426; 331503, 3838426; 331503, 3838456; 331443, 
3838456; 331443, 3838486; 331413, 3838486; 331413, 3838546; 331353, 
3838546; 331353, 3838576; 331293, 3838576; 331293, 3838666; 331203, 
3838666; 331203, 3838726; 331173, 3838726; 331173, 3838846; 331203, 
3838846; 331203, 3838906; 331233, 3838906; 331233, 3838936; 331263, 
3838936; 331263, 3838966; 331203, 3838966; 331203, 3838996; 331143, 
3838996; 331143, 3839026; 331113, 3839026; 331113, 3839056; 331083, 
3839056; 331083, 3839086; 331053, 3839086; 331053, 3839146; 331023, 
3839146; 331023, 3839236; 330993, 3839236; 330993, 3839326; 330963, 
3839326; 330963, 3839356; 330933, 3839356; 330933, 3839386; 330963, 
3839386; 330963, 3839446; 330933, 3839446; 330933, 3839506; 330873, 
3839506; 330873, 3839536; 330783, 3839536; 330783, 3839566; 330723, 
3839566; 330723, 3839626; 330693, 3839626; 330693, 3839686; 330663, 
3839686; 330663, 3839746; 330633, 3839746; 330633, 3839866; 330603, 
3839866; 330603, 3839926; 330573, 3839926; 330573, 3839986; 330543, 
3839986; 330543, 3840046; 330513, 3840046; 330513, 3840076; 330453, 
3840076; 330453, 3840106; 330423, 3840106; 330423, 3840166; 330393, 
3840166; 330393, 3840196; 330363, 3840196; 330363, 3840256; 330333, 
3840256; 330333, 3840286; 330303, 3840286; 330303, 3840316; 330273, 
3840316; 330273, 3840346; 330213, 3840346; 330213, 3840376; 330183, 
3840376; 330183, 3840406; 330153, 3840406; 330153, 3840436; 330123, 
3840436; 330123, 3840496; 330093, 3840496; 330093, 3840586; 330063, 
3840586; 330063, 3840646; 329973, 3840646; 329973, 3840616; 329763, 
3840616; 329763, 3840646; 329673, 3840646; 329673, 3840616; 329553, 
3840616; 329553, 3840586; 329523, 3840586; 329523, 3840556; 329463, 
3840556; 329463, 3840526; 329433, 3840526; 329433, 3840556; 329403, 
3840556; 329403, 3840616; 329373, 3840616; 329373, 3840706; 329343, 
3840706; 329343, 3840826; 329313, 3840826; 329313, 3840856; 329283, 
3840856; 329283, 3840886; 329253, 3840886; 329253, 3840916; 329223, 
3840916; 329223, 3840946; 329193, 3840946; 329193, 3841006; 329163, 
3841006; 329163, 3841126; 329133, 3841126; 329133, 3841216; 329103, 
3841216; 329103, 3841276; 329073, 3841276; 329073, 3841336; 329043, 
3841336; 329043, 3841366; 329013, 3841366; 329013, 3841396; 328983, 
3841396; 328983, 3841456; 328953, 3841456; 328953, 3841516; 328923, 
3841516; 328923, 3841576; 328773, 3841576; 328773, 3841546; 328713, 
3841546; 328713, 3841516; 328683, 3841516; 328683, 3841486; 328653, 
3841486; 328653, 3841426; 328623, 3841426; 328623, 3841216; 328593, 
3841216; 328593, 3841186; 328563, 3841186; 328563, 3841156; 328503, 
3841156; 328503, 3841126; 328413, 3841126; 328413, 3841156; 328383, 
3841156; 328383, 3841096; 328413, 3841096; 328413, 3840976; 328443, 
3840976; 328443, 3840796; 328413, 3840796; 328413, 3840736; 328233, 
3840736; 328233, 3840796; 328173, 3840796; 328173, 3840766; 328203, 
3840766; 328203, 3840736; 328143, 3840736; 328143, 3840706; 328053, 
3840706; 328053, 3840676; 327993, 3840676; 327993, 3840646; 327933, 
3840646; 327933, 3840616; 327903, 3840616; 327903, 3840586; 327873, 
3840586; 327873, 3840496; 327843, 3840496; 327843, 3840466; 327813, 
3840466; 327813, 3840436; 327603, 3840436; 327603, 3840346; 327573, 
3840346; 327573, 3840316; 327543,

[[Page 368]]

3840316; 327543, 3840256; 327453, 3840256; 327453, 3840226; 327423, 
3840226; 327423, 3840196; 327303, 3840196; 327303, 3840166; 327273, 
3840166; 327273, 3840196; 327243, 3840196; 327243, 3840226; 327183, 
3840226; 327183, 3840196; 327153, 3840196; 327153, 3840136; 327123, 
3840136; 327123, 3840106; 327093, 3840106; 327093, 3840076; 327063, 
3840076; 327063, 3840046; 327003, 3840046; 327003, 3840016; 326913, 
3840016; 326913, 3840076; 326883, 3840076; 326883, 3840106; 326853, 
3840106; 326853, 3840196; 326823, 3840196; 326823, 3840256; 326763, 
3840256; 326763, 3840286; 326733, 3840286; 326733, 3840316; 326643, 
3840316; 326643, 3840286; 326613, 3840286; 326613, 3840256; 326583, 
3840256; 326583, 3840106; 326553, 3840106; 326553, 3840046; 326523, 
3840046; 326523, 3839986; 326493, 3839986; 326493, 3839926; 326463, 
3839926; 326463, 3839896; 326373, 3839896; 326373, 3839866; 326283, 
3839866; 326283, 3839836; 326253, 3839836; 326253, 3839806; 326103, 
3839806; 326103, 3839776; 325953, 3839776; 325953, 3839836; 325923, 
3839836; 325923, 3839956; 325953, 3839956; 325953, 3840076; 325983, 
3840076; 325983, 3840166; 326013, 3840166; 326013, 3840346; 325923, 
3840346; 325923, 3840316; 325863, 3840316; 325863, 3840286; 325803, 
3840286; 325803, 3840256; 325683, 3840256; 325683, 3840076; 325623, 
3840076; 325623, 3840046; 325413, 3840046; 325413, 3840016; 325383, 
3840016; 325383, 3840046; 325233, 3840046; 325233, 3840076; 325203, 
3840076; 325203, 3840106; 325233, 3840106; 325233, 3840136; 325203, 
3840136; 325203, 3840166; 325173, 3840166; 325173, 3840136; 325143, 
3840136; 325143, 3840196; 325023, 3840196; 325023, 3840226; 324933, 
3840226; 324933, 3840196; 324993, 3840196; 324993, 3840166; 324963, 
3840166; 324963, 3840136; 324813, 3840136; 324813, 3840106; 324723, 
3840106; 324723, 3840136; 324693, 3840136; 324693, 3840166; 324663, 
3840166; 324663, 3840316; 324693, 3840316; 324693, 3840376; 324723, 
3840376; 324723, 3840436; 324753, 3840436; 324753, 3840466; 324783, 
3840466; 324783, 3840526; 324813, 3840526; 324813, 3840556; 324843, 
3840556; 324843, 3840616; 324873, 3840616; 324873, 3840736; 324843, 
3840736; 324843, 3840766; 324903, 3840766; 324903, 3840796; 324873, 
3840796; 324873, 3840826; 324843, 3840826; 324843, 3840856; 324813, 
3840856; 324813, 3840886; 324753, 3840886; 324753, 3840856; 324723, 
3840856; 324723, 3840826; 324693, 3840826; 324693, 3840856; 324603, 
3840856; 324603, 3840886; 324573, 3840886; 324573, 3840946; 324543, 
3840946; 324543, 3840856; 324453, 3840856; 324453, 3840826; 324423, 
3840826; 324423, 3840796; 324333, 3840796; 324333, 3840766; 324093, 
3840766; 324093, 3840796; 324003, 3840796; 324003, 3840826; 323943, 
3840826; 323943, 3840856; 323853, 3840856; 323853, 3840886; 323793, 
3840886; 323793, 3840856; 323673, 3840856; 323673, 3840826; 323643, 
3840826; 323643, 3840796; 323583, 3840796; 323583, 3840766; 323523, 
3840766; 323523, 3840796; 323463, 3840796; 323463, 3840826; 323403, 
3840826; 323403, 3840796; 323343, 3840796; 323343, 3840826; 323313, 
3840826; 323313, 3840856; 323283, 3840856; 323283, 3840916; 323253, 
3840916; 323253, 3840946; 323223, 3840946; 323223, 3840976; 323163, 
3840976; 323163, 3841006; 323013, 3841006; 323013, 3841036; 322953, 
3841036; 322953, 3841126; 322923, 3841126; 322923, 3841156; 322893, 
3841156; 322893, 3841246; 322863, 3841246; 322863, 3841306; 322833, 
3841306; 322833, 3841336; 322803, 3841336; 322803, 3841366; 322773, 
3841366; 322773, 3841396; 322743, 3841396; 322743, 3841576; 322713, 
3841576; 322713, 3841606; 322683, 3841606; 322683, 3841666; 322653, 
3841666; 322653, 3841696; 322623, 3841696; 322623, 3841726; 322353, 
3841726; 322353, 3841756; 322323, 3841756; 322323, 3841786; 322293, 
3841786; 322293, 3841816; 322263, 3841816; 322263, 3841846; 322203, 
3841846; 322203, 3841876; 322143, 3841876; 322143, 3841906; 322023, 
3841906; 322023, 3841936; 321963, 3841936; 321963, 3841966; 321783, 
3841966; 321783, 3841996; 321753, 3841996; 321753, 3842026; 321693, 
3842026; 321693, 3842056; 321663, 3842056; 321663, 3842086; 321633, 
3842086; 321633, 3842116; 321573, 3842116; 321573, 3842146; 321543, 
3842146; 321543, 3842176; 321513, 3842176; 321513, 3842206; 321303, 
3842206; 321303, 3842236; 321183, 3842236; 321183, 3842266; 321123, 
3842266; 321123, 3842236; 321033, 3842236; 321033, 3842206; 320853, 
3842206; 320853, 3842176; 320823, 3842176; 320823, 3842206; 320793, 
3842206; 320793, 3842236; 320763, 3842236; 320763, 3842296; 320733, 
3842296; 320733, 3842386; 320703, 3842386; 320703, 3842416; 320463, 
3842416; 320463, 3842386; 320373, 3842386; 320373, 3842356; 320343, 
3842356; 320343, 3842386; 320283, 3842386; 320283, 3842446; 320253, 
3842446; 320253, 3842476; 320193, 3842476; 320193, 3842446; 319983, 
3842446; 319983, 3842416; 319953, 3842416; 319953, 3842386; 319923, 
3842386; 319923, 3842356; 319893, 3842356; 319893, 3842296; 319863, 
3842296; 319863, 3842266; 319713, 3842266; 319713, 3842236; 319443, 
3842236; 319443, 3842266; 319323, 3842266; 319323, 3842296; 319293, 
3842296; 319293, 3842326; 319263, 3842326; 319263, 3842356; 319203, 
3842356; 319203, 3842326; 319113, 3842326; 319113, 3842356; 318903, 
3842356; 318903, 3842326; 318873, 3842326; 318873, 3842296; 318843, 
3842296; 318843, 3842176; 318783, 3842176; 318783, 3842056; 318753, 
3842056; 318753, 3841996; 318723, 3841996; 318723, 3841966; 318693, 
3841966; 318693, 3841936; 318543, 3841936; 318543, 3841966; 318483, 
3841966; 318483, 3841996; 318363, 3841996; 318363, 3841936; 318333, 
3841936; 318333, 3841906; 318303, 3841906; 318303, 3841876; 318243, 
3841876; 318243, 3841846; 318273, 3841846; 318273, 3841816; 318243, 
3841816; 318243, 3841786; 318213, 3841786; 318213, 3841756; 318183, 
3841756; 318183, 3841726; 318153, 3841726; 318153, 3841636; 318123, 
3841636; 318123, 3841576; 318093, 3841576; 318093, 3841546; 318063, 
3841546; 318063, 3841516; 318033, 3841516; 318033, 3841456; 317823, 
3841456; 317823, 3841486; 317793, 3841486; 317793, 3841516; 317763, 
3841516; 317763, 3841546; 317733, 3841546; 317733, 3841516; 317673, 
3841516; 317673, 3841486; 317613, 3841486; 317613, 3841456; 317583, 
3841456; 317583, 3841396; 317493, 3841396; 317493, 3841366; 317433, 
3841366; 317433, 3841336; 317403, 3841336; 317403, 3841306; 317343, 
3841306; 317343, 3841336; 317283, 3841336; 317283, 3841366; 317223, 
3841366; 317223, 3841336; 317103, 3841336; 317103, 3841366; 316713, 
3841366; 316713, 3841396; 316653, 3841396; 316653, 3841426; 316563, 
3841426; 316563, 3841396; 316503, 3841396; 316503, 3841366; 316473, 
3841366; 316473, 3841486; 316503, 3841486; 316503, 3841546; 316533, 
3841546; 316533, 3841576; 316563, 3841576; 316563, 3841606; 316593, 
3841606; 316593, 3841636; 316653, 3841636; 316653, 3841666; 316743, 
3841666; 316743, 3841756; 316773, 3841756; 316773, 3841786; 316803, 
3841786; 316803, 3841816; 316953, 3841816; 316953, 3841786; 317013, 
3841786; 317013, 3841756; 317193,

[[Page 369]]

3841756; 317193, 3841726; 317253, 3841726; 317253, 3841696; 317283, 
3841696; 317283, 3841636; 317313, 3841636; 317313, 3841606; 317343, 
3841606; 317343, 3841546; 317463, 3841546; 317463, 3841576; 317493, 
3841576; 317493, 3841636; 317553, 3841636; 317553, 3841666; 317673, 
3841666; 317673, 3841696; 317793, 3841696; 317793, 3841726; 317883, 
3841726; 317883, 3841666; 317913, 3841666; 317913, 3841606; 317943, 
3841606; 317943, 3841666; 317973, 3841666; 317973, 3841786; 317943, 
3841786; 317943, 3841876; 317973, 3841876; 317973, 3841966; 318003, 
3841966; 318003, 3841996; 318033, 3841996; 318033, 3842056; 318063, 
3842056; 318063, 3842116; 318213, 3842116; 318213, 3842146; 318243, 
3842146; 318243, 3842176; 318333, 3842176; 318333, 3842206; 318393, 
3842206; 318393, 3842176; 318453, 3842176; 318453, 3842146; 318483, 
3842146; 318483, 3842176; 318513, 3842176; 318513, 3842146; 318543, 
3842146; 318543, 3842116; 318573, 3842116; 318573, 3842146; 318603, 
3842146; 318603, 3842206; 318633, 3842206; 318633, 3842416; 318663, 
3842416; 318663, 3842506; 318693, 3842506; 318693, 3842566; 318723, 
3842566; 318723, 3842596; 318753, 3842596; 318753, 3842626; 318813, 
3842626; 318813, 3842656; 318903, 3842656; 318903, 3842686; 319023, 
3842686; 319023, 3842716; 319143, 3842716; 319143, 3842746; 319203, 
3842746; 319203, 3842776; returning to 319293, 3842776.
    (ii) Subunit 5b: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Black Mountain, 
Liebre Mountain, Whitaker Peak, and Cobblestone Mountain, land between 
Pyramid Lake and Lake Piru bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, 
N): 337443, 3829276; 337383, 3829276; 337383, 3829246; 337293, 3829246; 
337293, 3829216; 337263, 3829216; 337263, 3829246; 337203, 3829246; 
337203, 3829336; 337173, 3829336; 337173, 3829366; 337203, 3829366; 
337203, 3829426; 337173, 3829426; 337173, 3829456; 337143, 3829456; 
337143, 3829486; 337053, 3829486; 337053, 3829456; 336873, 3829456; 
336873, 3829486; 336843, 3829486; 336843, 3829516; 336813, 3829516; 
336813, 3829546; 336783, 3829546; 336783, 3829606; 336693, 3829606; 
336693, 3829726; 336723, 3829726; 336723, 3829786; 336693, 3829786; 
336693, 3829816; 336663, 3829816; 336663, 3829846; 336633, 3829846; 
336633, 3829876; 336573, 3829876; 336573, 3829936; 336513, 3829936; 
336513, 3829876; 336483, 3829876; 336483, 3829846; 336453, 3829846; 
336453, 3829816; 336303, 3829816; 336303, 3829876; 336273, 3829876; 
336273, 3829936; 336243, 3829936; 336243, 3830146; 336273, 3830146; 
336273, 3830206; 336243, 3830206; 336243, 3830176; 336123, 3830176; 
336123, 3830146; 336033, 3830146; 336033, 3830116; 335973, 3830116; 
335973, 3830086; 335943, 3830086; 335943, 3830026; 335913, 3830026; 
335913, 3829966; 335883, 3829966; 335883, 3829936; 335823, 3829936; 
335823, 3829906; 335733, 3829906; 335733, 3829936; 335703, 3829936; 
335703, 3829906; 335613, 3829906; 335613, 3829966; 335583, 3829966; 
335583, 3830116; 335553, 3830116; 335553, 3830176; 335583, 3830176; 
335583, 3830326; 335553, 3830326; 335553, 3830356; 335523, 3830356; 
335523, 3830386; 335463, 3830386; 335463, 3830416; 335433, 3830416; 
335433, 3830566; 335223, 3830566; 335223, 3830626; 335193, 3830626; 
335193, 3830656; 335163, 3830656; 335163, 3830686; 335133, 3830686; 
335133, 3830776; 335163, 3830776; 335163, 3830806; 335193, 3830806; 
335193, 3830836; 335223, 3830836; 335223, 3830866; 335283, 3830866; 
335283, 3830956; 335223, 3830956; 335223, 3830986; 335193, 3830986; 
335193, 3831046; 335163, 3831046; 335163, 3831076; 335103, 3831076; 
335103, 3831166; 335073, 3831166; 335073, 3831196; 335283, 3831196; 
335283, 3831106; 335313, 3831106; 335313, 3831046; 335343, 3831046; 
335343, 3831016; 335373, 3831016; 335373, 3830986; 335403, 3830986; 
335403, 3830926; 335433, 3830926; 335433, 3830896; 335463, 3830896; 
335463, 3830836; 335433, 3830836; 335433, 3830806; 335403, 3830806; 
335403, 3830776; 335343, 3830776; 335343, 3830806; 335313, 3830806; 
335313, 3830776; 335283, 3830776; 335283, 3830746; 335313, 3830746; 
335313, 3830686; 335553, 3830686; 335553, 3830656; 335583, 3830656; 
335583, 3830476; 335643, 3830476; 335643, 3830446; 335673, 3830446; 
335673, 3830386; 335703, 3830386; 335703, 3830086; 335763, 3830086; 
335763, 3830116; 335793, 3830116; 335793, 3830086; 335823, 3830086; 
335823, 3830146; 335883, 3830146; 335883, 3830176; 335913, 3830176; 
335913, 3830206; 336003, 3830206; 336003, 3830236; 336063, 3830236; 
336063, 3830266; 336123, 3830266; 336123, 3830296; 336183, 3830296; 
336183, 3830326; 336243, 3830326; 336243, 3830356; 336393, 3830356; 
336393, 3830266; 336423, 3830266; 336423, 3830236; 336393, 3830236; 
336393, 3830146; 336363, 3830146; 336363, 3829996; 336393, 3829996; 
336393, 3829966; 336423, 3829966; 336423, 3830026; 336453, 3830026; 
336453, 3830056; 336483, 3830056; 336483, 3830086; 336543, 3830086; 
336543, 3830056; 336603, 3830056; 336603, 3830026; 336633, 3830026; 
336633, 3829996; 336693, 3829996; 336693, 3829936; 336723, 3829936; 
336723, 3829876; 336753, 3829876; 336753, 3829846; 336783, 3829846; 
336783, 3829786; 336813, 3829786; 336813, 3829756; 336843, 3829756; 
336843, 3829726; 337053, 3829726; 337053, 3829636; 337083, 3829636; 
337083, 3829606; 337053, 3829606; 337053, 3829576; 337113, 3829576; 
337113, 3829546; 337203, 3829546; 337203, 3829516; 337233, 3829516; 
337233, 3829486; 337263, 3829486; 337263, 3829396; 337293, 3829396; 
337293, 3829366; 337353, 3829366; 337353, 3829396; 337473, 3829396; 
337473, 3829366; 337503, 3829366; 337503, 3829216; 337533, 3829216; 
337533, 3829186; 337563, 3829186; 337563, 3829126; 337593, 3829126; 
337593, 3829036; 337623, 3829036; 337623, 3829006; 337653, 3829006; 
337653, 3828976; 337623, 3828976; 337623, 3828916; 337653, 3828916; 
337653, 3828826; 337683, 3828826; 337683, 3828796; 337653, 3828796; 
337653, 3828766; 337683, 3828766; 337683, 3828736; 337653, 3828736; 
337653, 3828706; 337623, 3828706; 337623, 3828646; 337593, 3828646; 
337593, 3828616; 337473, 3828616; 337473, 3828586; 337413, 3828586; 
337413, 3828616; 337353, 3828616; 337353, 3828646; 337323, 3828646; 
337323, 3828676; 337173, 3828676; 337173, 3828706; 337113, 3828706; 
337113, 3828616; 337083, 3828616; 337083, 3828586; 337053, 3828586; 
337053, 3828526; 336993, 3828526; 336993, 3828496; 336963, 3828496; 
336963, 3828286; 336993, 3828286; 336993, 3828136; 337053, 3828136; 
337053, 3828106; 337113, 3828106; 337113, 3828046; 337143, 3828046; 
337143, 3827926; 337113, 3827926; 337113, 3827716; 337143, 3827716; 
337143, 3827626; 337173, 3827626; 337173, 3827596; 337233, 3827596; 
337233, 3827566; 337203, 3827566; 337203, 3827536; 337173, 3827536; 
337173, 3827326; 337143, 3827326; 337143, 3827296; 337173, 3827296; 
337173, 3827266; 337143, 3827266; 337143, 3827236; 337113, 3827236; 
337113, 3827206; 337143, 3827206; 337143, 3827176; 337263, 3827176; 
337263, 3827146;

[[Page 370]]

337293, 3827146; 337293, 3827086; 337323, 3827086; 337323, 3827026; 
337353, 3827026; 337353, 3826996; 337383, 3826996; 337383, 3826936; 
337353, 3826936; 337353, 3826846; 337323, 3826846; 337323, 3826786; 
337293, 3826786; 337293, 3826726; 337263, 3826726; 337263, 3826696; 
336993, 3826696; 336993, 3826726; 336903, 3826726; 336903, 3826756; 
336843, 3826756; 336843, 3826726; 336813, 3826726; 336813, 3826636; 
336843, 3826636; 336843, 3826516; 337053, 3826516; 337053, 3826456; 
337083, 3826456; 337083, 3826426; 337143, 3826426; 337143, 3826396; 
337173, 3826396; 337173, 3826366; 337203, 3826366; 337203, 3826336; 
337233, 3826336; 337233, 3826306; 337263, 3826306; 337263, 3826096; 
337233, 3826096; 337233, 3825946; 337353, 3825946; 337353, 3825976; 
337383, 3825976; 337383, 3825916; 337353, 3825916; 337353, 3825766; 
337323, 3825766; 337323, 3825706; 337293, 3825706; 337293, 3825676; 
337263, 3825676; 337263, 3825646; 337233, 3825646; 337233, 3825616; 
337203, 3825616; 337203, 3825586; 337173, 3825586; 337173, 3825526; 
337143, 3825526; 337143, 3825106; 337173, 3825106; 337173, 3825016; 
337203, 3825016; 337203, 3824956; 337233, 3824956; 337233, 3824896; 
337263, 3824896; 337263, 3824806; 337233, 3824806; 337233, 3824746; 
337203, 3824746; 337203, 3824686; 337173, 3824686; 337173, 3824536; 
337143, 3824536; 337143, 3824446; 337173, 3824446; 337173, 3824356; 
337203, 3824356; 337203, 3824326; 337233, 3824326; 337233, 3824296; 
337263, 3824296; 337263, 3824266; 337293, 3824266; 337293, 3824236; 
337413, 3824236; 337413, 3824296; 337443, 3824296; 337443, 3824356; 
337503, 3824356; 337503, 3824326; 337533, 3824326; 337533, 3824356; 
337563, 3824356; 337563, 3824326; 337653, 3824326; 337653, 3824296; 
337713, 3824296; 337713, 3824266; 337863, 3824266; 337863, 3824236; 
337983, 3824236; 337983, 3824206; 338043, 3824206; 338043, 3824176; 
338073, 3824176; 338073, 3824146; 338103, 3824146; 338103, 3824116; 
338133, 3824116; 338133, 3824086; 338163, 3824086; 338163, 3824056; 
338193, 3824056; 338193, 3823996; 338223, 3823996; 338223, 3823966; 
338253, 3823966; 338253, 3823936; 338283, 3823936; 338283, 3823906; 
338313, 3823906; 338313, 3823876; 338343, 3823876; 338343, 3823846; 
338373, 3823846; 338373, 3823816; 338493, 3823816; 338493, 3823756; 
338463, 3823756; 338463, 3823726; 338493, 3823726; 338493, 3823666; 
338523, 3823666; 338523, 3823636; 338553, 3823636; 338553, 3823576; 
338583, 3823576; 338583, 3823546; 338643, 3823546; 338643, 3823516; 
338673, 3823516; 338673, 3823486; 338733, 3823486; 338733, 3823456; 
338793, 3823456; 338793, 3823366; 338823, 3823366; 338823, 3823276; 
338883, 3823276; 338883, 3823246; 338913, 3823246; 338913, 3823186; 
338853, 3823186; 338853, 3823006; 338883, 3823006; 338883, 3822976; 
338913, 3822976; 338913, 3822946; 338883, 3822946; 338883, 3822916; 
338853, 3822916; 338853, 3822886; 338823, 3822886; 338823, 3822826; 
338793, 3822826; 338793, 3822766; 338763, 3822766; 338763, 3822736; 
338733, 3822736; 338733, 3822646; 338703, 3822646; 338703, 3822616; 
338733, 3822616; 338733, 3822556; 338763, 3822556; 338763, 3822526; 
338883, 3822526; 338883, 3822496; 338943, 3822496; 338943, 3822466; 
339003, 3822466; 339003, 3822436; 339033, 3822436; 339033, 3822346; 
339063, 3822346; 339063, 3822316; 339093, 3822316; 339093, 3822286; 
339063, 3822286; 339063, 3822256; 338943, 3822256; 338943, 3822226; 
338883, 3822226; 338883, 3822196; 338853, 3822196; 338853, 3822046; 
338823, 3822046; 338823, 3821956; 338853, 3821956; 338853, 3821896; 
338823, 3821896; 338823, 3821626; 338853, 3821626; 338853, 3821566; 
338883, 3821566; 338883, 3821536; 338913, 3821536; 338913, 3821446; 
338943, 3821446; 338943, 3821326; 338973, 3821326; 338973, 3821116; 
339003, 3821116; 339003, 3820966; 338973, 3820966; 338973, 3820816; 
339003, 3820816; 339003, 3820786; 339123, 3820786; 339123, 3820726; 
339153, 3820726; 339153, 3820666; 339183, 3820666; 339183, 3820606; 
339213, 3820606; 339213, 3820576; 339303, 3820576; 339303, 3820546; 
339333, 3820546; 339333, 3820516; 339363, 3820516; 339363, 3820456; 
339303, 3820456; 339303, 3820426; 339243, 3820426; 339243, 3820396; 
339093, 3820396; 339093, 3820336; 339063, 3820336; 339063, 3820306; 
339033, 3820306; 339033, 3820276; 339003, 3820276; 339003, 3820216; 
338973, 3820216; 338973, 3820186; 338913, 3820186; 338913, 3820156; 
338853, 3820156; 338853, 3820126; 338823, 3820126; 338823, 3820096; 
338793, 3820096; 338793, 3820066; 338763, 3820066; 338763, 3820006; 
338793, 3820006; 338793, 3819886; 338823, 3819886; 338823, 3819826; 
338853, 3819826; 338853, 3819796; 338883, 3819796; 338883, 3819736; 
338913, 3819736; 338913, 3819676; 338943, 3819676; 338943, 3819586; 
338973, 3819586; 338973, 3819526; 339003, 3819526; 339003, 3819496; 
338973, 3819496; 338973, 3819436; 339003, 3819436; 339003, 3819316; 
338973, 3819316; 338973, 3819196; 338943, 3819196; 338943, 3819166; 
338913, 3819166; 338913, 3819136; 338793, 3819136; 338793, 3819166; 
338733, 3819166; 338733, 3819196; 338703, 3819196; 338703, 3819226; 
338673, 3819226; 338673, 3819286; 338643, 3819286; 338643, 3819436; 
338493, 3819436; 338493, 3819406; 338403, 3819406; 338403, 3819436; 
338433, 3819436; 338433, 3819466; 338463, 3819466; 338463, 3819496; 
338493, 3819496; 338493, 3819646; 338463, 3819646; 338463, 3819676; 
338433, 3819676; 338433, 3819706; 338403, 3819706; 338403, 3819766; 
338373, 3819766; 338373, 3819796; 338343, 3819796; 338343, 3819856; 
338313, 3819856; 338313, 3819886; 338283, 3819886; 338283, 3819916; 
338223, 3819916; 338223, 3819976; 338253, 3819976; 338253, 3820036; 
338283, 3820036; 338283, 3820096; 338313, 3820096; 338313, 3820156; 
338343, 3820156; 338343, 3820186; 338373, 3820186; 338373, 3820276; 
338313, 3820276; 338313, 3820306; 338223, 3820306; 338223, 3820276; 
338193, 3820276; 338193, 3820306; 338133, 3820306; 338133, 3820336; 
338103, 3820336; 338103, 3820366; 338133, 3820366; 338133, 3820426; 
338163, 3820426; 338163, 3820486; 338193, 3820486; 338193, 3820456; 
338313, 3820456; 338313, 3820486; 338373, 3820486; 338373, 3820456; 
338433, 3820456; 338433, 3820426; 338643, 3820426; 338643, 3820516; 
338613, 3820516; 338613, 3820576; 338583, 3820576; 338583, 3820696; 
338553, 3820696; 338553, 3820966; 338583, 3820966; 338583, 3821056; 
338553, 3821056; 338553, 3821446; 338523, 3821446; 338523, 3821476; 
338493, 3821476; 338493, 3821506; 338433, 3821506; 338433, 3821536; 
338493, 3821536; 338493, 3821566; 338553, 3821566; 338553, 3821536; 
338583, 3821536; 338583, 3821566; 338613, 3821566; 338613, 3821656; 
338583, 3821656; 338583, 3821686; 338613, 3821686; 338613, 3821746; 
338643, 3821746; 338643, 3821896; 338673, 3821896; 338673, 3821956; 
338703, 3821956; 338703, 3822196; 338673, 3822196; 338673, 3822376; 
338643, 3822376; 338643, 3822406; 338613, 3822406; 338613, 3822436; 
338583, 3822436; 338583, 3822496; 338553, 3822496; 338553, 3822616; 
338523, 3822616; 338523, 3822676;

[[Page 371]]

338553, 3822676; 338553, 3822706; 338523, 3822706; 338523, 3822736; 
338493, 3822736; 338493, 3822766; 338463, 3822766; 338463, 3822826; 
338433, 3822826; 338433, 3822976; 338493, 3822976; 338493, 3823066; 
338463, 3823066; 338463, 3823126; 338343, 3823126; 338343, 3823156; 
338283, 3823156; 338283, 3823186; 338253, 3823186; 338253, 3823216; 
338223, 3823216; 338223, 3823276; 338193, 3823276; 338193, 3823336; 
338163, 3823336; 338163, 3823456; 338193, 3823456; 338193, 3823516; 
338253, 3823516; 338253, 3823606; 338223, 3823606; 338223, 3823636; 
338133, 3823636; 338133, 3823576; 338103, 3823576; 338103, 3823516; 
338073, 3823516; 338073, 3823486; 337893, 3823486; 337893, 3823426; 
337863, 3823426; 337863, 3823396; 337803, 3823396; 337803, 3823366; 
337743, 3823366; 337743, 3823396; 337593, 3823396; 337593, 3823486; 
337563, 3823486; 337563, 3823576; 337383, 3823576; 337383, 3823546; 
337293, 3823546; 337293, 3823516; 337263, 3823516; 337263, 3823486; 
337233, 3823486; 337233, 3823456; 337203, 3823456; 337203, 3823426; 
337173, 3823426; 337173, 3823366; 337113, 3823366; 337113, 3823336; 
337053, 3823336; 337053, 3823366; 336873, 3823366; 336873, 3823396; 
336843, 3823396; 336843, 3823426; 336813, 3823426; 336813, 3823456; 
336783, 3823456; 336783, 3823486; 336693, 3823486; 336693, 3823456; 
336633, 3823456; 336633, 3823426; 336603, 3823426; 336603, 3823456; 
336543, 3823456; 336543, 3823486; 336513, 3823486; 336513, 3823516; 
336483, 3823516; 336483, 3823576; 336363, 3823576; 336363, 3823636; 
336333, 3823636; 336333, 3823666; 336273, 3823666; 336273, 3823696; 
336243, 3823696; 336243, 3823726; 336213, 3823726; 336213, 3823786; 
336183, 3823786; 336183, 3823816; 336063, 3823816; 336063, 3823846; 
336003, 3823846; 336003, 3823876; 335973, 3823876; 335973, 3823906; 
335913, 3823906; 335913, 3823936; 335883, 3823936; 335883, 3823966; 
335823, 3823966; 335823, 3823996; 335763, 3823996; 335763, 3824026; 
335733, 3824026; 335733, 3824056; 335703, 3824056; 335703, 3824206; 
335673, 3824206; 335673, 3824386; 335643, 3824386; 335643, 3824416; 
335583, 3824416; 335583, 3824446; 335553, 3824446; 335553, 3824506; 
335523, 3824506; 335523, 3824536; 335373, 3824536; 335373, 3824566; 
335313, 3824566; 335313, 3824596; 335223, 3824596; 335223, 3824626; 
334953, 3824626; 334953, 3824656; 334923, 3824656; 334923, 3824626; 
334743, 3824626; 334743, 3824656; 334653, 3824656; 334653, 3824626; 
334623, 3824626; 334623, 3824596; 334563, 3824596; 334563, 3824656; 
334593, 3824656; 334593, 3824716; 334623, 3824716; 334623, 3824836; 
334653, 3824836; 334653, 3824866; 334683, 3824866; 334683, 3824806; 
334803, 3824806; 334803, 3824776; 334863, 3824776; 334863, 3824746; 
335103, 3824746; 335103, 3824776; 335163, 3824776; 335163, 3824746; 
335343, 3824746; 335343, 3824716; 335373, 3824716; 335373, 3824686; 
335403, 3824686; 335403, 3824656; 335613, 3824656; 335613, 3824626; 
335643, 3824626; 335643, 3824536; 335673, 3824536; 335673, 3824506; 
335703, 3824506; 335703, 3824536; 335733, 3824536; 335733, 3824506; 
335763, 3824506; 335763, 3824476; 335793, 3824476; 335793, 3824176; 
335823, 3824176; 335823, 3824116; 335853, 3824116; 335853, 3824086; 
335943, 3824086; 335943, 3824056; 336003, 3824056; 336003, 3823996; 
336033, 3823996; 336033, 3823966; 336093, 3823966; 336093, 3823936; 
336183, 3823936; 336183, 3823966; 336213, 3823966; 336213, 3823936; 
336243, 3823936; 336243, 3823966; 336273, 3823966; 336273, 3823936; 
336303, 3823936; 336303, 3823906; 336273, 3823906; 336273, 3823876; 
336303, 3823876; 336303, 3823786; 336333, 3823786; 336333, 3823756; 
336393, 3823756; 336393, 3823726; 336453, 3823726; 336453, 3823696; 
336513, 3823696; 336513, 3823666; 336543, 3823666; 336543, 3823636; 
336603, 3823636; 336603, 3823576; 336633, 3823576; 336633, 3823606; 
336693, 3823606; 336693, 3823636; 336813, 3823636; 336813, 3823606; 
336843, 3823606; 336843, 3823576; 336873, 3823576; 336873, 3823516; 
336933, 3823516; 336933, 3823486; 337113, 3823486; 337113, 3823516; 
337143, 3823516; 337143, 3823546; 337113, 3823546; 337113, 3823696; 
337203, 3823696; 337203, 3823726; 337323, 3823726; 337323, 3823696; 
337413, 3823696; 337413, 3823726; 337533, 3823726; 337533, 3823756; 
337563, 3823756; 337563, 3823726; 337623, 3823726; 337623, 3823696; 
337713, 3823696; 337713, 3823636; 337743, 3823636; 337743, 3823606; 
337833, 3823606; 337833, 3823636; 337863, 3823636; 337863, 3823666; 
337893, 3823666; 337893, 3823696; 337923, 3823696; 337923, 3823786; 
337953, 3823786; 337953, 3823966; 337803, 3823966; 337803, 3823996; 
337743, 3823996; 337743, 3824026; 337683, 3824026; 337683, 3824086; 
337653, 3824086; 337653, 3824146; 337623, 3824146; 337623, 3824176; 
337443, 3824176; 337443, 3824146; 337323, 3824146; 337323, 3824116; 
337203, 3824116; 337203, 3824146; 337143, 3824146; 337143, 3824176; 
337113, 3824176; 337113, 3824206; 337083, 3824206; 337083, 3824236; 
337053, 3824236; 337053, 3824326; 337023, 3824326; 337023, 3824476; 
337053, 3824476; 337053, 3824596; 337083, 3824596; 337083, 3824716; 
337113, 3824716; 337113, 3824776; 337143, 3824776; 337143, 3824866; 
337173, 3824866; 337173, 3824896; 337143, 3824896; 337143, 3824956; 
337113, 3824956; 337113, 3824986; 337083, 3824986; 337083, 3825046; 
337053, 3825046; 337053, 3825376; 337023, 3825376; 337023, 3825436; 
336993, 3825436; 336993, 3825466; 336963, 3825466; 336963, 3825526; 
336933, 3825526; 336933, 3825616; 336963, 3825616; 336963, 3825676; 
337023, 3825676; 337023, 3825706; 337053, 3825706; 337053, 3825736; 
337083, 3825736; 337083, 3825766; 337113, 3825766; 337113, 3825856; 
337083, 3825856; 337083, 3825976; 337053, 3825976; 337053, 3826036; 
337023, 3826036; 337023, 3826066; 336993, 3826066; 336993, 3826096; 
337023, 3826096; 337023, 3826126; 337053, 3826126; 337053, 3826186; 
337023, 3826186; 337023, 3826246; 336993, 3826246; 336993, 3826276; 
336933, 3826276; 336933, 3826306; 336723, 3826306; 336723, 3826336; 
336693, 3826336; 336693, 3826366; 336663, 3826366; 336663, 3826396; 
336603, 3826396; 336603, 3826456; 336573, 3826456; 336573, 3826516; 
336543, 3826516; 336543, 3826576; 336513, 3826576; 336513, 3826636; 
336633, 3826636; 336633, 3826846; 336663, 3826846; 336663, 3826906; 
336693, 3826906; 336693, 3826936; 336723, 3826936; 336723, 3826966; 
336753, 3826966; 336753, 3827026; 336783, 3827026; 336783, 3827056; 
336843, 3827056; 336843, 3827086; 336873, 3827086; 336873, 3827206; 
336903, 3827206; 336903, 3827296; 336933, 3827296; 336933, 3827326; 
336963, 3827326; 336963, 3827416; 336993, 3827416; 336993, 3827476; 
337023, 3827476; 337023, 3828016; 336993, 3828016; 336993, 3828046; 
336963, 3828046; 336963, 3828076; 336933, 3828076; 336933, 3828106; 
336903, 3828106; 336903, 3828256; 336873, 3828256; 336873, 3828286; 
336903, 3828286; 336903, 3828556; 336963, 3828556; 336963, 3828586; 
336993, 3828586; 336993, 3828646; 336963, 3828646; 336963, 3828706; 
336933, 3828706; 336933, 3828736;

[[Page 372]]

336903, 3828736; 336903, 3828766; 336933, 3828766; 336933, 3828826; 
336963, 3828826; 336963, 3828856; 336993, 3828856; 336993, 3828886; 
337083, 3828886; 337083, 3828856; 337173, 3828856; 337173, 3828826; 
337263, 3828826; 337263, 3828796; 337353, 3828796; 337353, 3828766; 
337533, 3828766; 337533, 3828916; 337503, 3828916; 337503, 3829006; 
337473, 3829006; 337473, 3829126; 337443, 3829126; returning to 337443, 
3829276. Excluding land bounded by 337443, 3829276; 337473, 3829276; 
337473, 3829336; 337443, 3829336; returning to 337443, 3829276.
    (iii) Note: Map of Units 4 and 5 follows:

[[Page 373]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09FE11.003

    (11) Unit 6: Upper Santa Clara River Basin, Los Angeles County, 
California.
    (i) Subunit 6a: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Liebre Mtn. and 
Whitaker Peak, land upstream of Castaic Lake, bounded by the following 
UTM coordinates (E, N): 347013, 3835726; 347013, 3835696; 347043, 
3835696; 347043, 3835576; 347073, 3835576; 347073, 3835546; 347103,

[[Page 374]]

3835546; 347103, 3835516; 347073, 3835516; 347073, 3835426; 347103, 
3835426; 347103, 3835306; 347133, 3835306; 347133, 3835276; 347163, 
3835276; 347163, 3835216; 347133, 3835216; 347133, 3835186; 347163, 
3835186; 347163, 3835126; 347133, 3835126; 347133, 3835036; 347163, 
3835036; 347163, 3834976; 347193, 3834976; 347193, 3834946; 347223, 
3834946; 347223, 3834916; 347193, 3834916; 347193, 3834886; 347163, 
3834886; 347163, 3834856; 347133, 3834856; 347133, 3834766; 347163, 
3834766; 347163, 3834676; 347133, 3834676; 347133, 3834646; 347103, 
3834646; 347103, 3834436; 347073, 3834436; 347073, 3834406; 347043, 
3834406; 347043, 3834346; 347073, 3834346; 347073, 3834226; 347043, 
3834226; 347043, 3834166; 347073, 3834166; 347073, 3834136; 347103, 
3834136; 347103, 3834106; 347073, 3834106; 347073, 3834046; 347043, 
3834046; 347043, 3834016; 346983, 3834016; 346983, 3833986; 347013, 
3833986; 347013, 3833956; 347043, 3833956; 347043, 3833926; 347163, 
3833926; 347163, 3833956; 347223, 3833956; 347223, 3833986; 347313, 
3833986; 347313, 3833956; 347373, 3833956; 347373, 3833926; 347433, 
3833926; 347433, 3833836; 347463, 3833836; 347463, 3833776; 347493, 
3833776; 347493, 3833806; 347523, 3833806; 347523, 3833776; 347553, 
3833776; 347553, 3833746; 347583, 3833746; 347583, 3833716; 347613, 
3833716; 347613, 3833596; 347643, 3833596; 347643, 3833566; 347613, 
3833566; 347613, 3833536; 347523, 3833536; 347523, 3833506; 347553, 
3833506; 347553, 3833476; 347583, 3833476; 347583, 3833446; 347613, 
3833446; 347613, 3833326; 347583, 3833326; 347583, 3833296; 347553, 
3833296; 347553, 3833236; 347523, 3833236; 347523, 3833206; 347493, 
3833206; 347493, 3833116; 347523, 3833116; 347523, 3833086; 347553, 
3833086; 347553, 3833056; 347523, 3833056; 347523, 3833026; 347583, 
3833026; 347583, 3832966; 347613, 3832966; 347613, 3832936; 347673, 
3832936; 347673, 3832876; 347733, 3832876; 347733, 3832846; 347763, 
3832846; 347763, 3832816; 347883, 3832816; 347883, 3832756; 347913, 
3832756; 347913, 3832516; 347883, 3832516; 347883, 3832456; 347853, 
3832456; 347853, 3832396; 347823, 3832396; 347823, 3832336; 347793, 
3832336; 347793, 3832276; 347763, 3832276; 347763, 3832186; 347733, 
3832186; 347733, 3832126; 347763, 3832126; 347763, 3832096; 347793, 
3832096; 347793, 3832006; 347823, 3832006; 347823, 3831916; 347853, 
3831916; 347853, 3831886; 348003, 3831886; 348003, 3831616; 348033, 
3831616; 348033, 3831496; 348003, 3831496; 348003, 3831436; 347943, 
3831436; 347943, 3831406; 347913, 3831406; 347913, 3831376; 347883, 
3831376; 347883, 3831346; 347853, 3831346; 347853, 3831316; 347793, 
3831316; 347793, 3831286; 347763, 3831286; 347763, 3831316; 347733, 
3831316; 347733, 3831286; 347703, 3831286; 347703, 3831256; 347643, 
3831256; 347643, 3831196; 347613, 3831196; 347613, 3831106; 347583, 
3831106; 347583, 3831046; 347553, 3831046; 347553, 3830956; 347463, 
3830956; 347463, 3830926; 347403, 3830926; 347403, 3830776; 347373, 
3830776; 347373, 3830686; 347343, 3830686; 347343, 3830626; 347373, 
3830626; 347373, 3830596; 347403, 3830596; 347403, 3830566; 347433, 
3830566; 347433, 3830536; 347463, 3830536; 347463, 3830506; 347493, 
3830506; 347493, 3830416; 347583, 3830416; 347583, 3830446; 347613, 
3830446; 347613, 3830506; 347673, 3830506; 347673, 3830536; 347733, 
3830536; 347733, 3830566; 347883, 3830566; 347883, 3830596; 347943, 
3830596; 347943, 3830566; 347973, 3830566; 347973, 3830596; 348003, 
3830596; 348003, 3830656; 348033, 3830656; 348033, 3830686; 348063, 
3830686; 348063, 3830746; 348093, 3830746; 348093, 3830776; 348153, 
3830776; 348153, 3830836; 348183, 3830836; 348183, 3830806; 348213, 
3830806; 348213, 3830656; 348243, 3830656; 348243, 3830626; 348213, 
3830626; 348213, 3830596; 348153, 3830596; 348153, 3830536; 348123, 
3830536; 348123, 3830476; 348093, 3830476; 348093, 3830446; 348063, 
3830446; 348063, 3830416; 348033, 3830416; 348033, 3830386; 347763, 
3830386; 347763, 3830326; 347733, 3830326; 347733, 3830236; 347703, 
3830236; 347703, 3830206; 347643, 3830206; 347643, 3830176; 347583, 
3830176; 347583, 3830146; 347553, 3830146; 347553, 3830116; 347523, 
3830116; 347523, 3830056; 347493, 3830056; 347493, 3830026; 347463, 
3830026; 347463, 3829936; 347493, 3829936; 347493, 3829906; 347463, 
3829906; 347463, 3829876; 347493, 3829876; 347493, 3829786; 347523, 
3829786; 347523, 3829726; 347553, 3829726; 347553, 3829666; 347583, 
3829666; 347583, 3829636; 347613, 3829636; 347613, 3829606; 347643, 
3829606; 347643, 3829516; 347673, 3829516; 347673, 3829486; 347703, 
3829486; 347703, 3829456; 347733, 3829456; 347733, 3829396; 347763, 
3829396; 347763, 3829246; 347793, 3829246; 347793, 3829186; 347823, 
3829186; 347823, 3829156; 347793, 3829156; 347793, 3829126; 347823, 
3829126; 347823, 3829096; 347853, 3829096; 347853, 3829066; 348003, 
3829066; 348003, 3829036; 348033, 3829036; 348033, 3828976; 348063, 
3828976; 348063, 3828946; 348093, 3828946; 348093, 3828916; 348123, 
3828916; 348123, 3828886; 348153, 3828886; 348153, 3828856; 348243, 
3828856; 348243, 3828826; 348333, 3828826; 348333, 3828796; 348423, 
3828796; 348423, 3828706; 348453, 3828706; 348453, 3828646; 348483, 
3828646; 348483, 3828616; 348513, 3828616; 348513, 3828586; 348543, 
3828586; 348543, 3828556; 348573, 3828556; 348573, 3828526; 348603, 
3828526; 348603, 3828496; 348663, 3828496; 348663, 3828436; 348693, 
3828436; 348693, 3828376; 348723, 3828376; 348723, 3828286; 348753, 
3828286; 348753, 3828226; 348589, 3828161; 348284, 3828591; 348178, 
3828688; 348078, 3828752; 348062, 3828760; 347717, 3828918; 347472, 
3829091; 347435, 3829183; 347360, 3829275; 347250, 3829419; 347225, 
3829488; 347198, 3829606; 347157, 3829757; 347133, 3829992; 347133, 
3830026; 347103, 3830026; 347103, 3830056; 347073, 3830056; 347073, 
3830116; 347133, 3830116; 347133, 3830176; 347163, 3830176; 347163, 
3830206; 347193, 3830206; 347193, 3830266; 347223, 3830266; 347223, 
3830356; 347193, 3830356; 347193, 3830416; 347163, 3830416; 347163, 
3830476; 347133, 3830476; 347133, 3830506; 347103, 3830506; 347103, 
3830536; 347043, 3830536; 347043, 3830566; 346953, 3830566; 346953, 
3830596; 347043, 3830596; 347043, 3830626; 347103, 3830626; 347103, 
3830656; 347133, 3830656; 347133, 3830716; 347193, 3830716; 347193, 
3830746; 347223, 3830746; 347223, 3830896; 347253, 3830896; 347253, 
3830986; 347283, 3830986; 347283, 3831046; 347343, 3831046; 347343, 
3831076; 347433, 3831076; 347433, 3831106; 347463, 3831106; 347463, 
3831286; 347523, 3831286; 347523, 3831346; 347553, 3831346; 347553, 
3831376; 347613, 3831376; 347613, 3831406; 347673, 3831406; 347673, 
3831436; 347763, 3831436; 347763, 3831466; 347823, 3831466; 347823, 
3831496; 347883, 3831496; 347883, 3831526; 347853, 3831526; 347853, 
3831766; 347793, 3831766; 347793, 3831826; 347763, 3831826; 347763, 
3831856; 347733, 3831856; 347733, 3831946; 347703, 3831946; 347703, 
3832006; 347643, 3832006; 347643,

[[Page 375]]

3832036; 347613, 3832036; 347613, 3832216; 347643, 3832216; 347643, 
3832276; 347673, 3832276; 347673, 3832306; 347643, 3832306; 347643, 
3832396; 347673, 3832396; 347673, 3832456; 347703, 3832456; 347703, 
3832546; 347733, 3832546; 347733, 3832576; 347763, 3832576; 347763, 
3832636; 347793, 3832636; 347793, 3832696; 347733, 3832696; 347733, 
3832726; 347703, 3832726; 347703, 3832756; 347673, 3832756; 347673, 
3832786; 347643, 3832786; 347643, 3832816; 347583, 3832816; 347583, 
3832846; 347553, 3832846; 347553, 3832876; 347523, 3832876; 347523, 
3832906; 347493, 3832906; 347493, 3832936; 347403, 3832936; 347403, 
3832966; 347343, 3832966; 347343, 3832996; 347283, 3832996; 347283, 
3833026; 347313, 3833026; 347313, 3833056; 347283, 3833056; 347283, 
3833146; 347253, 3833146; 347253, 3833206; 347283, 3833206; 347283, 
3833266; 347313, 3833266; 347313, 3833296; 347343, 3833296; 347343, 
3833356; 347373, 3833356; 347373, 3833386; 347343, 3833386; 347343, 
3833566; 347313, 3833566; 347313, 3833596; 347283, 3833596; 347283, 
3833746; 347253, 3833746; 347253, 3833716; 347223, 3833716; 347223, 
3833686; 347193, 3833686; 347193, 3833716; 347133, 3833716; 347133, 
3833746; 347073, 3833746; 347073, 3833776; 346983, 3833776; 346983, 
3833806; 346953, 3833806; 346953, 3833866; 346923, 3833866; 346923, 
3833896; 346893, 3833896; 346893, 3833926; 346833, 3833926; 346833, 
3834046; 346803, 3834046; 346803, 3834076; 346833, 3834076; 346833, 
3834196; 346803, 3834196; 346803, 3834316; 346833, 3834316; 346833, 
3834286; 346893, 3834286; 346893, 3834316; 346923, 3834316; 346923, 
3834466; 346953, 3834466; 346953, 3834766; 346983, 3834766; 346983, 
3834796; 346953, 3834796; 346953, 3834916; 346983, 3834916; 346983, 
3835006; 346953, 3835006; 346953, 3835126; 346923, 3835126; 346923, 
3835186; 346953, 3835186; 346953, 3835276; 346923, 3835276; 346923, 
3835576; 346953, 3835576; 346953, 3835666; 346983, 3835666; 346983, 
3835726; returning to 347013, 3835726.
    (ii) Subunit 6b: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Val Verde and 
Newhall, land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 351607, 
3812015; 351519, 3811959; 351509, 3811885; 351441, 3811818; 351334, 
3811775; 351265, 3811817; 351198, 3811784; 351050, 3811684; 350707, 
3811270; 350549, 3811035; 350461, 3810962; 350392, 3810900; 350536, 
3810555; 350611, 3810615; 350651, 3810701; 350911, 3810836; 350996, 
3810902; 351071, 3811080; 351233, 3811324; 351219, 3811410; 351600, 
3811716; 351723, 3811700; 351817, 3811720; 351869, 3811755; 351931, 
3811780; 352028, 3811785; 352275, 3811789; 352444, 3811775; 352470, 
3811769; 352572, 3811731; 352656, 3811722; 352693, 3811705; 352754, 
3811671; 352780, 3811675; 352794, 3811672; 352866, 3811626; 352898, 
3811602; 352914, 3811598; 352942, 3811612; 352987, 3811637; 353083, 
3811663; 353147, 3811702; 353216, 3811740; 353234, 3811758; 353232, 
3811809; 353269, 3811790; 353276, 3811785; 353335, 3811693; 353500, 
3811489; 353620, 3811270; 353712, 3811027; 353790, 3810921; 353806, 
3810879; 353836, 3810829; 353902, 3810814; 354034, 3810821; 354163, 
3810711; 354188, 3810661; 354219, 3810611; 354385, 3810571; 354404, 
3810585; 354407, 3810621; 354340, 3810791; 354401, 3810779; 354503, 
3810743; 354626, 3810700; 354675, 3810672; 354728, 3810658; 354809, 
3810606; 354872, 3810556; 354931, 3810602; 354944, 3810635; 354962, 
3810664; 354999, 3810679; 355059, 3810710; 355104, 3810722; 355134, 
3810752; 355211, 3810742; 355239, 3810746; 355261, 3810741; 355286, 
3810734; 355312, 3810731; 355340, 3810738; 355367, 3810705; 355334, 
3810669; 355308, 3810641; 355272, 3810602; 355329, 3810504; 355339, 
3810502; 355434, 3810487; 355489, 3810439; 355510, 3810432; 355515, 
3810392; 355464, 3810402; 355405, 3810353; 355244, 3810403; 355176, 
3810435; 355113, 3810417; 355091, 3810325; 354761, 3810325; 354746, 
3810358; 354539, 3810348; 354510, 3810406; 354477, 3810400; 354282, 
3810496; 354213, 3810530; 354144, 3810533; 354039, 3810589; 353745, 
3810703; 353618, 3810835; 353493, 3810884; 353457, 3810959; 353464, 
3811077; 353461, 3811117; 353440, 3811155; 353401, 3811177; 353203, 
3811177; 353129, 3811231; 353097, 3811234; 353059, 3811234; 353025, 
3811241; 353000, 3811258; 352943, 3811285; 352799, 3811294; 352639, 
3811323; 352632, 3811323; 352526, 3811295; 352391, 3811345; 352293, 
3811456; 352263, 3811456; 352263, 3811486; 352203, 3811486; 352203, 
3811516; 352143, 3811516; 352143, 3811486; 352083, 3811486; 352083, 
3811516; 352053, 3811516; 352053, 3811546; 351933, 3811546; 351933, 
3811516; 351903, 3811516; 351903, 3811486; 351873, 3811486; 351873, 
3811456; 351843, 3811456; 351843, 3811396; 351813, 3811396; 351813, 
3811366; 351783, 3811366; 351783, 3811306; 351753, 3811306; 351753, 
3811246; 351723, 3811246; 351723, 3811216; 351693, 3811216; 351693, 
3811126; 351723, 3811126; 351723, 3811096; 351753, 3811096; 351753, 
3811036; 351783, 3811036; 351783, 3811006; 351843, 3811006; 351843, 
3810946; 351873, 3810946; 351873, 3810916; 351903, 3810916; 351903, 
3810886; 351873, 3810886; 351873, 3810856; 351783, 3810856; 351783, 
3810886; 351693, 3810886; 351693, 3810916; 351633, 3810916; 351633, 
3810886; 351573, 3810886; 351573, 3810856; 351543, 3810856; 351543, 
3810826; 351513, 3810826; 351513, 3810796; 351483, 3810796; 351483, 
3810766; 351453, 3810766; 351453, 3810736; 351423, 3810736; 351423, 
3810706; 351393, 3810706; 351393, 3810586; 351423, 3810586; 351423, 
3810556; 351483, 3810556; 351483, 3810526; 351573, 3810526; 351573, 
3810496; 351513, 3810496; 351513, 3810406; 351423, 3810406; 351423, 
3810436; 351333, 3810436; 351333, 3810406; 351273, 3810406; 351273, 
3810376; 351213, 3810376; 351213, 3810346; 351123, 3810346; 351123, 
3810316; 351063, 3810316; 351063, 3810286; 350973, 3810286; 350973, 
3810256; 350913, 3810256; 350913, 3810196; 350853, 3810196; 350853, 
3810166; 350823, 3810166; 350823, 3810106; 350793, 3810106; 350793, 
3810016; 350763, 3810016; 350763, 3809986; 350733, 3809986; 350733, 
3810016; 350703, 3810016; 350703, 3810046; 350673, 3810046; 350673, 
3810016; 350613, 3810016; 350613, 3809986; 350583, 3809986; 350583, 
3809956; 350553, 3809956; 350553, 3809926; 350523, 3809926; 350523, 
3809896; 350463, 3809896; 350463, 3809866; 350433, 3809866; 350433, 
3809806; 350463, 3809806; 350463, 3809776; 350493, 3809776; 350493, 
3809716; 350523, 3809716; 350523, 3809686; 350493, 3809686; 350493, 
3809656; 350403, 3809656; 350403, 3809686; 350343, 3809686; 350343, 
3809716; 350283, 3809716; 350283, 3809746; 350163, 3809746; 350163, 
3809716; 350073, 3809716; 350073, 3809746; 349803, 3809746; 349803, 
3809716; 349773, 3809716; 349773, 3809656; 349743, 3809656; 349743, 
3809626; 349713, 3809626; 349713, 3809656; 349683, 3809656; 349683, 
3809716; 349653, 3809716; 349653, 3809746; 349593, 3809746; 349593, 
3809776; 349443, 3809776; 349443, 3809746; 349413,

[[Page 376]]

3809746; 349413, 3809716; 349383, 3809716; 349383, 3809686; 349353, 
3809686; 349353, 3809716; 349293, 3809716; 349293, 3809746; 349203, 
3809746; 349203, 3809716; 348963, 3809716; 348963, 3809686; 348843, 
3809686; 348843, 3809656; 348783, 3809656; 348783, 3809626; 348723, 
3809626; 348723, 3809716; 348693, 3809716; 348693, 3809956; 348723, 
3809956; 348723, 3810010; 348814, 3810014; 348855, 3810063; 348912, 
3810088; 348977, 3810098; 349069, 3810099; 349167, 3810089; 349274, 
3810065; 349342, 3810026; 349783, 3810022; 349908, 3810053; 350020, 
3810116; 350109, 3810204; 350111, 3810282; 350155, 3810412; 350231, 
3810529; 350260, 3810644; 350290, 3810839; 350136, 3810837; 350133, 
3810916; 350133, 3810946; 350163, 3810946; 350163, 3810976; 350193, 
3810976; 350193, 3811006; 350223, 3811006; 350223, 3811036; 350253, 
3811036; 350253, 3811066; 350284, 3811067; 350332, 3811179; 350353, 
3811269; 350362, 3811367; 350497, 3811286; 350572, 3811314; 350783, 
3811547; 350856, 3811582; 350916, 3811674; 350944, 3811744; 351015, 
3811821; 351114, 3811958; 351013, 3811999; 350945, 3812079; 350793, 
3812290; 350679, 3812483; 350662, 3812533; 350660, 3812557; 350664, 
3812570; 350686, 3812591; 350711, 3812689; 350772, 3812746; 350853, 
3812746; 350853, 3812716; 350883, 3812716; 350883, 3812656; 350943, 
3812656; 350943, 3812506; 350973, 3812506; 350973, 3812446; 351003, 
3812446; 351003, 3812416; 351033, 3812416; 351033, 3812356; 351123, 
3812356; 351154, 3812153; 351230, 3811960; 351308, 3812011; 351365, 
3812071; 351394, 3812134; 351402, 3812197; 351373, 3812260; 351429, 
3812312; 351362, 3812433; 351344, 3812518; 351327, 3812670; 351317, 
3812718; 351276, 3812777; 351276, 3812820; 351290, 3812866; 351284, 
3812918; 351290, 3812961; 351301, 3813098; 351324, 3813156; 351391, 
3813243; 351591, 3813448; 351660, 3813318; 351665, 3813305; 351582, 
3813228; 351575, 3813219; 351541, 3813083; 351558, 3812923; 351732, 
3812697; 351808, 3812549; 351808, 3812379; 351818, 3812330; 351792, 
3812262; 351710, 3812130; returning to 351607, 3812015.
    (iii) Subunit 6c: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Agua Dulce, and 
Acton, land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 388803, 
3811696; 388803, 3811636; 388833, 3811636; 388833, 3811606; 388863, 
3811606; 388863, 3811576; 388833, 3811576; 388833, 3811486; 388773, 
3811486; 388773, 3811426; 388683, 3811426; 388683, 3811306; 388653, 
3811306; 388653, 3811276; 388623, 3811276; 388623, 3811246; 388593, 
3811246; 388593, 3811216; 388353, 3811216; 388353, 3811186; 388293, 
3811186; 388293, 3811126; 387965, 3811126; 387965, 3810996; 386223, 
3810996; 386223, 3811006; 386163, 3811006; 386163, 3811036; 386013, 
3811036; 386013, 3811066; 385953, 3811066; 385953, 3811096; 385893, 
3811096; 385893, 3811186; 385773, 3811186; 385773, 3811156; 385743, 
3811156; 385743, 3811036; 385773, 3811036; 385773, 3810706; 385803, 
3810706; 385803, 3810646; 385833, 3810646; 385833, 3810586; 385863, 
3810586; 385863, 3810526; 385773, 3810526; 385773, 3810556; 385713, 
3810556; 385713, 3810586; 385623, 3810586; 385623, 3810646; 385563, 
3810646; 385563, 3810706; 385533, 3810706; 385533, 3810766; 385503, 
3810766; 385503, 3810796; 385443, 3810796; 385443, 3810766; 385383, 
3810766; 385383, 3810736; 385353, 3810736; 385353, 3810826; 385383, 
3810826; 385383, 3810886; 385413, 3810886; 385413, 3811006; 385383, 
3811006; 385383, 3811066; 385353, 3811066; 385353, 3811216; 385323, 
3811216; 385323, 3811276; 385293, 3811276; 385293, 3811246; 385263, 
3811246; 385263, 3811276; 385233, 3811276; 385233, 3811396; 385203, 
3811396; 385203, 3811426; 385173, 3811426; 385173, 3811456; 385113, 
3811456; 385113, 3811486; 385083, 3811486; 385083, 3811516; 385023, 
3811516; 385023, 3811546; 384963, 3811546; 384963, 3811576; 384783, 
3811576; 384783, 3811546; 384753, 3811546; 384753, 3811516; 384783, 
3811516; 384783, 3811426; 384723, 3811426; 384723, 3811456; 384693, 
3811456; 384693, 3811426; 384633, 3811426; 384633, 3811306; 384573, 
3811306; 384573, 3811336; 384543, 3811336; 384543, 3811366; 384453, 
3811366; 384453, 3811396; 384333, 3811396; 384333, 3811426; 384033, 
3811426; 384033, 3811366; 383883, 3811366; 383883, 3811336; 383823, 
3811336; 383823, 3811306; 383793, 3811306; 383793, 3811276; 383703, 
3811276; 383703, 3811246; 383673, 3811246; 383673, 3811306; 383643, 
3811306; 383643, 3811276; 383553, 3811276; 383553, 3811306; 383433, 
3811306; 383433, 3811246; 383343, 3811246; 383343, 3811276; 383253, 
3811276; 383253, 3811306; 383193, 3811306; 383193, 3811276; 383163, 
3811276; 383163, 3811306; 383103, 3811306; 383103, 3811336; 383073, 
3811336; 383073, 3811306; 383043, 3811306; 383043, 3811336; 382893, 
3811336; 382893, 3811366; 382623, 3811366; 382623, 3811396; 382503, 
3811396; 382503, 3811366; 382443, 3811366; 382443, 3811336; 382383, 
3811336; 382383, 3811306; 382353, 3811306; 382353, 3811246; 382323, 
3811246; 382323, 3811336; 382293, 3811336; 382293, 3811366; 382263, 
3811366; 382263, 3811426; 382233, 3811426; 382233, 3811456; 382203, 
3811456; 382203, 3811516; 382173, 3811516; 382173, 3811546; 382143, 
3811546; 382143, 3811576; 382083, 3811576; 382083, 3811546; 382023, 
3811546; 382023, 3811516; 381903, 3811516; 381903, 3811546; 381813, 
3811546; 381813, 3811456; 381783, 3811456; 381783, 3811396; 381723, 
3811396; 381723, 3811336; 381693, 3811336; 381693, 3811366; 381663, 
3811366; 381663, 3811486; 381543, 3811486; 381543, 3811456; 381453, 
3811456; 381453, 3811486; 381423, 3811486; 381423, 3811516; 381333, 
3811516; 381333, 3811486; 381303, 3811486; 381303, 3811426; 381273, 
3811426; 381273, 3811486; 381213, 3811486; 381213, 3811456; 381183, 
3811456; 381183, 3811426; 381153, 3811426; 381153, 3811396; 381123, 
3811396; 381123, 3811366; 381063, 3811366; 381063, 3811396; 380973, 
3811396; 380973, 3811426; 380883, 3811426; 380883, 3811456; 380853, 
3811456; 380853, 3811606; 380823, 3811606; 380823, 3811636; 380793, 
3811636; 380793, 3811576; 380763, 3811576; 380763, 3811546; 380733, 
3811546; 380733, 3811516; 380703, 3811516; 380703, 3811486; 380673, 
3811486; 380673, 3811456; 380643, 3811456; 380643, 3811426; 380583, 
3811426; 380583, 3811396; 380553, 3811396; 380553, 3811426; 380403, 
3811426; 380403, 3811396; 380313, 3811396; 380313, 3811366; 380253, 
3811366; 380253, 3811456; 380223, 3811456; 380223, 3811486; 380193, 
3811486; 380193, 3811516; 380133, 3811516; 380133, 3811576; 380103, 
3811576; 380103, 3811606; 380043, 3811606; 380043, 3811576; 380013, 
3811576; 380013, 3811606; 379983, 3811606; 379983, 3811666; 379953, 
3811666; 379953, 3811696; 379923, 3811696; 379923, 3811726; 379893, 
3811726; 379893, 3811756; 379803, 3811756; 379803, 3811726; 379773, 
3811726; 379773, 3811696; 379803, 3811696; 379803, 3811636; 379743, 
3811636; 379743, 3811666; 379713, 3811666; 379713, 3811696; 379653, 
3811696; 379653, 3811726; 379623, 3811726; 379623, 3811696; 379563,

[[Page 377]]

3811696; 379563, 3811666; 379503, 3811666; 379503, 3811636; 379443, 
3811636; 379443, 3811606; 379413, 3811606; 379413, 3811576; 379353, 
3811576; 379353, 3811546; 379263, 3811546; 379263, 3811516; 379173, 
3811516; 379173, 3811486; 379053, 3811486; 379053, 3811456; 378963, 
3811456; 378963, 3811426; 378903, 3811426; 378903, 3811396; 378873, 
3811396; 378873, 3811366; 378843, 3811366; 378843, 3811336; 378753, 
3811336; 378753, 3811306; 378603, 3811306; 378603, 3811336; 378513, 
3811336; 378513, 3811306; 378453, 3811306; 378453, 3811456; 378423, 
3811456; 378423, 3811516; 378393, 3811516; 378393, 3811576; 378273, 
3811576; 378273, 3811546; 378243, 3811546; 378243, 3811516; 378153, 
3811516; 378153, 3811486; 378093, 3811486; 378093, 3811456; 377973, 
3811456; 377973, 3811426; 377883, 3811426; 377883, 3811396; 377823, 
3811396; 377823, 3811366; 377793, 3811366; 377793, 3811396; 377763, 
3811396; 377763, 3811426; 377643, 3811426; 377643, 3811396; 377583, 
3811396; 377583, 3811366; 377553, 3811366; 377553, 3811336; 377463, 
3811336; 377463, 3811306; 377403, 3811306; 377403, 3811276; 377343, 
3811276; 377343, 3811246; 377283, 3811246; 377283, 3811216; 377193, 
3811216; 377193, 3811186; 377133, 3811186; 377133, 3811216; 377103, 
3811216; 377103, 3811276; 377043, 3811276; 377043, 3811216; 377013, 
3811216; 377013, 3811186; 376983, 3811186; 376983, 3811126; 376953, 
3811126; 376953, 3811036; 376803, 3811036; 376803, 3811006; 376773, 
3811006; 376773, 3811036; 376743, 3811036; 376743, 3811006; 376623, 
3811006; 376623, 3811039; 376545, 3811045; 376512, 3811023; 376510, 
3810982; 376495, 3810969; 376469, 3810978; 376452, 3810976; 376291, 
3810900; 376219, 3810812; 376203, 3810708; 376203, 3810526; 376173, 
3810526; 376173, 3810466; 376143, 3810466; 376143, 3810406; 376173, 
3810406; 376173, 3810376; 376203, 3810376; 376203, 3810346; 376233, 
3810346; 376233, 3810256; 376173, 3810256; 376173, 3810286; 376143, 
3810286; 376143, 3810256; 376083, 3810256; 376083, 3810226; 375933, 
3810226; 375933, 3810256; 375903, 3810256; 375903, 3810286; 375873, 
3810286; 375873, 3810316; 375843, 3810316; 375843, 3810346; 375813, 
3810346; 375813, 3810376; 375783, 3810376; 375783, 3810406; 375753, 
3810406; 375753, 3810466; 375723, 3810466; 375723, 3810496; 375693, 
3810496; 375693, 3810526; 375663, 3810526; 375663, 3810556; 375513, 
3810556; 375513, 3810526; 375483, 3810526; 375483, 3810466; 375453, 
3810466; 375453, 3810436; 375423, 3810436; 375423, 3810406; 375363, 
3810406; 375363, 3810436; 375273, 3810436; 375273, 3810466; 375213, 
3810466; 375213, 3810496; 375183, 3810496; 375183, 3810526; 375153, 
3810526; 375153, 3810586; 375183, 3810586; 375183, 3810796; 375123, 
3810796; 375123, 3810826; 375063, 3810826; 375063, 3810856; 375003, 
3810856; 375003, 3810886; 374853, 3810886; 374853, 3810856; 374733, 
3810856; 374733, 3810886; 374673, 3810886; 374673, 3810916; 374643, 
3810916; 374643, 3810946; 374619, 3810946; 374619, 3811009; 374606, 
3811024; 374509, 3811098; 374493, 3811108; 374452, 3811126; 374405, 
3811138; 374370, 3811142; 374330, 3811143; 374285, 3811149; 374167, 
3811152; 374045, 3811143; 373991, 3811134; 373939, 3811129; 373833, 
3811111; 373719, 3811097; 373719, 3811297; 373917, 3811395; 373954, 
3811427; 374012, 3811466; 374043, 3811478; 374072, 3811494; 374151, 
3811554; 374189, 3811575; 374233, 3811590; 374300, 3811595; 374307, 
3811609; 374356, 3811624; 374413, 3811623; 374441, 3811626; 374477, 
3811626; 374510, 3811616; 374526, 3811608; 374558, 3811585; 374590, 
3811572; 374615, 3811550; 374646, 3811509; 374660, 3811484; 374667, 
3811464; 374676, 3811448; 374684, 3811410; 374724, 3811105; 374737, 
3811072; 374765, 3811041; 374796, 3811023; 374822, 3811017; 374844, 
3811017; 374901, 3811027; 374967, 3811050; 374994, 3811054; 375014, 
3811054; 375039, 3811050; 375053, 3811044; 375147, 3811016; 375153, 
3811013; 375153, 3811006; 375173, 3811006; 375189, 3810997; 375206, 
3810983; 375284, 3810900; 375320, 3810857; 375345, 3810834; 375363, 
3810821; 375363, 3810676; 375393, 3810676; 375393, 3810706; 375423, 
3810706; 375424, 3810710; 375432, 3810701; 375442, 3810695; 375486, 
3810673; 375516, 3810668; 375557, 3810656; 375601, 3810648; 375641, 
3810636; 375660, 3810626; 375699, 3810600; 375722, 3810581; 375798, 
3810506; 375845, 3810475; 375886, 3810456; 375898, 3810454; 375961, 
3810455; 375979, 3810466; 376023, 3810466; 376023, 3810490; 376046, 
3810502; 376073, 3810523; 376106, 3810565; 376121, 3810597; 376126, 
3810620; 376132, 3810672; 376141, 3810800; 376156, 3810864; 376176, 
3810912; 376196, 3810945; 376215, 3810969; 376244, 3810998; 376265, 
3811015; 376309, 3811045; 376340, 3811058; 376473, 3811108; 376547, 
3811132; 376678, 3811179; 376735, 3811202; 376769, 3811219; 376800, 
3811238; 376833, 3811262; 376919, 3811345; 376960, 3811381; 376985, 
3811400; 377028, 3811423; 377083, 3811443; 377272, 3811484; 377232, 
3811514; 377310, 3811526; 377398, 3811545; 377422, 3811559; 377455, 
3811588; 377494, 3811630; 377507, 3811650; 377511, 3811662; 377512, 
3811769; 377510, 3811785; 377501, 3811817; 377493, 3811835; 377493, 
3811846; 377523, 3811846; 377523, 3811936; 377553, 3811936; 377553, 
3811846; 377583, 3811846; 377583, 3811816; 377613, 3811816; 377613, 
3811666; 377918, 3811666; 377918, 3811609; 377969, 3811624; 378003, 
3811629; 378033, 3811642; 378048, 3811646; 378061, 3811653; 378073, 
3811664; 378148, 3811708; 378195, 3811739; 378227, 3811754; 378287, 
3811775; 378356, 3811793; 378386, 3811797; 378469, 3811797; 378486, 
3811794; 378505, 3811787; 378542, 3811766; 378550, 3811758; 378631, 
3811699; 378654, 3811688; 378687, 3811677; 378729, 3811671; 378779, 
3811672; 378798, 3811675; 379128, 3811748; 379177, 3811756; 379231, 
3811771; 379383, 3811834; 379533, 3811890; 379591, 3811916; 379684, 
3811953; 379734, 3811970; 379788, 3811979; 379825, 3811977; 380026, 
3811944; 380076, 3811933; 380107, 3811917; 380130, 3811899; 380217, 
3811809; 380239, 3811793; 380319, 3811744; 380405, 3811710; 380453, 
3811700; 380495, 3811696; 380524, 3811697; 380560, 3811706; 380583, 
3811715; 380611, 3811732; 380629, 3811744; 380649, 3811764; 380688, 
3811812; 380714, 3811850; 380757, 3811892; 380793, 3811916; 380833, 
3811935; 380856, 3811942; 380888, 3811948; 380917, 3811948; 380941, 
3811945; 380981, 3811931; 381014, 3811909; 381039, 3811886; 381059, 
3811872; 381083, 3811859; 381110, 3811849; 381136, 3811845; 381165, 
3811844; 381242, 3811857; 381272, 3811858; 381295, 3811855; 381331, 
3811844; 381350, 3811832; 381401, 3811788; 381447, 3811741; 381493, 
3811713; 381540, 3811699; 381589, 3811700; 381647, 3811714; 381697, 
3811751; 381742, 3811797; 381774, 3811820; 381813, 3811836; 381875, 
3811851; 381949, 3811861; 381964, 3811861; 382009, 3811854; 382024, 
3811854; 382074, 3811861; 382165, 3811909; 382211, 3811924; 382268, 
3811917; 382320, 3811895; 382361, 3811860; 382391, 3811806; 382417, 
3811744; 382438, 3811720; 382471,

[[Page 378]]

3811698; 382774, 3811598; 382839, 3811580; 382890, 3811582; 382931, 
3811591; 382978, 3811615; 383030, 3811647; 383073, 3811667; 383137, 
3811678; 383281, 3811676; 383335, 3811680; 383381, 3811679; 383442, 
3811670; 383563, 3811642; 383618, 3811638; 383678, 3811653; 383810, 
3811692; 383902, 3811715; 383975, 3811726; 384092, 3811729; 384401, 
3811731; 384445, 3811735; 384502, 3811747; 384571, 3811775; 384652, 
3811815; 384705, 3811837; 384755, 3811848; 384809, 3811851; 384858, 
3811846; 384919, 3811829; 384987, 3811796; 385059, 3811745; 385212, 
3811628; 385258, 3811586; 385318, 3811521; 385360, 3811483; 385393, 
3811458; 385455, 3811429; 385503, 3811416; 385551, 3811409; 385604, 
3811411; 385663, 3811424; 385741, 3811449; 385803, 3811460; 385914, 
3811454; 385966, 3811458; 386054, 3811474; 386119, 3811474; 386163, 
3811456; 386279, 3811357; 386367, 3811327; 386444, 3811315; 386679, 
3811313; 386980, 3811335; 387030, 3811349; 387161, 3811396; 387311, 
3811454; 387379, 3811466; 387432, 3811467; 387477, 3811462; 387554, 
3811437; 387673, 3811385; 387800, 3811344; 387846, 3811336; 387864, 
3811336; 387910, 3811338; 387952, 3811350; 388023, 3811383; 388126, 
3811463; 388185, 3811505; 388246, 3811554; 388293, 3811597; 388382, 
3811653; 388449, 3811688; 388507, 3811713; 388551, 3811776; 388599, 
3811829; 388647, 3811900; 388675, 3811946; 388795, 3812106; 388839, 
3812194; 388882, 3812243; 388918, 3812296; 389119, 3812296; 389120, 
3812290; 389121, 3812252; 389019, 3812197; 389019, 3811816; 388953, 
3811816; 388953, 3811786; 388893, 3811786; 388893, 3811756; 388863, 
3811756; 388863, 3811726; 388833, 3811726; 388833, 3811696; returning to 
388803, 3811696.
    (iv) Note: Map of Unit 6 follows.

[[Page 379]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09FE11.004

    (12) Unit 7: Upper Los Angeles River Basin, Los Angeles County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Condor Peak and Chilao Flat, 
land in the Big Tujunga Creek basin bounded by the following UTM zone 
11, NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 398433, 3797296; 398403, 3797296; 398403,

[[Page 380]]

3797326; 398433, 3797326; returning to 398433, 3797296.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 398433, 
3797296; 398463, 3797296; 398463, 3797326; 398523, 3797326; 398523, 
3797446; 398553, 3797446; 398553, 3797416; 398583, 3797416; 398583, 
3797386; 398613, 3797386; 398613, 3797326; 398643, 3797326; 398643, 
3797296; 398703, 3797296; 398703, 3797326; 398733, 3797326; 398733, 
3797356; 398763, 3797356; 398763, 3797386; 398823, 3797386; 398823, 
3797326; 398793, 3797326; 398793, 3797266; 398823, 3797266; 398823, 
3797236; 398943, 3797236; 398943, 3797266; 399003, 3797266; 399003, 
3797236; 399033, 3797236; 399033, 3797206; 399003, 3797206; 399003, 
3797146; 399093, 3797146; 399093, 3797176; 399123, 3797176; 399123, 
3797206; 399153, 3797206; 399153, 3797296; 399183, 3797296; 399183, 
3797326; 399213, 3797326; 399213, 3797296; 399243, 3797296; 399243, 
3797266; 399273, 3797266; 399273, 3797296; 399303, 3797296; 399303, 
3797326; 399363, 3797326; 399363, 3797356; 399393, 3797356; 399393, 
3797236; 399633, 3797236; 399633, 3797206; 399693, 3797206; 399693, 
3797176; 399723, 3797176; 399723, 3797116; 399783, 3797116; 399783, 
3797146; 399843, 3797146; 399843, 3797176; 399903, 3797176; 399903, 
3797206; 399933, 3797206; 399933, 3797236; 399963, 3797236; 399963, 
3797356; 399993, 3797356; 399993, 3797416; 400203, 3797416; 400203, 
3797446; 400263, 3797446; 400263, 3797356; 400293, 3797356; 400293, 
3797326; 400323, 3797326; 400323, 3797236; 400443, 3797236; 400443, 
3797206; 400473, 3797206; 400473, 3797176; 400503, 3797176; 400503, 
3797146; 400563, 3797146; 400563, 3797116; 400593, 3797116; 400593, 
3797086; 400623, 3797086; 400623, 3797056; 400653, 3797056; 400653, 
3797026; 400713, 3797026; 400713, 3796996; 400743, 3796996; 400743, 
3796966; 400773, 3796966; 400773, 3796936; 400803, 3796936; 400803, 
3796906; 400983, 3796906; 400983, 3796876; 401103, 3796876; 401103, 
3796906; 401133, 3796906; 401133, 3796996; 401163, 3796996; 401163, 
3797026; 401193, 3797026; 401193, 3797056; 401223, 3797056; 401223, 
3797086; 401253, 3797086; 401253, 3797116; 401283, 3797116; 401283, 
3797176; 401313, 3797176; 401313, 3797206; 401343, 3797206; 401343, 
3797236; 401373, 3797236; 401373, 3797296; 401433, 3797296; 401433, 
3797326; 401493, 3797326; 401493, 3797386; 401523, 3797386; 401523, 
3797536; 401493, 3797536; 401493, 3797626; 401463, 3797626; 401463, 
3797716; 401493, 3797716; 401493, 3797686; 401553, 3797686; 401553, 
3797656; 401583, 3797656; 401583, 3797716; 401613, 3797716; 401613, 
3797746; 401643, 3797746; 401643, 3797806; 401673, 3797806; 401673, 
3797836; 401733, 3797836; 401733, 3797866; 401883, 3797866; 401883, 
3797926; 401913, 3797926; 401913, 3797956; 401943, 3797956; 401943, 
3797926; 401973, 3797926; 401973, 3797866; 402033, 3797866; 402033, 
3797896; 402063, 3797896; 402063, 3797926; 402093, 3797926; 402093, 
3797956; 402123, 3797956; 402123, 3797986; 402273, 3797986; 402273, 
3797956; 402303, 3797956; 402303, 3797986; 402363, 3797986; 402363, 
3797956; 402393, 3797956; 402393, 3797986; 402483, 3797986; 402483, 
3798106; 402513, 3798106; 402513, 3798226; 402723, 3798226; 402723, 
3798256; 402753, 3798256; 402753, 3798226; 403113, 3798226; 403113, 
3798256; 403263, 3798256; 403263, 3798286; 403293, 3798286; 403293, 
3798316; 403323, 3798316; 403323, 3798106; 403353, 3798106; 403353, 
3798076; 403383, 3798076; 403383, 3798046; 403413, 3798046; 403413, 
3798016; 403443, 3798016; 403443, 3797986; 403383, 3797986; 403383, 
3797926; 403353, 3797926; 403353, 3797806; 403293, 3797806; 403293, 
3797836; 403263, 3797836; 403263, 3797866; 403233, 3797866; 403233, 
3797896; 403203, 3797896; 403203, 3797926; 403143, 3797926; 403143, 
3797956; 402933, 3797956; 402933, 3797986; 402873, 3797986; 402873, 
3798016; 402843, 3798016; 402843, 3798046; 402783, 3798046; 402783, 
3798076; 402723, 3798076; 402723, 3798046; 402693, 3798046; 402693, 
3798016; 402663, 3798016; 402663, 3797926; 402603, 3797926; 402603, 
3797896; 402543, 3797896; 402543, 3797866; 402513, 3797866; 402513, 
3797836; 402453, 3797836; 402453, 3797806; 402363, 3797806; 402363, 
3797776; 402303, 3797776; 402303, 3797746; 402213, 3797746; 402213, 
3797716; 402183, 3797716; 402183, 3797686; 402153, 3797686; 402153, 
3797656; 402123, 3797656; 402123, 3797626; 402063, 3797626; 402063, 
3797596; 401883, 3797596; 401883, 3797566; 401823, 3797566; 401823, 
3797326; 401793, 3797326; 401793, 3797266; 401763, 3797266; 401763, 
3797236; 401733, 3797236; 401733, 3797206; 401673, 3797206; 401673, 
3797176; 401643, 3797176; 401643, 3797146; 401613, 3797146; 401613, 
3797116; 401583, 3797116; 401583, 3797026; 401553, 3797026; 401553, 
3796996; 401433, 3796996; 401433, 3796966; 401373, 3796966; 401373, 
3796936; 401313, 3796936; 401313, 3796876; 401283, 3796876; 401283, 
3796816; 401373, 3796816; 401373, 3796786; 401403, 3796786; 401403, 
3796816; 401433, 3796816; 401433, 3796786; 401523, 3796786; 401523, 
3796756; 401583, 3796756; 401583, 3796786; 401613, 3796786; 401643, 
3796786; 401643, 3796756; 401673, 3796756; 401673, 3796786; 401703, 
3796786; 401703, 3796756; 401733, 3796756; 401733, 3796726; 401763, 
3796726; 401763, 3796666; 401823, 3796666; 401823, 3796636; 401853, 
3796636; 401853, 3796546; 401913, 3796546; 401913, 3796516; 402033, 
3796516; 402033, 3796456; 402183, 3796456; 402183, 3796426; 402213, 
3796426; 402213, 3796366; 402243, 3796366; 402243, 3796336; 402273, 
3796336; 402273, 3796276; 402303, 3796276; 402303, 3796216; 402363, 
3796216; 402363, 3796186; 402393, 3796186; 402393, 3796096; 402423, 
3796096; 402423, 3796066; 402483, 3796066; 402483, 3795976; 402513, 
3795976; 402513, 3795946; 402573, 3795946; 402573, 3795916; 402633, 
3795916; 402633, 3795886; 402663, 3795886; 402663, 3795856; 402633, 
3795856; 402633, 3795796; 402663, 3795796; 402663, 3795676; 402693, 
3795676; 402693, 3795586; 402663, 3795586; 402663, 3795466; 402693, 
3795466; 402693, 3795406; 402723, 3795406; 402723, 3795376; 402783, 
3795376; 402783, 3795346; 402813, 3795346; 402813, 3795316; 402843, 
3795316; 402843, 3795286; 402693, 3795286; 402693, 3795256; 402603, 
3795256; 402603, 3795286; 402573, 3795286; 402573, 3795316; 402543, 
3795316; 402543, 3795346; 402483, 3795346; 402483, 3795406; 402453, 
3795406; 402453, 3795496; 402483, 3795496; 402483, 3795586; 402453, 
3795586; 402453, 3795646; 402423, 3795646; 402423, 3795706; 402393, 
3795706; 402393, 3795736; 402303, 3795736; 402303, 3795766; 402273, 
3795766; 402273, 3795856; 402243, 3795856; 402243, 3795886; 402213, 
3795886; 402213, 3795946; 402153, 3795946; 402153, 3795976; 402123, 
3795976; 402123, 3796066; 402153, 3796066; 402153, 3796186; 402123, 
3796186; 402123, 3796216; 402033, 3796216; 402033, 3796186; 402003, 
3796186; 402003, 3796156; 401973, 3796156; 401973, 3796126; 401943, 
3796126; 401943, 3796156; 401913, 3796156; 401913,

[[Page 381]]

3796186; 401853, 3796186; 401853, 3796216; 401823, 3796216; 401823, 
3796186; 401733, 3796186; 401733, 3796306; 401703, 3796306; 401703, 
3796336; 401673, 3796336; 401673, 3796396; 401643, 3796396; 401643, 
3796486; 401613, 3796486; 401613, 3796516; 401463, 3796516; 401463, 
3796546; 401403, 3796546; 401403, 3796576; 401373, 3796576; 401373, 
3796606; 401343, 3796606; 401343, 3796636; 401283, 3796636; 401283, 
3796666; 401193, 3796666; 401193, 3796696; 400893, 3796696; 400893, 
3796666; 400863, 3796666; 400863, 3796636; 400803, 3796636; 400803, 
3796606; 400683, 3796606; 400683, 3796576; 400593, 3796576; 400593, 
3796546; 400563, 3796546; 400563, 3796486; 400533, 3796486; 400533, 
3796546; 400503, 3796546; 400503, 3796606; 400443, 3796606; 400443, 
3796636; 400413, 3796636; 400413, 3796666; 400383, 3796666; 400383, 
3796726; 400353, 3796726; 400353, 3796756; 400323, 3796756; 400323, 
3796786; 400293, 3796786; 400293, 3796816; 400233, 3796816; 400233, 
3796846; 400173, 3796846; 400173, 3796876; 399873, 3796876; 399873, 
3796846; 399813, 3796846; 399813, 3796816; 399753, 3796816; 399753, 
3796846; 399723, 3796846; 399723, 3796876; 399573, 3796876; 399573, 
3796906; 399513, 3796906; 399513, 3796876; 399453, 3796876; 399453, 
3796906; 399423, 3796906; 399423, 3796936; 399363, 3796936; 399363, 
3796906; 399333, 3796906; 399333, 3796876; 399303, 3796876; 399303, 
3796846; 399243, 3796846; 399243, 3796816; 399213, 3796816; 399213, 
3796846; 399153, 3796846; 399153, 3796816; 398973, 3796816; 398973, 
3796846; 398943, 3796846; 398943, 3796876; 398913, 3796876; 398913, 
3796906; 398853, 3796906; 398853, 3796936; 398823, 3796936; 398823, 
3796966; 398793, 3796966; 398793, 3796996; 398733, 3796996; 398733, 
3797026; 398673, 3797026; 398673, 3797056; 398493, 3797056; 398493, 
3796996; 398523, 3796996; 398523, 3796966; 398553, 3796966; 398553, 
3796936; 398583, 3796936; 398583, 3796906; 398463, 3796906; 398463, 
3796936; 398313, 3796936; 398313, 3796906; 398283, 3796906; 398283, 
3796876; 398253, 3796876; 398253, 3796846; 398073, 3796846; 398073, 
3796816; 398043, 3796816; 398043, 3796756; 398073, 3796756; 398073, 
3796606; 398043, 3796606; 398043, 3796576; 398013, 3796576; 398013, 
3796546; 397953, 3796546; 397953, 3796516; 397863, 3796516; 397863, 
3796546; 397803, 3796546; 397803, 3796576; 397743, 3796576; 397743, 
3796636; 397683, 3796636; 397683, 3796666; 397653, 3796666; 397653, 
3796756; 397623, 3796756; 397623, 3796786; 397593, 3796786; 397593, 
3796816; 397503, 3796816; 397503, 3796936; 397473, 3796936; 397473, 
3796996; 397443, 3796996; 397443, 3797026; 397383, 3797026; 397383, 
3796996; 397353, 3796996; 397353, 3796936; 397293, 3796936; 397293, 
3796906; 397263, 3796906; 397263, 3796936; 397203, 3796936; 397203, 
3796966; 397173, 3796966; 397173, 3796996; 397053, 3796996; 397053, 
3796966; 397023, 3796966; 397023, 3796996; 396993, 3796996; 396993, 
3797026; 396933, 3797026; 396933, 3797176; 396783, 3797176; 396783, 
3797206; 396663, 3797206; 396663, 3797146; 396633, 3797146; 396633, 
3797086; 396603, 3797086; 396603, 3797026; 396543, 3797026; 396543, 
3796996; 396423, 3796996; 396423, 3797026; 396393, 3797026; 396393, 
3797056; 396333, 3797056; 396333, 3797116; 396303, 3797116; 396303, 
3797086; 396273, 3797086; 396273, 3797116; 396243, 3797116; 396243, 
3797086; 396183, 3797086; 396183, 3797056; 396003, 3797056; 396003, 
3797026; 395943, 3797026; 395943, 3796996; 395883, 3796996; 395883, 
3796966; 395733, 3796966; 395733, 3796936; 395703, 3796936; 395613, 
3796936; 395613, 3796966; 395583, 3796966; 395583, 3796996; 395553, 
3796996; 395553, 3797026; 395523, 3797026; 395523, 3797056; 395493, 
3797056; 395493, 3797086; 395523, 3797086; 395523, 3797116; 395553, 
3797116; 395553, 3797176; 395493, 3797176; 395493, 3797206; 395403, 
3797206; 395403, 3797176; 395373, 3797176; 395373, 3797146; 395343, 
3797146; 395343, 3797116; 395313, 3797116; 395313, 3797086; 395253, 
3797086; 395253, 3797056; 395193, 3797056; 395193, 3797026; 395133, 
3797026; 395133, 3797056; 395073, 3797056; 395073, 3797086; 394923, 
3797086; 394923, 3797056; 394893, 3797056; 394893, 3797026; 394863, 
3797026; 394863, 3796996; 394833, 3796996; 394833, 3796966; 394743, 
3796966; 394743, 3796936; 394653, 3796936; 394653, 3796966; 394593, 
3796966; 394593, 3796936; 394563, 3796936; 394563, 3796906; 394413, 
3796906; 394413, 3796996; 394383, 3796996; 394383, 3797026; 394323, 
3797026; 394323, 3797056; 394233, 3797056; 394233, 3797026; 394083, 
3797026; 394083, 3797056; 394023, 3797056; 394023, 3797086; 393963, 
3797086; 393963, 3797116; 393903, 3797116; 393903, 3797146; 393753, 
3797146; 393753, 3797116; 393723, 3797116; 393723, 3797056; 393693, 
3797056; 393693, 3797026; 393663, 3797026; 393663, 3796936; 393633, 
3796936; 393633, 3796876; 393603, 3796876; 393603, 3796756; 393573, 
3796756; 393573, 3796606; 393513, 3796606; 393513, 3796576; 393453, 
3796576; 393453, 3796546; 393423, 3796546; 393423, 3796516; 393393, 
3796516; 393393, 3796486; 393213, 3796486; 393213, 3796516; 393183, 
3796516; 393183, 3796546; 393153, 3796546; 393153, 3796666; 393093, 
3796666; 393093, 3796696; 393033, 3796696; 393033, 3796666; 393003, 
3796666; 393003, 3796636; 392973, 3796636; 392973, 3796606; 392943, 
3796606; 392943, 3796576; 392703, 3796576; 392703, 3796546; 392673, 
3796546; 392673, 3796516; 392613, 3796516; 392613, 3796486; 392583, 
3796486; 392583, 3796426; 392553, 3796426; 392553, 3796366; 392523, 
3796366; 392523, 3796336; 392493, 3796336; 392493, 3796306; 392463, 
3796306; 392463, 3796276; 392433, 3796276; 392433, 3796246; 392403, 
3796246; 392403, 3796156; 392343, 3796156; 392343, 3796126; 392253, 
3796126; 392253, 3796096; 392163, 3796096; 392163, 3796066; 392073, 
3796066; 392073, 3796036; 392043, 3796036; 392043, 3796006; 392013, 
3796006; 392013, 3796036; 391983, 3796036; 391983, 3796186; 392013, 
3796186; 392013, 3796216; 391983, 3796216; 391983, 3796246; 391953, 
3796246; 391953, 3796276; 391983, 3796276; 391983, 3796306; 392073, 
3796306; 392073, 3796276; 392103, 3796276; 392103, 3796216; 392133, 
3796216; 392133, 3796186; 392163, 3796186; 392163, 3796216; 392283, 
3796216; 392283, 3796246; 392313, 3796246; 392313, 3796306; 392343, 
3796306; 392343, 3796336; 392373, 3796336; 392373, 3796366; 392403, 
3796366; 392403, 3796396; 392433, 3796396; 392433, 3796456; 392463, 
3796456; 392463, 3796486; 392493, 3796486; 392493, 3796516; 392523, 
3796516; 392523, 3796606; 392553, 3796606; 392553, 3796636; 392613, 
3796636; 392613, 3796666; 392883, 3796666; 392883, 3796696; 392913, 
3796696; 392913, 3796756; 392943, 3796756; 392943, 3796786; 393003, 
3796786; 393003, 3796816; 393063, 3796816; 393063, 3796846; 393093, 
3796846; 393093, 3796816; 393183, 3796816; 393183, 3796786; 393213, 
3796786; 393213, 3796756; 393273, 3796756; 393273, 3796726; 393303, 
3796726; 393303, 3796636; 393333, 3796636; 393333, 3796666; 393393, 
3796666; 393393, 3796696; 393423,

[[Page 382]]

3796696; 393423, 3796726; 393453, 3796726; 393453, 3796756; 393483, 
3796756; 393483, 3796816; 393513, 3796816; 393513, 3796906; 393543, 
3796906; 393543, 3796936; 393573, 3796936; 393573, 3796996; 393603, 
3796996; 393603, 3797056; 393633, 3797056; 393633, 3797146; 393663, 
3797146; 393663, 3797206; 393693, 3797206; 393693, 3797236; 393903, 
3797236; 393903, 3797206; 393963, 3797206; 393963, 3797176; 394023, 
3797176; 394023, 3797146; 394083, 3797146; 394083, 3797176; 394113, 
3797176; 394113, 3797146; 394143, 3797146; 394143, 3797116; 394173, 
3797116; 394173, 3797146; 394353, 3797146; 394353, 3797116; 394413, 
3797116; 394413, 3797086; 394443, 3797086; 394443, 3797056; 394473, 
3797056; 394473, 3797026; 394593, 3797026; 394593, 3797056; 394743, 
3797056; 394743, 3797116; 394773, 3797116; 394773, 3797176; 394803, 
3797176; 394803, 3797206; 394773, 3797206; 394773, 3797266; 394743, 
3797266; 394743, 3797296; 394713, 3797296; 394713, 3797326; 394683, 
3797326; 394683, 3797416; 394713, 3797416; 394713, 3797476; 394743, 
3797476; 394743, 3797536; 394773, 3797536; 394773, 3797566; 394803, 
3797566; 394803, 3797596; 394833, 3797596; 394833, 3797626; 394863, 
3797626; 394863, 3797656; 394893, 3797656; 394893, 3797686; 394923, 
3797686; 394923, 3797746; 394953, 3797746; 394953, 3797776; 395103, 
3797776; 395103, 3797746; 395163, 3797746; 395163, 3797716; 395193, 
3797716; 395193, 3797686; 395283, 3797686; 395283, 3797746; 395313, 
3797746; 395313, 3797806; 395403, 3797806; 395403, 3797926; 395493, 
3797926; 395493, 3797986; 395553, 3797986; 395553, 3798016; 395583, 
3798016; 395583, 3798076; 395613, 3798076; 395613, 3798166; 395673, 
3798166; 395673, 3798136; 395703, 3798136; 395703, 3797956; 395763, 
3797956; 395763, 3797986; 395823, 3797986; 395823, 3798016; 395853, 
3798016; 395853, 3798046; 395883, 3798046; 395883, 3798076; 395913, 
3798076; 395913, 3798196; 395943, 3798196; 395943, 3798226; 395973, 
3798226; 395973, 3798256; 396033, 3798256; 396033, 3798286; 396093, 
3798286; 396093, 3798346; 396123, 3798346; 396123, 3798406; 396153, 
3798406; 396153, 3798466; 396213, 3798466; 396213, 3798526; 396243, 
3798526; 396243, 3798646; 396273, 3798646; 396273, 3798676; 396333, 
3798676; 396333, 3798706; 396363, 3798706; 396363, 3798886; 396393, 
3798886; 396393, 3798916; 396423, 3798916; 396423, 3798946; 396513, 
3798946; 396513, 3798916; 396543, 3798916; 396543, 3798886; 396573, 
3798886; 396573, 3798856; 396603, 3798856; 396603, 3799006; 396573, 
3799006; 396573, 3799126; 396693, 3799126; 396693, 3799156; 396723, 
3799156; 396723, 3799216; 396753, 3799216; 396753, 3799246; 396813, 
3799246; 396813, 3799366; 396843, 3799366; 396843, 3799396; 396873, 
3799396; 396873, 3799516; 396903, 3799516; 396903, 3799486; 396963, 
3799486; 396963, 3799396; 396993, 3799396; 396993, 3799366; 396963, 
3799366; 396963, 3799276; 397053, 3799276; 397053, 3799306; 397113, 
3799306; 397113, 3799336; 397173, 3799336; 397173, 3799366; 397233, 
3799366; 397233, 3799426; 397263, 3799426; 397263, 3799546; 397323, 
3799546; 397323, 3799576; 397353, 3799576; 397353, 3799636; 397383, 
3799636; 397383, 3799666; 397413, 3799666; 397413, 3799696; 397473, 
3799696; 397473, 3799726; 397503, 3799726; 397503, 3799756; 397533, 
3799756; 397533, 3799786; 397563, 3799786; 397563, 3799846; 397593, 
3799846; 397593, 3799876; 397623, 3799876; 397623, 3799996; 397713, 
3799996; 397713, 3799936; 397833, 3799936; 397833, 3799966; 397923, 
3799966; 397923, 3799996; 397953, 3799996; 397953, 3800116; 397923, 
3800116; 397923, 3800206; 397893, 3800206; 397893, 3800386; 397863, 
3800386; 397863, 3800476; 397833, 3800476; 397833, 3800596; 397803, 
3800596; 397803, 3800686; 397773, 3800686; 397773, 3800746; 397803, 
3800746; 397803, 3800836; 397833, 3800836; 397833, 3800926; 397863, 
3800926; 397863, 3800986; 397893, 3800986; 397893, 3801016; 397923, 
3801016; 397923, 3801166; 397983, 3801166; 397983, 3801106; 398013, 
3801106; 398013, 3801016; 398193, 3801016; 398193, 3800986; 398163, 
3800986; 398163, 3800956; 398133, 3800956; 398133, 3800926; 398103, 
3800926; 398103, 3800896; 398073, 3800896; 398073, 3800866; 398043, 
3800866; 398043, 3800836; 398013, 3800836; 398013, 3800716; 398043, 
3800716; 398043, 3800686; 398073, 3800686; 398073, 3800566; 398103, 
3800566; 398103, 3800476; 398073, 3800476; 398073, 3800446; 398043, 
3800446; 398043, 3800416; 398073, 3800416; 398073, 3800356; 398133, 
3800356; 398133, 3800326; 398103, 3800326; 398103, 3800296; 398073, 
3800296; 398073, 3800176; 398103, 3800176; 398103, 3800146; 398163, 
3800146; 398163, 3800056; 398133, 3800056; 398133, 3799876; 398103, 
3799876; 398103, 3799786; 398013, 3799786; 398013, 3799756; 397983, 
3799756; 397983, 3799726; 397923, 3799726; 397923, 3799756; 397803, 
3799756; 397803, 3799726; 397743, 3799726; 397743, 3799696; 397683, 
3799696; 397683, 3799576; 397713, 3799576; 397713, 3799546; 397623, 
3799546; 397623, 3799516; 397533, 3799516; 397533, 3799486; 397473, 
3799486; 397473, 3799456; 397443, 3799456; 397443, 3799306; 397503, 
3799306; 397503, 3799276; 397473, 3799276; 397473, 3799246; 397413, 
3799246; 397413, 3799216; 397353, 3799216; 397353, 3799186; 397323, 
3799186; 397323, 3799156; 397113, 3799156; 397113, 3799126; 397023, 
3799126; 397023, 3799096; 396963, 3799096; 396963, 3799066; 396933, 
3799066; 396933, 3799006; 396903, 3799006; 396903, 3798976; 396933, 
3798976; 396933, 3798916; 396873, 3798916; 396873, 3798886; 396843, 
3798886; 396843, 3798826; 396813, 3798826; 396813, 3798796; 396783, 
3798796; 396783, 3798766; 396753, 3798766; 396753, 3798736; 396723, 
3798736; 396723, 3798706; 396693, 3798706; 396693, 3798676; 396663, 
3798676; 396663, 3798646; 396633, 3798646; 396633, 3798676; 396543, 
3798676; 396543, 3798616; 396513, 3798616; 396513, 3798586; 396423, 
3798586; 396423, 3798556; 396393, 3798556; 396393, 3798526; 396423, 
3798526; 396423, 3798496; 396453, 3798496; 396453, 3798376; 396423, 
3798376; 396423, 3798346; 396393, 3798346; 396393, 3798286; 396333, 
3798286; 396333, 3798256; 396273, 3798256; 396273, 3798226; 396303, 
3798226; 396303, 3798136; 396273, 3798136; 396273, 3798106; 396213, 
3798106; 396213, 3798136; 396093, 3798136; 396093, 3798046; 396063, 
3798046; 396063, 3798016; 396033, 3798016; 396033, 3797926; 396003, 
3797926; 396003, 3797896; 395943, 3797896; 395943, 3797866; 395913, 
3797866; 395913, 3797836; 395853, 3797836; 395853, 3797806; 395823, 
3797806; 395823, 3797776; 395763, 3797776; 395763, 3797746; 395733, 
3797746; 395733, 3797716; 395583, 3797716; 395583, 3797746; 395553, 
3797746; 395553, 3797806; 395523, 3797806; 395523, 3797746; 395493, 
3797746; 395493, 3797686; 395433, 3797686; 395433, 3797656; 395403, 
3797656; 395403, 3797626; 395373, 3797626; 395373, 3797596; 395313, 
3797596; 395313, 3797566; 395163, 3797566; 395163, 3797596; 395103, 
3797596; 395103, 3797626; 395073, 3797626; 395073, 3797656; 395013, 
3797656; 395013, 3797626; 394983,

[[Page 383]]

3797626; 394983, 3797596; 394953, 3797596; 394953, 3797566; 394923, 
3797566; 394923, 3797536; 394893, 3797536; 394893, 3797506; 394863, 
3797506; 394863, 3797476; 394833, 3797476; 394833, 3797446; 394803, 
3797446; 394803, 3797356; 394833, 3797356; 394833, 3797326; 394863, 
3797326; 394863, 3797266; 394893, 3797266; 394893, 3797206; 394923, 
3797206; 394923, 3797176; 395013, 3797176; 395013, 3797206; 395103, 
3797206; 395103, 3797176; 395133, 3797176; 395133, 3797146; 395253, 
3797146; 395253, 3797176; 395283, 3797176; 395283, 3797206; 395313, 
3797206; 395313, 3797266; 395343, 3797266; 395343, 3797296; 395553, 
3797296; 395553, 3797266; 395613, 3797266; 395613, 3797236; 395643, 
3797236; 395643, 3797086; 395673, 3797086; 395673, 3797056; 395763, 
3797056; 395763, 3797086; 395823, 3797086; 395823, 3797116; 395943, 
3797116; 395943, 3797146; 396093, 3797146; 396093, 3797176; 396153, 
3797176; 396153, 3797206; 396213, 3797206; 396213, 3797236; 396243, 
3797236; 396243, 3797266; 396303, 3797266; 396303, 3797296; 396393, 
3797296; 396393, 3797266; 396423, 3797266; 396423, 3797236; 396453, 
3797236; 396453, 3797176; 396483, 3797176; 396483, 3797146; 396513, 
3797146; 396513, 3797176; 396543, 3797176; 396543, 3797236; 396573, 
3797236; 396573, 3797296; 396603, 3797296; 396603, 3797326; 396663, 
3797326; 396663, 3797356; 396723, 3797356; 396723, 3797326; 396783, 
3797326; 396783, 3797296; 397053, 3797296; 397053, 3797236; 397083, 
3797236; 397083, 3797206; 397053, 3797206; 397053, 3797146; 397113, 
3797146; 397113, 3797116; 397203, 3797116; 397203, 3797086; 397263, 
3797086; 397263, 3797116; 397293, 3797116; 397293, 3797146; 397323, 
3797146; 397323, 3797236; 397353, 3797236; 397353, 3797266; 397383, 
3797266; 397383, 3797236; 397413, 3797236; 397413, 3797266; 397473, 
3797266; 397473, 3797296; 397503, 3797296; 397503, 3797266; 397533, 
3797266; 397533, 3797236; 397563, 3797236; 397563, 3797176; 397593, 
3797176; 397593, 3797116; 397623, 3797116; 397623, 3797086; 397653, 
3797086; 397653, 3797056; 397683, 3797056; 397683, 3797026; 397713, 
3797026; 397713, 3796996; 397743, 3796996; 397743, 3796876; 397773, 
3796876; 397773, 3796846; 397803, 3796846; 397803, 3796816; 397833, 
3796816; 397833, 3796786; 397863, 3796786; 397863, 3796756; 397893, 
3796756; 397893, 3796966; 397923, 3796966; 397923, 3797026; 397953, 
3797026; 397953, 3797086; 397983, 3797086; 397983, 3797056; 398013, 
3797056; 398013, 3797026; 398103, 3797026; 398103, 3796996; 398133, 
3796996; 398133, 3797026; 398163, 3797026; 398163, 3797086; 398193, 
3797086; 398193, 3797146; 398313, 3797146; 398313, 3797176; 398343, 
3797176; 398343, 3797206; 398373, 3797206; 398373, 3797236; 398403, 
3797236; 398403, 3797266; 398433, 3797266; returning to 398433, 3797296.
    (iii) Note: Map of Units 7 and 21 follows.

[[Page 384]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09FE11.005

    (13) Unit 8: Lower Santa Ana River Basin, Orange County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Black Star Canyon, Corona 
South, El Toro, and Santiago Peak, land bounded by the following UTM 
coordinates (E, N): 439642, 3732778; 439642, 3732749; 439671, 3732749; 
439671, 3732721; 439699, 3732721; 439699, 3732692; 439727,

[[Page 385]]

3732692; 439727, 3732636; 439756, 3732636; 439756, 3732607; 439841, 
3732607; 439841, 3732522; 439897, 3732522; 439897, 3732466; 439926, 
3732466; 439926, 3732409; 439983, 3732409; 439983, 3732380; 440153, 
3732380; 440153, 3732409; 440181, 3732409; 440181, 3732380; 440210, 
3732380; 440210, 3732324; 440153, 3732324; 440153, 3732295; 440124, 
3732295; 440124, 3732267; 440068, 3732267; 440068, 3732239; 440011, 
3732239; 440011, 3732210; 439983, 3732210; 439983, 3732097; 440011, 
3732097; 440011, 3732040; 440039, 3732040; 440039, 3731813; 440068, 
3731813; 440068, 3731785; 440011, 3731785; 440011, 3731756; 439983, 
3731756; 439983, 3731671; 440011, 3731671; 440011, 3731586; 439983, 
3731586; 439983, 3731501; 440068, 3731501; 440068, 3731302; 440096, 
3731302; 440096, 3731274; 440124, 3731274; 440124, 3731217; 440096, 
3731217; 440096, 3731161; 440124, 3731161; 440124, 3731132; 440153, 
3731132; 440153, 3731075; 440181, 3731075; 440181, 3731047; 440210, 
3731047; 440210, 3730962; 440238, 3730962; 440238, 3730934; 440295, 
3730934; 440295, 3730905; 440323, 3730905; 440323, 3730877; 440351, 
3730877; 440351, 3730820; 440380, 3730820; 440380, 3730707; 440408, 
3730707; 440408, 3730678; 440465, 3730678; 440465, 3730650; 440493, 
3730650; 440493, 3730622; 440522, 3730622; 440522, 3730593; 440550, 
3730593; 440550, 3730565; 440578, 3730565; 440578, 3730508; 440607, 
3730508; 440607, 3730451; 440692, 3730451; 440692, 3730395; 440663, 
3730395; 440663, 3730366; 440692, 3730366; 440692, 3730309; 440720, 
3730309; 440720, 3730253; 440749, 3730253; 440749, 3730224; 440777, 
3730224; 440777, 3730196; 440805, 3730196; 440805, 3730168; 440862, 
3730168; 440862, 3730139; 440919, 3730139; 440919, 3730111; 440947, 
3730111; 440947, 3730083; 440976, 3730083; 440976, 3730054; 441032, 
3730054; 441032, 3730026; 441089, 3730026; 441089, 3729997; 441061, 
3729997; 441061, 3729969; 441004, 3729969; 441004, 3729941; 440976, 
3729941; 440976, 3729912; 440890, 3729912; 440890, 3729941; 440834, 
3729941; 440834, 3729969; 440805, 3729969; 440805, 3729997; 440777, 
3729997; 440777, 3730026; 440749, 3730026; 440749, 3730054; 440607, 
3730054; 440607, 3730083; 440578, 3730083; 440578, 3730111; 440550, 
3730111; 440550, 3730139; 440522, 3730139; 440522, 3730196; 440493, 
3730196; 440493, 3730224; 440465, 3730224; 440465, 3730253; 440436, 
3730253; 440436, 3730281; 440408, 3730281; 440408, 3730338; 440380, 
3730338; 440380, 3730366; 440323, 3730366; 440323, 3730395; 440266, 
3730395; 440266, 3730366; 440238, 3730366; 440238, 3730338; 440238, 
3730281; 440266, 3730281; 440266, 3730168; 440295, 3730168; 440295, 
3730083; 440323, 3730083; 440323, 3730054; 440295, 3730054; 440295, 
3730026; 440266, 3730026; 440266, 3730054; 440238, 3730054; 440238, 
3730083; 440181, 3730083; 440181, 3730111; 440096, 3730111; 440096, 
3730083; 440068, 3730083; 440068, 3730168; 440096, 3730168; 440096, 
3730224; 440068, 3730224; 440068, 3730253; 440039, 3730253; 440039, 
3730281; 440068, 3730281; 440068, 3730395; 440039, 3730395; 440039, 
3730423; 440011, 3730423; 440011, 3730439; 440013, 3730446; 440018, 
3730467; 440024, 3730487; 440031, 3730507; 440037, 3730527; 440044, 
3730546; 440051, 3730566; 440059, 3730585; 440067, 3730605; 440075, 
3730624; 440084, 3730643; 440093, 3730662; 440102, 3730681; 440108, 
3730691; 440108, 3730692; 440128, 3730713; 440130, 3730716; 440130, 
3730717; 440129, 3730719; 440128, 3730723; 440116, 3730760; 440108, 
3730799; 440104, 3730838; 440104, 3730875; 440104, 3730878; 440104, 
3730881; 440106, 3730918; 440111, 3730918; 440112, 3730939; 440107, 
3730939; 440109, 3730968; 440109, 3730994; 440107, 3731031; 440100, 
3731067; 440090, 3731103; 440076, 3731137; 439958, 3731389; 439957, 
3731392; 439956, 3731395; 439949, 3731411; 439936, 3731449; 439927, 
3731487; 439922, 3731526; 439911, 3731686; 439911, 3731689; 439911, 
3731692; 439910, 3731703; 439904, 3731739; 439894, 3731775; 439753, 
3732205; 439751, 3732211; 439742, 3732247; 439740, 3732253; 439720, 
3732354; 439719, 3732360; 439710, 3732393; 439709, 3732396; 439708, 
3732399; 439643, 3732597; 439641, 3732603; 439630, 3732631; 439613, 
3732664; 439594, 3732695; 439581, 3732711; 439581, 3732712; 439603, 
3732730; 439642, 3732784; returning to 439642, 3732778.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 446706, 
3734905; 446706, 3734877; 446734, 3734877; 446734, 3734849; 446763, 
3734849; 446763, 3734820; 446791, 3734820; 446791, 3734792; 446820, 
3734792; 446820, 3734735; 446791, 3734735; 446791, 3734763; 446734, 
3734763; 446734, 3734735; 446678, 3734735; 446678, 3734707; 446593, 
3734707; 446593, 3734678; 446536, 3734678; 446536, 3734650; 446366, 
3734650; 446366, 3734622; 446337, 3734622; 446337, 3734565; 446309, 
3734565; 446309, 3734536; 446281, 3734536; 446281, 3734508; 446252, 
3734508; 446252, 3734480; 446224, 3734480; 446224, 3734451; 446195, 
3734451; 446195, 3734423; 446167, 3734423; 446167, 3734366; 446054, 
3734366; 446054, 3734338; 446025, 3734338; 446025, 3734309; 445997, 
3734309; 445997, 3734253; 445968, 3734253; 445968, 3734196; 445940, 
3734196; 445940, 3734083; 445968, 3734083; 445968, 3734054; 445855, 
3734054; 445855, 3733997; 445770, 3733997; 445770, 3734026; 445685, 
3734026; 445685, 3734054; 445600, 3734054; 445600, 3734083; 445344, 
3734083; 445344, 3734111; 445259, 3734111; 445259, 3734139; 444919, 
3734139; 444919, 3734111; 444749, 3734111; 444749, 3734139; 444635, 
3734139; 444635, 3734111; 444578, 3734111; 444578, 3734083; 444408, 
3734083; 444408, 3734111; 444380, 3734111; 444380, 3734083; 444153, 
3734083; 444153, 3734054; 444068, 3734054; 444068, 3734083; 443869, 
3734083; 443869, 3734111; 443841, 3734111; 443841, 3734139; 443699, 
3734139; 443699, 3734111; 443585, 3734111; 443585, 3734139; 443529, 
3734139; 443529, 3734168; 443472, 3734168; 443472, 3734139; 443358, 
3734139; 443358, 3734168; 443302, 3734168; 443302, 3734196; 443273, 
3734196; 443273, 3734224; 443217, 3734224; 443217, 3734253; 443188, 
3734253; 443188, 3734281; 443018, 3734281; 443018, 3734253; 442933, 
3734253; 442933, 3734224; 442905, 3734224; 442905, 3734196; 442819, 
3734196; 442819, 3734168; 442706, 3734168; 442706, 3734139; 442649, 
3734139; 442649, 3734054; 442564, 3734054; 442564, 3734083; 442536, 
3734083; 442536, 3734139; 442507, 3734139; 442507, 3734168; 442451, 
3734168; 442451, 3734139; 442394, 3734139; 442394, 3734083; 442366, 
3734083; 442366, 3734054; 442337, 3734054; 442337, 3734083; 442309, 
3734083; 442309, 3734168; 442280, 3734168; 442280, 3734224; 442195, 
3734224; 442195, 3734196; 442054, 3734196; 442054, 3734168; 441968, 
3734168; 441968, 3734139; 441912, 3734139; 441912, 3734111; 441855, 
3734111; 441855, 3734139; 441827, 3734139; 441827, 3734111; 441798, 
3734111; 441798, 3734139; 441741, 3734139; 441741, 3734168; 441628, 
3734168; 441628, 3734196; 441543, 3734196; 441543, 3734224; 441401,

[[Page 386]]

3734224; 441401, 3734196; 441344, 3734196; 441344, 3734168; 441288, 
3734168; 441288, 3734139; 441174, 3734139; 441174, 3734111; 441146, 
3734111; 441146, 3733969; 441089, 3733969; 441089, 3733997; 441061, 
3733997; 441061, 3734026; 441032, 3734026; 441032, 3734054; 440976, 
3734054; 440976, 3734026; 440947, 3734026; 440947, 3734054; 440919, 
3734054; 440919, 3734083; 440862, 3734083; 440862, 3734111; 440834, 
3734111; 440834, 3734139; 440805, 3734139; 440805, 3734168; 440777, 
3734168; 440777, 3734196; 440749, 3734196; 440749, 3734253; 440720, 
3734253; 440720, 3734281; 440663, 3734281; 440663, 3734309; 440578, 
3734309; 440578, 3734281; 440550, 3734281; 440550, 3734253; 440522, 
3734253; 440522, 3734054; 440465, 3734054; 440465, 3734083; 440408, 
3734083; 440408, 3734054; 440068, 3734054; 440068, 3734026; 439983, 
3734026; 439983, 3734054; 439926, 3734054; 439926, 3734083; 439869, 
3734083; 439869, 3734054; 439812, 3734054; 439812, 3734083; 439784, 
3734083; 439784, 3734054; 439756, 3734054; 439756, 3733997; 439727, 
3733997; 439727, 3733941; 439671, 3733941; 439671, 3733969; 439529, 
3733969; 439529, 3733941; 439387, 3733941; 439387, 3733912; 439339, 
3733912; 439324, 3733961; 439289, 3734068; 439239, 3734221; 439238, 
3734226; 439146, 3734508; 439160, 3734508; 439160, 3734480; 439188, 
3734480; 439188, 3734395; 439217, 3734395; 439217, 3734366; 439444, 
3734366; 439444, 3734338; 439529, 3734338; 439529, 3734281; 439557, 
3734281; 439557, 3734309; 439642, 3734309; 439642, 3734338; 439671, 
3734338; 439671, 3734309; 439756, 3734309; 439756, 3734338; 439784, 
3734338; 439784, 3734423; 439812, 3734423; 439812, 3734451; 439841, 
3734451; 439841, 3734508; 439897, 3734508; 439897, 3734536; 439926, 
3734536; 439926, 3734565; 439983, 3734565; 439983, 3734593; 440124, 
3734593; 440124, 3734622; 440266, 3734622; 440266, 3734650; 440323, 
3734650; 440323, 3734536; 440380, 3734536; 440380, 3734480; 440550, 
3734480; 440550, 3734451; 440635, 3734451; 440635, 3734480; 440663, 
3734480; 440663, 3734508; 440692, 3734508; 440692, 3734536; 440720, 
3734536; 440720, 3734593; 440749, 3734593; 440749, 3734650; 440777, 
3734650; 440777, 3734707; 440805, 3734707; 440805, 3734763; 440834, 
3734763; 440834, 3734820; 440862, 3734820; 440862, 3734792; 440890, 
3734792; 440890, 3734650; 440919, 3734650; 440919, 3734622; 440890, 
3734622; 440890, 3734508; 440862, 3734508; 440862, 3734451; 440890, 
3734451; 440890, 3734423; 440947, 3734423; 440947, 3734395; 441004, 
3734395; 441004, 3734338; 441032, 3734338; 441032, 3734281; 441174, 
3734281; 441174, 3734253; 441259, 3734253; 441259, 3734281; 441316, 
3734281; 441316, 3734309; 441344, 3734309; 441344, 3734338; 441401, 
3734338; 441401, 3734366; 441458, 3734366; 441458, 3734338; 441628, 
3734338; 441628, 3734309; 441741, 3734309; 441741, 3734281; 441798, 
3734281; 441798, 3734309; 441997, 3734309; 441997, 3734338; 442280, 
3734338; 442280, 3734366; 442366, 3734366; 442366, 3734395; 442394, 
3734395; 442394, 3734423; 442451, 3734423; 442451, 3734395; 442479, 
3734395; 442479, 3734366; 442507, 3734366; 442507, 3734338; 442593, 
3734338; 442593, 3734309; 442848, 3734309; 442848, 3734338; 442905, 
3734338; 442905, 3734366; 442961, 3734366; 442961, 3734423; 443160, 
3734423; 443160, 3734395; 443217, 3734395; 443217, 3734366; 443273, 
3734366; 443273, 3734338; 443330, 3734338; 443330, 3734309; 443387, 
3734309; 443387, 3734281; 443529, 3734281; 443529, 3734309; 443585, 
3734309; 443585, 3734253; 443614, 3734253; 443614, 3734224; 443699, 
3734224; 443699, 3734253; 443784, 3734253; 443784, 3734281; 443812, 
3734281; 443812, 3734253; 444068, 3734253; 444068, 3734224; 444153, 
3734224; 444153, 3734196; 444295, 3734196; 444295, 3734224; 444323, 
3734224; 444323, 3734253; 444351, 3734253; 444351, 3734281; 444408, 
3734281; 444408, 3734253; 444493, 3734253; 444493, 3734224; 444607, 
3734224; 444607, 3734253; 444976, 3734253; 444976, 3734281; 445032, 
3734281; 445032, 3734253; 445344, 3734253; 445344, 3734224; 445401, 
3734224; 445401, 3734196; 445429, 3734196; 445429, 3734224; 445543, 
3734224; 445543, 3734196; 445685, 3734196; 445685, 3734168; 445798, 
3734168; 445798, 3734196; 445827, 3734196; 445827, 3734338; 445883, 
3734338; 445883, 3734395; 445940, 3734395; 445940, 3734423; 445968, 
3734423; 445968, 3734451; 445997, 3734451; 445997, 3734508; 446025, 
3734508; 446025, 3734536; 446082, 3734536; 446082, 3734565; 446110, 
3734565; 446110, 3734593; 446139, 3734593; 446139, 3734622; 446195, 
3734622; 446195, 3734650; 446224, 3734650; 446224, 3734707; 446252, 
3734707; 446252, 3734763; 446479, 3734763; 446479, 3734792; 446593, 
3734792; 446593, 3734820; 446621, 3734820; 446621, 3734849; 446649, 
3734849; 446649, 3734877; 446678, 3734877; 446678, 3734905; returning to 
446706, 3734905.
    (iii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 439075, 
3737033; 439075, 3737005; 439132, 3737005; 439132, 3736976; 439188, 
3736976; 439188, 3736948; 439217, 3736948; 439217, 3736919; 439188, 
3736919; 439188, 3736692; 439160, 3736692; 439160, 3736664; 439188, 
3736664; 439188, 3736607; 439160, 3736607; 439160, 3736522; 439132, 
3736522; 439132, 3736437; 439103, 3736437; 439103, 3736409; 439046, 
3736409; 439046, 3736352; 439018, 3736352; 439018, 3736324; 438990, 
3736324; 438990, 3736295; 438961, 3736295; 438961, 3736267; 438933, 
3736267; 438933, 3736239; 438848, 3736239; 438848, 3736182; 438819, 
3736182; 438819, 3736125; 438791, 3736125; 438791, 3736040; 438819, 
3736040; 438819, 3735955; 438791, 3735955; 438791, 3735927; 438819, 
3735927; 438819, 3735841; 438848, 3735841; 438848, 3735756; 438905, 
3735756; 438905, 3735728; 438848, 3735728; 438848, 3735700; 438819, 
3735700; 438819, 3735643; 438791, 3735643; 438791, 3735614; 438770, 
3735614; 438763, 3735636; 438678, 3735898; 438678, 3736125; 438706, 
3736125; 438706, 3736182; 438734, 3736182; 438734, 3736267; 438763, 
3736267; 438763, 3736295; 438791, 3736295; 438791, 3736352; 438848, 
3736352; 438848, 3736380; 438876, 3736380; 438876, 3736466; 438905, 
3736466; 438905, 3736494; 438933, 3736494; 438933, 3736522; 438961, 
3736522; 438961, 3736551; 438990, 3736551; 438990, 3736721; 439018, 
3736721; 439018, 3736749; 439046, 3736749; 439046, 3736834; 439018, 
3736834; 439018, 3736863; 439046, 3736863; 439046, 3736891; 439018, 
3736891; 439018, 3737061; 439018, 3737090; 439046, 3737090; 439046, 
3737118; 439075, 3737118; returning to 439075, 3737033.
    (iv) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 438819, 
3738707; 438819, 3738650; 438791, 3738650; 438791, 3738622; 438763, 
3738622; 438763, 3738593; 438678, 3738593; 438678, 3738565; 438593, 
3738565; 438593, 3738593; 438536, 3738593; 438536, 3738622; 438394, 
3738622; 438394, 3738593; 438337, 3738593; 438337, 3738565; 438309, 
3738565; 438309, 3738423; 438337, 3738423; 438337,

[[Page 387]]

3738338; 438309, 3738338; 438309, 3738224; 438280, 3738224; 438280, 
3738054; 438224, 3738054; 438224, 3737997; 438216, 3737997; 438212, 
3738060; 438195, 3738336; 438198, 3738398; 438195, 3738441; 438195, 
3738735; 438252, 3738735; 438252, 3738763; 438309, 3738763; 438309, 
3738820; 438337, 3738820; 438337, 3738849; 438366, 3738849; 438366, 
3738820; 438394, 3738820; 438394, 3738792; 438422, 3738792; 438422, 
3738763; 438536, 3738763; 438536, 3738735; 438621, 3738735; 438621, 
3738707; 438678, 3738707; 438678, 3738763; 438734, 3738763; 438734, 
3738792; 438763, 3738792; 438763, 3738849; 438791, 3738849; 438791, 
3738877; 438819, 3738877; 438819, 3738905; 438848, 3738905; 438848, 
3738934; 438905, 3738934; 438905, 3738905; 438876, 3738905; 438876, 
3738820; 438848, 3738820; 438848, 3738707; returning to 438819, 3738707.
    (v) Note: Map of Units 8, 10, and 11 follows.

[[Page 388]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09FE11.006

    (14) Unit 9: San Jacinto River Basin, Riverside County, California.
    (i) Subunit 9a: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps San Jacinto, Lake 
Fulmor, Hemet and Blackburn Canyon, land bounded by the following UTM 
coordinates (E, N): 511446, 3735434; 511416, 3735434; 511416, 3735453;

[[Page 389]]

511469, 3735455; 511469, 3735434; returning to 511446, 3735434.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 510915, 
3735426; 510915, 3735426; 511236, 3735443; 511236, 3735434; 511266, 
3735434; 511266, 3735374; 511296, 3735374; 511296, 3735344; 511326, 
3735344; 511326, 3735314; 511386, 3735314; 511386, 3735284; 511446, 
3735284; 511446, 3735254; 511471, 3735254; 511473, 3734974; 511953, 
3734586; 512009, 3734541; 512526, 3734545; 512526, 3734534; 512676, 
3734534; 512676, 3734546; 512704, 3734546; 512796, 3734547; 512796, 
3734474; 512826, 3734474; 512826, 3734444; 512886, 3734444; 512886, 
3734414; 512916, 3734414; 512916, 3734384; 512946, 3734384; 512946, 
3734354; 513156, 3734354; 513156, 3734324; 513216, 3734324; 513216, 
3734294; 513246, 3734294; 513246, 3734264; 513276, 3734264; 513276, 
3734234; 513306, 3734234; 513306, 3734204; 513336, 3734204; 513336, 
3734174; 513606, 3734174; 513606, 3734144; 513636, 3734144; 513636, 
3734114; 513696, 3734114; 513696, 3734084; 513726, 3734084; 513726, 
3734054; 513756, 3734054; 513756, 3734024; 513966, 3734024; 513966, 
3733994; 514056, 3733994; 514056, 3733964; 514116, 3733964; 514116, 
3733934; 514176, 3733934; 514176, 3733904; 514206, 3733904; 514206, 
3733874; 514296, 3733874; 514296, 3733724; 514326, 3733724; 514326, 
3733694; 514356, 3733694; 514356, 3733664; 514446, 3733664; 514446, 
3733634; 514476, 3733634; 514476, 3733604; 514506, 3733604; 514506, 
3733574; 514566, 3733574; 514566, 3733604; 514596, 3733604; 514596, 
3733634; 514626, 3733634; 514626, 3733664; 514656, 3733664; 514656, 
3733724; 514686, 3733724; 514686, 3733694; 514776, 3733694; 514776, 
3733604; 514836, 3733604; 514836, 3733574; 514896, 3733574; 514896, 
3733544; 514956, 3733544; 514956, 3733574; 515016, 3733574; 515016, 
3733544; 515046, 3733544; 515046, 3733484; 515076, 3733484; 515076, 
3733454; 515196, 3733454; 515196, 3733424; 515256, 3733424; 515256, 
3733394; 515346, 3733394; 515346, 3733364; 515436, 3733364; 515436, 
3733394; 515556, 3733394; 515556, 3733424; 515586, 3733424; 515586, 
3733394; 515706, 3733394; 515706, 3733364; 515766, 3733364; 515766, 
3733334; 515856, 3733334; 515856, 3733304; 515976, 3733304; 515976, 
3733274; 516006, 3733274; 516006, 3733244; 516036, 3733244; 516036, 
3733214; 516066, 3733214; 516066, 3733184; 516126, 3733184; 516126, 
3733154; 516186, 3733154; 516186, 3733124; 516246, 3733124; 516246, 
3733154; 516306, 3733154; 516306, 3733094; 516426, 3733094; 516426, 
3733064; 516456, 3733064; 516456, 3733034; 516636, 3733034; 516636, 
3733064; 516666, 3733064; 516666, 3733034; 516696, 3733034; 516696, 
3733004; 516726, 3733004; 516726, 3732974; 516846, 3732974; 516846, 
3733004; 516906, 3733004; 516906, 3732914; 517086, 3732914; 517086, 
3732884; 517206, 3732884; 517206, 3732764; 517236, 3732764; 517236, 
3732704; 517266, 3732704; 517266, 3732674; 517326, 3732674; 517326, 
3732614; 517356, 3732614; 517356, 3732554; 517386, 3732554; 517386, 
3732524; 517416, 3732524; 517416, 3732494; 517476, 3732494; 517476, 
3732464; 517536, 3732464; 517536, 3732434; 517566, 3732434; 517566, 
3732404; 517596, 3732404; 517596, 3732374; 517626, 3732374; 517626, 
3732344; 517716, 3732344; 517716, 3732314; 517746, 3732314; 517746, 
3732284; 517836, 3732284; 517836, 3732314; 517926, 3732314; 517926, 
3732284; 517956, 3732284; 517956, 3732254; 517926, 3732254; 517926, 
3732224; 517866, 3732224; 517866, 3732194; 517836, 3732194; 517836, 
3732164; 517806, 3732164; 517806, 3732134; 517776, 3732134; 517776, 
3731984; 517806, 3731984; 517806, 3731924; 517836, 3731924; 517836, 
3731894; 517896, 3731894; 517896, 3731834; 517926, 3731834; 517926, 
3731804; 517956, 3731804; 517956, 3731744; 517986, 3731744; 517986, 
3731714; 518016, 3731714; 518016, 3731684; 518046, 3731684; 518046, 
3731654; 518076, 3731654; 518076, 3731624; 518106, 3731624; 518106, 
3731594; 518136, 3731594; 518136, 3731564; 518196, 3731564; 518196, 
3731534; 518256, 3731534; 518256, 3731474; 518286, 3731474; 518286, 
3731444; 518316, 3731444; 518316, 3731414; 518346, 3731414; 518346, 
3731354; 518406, 3731354; 518406, 3731324; 518436, 3731324; 518436, 
3731294; 518466, 3731294; 518466, 3731234; 518496, 3731234; 518496, 
3731204; 518526, 3731204; 518526, 3731174; 518646, 3731174; 518646, 
3731144; 518766, 3731144; 518766, 3731114; 518796, 3731114; 518796, 
3731084; 518826, 3731084; 518826, 3731054; 518856, 3731054; 518856, 
3730964; 518886, 3730964; 518886, 3730934; 518916, 3730934; 518916, 
3730874; 518946, 3730874; 518946, 3730814; 518976, 3730814; 518976, 
3730724; 518916, 3730724; 518916, 3730754; 518886, 3730754; 518886, 
3730784; 518856, 3730784; 518856, 3730814; 518826, 3730814; 518826, 
3730844; 518796, 3730844; 518796, 3730874; 518736, 3730874; 518736, 
3730904; 518706, 3730904; 518706, 3730934; 518646, 3730934; 518646, 
3730964; 518496, 3730964; 518496, 3730994; 518406, 3730994; 518406, 
3731024; 518316, 3731024; 518316, 3731054; 518256, 3731054; 518256, 
3730994; 518226, 3730994; 518226, 3731024; 518196, 3731024; 518196, 
3731054; 518166, 3731054; 518166, 3731114; 518136, 3731114; 518136, 
3731144; 518106, 3731144; 518106, 3731204; 518076, 3731204; 518076, 
3731234; 518046, 3731234; 518046, 3731264; 518016, 3731264; 518016, 
3731294; 517986, 3731294; 517986, 3731324; 517956, 3731324; 517956, 
3731354; 517926, 3731354; 517926, 3731384; 517896, 3731384; 517896, 
3731474; 517866, 3731474; 517866, 3731534; 517806, 3731534; 517806, 
3731564; 517776, 3731564; 517776, 3731624; 517746, 3731624; 517746, 
3731654; 517686, 3731654; 517686, 3731684; 517656, 3731684; 517656, 
3731744; 517626, 3731744; 517626, 3731804; 517596, 3731804; 517596, 
3731864; 517536, 3731864; 517536, 3732044; 517506, 3732044; 517506, 
3732074; 517476, 3732074; 517476, 3732104; 517446, 3732104; 517446, 
3732134; 517416, 3732134; 517416, 3732164; 517386, 3732164; 517386, 
3732224; 517326, 3732224; 517326, 3732254; 517266, 3732254; 517266, 
3732284; 517236, 3732284; 517236, 3732314; 517206, 3732314; 517206, 
3732344; 517176, 3732344; 517176, 3732404; 517116, 3732404; 517116, 
3732434; 517086, 3732434; 517086, 3732464; 517056, 3732464; 517056, 
3732524; 516996, 3732524; 516996, 3732554; 516906, 3732554; 516906, 
3732524; 516786, 3732524; 516786, 3732554; 516696, 3732554; 516696, 
3732584; 516666, 3732584; 516666, 3732614; 516636, 3732614; 516636, 
3732644; 516576, 3732644; 516576, 3732674; 516486, 3732674; 516486, 
3732644; 516456, 3732644; 516456, 3732674; 516336, 3732674; 516336, 
3732704; 516246, 3732704; 516246, 3732734; 516186, 3732734; 516186, 
3732764; 516156, 3732764; 516156, 3732794; 516126, 3732794; 516126, 
3732824; 516066, 3732824; 516066, 3732854; 516006, 3732854; 516006, 
3732884; 515886, 3732884; 515886, 3732914; 515796, 3732914; 515796, 
3732944; 515736, 3732944; 515736, 3732914; 515676, 3732914; 515676, 
3732884; 515436, 3732884; 515436, 3732914; 515316,

[[Page 390]]

3732914; 515316, 3732944; 515256, 3732944; 515256, 3732974; 514986, 
3732974; 514986, 3732944; 514896, 3732944; 514896, 3732974; 514656, 
3732974; 514656, 3733004; 514596, 3733004; 514596, 3733034; 514566, 
3733034; 514566, 3733064; 514476, 3733064; 514476, 3733094; 514236, 
3733094; 514236, 3733064; 514206, 3733064; 514206, 3733034; 514176, 
3733034; 514176, 3733004; 514146, 3733004; 514146, 3732974; 513696, 
3732974; 513696, 3732944; 513606, 3732944; 513606, 3732914; 513396, 
3732914; 513396, 3732944; 513336, 3732944; 513336, 3732974; 513246, 
3732974; 513246, 3733004; 513186, 3733004; 513186, 3733034; 513156, 
3733034; 513156, 3733094; 513126, 3733094; 513126, 3733154; 513096, 
3733154; 513096, 3733184; 513126, 3733184; 513126, 3733214; 513122, 
3733214; 513126, 3733216; 513123, 3733965; 512879, 3733975; 512777, 
3733959; 512768, 3733972; 512574, 3733978; 512520, 3733934; 512234, 
3734086; 512218, 3734105; 512098, 3734213; 511933, 3734330; 511809, 
3734369; 511809, 3734327; 511612, 3734327; 511609, 3734464; 511507, 
3734492; 511336, 3734603; 511240, 3734683; 511098, 3734746; 510993, 
3734816; 510894, 3734962; 510767, 3735181; 510663, 3735432; 510628, 
3735654; 510623, 3735662; returning to 510915, 3735426.
    (iii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 510080, 
3736102; 510444, 3735807; 510183, 3735807; 509230, 3735809; 509158, 
3735887; 509092, 3735942; 509032, 3735968; 508988, 3736003; 508969, 
3736079; 508994, 3736113; 509122, 3736113; 509266, 3736094; 509314, 
3736096; 509464, 3736079; 509601, 3736077; 509649, 3736100; 509650, 
3736103; 509652, 3736114; 509871, 3736115; 510063, 3736116; returning to 
510080, 3736102.
    (iv) Subunit 9b: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle map Blackburn Canyon, 
land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 512766, 3730034; 
512766, 3730004; 512796, 3730004; 512796, 3729974; 512826, 3729974; 
512826, 3729944; 512886, 3729944; 512886, 3729914; 512916, 3729914; 
512916, 3729884; 512946, 3729884; 512946, 3729854; 512976, 3729854; 
512976, 3729824; 513006, 3729824; 513006, 3729794; 513066, 3729794; 
513066, 3729764; 513096, 3729764; 513096, 3729704; 513186, 3729704; 
513186, 3729734; 513216, 3729734; 513216, 3729794; 513246, 3729794; 
513246, 3729824; 513426, 3729824; 513426, 3729794; 513456, 3729794; 
513456, 3729764; 513486, 3729764; 513486, 3729734; 513546, 3729734; 
513546, 3729704; 513516, 3729704; 513516, 3729674; 513486, 3729674; 
513486, 3729644; 513456, 3729644; 513456, 3729614; 513426, 3729614; 
513426, 3729554; 513396, 3729554; 513396, 3729524; 513456, 3729524; 
513456, 3729494; 513486, 3729494; 513486, 3729374; 513576, 3729374; 
513576, 3729344; 513606, 3729344; 513606, 3729254; 513696, 3729254; 
513696, 3729284; 513726, 3729284; 513726, 3729254; 513756, 3729254; 
513756, 3729194; 513876, 3729194; 513876, 3729164; 513906, 3729164; 
513906, 3729134; 513936, 3729134; 513936, 3728984; 513966, 3728984; 
513966, 3728954; 513996, 3728954; 513996, 3728924; 514026, 3728924; 
514026, 3728894; 513996, 3728894; 513996, 3728834; 514026, 3728834; 
514026, 3728804; 514056, 3728804; 514056, 3728774; 514086, 3728774; 
514086, 3728744; 514116, 3728744; 514116, 3728714; 514206, 3728714; 
514206, 3728654; 514236, 3728654; 514236, 3728504; 514326, 3728504; 
514326, 3728444; 514356, 3728444; 514356, 3728384; 514386, 3728384; 
514386, 3728324; 514416, 3728324; 514416, 3728264; 514446, 3728264; 
514446, 3728234; 514476, 3728234; 514476, 3728084; 514446, 3728084; 
514446, 3728114; 514386, 3728114; 514386, 3728144; 514266, 3728144; 
514266, 3728114; 514206, 3728114; 514206, 3728054; 514176, 3728054; 
514176, 3727904; 514206, 3727904; 514206, 3727844; 514236, 3727844; 
514236, 3727784; 514266, 3727784; 514266, 3727694; 514386, 3727694; 
514386, 3727664; 514536, 3727664; 514536, 3727634; 514566, 3727634; 
514566, 3727454; 514596, 3727454; 514596, 3727394; 514626, 3727394; 
514626, 3727214; 514656, 3727214; 514656, 3727184; 514686, 3727184; 
514686, 3727154; 514716, 3727154; 514716, 3727124; 514746, 3727124; 
514746, 3727094; 514776, 3727094; 514776, 3727064; 514806, 3727064; 
514806, 3727034; 514836, 3727034; 514836, 3726944; 514866, 3726944; 
514866, 3726884; 514836, 3726884; 514836, 3726854; 514866, 3726854; 
514866, 3726764; 514896, 3726764; 514896, 3726734; 514926, 3726734; 
514926, 3726644; 514956, 3726644; 514956, 3726584; 515016, 3726584; 
515016, 3726554; 515106, 3726554; 515106, 3726524; 515136, 3726524; 
515136, 3726494; 515166, 3726494; 515166, 3726464; 515226, 3726464; 
515226, 3726434; 515256, 3726434; 515256, 3726344; 515286, 3726344; 
515286, 3726314; 515256, 3726314; 515256, 3726284; 515286, 3726284; 
515286, 3726194; 515316, 3726194; 515316, 3726134; 515346, 3726134; 
515346, 3725984; 515376, 3725984; 515376, 3725954; 515406, 3725954; 
515406, 3725924; 515436, 3725924; 515436, 3725894; 515466, 3725894; 
515466, 3725864; 515496, 3725864; 515496, 3725834; 515526, 3725834; 
515526, 3725804; 515556, 3725804; 515556, 3725774; 515526, 3725774; 
515526, 3725684; 515556, 3725684; 515556, 3725654; 515616, 3725654; 
515616, 3725624; 515646, 3725624; 515646, 3725384; 515676, 3725384; 
515676, 3725354; 515706, 3725354; 515706, 3725324; 515676, 3725324; 
515676, 3725264; 515646, 3725264; 515646, 3725234; 515676, 3725234; 
515676, 3725204; 515706, 3725204; 515706, 3725174; 515736, 3725174; 
515736, 3725144; 515766, 3725144; 515766, 3725114; 515796, 3725114; 
515796, 3725084; 515826, 3725084; 515826, 3725054; 515856, 3725054; 
515856, 3725024; 515946, 3725024; 515946, 3725054; 515976, 3725054; 
515976, 3725084; 516036, 3725084; 516036, 3724934; 516066, 3724934; 
516066, 3724844; 516096, 3724844; 516096, 3724814; 516126, 3724814; 
516126, 3724784; 516156, 3724784; 516156, 3724694; 516216, 3724694; 
516216, 3724664; 516336, 3724664; 516336, 3724634; 516366, 3724634; 
516366, 3724604; 516306, 3724604; 516306, 3724574; 516336, 3724574; 
516336, 3724544; 516396, 3724544; 516396, 3724604; 516486, 3724604; 
516486, 3724574; 516546, 3724574; 516546, 3724544; 516606, 3724544; 
516606, 3724514; 516636, 3724514; 516636, 3724364; 516666, 3724364; 
516666, 3724334; 516726, 3724334; 516726, 3724304; 516786, 3724304; 
516786, 3724274; 516816, 3724274; 516816, 3724214; 516846, 3724214; 
516846, 3724184; 516876, 3724184; 516876, 3724034; 516846, 3724034; 
516846, 3723944; 516906, 3723944; 516906, 3723914; 517086, 3723914; 
517086, 3723854; 517056, 3723854; 517056, 3723824; 517026, 3723824; 
517026, 3723764; 516996, 3723764; 516996, 3723734; 517026, 3723734; 
517026, 3723674; 517056, 3723674; 517056, 3723614; 517086, 3723614; 
517086, 3723554; 517146, 3723554; 517146, 3723524; 517206, 3723524; 
517206, 3723434; 517176, 3723434; 517176, 3723344; 517206, 3723344; 
517206, 3723254; 517146, 3723254; 517146, 3723224; 517176, 3723224; 
517176, 3723164; 517206, 3723164; 517206, 3723134; 517236, 3723134; 
517236, 3723104;

[[Page 391]]

517266, 3723104; 517266, 3723074; 517296, 3723074; 517296, 3723044; 
517326, 3723044; 517326, 3723074; 517386, 3723074; 517386, 3723224; 
517416, 3723224; 517416, 3723374; 517446, 3723374; 517446, 3723404; 
517566, 3723404; 517566, 3723374; 517596, 3723374; 517596, 3723344; 
517626, 3723344; 517626, 3723314; 517686, 3723314; 517686, 3723254; 
517716, 3723254; 517716, 3723224; 517866, 3723224; 517866, 3723194; 
517896, 3723194; 517896, 3723164; 517926, 3723164; 517926, 3723134; 
517956, 3723134; 517956, 3723074; 517986, 3723074; 517986, 3723044; 
518046, 3723044; 518046, 3723014; 518136, 3723014; 518136, 3722954; 
518106, 3722954; 518106, 3722924; 518046, 3722924; 518046, 3722834; 
518076, 3722834; 518076, 3722774; 518106, 3722774; 518106, 3722744; 
518196, 3722744; 518196, 3722654; 518226, 3722654; 518226, 3722624; 
518256, 3722624; 518256, 3722594; 518316, 3722594; 518316, 3722534; 
518346, 3722534; 518346, 3722504; 518376, 3722504; 518376, 3722474; 
518406, 3722474; 518406, 3722444; 518436, 3722444; 518436, 3722414; 
518466, 3722414; 518466, 3722354; 518436, 3722354; 518436, 3722324; 
518376, 3722324; 518376, 3722294; 518346, 3722294; 518346, 3722264; 
518376, 3722264; 518376, 3722234; 518406, 3722234; 518406, 3722264; 
518466, 3722264; 518526, 3722264; 518526, 3722234; 518586, 3722234; 
518586, 3722174; 518616, 3722174; 518616, 3721994; 518676, 3721994; 
518676, 3722024; 518706, 3722024; 518706, 3722054; 518736, 3722054; 
518736, 3722084; 518766, 3722084; 518766, 3722114; 518796, 3722114; 
518796, 3722144; 518826, 3722144; 518826, 3722204; 518856, 3722204; 
518856, 3722114; 518886, 3722114; 518886, 3722084; 518916, 3722084; 
518916, 3722054; 519006, 3722054; 519006, 3722114; 519066, 3722114; 
519066, 3722024; 519036, 3722024; 519036, 3721964; 519066, 3721964; 
519066, 3721934; 519126, 3721934; 519126, 3721844; 519186, 3721844; 
519186, 3721874; 519216, 3721874; 519216, 3721904; 519276, 3721904; 
519276, 3721874; 519336, 3721874; 519336, 3721754; 519306, 3721754; 
519306, 3721694; 519276, 3721694; 519276, 3721634; 519306, 3721634; 
519306, 3721544; 519336, 3721544; 519336, 3721484; 519306, 3721484; 
519306, 3721514; 519246, 3721514; 519246, 3721544; 519156, 3721544; 
519156, 3721574; 519006, 3721574; 519006, 3721544; 518826, 3721544; 
518826, 3721574; 518796, 3721574; 518796, 3721604; 518706, 3721604; 
518706, 3721634; 518616, 3721634; 518616, 3721664; 518556, 3721664; 
518556, 3721694; 518436, 3721694; 518436, 3721664; 518376, 3721664; 
518376, 3721694; 518226, 3721694; 518226, 3721724; 518196, 3721724; 
518196, 3721754; 518166, 3721754; 518166, 3721814; 518136, 3721814; 
518136, 3721874; 518076, 3721874; 518076, 3721904; 518016, 3721904; 
518016, 3721934; 517956, 3721934; 517956, 3721994; 517896, 3721994; 
517896, 3722054; 517866, 3722054; 517866, 3722084; 517836, 3722084; 
517836, 3722114; 517656, 3722114; 517656, 3722144; 517626, 3722144; 
517626, 3722204; 517596, 3722204; 517596, 3722264; 517566, 3722264; 
517566, 3722354; 517536, 3722354; 517536, 3722384; 517506, 3722384; 
517506, 3722534; 517476, 3722534; 517476, 3722594; 517386, 3722594; 
517386, 3722624; 517326, 3722624; 517326, 3722594; 517296, 3722594; 
517296, 3722564; 517266, 3722564; 517266, 3722504; 517236, 3722504; 
517236, 3722564; 517206, 3722564; 517206, 3722624; 517176, 3722624; 
517176, 3722654; 517146, 3722654; 517146, 3722684; 517086, 3722684; 
517086, 3722714; 517056, 3722714; 517056, 3722834; 517026, 3722834; 
517026, 3722864; 517056, 3722864; 517056, 3722984; 517026, 3722984; 
517026, 3723014; 516996, 3723014; 516996, 3723134; 516966, 3723134; 
516966, 3723164; 516936, 3723164; 516936, 3723194; 516906, 3723194; 
516906, 3723224; 516876, 3723224; 516876, 3723254; 516846, 3723254; 
516846, 3723284; 516816, 3723284; 516816, 3723314; 516846, 3723314; 
516846, 3723494; 516816, 3723494; 516816, 3723524; 516786, 3723524; 
516786, 3723554; 516756, 3723554; 516756, 3723614; 516726, 3723614; 
516726, 3723704; 516756, 3723704; 516756, 3723734; 516666, 3723734; 
516666, 3723764; 516546, 3723764; 516546, 3723794; 516516, 3723794; 
516516, 3723824; 516546, 3723824; 516546, 3723854; 516576, 3723854; 
516576, 3723974; 516606, 3723974; 516606, 3724004; 516636, 3724004; 
516636, 3724034; 516666, 3724034; 516666, 3724094; 516696, 3724094; 
516696, 3724124; 516666, 3724124; 516666, 3724154; 516546, 3724154; 
516546, 3724184; 516456, 3724184; 516456, 3724214; 516426, 3724214; 
516426, 3724244; 516456, 3724244; 516456, 3724334; 516426, 3724334; 
516426, 3724364; 516276, 3724364; 516276, 3724394; 516246, 3724394; 
516246, 3724424; 516186, 3724424; 516186, 3724454; 516126, 3724454; 
516126, 3724484; 515946, 3724484; 515946, 3724454; 515886, 3724454; 
515886, 3724574; 515856, 3724574; 515856, 3724754; 515796, 3724754; 
515796, 3724784; 515736, 3724784; 515736, 3724814; 515706, 3724814; 
515706, 3724844; 515646, 3724844; 515646, 3724874; 515616, 3724874; 
515616, 3724904; 515586, 3724904; 515586, 3724934; 515556, 3724934; 
515556, 3724964; 515526, 3724964; 515526, 3724994; 515496, 3724994; 
515496, 3725024; 515466, 3725024; 515466, 3725084; 515436, 3725084; 
515436, 3725114; 515466, 3725114; 515466, 3725414; 515496, 3725414; 
515496, 3725504; 515466, 3725504; 515466, 3725564; 515436, 3725564; 
515436, 3725624; 515406, 3725624; 515406, 3725684; 515376, 3725684; 
515376, 3725714; 515316, 3725714; 515316, 3725744; 515286, 3725744; 
515286, 3725834; 515256, 3725834; 515256, 3725864; 515226, 3725864; 
515226, 3725954; 515196, 3725954; 515196, 3726044; 515166, 3726044; 
515166, 3726074; 515136, 3726074; 515136, 3726134; 515106, 3726134; 
515106, 3726284; 515076, 3726284; 515076, 3726344; 515016, 3726344; 
515016, 3726374; 514986, 3726374; 514986, 3726404; 514956, 3726404; 
514956, 3726434; 514896, 3726434; 514896, 3726464; 514866, 3726464; 
514866, 3726494; 514836, 3726494; 514836, 3726554; 514806, 3726554; 
514806, 3726584; 514776, 3726584; 514776, 3726614; 514746, 3726614; 
514746, 3726674; 514716, 3726674; 514716, 3726884; 514686, 3726884; 
514686, 3726914; 514626, 3726914; 514626, 3726944; 514596, 3726944; 
514596, 3726914; 514536, 3726914; 514536, 3727094; 514506, 3727094; 
514506, 3727154; 514476, 3727154; 514476, 3727304; 514446, 3727304; 
514446, 3727394; 514416, 3727394; 514416, 3727454; 514386, 3727454; 
514386, 3727484; 514176, 3727484; 514176, 3727514; 514146, 3727514; 
514146, 3727544; 514116, 3727544; 514116, 3727604; 514086, 3727604; 
514086, 3727664; 514056, 3727664; 514056, 3727694; 514026, 3727694; 
514026, 3727664; 513996, 3727664; 513996, 3727634; 513966, 3727634; 
513966, 3727604; 513936, 3727604; 513936, 3727664; 513913, 3727664; 
513914, 3728200; 513756, 3728198; 513756, 3728234; 513726, 3728234; 
513726, 3728294; 513696, 3728294; 513696, 3728384; 513666, 3728384; 
513666, 3728414; 513636, 3728414; 513636, 3728444; 513606, 3728444; 
513606, 3728414; 513516, 3728414; 513516, 3728534; 513486, 3728534; 
513486, 3728594; 513456, 3728594;

[[Page 392]]

513456, 3728654; 513426, 3728654; 513426, 3728744; 513396, 3728744; 
513396, 3728774; 513366, 3728774; 513366, 3728804; 513336, 3728804; 
513336, 3728834; 513306, 3728834; 513306, 3728864; 513246, 3728864; 
513246, 3728894; 513156, 3728894; 513156, 3728924; 513126, 3728924; 
513126, 3728954; 513096, 3728954; 513096, 3728984; 513036, 3728984; 
513036, 3729014; 512886, 3729014; 512886, 3728984; 512856, 3728984; 
512856, 3728924; 512736, 3728924; 512736, 3728894; 512646, 3728894; 
512646, 3728954; 512706, 3728954; 512706, 3728984; 512736, 3728984; 
512736, 3729044; 512766, 3729044; 512766, 3729224; 512736, 3729224; 
512736, 3729254; 512676, 3729254; 512676, 3729284; 512616, 3729284; 
512616, 3729314; 512556, 3729314; 512556, 3729344; 512526, 3729344; 
512526, 3729374; 512496, 3729374; 512496, 3729404; 512406, 3729404; 
512406, 3729374; 512376, 3729374; 512376, 3729404; 512346, 3729404; 
512346, 3729494; 512316, 3729494; 512316, 3729554; 512286, 3729554; 
512286, 3729584; 512276, 3729584; 512290, 3729613; 512330, 3729661; 
512366, 3729715; 512447, 3729823; 512540, 3729942; 512602, 3730014; 
512646, 3730069; 512675, 3730084; 512725, 3730071; 512766, 3730045; 
returning to 512766, 3730034. Excluding land bounded by 514086, 3728504; 
514086, 3728474; 514176, 3728474; 514176, 3728504; returning to 514086, 
3728504. Excluding land bounded by 518226, 3722324; 518226, 3722294; 
518316, 3722294; 518316, 3722324; returning to 518226, 3722324. 
Excluding land bounded by 518166, 3722264; 518166, 3722234; 518196, 
3722234; 518196, 3722264; returning to 518166, 3722264.
    (v) Note: Map of Units 9 follows.

[[Page 393]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09FE11.007

    (15) Unit 10: San Juan Creek Basin, Orange and Riverside Counties, 
California.
    (i) Subunit 10a: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Dana Point, San 
Juan
    Capistrano, Canada Gobernadora, Sitton Peak and Santiago Peak, land 
bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 447472,

[[Page 394]]

3708409; 447500, 3708409; 447500, 3708380; 447472, 3708380; returning to 
447472, 3708409.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 441070, 
3707874; 440879, 3707726; 440814, 3707675; 440754, 3707729; 440678, 
3707697; 440528, 3707653; 440465, 3707615; 440377, 3707567; 440272, 
3707509; 440174, 3707454; 440104, 3707399; 440020, 3707298; 439965, 
3707219; 440000, 3707162; 439676, 3706892; 439661, 3706908; 438873, 
3706187; 438824, 3706258; 438695, 3706127; 438635, 3706121; 438686, 
3706234; 438758, 3706415; 438804, 3706545; 438837, 3706647; 438873, 
3706816; 439038, 3706816; 439203, 3706857; 439263, 3706896; 439336, 
3706864; 439776, 3707199; 439744, 3707291; 439846, 3707335; 439862, 
3707411; 439881, 3707446; 440036, 3707561; 440055, 3707608; 440093, 
3707650; 440122, 3707669; 440440, 3707748; 440530, 3707810; 440697, 
3707840; 440905, 3707927; 441006, 3707988; 441112, 3708087; 441606, 
3708588; 441697, 3708520; 441649, 3708481; 441617, 3708427; 441513, 
3708319; 441579, 3708243; 441373, 3708129; 441210, 3707990; returning to 
441070, 3707874.
    (iii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 447500, 
3708409; 447500, 3708437; 447472, 3708437; 447472, 3708409; 447330, 
3708409; 447330, 3708380; 447075, 3708380; 447075, 3708409; 446905, 
3708409; 446905, 3708380; 446876, 3708380; 446876, 3708409; 446820, 
3708409; 446820, 3708437; 446678, 3708437; 446678, 3708409; 446621, 
3708409; 446621, 3708380; 446593, 3708380; 446593, 3708352; 446564, 
3708352; 446564, 3708295; 446593, 3708295; 446593, 3708267; 446536, 
3708267; 446536, 3708295; 446479, 3708295; 446479, 3708324; 446394, 
3708324; 446394, 3708352; 446366, 3708352; 446366, 3708267; 446394, 
3708267; 446394, 3708238; 446422, 3708238; 446422, 3708182; 446366, 
3708182; 446366, 3708210; 446252, 3708210; 446252, 3708238; 446167, 
3708238; 446167, 3708153; 446139, 3708153; 446139, 3708068; 446110, 
3708068; 446110, 3707983; 446082, 3707983; 446082, 3707926; 446054, 
3707926; 446054, 3708011; 446025, 3708011; 446025, 3708097; 446018, 
3708097; 446002, 3708150; 445977, 3708203; 445942, 3708250; 445901, 
3708290; 445888, 3708299; 445855, 3708318; 445855, 3708324; 445841, 
3708324; 445827, 3708328; 445827, 3708352; 445770, 3708352; 445770, 
3708380; 445741, 3708380; 445741, 3708437; 445713, 3708437; 445713, 
3708465; 445600, 3708465; 445600, 3708494; 445543, 3708494; 445543, 
3708465; 445515, 3708465; 445515, 3708437; 445486, 3708437; 445486, 
3708409; 445429, 3708409; 445429, 3708437; 445401, 3708437; 445401, 
3708465; 445316, 3708465; 445316, 3708494; 445288, 3708494; 445288, 
3708465; 445231, 3708465; 445231, 3708437; 445202, 3708437; 445202, 
3708409; 445174, 3708409; 445174, 3708352; 445146, 3708352; 445146, 
3708324; 445117, 3708324; 445117, 3708352; 445089, 3708352; 445089, 
3708380; 445004, 3708380; 445004, 3708465; 445032, 3708465; 445032, 
3708550; 444976, 3708550; 444976, 3708579; 444919, 3708579; 444919, 
3708636; 444947, 3708636; 444947, 3708692; 444890, 3708692; 444890, 
3708721; 444805, 3708721; 444805, 3708749; 444749, 3708749; 444749, 
3708721; 444692, 3708721; 444692, 3708777; 444663, 3708777; 444663, 
3708806; 444607, 3708806; 444607, 3708834; 444493, 3708834; 444493, 
3708863; 444437, 3708863; 444437, 3708891; 444351, 3708891; 444351, 
3708919; 444238, 3708919; 444238, 3708976; 444181, 3708976; 444181, 
3709004; 444068, 3709004; 444068, 3709061; 444039, 3709061; 444039, 
3709118; 444011, 3709118; 444011, 3709146; 443983, 3709146; 443983, 
3709175; 443954, 3709175; 443954, 3709345; 443898, 3709345; 443898, 
3709373; 443869, 3709373; 443869, 3709402; 443841, 3709402; 443841, 
3709458; 443812, 3709458; 443812, 3709487; 443784, 3709487; 443784, 
3709515; 443699, 3709515; 443699, 3709543; 443671, 3709543; 443671, 
3709572; 443614, 3709572; 443614, 3709600; 443500, 3709600; 443500, 
3709572; 443444, 3709572; 443444, 3709543; 443415, 3709543; 443415, 
3709402; 443330, 3709402; 443330, 3709373; 443302, 3709373; 443302, 
3709345; 443273, 3709345; 443273, 3709373; 443132, 3709373; 443132, 
3709345; 442990, 3709345; 442990, 3709316; 442961, 3709316; 442961, 
3709288; 442950, 3709288; 442920, 3709331; 442686, 3709397; 442563, 
3709375; 442415, 3709399; 442367, 3709382; 442333, 3709353; 442323, 
3709323; 442200, 3709228; 442120, 3709187; 442072, 3709143; 442076, 
3709109; 442083, 3709055; 442083, 3709049; 442084, 3709043; 442081, 
3709040; 442070, 3709038; 442005, 3709034; 441981, 3708979; 441974, 
3708978; 441973, 3708978; 441954, 3708976; 441928, 3708972; 441928, 
3708972; 441915, 3709069; 441957, 3709281; 441925, 3709345; 441928, 
3709345; 441931, 3709346; 441932, 3709346; 441937, 3709347; 441938, 
3709347; 441941, 3709348; 441943, 3709348; 441944, 3709349; 441946, 
3709349; 441947, 3709349; 441952, 3709350; 441953, 3709351; 441955, 
3709351; 441956, 3709352; 441958, 3709352; 441959, 3709352; 441962, 
3709353; 441964, 3709354; 441967, 3709355; 441968, 3709355; 441969, 
3709356; 441971, 3709356; 441972, 3709357; 441974, 3709357; 441975, 
3709358; 441977, 3709358; 441978, 3709359; 441980, 3709359; 441981, 
3709360; 441982, 3709360; 441984, 3709361; 441985, 3709361; 441987, 
3709362; 441988, 3709363; 441990, 3709363; 441991, 3709364; 441992, 
3709364; 441994, 3709365; 441995, 3709366; 442001, 3709368; 442002, 
3709369; 442004, 3709369; 442005, 3709370; 442006, 3709371; 442009, 
3709372; 442011, 3709373; 442013, 3709374; 442015, 3709375; 442017, 
3709376; 442019, 3709377; 442020, 3709378; 442021, 3709378; 442023, 
3709379; 442024, 3709380; 442028, 3709382; 442029, 3709383; 442031, 
3709384; 442032, 3709385; 442033, 3709385; 442035, 3709386; 442036, 
3709387; 442037, 3709388; 442039, 3709389; 442040, 3709389; 442041, 
3709390; 442044, 3709392; 442045, 3709393; 442046, 3709394; 442048, 
3709395; 442049, 3709395; 442050, 3709396; 442051, 3709397; 442053, 
3709398; 442054, 3709399; 442055, 3709400; 442060, 3709404; 442061, 
3709405; 442063, 3709406; 442065, 3709407; 442066, 3709408; 442068, 
3709410; 442069, 3709411; 442073, 3709414; 442074, 3709415; 442075, 
3709416; 442076, 3709417; 442078, 3709418; 442079, 3709419; 442080, 
3709420; 442081, 3709422; 442082, 3709423; 442083, 3709424; 442084, 
3709425; 442085, 3709426; 442086, 3709427; 442088, 3709428; 442089, 
3709429; 442090, 3709430; 442093, 3709433; 442094, 3709434; 442095, 
3709436; 442097, 3709438; 442098, 3709439; 442100, 3709441; 442101, 
3709442; 442104, 3709446; 442105, 3709447; 442106, 3709448; 442107, 
3709449; 442108, 3709450; 442109, 3709452; 442110, 3709453; 442111, 
3709454; 442112, 3709455; 442113, 3709456; 442114, 3709458; 442115, 
3709459; 442116, 3709460; 442117, 3709461; 442119, 3709464; 442120, 
3709465; 442122, 3709469; 442123, 3709470; 442124, 3709471; 442125, 
3709473; 442126, 3709474; 442127, 3709475; 442128, 3709476; 442128, 
3709478; 442129, 3709479; 442130, 3709480; 442131,

[[Page 395]]

3709481; 442132, 3709483; 442133, 3709484; 442133, 3709485; 442136, 
3709489; 442137, 3709491; 442137, 3709492; 442138, 3709493; 442139, 
3709495; 442140, 3709496; 442140, 3709498; 442141, 3709498; 442142, 
3709500; 442143, 3709501; 442143, 3709502; 442144, 3709503; 442144, 
3709503; 442145, 3709504; 442145, 3709505; 442146, 3709506; 442146, 
3709507; 442147, 3709507; 442147, 3709508; 442152, 3709514; 442153, 
3709515; 442154, 3709516; 442154, 3709517; 442155, 3709517; 442155, 
3709518; 442156, 3709519; 442157, 3709519; 442157, 3709520; 442158, 
3709521; 442159, 3709522; 442160, 3709522; 442160, 3709523; 442162, 
3709524; 442162, 3709525; 442164, 3709526; 442164, 3709527; 442165, 
3709528; 442167, 3709529; 442168, 3709530; 442169, 3709531; 442170, 
3709531; 442170, 3709532; 442173, 3709534; 442173, 3709534; 442174, 
3709535; 442176, 3709536; 442177, 3709537; 442178, 3709537; 442179, 
3709538; 442180, 3709539; 442181, 3709539; 442182, 3709540; 442182, 
3709540; 442183, 3709541; 442184, 3709541; 442185, 3709542; 442186, 
3709542; 442187, 3709543; 442187, 3709543; 442189, 3709544; 442190, 
3709545; 442191, 3709545; 442192, 3709546; 442193, 3709546; 442193, 
3709546; 442194, 3709547; 442195, 3709547; 442199, 3709549; 442200, 
3709549; 442202, 3709550; 442202, 3709550; 442203, 3709551; 442206, 
3709551; 442207, 3709552; 442211, 3709553; 442212, 3709553; 442213, 
3709554; 442214, 3709554; 442215, 3709554; 442217, 3709555; 442218, 
3709555; 442220, 3709555; 442221, 3709556; 442222, 3709556; 442223, 
3709556; 442225, 3709556; 442226, 3709556; 442228, 3709557; 442229, 
3709557; 442230, 3709557; 442231, 3709557; 442232, 3709557; 442233, 
3709557; 442234, 3709558; 442236, 3709558; 442237, 3709558; 442238, 
3709558; 442240, 3709558; 442242, 3709558; 442242, 3709558; 442246, 
3709558; 442247, 3709558; 442251, 3709558; 442254, 3709558; 442255, 
3709558; 442257, 3709559; 442258, 3709559; 442261, 3709559; 442263, 
3709559; 442264, 3709559; 442266, 3709559; 442267, 3709559; 442270, 
3709560; 442272, 3709560; 442274, 3709560; 442275, 3709560; 442280, 
3709561; 442281, 3709561; 442283, 3709561; 442293, 3709563; 442295, 
3709563; 442296, 3709563; 442299, 3709564; 442301, 3709564; 442302, 
3709564; 442304, 3709565; 442305, 3709565; 442307, 3709565; 442310, 
3709566; 442311, 3709566; 442313, 3709567; 442314, 3709567; 442320, 
3709569; 442322, 3709569; 442323, 3709570; 442325, 3709570; 442326, 
3709570; 442328, 3709571; 442329, 3709571; 442331, 3709572; 442334, 
3709573; 442335, 3709573; 442338, 3709574; 442339, 3709575; 442341, 
3709575; 442342, 3709576; 442344, 3709576; 442345, 3709577; 442347, 
3709577; 442348, 3709578; 442350, 3709578; 442351, 3709579; 442352, 
3709579; 442354, 3709580; 442355, 3709581; 442357, 3709581; 442358, 
3709582; 442359, 3709582; 442361, 3709583; 442362, 3709584; 442364, 
3709584; 442365, 3709585; 442369, 3709587; 442371, 3709587; 442372, 
3709588; 442374, 3709589; 442375, 3709589; 442376, 3709590; 442380, 
3709592; 442382, 3709593; 442384, 3709594; 442386, 3709595; 442387, 
3709596; 442388, 3709596; 442390, 3709597; 442394, 3709599; 442395, 
3709600; 442396, 3709601; 442398, 3709602; 442399, 3709603; 442400, 
3709603; 442402, 3709604; 442403, 3709605; 442404, 3709606; 442406, 
3709607; 442407, 3709608; 442408, 3709608; 442410, 3709609; 442411, 
3709610; 442412, 3709611; 442413, 3709612; 442415, 3709613; 442416, 
3709614; 442417, 3709614; 442418, 3709615; 442420, 3709616; 442421, 
3709617; 442422, 3709618; 442425, 3709620; 442426, 3709621; 442429, 
3709624; 442431, 3709625; 442432, 3709626; 442433, 3709627; 442434, 
3709627; 442435, 3709628; 442436, 3709629; 442440, 3709632; 442441, 
3709633; 442442, 3709634; 442443, 3709636; 442445, 3709637; 442446, 
3709638; 442447, 3709639; 442448, 3709640; 442449, 3709641; 442450, 
3709642; 442451, 3709643; 442455, 3709646; 442456, 3709647; 442458, 
3709649; 442459, 3709650; 442461, 3709653; 442463, 3709655; 442464, 
3709656; 442467, 3709659; 442468, 3709661; 442471, 3709663; 442471, 
3709664; 442474, 3709666; 442474, 3709668; 442476, 3709669; 442476, 
3709670; 442508, 3709708; 442508, 3709711; 442509, 3709713; 442510, 
3709715; 442510, 3709717; 442511, 3709720; 442511, 3709722; 442512, 
3709724; 442512, 3709726; 442513, 3709729; 442513, 3709731; 442514, 
3709733; 442514, 3709735; 442515, 3709738; 442517, 3709747; 442517, 
3709749; 442518, 3709754; 442518, 3709756; 442520, 3709765; 442521, 
3709767; 442521, 3709772; 442522, 3709774; 442522, 3709776; 442522, 
3709779; 442523, 3709781; 442523, 3709783; 442524, 3709788; 442524, 
3709790; 442524, 3709793; 442525, 3709795; 442526, 3709802; 442526, 
3709804; 442526, 3709806; 442526, 3709809; 442527, 3709811; 442527, 
3709813; 442527, 3709816; 442527, 3709818; 442527, 3709820; 442528, 
3709823; 442528, 3709825; 442528, 3709827; 442528, 3709830; 442528, 
3709832; 442529, 3709834; 442529, 3709837; 442529, 3709841; 442529, 
3709843; 442529, 3709846; 442530, 3709848; 442530, 3709850; 442530, 
3709853; 442530, 3709855; 442530, 3709855; 442536, 3709855; 442536, 
3709827; 442566, 3709827; 442566, 3709823; 442564, 3709810; 442563, 
3709798; 442561, 3709785; 442560, 3709772; 442558, 3709760; 442555, 
3709747; 442553, 3709734; 442550, 3709722; 442547, 3709709; 442544, 
3709697; 442541, 3709685; 442537, 3709672; 442533, 3709660; 442529, 
3709648; 442509, 3709588; 442523, 3709589; 442534, 3709590; 442549, 
3709597; 442563, 3709612; 442616, 3709673; 442624, 3709678; 442631, 
3709681; 442639, 3709683; 442676, 3709686; 442686, 3709687; 442698, 
3709687; 442715, 3709690; 442740, 3709698; 442813, 3709733; 442830, 
3709740; 442855, 3709747; 442885, 3709750; 442941, 3709754; 442987, 
3709764; 443017, 3709779; 443028, 3709786; 443029, 3709799; 443046, 
3709799; 443046, 3709827; 443075, 3709827; 443075, 3709884; 443103, 
3709884; 443103, 3709912; 443132, 3709912; 443132, 3709997; 443160, 
3709997; 443160, 3710111; 443188, 3710111; 443188, 3710281; 443160, 
3710281; 443160, 3710366; 443188, 3710366; 443188, 3710394; 443217, 
3710394; 443217, 3710423; 443245, 3710423; 443245, 3710593; 443273, 
3710593; 443273, 3710678; 443302, 3710678; 443302, 3710735; 443358, 
3710735; 443358, 3710706; 443387, 3710706; 443387, 3710593; 443415, 
3710593; 443415, 3710565; 443444, 3710565; 443444, 3710536; 443469, 
3710536; 443497, 3710181; 443497, 3710179; 443497, 3710177; 443497, 
3710175; 443498, 3710170; 443498, 3710168; 443498, 3710166; 443498, 
3710165; 443499, 3710161; 443499, 3710159; 443500, 3710158; 443500, 
3710156; 443501, 3710154; 443501, 3710153; 443502, 3710151; 443502, 
3710149; 443503, 3710147; 443505, 3710142; 443505, 3710141; 443506, 
3710139; 443507, 3710138; 443508, 3710136; 443508, 3710134; 443509, 
3710133; 443510, 3710131; 443511, 3710130; 443513, 3710127; 443514, 
3710125; 443515, 3710124; 443516, 3710122; 443517, 3710121; 443518, 
3710119; 443519, 3710118; 443520, 3710117; 443521, 3710115; 443523, 
3710114; 443524, 3710113; 443526,

[[Page 396]]

3710110; 443527, 3710109; 443530, 3710106; 443531, 3710105; 443535, 
3710102; 443540, 3710099; 443541, 3710098; 443542, 3710097; 443545, 
3710095; 443547, 3710094; 443549, 3710093; 443550, 3710092; 443552, 
3710091; 443553, 3710091; 443555, 3710090; 443557, 3710089; 443558, 
3710088; 443561, 3710087; 443566, 3710085; 443571, 3710084; 443573, 
3710083; 443575, 3710083; 443577, 3710082; 443578, 3710082; 443580, 
3710082; 443581, 3710082; 443582, 3710081; 443584, 3710081; 443615, 
3710074; 443619, 3710073; 443623, 3710072; 443635, 3710069; 443639, 
3710068; 443642, 3710068; 443642, 3710054; 443699, 3710054; 443699, 
3710026; 443812, 3710026; 443812, 3709997; 443841, 3709997; 443841, 
3709969; 443898, 3709969; 443898, 3709997; 443921, 3709997; 443926, 
3709995; 443926, 3709969; 443954, 3709969; 443954, 3709941; 443983, 
3709941; 443983, 3709912; 444039, 3709912; 444039, 3709884; 444107, 
3709884; 444124, 3709871; 444124, 3709827; 444181, 3709827; 444268, 
3709756; 444272, 3709753; 444276, 3709750; 444280, 3709747; 444288, 
3709741; 444292, 3709738; 444296, 3709735; 444300, 3709732; 444303, 
3709729; 444308, 3709726; 444312, 3709723; 444316, 3709721; 444320, 
3709718; 444324, 3709715; 444328, 3709712; 444341, 3709704; 444345, 
3709701; 444349, 3709699; 444353, 3709696; 444357, 3709694; 444366, 
3709689; 444375, 3709684; 444379, 3709681; 444380, 3709681; 444381, 
3709680; 444383, 3709679; 444384, 3709679; 444385, 3709678; 444388, 
3709677; 444390, 3709676; 444392, 3709676; 444394, 3709675; 444398, 
3709674; 444401, 3709674; 444405, 3709673; 444409, 3709673; 444412, 
3709673; 444414, 3709673; 444415, 3709673; 444421, 3709674; 444422, 
3709674; 444423, 3709674; 444426, 3709675; 444427, 3709675; 444429, 
3709676; 444430, 3709676; 444431, 3709677; 444433, 3709677; 444434, 
3709678; 444435, 3709678; 444437, 3709679; 444438, 3709679; 444439, 
3709680; 444440, 3709681; 444441, 3709681; 444443, 3709682; 444445, 
3709684; 444446, 3709684; 444447, 3709685; 444448, 3709686; 444450, 
3709687; 444451, 3709688; 444453, 3709689; 444467, 3709706; 444477, 
3709717; 444482, 3709723; 444486, 3709728; 444501, 3709745; 444505, 
3709751; 444510, 3709757; 444514, 3709763; 444519, 3709768; 444524, 
3709774; 444528, 3709780; 444533, 3709786; 444537, 3709792; 444542, 
3709798; 444546, 3709803; 444550, 3709809; 444555, 3709815; 444559, 
3709821; 444563, 3709827; 444568, 3709833; 444572, 3709839; 444576, 
3709845; 444578, 3709848; 444578, 3709827; 444607, 3709827; 444607, 
3709799; 444663, 3709799; 444663, 3709770; 444692, 3709770; 444692, 
3709799; 444720, 3709799; 444720, 3709827; 444976, 3709827; 444976, 
3709855; 445004, 3709855; 445004, 3709884; 445032, 3709884; 445032, 
3709912; 445061, 3709912; 445061, 3709969; 445089, 3709969; 445089, 
3710026; 445117, 3710026; 445117, 3710082; 445174, 3710082; 445174, 
3709861; 445158, 3709844; 445123, 3709780; 445062, 3709716; 444929, 
3709558; 444893, 3709515; 444862, 3709515; 444862, 3709430; 444890, 
3709430; 444890, 3709402; 444958, 3709402; 444937, 3709371; 444923, 
3709322; 444931, 3709266; 444956, 3709215; 444963, 3709208; 444974, 
3709204; 445003, 3709188; 445042, 3709164; 445071, 3709147; 445089, 
3709138; 445111, 3709124; 445123, 3709111; 445124, 3709111; 445148, 
3709086; 445156, 3709072; 445157, 3709071; 445172, 3709046; 445198, 
3709001; 445244, 3708962; 445246, 3708960; 445262, 3708945; 445403, 
3708883; 445462, 3708843; 445503, 3708810; 445527, 3708751; 445576, 
3708709; 445615, 3708706; 445663, 3708675; 445751, 3708651; 445803, 
3708641; 445820, 3708637; 445858, 3708626; 445889, 3708629; 445929, 
3708665; 445948, 3708694; 445970, 3708712; 445995, 3708732; 446016, 
3708745; 446043, 3708751; 446080, 3708760; 446114, 3708762; 446169, 
3708758; 446453, 3708744; 446656, 3708739; 446746, 3708737; 446748, 
3708737; 446788, 3708736; 446869, 3708735; 446955, 3708712; 447011, 
3708709; 447059, 3708739; 447106, 3708754; 447236, 3708802; 447294, 
3708829; 447345, 3708949; 447350, 3708960; 447427, 3709026; 447475, 
3709056; 447538, 3709095; 447739, 3709197; 447810, 3709250; 447962, 
3709453; 448000, 3709491; 448031, 3709544; 448032, 3709619; 448035, 
3709768; 448149, 3710304; 448170, 3710404; 448162, 3710451; 448181, 
3710451; 448181, 3710480; 448210, 3710480; 448210, 3710565; 448295, 
3710565; 448295, 3710680; 448923, 3710518; 448929, 3710533; 448935, 
3710548; 448940, 3710563; 448945, 3710578; 448950, 3710593; 448955, 
3710609; 448959, 3710624; 448963, 3710639; 448966, 3710654; 448976, 
3710654; 448979, 3710670; 448983, 3710685; 448986, 3710701; 448988, 
3710715; 448988, 3710715; 448988, 3710715; 449110, 3710714; 449159, 
3710763; 449174, 3710763; 449174, 3710735; 449515, 3710735; 449515, 
3710706; 449628, 3710706; 449628, 3710678; 449656, 3710678; 449656, 
3710650; 449600, 3710650; 449600, 3710621; 449543, 3710621; 449543, 
3710593; 449486, 3710593; 449486, 3710565; 449429, 3710565; 449429, 
3710536; 449344, 3710536; 449344, 3710508; 449288, 3710508; 449288, 
3710480; 449259, 3710480; 449259, 3710423; 449264, 3710423; 449262, 
3710422; 449258, 3710419; 449254, 3710416; 449251, 3710415; 449249, 
3710413; 449247, 3710412; 449242, 3710409; 449240, 3710408; 449238, 
3710407; 449235, 3710406; 449233, 3710404; 449231, 3710403; 449228, 
3710402; 449221, 3710399; 449218, 3710398; 449216, 3710397; 449213, 
3710396; 449211, 3710395; 449209, 3710394; 449206, 3710393; 449203, 
3710392; 449201, 3710391; 449198, 3710391; 449196, 3710390; 449193, 
3710389; 449191, 3710389; 449183, 3710387; 449175, 3710385; 449173, 
3710384; 449170, 3710384; 449167, 3710384; 449165, 3710383; 449162, 
3710383; 449157, 3710382; 449154, 3710382; 449152, 3710382; 449149, 
3710382; 449146, 3710381; 449144, 3710381; 449141, 3710381; 449138, 
3710381; 449130, 3710381; 449125, 3710381; 449123, 3710381; 449120, 
3710381; 449117, 3710381; 449109, 3710382; 449107, 3710382; 449104, 
3710383; 449101, 3710383; 449099, 3710383; 449096, 3710384; 449091, 
3710385; 449089, 3710385; 449089, 3710394; 449057, 3710394; 449055, 
3710395; 449051, 3710397; 449049, 3710398; 449047, 3710399; 449043, 
3710400; 449039, 3710403; 449037, 3710404; 449035, 3710405; 449034, 
3710406; 449032, 3710407; 449028, 3710409; 449026, 3710411; 449024, 
3710412; 449023, 3710413; 449022, 3710413; 449021, 3710414; 449020, 
3710414; 449016, 3710416; 449015, 3710416; 449014, 3710416; 449012, 
3710417; 449011, 3710417; 449010, 3710417; 449008, 3710417; 449008, 
3710417; 449004, 3710417; 449004, 3710417; 449003, 3710417; 449001, 
3710417; 449000, 3710417; 448998, 3710416; 448991, 3710421; 448983, 
3710424; 448972, 3710428; 448960, 3710444; 448960, 3710445; 448959, 
3710445; 448959, 3710445; 448959, 3710446; 448958, 3710446; 448958, 
3710446; 448957, 3710446; 448956, 3710447; 448955, 3710447; 448954, 
3710447; 448954, 3710447; 448953, 3710447; 448953, 3710447; 448952, 
3710446; 448952, 3710446; 448951, 3710446; 448951, 3710446; 448951, 
3710446; 448950, 3710445; 448950,

[[Page 397]]

3710445; 448949, 3710445; 448949, 3710444; 448949, 3710444; 448948, 
3710443; 448948, 3710443; 448948, 3710442; 448948, 3710442; 448947, 
3710441; 448946, 3710440; 448946, 3710440; 448945, 3710439; 448944, 
3710438; 448943, 3710438; 448942, 3710437; 448941, 3710437; 448940, 
3710436; 448937, 3710434; 448936, 3710434; 448935, 3710433; 448934, 
3710433; 448933, 3710433; 448932, 3710433; 448931, 3710432; 448930, 
3710432; 448929, 3710432; 448928, 3710432; 448927, 3710431; 448926, 
3710431; 448924, 3710431; 448920, 3710431; 448918, 3710431; 448917, 
3710431; 448915, 3710432; 448913, 3710432; 448913, 3710432; 448911, 
3710432; 448911, 3710433; 448909, 3710433; 448908, 3710434; 448907, 
3710434; 448905, 3710435; 448904, 3710436; 448903, 3710436; 448902, 
3710437; 448871, 3710452; 448847, 3710468; 448836, 3710466; 448824, 
3710464; 448808, 3710460; 448799, 3710460; 448763, 3710454; 448734, 
3710449; 448721, 3710449; 448706, 3710446; 448685, 3710439; 448676, 
3710437; 448651, 3710424; 448632, 3710411; 448621, 3710397; 448615, 
3710387; 448609, 3710373; 448603, 3710362; 448597, 3710347; 448589, 
3710333; 448584, 3710322; 448565, 3710291; 448561, 3710289; 448556, 
3710283; 448540, 3710265; 448528, 3710249; 448521, 3710237; 448513, 
3710227; 448497, 3710202; 448486, 3710187; 448474, 3710172; 448465, 
3710157; 448458, 3710145; 448452, 3710134; 448433, 3710106; 448425, 
3710097; 448418, 3710086; 448413, 3710082; 448396, 3710061; 448376, 
3710040; 448362, 3710028; 448347, 3710011; 448340, 3710003; 448333, 
3709991; 448323, 3709978; 448315, 3709961; 448304, 3709944; 448297, 
3709932; 448293, 3709921; 448285, 3709908; 448280, 3709898; 448272, 
3709879; 448270, 3709878; 448269, 3709878; 448269, 3709878; 448269, 
3709878; 448268, 3709878; 448268, 3709878; 448268, 3709878; 448267, 
3709877; 448267, 3709877; 448267, 3709877; 448266, 3709877; 448266, 
3709877; 448266, 3709876; 448266, 3709876; 448265, 3709876; 448265, 
3709875; 448265, 3709875; 448264, 3709872; 448263, 3709869; 448262, 
3709866; 448261, 3709864; 448260, 3709861; 448256, 3709849; 448255, 
3709846; 448255, 3709843; 448254, 3709840; 448253, 3709837; 448252, 
3709834; 448251, 3709828; 448250, 3709825; 448250, 3709822; 448247, 
3709805; 448243, 3709787; 448240, 3709769; 448237, 3709751; 448233, 
3709734; 448233, 3709732; 448233, 3709731; 448232, 3709729; 448232, 
3709728; 448231, 3709725; 448231, 3709724; 448230, 3709721; 448229, 
3709720; 448229, 3709719; 448227, 3709716; 448227, 3709715; 448226, 
3709714; 448225, 3709712; 448225, 3709711; 448224, 3709710; 448223, 
3709709; 448222, 3709707; 448222, 3709706; 448220, 3709704; 448219, 
3709703; 448218, 3709702; 448217, 3709701; 448216, 3709700; 448215, 
3709699; 448214, 3709698; 448212, 3709696; 448209, 3709693; 448208, 
3709692; 448207, 3709691; 448204, 3709690; 448202, 3709688; 448198, 
3709686; 448198, 3709686; 448197, 3709685; 448197, 3709685; 448196, 
3709684; 448195, 3709684; 448195, 3709683; 448195, 3709683; 448194, 
3709683; 448194, 3709682; 448194, 3709682; 448193, 3709680; 448193, 
3709679; 448192, 3709679; 448192, 3709678; 448192, 3709678; 448192, 
3709677; 448192, 3709674; 448191, 3709670; 448190, 3709665; 448189, 
3709660; 448188, 3709656; 448187, 3709651; 448186, 3709647; 448185, 
3709642; 448181, 3709628; 448180, 3709624; 448177, 3709614; 448176, 
3709611; 448174, 3709605; 448173, 3709602; 448171, 3709596; 448170, 
3709593; 448167, 3709587; 448165, 3709581; 448162, 3709575; 448161, 
3709572; 448160, 3709569; 448158, 3709566; 448157, 3709563; 448154, 
3709557; 448152, 3709554; 448152, 3709554; 448152, 3709553; 448151, 
3709553; 448151, 3709552; 448151, 3709552; 448150, 3709551; 448150, 
3709551; 448149, 3709550; 448149, 3709550; 448148, 3709549; 448148, 
3709549; 448145, 3709548; 448144, 3709547; 448143, 3709547; 448142, 
3709547; 448141, 3709547; 448140, 3709547; 448140, 3709546; 448139, 
3709546; 448139, 3709546; 448139, 3709546; 448138, 3709546; 448138, 
3709545; 448137, 3709545; 448137, 3709545; 448137, 3709544; 448135, 
3709543; 448135, 3709542; 448134, 3709540; 448134, 3709540; 448134, 
3709537; 448134, 3709537; 448135, 3709507; 448134, 3709505; 448134, 
3709503; 448134, 3709499; 448134, 3709497; 448134, 3709493; 448133, 
3709489; 448133, 3709487; 448132, 3709483; 448132, 3709481; 448131, 
3709479; 448131, 3709477; 448130, 3709475; 448130, 3709473; 448130, 
3709471; 448129, 3709470; 448127, 3709464; 448124, 3709453; 448123, 
3709448; 448121, 3709442; 448120, 3709437; 448118, 3709431; 448118, 
3709429; 448117, 3709428; 448117, 3709427; 448117, 3709426; 448116, 
3709423; 448115, 3709422; 448115, 3709421; 448114, 3709420; 448112, 
3709417; 448112, 3709416; 448111, 3709415; 448110, 3709415; 448109, 
3709413; 448108, 3709412; 448107, 3709411; 448106, 3709410; 448099, 
3709400; 448095, 3709395; 448092, 3709390; 448080, 3709375; 448077, 
3709370; 448073, 3709365; 448069, 3709360; 448065, 3709355; 448061, 
3709350; 448053, 3709340; 448049, 3709335; 448045, 3709330; 448041, 
3709325; 448037, 3709319; 448032, 3709314; 448028, 3709309; 448023, 
3709304; 448019, 3709298; 448017, 3709297; 448016, 3709295; 448015, 
3709294; 448014, 3709292; 448013, 3709291; 448011, 3709289; 448010, 
3709287; 448009, 3709286; 448006, 3709281; 448005, 3709279; 448004, 
3709277; 448003, 3709276; 448000, 3709270; 447999, 3709268; 447998, 
3709267; 447997, 3709265; 447997, 3709263; 447996, 3709261; 447995, 
3709259; 447994, 3709257; 447994, 3709256; 447993, 3709253; 447991, 
3709250; 447985, 3709235; 447984, 3709232; 447983, 3709229; 447982, 
3709227; 447980, 3709224; 447979, 3709221; 447977, 3709218; 447976, 
3709215; 447974, 3709213; 447974, 3709211; 447973, 3709210; 447972, 
3709209; 447971, 3709205; 447970, 3709202; 447969, 3709200; 447969, 
3709199; 447968, 3709197; 447968, 3709196; 447968, 3709195; 447967, 
3709193; 447967, 3709190; 447966, 3709189; 447966, 3709187; 447966, 
3709184; 447966, 3709183; 447965, 3709175; 447964, 3709171; 447964, 
3709168; 447963, 3709164; 447962, 3709160; 447961, 3709152; 447960, 
3709149; 447959, 3709141; 447958, 3709137; 447957, 3709133; 447956, 
3709130; 447955, 3709126; 447955, 3709124; 447954, 3709123; 447954, 
3709121; 447953, 3709119; 447951, 3709114; 447950, 3709113; 447950, 
3709111; 447949, 3709109; 447948, 3709108; 447947, 3709104; 447946, 
3709103; 447945, 3709101; 447942, 3709097; 447939, 3709091; 447935, 
3709086; 447932, 3709081; 447922, 3709065; 447918, 3709060; 447911, 
3709049; 447907, 3709044; 447904, 3709039; 447903, 3709037; 447898, 
3709032; 447897, 3709030; 447894, 3709026; 447893, 3709025; 447891, 
3709023; 447890, 3709021; 447888, 3709019; 447886, 3709018; 447885, 
3709016; 447883, 3709015; 447882, 3709013; 447880, 3709011; 447878, 
3709010; 447877, 3709008; 447876, 3709007; 447875, 3709006; 447873, 
3709004; 447872, 3709003; 447871, 3709002; 447870, 3709001; 447870, 
3709000; 447868, 3708996; 447868, 3708995; 447867, 3708994; 447867, 
3708993; 447866, 3708992; 447866,

[[Page 398]]

3708991; 447865, 3708990; 447865, 3708989; 447865, 3708987; 447864, 
3708986; 447864, 3708985; 447864, 3708984; 447864, 3708983; 447863, 
3708981; 447863, 3708980; 447863, 3708979; 447863, 3708978; 447863, 
3708976; 447863, 3708975; 447863, 3708974; 447864, 3708972; 447864, 
3708972; 447864, 3708971; 447864, 3708970; 447866, 3708967; 447866, 
3708966; 447866, 3708966; 447867, 3708965; 447867, 3708964; 447868, 
3708964; 447868, 3708963; 447869, 3708962; 447869, 3708961; 447870, 
3708961; 447870, 3708960; 447870, 3708959; 447870, 3708959; 447870, 
3708958; 447871, 3708957; 447871, 3708956; 447871, 3708952; 447871, 
3708952; 447871, 3708951; 447871, 3708950; 447870, 3708949; 447870, 
3708948; 447869, 3708947; 447869, 3708945; 447868, 3708944; 447868, 
3708942; 447866, 3708939; 447865, 3708938; 447865, 3708936; 447864, 
3708935; 447863, 3708933; 447861, 3708930; 447860, 3708929; 447859, 
3708927; 447858, 3708926; 447857, 3708925; 447856, 3708923; 447853, 
3708919; 447852, 3708918; 447851, 3708917; 447850, 3708916; 447848, 
3708914; 447847, 3708913; 447845, 3708911; 447844, 3708910; 447842, 
3708909; 447841, 3708908; 447840, 3708907; 447838, 3708906; 447837, 
3708905; 447836, 3708904; 447834, 3708903; 447833, 3708902; 447831, 
3708901; 447830, 3708900; 447829, 3708900; 447895, 3708806; 447812, 
3708806; 447812, 3708777; 447784, 3708777; 447784, 3708749; 447756, 
3708749; 447756, 3708721; 447727, 3708721; 447727, 3708692; 447699, 
3708692; 447699, 3708579; 447727, 3708579; 447727, 3708550; 447756, 
3708550; 447756, 3708522; 447784, 3708522; 447784, 3708465; 447756, 
3708465; 447756, 3708324; 447727, 3708324; 447727, 3708380; 447699, 
3708380; 447699, 3708409; 447671, 3708409; 447671, 3708437; 447642, 
3708437; 447642, 3708465; 447557, 3708465; 447557, 3708437; 447529, 
3708437; 447529, 3708409; returning to 447500, 3708409.
    (iv) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 449399, 
3714186; 449414, 3714181; 449414, 3714181; 449414, 3714181; 449415, 
3714181; 449543, 3714135; 449543, 3714111; 449515, 3714111; 449515, 
3714054; 449486, 3714054; 449486, 3713997; 449515, 3713997; 449515, 
3713969; 449486, 3713969; 449486, 3713912; 449458, 3713912; 449458, 
3713799; 449401, 3713799; 449401, 3713742; 449373, 3713742; 449373, 
3713714; 449344, 3713714; 449344, 3713657; 449316, 3713657; 449316, 
3713515; 449288, 3713515; 449288, 3713316; 449259, 3713316; 449259, 
3713288; 449203, 3713288; 449203, 3713264; 449189, 3713262; 449095, 
3713281; 449077, 3713285; 449383, 3714147; returning to 449399, 3714186.
    (v) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 460039, 
3719671; 460039, 3719643; 460011, 3719643; 460011, 3719558; 459983, 
3719558; 459983, 3719529; 459954, 3719529; 459954, 3719501; 459926, 
3719501; 459926, 3719473; 459869, 3719473; 459869, 3719387; 459841, 
3719387; 459841, 3719302; 459813, 3719302; 459813, 3719189; 459784, 
3719189; 459784, 3719132; 459727, 3719132; 459727, 3719160; 459699, 
3719160; 459699, 3719217; 459671, 3719217; 459671, 3719274; 459586, 
3719274; 459586, 3719246; 459557, 3719246; 459557, 3719132; 459529, 
3719132; 459529, 3719104; 459500, 3719104; 459500, 3719047; 459472, 
3719047; 459472, 3719019; 459444, 3719019; 459444, 3718962; 459415, 
3718962; 459415, 3718934; 459387, 3718934; 459387, 3718905; 459359, 
3718905; 459359, 3718877; 459330, 3718877; 459330, 3718848; 459302, 
3718848; 459302, 3718820; 459274, 3718820; 459274, 3718763; 459103, 
3718763; 459103, 3718735; 459075, 3718735; 459075, 3718707; 459047, 
3718707; 459047, 3718678; 459018, 3718678; 459018, 3718650; 458990, 
3718650; 458990, 3718593; 458933, 3718593; 458933, 3718565; 458905, 
3718565; 458905, 3718593; 458848, 3718593; 458848, 3718621; 458820, 
3718621; 458820, 3718593; 458734, 3718593; 458734, 3718565; 458678, 
3718565; 458678, 3718536; 458649, 3718536; 458649, 3718508; 458593, 
3718508; 458593, 3718480; 458564, 3718480; 458564, 3718451; 458536, 
3718451; 458536, 3718423; 458508, 3718423; 458508, 3718451; 458479, 
3718451; 458479, 3718366; 458451, 3718366; 458451, 3718281; 458422, 
3718281; 458422, 3718253; 458366, 3718253; 458366, 3718224; 458337, 
3718224; 458337, 3718196; 458309, 3718196; 458309, 3718168; 458195, 
3718168; 458195, 3718196; 458139, 3718196; 458139, 3718224; 458054, 
3718224; 458054, 3718196; 458025, 3718196; 458025, 3718168; 457883, 
3718168; 457883, 3718196; 457855, 3718196; 457855, 3718224; 457713, 
3718224; 457713, 3718196; 457656, 3718196; 457656, 3718168; 457628, 
3718168; 457628, 3718139; 457515, 3718139; 457515, 3718111; 457486, 
3718111; 457486, 3718082; 457430, 3718082; 457430, 3718054; 457373, 
3718054; 457373, 3718026; 457344, 3718026; 457344, 3717855; 457316, 
3717855; 457316, 3717770; 457288, 3717770; 457288, 3717714; 457259, 
3717714; 457259, 3717685; 457231, 3717685; 457231, 3717629; 457203, 
3717629; 457203, 3717572; 457174, 3717572; 457174, 3717487; 457146, 
3717487; 457146, 3717458; 457117, 3717458; 457117, 3717487; 457089, 
3717487; 457089, 3717515; 457061, 3717515; 457061, 3717543; 457032, 
3717543; 456976, 3717543; 456976, 3717515; 456947, 3717515; 456947, 
3717487; 456919, 3717487; 456919, 3717260; 456947, 3717260; 456947, 
3717203; 456862, 3717203; 456862, 3717175; 456834, 3717175; 456834, 
3717146; 456692, 3717146; 456692, 3717175; 456664, 3717175; 456664, 
3717146; 456635, 3717146; 456635, 3717175; 456550, 3717175; 456550, 
3717146; 456493, 3717146; 456493, 3717118; 456465, 3717118; 456465, 
3716976; 456380, 3716976; 456380, 3716948; 456323, 3716948; 456323, 
3716976; 456238, 3716976; 456238, 3717004; 456210, 3717004; 456210, 
3717033; 456181, 3717033; 456181, 3717061; 456153, 3717061; 456153, 
3717033; 456096, 3717033; 456096, 3717004; 455926, 3717004; 455926, 
3717033; 455812, 3717033; 455812, 3716948; 455756, 3716948; 455756, 
3716976; 455727, 3716976; 455727, 3717004; 455699, 3717004; 455699, 
3717061; 455642, 3717061; 455642, 3717118; 455614, 3717118; 455614, 
3717146; 455586, 3717146; 455586, 3717175; 455557, 3717175; 455557, 
3717316; 455472, 3717316; 455472, 3717288; 455415, 3717288; 455415, 
3717316; 455359, 3717316; 455359, 3717345; 455273, 3717345; 455273, 
3717373; 455188, 3717373; 455188, 3717402; 455075, 3717402; 455075, 
3717373; 455047, 3717373; 455047, 3717288; 454990, 3717288; 454990, 
3717260; 454706, 3717260; 454706, 3717231; 454649, 3717231; 454649, 
3717203; 454621, 3717203; 454621, 3717175; 454564, 3717175; 454564, 
3717146; 454536, 3717146; 454536, 3717175; 454394, 3717175; 454394, 
3717118; 454366, 3717118; 454366, 3717090; 454309, 3717090; 454309, 
3717061; 454252, 3717061; 454252, 3717090; 454139, 3717090; 454139, 
3717118; 454054, 3717118; 454054, 3717090; 454025, 3717090; 454025, 
3717033; 453883, 3717033; 453883, 3716948; 453855, 3716948; 453855, 
3716919; 453827, 3716919; 453827, 3716891; 453798, 3716891; 453798, 
3716863; 453770, 3716863; 453770, 3716834; 453713,

[[Page 399]]

3716834; 453713, 3716806; 453656, 3716806; 453656, 3716834; 453571, 
3716834; 453571, 3716863; 453515, 3716863; 453515, 3716834; 453486, 
3716834; 453486, 3716806; 453458, 3716806; 453458, 3716749; 453344, 
3716749; 453344, 3716721; 453316, 3716721; 453316, 3716692; 453231, 
3716692; 453231, 3716721; 453146, 3716721; 453146, 3716749; 453061, 
3716749; 453061, 3716777; 453032, 3716777; 453032, 3716806; 453004, 
3716806; 453004, 3716834; 452890, 3716834; 452890, 3716806; 452834, 
3716806; 452834, 3716777; 452805, 3716777; 452805, 3716749; 452777, 
3716749; 452777, 3716777; 452749, 3716777; 452749, 3716806; 452692, 
3716806; 452692, 3716834; 452635, 3716834; 452635, 3716863; 452594, 
3716863; 452592, 3717090; 452607, 3717090; 452607, 3717061; 452692, 
3717061; 452692, 3717033; 452720, 3717033; 452720, 3717004; 452890, 
3717004; 452890, 3716976; 453032, 3716976; 453032, 3716948; 453089, 
3716948; 453089, 3716919; 453146, 3716919; 453146, 3716891; 453174, 
3716891; 453174, 3716863; 453231, 3716863; 453231, 3716834; 453259, 
3716834; 453259, 3716863; 453288, 3716863; 453288, 3716834; 453373, 
3716834; 453373, 3716891; 453401, 3716891; 453401, 3716919; 453429, 
3716919; 453429, 3716948; 453486, 3716948; 453486, 3716976; 453543, 
3716976; 453543, 3716948; 453685, 3716948; 453685, 3716976; 453713, 
3716976; 453713, 3717004; 453742, 3717004; 453742, 3717061; 453770, 
3717061; 453770, 3717175; 453827, 3717175; 453827, 3717203; 453912, 
3717203; 453912, 3717260; 453940, 3717260; 453940, 3717288; 454054, 
3717288; 454054, 3717316; 454082, 3717316; 454082, 3717288; 454139, 
3717288; 454139, 3717231; 454167, 3717231; 454167, 3717203; 454224, 
3717203; 454224, 3717175; 454281, 3717175; 454281, 3717231; 454309, 
3717231; 454309, 3717316; 454337, 3717316; 454337, 3717373; 454394, 
3717373; 454394, 3717402; 454422, 3717402; 454422, 3717430; 454479, 
3717430; 454479, 3717402; 454508, 3717402; 454508, 3717373; 454536, 
3717373; 454536, 3717316; 454593, 3717316; 454593, 3717345; 454649, 
3717345; 454649, 3717373; 454678, 3717373; 454678, 3717430; 454649, 
3717430; 454649, 3717515; 454706, 3717515; 454706, 3717487; 454734, 
3717487; 454734, 3717458; 454763, 3717458; 454763, 3717430; 454791, 
3717430; 454791, 3717402; 454876, 3717402; 454876, 3717430; 454905, 
3717430; 454905, 3717458; 454961, 3717458; 454961, 3717487; 454990, 
3717487; 454990, 3717515; 455047, 3717515; 455047, 3717543; 455075, 
3717543; 455075, 3717572; 455217, 3717572; 455217, 3717543; 455245, 
3717543; 455245, 3717515; 455387, 3717515; 455387, 3717487; 455415, 
3717487; 455415, 3717458; 455472, 3717458; 455472, 3717487; 455529, 
3717487; 455529, 3717515; 455557, 3717515; 455557, 3717487; 455642, 
3717487; 455642, 3717458; 455671, 3717458; 455671, 3717430; 455699, 
3717430; 455699, 3717260; 455756, 3717260; 455756, 3717231; 455784, 
3717231; 455784, 3717203; 455841, 3717203; 455841, 3717175; 455926, 
3717175; 455926, 3717146; 456011, 3717146; 456011, 3717118; 456039, 
3717118; 456039, 3717146; 456096, 3717146; 456096, 3717175; 456125, 
3717175; 456125, 3717203; 456181, 3717203; 456181, 3717175; 456238, 
3717175; 456238, 3717146; 456266, 3717146; 456266, 3717118; 456295, 
3717118; 456295, 3717090; 456351, 3717090; 456351, 3717231; 456380, 
3717231; 456380, 3717260; 456408, 3717260; 456408, 3717288; 456465, 
3717288; 456465, 3717316; 456522, 3717316; 456578, 3717316; 456578, 
3717288; 456749, 3717288; 456749, 3717316; 456777, 3717316; 456777, 
3717345; 456805, 3717345; 456805, 3717458; 456777, 3717458; 456777, 
3717572; 456805, 3717572; 456805, 3717629; 456834, 3717629; 456834, 
3717657; 456891, 3717657; 456891, 3717685; 457089, 3717685; 457089, 
3717855; 457117, 3717855; 457117, 3717884; 457146, 3717884; 457146, 
3718026; 457174, 3718026; 457174, 3718082; 457203, 3718082; 457203, 
3718168; 457231, 3718168; 457231, 3718196; 457259, 3718196; 457259, 
3718281; 457316, 3718281; 457316, 3718309; 457373, 3718309; 457373, 
3718253; 457344, 3718253; 457344, 3718224; 457486, 3718224; 457486, 
3718253; 457543, 3718253; 457543, 3718281; 457571, 3718281; 457571, 
3718309; 457656, 3718309; 457656, 3718338; 457713, 3718338; 457713, 
3718366; 457997, 3718366; 457997, 3718394; 458082, 3718394; 458082, 
3718423; 458167, 3718423; 458167, 3718394; 458195, 3718394; 458195, 
3718366; 458224, 3718366; 458224, 3718338; 458252, 3718338; 458252, 
3718394; 458309, 3718394; 458309, 3718423; 458337, 3718423; 458337, 
3718565; 458366, 3718565; 458366, 3718593; 458394, 3718593; 458394, 
3718621; 458479, 3718621; 458479, 3718650; 458508, 3718650; 458508, 
3718678; 458536, 3718678; 458536, 3718735; 458649, 3718735; 458649, 
3718763; 458706, 3718763; 458706, 3718792; 458734, 3718792; 458734, 
3718820; 458763, 3718820; 458763, 3718848; 458791, 3718848; 458791, 
3718877; 458848, 3718877; 458848, 3718905; 458933, 3718905; 458933, 
3718934; 459018, 3718934; 459018, 3718905; 459047, 3718905; 459047, 
3718934; 459103, 3718934; 459103, 3718962; 459188, 3718962; 459188, 
3718990; 459245, 3718990; 459245, 3719047; 459274, 3719047; 459274, 
3719104; 459302, 3719104; 459302, 3719132; 459330, 3719132; 459330, 
3719160; 459359, 3719160; 459359, 3719274; 459387, 3719274; 459387, 
3719331; 459415, 3719331; 459415, 3719359; 459444, 3719359; 459444, 
3719416; 459472, 3719416; 459472, 3719444; 459500, 3719444; 459500, 
3719473; 459529, 3719473; 459529, 3719501; 459557, 3719501; 459557, 
3719529; 459586, 3719529; 459586, 3719671; 459614, 3719671; 459614, 
3719785; 459671, 3719785; 459671, 3719756; 459699, 3719756; 459699, 
3719728; 459727, 3719728; 459727, 3719699; 459756, 3719699; 459756, 
3719671; 459784, 3719671; 459784, 3719699; 459813, 3719699; 459813, 
3719728; 459869, 3719728; 459869, 3719756; 459926, 3719756; 459926, 
3719785; 459954, 3719785; 459954, 3719813; 459983, 3719813; 459983, 
3719841; 460011, 3719841; 460011, 3719898; 460039, 3719898; 460039, 
3719926; 460068, 3719926; 460068, 3719955; 460096, 3719955; 460096, 
3719983; 460125, 3719983; 460125, 3720012; 460153, 3720012; 460153, 
3720040; 460210, 3720040; 460210, 3719898; 460181, 3719898; 460181, 
3719841; 460153, 3719841; 460153, 3719756; 460125, 3719756; 460125, 
3719728; 460096, 3719728; 460096, 3719671; returning to 460039, 3719671.
    (vi) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 447671, 
3720125; 447642, 3720125; 447642, 3720153; 447671, 3720153; returning to 
447671, 3720125;
    (vii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 447671, 
3720125; 447727, 3720125; 447727, 3720182; 447756, 3720182; 447756, 
3720238; 447727, 3720238; 447727, 3720375; 447784, 3720486; 447784, 
3720465; 447812, 3720465; 447812, 3720437; 447841, 3720437; 447841, 
3720409; 447926, 3720409; 447926, 3720437; 447954, 3720437; 447954, 
3720465; 447983, 3720465; 447983, 3720494; 448011, 3720494; 448011, 
3720522; 448039, 3720522; 448039,

[[Page 400]]

3720579; 448068, 3720579; 448068, 3720607; 448096, 3720607; 448096, 
3720664; 448124, 3720664; 448124, 3720692; 448153, 3720692; 448153, 
3720721; 448181, 3720721; 448181, 3720749; 448210, 3720749; 448210, 
3720777; 448238, 3720777; 448238, 3720806; 448266, 3720806; 448266, 
3720834; 448295, 3720834; 448295, 3720891; 448323, 3720891; 448323, 
3720948; 448351, 3720948; 448351, 3721118; 448380, 3721118; 448380, 
3721203; 448408, 3721203; 448408, 3721231; 448465, 3721231; 448465, 
3721402; 448437, 3721402; 448437, 3721458; 448408, 3721458; 448408, 
3721543; 448380, 3721543; 448380, 3721685; 448408, 3721685; 448408, 
3721742; 448437, 3721742; 448437, 3721770; 448380, 3721770; 448380, 
3721884; 448351, 3721884; 448351, 3721912; 448380, 3721912; 448380, 
3721969; 448408, 3721969; 448408, 3722196; 448437, 3722196; 448437, 
3722281; 448465, 3722281; 448465, 3722338; 448437, 3722338; 448437, 
3722366; 448408, 3722366; 448408, 3722383; 448437, 3722453; 448437, 
3722451; 448550, 3722451; 448550, 3722480; 448607, 3722480; 448607, 
3722508; 448635, 3722508; 448635, 3722565; 448664, 3722565; 448664, 
3722621; 448607, 3722621; 448607, 3722848; 448635, 3722848; 448635, 
3722990; 448607, 3722990; 448607, 3723047; 448635, 3723047; 448635, 
3723189; 448692, 3723189; 448692, 3723246; 448720, 3723246; 448720, 
3723302; 448749, 3723302; 448749, 3723359; 448777, 3723359; 448777, 
3723416; 448805, 3723416; 448805, 3723444; 448777, 3723444; 448777, 
3723529; 448805, 3723529; 448805, 3723636; 448808, 3723636; 448814, 
3724012; 448890, 3724012; 448890, 3724040; 448919, 3724040; 448919, 
3724068; 448947, 3724068; 448947, 3724097; 448976, 3724097; 448976, 
3724125; 449061, 3724125; 449061, 3724153; 449117, 3724153; 449117, 
3724182; 449146, 3724182; 449146, 3724210; 449231, 3724210; 449231, 
3724182; 449259, 3724182; 449288, 3724182; 449288, 3724210; 449373, 
3724210; 449373, 3724182; 449401, 3724182; 449401, 3724068; 449373, 
3724068; 449373, 3724040; 449344, 3724040; 449344, 3724068; 449316, 
3724068; 449316, 3724097; 449203, 3724097; 449203, 3724068; 449174, 
3724068; 449174, 3724040; 449117, 3724040; 449117, 3724012; 449004, 
3724012; 449004, 3723955; 448976, 3723955; 448976, 3723898; 448919, 
3723898; 448919, 3723813; 448890, 3723813; 448890, 3723756; 448919, 
3723756; 448919, 3723728; 448947, 3723728; 448947, 3723699; 448919, 
3723699; 448919, 3723416; 448890, 3723416; 448890, 3723274; 448862, 
3723274; 448862, 3723217; 448834, 3723217; 448834, 3723189; 448805, 
3723189; 448805, 3723160; 448834, 3723160; 448834, 3723132; 448805, 
3723132; 448805, 3723075; 448777, 3723075; 448777, 3723047; 448749, 
3723047; 448749, 3722792; 448777, 3722792; 448777, 3722735; 448805, 
3722735; 448805, 3722707; 448834, 3722707; 448834, 3722735; 448919, 
3722735; 448919, 3722763; 448947, 3722763; 448947, 3722792; 448976, 
3722792; 448976, 3722820; 449032, 3722820; 449032, 3722848; 449089, 
3722848; 449089, 3722905; 449117, 3722905; 449117, 3722962; 449146, 
3722962; 449146, 3722990; 449174, 3722990; 449174, 3723019; 449231, 
3723019; 449231, 3723104; 449259, 3723104; 449259, 3723132; 449288, 
3723132; 449288, 3723160; 449316, 3723160; 449316, 3723189; 449344, 
3723189; 449344, 3723217; 449373, 3723217; 449373, 3723274; 449401, 
3723274; 449401, 3723302; 449486, 3723302; 449486, 3723444; 449515, 
3723444; 449515, 3723529; 449656, 3723529; 449656, 3723586; 449685, 
3723586; 449685, 3723614; 449713, 3723614; 449713, 3723643; 449742, 
3723643; 449742, 3723671; 449770, 3723671; 449770, 3723728; 449798, 
3723728; 449798, 3723785; 449827, 3723785; 449827, 3723813; 449855, 
3723813; 449855, 3723898; 449883, 3723898; 449883, 3724012; 449912, 
3724012; 449912, 3724125; 449883, 3724125; 449883, 3724182; 449997, 
3724182; 449997, 3724153; 450082, 3724153; 450082, 3724125; 450167, 
3724125; 450167, 3724097; 450110, 3724097; 450110, 3724068; 450082, 
3724068; 450082, 3724040; 450054, 3724040; 450054, 3724012; 450025, 
3724012; 450025, 3723955; 449997, 3723955; 449997, 3723898; 449968, 
3723898; 449968, 3723785; 449940, 3723785; 449940, 3723699; 449912, 
3723699; 449912, 3723671; 449883, 3723671; 449883, 3723614; 449855, 
3723614; 449855, 3723586; 449827, 3723586; 449827, 3723558; 449798, 
3723558; 449798, 3723529; 449770, 3723529; 449770, 3723501; 449742, 
3723501; 449742, 3723444; 449713, 3723444; 449713, 3723416; 449656, 
3723416; 449656, 3723387; 449628, 3723387; 449628, 3723274; 449600, 
3723274; 449600, 3723246; 449628, 3723246; 449628, 3723217; 449571, 
3723217; 449571, 3723189; 449515, 3723189; 449515, 3723160; 449486, 
3723160; 449486, 3723132; 449458, 3723132; 449458, 3723104; 449429, 
3723104; 449429, 3723075; 449373, 3723075; 449373, 3722990; 449344, 
3722990; 449344, 3722934; 449288, 3722934; 449288, 3722905; 449259, 
3722905; 449259, 3722820; 449231, 3722820; 449231, 3722792; 449203, 
3722792; 449203, 3722763; 449117, 3722763; 449117, 3722735; 449061, 
3722735; 449061, 3722707; 449004, 3722707; 449004, 3722678; 448976, 
3722678; 448976, 3722650; 448919, 3722650; 448919, 3722621; 448890, 
3722621; 448890, 3722593; 448834, 3722593; 448834, 3722508; 448862, 
3722508; 448862, 3722395; 448834, 3722395; 448834, 3722366; 448805, 
3722366; 448805, 3722338; 448777, 3722338; 448777, 3722281; 448749, 
3722281; 448749, 3722253; 448720, 3722253; 448720, 3722168; 448692, 
3722168; 448692, 3722139; 448635, 3722139; 448635, 3722111; 448607, 
3722111; 448607, 3722054; 448578, 3722054; 448578, 3722026; 448607, 
3722026; 448607, 3721997; 448607, 3721884; 448578, 3721884; 448578, 
3721487; 448635, 3721487; 448635, 3721402; 448664, 3721402; 448664, 
3721231; 448692, 3721231; 448692, 3721175; 448720, 3721175; 448720, 
3721146; 448692, 3721146; 448692, 3721090; 448664, 3721090; 448664, 
3720976; 448635, 3720976; 448635, 3720948; 448607, 3720948; 448607, 
3720863; 448578, 3720863; 448578, 3720777; 448522, 3720777; 448522, 
3720749; 448465, 3720749; 448465, 3720721; 448437, 3720721; 448437, 
3720664; 448408, 3720664; 448408, 3720636; 448437, 3720636; 448437, 
3720607; 448493, 3720607; 448493, 3720579; 448465, 3720579; 448465, 
3720551; 448437, 3720551; 448437, 3720522; 448323, 3720522; 448323, 
3720551; 448295, 3720551; 448295, 3720522; 448266, 3720522; 448266, 
3720465; 448238, 3720465; 448238, 3720437; 448210, 3720437; 448210, 
3720409; 448181, 3720409; 448181, 3720324; 448153, 3720324; 448153, 
3720295; 448124, 3720295; 448124, 3720238; 448096, 3720238; 448096, 
3720210; 448011, 3720210; 448011, 3720182; 447983, 3720182; 447983, 
3720068; 447954, 3720068; 447954, 3719983; 447983, 3719983; 447983, 
3719870; 447954, 3719870; 447954, 3719813; 447926, 3719813; 447926, 
3719728; 447898, 3719728; 447898, 3719643; 447869, 3719643; 447869, 
3719473; 447898, 3719473; 447898, 3719416; 447869, 3719416; 447869, 
3719331; 447841, 3719331; 447841, 3719132; 447812, 3719132; 447812, 
3718905; 447784, 3718905; 447784, 3718678; 447841, 3718678; 447841, 
3718621; 447812, 3718621; 447812,

[[Page 401]]

3718593; 447784, 3718593; 447784, 3718508; 447756, 3718508; 447756, 
3718480; 447727, 3718480; 447727, 3718253; 447699, 3718253; 447699, 
3717855; 447756, 3717855; 447756, 3717799; 447727, 3717799; 447727, 
3717770; 447671, 3717770; 447671, 3717600; 447642, 3717600; 447642, 
3717316; 447614, 3717316; 447614, 3717288; 447585, 3717288; 447585, 
3717260; 447614, 3717260; 447614, 3717203; 447585, 3717203; 447585, 
3717146; 447557, 3717146; 447557, 3717061; 447529, 3717061; 447529, 
3716834; 447500, 3716834; 447500, 3716551; 447472, 3716551; 447472, 
3716352; 447444, 3716352; 447444, 3716267; 447500, 3716267; 447500, 
3716295; 447529, 3716295; 447529, 3716324; 447557, 3716324; 447557, 
3716352; 447614, 3716352; 447614, 3716380; 447671, 3716380; 447671, 
3716409; 447756, 3716409; 447756, 3716380; 447727, 3716380; 447727, 
3716324; 447699, 3716324; 447699, 3716267; 447671, 3716267; 447671, 
3716238; 447642, 3716238; 447642, 3716210; 447614, 3716210; 447614, 
3716153; 447585, 3716153; 447585, 3716125; 447557, 3716125; 447557, 
3716097; 447529, 3716097; 447529, 3716068; 447500, 3716068; 447500, 
3715983; 447472, 3715983; 447472, 3715926; 447444, 3715926; 447444, 
3715898; 447472, 3715898; 447472, 3715813; 447500, 3715813; 447500, 
3715785; 447529, 3715785; 447529, 3715728; 447557, 3715728; 447557, 
3715710; 447160, 3715710; 447160, 3715728; 447132, 3715728; 447132, 
3715756; 447103, 3715756; 447103, 3715785; 447075, 3715785; 447075, 
3715813; 447103, 3715813; 447103, 3715898; 447046, 3715898; 447046, 
3716012; 447075, 3716012; 447075, 3716068; 447046, 3716068; 447046, 
3716097; 447075, 3716097; 447075, 3716182; 447103, 3716182; 447103, 
3716267; 447075, 3716267; 447075, 3716295; 447046, 3716295; 447046, 
3716324; 447103, 3716324; 447103, 3716352; 447132, 3716352; 447132, 
3716437; 447160, 3716437; 447160, 3716664; 447188, 3716664; 447188, 
3717061; 447217, 3717061; 447217, 3717146; 447188, 3717146; 447188, 
3717175; 447160, 3717175; 447160, 3717203; 447132, 3717203; 447132, 
3717260; 447160, 3717260; 447160, 3717288; 447132, 3717288; 447132, 
3717430; 447103, 3717430; 447103, 3717487; 447132, 3717487; 447132, 
3717515; 447160, 3717515; 447160, 3717487; 447188, 3717487; 447188, 
3717458; 447273, 3717458; 447273, 3717487; 447302, 3717487; 447302, 
3717629; 447273, 3717629; 447273, 3717714; 447302, 3717714; 447302, 
3717799; 447273, 3717799; 447273, 3717884; 447302, 3717884; 447302, 
3718168; 447273, 3718168; 447273, 3718196; 447245, 3718196; 447245, 
3718224; 447217, 3718224; 447217, 3718281; 447302, 3718281; 447302, 
3718253; 447359, 3718253; 447359, 3718281; 447415, 3718281; 447415, 
3718338; 447444, 3718338; 447444, 3718366; 447472, 3718366; 447472, 
3718394; 447500, 3718394; 447500, 3718480; 447529, 3718480; 447529, 
3718650; 447557, 3718650; 447557, 3718877; 447585, 3718877; 447585, 
3718934; 447557, 3718934; 447557, 3718962; 447529, 3718962; 447529, 
3718990; 447585, 3718990; 447585, 3719047; 447614, 3719047; 447614, 
3719104; 447585, 3719104; 447585, 3719132; 447614, 3719132; 447614, 
3719302; 447642, 3719302; 447642, 3719416; 447671, 3719416; 447671, 
3719643; 447699, 3719643; 447699, 3719728; 447727, 3719728; 447727, 
3720012; 447699, 3720012; 447699, 3720068; 447671, 3720068; returning to 
447671, 3720125.
    (viii) Subunit 10b: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle map Santiago Peak, 
land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 443236, 3722799; 
443231, 3722788; 443185, 3722746; 443127, 3722747; 443085, 3722768; 
443067, 3722796; 443053, 3722858; 443052, 3722896; 443090, 3722896; 
443099, 3722835; 443114, 3722806; 443117, 3722806; 443117, 3722805; 
443120, 3722805; 443120, 3722806; 443131, 3722805; 443128, 3722802; 
443128, 3722799; 443143, 3722793; 443173, 3722792; 443198, 3722813; 
443198, 3722825; 443218, 3722844; 443223, 3722867; 443232, 3722876; 
443233, 3722907; 443223, 3722918; 443223, 3722926; 443253, 3722926; 
443253, 3722946; 443262, 3722956; 443283, 3722956; 443283, 3722986; 
443313, 3722986; 443313, 3723036; 443322, 3723044; 443322, 3723046; 
443343, 3723046; 443343, 3723076; 443368, 3723076; 443371, 3723067; 
443339, 3723002; 443314, 3722980; 443311, 3722950; 443308, 3722945; 
443274, 3722909; 443272, 3722871; 443258, 3722842; 443240, 3722823; 
returning to 443236, 3722799.
    (ix) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 449163, 
3726106; 449163, 3726076; 449193, 3726076; 449193, 3725986; 449163, 
3725986; 449163, 3725956; 449133, 3725956; 449133, 3725896; 449013, 
3725896; 449013, 3725866; 448953, 3725866; 448953, 3725836; 448623, 
3725836; 448623, 3725806; 448563, 3725806; 448563, 3725776; 448473, 
3725776; 448473, 3725746; 448413, 3725746; 448413, 3725776; 448293, 
3725776; 448293, 3725686; 448263, 3725686; 448263, 3725656; 448233, 
3725656; 448233, 3725626; 448203, 3725626; 448203, 3725566; 448173, 
3725566; 448173, 3725536; 448143, 3725536; 448143, 3725506; 448113, 
3725506; 448113, 3725476; 448083, 3725476; 448083, 3725446; 448053, 
3725446; 448053, 3725416; 447933, 3725416; 447933, 3725386; 447873, 
3725386; 447873, 3725356; 447723, 3725356; 447723, 3725266; 447693, 
3725266; 447693, 3725236; 447663, 3725236; 447663, 3725206; 447633, 
3725206; 447633, 3725146; 447393, 3725146; 447393, 3725116; 447363, 
3725116; 447363, 3725086; 447303, 3725086; 447303, 3725056; 447243, 
3725056; 447243, 3725026; 447183, 3725026; 447183, 3724996; 447153, 
3724996; 447153, 3724966; 447123, 3724966; 447123, 3724936; 447093, 
3724936; 447093, 3724906; 447063, 3724906; 447063, 3724876; 447033, 
3724876; 447033, 3724846; 446973, 3724846; 446973, 3724816; 446913, 
3724816; 446913, 3724786; 446823, 3724786; 446823, 3724756; 446733, 
3724756; 446733, 3724726; 446703, 3724726; 446703, 3724696; 446691, 
3724696; 446673, 3724696; 446673, 3724666; 446613, 3724666; 446613, 
3724636; 446553, 3724636; 446553, 3724606; 446493, 3724606; 446493, 
3724576; 446433, 3724576; 446433, 3724546; 446343, 3724546; 446343, 
3724516; 446283, 3724516; 446283, 3724486; 445953, 3724486; 445953, 
3724456; 445900, 3724456; 445545, 3724573; 445541, 3724565; 445540, 
3724565; 445539, 3724566; 445538, 3724566; 445537, 3724566; 445536, 
3724567; 445535, 3724567; 445534, 3724567; 445533, 3724568; 445532, 
3724568; 445531, 3724568; 445530, 3724568; 445529, 3724569; 445528, 
3724569; 445526, 3724569; 445525, 3724569; 445524, 3724569; 445523, 
3724569; 445522, 3724569; 445521, 3724570; 445520, 3724570; 445519, 
3724570; 445518, 3724570; 445517, 3724570; 445516, 3724570; 445515, 
3724570; 445513, 3724570; 445512, 3724569; 445511, 3724569; 445510, 
3724569; 445509, 3724569; 445508, 3724569; 445507, 3724569; 445506, 
3724569; 445505, 3724568; 445504, 3724568; 445503, 3724568; 445502, 
3724568; 445501, 3724567; 445500, 3724567; 445499, 3724567; 445498, 
3724566; 445496, 3724566; 445495, 3724566; 445494, 3724565; 445489, 
3724563; 445487,

[[Page 402]]

3724562; 445485, 3724562; 445483, 3724561; 445481, 3724560; 445479, 
3724560; 445477, 3724559; 445474, 3724558; 445472, 3724558; 445470, 
3724557; 445468, 3724557; 445466, 3724556; 445464, 3724556; 445461, 
3724556; 445459, 3724555; 445457, 3724555; 445455, 3724555; 445452, 
3724555; 445450, 3724555; 445448, 3724554; 445446, 3724554; 445443, 
3724554; 445441, 3724554; 445439, 3724554; 445437, 3724554; 445435, 
3724555; 445432, 3724555; 445430, 3724555; 445317, 3724437; 445268, 
3724447; 445205, 3724469; 445288, 3724575; 445280, 3724575; 445272, 
3724575; 445259, 3724573; 445243, 3724568; 445235, 3724565; 445226, 
3724560; 445213, 3724551; 445133, 3724480; 445174, 3724434; 445157, 
3724384; 445145, 3724398; 445137, 3724426; 445108, 3724458; 445027, 
3724385; 445007, 3724367; 444983, 3724345; 444903, 3724267; 444895, 
3724260; 444888, 3724252; 444881, 3724245; 444873, 3724237; 444866, 
3724229; 444854, 3724214; 444830, 3724185; 444827, 3724180; 444823, 
3724176; 444820, 3724172; 444817, 3724168; 444814, 3724163; 444811, 
3724159; 444808, 3724154; 444805, 3724150; 444801, 3724142; 444789, 
3724121; 444772, 3724095; 444770, 3724092; 444769, 3724091; 444768, 
3724089; 444766, 3724087; 444765, 3724086; 444764, 3724084; 444762, 
3724082; 444761, 3724081; 444759, 3724079; 444758, 3724078; 444757, 
3724076; 444755, 3724074; 444754, 3724073; 444752, 3724072; 444750, 
3724070; 444749, 3724069; 444728, 3724051; 444698, 3724028; 444689, 
3724021; 444685, 3724017; 444681, 3724014; 444677, 3724010; 444673, 
3724007; 444669, 3724003; 444664, 3723999; 444658, 3723992; 444651, 
3723986; 444647, 3723982; 444643, 3723979; 444639, 3723975; 444635, 
3723972; 444597, 3723940; 444593, 3723938; 444590, 3723935; 444587, 
3723932; 444584, 3723929; 444581, 3723926; 444578, 3723923; 444575, 
3723920; 444572, 3723917; 444570, 3723914; 444567, 3723911; 444562, 
3723905; 444548, 3723887; 444542, 3723882; 444539, 3723879; 444538, 
3723878; 444536, 3723876; 444534, 3723875; 444533, 3723874; 444531, 
3723872; 444529, 3723871; 444528, 3723870; 444526, 3723868; 444524, 
3723867; 444522, 3723866; 444520, 3723865; 444519, 3723864; 444517, 
3723862; 444515, 3723861; 444513, 3723860; 444511, 3723859; 444508, 
3723858; 444505, 3723856; 444502, 3723855; 444499, 3723853; 444496, 
3723852; 444493, 3723851; 444490, 3723850; 444487, 3723849; 444484, 
3723848; 444481, 3723847; 444478, 3723846; 444475, 3723845; 444434, 
3723833; 444432, 3723832; 444431, 3723832; 444430, 3723832; 444429, 
3723832; 444427, 3723832; 444426, 3723831; 444425, 3723831; 444424, 
3723831; 444423, 3723831; 444422, 3723831; 444421, 3723831; 444420, 
3723831; 444419, 3723831; 444418, 3723831; 444417, 3723831; 444416, 
3723831; 444415, 3723831; 444414, 3723831; 444413, 3723831; 444412, 
3723831; 444411, 3723831; 444409, 3723831; 444408, 3723831; 444407, 
3723831; 444406, 3723832; 444405, 3723832; 444404, 3723832; 444403, 
3723832; 444402, 3723832; 444401, 3723833; 444400, 3723833; 444399, 
3723833; 444398, 3723834; 444397, 3723834; 444396, 3723834; 444395, 
3723835; 444394, 3723835; 444393, 3723835; 444392, 3723836; 444391, 
3723836; 444390, 3723837; 444389, 3723837; 444388, 3723838; 444387, 
3723838; 444386, 3723839; 444386, 3723839; 444385, 3723840; 444384, 
3723840; 444383, 3723841; 444382, 3723842; 444381, 3723842; 444380, 
3723843; 444379, 3723843; 444379, 3723844; 444378, 3723845; 444377, 
3723846; 444376, 3723846; 444375, 3723847; 444375, 3723848; 444374, 
3723848; 444373, 3723849; 444372, 3723850; 444372, 3723851; 444371, 
3723852; 444333, 3723895; 444332, 3723897; 444331, 3723898; 444330, 
3723899; 444329, 3723900; 444328, 3723902; 444327, 3723903; 444326, 
3723904; 444325, 3723906; 444324, 3723907; 444324, 3723908; 444323, 
3723910; 444322, 3723911; 444321, 3723913; 444321, 3723914; 444320, 
3723915; 444319, 3723917; 444318, 3723918; 444318, 3723920; 444317, 
3723921; 444317, 3723923; 444316, 3723924; 444316, 3723926; 444315, 
3723927; 444315, 3723929; 444314, 3723930; 444314, 3723932; 444313, 
3723933; 444313, 3723935; 444313, 3723937; 444313, 3723938; 444312, 
3723940; 444312, 3723941; 444312, 3723943; 444312, 3723944; 444311, 
3723946; 444311, 3723948; 444311, 3723949; 444311, 3723951; 444311, 
3723952; 444311, 3723954; 444311, 3723956; 444311, 3723957; 444311, 
3723959; 444311, 3723960; 444311, 3723962; 444311, 3723964; 444312, 
3723965; 444312, 3723967; 444312, 3723968; 444312, 3723970; 444313, 
3723971; 444313, 3723973; 444324, 3724025; 444324, 3724027; 444325, 
3724030; 444325, 3724032; 444325, 3724035; 444326, 3724038; 444326, 
3724040; 444326, 3724043; 444326, 3724046; 444327, 3724048; 444327, 
3724051; 444327, 3724054; 444327, 3724056; 444327, 3724059; 444327, 
3724062; 444326, 3724064; 444326, 3724066; 444333, 3724066; 444333, 
3724096; 444363, 3724096; 444363, 3724126; 444393, 3724126; 444393, 
3724066; 444423, 3724066; 444423, 3723946; 444483, 3723946; 444483, 
3724006; 444543, 3724006; 444543, 3724036; 444573, 3724036; 444573, 
3724096; 444633, 3724096; 444633, 3724066; 444663, 3724066; 444663, 
3724096; 444723, 3724096; 444723, 3724156; 444753, 3724156; 444753, 
3724246; 444783, 3724246; 444783, 3724276; 444843, 3724276; 444843, 
3724336; 444873, 3724336; 444873, 3724366; 444903, 3724366; 444903, 
3724456; 444963, 3724456; 444963, 3724426; 444993, 3724426; 444993, 
3724456; 445023, 3724456; 445023, 3724516; 445083, 3724516; 445083, 
3724546; 445113, 3724546; 445113, 3724576; 445143, 3724576; 445143, 
3724606; 445203, 3724606; 445203, 3724636; 445233, 3724636; 445233, 
3724666; 445263, 3724666; 445263, 3724876; 445293, 3724876; 445293, 
3724936; 445323, 3724936; 445323, 3724966; 445353, 3724966; 445353, 
3724996; 445383, 3724996; 445383, 3725026; 445413, 3725026; 445413, 
3724786; 445383, 3724786; 445383, 3724726; 445413, 3724726; 445413, 
3724696; 445473, 3724696; 445473, 3724726; 445533, 3724726; 445533, 
3724756; 445563, 3724756; 445563, 3724786; 445623, 3724786; 445623, 
3724846; 445683, 3724846; 445683, 3724876; 445713, 3724876; 445713, 
3724936; 445743, 3724936; 445743, 3724966; 445803, 3724966; 445803, 
3724996; 445833, 3724996; 445833, 3725026; 445863, 3725026; 445863, 
3724816; 445953, 3724816; 445953, 3724846; 445983, 3724846; 445983, 
3724876; 446043, 3724876; 446043, 3724906; 446103, 3724906; 446103, 
3724936; 446133, 3724936; 446133, 3724966; 446163, 3724966; 446163, 
3725056; 446193, 3725056; 446193, 3725146; 446223, 3725146; 446223, 
3725176; 446253, 3725176; 446253, 3725146; 446283, 3725146; 446283, 
3725176; 446343, 3725176; 446343, 3725206; 446403, 3725206; 446403, 
3725146; 446373, 3725146; 446373, 3725086; 446343, 3725086; 446343, 
3724966; 446493, 3724966; 446493, 3724996; 446553, 3724996; 446553, 
3725026; 446583, 3725026; 446583, 3725056; 446613, 3725056; 446613, 
3725086; 446643, 3725086; 446643, 3725146; 446673, 3725146; 446673, 
3725176; 446733, 3725176; 446733, 3725206; 446763, 3725206; 446763, 
3725236; 446823, 3725236; 446823,

[[Page 403]]

3725266; 446883, 3725266; 446883, 3725326; 446973, 3725326; 446973, 
3725356; 447003, 3725356; 447003, 3725386; 447063, 3725386; 447063, 
3725416; 447123, 3725416; 447123, 3725446; 447153, 3725446; 447153, 
3725476; 447213, 3725476; 447213, 3725506; 447303, 3725506; 447303, 
3725536; 447333, 3725536; 447333, 3725596; 447483, 3725596; 447483, 
3725626; 447543, 3725626; 447543, 3725656; 447603, 3725656; 447603, 
3725686; 447633, 3725686; 447633, 3725716; 447693, 3725716; 447693, 
3725746; 447783, 3725746; 447783, 3725776; 447933, 3725776; 447933, 
3725806; 447963, 3725806; 447963, 3725836; 447993, 3725836; 447993, 
3725866; 448023, 3725866; 448023, 3725896; 448053, 3725896; 448053, 
3725926; 448113, 3725926; 448113, 3725956; 448143, 3725956; 448143, 
3725986; 448203, 3725986; 448203, 3726016; 448233, 3726016; 448233, 
3725986; 448263, 3725986; 448263, 3725956; 448413, 3725956; 448413, 
3725926; 448503, 3725926; 448503, 3725956; 448563, 3725956; 448563, 
3725986; 448653, 3725986; 448653, 3725956; 448893, 3725956; 448893, 
3725986; 448953, 3725986; 448953, 3726016; 449013, 3726016; 449013, 
3726046; 449073, 3726046; 449073, 3726076; 449103, 3726076; 449103, 
3726106; 449133, 3726106; 449133, 3726196; 449163, 3726196; returning to 
449163, 3726106.
    (x) Note: Map of Unit 10 is provided at paragraph (13)(v) of this 
entry.
    (16) Unit 11: San Mateo Basin, Orange, Riverside, and San Diego 
Counties, California.
    (i) Subunit 11a: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle map San Clemente, 
land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 449613, 3702046; 
449583, 3702046; 449583, 3702076; 449613, 3702076; returning to 449613, 
3702046.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 449613, 
3702046; 449703, 3702046; 449703, 3702016; 449733, 3702016; 449733, 
3702046; 449823, 3702046; 449823, 3702076; 449853, 3702076; 449853, 
3702196; 449913, 3702196; 449913, 3702166; 450033, 3702166; 450033, 
3702196; 450093, 3702196; 450093, 3702256; 450153, 3702256; 450153, 
3702286; 450213, 3702286; 450213, 3702316; 450243, 3702316; 450243, 
3702346; 450273, 3702346; 450273, 3702436; 450243, 3702436; 450243, 
3702466; 450303, 3702466; 450303, 3702496; 450393, 3702496; 450393, 
3702466; 450423, 3702466; 450423, 3702496; 450483, 3702496; 450483, 
3702526; 450513, 3702526; 450513, 3702556; 450603, 3702556; 450603, 
3702586; 450633, 3702586; 450633, 3702646; 450663, 3702646; 450663, 
3702616; 450753, 3702616; 450753, 3702646; 450813, 3702646; 450813, 
3702676; 450933, 3702676; 450933, 3702706; 450963, 3702706; 450963, 
3702736; 451083, 3702736; 451083, 3702766; 451203, 3702766; 451203, 
3702796; 451263, 3702796; 451263, 3702826; 451293, 3702826; 451293, 
3702796; 451323, 3702796; 451323, 3702826; 451383, 3702826; 451383, 
3702856; 451413, 3702856; 451413, 3702886; 451473, 3702886; 451473, 
3702916; 451533, 3702916; 451533, 3702976; 451563, 3702976; 451563, 
3703006; 451743, 3703006; 451743, 3703036; 451818, 3703036; 450584, 
3702286; 450513, 3702286; 450513, 3702256; 450453, 3702256; 450453, 
3702226; 450423, 3702226; 450423, 3702188; 449917, 3701885; 449865, 
3701873; 448313, 3701517; 448318, 3701806; 448320, 3701805; 448504, 
3701735; 448596, 3701741; 448628, 3701756; 448657, 3701771; 448701, 
3701806; 448773, 3701806; 448773, 3701776; 448803, 3701776; 448803, 
3701806; 448953, 3701806; 448953, 3701836; 448983, 3701836; 448983, 
3701806; 449163, 3701806; 449163, 3701836; 449223, 3701836; 449223, 
3701806; 449313, 3701806; 449313, 3701836; 449343, 3701836; 449343, 
3701866; 449433, 3701866; 449433, 3701896; 449463, 3701896; 449463, 
3701926; 449523, 3701926; 449523, 3701956; 449613, 3701956; returning to 
449613, 3702046.
    (iii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 452685, 
3703768; 452686, 3703564; 451833, 3703045; 451833, 3703096; 451863, 
3703096; 451863, 3703126; 451893, 3703126; 451893, 3703156; 451923, 
3703156; 451923, 3703216; 451953, 3703216; 451953, 3703246; 451983, 
3703246; 451983, 3703306; 452013, 3703306; 452013, 3703276; 452073, 
3703276; 452073, 3703306; 452103, 3703306; 452103, 3703426; 452223, 
3703426; 452223, 3703456; 452253, 3703456; 452253, 3703486; 452283, 
3703486; 452283, 3703636; 452313, 3703636; 452313, 3703696; 452343, 
3703696; 452343, 3703636; 452433, 3703636; 452433, 3703666; 452463, 
3703666; 452463, 3703696; 452493, 3703696; 452493, 3703816; 452553, 
3703816; 452553, 3703786; 452583, 3703786; 452583, 3703756; 452613, 
3703756; 452613, 3703786; 452643, 3703786; 452643, 3703816; 452673, 
3703816; 452673, 3703876; 452684, 3703876; returning to 452685, 3703768.
    (iv) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 451503, 
3705316; 451503, 3705346; 451533, 3705346; 451533, 3705316; returning to 
451503, 3705316.
    (v) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 451503, 
3705316; 451503, 3705166; 451473, 3705166; 451473, 3705136; 451443, 
3705136; 451443, 3705046; 451413, 3705046; 451413, 3705016; 451383, 
3705016; 451383, 3704926; 451413, 3704926; 451413, 3704896; 451443, 
3704896; 451443, 3704836; 451383, 3704836; 451383, 3704866; 451323, 
3704866; 451323, 3704776; 451263, 3704776; 451263, 3704746; 451233, 
3704746; 451233, 3704686; 451203, 3704686; 451203, 3704656; 451053, 
3704656; 451053, 3704626; 450993, 3704626; 450993, 3704566; 450813, 
3704566; 450813, 3704536; 450753, 3704536; 450753, 3704506; 450723, 
3704506; 450723, 3704536; 450483, 3704536; 450483, 3704506; 450423, 
3704506; 450423, 3704476; 450393, 3704476; 450393, 3704536; 450333, 
3704536; 450333, 3704566; 450273, 3704566; 450273, 3704596; 450153, 
3704596; 450153, 3704626; 450033, 3704626; 450033, 3704596; 450003, 
3704596; 450003, 3704566; 449973, 3704566; 449973, 3704536; 449943, 
3704536; 449943, 3704476; 449913, 3704476; 449913, 3704446; 449883, 
3704446; 449883, 3704416; 449763, 3704416; 449763, 3704386; 449703, 
3704386; 449703, 3704356; 449673, 3704356; 449673, 3704326; 449613, 
3704326; 449613, 3704296; 449583, 3704296; 449583, 3704266; 449553, 
3704266; 449553, 3704236; 449523, 3704236; 449523, 3704206; 449493, 
3704206; 449493, 3704176; 449433, 3704176; 449433, 3704146; 449403, 
3704146; 449403, 3704116; 449343, 3704116; 449343, 3704086; 449283, 
3704086; 449283, 3704056; 449253, 3704056; 449253, 3704026; 449223, 
3704026; 449223, 3703906; 449163, 3703906; 449163, 3703876; 449073, 
3703876; 449073, 3703846; 449043, 3703846; 449043, 3703742; 449037, 
3703740; 449021, 3703726; 448893, 3703726; 448893, 3703696; 448863, 
3703696; 448863, 3703666; 448833, 3703666; 448833, 3703646; 448818, 
3703644; 448808, 3703636; 448803, 3703636; 448803, 3703631; 448776, 
3703606; 448743, 3703606; 448743, 3703580; 448738, 3703576; 448683, 
3703576; 448683,

[[Page 404]]

3703546; 448653, 3703546; 448653, 3703516; 448593, 3703516; 448593, 
3703486; 448503, 3703486; 448503, 3703456; 448473, 3703456; 448473, 
3703426; 448443, 3703426; 448443, 3703396; 448353, 3703396; 448353, 
3703366; 448203, 3703366; 448203, 3703336; 448143, 3703336; 448143, 
3703281; 448143, 3703281; 448025, 3703185; 448021, 3703182; 448017, 
3703179; 448014, 3703176; 448006, 3703169; 447991, 3703157; 447987, 
3703154; 447983, 3703152; 447979, 3703149; 447968, 3703140; 447956, 
3703132; 447948, 3703126; 447944, 3703124; 447940, 3703121; 447935, 
3703119; 447931, 3703116; 447927, 3703113; 447923, 3703111; 447919, 
3703108; 447915, 3703106; 447911, 3703103; 447906, 3703101; 447902, 
3703099; 447898, 3703096; 447885, 3703089; 447881, 3703087; 447876, 
3703084; 447873, 3703083; 447873, 3703096; 447843, 3703096; 447843, 
3703126; 447603, 3703126; 447603, 3703096; 447573, 3703096; 447573, 
3703066; 447543, 3703066; 447543, 3703036; 447483, 3703036; 447483, 
3703006; 447453, 3703006; 447453, 3702976; 447423, 3702976; 447423, 
3702796; 447393, 3702796; 447393, 3702766; 447363, 3702766; 447363, 
3702706; 447333, 3702706; 447333, 3702646; 447363, 3702646; 447363, 
3702586; 447333, 3702586; 447333, 3702526; 447303, 3702526; 447303, 
3702316; 447309, 3702316; 447309, 3702315; 447310, 3702312; 447310, 
3702309; 447310, 3702307; 447311, 3702304; 447311, 3702302; 447311, 
3702299; 447312, 3702297; 447312, 3702294; 447313, 3702292; 447313, 
3702289; 447314, 3702287; 447314, 3702284; 447315, 3702282; 447316, 
3702279; 447316, 3702277; 447321, 3702238; 447322, 3702179; 447310, 
3702120; 447280, 3702060; 447269, 3702013; 447264, 3701961; 447266, 
3701919; 447273, 3701877; 447273, 3701866; 447275, 3701866; 447283, 
3701816; 446936, 3701818; 446935, 3701833; 446809, 3701877; 446763, 
3701876; 446763, 3701896; 446733, 3701896; 446733, 3701956; 446673, 
3701956; 446673, 3701986; 446763, 3701986; 446763, 3702016; 446793, 
3702016; 446793, 3702046; 446823, 3702046; 446823, 3702136; 446853, 
3702136; 446853, 3702196; 446883, 3702196; 446883, 3702286; 446853, 
3702286; 446853, 3702316; 446823, 3702316; 446823, 3702331; 446825, 
3702332; 446912, 3702538; 446823, 3702586; 446823, 3702593; 446919, 
3702557; 446919, 3702610; 446919, 3702610; 446919, 3702610; 446920, 
3702704; 447013, 3702695; 447015, 3702705; 447016, 3702705; 447018, 
3702716; 447020, 3702726; 447023, 3702736; 447026, 3702747; 447029, 
3702757; 447032, 3702767; 447036, 3702778; 447038, 3702785; 447058, 
3702839; 446943, 3702850; 446943, 3702886; 446973, 3702886; 446973, 
3702916; 447003, 3702916; 447003, 3702946; 447033, 3702946; 447033, 
3702975; 447043, 3702975; 447083, 3703066; 447093, 3703066; 447093, 
3703089; 447123, 3703156; 447123, 3703156; 447123, 3703157; 447129, 
3703170; 447173, 3703176; 447181, 3703178; 447195, 3703180; 447207, 
3703198; 447219, 3703216; 447230, 3703232; 447231, 3703233; 447231, 
3703234; 447231, 3703234; 447244, 3703252; 447257, 3703268; 447258, 
3703270; 447271, 3703287; 447284, 3703303; 447511, 3703579; 447709, 
3704204; 447666, 3704343; 447663, 3704356; 447663, 3704446; 447693, 
3704446; 447693, 3704416; 447723, 3704416; 447723, 3704386; 447753, 
3704386; 447753, 3704356; 447783, 3704356; 447783, 3704236; 447813, 
3704236; 447813, 3704206; 447843, 3704206; 447843, 3704176; 447933, 
3704176; 447933, 3704116; 447903, 3704116; 447903, 3704086; 447873, 
3704086; 447873, 3704026; 447843, 3704026; 447843, 3703996; 447873, 
3703996; 447873, 3703786; 447993, 3703786; 447993, 3703756; 448053, 
3703756; 448053, 3703786; 448143, 3703786; 448143, 3703816; 448263, 
3703816; 448263, 3703846; 448323, 3703846; 448323, 3703876; 448383, 
3703876; 448383, 3703906; 448413, 3703906; 448413, 3703936; 448443, 
3703936; 448443, 3703966; 448473, 3703966; 448473, 3704056; 448623, 
3704056; 448623, 3704086; 448653, 3704086; 448653, 3704056; 448683, 
3704056; 448683, 3704116; 448713, 3704116; 448713, 3704146; 448743, 
3704146; 448743, 3704206; 448773, 3704206; 448773, 3704266; 448803, 
3704266; 448803, 3704326; 448773, 3704326; 448773, 3704390; 448780, 
3704380; 448783, 3704372; 448793, 3704377; 448831, 3704407; 448818, 
3704425; 448818, 3704425; 448818, 3704425; 448818, 3704426; 448818, 
3704426; 448818, 3704427; 448813, 3704446; 448815, 3704446; 448820, 
3704427; 448820, 3704427; 448820, 3704427; 448820, 3704427; 448820, 
3704427; 448820, 3704427; 448820, 3704427; 448820, 3704427; 448834, 
3704409; 448858, 3704427; 448863, 3704433; 448863, 3704416; 448893, 
3704416; 448893, 3704356; 448923, 3704356; 448923, 3704326; 448953, 
3704326; 448953, 3704296; 449133, 3704296; 449133, 3704326; 449163, 
3704326; 449163, 3704356; 449193, 3704356; 449193, 3704386; 449223, 
3704386; 449223, 3704446; 449283, 3704446; 449283, 3704476; 449313, 
3704476; 449313, 3704506; 449343, 3704506; 449343, 3704536; 449373, 
3704536; 449373, 3704566; 449403, 3704566; 449403, 3704596; 449433, 
3704596; 449433, 3704626; 449463, 3704626; 449463, 3704596; 449553, 
3704596; 449553, 3704626; 449583, 3704626; 449583, 3704656; 449613, 
3704656; 449613, 3704686; 449703, 3704686; 449703, 3704716; 449733, 
3704716; 449733, 3704746; 449763, 3704746; 449763, 3704866; 449823, 
3704866; 449823, 3704896; 449883, 3704896; 449883, 3704986; 449913, 
3704986; 449913, 3705046; 449973, 3705046; 449973, 3705016; 450003, 
3705016; 450003, 3704986; 450093, 3704986; 450093, 3705016; 450213, 
3705016; 450213, 3705046; 450243, 3705046; 450243, 3705136; 450273, 
3705136; 450273, 3705346; 450303, 3705346; 450303, 3705496; 450273, 
3705496; 450273, 3705556; 450243, 3705556; 450243, 3705856; 450273, 
3705856; 450273, 3705916; 450303, 3705916; 450303, 3706006; 450363, 
3706006; 450363, 3706066; 450393, 3706066; 450393, 3706096; 450423, 
3706096; 450423, 3706156; 450453, 3706156; 450453, 3706216; 450483, 
3706216; 450483, 3706246; 450513, 3706246; 450513, 3706366; 450543, 
3706366; 450543, 3706396; 450573, 3706396; 450573, 3706366; 450603, 
3706366; 450603, 3706126; 450573, 3706126; 450573, 3705976; 450543, 
3705976; 450543, 3705946; 450753, 3705946; 450753, 3705916; 450723, 
3705916; 450723, 3705886; 450693, 3705886; 450693, 3705856; 450663, 
3705856; 450663, 3705826; 450633, 3705826; 450633, 3705706; 450603, 
3705706; 450603, 3705646; 450573, 3705646; 450573, 3705616; 450603, 
3705616; 450603, 3705586; 450633, 3705586; 450633, 3705526; 450603, 
3705526; 450603, 3705496; 450573, 3705496; 450573, 3705436; 450603, 
3705436; 450603, 3705406; 450573, 3705406; 450573, 3705346; 450543, 
3705346; 450543, 3705226; 450573, 3705226; 450573, 3705166; 450543, 
3705166; 450543, 3705106; 450573, 3705106; 450573, 3705046; 450543, 
3705046; 450543, 3704986; 450513, 3704986; 450513, 3704956; 450483, 
3704956; 450483, 3704926; 450453, 3704926; 450453, 3704896; 450423, 
3704896; 450423, 3704866; 450393, 3704866; 450393, 3704806; 450423, 
3704806; 450423, 3704776; 450453, 3704776; 450453, 3704806; 450513, 
3704806; 450513, 3704836; 450603,

[[Page 405]]

3704836; 450603, 3704866; 450633, 3704866; 450633, 3704836; 450693, 
3704836; 450693, 3704866; 450723, 3704866; 450723, 3704896; 450843, 
3704896; 450843, 3704926; 450933, 3704926; 450933, 3704956; 450963, 
3704956; 450963, 3704986; 451023, 3704986; 451023, 3705016; 451053, 
3705016; 451053, 3705046; 451083, 3705046; 451083, 3705016; 451113, 
3705016; 451113, 3705046; 451143, 3705046; 451143, 3705016; 451173, 
3705016; 451173, 3705046; 451203, 3705046; 451203, 3705076; 451233, 
3705076; 451233, 3705136; 451263, 3705136; 451263, 3705166; 451323, 
3705166; 451323, 3705196; 451353, 3705196; 451353, 3705226; 451383, 
3705226; 451383, 3705256; 451443, 3705256; 451443, 3705286; 451473, 
3705286; 451473, 3705316; returning to 451503, 3705316.
    (vi) Subunit 11b: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle map Margarita Peak, 
land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 455883, 3703636; 
455883, 3703606; 455943, 3703606; 455943, 3703592; 455790, 3703594; 
455792, 3703606; 455853, 3703606; 455853, 3703636; returning to 455883, 
3703636.
    (vii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 467274, 
3712323; 467274, 3712352; 467302, 3712352; 467302, 3712323; returning to 
467274, 3712323;
    (viii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 467274, 
3712323; 467274, 3712267; 467245, 3712267; 467245, 3712238; 467217, 
3712238; 467217, 3712210; 467188, 3712210; 467188, 3712182; 467160, 
3712182; 467160, 3712153; 467132, 3712153; 467132, 3712096; 467160, 
3712096; 467160, 3712068; 467188, 3712068; 467188, 3712040; 467217, 
3712040; 467217, 3711983; 467245, 3711983; 467245, 3711926; 467274, 
3711926; 467274, 3711898; 467188, 3711898; 467188, 3711926; 467160, 
3711926; 467160, 3711955; 467047, 3711955; 467047, 3711926; 467018, 
3711926; 467018, 3711898; 466990, 3711898; 466990, 3711870; 466961, 
3711870; 466961, 3711841; 466848, 3711841; 466848, 3711870; 466706, 
3711870; 466706, 3711813; 466678, 3711813; 466678, 3711756; 466564, 
3711756; 466564, 3711784; 466536, 3711784; 466536, 3711813; 466508, 
3711813; 466508, 3711841; 466479, 3711841; 466479, 3711870; 466196, 
3711870; 466196, 3711898; 466082, 3711898; 466082, 3711870; 466025, 
3711870; 466025, 3711841; 465969, 3711841; 465969, 3711870; 465770, 
3711870; 465770, 3711841; 465742, 3711841; 465742, 3711784; 465713, 
3711784; 465713, 3711841; 465628, 3711841; 465628, 3711870; 465600, 
3711870; 465600, 3711955; 465571, 3711955; 465571, 3711983; 465373, 
3711983; 465373, 3711955; 465344, 3711955; 465344, 3711926; 465288, 
3711926; 465288, 3711955; 465259, 3711955; 465259, 3711983; 465231, 
3711983; 465231, 3711955; 465203, 3711955; 465203, 3711983; 465174, 
3711983; 465174, 3712011; 465117, 3712011; 465117, 3712096; 465089, 
3712096; 465089, 3712068; 465061, 3712068; 465061, 3712040; 465004, 
3712040; 465004, 3712011; 464919, 3712011; 464919, 3712040; 464834, 
3712040; 464834, 3712068; 464777, 3712068; 464777, 3712096; 464607, 
3712096; 464607, 3712068; 464578, 3712068; 464578, 3712096; 464522, 
3712096; 464522, 3712125; 464465, 3712125; 464465, 3712153; 464437, 
3712153; 464437, 3712210; 464408, 3712210; 464408, 3712238; 464380, 
3712238; 464380, 3712267; 464352, 3712267; 464352, 3712323; 464323, 
3712323; 464323, 3712352; 464295, 3712352; 464295, 3712380; 464181, 
3712380; 464181, 3712409; 464125, 3712409; 464125, 3712380; 464039, 
3712380; 464039, 3712409; 464011, 3712409; 464011, 3712437; 463954, 
3712437; 463954, 3712465; 463898, 3712465; 463898, 3712437; 463756, 
3712437; 463756, 3712409; 463671, 3712409; 463671, 3712380; 463586, 
3712380; 463586, 3712352; 463557, 3712352; 463557, 3712323; 463529, 
3712323; 463529, 3712267; 463500, 3712267; 463500, 3712210; 463472, 
3712210; 463472, 3712182; 463387, 3712182; 463387, 3712153; 463330, 
3712153; 463330, 3712125; 463302, 3712125; 463302, 3712068; 463274, 
3712068; 463274, 3712011; 463245, 3712011; 463245, 3711955; 463274, 
3711955; 463274, 3711756; 463245, 3711756; 463245, 3711699; 463217, 
3711699; 463217, 3711529; 463188, 3711529; 463188, 3711444; 463160, 
3711444; 463160, 3711330; 463132, 3711330; 463132, 3711302; 463103, 
3711302; 463103, 3711189; 463075, 3711189; 463075, 3711104; 463047, 
3711104; 463047, 3711047; 463018, 3711047; 463018, 3710990; 462990, 
3710990; 462990, 3710962; 462848, 3710962; 462848, 3710933; 462820, 
3710933; 462820, 3710791; 462791, 3710791; 462791, 3710706; 462763, 
3710706; 462763, 3710791; 462678, 3710791; 462678, 3710763; 462564, 
3710763; 462564, 3710706; 462536, 3710706; 462536, 3710593; 462564, 
3710593; 462564, 3710565; 462564, 3710536; 462536, 3710536; 462536, 
3710451; 462508, 3710451; 462508, 3710423; 462394, 3710423; 462394, 
3710366; 462337, 3710366; 462337, 3710309; 462309, 3710309; 462309, 
3710281; 462337, 3710281; 462337, 3710252; 462252, 3710252; 462252, 
3710196; 462224, 3710196; 462224, 3710167; 462195, 3710167; 462195, 
3710139; 462167, 3710139; 462167, 3710111; 462139, 3710111; 462139, 
3710082; 462110, 3710082; 462110, 3710054; 462082, 3710054; 462082, 
3709997; 462110, 3709997; 462110, 3709940; 462139, 3709940; 462139, 
3709884; 462167, 3709884; 462167, 3709855; 462195, 3709855; 462195, 
3709827; 462224, 3709827; 462224, 3709770; 462195, 3709770; 462195, 
3709799; 462110, 3709799; 462110, 3709827; 462082, 3709827; 462082, 
3709855; 462054, 3709855; 462054, 3709884; 462025, 3709884; 462025, 
3709912; 461997, 3709912; 461997, 3709940; 461969, 3709940; 461969, 
3709997; 461940, 3709997; 461940, 3710026; 461883, 3710026; 461883, 
3710054; 461798, 3710054; 461798, 3710082; 461770, 3710082; 461770, 
3710111; 461742, 3710111; 461742, 3710139; 461713, 3710139; 461713, 
3710167; 461685, 3710167; 461685, 3710196; 461628, 3710196; 461628, 
3710224; 461486, 3710224; 461486, 3710196; 461458, 3710196; 461458, 
3710167; 461401, 3710167; 461401, 3710111; 461373, 3710111; 461373, 
3710026; 461344, 3710026; 461344, 3709997; 461259, 3709997; 461259, 
3709969; 461203, 3709969; 461203, 3709940; 461174, 3709940; 461174, 
3709912; 461146, 3709912; 461146, 3709884; 461117, 3709884; 461117, 
3709912; 461089, 3709912; 461089, 3709940; 461004, 3709940; 461004, 
3709969; 460976, 3709969; 460976, 3709997; 460947, 3709997; 460947, 
3710026; 460862, 3710026; 460862, 3709997; 460834, 3709997; 460834, 
3709969; 460834, 3709940; 460862, 3709940; 460862, 3709855; 460834, 
3709855; 460834, 3709827; 460805, 3709827; 460805, 3709799; 460777, 
3709799; 460777, 3709742; 460749, 3709742; 460749, 3709713; 460720, 
3709713; 460720, 3709685; 460635, 3709685; 460635, 3709657; 460607, 
3709657; 460607, 3709628; 460578, 3709628; 460578, 3709572; 460550, 
3709572; 460550, 3709515; 460493, 3709515; 460493, 3709430; 460522, 
3709430; 460522, 3709345; 460550, 3709345; 460550, 3709316; 460578, 
3709316; 460578, 3709260; 460720, 3709260; 460720,

[[Page 406]]

3709231; 460692, 3709231; 460692, 3709203; 460664, 3709203; 460664, 
3709174; 460635, 3709174; 460635, 3709146; 460578, 3709146; 460578, 
3709118; 460522, 3709118; 460522, 3709089; 460465, 3709089; 460465, 
3709061; 460408, 3709061; 460408, 3709033; 460380, 3709033; 460380, 
3709004; 460352, 3709004; 460352, 3708976; 460323, 3708976; 460323, 
3708947; 460266, 3708947; 460266, 3708919; 460238, 3708919; 460238, 
3708891; 460210, 3708891; 460210, 3708862; 460181, 3708862; 460181, 
3708834; 460125, 3708834; 460125, 3708806; 460011, 3708806; 460011, 
3708777; 459841, 3708777; 459841, 3708806; 459756, 3708806; 459756, 
3708834; 459699, 3708834; 459699, 3708806; 459671, 3708806; 459671, 
3708777; 459642, 3708777; 459642, 3708635; 459614, 3708635; 459614, 
3708607; 459586, 3708607; 459586, 3708408; 459472, 3708408; 459472, 
3708380; 459302, 3708380; 459302, 3708408; 459273, 3708408; 459273, 
3708437; 459245, 3708437; 459245, 3708465; 459217, 3708465; 459217, 
3708522; 459188, 3708522; 459188, 3708607; 459160, 3708607; 459160, 
3708579; 459132, 3708579; 459132, 3708494; 459103, 3708494; 459103, 
3708323; 459075, 3708323; 459075, 3708238; 459047, 3708238; 459047, 
3708182; 458990, 3708182; 458990, 3708153; 458961, 3708153; 458961, 
3708125; 458933, 3708125; 458933, 3708096; 458876, 3708096; 458876, 
3708068; 458848, 3708068; 458848, 3708040; 458734, 3708040; 458734, 
3707983; 458706, 3707983; 458706, 3707926; 458678, 3707926; 458678, 
3707869; 458649, 3707869; 458649, 3707813; 458621, 3707813; 458621, 
3707756; 458593, 3707756; 458593, 3707728; 458564, 3707728; 458564, 
3707699; 458536, 3707699; 458536, 3707671; 458508, 3707671; 458508, 
3707643; 458451, 3707643; 458451, 3707614; 458422, 3707614; 458422, 
3707472; 458451, 3707472; 458451, 3707302; 458479, 3707302; 458479, 
3707245; 458422, 3707245; 458422, 3707217; 458394, 3707217; 458394, 
3707189; 458366, 3707189; 458366, 3707160; 458337, 3707160; 458337, 
3707104; 458309, 3707104; 458309, 3706990; 458281, 3706990; 458281, 
3706962; 458252, 3706962; 458252, 3706820; 458281, 3706820; 458281, 
3706763; 458252, 3706763; 458252, 3706706; 458224, 3706706; 458224, 
3706678; 458195, 3706678; 458195, 3706650; 458167, 3706650; 458167, 
3706593; 458139, 3706593; 458139, 3706565; 458110, 3706565; 458110, 
3706536; 458082, 3706536; 458082, 3706338; 458110, 3706338; 458110, 
3706281; 458139, 3706281; 458139, 3706139; 458167, 3706139; 458167, 
3706082; 458110, 3706082; 458110, 3706054; 458082, 3706054; 458082, 
3706025; 458054, 3706025; 458054, 3705997; 457997, 3705997; 457997, 
3705969; 457969, 3705969; 457969, 3705940; 457883, 3705940; 457883, 
3705912; 457827, 3705912; 457827, 3705855; 457798, 3705855; 457798, 
3705827; 457770, 3705827; 457770, 3705799; 457742, 3705799; 457742, 
3705770; 457656, 3705770; 457656, 3705742; 457628, 3705742; 457628, 
3705685; 457600, 3705685; 457600, 3705486; 457571, 3705486; 457571, 
3705430; 457543, 3705430; 457543, 3705373; 457515, 3705373; 457515, 
3705345; 457486, 3705345; 457486, 3705316; 457401, 3705316; 457401, 
3705288; 457373, 3705288; 457373, 3705033; 457430, 3705033; 457430, 
3705004; 457486, 3705004; 457486, 3704976; 457515, 3704976; 457515, 
3704834; 457543, 3704834; 457543, 3704607; 457486, 3704607; 457486, 
3704465; 457458, 3704465; 457458, 3704437; 457430, 3704437; 457430, 
3704408; 457401, 3704408; 457401, 3704380; 457344, 3704380; 457344, 
3704352; 457288, 3704352; 457288, 3704380; 457231, 3704380; 457231, 
3704408; 457117, 3704408; 457117, 3704386; 457143, 3704386; 457143, 
3704236; 457173, 3704236; 457173, 3704206; 457143, 3704206; 457143, 
3704176; 457115, 3704176; 456735, 3704311; 456699, 3704161; 456732, 
3703919; 456561, 3703832; 456349, 3703587; 456003, 3703591; 456003, 
3703606; 456243, 3703606; 456243, 3703636; 456303, 3703636; 456303, 
3703666; 456333, 3703666; 456333, 3703696; 456363, 3703696; 456363, 
3703726; 456393, 3703726; 456393, 3703756; 456423, 3703756; 456423, 
3703816; 456453, 3703816; 456453, 3703846; 456483, 3703846; 456483, 
3703876; 456513, 3703876; 456513, 3703906; 456543, 3703906; 456543, 
3703936; 456633, 3703936; 456633, 3703996; 456603, 3703996; 456603, 
3704056; 456633, 3704056; 456633, 3704266; 456663, 3704266; 456663, 
3704296; 456723, 3704296; 456723, 3704326; 456813, 3704326; 456813, 
3704296; 456873, 3704296; 456873, 3704266; 457023, 3704266; 457023, 
3704296; 456993, 3704296; 456993, 3704326; 456963, 3704326; 456963, 
3704446; 456993, 3704446; 456993, 3704506; 457004, 3704506; 457004, 
3704522; 457231, 3704522; 457231, 3704494; 457316, 3704494; 457316, 
3704465; 457344, 3704465; 457344, 3704494; 457373, 3704494; 457373, 
3704664; 457401, 3704664; 457401, 3704721; 457344, 3704721; 457344, 
3704834; 457373, 3704834; 457373, 3704891; 457344, 3704891; 457344, 
3704919; 457316, 3704919; 457316, 3704947; 457259, 3704947; 457259, 
3705004; 457231, 3705004; 457231, 3705146; 457259, 3705146; 457259, 
3705174; 457231, 3705174; 457231, 3705288; 457259, 3705288; 457259, 
3705373; 457316, 3705373; 457316, 3705401; 457344, 3705401; 457344, 
3705430; 457430, 3705430; 457430, 3705458; 457458, 3705458; 457458, 
3705543; 457486, 3705543; 457486, 3705572; 457458, 3705572; 457458, 
3705628; 457458, 3705657; 457486, 3705657; 457486, 3705770; 457515, 
3705770; 457515, 3705827; 457543, 3705827; 457543, 3705884; 457571, 
3705884; 457571, 3705940; 457600, 3705940; 457600, 3705969; 457628, 
3705969; 457628, 3705997; 457656, 3705997; 457656, 3706054; 457742, 
3706054; 457742, 3706082; 457827, 3706082; 457827, 3706111; 457855, 
3706111; 457855, 3706139; 457883, 3706139; 457883, 3706196; 457969, 
3706196; 457969, 3706224; 457940, 3706224; 457940, 3706281; 457912, 
3706281; 457912, 3706536; 457940, 3706536; 457940, 3706565; 457969, 
3706565; 457969, 3706621; 457997, 3706621; 457997, 3706706; 458082, 
3706706; 458082, 3706848; 458054, 3706848; 458054, 3706905; 458025, 
3706905; 458025, 3706933; 458082, 3706933; 458082, 3707047; 458054, 
3707047; 458054, 3707075; 458082, 3707075; 458082, 3707104; 458110, 
3707104; 458110, 3707132; 458139, 3707132; 458139, 3707160; 458167, 
3707160; 458167, 3707189; 458195, 3707189; 458195, 3707217; 458224, 
3707217; 458224, 3707245; 458252, 3707245; 458252, 3707274; 458281, 
3707274; 458281, 3707302; 458309, 3707302; 458309, 3707330; 458337, 
3707330; 458337, 3707444; 458309, 3707444; 458309, 3707614; 458337, 
3707614; 458337, 3707671; 458309, 3707671; 458309, 3707728; 458281, 
3707728; 458281, 3707784; 458309, 3707784; 458309, 3707756; 458394, 
3707756; 458422, 3707756; 458422, 3707784; 458479, 3707784; 458479, 
3707813; 458508, 3707813; 458508, 3707841; 458536, 3707841; 458536, 
3707869; 458564, 3707869; 458564, 3707955; 458593, 3707955; 458593, 
3708011; 458621, 3708011; 458621, 3708068; 458649, 3708068; 458649, 
3708096; 458678, 3708096; 458678, 3708125; 458706, 3708125; 458706, 
3708153; 458734, 3708153; 458734, 3708182; 458848, 3708182; 458848, 
3708210; 458876, 3708210; 458876,

[[Page 407]]

3708238; 458905, 3708238; 458905, 3708267; 458933, 3708267; 458933, 
3708352; 458961, 3708352; 458961, 3708465; 458933, 3708465; 458933, 
3708494; 458961, 3708494; 458961, 3708550; 458990, 3708550; 458990, 
3708664; 459018, 3708664; 459018, 3708692; 459047, 3708692; 459047, 
3708721; 459075, 3708721; 459075, 3708749; 459103, 3708749; 459103, 
3708777; 459245, 3708777; 459245, 3708749; 459302, 3708749; 459302, 
3708692; 459330, 3708692; 459330, 3708635; 459359, 3708635; 459359, 
3708522; 459387, 3708522; 459387, 3708494; 459415, 3708494; 459415, 
3708522; 459472, 3708522; 459472, 3708579; 459444, 3708579; 459444, 
3708635; 459472, 3708635; 459472, 3708749; 459500, 3708749; 459500, 
3708834; 459529, 3708834; 459529, 3708862; 459500, 3708862; 459500, 
3708919; 459557, 3708919; 459557, 3708947; 459614, 3708947; 459614, 
3709004; 459642, 3709004; 459642, 3709033; 459699, 3709033; 459699, 
3709004; 459727, 3709004; 459727, 3708976; 459784, 3708976; 459784, 
3708947; 459869, 3708947; 459869, 3708919; 459926, 3708919; 459926, 
3708891; 460011, 3708891; 460011, 3708919; 460068, 3708919; 460068, 
3708947; 460096, 3708947; 460096, 3708976; 460125, 3708976; 460125, 
3709004; 460153, 3709004; 460153, 3709089; 460181, 3709089; 460181, 
3709487; 460210, 3709487; 460210, 3709543; 460238, 3709543; 460238, 
3709770; 460266, 3709770; 460266, 3709884; 460295, 3709884; 460295, 
3709997; 460352, 3709997; 460352, 3709969; 460380, 3709969; 460380, 
3709940; 460465, 3709940; 460465, 3709969; 460493, 3709969; 460493, 
3709997; 460550, 3709997; 460550, 3710026; 460607, 3710026; 460607, 
3710054; 460635, 3710054; 460635, 3710082; 460664, 3710082; 460664, 
3710111; 460692, 3710111; 460692, 3710139; 460720, 3710139; 460720, 
3710167; 460749, 3710167; 460749, 3710196; 460777, 3710196; 460777, 
3710224; 460834, 3710224; 460834, 3710252; 460862, 3710252; 460862, 
3710281; 460891, 3710281; 460891, 3710252; 460976, 3710252; 460976, 
3710167; 461032, 3710167; 461032, 3710139; 461061, 3710139; 461061, 
3710111; 461203, 3710111; 461203, 3710139; 461231, 3710139; 461231, 
3710167; 461259, 3710167; 461259, 3710196; 461288, 3710196; 461288, 
3710224; 461316, 3710224; 461316, 3710252; 461344, 3710252; 461344, 
3710281; 461373, 3710281; 461373, 3710309; 461401, 3710309; 461401, 
3710338; 461486, 3710338; 461486, 3710366; 461515, 3710366; 461515, 
3710394; 461571, 3710394; 461571, 3710366; 461628, 3710366; 461628, 
3710338; 461713, 3710338; 461713, 3710309; 461798, 3710309; 461798, 
3710281; 461855, 3710281; 461855, 3710252; 461912, 3710252; 461912, 
3710224; 462054, 3710224; 462054, 3710252; 462082, 3710252; 462082, 
3710281; 462110, 3710281; 462110, 3710309; 462082, 3710309; 462082, 
3710423; 462054, 3710423; 462054, 3710451; 462110, 3710451; 462110, 
3710423; 462224, 3710423; 462224, 3710479; 462281, 3710479; 462281, 
3710508; 462337, 3710508; 462337, 3710536; 462366, 3710536; 462366, 
3710593; 462394, 3710593; 462394, 3710650; 462422, 3710650; 462422, 
3710763; 462451, 3710763; 462451, 3710820; 462479, 3710820; 462479, 
3710848; 462536, 3710848; 462536, 3710962; 462564, 3710962; 462564, 
3710933; 462621, 3710933; 462621, 3710962; 462649, 3710962; 462649, 
3710990; 462678, 3710990; 462678, 3711018; 462706, 3711018; 462706, 
3711075; 462735, 3711075; 462735, 3711132; 462763, 3711132; 462763, 
3711189; 462791, 3711189; 462791, 3711217; 462820, 3711217; 462820, 
3711330; 462848, 3711330; 462848, 3711359; 462876, 3711359; 462876, 
3711416; 462905, 3711416; 462905, 3711444; 462933, 3711444; 462933, 
3711472; 462990, 3711472; 462990, 3711557; 463018, 3711557; 463018, 
3711614; 463047, 3711614; 463047, 3711756; 463075, 3711756; 463075, 
3711926; 463047, 3711926; 463047, 3712040; 463075, 3712040; 463075, 
3712125; 463103, 3712125; 463103, 3712153; 463132, 3712153; 463132, 
3712182; 463160, 3712182; 463160, 3712380; 463188, 3712380; 463188, 
3712437; 463217, 3712437; 463217, 3712579; 463245, 3712579; 463245, 
3712692; 463274, 3712692; 463274, 3712721; 463302, 3712721; 463302, 
3712664; 463330, 3712664; 463330, 3712522; 463415, 3712522; 463415, 
3712550; 463444, 3712550; 463444, 3712579; 463472, 3712579; 463472, 
3712607; 463529, 3712607; 463529, 3712635; 463557, 3712635; 463557, 
3712664; 463756, 3712664; 463756, 3712635; 463841, 3712635; 463841, 
3712607; 464068, 3712607; 464068, 3712579; 464125, 3712579; 464125, 
3712607; 464323, 3712607; 464323, 3712635; 464380, 3712635; 464380, 
3712607; 464408, 3712607; 464408, 3712550; 464437, 3712550; 464437, 
3712522; 464465, 3712522; 464465, 3712437; 464493, 3712437; 464493, 
3712380; 464522, 3712380; 464522, 3712352; 464578, 3712352; 464578, 
3712323; 464635, 3712323; 464635, 3712295; 464720, 3712295; 464720, 
3712267; 464749, 3712267; 464749, 3712238; 464834, 3712238; 464834, 
3712267; 464976, 3712267; 464976, 3712238; 465004, 3712238; 465004, 
3712267; 465089, 3712267; 465089, 3712238; 465174, 3712238; 465174, 
3712267; 465203, 3712267; 465203, 3712238; 465288, 3712238; 465288, 
3712210; 465316, 3712210; 465316, 3712182; 465344, 3712182; 465373, 
3712182; 465373, 3712210; 465430, 3712210; 465430, 3712238; 465486, 
3712238; 465486, 3712210; 465515, 3712210; 465600, 3712210; 465600, 
3712238; 465713, 3712238; 465713, 3712210; 465742, 3712210; 465742, 
3712182; 465770, 3712182; 465770, 3712153; 465827, 3712153; 465827, 
3712125; 465855, 3712125; 465855, 3712096; 465827, 3712096; 465827, 
3712068; 465855, 3712068; 465855, 3712040; 465940, 3712040; 465940, 
3712011; 465997, 3712011; 465997, 3711983; 466139, 3711983; 466139, 
3712011; 466196, 3712011; 466196, 3712040; 466224, 3712040; 466224, 
3712011; 466422, 3712011; 466422, 3712040; 466451, 3712040; 466451, 
3712068; 466536, 3712068; 466536, 3712040; 466649, 3712040; 466649, 
3712011; 466735, 3712011; 466735, 3712040; 466791, 3712040; 466791, 
3712068; 466820, 3712068; 466820, 3712040; 466876, 3712040; 466876, 
3712096; 466905, 3712096; 466905, 3712153; 466933, 3712153; 466933, 
3712238; 467018, 3712238; 467018, 3712267; 467047, 3712267; 467047, 
3712295; 467188, 3712295; 467188, 3712323; returning to 467274, 3712323.
    (ix) Note: Map of Unit 11 is provided at paragraph (13)(v) of this 
entry.
    (17) Unit 12: Lower Santa Margarita Basin, San Diego County, 
California.
    (i) Subunit 12a: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Fallbrook and 
Temecula, land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 470019, 
3696496; 470013, 3696496; 470013, 3696526; 470019, 3696526; returning to 
470019, 3696496.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 470024, 
3696976; 470020, 3696616; 470013, 3696616; 470013, 3696646; 469983, 
3696646; 469983, 3696856; 470013, 3696856; 470013, 3696976; returning to 
470024, 3696976.

[[Page 408]]

    (iii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 470553, 
3700756; 470553, 3700726; 470583, 3700726; 470583, 3700606; 470553, 
3700606; 470553, 3700576; 470523, 3700576; 470523, 3700546; 470463, 
3700546; 470463, 3700456; 470493, 3700456; 470493, 3700426; 470553, 
3700426; 470553, 3700396; 470583, 3700396; 470583, 3700336; 470523, 
3700336; 470523, 3700306; 470313, 3700306; 470313, 3700276; 470223, 
3700276; 470223, 3700246; 470163, 3700246; 470163, 3700096; 470043, 
3700096; 470043, 3700126; 469923, 3700126; 469923, 3699976; 469893, 
3699976; 469893, 3699886; 469923, 3699886; 469923, 3699766; 469953, 
3699766; 469953, 3699706; 469983, 3699706; 469983, 3699676; 470013, 
3699676; 470013, 3699646; 470043, 3699646; 470043, 3699616; 470103, 
3699616; 470103, 3699586; 470073, 3699586; 470073, 3699436; 470043, 
3699436; 470043, 3699406; 470013, 3699406; 470013, 3699376; 469983, 
3699376; 469983, 3699286; 470073, 3699286; 470073, 3699256; 470043, 
3699256; 470043, 3699196; 470013, 3699196; 470013, 3699136; 469983, 
3699136; 469983, 3699076; 470013, 3699076; 470013, 3698896; 470043, 
3698896; 470043, 3698866; 470073, 3698866; 470073, 3698836; 470133, 
3698836; 470133, 3698806; 470223, 3698806; 470223, 3698836; 470253, 
3698836; 470253, 3698866; 470313, 3698866; 470313, 3698806; 470343, 
3698806; 470343, 3698746; 470313, 3698746; 470313, 3698686; 470343, 
3698686; 470343, 3698596; 470313, 3698596; 470313, 3698566; 470253, 
3698566; 470253, 3698446; 470223, 3698446; 470223, 3698416; 470193, 
3698416; 470193, 3698446; 470163, 3698446; 470163, 3698416; 470133, 
3698416; 470133, 3698356; 470103, 3698356; 470103, 3698326; 470133, 
3698326; 470133, 3698266; 470163, 3698266; 470163, 3698206; 470193, 
3698206; 470193, 3698176; 470283, 3698176; 470283, 3698146; 470313, 
3698146; 470313, 3698116; 470283, 3698116; 470283, 3698086; 470253, 
3698086; 470253, 3697936; 470283, 3697936; 470283, 3697906; 470373, 
3697906; 470373, 3697876; 470433, 3697876; 470433, 3697816; 470403, 
3697816; 470403, 3697786; 470313, 3697786; 470313, 3697756; 470283, 
3697756; 470283, 3697696; 470253, 3697696; 470253, 3697576; 470283, 
3697576; 470283, 3697546; 470343, 3697546; 470343, 3697516; 470373, 
3697516; 470373, 3697511; 470031, 3697512; 470029, 3697396; 470013, 
3697396; 470013, 3697486; 469983, 3697486; 469983, 3697666; 470013, 
3697666; 470013, 3697786; 469953, 3697786; 469953, 3697846; 469923, 
3697846; 469923, 3697876; 469893, 3697876; 469893, 3697936; 469923, 
3697936; 469923, 3698116; 469893, 3698116; 469893, 3698176; 469863, 
3698176; 469863, 3698236; 469833, 3698236; 469833, 3698296; 469803, 
3698296; 469803, 3698356; 469773, 3698356; 469773, 3698416; 469743, 
3698416; 469743, 3698476; 469713, 3698476; 469713, 3698506; 469683, 
3698506; 469683, 3698536; 469653, 3698536; 469653, 3698596; 469623, 
3698596; 469623, 3698716; 469563, 3698716; 469563, 3698806; 469533, 
3698806; 469533, 3698866; 469503, 3698866; 469503, 3698986; 469593, 
3698986; 469593, 3699046; 469623, 3699046; 469623, 3699106; 469593, 
3699106; 469593, 3699136; 469563, 3699136; 469563, 3699196; 469533, 
3699196; 469533, 3699226; 469469, 3699226; 469466, 3699436; 469503, 
3699436; 469503, 3699616; 469473, 3699616; 469473, 3699646; 469413, 
3699646; 469413, 3699676; 469383, 3699676; 469383, 3699736; 469413, 
3699736; 469413, 3699766; 469383, 3699766; 469383, 3699886; 469473, 
3699886; 469473, 3699856; 469503, 3699856; 469503, 3699946; 469533, 
3699946; 469533, 3699976; 469563, 3699976; 469563, 3700006; 469593, 
3700006; 469593, 3700036; 469623, 3700036; 469623, 3700306; 469653, 
3700306; 469653, 3700336; 469683, 3700336; 469683, 3700396; 469713, 
3700396; 469713, 3700486; 469743, 3700486; 469743, 3700516; 469773, 
3700516; 469773, 3700456; 469803, 3700456; 469803, 3700426; 469893, 
3700426; 469893, 3700456; 469953, 3700456; 469953, 3700486; 470013, 
3700486; 470013, 3700696; 469983, 3700696; 469983, 3700726; 470013, 
3700726; 470013, 3700756; 470043, 3700756; 470043, 3700786; 470073, 
3700786; 470073, 3700756; 470103, 3700756; 470103, 3700666; 470163, 
3700666; 470163, 3700636; 470223, 3700636; 470223, 3700606; 470313, 
3700606; 470313, 3700636; 470343, 3700636; 470343, 3700666; 470403, 
3700666; 470403, 3700726; 470433, 3700726; 470433, 3700756; 470493, 
3700756; 470493, 3700816; 470523, 3700816; 470523, 3700846; 470553, 
3700846; returning to 470553, 3700756. Excluding land bounded by 469743, 
3699526; 469743, 3699496; 469773, 3699496; 469773, 3699466; 469803, 
3699466; 469803, 3699526; returning to 469743, 3699526.
    (iv) Subunit 12b: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Fallbrook and 
Temecula, land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 481713, 
3699166; 481713, 3699136; 481743, 3699136; 481743, 3699106; 481773, 
3699106; 481773, 3699046; 481803, 3699046; 481803, 3698986; 481833, 
3698986; 481833, 3698956; 481983, 3698956; 481983, 3698926; 482043, 
3698926; 482043, 3698896; 481983, 3698896; 481983, 3698866; 481953, 
3698866; 481953, 3698836; 481923, 3698836; 481923, 3698806; 481893, 
3698806; 481893, 3698716; 481863, 3698716; 481863, 3698686; 481833, 
3698686; 481833, 3698656; 481803, 3698656; 481803, 3698626; 481773, 
3698626; 481773, 3698596; 481743, 3698596; 481743, 3698566; 481683, 
3698566; 481683, 3698536; 481653, 3698536; 481653, 3698506; 481518, 
3698506; 481519, 3698558; 481476, 3698579; 481418, 3698570; 481299, 
3698509; 481259, 3698468; 481232, 3698394; 481172, 3698298; 481108, 
3698204; 481085, 3698135; 481233, 3698076; 481233, 3698056; 481173, 
3698056; 481173, 3698026; 481083, 3698026; 481083, 3697996; 481053, 
3697996; 481053, 3697936; 480993, 3697936; 480993, 3697876; 480963, 
3697876; 480963, 3697816; 480933, 3697816; 480933, 3697786; 480903, 
3697786; 480903, 3697756; 480873, 3697756; 480873, 3697726; 480843, 
3697726; 480843, 3697666; 480783, 3697666; 480783, 3697636; 480753, 
3697636; 480753, 3697606; 480693, 3697606; 480693, 3697576; 480663, 
3697576; 480663, 3697546; 480633, 3697546; 480633, 3697456; 480543, 
3697456; 480543, 3697486; 480483, 3697486; 480483, 3697456; 480453, 
3697456; 480453, 3697336; 480483, 3697336; 480483, 3697306; 480453, 
3697306; 480453, 3697276; 480393, 3697276; 480393, 3697246; 480363, 
3697246; 480363, 3697276; 480303, 3697276; 480303, 3697246; 480273, 
3697246; 480273, 3697186; 480243, 3697186; 480243, 3697156; 480273, 
3697156; 480273, 3697066; 480213, 3697066; 480213, 3697036; 480183, 
3697036; 480183, 3697006; 480153, 3697006; 480153, 3696976; 480123, 
3696976; 480123, 3696946; 480093, 3696946; 480093, 3696916; 480063, 
3696916; 480063, 3696886; 480093, 3696886; 480093, 3696856; 480123, 
3696856; 480123, 3696796; 480153, 3696796; 480153, 3696766; 480213, 
3696766; 480213, 3696736; 480183, 3696736; 480183, 3696706; 480153, 
3696706; 480153, 3696676; 480093, 3696676; 480093, 3696706; 480063, 
3696706; 480063,

[[Page 409]]

3696736; 479883, 3696736; 479883, 3696676; 479733, 3696676; 479733, 
3696646; 479673, 3696646; 479673, 3696616; 479643, 3696616; 479643, 
3696586; 479613, 3696586; 479613, 3696556; 479583, 3696556; 479583, 
3696496; 479553, 3696496; 479553, 3696466; 479493, 3696466; 479493, 
3696436; 479463, 3696436; 479463, 3696406; 479373, 3696406; 479373, 
3696376; 479343, 3696376; 479343, 3696346; 479283, 3696346; 479283, 
3696316; 479253, 3696316; 479253, 3696286; 479223, 3696286; 479223, 
3696226; 479193, 3696226; 479193, 3696196; 479163, 3696196; 479163, 
3696226; 479043, 3696226; 479043, 3696196; 479013, 3696196; 479013, 
3696166; 478953, 3696166; 478953, 3696196; 478923, 3696196; 478923, 
3696226; 478953, 3696226; 478953, 3696316; 478923, 3696316; 478923, 
3696376; 478863, 3696376; 478863, 3696346; 478833, 3696346; 478833, 
3696286; 478563, 3696286; 478563, 3696316; 478473, 3696316; 478473, 
3696346; 478443, 3696346; 478443, 3696376; 478473, 3696376; 478473, 
3696436; 478443, 3696436; 478443, 3696496; 478413, 3696496; 478413, 
3696556; 478383, 3696556; 478383, 3696586; 478293, 3696586; 478293, 
3696556; 478173, 3696556; 478173, 3696526; 478143, 3696526; 478143, 
3696496; 478083, 3696496; 478083, 3696436; 478053, 3696436; 478053, 
3696406; 478023, 3696406; 478023, 3696376; 477993, 3696376; 477993, 
3696406; 477963, 3696406; 477963, 3696466; 477903, 3696466; 477903, 
3696496; 477813, 3696496; 477813, 3696466; 477753, 3696466; 477753, 
3696526; 477723, 3696526; 477723, 3696556; 477693, 3696556; 477693, 
3696586; 477663, 3696586; 477663, 3696796; 477633, 3696796; 477633, 
3696856; 477663, 3696856; 477663, 3696976; 477633, 3696976; 477633, 
3697006; 477573, 3697006; 477573, 3697036; 477333, 3697036; 477333, 
3697006; 477273, 3697006; 477273, 3696976; 477243, 3696976; 477243, 
3696946; 477213, 3696946; 477213, 3696916; 477183, 3696916; 477183, 
3696886; 477153, 3696886; 477153, 3696856; 477123, 3696856; 477123, 
3696826; 477093, 3696826; 477093, 3696796; 477063, 3696796; 477063, 
3696766; 477033, 3696766; 477033, 3696706; 476973, 3696706; 476973, 
3696616; 477003, 3696616; 477003, 3696586; 476943, 3696586; 476943, 
3696556; 476913, 3696556; 476913, 3696526; 476883, 3696526; 476883, 
3696346; 476913, 3696346; 476913, 3696316; 476883, 3696316; 476883, 
3696196; 476853, 3696196; 476853, 3695926; 476823, 3695926; 476823, 
3695836; 476793, 3695836; 476793, 3695776; 476763, 3695776; 476763, 
3695746; 476733, 3695746; 476733, 3695686; 476673, 3695686; 476673, 
3695716; 476643, 3695716; 476643, 3695776; 476613, 3695776; 476613, 
3695806; 476553, 3695806; 476553, 3695836; 476493, 3695836; 476493, 
3695866; 476196, 3695866; 476213, 3696016; 476253, 3696016; 476253, 
3696046; 476463, 3696046; 476463, 3696076; 476553, 3696076; 476553, 
3696136; 476583, 3696136; 476583, 3696196; 476613, 3696196; 476613, 
3696226; 476643, 3696226; 476643, 3696376; 476673, 3696376; 476673, 
3696496; 476643, 3696496; 476643, 3696526; 476613, 3696526; 476613, 
3696586; 476643, 3696586; 476643, 3696616; 476673, 3696616; 476673, 
3696736; 476703, 3696736; 476703, 3696796; 476733, 3696796; 476733, 
3696826; 476763, 3696826; 476763, 3696856; 476793, 3696856; 476793, 
3696946; 476883, 3696946; 476883, 3696976; 477003, 3696976; 477003, 
3697006; 477033, 3697006; 477033, 3697036; 477093, 3697036; 477093, 
3697066; 477153, 3697066; 477153, 3697156; 477123, 3697156; 477123, 
3697216; 477093, 3697216; 477093, 3697246; 477063, 3697246; 477063, 
3697306; 477003, 3697306; 477003, 3697336; 476973, 3697336; 476973, 
3697396; 476943, 3697396; 476943, 3697486; 476973, 3697486; 476973, 
3697546; 476943, 3697546; 476943, 3697576; 476973, 3697576; 476973, 
3697666; 477003, 3697666; 477003, 3697636; 477033, 3697636; 477033, 
3697576; 477063, 3697576; 477063, 3697456; 477093, 3697456; 477093, 
3697426; 477123, 3697426; 477123, 3697396; 477183, 3697396; 477183, 
3697426; 477273, 3697426; 477273, 3697456; 477363, 3697456; 477363, 
3697486; 477483, 3697486; 477483, 3697546; 477573, 3697546; 477573, 
3697516; 477603, 3697516; 477603, 3697486; 477633, 3697486; 477633, 
3697456; 477663, 3697456; 477663, 3697426; 477693, 3697426; 477693, 
3697366; 477663, 3697366; 477663, 3697306; 477693, 3697306; 477693, 
3697246; 477723, 3697246; 477723, 3697216; 477753, 3697216; 477753, 
3697186; 477783, 3697186; 477783, 3697156; 477813, 3697156; 477813, 
3697126; 477843, 3697126; 477843, 3697156; 477873, 3697156; 477873, 
3697216; 477903, 3697216; 477903, 3697276; 477963, 3697276; 477963, 
3697246; 477933, 3697246; 477933, 3697156; 477963, 3697156; 477963, 
3697066; 478053, 3697066; 478053, 3697006; 477993, 3697006; 477993, 
3696976; 477963, 3696976; 477963, 3696916; 477993, 3696916; 477993, 
3696826; 478023, 3696826; 478023, 3696796; 477993, 3696796; 477993, 
3696676; 478053, 3696676; 478053, 3696706; 478143, 3696706; 478143, 
3696736; 478173, 3696736; 478173, 3696796; 478203, 3696796; 478203, 
3696826; 478233, 3696826; 478233, 3696856; 478263, 3696856; 478263, 
3696886; 478323, 3696886; 478323, 3696916; 478443, 3696916; 478443, 
3696826; 478473, 3696826; 478473, 3696796; 478623, 3696796; 478623, 
3696826; 478653, 3696826; 478653, 3696856; 478683, 3696856; 478683, 
3696826; 478713, 3696826; 478713, 3696736; 478683, 3696736; 478683, 
3696676; 478653, 3696676; 478653, 3696646; 478623, 3696646; 478623, 
3696466; 478743, 3696466; 478743, 3696526; 478863, 3696526; 478863, 
3696556; 478923, 3696556; 478923, 3696586; 478953, 3696586; 478953, 
3696616; 479013, 3696616; 479013, 3696586; 479043, 3696586; 479043, 
3696556; 479163, 3696556; 479163, 3696586; 479223, 3696586; 479223, 
3696616; 479283, 3696616; 479283, 3696646; 479313, 3696646; 479313, 
3696616; 479343, 3696616; 479343, 3696646; 479373, 3696646; 479373, 
3696706; 479403, 3696706; 479403, 3696736; 479523, 3696736; 479523, 
3696796; 479553, 3696796; 479553, 3696856; 479613, 3696856; 479613, 
3696886; 479733, 3696886; 479733, 3696916; 479763, 3696916; 479763, 
3696946; 479793, 3696946; 479793, 3697006; 479823, 3697006; 479823, 
3697126; 479853, 3697126; 479853, 3697156; 479883, 3697156; 479883, 
3697186; 479913, 3697186; 479913, 3697216; 479943, 3697216; 479943, 
3697306; 479973, 3697306; 479973, 3697366; 479943, 3697366; 479943, 
3697486; 479973, 3697486; 479973, 3697516; 480003, 3697516; 480003, 
3697546; 480093, 3697546; 480093, 3697516; 480183, 3697516; 480183, 
3697546; 480213, 3697546; 480213, 3697666; 480303, 3697666; 480303, 
3697636; 480363, 3697636; 480363, 3697666; 480423, 3697666; 480423, 
3697696; 480453, 3697696; 480453, 3697756; 480483, 3697756; 480483, 
3697786; 480513, 3697786; 480513, 3697906; 480603, 3697906; 480603, 
3697936; 480663, 3697936; 480663, 3697966; 480723, 3697966; 480723, 
3697996; 480753, 3697996; 480753, 3698026; 480783, 3698026; 480783, 
3698056; 480813, 3698056; 480813, 3698086; 480783, 3698086; 480783, 
3698146; 480843, 3698146; 480843, 3698296; 480873, 3698296; 480873, 
3698326; 480903, 3698326; 480903,

[[Page 410]]

3698386; 480933, 3698386; 480933, 3698416; 480963, 3698416; 480963, 
3698476; 480993, 3698476; 480993, 3698506; 481023, 3698506; 481023, 
3698566; 481053, 3698566; 481053, 3698596; 481083, 3698596; 481083, 
3698626; 481113, 3698626; 481113, 3698656; 481143, 3698656; 481143, 
3698686; 481203, 3698686; 481203, 3698716; 481233, 3698716; 481233, 
3698746; 481323, 3698746; 481323, 3698776; 481353, 3698776; 481353, 
3698806; 481623, 3698806; 481623, 3698836; 481653, 3698836; 481653, 
3698956; 481683, 3698956; 481683, 3699106; 481653, 3699106; 481653, 
3699166; returning to 481713, 3699166.
    (v) Note: Map of Units 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17 follows.

[[Page 411]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09FE11.008

    (18) Unit 13: Upper Santa Margarita Basin, Riverside and San Diego 
Counties, California.
    (i) Subunit 13a: from USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle map Vail Lake, land 
bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 505506, 3698564; 
505506, 3698534; 505536, 3698534; 505536,

[[Page 412]]

3698564; 505506, 3698564; 505506, 3698599; 505506, 3698624; 505536, 
3698624; 505536, 3698654; 505566, 3698654; 505566, 3698624; 505626, 
3698624; 505626, 3698594; 505656, 3698594; 505656, 3698624; 505686, 
3698624; 505686, 3698654; 505716, 3698654; 505716, 3698684; 505686, 
3698684; 505686, 3698714; 505656, 3698714; 505656, 3698744; 505626, 
3698744; 505626, 3698774; 505596, 3698774; 505596, 3698804; 505446, 
3698804; 505446, 3698834; 505386, 3698834; 505386, 3698924; 505446, 
3698924; 505446, 3698954; 505476, 3698954; 505476, 3698984; 505506, 
3698984; 505506, 3699044; 505536, 3699044; 505536, 3699134; 505566, 
3699134; 505566, 3699194; 505656, 3699194; 505656, 3699224; 505746, 
3699224; 505746, 3699254; 505776, 3699254; 505776, 3699314; 505806, 
3699314; 505806, 3699494; 505836, 3699494; 505836, 3699554; 505866, 
3699554; 505866, 3699584; 505896, 3699584; 505896, 3699614; 505926, 
3699614; 505926, 3699734; 505896, 3699734; 505896, 3699824; 505866, 
3699824; 505866, 3699854; 505806, 3699854; 505806, 3699884; 505656, 
3699884; 505656, 3699944; 505626, 3699944; 505626, 3699974; 505596, 
3699974; 505596, 3700034; 505626, 3700034; 505626, 3700064; 505626, 
3700154; 505596, 3700154; 505596, 3700274; 505566, 3700274; 505566, 
3700304; 505476, 3700304; 505476, 3700274; 505446, 3700274; 505446, 
3700214; 505416, 3700214; 505416, 3700184; 505386, 3700184; 505386, 
3700214; 505326, 3700214; 505326, 3700244; 505296, 3700244; 505296, 
3700274; 505266, 3700274; 505266, 3700364; 505236, 3700364; 505236, 
3700634; 505206, 3700634; 505206, 3700694; 505176, 3700694; 505176, 
3700724; 505146, 3700724; 505146, 3700754; 505116, 3700754; 505116, 
3700784; 505086, 3700784; 505086, 3700814; 505026, 3700814; 505026, 
3700844; 504876, 3700844; 504876, 3700874; 504816, 3700874; 504816, 
3700904; 504516, 3700904; 504516, 3700934; 504456, 3700934; 504456, 
3700964; 504426, 3700964; 504426, 3700994; 504366, 3700994; 504366, 
3701084; 504336, 3701084; 504336, 3701144; 504306, 3701144; 504306, 
3701174; 504276, 3701174; 504276, 3701204; 504246, 3701204; 504246, 
3701234; 504216, 3701234; 504216, 3701294; 504186, 3701294; 504186, 
3701384; 504156, 3701384; 504156, 3701474; 504126, 3701474; 504126, 
3701504; 504066, 3701504; 504066, 3701534; 503886, 3701534; 503886, 
3701504; 503856, 3701504; 503856, 3701474; 503826, 3701474; 503826, 
3701444; 503796, 3701444; 503796, 3701384; 503646, 3701384; 503646, 
3701354; 503526, 3701354; 503526, 3701384; 503466, 3701384; 503466, 
3701414; 503406, 3701414; 503406, 3701384; 503346, 3701384; 503346, 
3701354; 503316, 3701354; 503316, 3701324; 503256, 3701324; 503256, 
3701294; 503226, 3701294; 503226, 3701234; 503166, 3701234; 503166, 
3701264; 503046, 3701264; 503046, 3701204; 503016, 3701204; 503016, 
3701174; 502956, 3701174; 502956, 3701204; 502836, 3701204; 502836, 
3701234; 502806, 3701234; 502806, 3701264; 502776, 3701264; 502776, 
3701294; 502746, 3701294; 502746, 3701414; 502716, 3701414; 502716, 
3701474; 502686, 3701474; 502686, 3701504; 502656, 3701504; 502656, 
3701594; 502686, 3701594; 502686, 3701654; 502716, 3701654; 502716, 
3701684; 502686, 3701684; 502686, 3701714; 502656, 3701714; 502656, 
3701774; 502626, 3701774; 502626, 3701804; 502536, 3701804; 502536, 
3701954; 502506, 3701954; 502506, 3701984; 502386, 3701984; 502386, 
3702104; 502416, 3702104; 502416, 3702194; 502386, 3702194; 502386, 
3702344; 502416, 3702344; 502416, 3702524; 502386, 3702524; 502386, 
3702584; 502356, 3702584; 502356, 3702554; 502296, 3702554; 502296, 
3702524; 502266, 3702524; 502266, 3702494; 502206, 3702494; 502206, 
3702584; 502236, 3702584; 502236, 3702644; 502266, 3702644; 502266, 
3702764; 502296, 3702764; 502296, 3702794; 502206, 3702794; 502206, 
3702824; 502176, 3702824; 502176, 3702854; 502116, 3702854; 502116, 
3702884; 502086, 3702884; 502086, 3702914; 502056, 3702914; 502056, 
3702974; 502026, 3702974; 502026, 3703004; 501996, 3703004; 501996, 
3703034; 501966, 3703034; 501966, 3703124; 501936, 3703124; 501936, 
3703154; 501876, 3703154; 501876, 3703184; 501846, 3703184; 501846, 
3703334; 501816, 3703334; 501816, 3703364; 501726, 3703364; 501726, 
3703394; 501666, 3703394; 501666, 3703424; 501636, 3703424; 501636, 
3703454; 501606, 3703454; 501606, 3703484; 501576, 3703484; 501576, 
3703514; 501546, 3703514; 501546, 3703544; 501516, 3703544; 501516, 
3703574; 501456, 3703574; 501456, 3703544; 501426, 3703544; 501426, 
3703514; 501396, 3703514; 501396, 3703484; 501366, 3703484; 501366, 
3703454; 501336, 3703454; 501336, 3703484; 501306, 3703484; 501306, 
3703544; 501336, 3703544; 501336, 3703634; 501306, 3703634; 501306, 
3703664; 501276, 3703664; 501276, 3703754; 501216, 3703754; 501216, 
3703724; 501186, 3703724; 501186, 3703694; 501126, 3703694; 501126, 
3703664; 501036, 3703664; 501036, 3703634; 501006, 3703634; 501006, 
3703604; 500976, 3703604; 500976, 3703574; 500916, 3703574; 500916, 
3703544; 500886, 3703544; 500886, 3703574; 500856, 3703574; 500856, 
3703634; 500886, 3703634; 500886, 3703664; 500916, 3703664; 500916, 
3703694; 500946, 3703694; 500946, 3703754; 500976, 3703754; 500976, 
3703874; 500916, 3703874; 500916, 3703994; 500946, 3703994; 500946, 
3704054; 501006, 3704054; 501006, 3704084; 501036, 3704084; 501036, 
3704114; 501066, 3704114; 501066, 3704144; 501126, 3704144; 501126, 
3704174; 501156, 3704174; 501156, 3704234; 501186, 3704234; 501186, 
3704324; 501156, 3704324; 501156, 3704354; 501126, 3704354; 501126, 
3704414; 501246, 3704414; 501246, 3704444; 501336, 3704444; 501336, 
3704594; 501486, 3704594; 501486, 3704624; 501516, 3704624; 501516, 
3704654; 501546, 3704654; 501546, 3704684; 501576, 3704684; 501576, 
3704744; 501606, 3704744; 501606, 3704804; 501636, 3704804; 501636, 
3704834; 501666, 3704834; 501666, 3704894; 501696, 3704894; 501696, 
3704924; 501726, 3704924; 501726, 3704954; 501696, 3704954; 501696, 
3705044; 501666, 3705044; 501666, 3705074; 501606, 3705074; 501606, 
3705164; 501666, 3705164; 501713, 3705144; 501832, 3704997; 501956, 
3704780; 502043, 3704659; 502101, 3704534; 501996, 3704534; 501996, 
3704564; 501966, 3704564; 501966, 3704594; 501906, 3704594; 501906, 
3704624; 501816, 3704624; 501816, 3704504; 501846, 3704504; 501846, 
3704444; 501876, 3704444; 501876, 3704384; 501846, 3704384; 501846, 
3704354; 501756, 3704354; 501756, 3704384; 501696, 3704384; 501696, 
3704414; 501636, 3704414; 501636, 3704384; 501606, 3704384; 501606, 
3704264; 501576, 3704264; 501576, 3704234; 501606, 3704234; 501606, 
3704174; 501636, 3704174; 501636, 3704144; 501666, 3704144; 501666, 
3704084; 501606, 3704084; 501606, 3704054; 501636, 3704054; 501636, 
3704024; 501666, 3704024; 501666, 3703994; 501786, 3703994; 501786, 
3703964; 501846, 3703964; 501846, 3703934; 501906, 3703934; 501906, 
3703904; 501936, 3703904; 501936, 3703814; 502026, 3703814; 502026, 
3703784; 502086, 3703784; 502086, 3703754; 502146, 3703754; 502146, 
3703784; 502236, 3703784; 502236,

[[Page 413]]

3703754; 502266, 3703754; 502266, 3703694; 502296, 3703694; 502296, 
3703664; 502326, 3703664; 502326, 3703634; 502356, 3703634; 502356, 
3703604; 502296, 3703604; 502296, 3703574; 502236, 3703574; 502236, 
3703394; 502266, 3703394; 502266, 3703424; 502296, 3703424; 502296, 
3703454; 502356, 3703454; 502356, 3703424; 502386, 3703424; 502386, 
3703394; 502416, 3703394; 502416, 3703364; 502446, 3703364; 502446, 
3703274; 502416, 3703274; 502416, 3703244; 502386, 3703244; 502386, 
3703184; 502416, 3703184; 502416, 3703154; 502446, 3703154; 502446, 
3703124; 502476, 3703124; 502476, 3703094; 502506, 3703094; 502506, 
3703064; 502566, 3703064; 502566, 3703034; 502626, 3703034; 502626, 
3703094; 502656, 3703094; 502656, 3703124; 502626, 3703124; 502626, 
3703184; 502656, 3703184; 502656, 3703214; 502686, 3703214; 502686, 
3703184; 502746, 3703184; 502746, 3703214; 502776, 3703214; 502776, 
3703244; 502806, 3703244; 502806, 3703214; 502836, 3703214; 502836, 
3703184; 502896, 3703184; 502896, 3703154; 502926, 3703154; 502926, 
3703094; 502896, 3703094; 502896, 3702974; 502926, 3702974; 502926, 
3702824; 502896, 3702824; 502896, 3702764; 502926, 3702764; 502926, 
3702734; 502986, 3702734; 502986, 3702644; 502806, 3702644; 502806, 
3702614; 502746, 3702614; 502746, 3702584; 502716, 3702584; 502716, 
3702464; 502746, 3702464; 502746, 3702434; 502776, 3702434; 502776, 
3702404; 502806, 3702404; 502806, 3702344; 502776, 3702344; 502776, 
3702314; 502746, 3702314; 502746, 3702254; 502776, 3702254; 502776, 
3702104; 502806, 3702104; 502806, 3702074; 502956, 3702074; 502956, 
3701894; 502986, 3701894; 502986, 3701864; 502956, 3701864; 502956, 
3701774; 502926, 3701774; 502926, 3701594; 502896, 3701594; 502896, 
3701534; 502866, 3701534; 502866, 3701444; 502896, 3701444; 502896, 
3701354; 502986, 3701354; 502986, 3701384; 503106, 3701384; 503106, 
3701414; 503166, 3701414; 503166, 3701474; 503226, 3701474; 503226, 
3701504; 503256, 3701504; 503256, 3701534; 503316, 3701534; 503316, 
3701564; 503346, 3701564; 503346, 3701594; 503526, 3701594; 503526, 
3701534; 503556, 3701534; 503556, 3701474; 503646, 3701474; 503646, 
3701504; 503706, 3701504; 503706, 3701564; 503736, 3701564; 503736, 
3701594; 503766, 3701594; 503766, 3701624; 503826, 3701624; 503826, 
3701654; 503946, 3701654; 503946, 3701684; 503976, 3701684; 503976, 
3701714; 504036, 3701714; 504036, 3701744; 504066, 3701744; 504066, 
3701714; 504096, 3701714; 504096, 3701684; 504126, 3701684; 504126, 
3701654; 504186, 3701654; 504186, 3701624; 504276, 3701624; 504276, 
3701594; 504306, 3701594; 504306, 3701564; 504336, 3701564; 504336, 
3701534; 504366, 3701534; 504366, 3701474; 504336, 3701474; 504336, 
3701414; 504306, 3701414; 504306, 3701384; 504336, 3701384; 504336, 
3701324; 504366, 3701324; 504366, 3701294; 504396, 3701294; 504396, 
3701234; 504426, 3701234; 504426, 3701204; 504486, 3701204; 504486, 
3701174; 504516, 3701174; 504516, 3701144; 504546, 3701144; 504546, 
3701114; 504576, 3701114; 504576, 3701084; 504606, 3701084; 504606, 
3701114; 504636, 3701114; 504636, 3701084; 504666, 3701084; 504666, 
3701114; 504696, 3701114; 504696, 3701084; 504756, 3701084; 504756, 
3701054; 504846, 3701054; 504846, 3701024; 505026, 3701024; 505026, 
3700994; 505086, 3700994; 505086, 3700964; 505116, 3700964; 505116, 
3700934; 505176, 3700934; 505176, 3700904; 505206, 3700904; 505206, 
3700874; 505236, 3700874; 505236, 3700844; 505296, 3700844; 505296, 
3700814; 505356, 3700814; 505356, 3700784; 505386, 3700784; 505386, 
3700754; 505416, 3700754; 505416, 3700814; 505476, 3700814; 505476, 
3700784; 505506, 3700784; 505506, 3700724; 505656, 3700724; 505656, 
3700754; 505686, 3700754; 505686, 3700784; 505716, 3700784; 505716, 
3700814; 505746, 3700814; 505746, 3700844; 505776, 3700844; 505776, 
3700874; 505836, 3700874; 505836, 3700904; 505866, 3700904; 505866, 
3700934; 505986, 3700934; 505986, 3700904; 506046, 3700904; 506046, 
3700844; 506106, 3700844; 506106, 3700814; 506136, 3700814; 506136, 
3700844; 506166, 3700844; 506166, 3700874; 506196, 3700874; 506196, 
3700904; 506226, 3700904; 506226, 3700934; 506406, 3700934; 506406, 
3700964; 506466, 3700964; 506466, 3700904; 506436, 3700904; 506436, 
3700874; 506406, 3700874; 506406, 3700814; 506376, 3700814; 506376, 
3700784; 506346, 3700784; 506346, 3700634; 506316, 3700634; 506316, 
3700574; 506286, 3700574; 506286, 3700514; 506316, 3700514; 506316, 
3700454; 506346, 3700454; 506346, 3700394; 506376, 3700394; 506376, 
3700034; 506406, 3700034; 506406, 3700004; 506466, 3700004; 506466, 
3699914; 506436, 3699914; 506436, 3699704; 506466, 3699704; 506466, 
3699674; 506496, 3699674; 506496, 3699644; 506526, 3699644; 506526, 
3699554; 506496, 3699554; 506496, 3699524; 506466, 3699524; 506466, 
3699434; 506436, 3699434; 506436, 3699404; 506136, 3699404; 506136, 
3699344; 506106, 3699344; 506106, 3699284; 506046, 3699284; 506046, 
3699224; 506016, 3699224; 506016, 3699194; 506046, 3699194; 506046, 
3699164; 506016, 3699164; 506016, 3699134; 505956, 3699134; 505956, 
3699104; 505926, 3699104; 505926, 3699074; 505896, 3699074; 505896, 
3699044; 505866, 3699044; 505866, 3699014; 505836, 3699014; 505836, 
3698924; 505806, 3698924; 505806, 3698894; 505836, 3698894; 505836, 
3698864; 505866, 3698864; 505866, 3698834; 505896, 3698834; 505896, 
3698774; 505866, 3698774; 505866, 3698714; 505836, 3698714; 505836, 
3698534; 505866, 3698534; 505866, 3698564; 505956, 3698564; 505956, 
3698534; 505986, 3698534; 505986, 3698414; 505956, 3698414; 505956, 
3698324; 505926, 3698324; 505926, 3698264; 505896, 3698264; 505896, 
3698204; 505866, 3698204; 505866, 3698174; 505776, 3698174; 505776, 
3698144; 505596, 3698144; 505596, 3698024; 505566, 3698024; 505566, 
3697964; 505536, 3697964; 505536, 3697934; 505506, 3697934; 505506, 
3697904; 505476, 3697904; 505476, 3697874; 505296, 3697874; 505296, 
3697844; 505266, 3697844; 505266, 3697814; 505236, 3697814; 505236, 
3697784; 505206, 3697784; 505206, 3697724; 505176, 3697724; 505176, 
3697694; 505116, 3697694; 505116, 3697724; 505026, 3697724; 505026, 
3697694; 504996, 3697694; 504996, 3697664; 504966, 3697664; 504966, 
3697634; 504846, 3697634; 504846, 3697664; 504816, 3697664; 504816, 
3697694; 504846, 3697694; 504846, 3697754; 504876, 3697754; 504876, 
3697844; 504846, 3697844; 504846, 3697934; 504816, 3697934; 504816, 
3697964; 504846, 3697964; 504846, 3698114; 504876, 3698114; 504876, 
3698174; 504906, 3698174; 504906, 3698204; 504966, 3698204; 504966, 
3698234; 504996, 3698234; 504996, 3698264; 505086, 3698264; 505086, 
3698324; 505116, 3698324; 505116, 3698354; 505146, 3698354; 505146, 
3698414; 505206, 3698414; 505206, 3698444; 505236, 3698444; 505236, 
3698414; 505266, 3698414; 505266, 3698444; 505296, 3698444; 505296, 
3698474; 505326, 3698474; 505326, 3698504; 505356, 3698504; 505356, 
3698534; 505386, 3698534; 505386, 3698564; returning to 505506, 3698564.

[[Page 414]]

    (ii) Subunit 13b: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Vail Lake, 
Aguanga, and Palomar Observatory, land bounded by the following UTM 
coordinates (E, N): 520626, 3692624; 520656, 3692624; 520656, 3692654; 
520626, 3692654; 520626, 3692624; 520596, 3692624; 520596, 3692594; 
520476, 3692594; 520476, 3692624; 520356, 3692624; 520356, 3692594; 
520326, 3692594; 520326, 3692564; 520266, 3692564; 520266, 3692594; 
520206, 3692594; 520206, 3692654; 520176, 3692654; 520176, 3692684; 
520146, 3692684; 520146, 3692744; 520116, 3692744; 520116, 3692864; 
519936, 3692864; 519936, 3692894; 519906, 3692894; 519906, 3692924; 
519876, 3692924; 519876, 3692984; 519846, 3692984; 519846, 3693014; 
519816, 3693014; 519816, 3693044; 519786, 3693044; 519786, 3693074; 
519756, 3693074; 519756, 3693104; 519726, 3693104; 519726, 3693134; 
519606, 3693134; 519606, 3693164; 519576, 3693164; 519576, 3693224; 
519546, 3693224; 519546, 3693284; 519456, 3693284; 519456, 3693314; 
519336, 3693314; 519336, 3693344; 519306, 3693344; 519306, 3693374; 
519276, 3693374; 519276, 3693434; 519246, 3693434; 519246, 3693524; 
519216, 3693524; 519216, 3693554; 519156, 3693554; 519156, 3693584; 
519126, 3693584; 519126, 3693614; 519036, 3693614; 519036, 3693644; 
518976, 3693644; 518976, 3693704; 518946, 3693704; 518946, 3693764; 
518916, 3693764; 518916, 3693794; 518886, 3693794; 518886, 3693824; 
518826, 3693824; 518826, 3693854; 518796, 3693854; 518796, 3693884; 
518766, 3693884; 518766, 3693914; 518736, 3693914; 518736, 3693944; 
518706, 3693944; 518706, 3694064; 518676, 3694064; 518676, 3694094; 
518646, 3694094; 518646, 3694124; 518616, 3694124; 518616, 3694154; 
518586, 3694154; 518586, 3694184; 518556, 3694184; 518556, 3694214; 
518526, 3694214; 518526, 3694364; 518496, 3694364; 518496, 3694394; 
518466, 3694394; 518466, 3694424; 518346, 3694424; 518346, 3694484; 
518316, 3694484; 518316, 3694514; 518286, 3694514; 518286, 3694544; 
518196, 3694544; 518196, 3694574; 518166, 3694574; 518166, 3694604; 
518136, 3694604; 518136, 3694634; 518106, 3694634; 518106, 3694664; 
518076, 3694664; 518076, 3694754; 518046, 3694754; 518046, 3694784; 
517986, 3694784; 517986, 3694814; 517956, 3694814; 517956, 3694844; 
517896, 3694844; 517896, 3694874; 517866, 3694874; 517866, 3694934; 
517836, 3694934; 517836, 3695024; 517806, 3695024; 517806, 3695084; 
517776, 3695084; 517776, 3695114; 517746, 3695114; 517746, 3695144; 
517716, 3695144; 517716, 3695114; 517656, 3695114; 517656, 3695084; 
517626, 3695084; 517626, 3695114; 517596, 3695114; 517596, 3695174; 
517536, 3695174; 517536, 3695234; 517506, 3695234; 517506, 3695324; 
517476, 3695324; 517476, 3695354; 517446, 3695354; 517446, 3695384; 
517386, 3695384; 517386, 3695414; 517356, 3695414; 517356, 3695444; 
517146, 3695444; 517146, 3695474; 517176, 3695474; 517176, 3695564; 
517146, 3695564; 517146, 3695654; 517116, 3695654; 517116, 3695684; 
517086, 3695684; 517086, 3695774; 517056, 3695774; 517056, 3695864; 
517026, 3695864; 517026, 3695924; 516996, 3695924; 516996, 3695954; 
516966, 3695954; 516966, 3696014; 516936, 3696014; 516936, 3696044; 
516876, 3696044; 516876, 3696074; 516846, 3696074; 516846, 3696104; 
516816, 3696104; 516816, 3696164; 516756, 3696164; 516756, 3696194; 
516696, 3696194; 516696, 3696224; 516666, 3696224; 516666, 3696254; 
516576, 3696254; 516576, 3696284; 516516, 3696284; 516516, 3696314; 
516396, 3696314; 516396, 3696374; 516366, 3696374; 516366, 3696404; 
516276, 3696404; 516276, 3696314; 516246, 3696314; 516246, 3696284; 
516216, 3696284; 516216, 3696254; 516186, 3696254; 516186, 3696224; 
516096, 3696224; 516096, 3696254; 516066, 3696254; 516066, 3696284; 
516036, 3696284; 516036, 3696314; 516006, 3696314; 516006, 3696344; 
515976, 3696344; 515976, 3696404; 515946, 3696404; 515946, 3696434; 
515916, 3696434; 515916, 3696494; 515886, 3696494; 515886, 3696524; 
515856, 3696524; 515856, 3696584; 515826, 3696584; 515826, 3696644; 
515796, 3696644; 515796, 3696734; 515766, 3696734; 515766, 3696764; 
515796, 3696764; 515796, 3696794; 515766, 3696794; 515766, 3696824; 
515646, 3696824; 515646, 3696854; 515586, 3696854; 515586, 3696884; 
515436, 3696884; 515436, 3697004; 515406, 3697004; 515406, 3697064; 
515436, 3697064; 515436, 3697094; 515376, 3697094; 515376, 3697124; 
515316, 3697124; 515316, 3697154; 515286, 3697154; 515286, 3697184; 
515256, 3697184; 515256, 3697214; 515226, 3697214; 515226, 3697244; 
515076, 3697244; 515076, 3697364; 515046, 3697364; 515046, 3697424; 
515016, 3697424; 515016, 3697484; 514986, 3697484; 514986, 3697514; 
514926, 3697514; 514926, 3697544; 514896, 3697544; 514896, 3697574; 
514866, 3697574; 514866, 3697604; 514836, 3697604; 514836, 3697694; 
514806, 3697694; 514806, 3697724; 514746, 3697724; 514746, 3697754; 
514716, 3697754; 514716, 3697784; 514686, 3697784; 514686, 3697814; 
514626, 3697814; 514626, 3697844; 514566, 3697844; 514566, 3697874; 
514476, 3697874; 514476, 3697904; 514446, 3697904; 514446, 3697964; 
514416, 3697964; 514416, 3698084; 514386, 3698084; 514386, 3698114; 
514326, 3698114; 514326, 3698144; 514266, 3698144; 514266, 3698204; 
514236, 3698204; 514236, 3698384; 514206, 3698384; 514206, 3698444; 
514176, 3698444; 514176, 3698474; 514146, 3698474; 514146, 3698504; 
514086, 3698504; 514086, 3698564; 514056, 3698564; 514056, 3698594; 
514026, 3698594; 514026, 3698624; 513996, 3698624; 513996, 3698654; 
513966, 3698654; 513966, 3698684; 513876, 3698684; 513876, 3698714; 
513846, 3698714; 513846, 3698744; 513816, 3698744; 513816, 3698774; 
513786, 3698774; 513786, 3698834; 513816, 3698834; 513816, 3698924; 
513846, 3698924; 513846, 3698954; 513816, 3698954; 513816, 3698984; 
513756, 3698984; 513756, 3698954; 513606, 3698954; 513606, 3698984; 
513576, 3698984; 513576, 3698954; 513396, 3698954; 513396, 3698984; 
513336, 3698984; 513336, 3699014; 513306, 3699014; 513306, 3699044; 
513276, 3699044; 513276, 3699074; 513246, 3699074; 513246, 3699104; 
513156, 3699104; 513156, 3699074; 513006, 3699074; 513006, 3699104; 
512976, 3699104; 512976, 3699134; 512946, 3699134; 512946, 3699104; 
512904, 3699104; 512911, 3699417; 512914, 3699474; 512962, 3699538; 
513016, 3699538; 512962, 3699681; 512898, 3699769; 512660, 3699925; 
512460, 3700001; 512238, 3700055; 512190, 3700049; 512092, 3700001; 
512101, 3699433; 512155, 3699433; 512171, 3699395; 512232, 3699347; 
512436, 3699302; 512436, 3699284; 512406, 3699284; 512406, 3699254; 
512376, 3699254; 512376, 3699164; 512346, 3699164; 512346, 3699134; 
512316, 3699134; 512316, 3699104; 512286, 3699104; 512286, 3699044; 
512256, 3699044; 512256, 3699014; 512226, 3699014; 512226, 3698864; 
512196, 3698864; 512196, 3698834; 512136, 3698834; 512136, 3698804; 
512016, 3698804; 512016, 3698834; 511986, 3698834; 511986, 3698864; 
511956, 3698864; 511956, 3698894; 511926, 3698894; 511926, 3698954; 
511896, 3698954; 511896, 3698984; 511866, 3698984; 511866,

[[Page 415]]

3699014; 511806, 3699014; 511806, 3699044; 511776, 3699044; 511776, 
3699074; 511716, 3699074; 511716, 3699044; 511656, 3699044; 511656, 
3699014; 511596, 3699014; 511596, 3699044; 511506, 3699044; 511506, 
3699074; 511446, 3699074; 511446, 3699104; 511356, 3699104; 511356, 
3699134; 511326, 3699134; 511326, 3699164; 511236, 3699164; 511236, 
3699194; 511206, 3699194; 511206, 3699254; 511176, 3699254; 511176, 
3699284; 511146, 3699284; 511146, 3699314; 511176, 3699314; 511176, 
3699344; 511146, 3699344; 511146, 3699374; 511026, 3699374; 511026, 
3699344; 510936, 3699344; 510936, 3699374; 510906, 3699374; 510906, 
3699404; 510816, 3699404; 510816, 3699434; 510786, 3699434; 510786, 
3699494; 510666, 3699494; 510666, 3699524; 510606, 3699524; 510606, 
3699644; 510546, 3699644; 510546, 3699674; 510516, 3699674; 510516, 
3699704; 510486, 3699704; 510486, 3699734; 510366, 3699734; 510366, 
3699794; 510336, 3699794; 510336, 3699854; 510306, 3699854; 510306, 
3699884; 510276, 3699884; 510276, 3699914; 510246, 3699914; 510246, 
3699944; 510216, 3699944; 510216, 3699974; 510186, 3699974; 510186, 
3699944; 510156, 3699944; 510156, 3699974; 510126, 3699974; 510126, 
3700064; 510096, 3700064; 510096, 3700124; 510066, 3700124; 510066, 
3700154; 510036, 3700154; 510036, 3700184; 509976, 3700184; 509976, 
3700214; 509916, 3700214; 509916, 3700304; 509886, 3700304; 509886, 
3700364; 509856, 3700364; 509856, 3700424; 509826, 3700424; 509826, 
3700454; 509796, 3700454; 509796, 3700484; 509676, 3700484; 509676, 
3700424; 509646, 3700424; 509646, 3700394; 509616, 3700394; 509616, 
3700364; 509586, 3700364; 509586, 3700394; 509406, 3700394; 509406, 
3700454; 509376, 3700454; 509376, 3700544; 509346, 3700544; 509346, 
3700604; 509226, 3700604; 509226, 3700634; 509166, 3700634; 509166, 
3700664; 509106, 3700664; 509106, 3700694; 508986, 3700694; 508986, 
3700664; 508926, 3700664; 508926, 3700544; 508866, 3700544; 508866, 
3700574; 508776, 3700574; 508746, 3700574; 508746, 3700544; 508596, 
3700544; 508596, 3700574; 508566, 3700574; 508566, 3700604; 508536, 
3700604; 508536, 3700664; 508476, 3700664; 508476, 3700634; 508446, 
3700634; 508446, 3700544; 508416, 3700544; 508416, 3700634; 508386, 
3700634; 508386, 3700664; 508416, 3700664; 508416, 3700724; 508446, 
3700724; 508446, 3700844; 508416, 3700844; 508416, 3700874; 508386, 
3700874; 508386, 3700904; 508356, 3700904; 508356, 3700934; 508326, 
3700934; 508326, 3701024; 508296, 3701024; 508296, 3701054; 508266, 
3701054; 508266, 3701084; 508206, 3701084; 508206, 3701114; 508146, 
3701114; 508146, 3701144; 508176, 3701144; 508176, 3701234; 508146, 
3701234; 508146, 3701294; 508116, 3701294; 508116, 3701384; 508056, 
3701384; 508056, 3701414; 507996, 3701414; 507996, 3701444; 507906, 
3701444; 507906, 3701474; 507876, 3701474; 507876, 3701534; 507846, 
3701534; 507846, 3701684; 507816, 3701684; 507816, 3701714; 507786, 
3701714; 507786, 3701744; 507696, 3701744; 507696, 3701834; 507666, 
3701834; 507666, 3702014; 507636, 3702014; 507636, 3702134; 507606, 
3702134; 507606, 3702194; 507576, 3702194; 507576, 3702224; 507516, 
3702224; 507516, 3702194; 507486, 3702194; 507486, 3702164; 507456, 
3702164; 507456, 3702104; 507426, 3702104; 507426, 3702044; 507396, 
3702044; 507396, 3701954; 507306, 3701954; 507306, 3701924; 507216, 
3701924; 507216, 3701954; 507186, 3701954; 507186, 3701984; 507156, 
3701984; 507156, 3702014; 507126, 3702014; 507126, 3702044; 507096, 
3702044; 507096, 3702074; 507066, 3702074; 507066, 3702104; 507036, 
3702104; 507036, 3702134; 506976, 3702134; 506976, 3702164; 506946, 
3702164; 506946, 3702194; 506916, 3702194; 506916, 3702224; 506886, 
3702224; 506886, 3702254; 506856, 3702254; 506856, 3702284; 506826, 
3702284; 506826, 3702344; 506796, 3702344; 506796, 3702374; 506766, 
3702374; 506766, 3702404; 506736, 3702404; 506736, 3702434; 506706, 
3702434; 506706, 3702464; 506676, 3702464; 506676, 3702494; 506646, 
3702494; 506646, 3702524; 506616, 3702524; 506616, 3702554; 506586, 
3702554; 506586, 3702584; 506556, 3702584; 506556, 3702614; 506496, 
3702614; 506496, 3702644; 506466, 3702644; 506466, 3702674; 506376, 
3702674; 506376, 3702704; 506346, 3702704; 506346, 3702734; 506286, 
3702734; 506286, 3702764; 506256, 3702764; 506256, 3702734; 506076, 
3702734; 506076, 3702704; 506016, 3702704; 506016, 3702674; 505986, 
3702674; 505986, 3702644; 505956, 3702644; 505956, 3702614; 505866, 
3702614; 505866, 3702644; 505836, 3702644; 505836, 3702704; 505806, 
3702704; 505806, 3702764; 505896, 3702764; 505896, 3702794; 505926, 
3702794; 505926, 3702824; 505956, 3702824; 505956, 3702854; 505986, 
3702854; 505986, 3702974; 505956, 3702974; 505956, 3703034; 505776, 
3703034; 505776, 3703124; 505746, 3703124; 505746, 3703154; 505686, 
3703154; 505686, 3703184; 505596, 3703184; 505596, 3703154; 505476, 
3703154; 505476, 3703094; 505446, 3703094; 505446, 3703064; 505416, 
3703064; 505416, 3703034; 505326, 3703034; 505326, 3703064; 505236, 
3703064; 505236, 3703094; 505176, 3703094; 505176, 3703064; 505146, 
3703064; 505146, 3703094; 505086, 3703094; 505086, 3703124; 504996, 
3703124; 504996, 3703154; 504906, 3703154; 504906, 3703184; 504846, 
3703184; 504846, 3703154; 504816, 3703154; 504816, 3703184; 504696, 
3703184; 504696, 3703214; 504576, 3703214; 504576, 3703244; 504516, 
3703244; 504516, 3703274; 504306, 3703274; 504306, 3703304; 504276, 
3703304; 504276, 3703274; 504186, 3703274; 504186, 3703334; 504096, 
3703334; 504096, 3703424; 504126, 3703424; 504126, 3703454; 504096, 
3703454; 504096, 3703484; 503796, 3703484; 503796, 3703514; 503736, 
3703514; 503736, 3703604; 503706, 3703604; 503706, 3703724; 503556, 
3703724; 503556, 3703844; 503526, 3703844; 503526, 3703904; 503556, 
3703904; 503556, 3703934; 503586, 3703934; 503586, 3704192; 503591, 
3704196; 503652, 3704385; 503788, 3704551; 503959, 3704548; 504076, 
3704590; 504156, 3704662; 504165, 3704684; 504216, 3704684; 504216, 
3704654; 504276, 3704654; 504276, 3704624; 504246, 3704624; 504246, 
3704564; 504216, 3704564; 504216, 3704534; 504246, 3704534; 504246, 
3704504; 504276, 3704504; 504276, 3704474; 504306, 3704474; 504306, 
3704414; 504336, 3704414; 504336, 3704384; 504366, 3704384; 504366, 
3704294; 504336, 3704294; 504336, 3704264; 504306, 3704264; 504306, 
3704084; 504456, 3704084; 504456, 3704024; 504546, 3704024; 504546, 
3704054; 504576, 3704054; 504576, 3704084; 504606, 3704084; 504606, 
3704114; 504636, 3704114; 504636, 3704144; 504666, 3704144; 504666, 
3704174; 504756, 3704174; 504756, 3704114; 504726, 3704114; 504726, 
3703994; 504786, 3703994; 504786, 3704024; 504816, 3704024; 504816, 
3704054; 504876, 3704054; 504876, 3704084; 504996, 3704084; 504996, 
3704114; 505086, 3704114; 505086, 3704054; 505056, 3704054; 505056, 
3703994; 505026, 3703994; 505026, 3703964; 504996, 3703964; 504996, 
3703904; 504966, 3703904; 504966, 3703874; 505056, 3703874; 505056, 
3703904; 505206, 3703904; 505206,

[[Page 416]]

3703934; 505356, 3703934; 505356, 3703994; 505386, 3703994; 505386, 
3704024; 505536, 3704024; 505536, 3703994; 505626, 3703994; 505626, 
3704024; 505656, 3704024; 505656, 3703994; 505746, 3703994; 505746, 
3704024; 505806, 3704024; 505806, 3703994; 505836, 3703994; 505836, 
3703934; 505896, 3703934; 505896, 3703904; 505926, 3703904; 505926, 
3703874; 506076, 3703874; 506076, 3703934; 506166, 3703934; 506166, 
3703904; 506196, 3703904; 506196, 3703844; 506286, 3703844; 506286, 
3703874; 506346, 3703874; 506346, 3703904; 506376, 3703904; 506376, 
3703874; 506436, 3703874; 506436, 3703844; 506406, 3703844; 506406, 
3703784; 506376, 3703784; 506376, 3703694; 506406, 3703694; 506406, 
3703664; 506436, 3703664; 506436, 3703574; 506406, 3703574; 506406, 
3703544; 506346, 3703544; 506346, 3703514; 506256, 3703514; 506256, 
3703454; 506286, 3703454; 506286, 3703424; 506316, 3703424; 506346, 
3703424; 506346, 3703454; 506406, 3703454; 506406, 3703484; 506526, 
3703484; 506526, 3703454; 506556, 3703454; 506556, 3703424; 506526, 
3703424; 506526, 3703364; 506496, 3703364; 506496, 3703274; 506526, 
3703274; 506526, 3703244; 506586, 3703244; 506586, 3703214; 506616, 
3703214; 506616, 3703184; 506586, 3703184; 506586, 3703124; 506616, 
3703124; 506616, 3703094; 506646, 3703094; 506646, 3703064; 506676, 
3703064; 506676, 3703034; 506706, 3703034; 506706, 3703004; 506586, 
3703004; 506586, 3702974; 506616, 3702974; 506616, 3702914; 506646, 
3702914; 506646, 3702734; 506676, 3702734; 506676, 3702704; 506706, 
3702704; 506706, 3702644; 506736, 3702644; 506736, 3702614; 506766, 
3702614; 506766, 3702584; 506796, 3702584; 506796, 3702554; 506856, 
3702554; 506856, 3702524; 506916, 3702524; 506916, 3702494; 506946, 
3702494; 506946, 3702524; 506976, 3702524; 506976, 3702554; 507006, 
3702554; 507006, 3702584; 507126, 3702584; 507126, 3702614; 507156, 
3702614; 507156, 3702764; 507246, 3702764; 507246, 3702734; 507276, 
3702734; 507276, 3702704; 507336, 3702704; 507336, 3702734; 507366, 
3702734; 507366, 3702764; 507396, 3702764; 507396, 3702794; 507426, 
3702794; 507426, 3702764; 507546, 3702764; 507546, 3702794; 507576, 
3702794; 507576, 3702824; 507696, 3702824; 507696, 3702794; 507966, 
3702794; 507966, 3702704; 507996, 3702704; 507996, 3702614; 508026, 
3702614; 508026, 3702554; 508056, 3702554; 508056, 3702464; 508086, 
3702464; 508086, 3702344; 508116, 3702344; 508116, 3702194; 508146, 
3702194; 508146, 3702104; 508176, 3702104; 508176, 3701984; 508146, 
3701984; 508146, 3701954; 508086, 3701954; 508086, 3701924; 508206, 
3701924; 508206, 3701894; 508236, 3701894; 508236, 3701864; 508266, 
3701864; 508266, 3701834; 508296, 3701834; 508296, 3701804; 508446, 
3701804; 508446, 3701774; 508476, 3701774; 508476, 3701804; 508506, 
3701804; 508506, 3701774; 508536, 3701774; 508536, 3701714; 508506, 
3701714; 508506, 3701624; 508416, 3701624; 508416, 3701594; 508296, 
3701594; 508296, 3701564; 508266, 3701564; 508266, 3701534; 508296, 
3701534; 508296, 3701504; 508326, 3701504; 508326, 3701474; 508386, 
3701474; 508386, 3701414; 508356, 3701414; 508356, 3701384; 508326, 
3701384; 508326, 3701324; 508296, 3701324; 508296, 3701234; 508326, 
3701234; 508326, 3701174; 508356, 3701174; 508356, 3701144; 508386, 
3701144; 508386, 3701114; 508416, 3701114; 508416, 3701084; 508446, 
3701084; 508446, 3701024; 508476, 3701024; 508476, 3700964; 508506, 
3700964; 508506, 3700934; 508536, 3700934; 508536, 3700874; 508566, 
3700874; 508566, 3700844; 508596, 3700844; 508596, 3700784; 508626, 
3700784; 508626, 3700724; 508656, 3700724; 508656, 3700694; 508746, 
3700694; 508746, 3700724; 508776, 3700724; 508776, 3700754; 508836, 
3700754; 508836, 3700784; 508866, 3700784; 508866, 3700814; 508896, 
3700814; 508896, 3700874; 508986, 3700874; 508986, 3700934; 509136, 
3700934; 509136, 3700904; 509166, 3700904; 509166, 3700874; 509196, 
3700874; 509196, 3700754; 509316, 3700754; 509316, 3700814; 509286, 
3700814; 509286, 3700904; 509316, 3700904; 509316, 3700874; 509346, 
3700874; 509346, 3700844; 509466, 3700844; 509466, 3700934; 509496, 
3700934; 509496, 3700964; 509586, 3700964; 509586, 3700934; 509646, 
3700934; 509646, 3700964; 509706, 3700964; 509706, 3701024; 509736, 
3701024; 509736, 3701084; 509766, 3701084; 509766, 3701144; 509796, 
3701144; 509796, 3701174; 509856, 3701174; 509856, 3701204; 509916, 
3701204; 509916, 3701234; 509976, 3701234; 509976, 3701264; 510186, 
3701264; 510186, 3701234; 510246, 3701234; 510246, 3701174; 510306, 
3701174; 510306, 3701144; 510366, 3701144; 510366, 3701114; 510396, 
3701114; 510396, 3700934; 510426, 3700934; 510426, 3700904; 510456, 
3700904; 510456, 3700994; 510486, 3700994; 510486, 3700964; 510516, 
3700964; 510516, 3700934; 510576, 3700934; 510576, 3700904; 510606, 
3700904; 510606, 3700874; 510666, 3700874; 510666, 3700844; 510696, 
3700844; 510696, 3700784; 510666, 3700784; 510666, 3700754; 510636, 
3700754; 510636, 3700694; 510666, 3700694; 510666, 3700664; 510696, 
3700664; 510696, 3700634; 510816, 3700634; 510816, 3700604; 510876, 
3700604; 510876, 3700574; 510906, 3700574; 510906, 3700634; 510966, 
3700634; 510966, 3700724; 510996, 3700724; 510996, 3700754; 511056, 
3700754; 511056, 3700784; 511086, 3700784; 511086, 3700814; 511116, 
3700814; 511116, 3700874; 511206, 3700874; 511206, 3700844; 511236, 
3700844; 511236, 3700814; 511326, 3700814; 511326, 3700754; 511356, 
3700754; 511356, 3700724; 511386, 3700724; 511386, 3700694; 511536, 
3700694; 511536, 3700664; 511596, 3700664; 511596, 3700694; 511716, 
3700694; 511716, 3700664; 511746, 3700664; 511746, 3700634; 511776, 
3700634; 511776, 3700604; 511806, 3700604; 511806, 3700634; 511836, 
3700634; 511836, 3700724; 511866, 3700724; 511866, 3700754; 511896, 
3700754; 511896, 3700724; 512046, 3700724; 512046, 3700754; 512136, 
3700754; 512136, 3700724; 512166, 3700724; 512166, 3700754; 512316, 
3700754; 512316, 3700724; 512346, 3700724; 512346, 3700694; 512466, 
3700694; 512466, 3700664; 512556, 3700664; 512556, 3700634; 512676, 
3700634; 512676, 3700604; 512736, 3700604; 512736, 3700574; 512796, 
3700574; 512796, 3700544; 512856, 3700544; 512856, 3700514; 512946, 
3700514; 512946, 3700484; 513156, 3700484; 513156, 3700454; 513306, 
3700454; 513306, 3700484; 513486, 3700484; 513486, 3700454; 513516, 
3700454; 513516, 3700424; 513546, 3700424; 513546, 3700334; 513576, 
3700334; 513576, 3700124; 513546, 3700124; 513546, 3700094; 513516, 
3700094; 513516, 3700034; 513456, 3700034; 513456, 3700064; 513396, 
3700064; 513396, 3700034; 513336, 3700034; 513336, 3699914; 513366, 
3699914; 513366, 3699884; 513456, 3699884; 513456, 3699824; 513486, 
3699824; 513486, 3699794; 513456, 3699794; 513456, 3699764; 513486, 
3699764; 513486, 3699734; 513516, 3699734; 513516, 3699704; 513546, 
3699704; 513546, 3699584; 513576, 3699584; 513576, 3699464; 513486, 
3699464; 513486, 3699494; 513396, 3699494; 513396, 3699524; 513336, 
3699524; 513336, 3699404; 513426,

[[Page 417]]

3699404; 513426, 3699284; 513396, 3699284; 513396, 3699134; 513426, 
3699134; 513426, 3699104; 513486, 3699104; 513486, 3699074; 513696, 
3699074; 513696, 3699104; 513906, 3699104; 513906, 3699044; 513936, 
3699044; 513936, 3699014; 513966, 3699014; 513966, 3698804; 514056, 
3698804; 514056, 3698774; 514086, 3698774; 514086, 3698744; 514116, 
3698744; 514116, 3698714; 514146, 3698714; 514146, 3698684; 514176, 
3698684; 514176, 3698654; 514236, 3698654; 514236, 3698624; 514266, 
3698624; 514266, 3698594; 514296, 3698594; 514296, 3698534; 514326, 
3698534; 514326, 3698504; 514356, 3698504; 514356, 3698294; 514386, 
3698294; 514386, 3698264; 514476, 3698264; 514476, 3698234; 514506, 
3698234; 514506, 3698204; 514536, 3698204; 514536, 3698054; 514566, 
3698054; 514566, 3698024; 514626, 3698024; 514626, 3697994; 514716, 
3697994; 514716, 3697964; 514746, 3697964; 514746, 3697934; 514776, 
3697934; 514776, 3697904; 514836, 3697904; 514836, 3697874; 514986, 
3697874; 514986, 3697814; 515016, 3697814; 515016, 3697754; 515046, 
3697754; 515046, 3697724; 515076, 3697724; 515076, 3697694; 515136, 
3697694; 515136, 3697664; 515166, 3697664; 515166, 3697634; 515256, 
3697634; 515256, 3697664; 515346, 3697664; 515346, 3697574; 515436, 
3697574; 515436, 3697514; 515496, 3697514; 515496, 3697484; 515646, 
3697484; 515646, 3697424; 515736, 3697424; 515736, 3697394; 515766, 
3697394; 515766, 3697364; 515856, 3697364; 515856, 3697394; 515886, 
3697394; 515886, 3697514; 515856, 3697514; 515856, 3697544; 515826, 
3697544; 515826, 3697574; 515796, 3697574; 515796, 3697694; 515976, 
3697694; 515976, 3697664; 516006, 3697664; 516006, 3697604; 516096, 
3697604; 516096, 3697634; 516126, 3697634; 516126, 3697664; 516156, 
3697664; 516156, 3697694; 516186, 3697694; 516186, 3697724; 516216, 
3697724; 516216, 3697754; 516276, 3697754; 516276, 3697784; 516366, 
3697784; 516366, 3697754; 516546, 3697754; 516546, 3697724; 516576, 
3697724; 516576, 3697664; 516606, 3697664; 516606, 3697634; 516666, 
3697634; 516666, 3697604; 516696, 3697604; 516696, 3697574; 516726, 
3697574; 516726, 3697544; 516816, 3697544; 516816, 3697514; 516846, 
3697514; 516846, 3697484; 516876, 3697484; 516876, 3697454; 516906, 
3697454; 516906, 3697394; 516936, 3697394; 516936, 3697214; 516906, 
3697214; 516906, 3697034; 516876, 3697034; 516876, 3697004; 516906, 
3697004; 516906, 3696884; 516936, 3696884; 516936, 3696794; 516906, 
3696794; 516906, 3696734; 516876, 3696734; 516876, 3696704; 516816, 
3696704; 516816, 3696674; 516786, 3696674; 516786, 3696644; 516846, 
3696644; 516846, 3696554; 516786, 3696554; 516786, 3696524; 516756, 
3696524; 516756, 3696494; 516696, 3696494; 516696, 3696464; 516756, 
3696464; 516756, 3696434; 516846, 3696434; 516846, 3696404; 516876, 
3696404; 516876, 3696374; 516846, 3696374; 516846, 3696344; 516876, 
3696344; 516876, 3696314; 516906, 3696314; 516906, 3696284; 516936, 
3696284; 516936, 3696254; 516966, 3696254; 516966, 3696224; 517026, 
3696224; 517026, 3696194; 517056, 3696194; 517056, 3696134; 517086, 
3696134; 517086, 3696104; 517116, 3696104; 517116, 3696074; 517206, 
3696074; 517206, 3696104; 517236, 3696104; 517236, 3696074; 517266, 
3696074; 517266, 3696044; 517326, 3696044; 517326, 3696074; 517386, 
3696074; 517386, 3696014; 517416, 3696014; 517416, 3695924; 517386, 
3695924; 517386, 3695864; 517476, 3695864; 517476, 3695834; 517506, 
3695834; 517506, 3695774; 517536, 3695774; 517536, 3695714; 517566, 
3695714; 517566, 3695744; 517626, 3695744; 517626, 3695684; 517686, 
3695684; 517686, 3695624; 517716, 3695624; 517716, 3695564; 517746, 
3695564; 517746, 3695504; 517776, 3695504; 517776, 3695474; 517806, 
3695474; 517806, 3695414; 517836, 3695414; 517836, 3695354; 517896, 
3695354; 517896, 3695324; 518166, 3695324; 518166, 3695354; 518196, 
3695354; 518196, 3695414; 518226, 3695414; 518226, 3695444; 518256, 
3695444; 518256, 3695474; 518256, 3695504; 518226, 3695504; 518226, 
3695534; 518196, 3695534; 518196, 3695594; 518166, 3695594; 518166, 
3695714; 518196, 3695714; 518196, 3695744; 518256, 3695744; 518256, 
3695714; 518316, 3695714; 518316, 3695684; 518346, 3695684; 518346, 
3695654; 518376, 3695654; 518376, 3695624; 518436, 3695624; 518436, 
3695594; 518466, 3695594; 518466, 3695564; 518496, 3695564; 518496, 
3695534; 518526, 3695534; 518526, 3695474; 518556, 3695474; 518556, 
3695444; 518586, 3695444; 518586, 3695474; 518646, 3695474; 518646, 
3695444; 518766, 3695444; 518766, 3695474; 518796, 3695474; 518796, 
3695504; 518826, 3695504; 518826, 3695534; 518856, 3695534; 518856, 
3695624; 518886, 3695624; 518886, 3695654; 518976, 3695654; 518976, 
3695624; 519156, 3695624; 519156, 3695654; 519246, 3695654; 519246, 
3695684; 519276, 3695684; 519276, 3695714; 519306, 3695714; 519306, 
3695744; 519336, 3695744; 519336, 3695774; 519366, 3695774; 519366, 
3695804; 519426, 3695804; 519426, 3695834; 519486, 3695834; 519486, 
3695804; 519546, 3695804; 519546, 3695774; 519576, 3695774; 519576, 
3695744; 519636, 3695744; 519636, 3695684; 519666, 3695684; 519666, 
3695594; 519696, 3695594; 519696, 3695564; 519726, 3695564; 519726, 
3695534; 519756, 3695534; 519756, 3695504; 519846, 3695504; 519846, 
3695474; 519876, 3695474; 519876, 3695444; 519906, 3695444; 519906, 
3695414; 519936, 3695414; 519936, 3695384; 519996, 3695384; 519996, 
3695354; 520026, 3695354; 520026, 3695294; 520056, 3695294; 520056, 
3695234; 520116, 3695234; 520116, 3695204; 520146, 3695204; 520146, 
3695174; 520176, 3695174; 520176, 3695144; 520206, 3695144; 520206, 
3695084; 520236, 3695084; 520236, 3694964; 520266, 3694964; 520266, 
3694724; 520296, 3694724; 520296, 3694694; 520356, 3694694; 520356, 
3694634; 520386, 3694634; 520386, 3694424; 520356, 3694424; 520356, 
3694304; 520386, 3694304; 520386, 3694274; 520416, 3694274; 520416, 
3694214; 520446, 3694214; 520446, 3694184; 520476, 3694184; 520476, 
3694094; 520536, 3694094; 520536, 3694064; 520566, 3694064; 520566, 
3694034; 520776, 3694034; 520776, 3694004; 520836, 3694004; 520836, 
3693974; 520866, 3693974; 520866, 3693704; 520836, 3693704; 520836, 
3693644; 520746, 3693644; 520746, 3693614; 520656, 3693614; 520656, 
3693644; 520536, 3693644; 520536, 3693674; 520296, 3693674; 520296, 
3693644; 520206, 3693644; 520206, 3693614; 520116, 3693614; 520116, 
3693644; 520086, 3693644; 520086, 3693614; 520056, 3693614; 520056, 
3693524; 519996, 3693524; 519996, 3693464; 519966, 3693464; 519966, 
3693404; 519996, 3693404; 519996, 3693374; 520026, 3693374; 520026, 
3693344; 520056, 3693344; 520056, 3693314; 520086, 3693314; 520086, 
3693344; 520116, 3693344; 520116, 3693374; 520146, 3693374; 520146, 
3693344; 520206, 3693344; 520206, 3693314; 520236, 3693314; 520236, 
3693254; 520266, 3693254; 520266, 3693224; 520296, 3693224; 520296, 
3693164; 520326, 3693164; 520326, 3693104; 520386, 3693104; 520386, 
3693074; 520416, 3693074; 520416, 3693044; 520506, 3693044; 520506, 
3693014; 520626, 3693014; 520626,

[[Page 418]]

3692984; 520746, 3692984; 520746, 3692954; 520806, 3692954; 520806, 
3692924; 520866, 3692924; 520866, 3692954; 520986, 3692954; 520986, 
3692924; 521016, 3692924; 521016, 3692954; 521046, 3692954; 521046, 
3692924; 521166, 3692924; 521166, 3692894; 521226, 3692894; 521226, 
3692864; 521346, 3692864; 521346, 3692834; 521376, 3692834; 521376, 
3692864; 521406, 3692864; 521406, 3692834; 521496, 3692834; 521496, 
3692864; 521556, 3692864; 521556, 3692834; 521586, 3692834; 521586, 
3692774; 521616, 3692774; 521616, 3692744; 521676, 3692744; 521676, 
3692774; 521826, 3692774; 521826, 3692744; 521856, 3692744; 521856, 
3692714; 521886, 3692714; 521886, 3692684; 521916, 3692684; 521916, 
3692714; 521976, 3692714; 521976, 3692744; 522006, 3692744; 522006, 
3692774; 522036, 3692774; 522036, 3692834; 522066, 3692834; 522066, 
3692774; 522096, 3692774; 522096, 3692714; 522126, 3692714; 522126, 
3692744; 522186, 3692744; 522186, 3692774; 522246, 3692774; 522246, 
3692744; 522276, 3692744; 522276, 3692654; 522306, 3692654; 522306, 
3692624; 522456, 3692624; 522456, 3692534; 522576, 3692534; 522576, 
3692504; 522606, 3692504; 522606, 3692414; 522576, 3692414; 522576, 
3692324; 522516, 3692324; 522516, 3692264; 522576, 3692264; 522576, 
3692204; 522606, 3692204; 522606, 3692114; 522636, 3692114; 522636, 
3692054; 522666, 3692054; 522666, 3692024; 522726, 3692024; 522726, 
3691994; 522846, 3691994; 522846, 3691964; 522936, 3691964; 522936, 
3691934; 523056, 3691934; 523056, 3691904; 523146, 3691904; 523146, 
3691874; 523176, 3691874; 523176, 3691814; 523206, 3691814; 523206, 
3691754; 523176, 3691754; 523176, 3691694; 523146, 3691694; 523146, 
3691664; 523116, 3691664; 523116, 3691634; 523056, 3691634; 523056, 
3691544; 523026, 3691544; 523026, 3691514; 522996, 3691514; 522996, 
3691454; 522966, 3691454; 522966, 3691424; 522936, 3691424; 522936, 
3691394; 522906, 3691394; 522906, 3691364; 522816, 3691364; 522816, 
3691334; 522756, 3691334; 522756, 3691244; 522696, 3691244; 522696, 
3691214; 522486, 3691214; 522486, 3691244; 522306, 3691244; 522306, 
3691274; 522246, 3691274; 522246, 3691304; 522216, 3691304; 522216, 
3691334; 522006, 3691334; 522006, 3691304; 521916, 3691304; 521916, 
3691334; 521796, 3691334; 521796, 3691304; 521766, 3691304; 521766, 
3691274; 521646, 3691274; 521646, 3691304; 521586, 3691304; 521586, 
3691334; 521556, 3691334; 521556, 3691394; 521526, 3691394; 521526, 
3691484; 521496, 3691484; 521496, 3691724; 521526, 3691724; 521526, 
3691934; 521496, 3691934; 521496, 3691964; 521466, 3691964; 521466, 
3691994; 521436, 3691994; 521436, 3692024; 521406, 3692024; 521406, 
3692054; 521316, 3692054; 521316, 3692084; 521286, 3692084; 521286, 
3692114; 521256, 3692114; 521256, 3692144; 521166, 3692144; 521166, 
3692174; 521136, 3692174; 521136, 3692264; 521106, 3692264; 521106, 
3692234; 521046, 3692234; 521046, 3692264; 521016, 3692264; 521016, 
3692294; 520896, 3692294; 520896, 3692324; 520806, 3692324; 520806, 
3692354; 520776, 3692354; 520776, 3692384; 520746, 3692384; 520746, 
3692414; 520716, 3692414; 520716, 3692444; 520656, 3692444; 520656, 
3692504; 520626, 3692504; returning to 520626, 3692624. Excluding land 
bounded by 518706, 3695084; 518706, 3695144; 518646, 3695144; 518646, 
3695174; 518616, 3695174; 518616, 3695204; 518586, 3695204; 518586, 
3695264; 518526, 3695264; 518526, 3695234; 518556, 3695234; 518556, 
3695174; 518526, 3695174; 518526, 3695144; 518496, 3695144; 518496, 
3695084; 518466, 3695084; 518466, 3695024; 518496, 3695024; 518496, 
3694994; 518616, 3694994; 518616, 3695024; 518676, 3695024; 518676, 
3695054; 518706, 3695054; returning to 518706, 3695084. Excluding land 
bounded by 511632, 3699846; 511649, 3700252; 511658, 3700476; 511603, 
3700464; 511599, 3700463; 511595, 3700462; 511591, 3700461; 511587, 
3700460; 511583, 3700459; 511579, 3700458; 511575, 3700456; 511572, 
3700455; 511568, 3700454; 511564, 3700452; 511560, 3700451; 511557, 
3700449; 511553, 3700447; 511549, 3700446; 511546, 3700444; 511542, 
3700442; 511539, 3700440; 511535, 3700438; 511532, 3700436; 511528, 
3700434; 511525, 3700432; 511521, 3700429; 511518, 3700427; 511515, 
3700425; 511512, 3700422; 511508, 3700420; 511505, 3700417; 511502, 
3700415; 511497, 3700410; 511476, 3700391; 511464, 3700454; 511444, 
3700451; 511413, 3700446; 511371, 3700441; 511325, 3700438; 511318, 
3700256; 511545, 3700253; 511537, 3699847; returning to 511632, 3699846. 
Excluding land bounded by 509586, 3700604; 509586, 3700634; 509616, 
3700634; 509616, 3700664; 509646, 3700664; 509646, 3700694; 509616, 
3700694; 509616, 3700724; 509586, 3700724; 509586, 3700754; 509526, 
3700754; 509526, 3700724; 509496, 3700724; 509496, 3700604; returning to 
509586, 3700604. Excluding land bounded by 506076, 3703064; 506076, 
3703094; 506046, 3703094; 506046, 3703064; returning to 506076, 3703064.
    (iii) Subunit 13c: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Vail Lake, 
Sage, Cahuilla Mtn., and Aguanga, land bounded by the following UTM 
coordinates (E, N): 508295, 3705827; 508285, 3705827; 508285, 3705874; 
508289, 3705912; 508352, 3705912; 508352, 3705827; returning to 508295, 
3705827.
    (iv) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 506990, 
3704380; 506962, 3704380; 506962, 3704408; 506990, 3704408; returning to 
506990, 3704380.
    (v) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 505004, 
3706809; 505004, 3706791; 505033, 3706791; 505033, 3706735; 505203, 
3706735; 505203, 3706763; 505260, 3706763; 505260, 3706678; 505231, 
3706678; 505231, 3706649; 505260, 3706649; 505260, 3706621; 505373, 
3706621; 505373, 3706649; 505401, 3706649; 505401, 3706621; 505628, 
3706621; 505628, 3706649; 505714, 3706649; 505714, 3706678; 505770, 
3706678; 505770, 3706593; 505742, 3706593; 505742, 3706564; 505770, 
3706564; 505770, 3706451; 505799, 3706451; 505799, 3706423; 505855, 
3706423; 505855, 3706394; 505997, 3706394; 505997, 3706423; 506026, 
3706423; 506026, 3706252; 506054, 3706252; 506054, 3706224; 506082, 
3706224; 506082, 3706139; 506224, 3706139; 506224, 3706110; 506253, 
3706110; 506253, 3706082; 506281, 3706082; 506281, 3705940; 506309, 
3705940; 506309, 3706025; 506338, 3706025; 506338, 3706054; 506394, 
3706054; 506394, 3706082; 506451, 3706082; 506451, 3706054; 506479, 
3706054; 506479, 3705997; 506536, 3705997; 506536, 3705969; 506678, 
3705969; 506678, 3705940; 506877, 3705940; 506877, 3705855; 506905, 
3705855; 506905, 3705827; 506933, 3705827; 506933, 3705855; 506990, 
3705855; 506990, 3705827; 506962, 3705827; 506962, 3705742; 506990, 
3705742; 506990, 3705657; 507018, 3705657; 507018, 3705600; 507047, 
3705600; 507047, 3705571; 507081, 3705571; 507080, 3705462; 507387, 
3705460; 507387, 3705458; 507416, 3705458; 507416,

[[Page 419]]

3705430; 507557, 3705430; 507557, 3705458; 507586, 3705458; 507586, 
3705459; 508287, 3705456; 508286, 3705713; 508295, 3705713; 508295, 
3705628; 508409, 3705628; 508409, 3705657; 508465, 3705657; 508465, 
3705458; 508494, 3705458; 508494, 3705486; 508607, 3705486; 508607, 
3705373; 508636, 3705373; 508636, 3705458; 508664, 3705458; 508664, 
3705486; 508749, 3705486; 508749, 3705515; 509118, 3705515; 509118, 
3705486; 509260, 3705486; 509260, 3705515; 509316, 3705515; 509316, 
3705543; 509345, 3705543; 509345, 3705628; 509487, 3705628; 509487, 
3705600; 509572, 3705600; 509572, 3705571; 509600, 3705571; 509600, 
3705401; 509628, 3705401; 509628, 3705373; 509685, 3705373; 509685, 
3705401; 509799, 3705401; 509799, 3705373; 509855, 3705373; 509855, 
3705345; 509884, 3705345; 509884, 3705316; 509912, 3705316; 509912, 
3705288; 509920, 3705288; 509899, 3705048; 510763, 3705036; 510763, 
3705032; 510735, 3705032; 510735, 3705004; 510678, 3705004; 510678, 
3704976; 510621, 3704976; 510621, 3704947; 510593, 3704947; 510593, 
3704919; 510565, 3704919; 510565, 3704891; 510536, 3704891; 510536, 
3704720; 510593, 3704720; 510593, 3704607; 510536, 3704607; 510536, 
3704579; 510508, 3704579; 510508, 3704465; 510394, 3704465; 510394, 
3704493; 510366, 3704493; 510366, 3704522; 510281, 3704522; 510281, 
3704493; 510224, 3704493; 510224, 3704465; 510196, 3704465; 510196, 
3704380; 510224, 3704380; 510224, 3704352; 510281, 3704352; 510281, 
3704323; 510366, 3704323; 510366, 3704295; 510394, 3704295; 510394, 
3704238; 510423, 3704238; 510423, 3704153; 510394, 3704153; 510394, 
3704068; 510366, 3704068; 510366, 3704040; 510281, 3704040; 510281, 
3704125; 510224, 3704125; 510224, 3704153; 510196, 3704153; 510196, 
3704125; 510139, 3704125; 510139, 3704068; 510111, 3704068; 510111, 
3704040; 510082, 3704040; 510082, 3703926; 509969, 3703926; 509969, 
3703954; 509940, 3703954; 509940, 3703983; 509884, 3703983; 509884, 
3704011; 509827, 3704011; 509827, 3704040; 509799, 3704040; 509799, 
3704068; 509742, 3704068; 509742, 3704096; 509714, 3704096; 509714, 
3704153; 509685, 3704153; 509685, 3704210; 509628, 3704210; 509628, 
3704181; 509600, 3704181; 509600, 3704153; 509572, 3704153; 509572, 
3704096; 509543, 3704096; 509543, 3704068; 509487, 3704068; 509487, 
3704096; 509401, 3704096; 509401, 3704153; 509373, 3704153; 509373, 
3704181; 509345, 3704181; 509345, 3704238; 509316, 3704238; 509316, 
3704096; 509345, 3704096; 509345, 3704011; 509175, 3704011; 509175, 
3703983; 509089, 3703983; 509089, 3704096; 509061, 3704096; 509061, 
3704266; 509004, 3704266; 509004, 3704323; 508976, 3704323; 508976, 
3704493; 508948, 3704493; 508948, 3704522; 508919, 3704522; 508919, 
3704550; 508891, 3704550; 508891, 3704579; 508862, 3704579; 508862, 
3704522; 508834, 3704522; 508834, 3704493; 508777, 3704493; 508777, 
3704408; 508749, 3704408; 508749, 3704380; 508721, 3704380; 508721, 
3704323; 508692, 3704323; 508692, 3704295; 508664, 3704295; 508664, 
3704323; 508636, 3704323; 508636, 3704352; 508607, 3704352; 508607, 
3704380; 508579, 3704380; 508579, 3704408; 508503, 3704408; 508503, 
3704670; 508299, 3704685; 508284, 3704713; 508213, 3704720; 508180, 
3704674; 508188, 3704581; 508188, 3704466; 508180, 3704409; 508125, 
3704284; 508125, 3704437; 508097, 3704437; 508097, 3704465; 508068, 
3704465; 508068, 3704579; 508040, 3704579; 508040, 3704720; 508011, 
3704720; 508011, 3704777; 507983, 3704777; 507983, 3704947; 508011, 
3704947; 508011, 3704976; 507983, 3704976; 507983, 3705061; 508040, 
3705061; 508040, 3705089; 508068, 3705089; 508068, 3705118; 508097, 
3705118; 508097, 3705174; 508068, 3705174; 508068, 3705203; 508011, 
3705203; 508011, 3705231; 507955, 3705231; 507955, 3705259; 507926, 
3705259; 507926, 3705231; 507699, 3705231; 507699, 3705174; 507728, 
3705174; 507728, 3705146; 507756, 3705146; 507756, 3705118; 507784, 
3705118; 507784, 3705089; 507841, 3705089; 507841, 3705061; 507870, 
3705061; 507870, 3705004; 507841, 3705004; 507841, 3704692; 507784, 
3704692; 507784, 3704720; 507728, 3704720; 507728, 3704692; 507699, 
3704692; 507699, 3704635; 507671, 3704635; 507671, 3704579; 507614, 
3704579; 507614, 3704607; 507586, 3704607; 507586, 3704749; 507557, 
3704749; 507557, 3704777; 507529, 3704777; 507529, 3704834; 507501, 
3704834; 507501, 3704862; 507472, 3704862; 507472, 3704891; 507444, 
3704891; 507444, 3704862; 507416, 3704862; 507416, 3704720; 507444, 
3704720; 507444, 3704692; 507416, 3704692; 507416, 3704635; 507359, 
3704635; 507359, 3704664; 507302, 3704664; 507302, 3704692; 507274, 
3704692; 507274, 3704720; 507245, 3704720; 507245, 3704550; 507217, 
3704550; 507217, 3704607; 507104, 3704607; 507104, 3704579; 507075, 
3704579; 507075, 3704408; 506990, 3704408; 506990, 3704493; 506962, 
3704493; 506962, 3704664; 506990, 3704664; 506990, 3704692; 506962, 
3704692; 506962, 3704720; 506990, 3704720; 506990, 3704749; 506933, 
3704749; 506933, 3704777; 506905, 3704777; 506905, 3704805; 506820, 
3704805; 506820, 3704777; 506792, 3704777; 506792, 3704720; 506763, 
3704720; 506763, 3704777; 506735, 3704777; 506735, 3704834; 506706, 
3704834; 506706, 3704919; 506678, 3704919; 506678, 3704947; 506565, 
3704947; 506565, 3705004; 506593, 3705004; 506593, 3705118; 506565, 
3705118; 506565, 3705146; 506536, 3705146; 506536, 3705174; 506508, 
3705174; 506508, 3705203; 506479, 3705203; 506479, 3705231; 506451, 
3705231; 506451, 3705345; 506479, 3705345; 506479, 3705430; 506451, 
3705430; 506451, 3705458; 506423, 3705458; 506423, 3705430; 506394, 
3705430; 506394, 3705259; 506281, 3705259; 506281, 3705231; 506253, 
3705231; 506253, 3705203; 506281, 3705203; 506281, 3705118; 506253, 
3705118; 506253, 3705061; 506224, 3705061; 506224, 3705089; 506167, 
3705089; 506167, 3705174; 506139, 3705174; 506139, 3705203; 506082, 
3705203; 506082, 3705231; 506026, 3705231; 506026, 3705203; 505969, 
3705203; 505969, 3705174; 505940, 3705174; 505940, 3705203; 505827, 
3705203; 505827, 3705231; 505799, 3705231; 505799, 3705259; 505770, 
3705259; 505770, 3705316; 505742, 3705316; 505742, 3705345; 505714, 
3705345; 505714, 3705373; 505685, 3705373; 505685, 3705543; 505657, 
3705543; 505657, 3705600; 505628, 3705600; 505628, 3705628; 505600, 
3705628; 505600, 3705685; 505628, 3705685; 505628, 3705713; 505657, 
3705713; 505657, 3705798; 505543, 3705798; 505543, 3705940; 505487, 
3705940; 505487, 3705912; 505316, 3705912; 505316, 3705884; 505288, 
3705884; 505288, 3705855; 505260, 3705855; 505260, 3705827; 505231, 
3705827; 505231, 3705798; 505174, 3705798; 505174, 3705770; 505146, 
3705770; 505146, 3705742; 505118, 3705742; 505118, 3705713; 505089, 
3705713; 505089, 3705628; 505118, 3705628; 505118, 3705600; 505203, 
3705600; 505203, 3705486; 505174, 3705486; 505174, 3705458; 505146, 
3705458; 505146, 3705401; 505061, 3705401; 505061, 3705373; 505033, 
3705373; 505033, 3705430; 505004, 3705430; 505004, 3705458; 504976, 
3705458; 504976, 3705515; 504948,

[[Page 420]]

3705515; 504948, 3705543; 504891, 3705543; 504891, 3705515; 504862, 
3705515; 504862, 3705486; 504834, 3705486; 504834, 3705430; 504806, 
3705430; 504806, 3705458; 504749, 3705458; 504749, 3705486; 504721, 
3705486; 504721, 3705515; 504692, 3705515; 504692, 3705543; 504550, 
3705543; 504550, 3705373; 504522, 3705373; 504522, 3705345; 504465, 
3705345; 504465, 3705288; 504437, 3705288; 504437, 3705284; 504424, 
3705291; 504400, 3705371; 504335, 3705756; 504255, 3706069; 504123, 
3706197; 504096, 3706220; 504096, 3706224; 504125, 3706224; 504125, 
3706252; 504153, 3706252; 504153, 3706281; 504182, 3706281; 504182, 
3706337; 504153, 3706337; 504153, 3706366; 504182, 3706366; 504182, 
3706564; 504210, 3706564; 504210, 3706593; 504238, 3706593; 504238, 
3706564; 504267, 3706564; 504267, 3706536; 504295, 3706536; 504295, 
3706564; 504352, 3706564; 504352, 3706536; 504380, 3706536; 504380, 
3706508; 504409, 3706508; 504409, 3706479; 504465, 3706479; 504465, 
3706508; 504494, 3706508; 504494, 3706536; 504550, 3706536; 504550, 
3706564; 504692, 3706564; 504692, 3706536; 504721, 3706536; 504721, 
3706706; 504777, 3706706; 504777, 3706763; 504834, 3706763; 504834, 
3706791; 504891, 3706791; 504891, 3706820; 504919, 3706820; 504919, 
3706848; 505004, 3706848; returning to 505004, 3706809. Excluding land 
bounded by 505004, 3706621; 505004, 3706593; 505033, 3706593; 505033, 
3706536; 505089, 3706536; 505089, 3706593; 505061, 3706593; 505061, 
3706649; 505033, 3706649; 505033, 3706621; returning to 505004, 3706621.
    (vi) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 512834, 
3706987; 512834, 3706962; 512891, 3706962; 512891, 3706980; 513089, 
3706957; 513089, 3706933; 513061, 3706933; 513061, 3706820; 513089, 
3706820; 513089, 3706848; 513146, 3706848; 513146, 3706791; 513203, 
3706791; 513203, 3706763; 513288, 3706763; 513288, 3706791; 513345, 
3706791; 513345, 3706763; 513373, 3706763; 513373, 3706706; 513345, 
3706706; 513345, 3706678; 513146, 3706678; 513146, 3706649; 513089, 
3706649; 513089, 3706621; 513061, 3706621; 513061, 3706479; 513089, 
3706479; 513089, 3706423; 513146, 3706423; 513146, 3706394; 513175, 
3706394; 513175, 3706337; 513203, 3706337; 513203, 3706281; 513231, 
3706281; 513231, 3706252; 513260, 3706252; 513260, 3706224; 513288, 
3706224; 513288, 3706196; 513316, 3706196; 513316, 3706054; 513288, 
3706054; 513288, 3705912; 513260, 3705912; 513260, 3705827; 513231, 
3705827; 513231, 3705770; 513203, 3705770; 513203, 3705657; 513175, 
3705657; 513175, 3705628; 513146, 3705628; 513146, 3705600; 513118, 
3705600; 513118, 3705543; 513089, 3705543; 513089, 3705515; 512862, 
3705515; 512862, 3705486; 512636, 3705486; 512636, 3705458; 512579, 
3705458; 512579, 3705430; 512323, 3705430; 512323, 3705401; 512295, 
3705401; 512295, 3705373; 512238, 3705373; 512238, 3705316; 512210, 
3705316; 512210, 3705288; 511955, 3705288; 511955, 3705259; 511813, 
3705259; 511813, 3705231; 511671, 3705231; 511671, 3705203; 511586, 
3705203; 511586, 3705174; 511535, 3705174; 511525, 3706082; 511699, 
3706082; 511699, 3706110; 511728, 3706110; 511728, 3706139; 511756, 
3706139; 511756, 3706167; 511784, 3706167; 511784, 3706196; 511813, 
3706196; 511813, 3706224; 511898, 3706224; 511898, 3706196; 511911, 
3706196; 511916, 3705800; 512341, 3705773; 512337, 3706082; 512522, 
3706082; 512522, 3706110; 512579, 3706110; 512579, 3706139; 512550, 
3706139; 512550, 3706196; 512437, 3706196; 512437, 3706309; 512409, 
3706309; 512409, 3706366; 512437, 3706366; 512437, 3706564; 512465, 
3706564; 512465, 3706630; 512761, 3706595; 512751, 3706990; 512808, 
3706990; returning to 512834, 3706987.
    (vii) Note: Map of Unit 13 is provided at paragraph (17)(v) of this 
entry.
    (19) Unit 14: Lower and Middle San Luis Rey Basin, San Diego County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Pechanga, San Luis Rey, Morro 
Hill, Bonsall, Pala, and Boucher Hill, land bounded by the following UTM 
coordinates (E, N): 505206, 3681404; 505206, 3681374; 505266, 3681374; 
505266, 3681344; 505326, 3681344; 505326, 3681224; 505356, 3681224; 
505356, 3681164; 505386, 3681164; 505386, 3681014; 505356, 3681014; 
505356, 3680984; 505326, 3680984; 505326, 3680864; 505356, 3680864; 
505356, 3680744; 505326, 3680744; 505326, 3680654; 505356, 3680654; 
505356, 3680624; 505326, 3680624; 505326, 3680594; 505296, 3680594; 
505296, 3680564; 505266, 3680564; 505266, 3680474; 505236, 3680474; 
505236, 3680429; 505066, 3680430; 505061, 3680430; 505061, 3680553; 
505061, 3680603; 505061, 3680603; 505061, 3680604; 505061, 3680604; 
505061, 3680604; 505061, 3680605; 505061, 3680605; 505061, 3680605; 
505061, 3680606; 505061, 3680606; 505061, 3680606; 505061, 3680606; 
505062, 3680607; 505062, 3680607; 505062, 3680607; 505062, 3680607; 
505062, 3680607; 505062, 3680608; 505062, 3680608; 505062, 3680608; 
505062, 3680608; 505062, 3680609; 505062, 3680609; 505062, 3680609; 
505062, 3680609; 505062, 3680610; 505062, 3680610; 505062, 3680610; 
505062, 3680610; 505062, 3680610; 505062, 3680611; 505062, 3680611; 
505062, 3680611; 505062, 3680612; 505062, 3680612; 505062, 3680612; 
505062, 3680612; 505062, 3680612; 505062, 3680612; 505062, 3680613; 
505062, 3680613; 505062, 3680613; 505062, 3680614; 505062, 3680614; 
505062, 3680614; 505062, 3680614; 505062, 3680615; 505062, 3680615; 
505062, 3680616; 505062, 3680616; 505062, 3680617; 505062, 3680617; 
505062, 3680617; 505062, 3680617; 505062, 3680617; 505062, 3680617; 
505062, 3680618; 505062, 3680618; 505062, 3680619; 505062, 3680620; 
505062, 3680620; 505062, 3680621; 505062, 3680621; 505062, 3680622; 
505062, 3680622; 505062, 3680623; 505062, 3680623; 505062, 3680623; 
505061, 3680624; 505061, 3680624; 505061, 3680625; 505061, 3680625; 
505061, 3680625; 505061, 3680625; 505061, 3680625; 505065, 3680625; 
505065, 3680726; 505066, 3680827; 505066, 3680927; 505066, 3681113; 
505066, 3681123; 505066, 3681123; 505066, 3681232; 505066, 3681273; 
505066, 3681344; 505146, 3681344; 505146, 3681374; 505176, 3681374; 
505176, 3681404; returning to 505206, 3681404.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 496083, 
3690984; 496081, 3690778; 496186, 3690777; 496188, 3690982; 496083, 
3690984; 496085, 3691184; 496086, 3691184; 496086, 3691124; 496116, 
3691124; 496116, 3691094; 496146, 3691094; 496146, 3691034; 496176, 
3691034; 496176, 3691004; 496236, 3691004; 496236, 3690944; 496266, 
3690944; 496266, 3690884; 496296, 3690884; 496296, 3690854; 496326, 
3690854; 496326, 3690824; 496356, 3690824; 496356, 3690794; 496386, 
3690794; 496386, 3690764; 496416, 3690764; 496416, 3690734; 496446, 
3690734; 496446, 3690704; 496476, 3690704; 496476, 3690674; 496506, 
3690674; 496506, 3690644; 496536,

[[Page 421]]

3690644; 496536, 3690614; 496596, 3690614; 496596, 3690584; 496656, 
3690584; 496656, 3690554; 496716, 3690554; 496716, 3690524; 496806, 
3690524; 496806, 3690494; 497106, 3690494; 497106, 3690464; 497166, 
3690464; 497166, 3690434; 497256, 3690434; 497256, 3690404; 497298, 
3690404; 497300, 3690146; 497496, 3690141; 497496, 3690134; 497526, 
3690134; 497526, 3689984; 497556, 3689984; 497556, 3689924; 497526, 
3689924; 497526, 3689804; 497556, 3689804; 497556, 3689744; 497586, 
3689744; 497586, 3689684; 497616, 3689684; 497616, 3689654; 497676, 
3689654; 497676, 3689624; 497747, 3689624; 497758, 3689276; 497954, 
3689277; 497951, 3689383; 498148, 3689383; 498145, 3689534; 498186, 
3689534; 498186, 3689504; 498216, 3689504; 498216, 3689444; 498246, 
3689444; 498246, 3689414; 498216, 3689414; 498216, 3689264; 498246, 
3689264; 498246, 3689234; 498216, 3689234; 498216, 3689204; 498366, 
3689204; 498366, 3689174; 498546, 3689174; 498546, 3689144; 498576, 
3689144; 498576, 3689054; 498546, 3689054; 498546, 3689024; 498636, 
3689024; 498636, 3688994; 498756, 3688994; 498756, 3688964; 498786, 
3688964; 498786, 3688934; 498876, 3688934; 498876, 3688904; 498936, 
3688904; 498936, 3688874; 499056, 3688874; 499056, 3688844; 499266, 
3688844; 499266, 3688814; 499326, 3688814; 499326, 3688544; 499356, 
3688544; 499356, 3688514; 499386, 3688514; 499386, 3688454; 499416, 
3688454; 499416, 3688364; 499446, 3688364; 499446, 3688274; 499476, 
3688274; 499476, 3688214; 499506, 3688214; 499506, 3688124; 499536, 
3688124; 499536, 3687884; 499566, 3687884; 499566, 3687674; 499596, 
3687674; 499596, 3687644; 499656, 3687644; 499656, 3687614; 499686, 
3687614; 499686, 3687584; 499746, 3687584; 499746, 3687554; 499776, 
3687554; 499776, 3687494; 499746, 3687494; 499746, 3687464; 499716, 
3687464; 499716, 3687374; 499746, 3687374; 499746, 3687314; 499836, 
3687314; 499836, 3687284; 499986, 3687284; 499986, 3687314; 500046, 
3687314; 500046, 3687284; 500076, 3687284; 500076, 3687194; 500106, 
3687194; 500106, 3687104; 500136, 3687104; 500136, 3687074; 500166, 
3687074; 500166, 3687014; 500196, 3687014; 500196, 3686984; 500226, 
3686984; 500226, 3686714; 500256, 3686714; 500256, 3686684; 500256, 
3686534; 500226, 3686534; 500226, 3686444; 500286, 3686444; 500286, 
3686384; 500316, 3686384; 500316, 3686324; 500346, 3686324; 500346, 
3686234; 500376, 3686234; 500376, 3686174; 500406, 3686174; 500406, 
3686084; 500436, 3686084; 500436, 3685994; 500466, 3685994; 500466, 
3685934; 500496, 3685934; 500496, 3685904; 500556, 3685904; 500556, 
3685874; 500586, 3685874; 500586, 3685844; 500616, 3685844; 500616, 
3685814; 500736, 3685814; 500736, 3685844; 500796, 3685844; 500796, 
3685814; 500826, 3685814; 500826, 3685844; 500886, 3685844; 500886, 
3685814; 500946, 3685814; 500946, 3685784; 501006, 3685784; 501006, 
3685754; 501066, 3685754; 501066, 3685724; 501126, 3685724; 501126, 
3685694; 501186, 3685694; 501186, 3685664; 501216, 3685664; 501216, 
3685574; 501246, 3685574; 501246, 3685544; 501276, 3685544; 501276, 
3685514; 501306, 3685514; 501306, 3685484; 501366, 3685484; 501366, 
3685424; 501396, 3685424; 501396, 3685394; 501426, 3685394; 501426, 
3685334; 501456, 3685334; 501456, 3685304; 501486, 3685304; 501486, 
3685274; 501546, 3685274; 501546, 3685244; 501576, 3685244; 501576, 
3685214; 501606, 3685214; 501606, 3685184; 501666, 3685184; 501666, 
3685154; 501756, 3685154; 501756, 3685124; 501816, 3685124; 501816, 
3685094; 501876, 3685094; 501876, 3685064; 501996, 3685064; 501996, 
3685034; 502116, 3685034; 502116, 3685004; 502176, 3685004; 502176, 
3684974; 502236, 3684974; 502236, 3684944; 502266, 3684944; 502266, 
3684974; 502326, 3684974; 502326, 3685004; 502446, 3685004; 502446, 
3684974; 502536, 3684974; 502536, 3685004; 502566, 3685004; 502566, 
3684974; 502626, 3684974; 502626, 3684944; 502656, 3684944; 502656, 
3684914; 502686, 3684914; 502686, 3684854; 502716, 3684854; 502716, 
3684764; 502746, 3684764; 502746, 3684734; 502776, 3684734; 502776, 
3684704; 502746, 3684704; 502746, 3684644; 502716, 3684644; 502716, 
3684554; 502746, 3684554; 502746, 3684374; 502776, 3684374; 502776, 
3684344; 502806, 3684344; 502806, 3684314; 502836, 3684314; 502836, 
3684284; 502866, 3684284; 502866, 3684254; 502896, 3684254; 502896, 
3684224; 502956, 3684224; 502956, 3684014; 502986, 3684014; 502986, 
3683834; 503016, 3683834; 503016, 3683804; 502986, 3683804; 502986, 
3683744; 502956, 3683744; 502956, 3683594; 502986, 3683594; 502986, 
3683474; 503016, 3683474; 503016, 3683324; 503046, 3683324; 503046, 
3683234; 503076, 3683234; 503076, 3683174; 503106, 3683174; 503106, 
3683084; 503166, 3683084; 503166, 3683024; 503196, 3683024; 503196, 
3682964; 503226, 3682964; 503226, 3682934; 503256, 3682934; 503256, 
3682844; 503286, 3682844; 503286, 3682814; 503316, 3682814; 503316, 
3682784; 503346, 3682784; 503346, 3682754; 503406, 3682754; 503406, 
3682724; 503436, 3682724; 503436, 3682694; 503454, 3682694; 503452, 
3682414; 503449, 3681953; 503449, 3681950; 503446, 3681434; 503436, 
3681434; 503436, 3681464; 503406, 3681464; 503406, 3681494; 503286, 
3681494; 503286, 3681524; 503226, 3681524; 503226, 3681554; 503196, 
3681554; 503196, 3681584; 503136, 3681584; 503136, 3681614; 503106, 
3681614; 503106, 3681644; 503076, 3681644; 503076, 3681674; 503046, 
3681674; 503046, 3681704; 502986, 3681704; 502986, 3681734; 502866, 
3681734; 502866, 3681764; 502746, 3681764; 502686, 3681764; 502686, 
3681734; 502626, 3681734; 502626, 3681824; 502656, 3681824; 502656, 
3681884; 502686, 3681884; 502686, 3681914; 502716, 3681914; 502716, 
3681944; 502746, 3681944; 502746, 3681974; 502776, 3681974; 502776, 
3682094; 502746, 3682094; 502746, 3682214; 502716, 3682214; 502716, 
3682244; 502536, 3682244; 502536, 3682274; 502476, 3682274; 502476, 
3682304; 502416, 3682304; 502416, 3682334; 502356, 3682334; 502356, 
3682364; 502326, 3682364; 502326, 3682394; 502296, 3682394; 502296, 
3682424; 502236, 3682424; 502236, 3682394; 502176, 3682394; 502176, 
3682424; 502116, 3682424; 502116, 3682454; 502026, 3682454; 502026, 
3682514; 502056, 3682514; 502056, 3682544; 502086, 3682544; 502086, 
3682574; 502116, 3682574; 502116, 3682604; 502146, 3682604; 502146, 
3682634; 502176, 3682634; 502176, 3682694; 502206, 3682694; 502206, 
3682754; 502236, 3682754; 502236, 3682844; 502266, 3682844; 502266, 
3682934; 502236, 3682934; 502236, 3683084; 502206, 3683084; 502206, 
3683114; 502176, 3683114; 502176, 3683144; 502146, 3683144; 502146, 
3683174; 502116, 3683174; 502116, 3683234; 502086, 3683234; 502086, 
3683264; 502056, 3683264; 502056, 3683354; 502086, 3683354; 502086, 
3683414; 502116, 3683414; 502116, 3683504; 502086, 3683504; 502086, 
3683624; 502056, 3683624; 502056, 3683684; 502026, 3683684; 502026, 
3683714; 501966, 3683714; 501966, 3683744; 501936, 3683744; 501936, 
3683804; 501906, 3683804; 501906, 3683834; 501876, 3683834; 501876, 
3683894; 501846, 3683894; 501846,

[[Page 422]]

3683984; 501816, 3683984; 501816, 3684044; 501786, 3684044; 501786, 
3684074; 501756, 3684074; 501756, 3684104; 501696, 3684104; 501696, 
3684074; 501666, 3684074; 501666, 3684044; 501606, 3684044; 501606, 
3684074; 501576, 3684074; 501576, 3684104; 501546, 3684104; 501546, 
3684134; 501456, 3684134; 501456, 3684164; 501336, 3684164; 501336, 
3684524; 501096, 3684524; 501096, 3684494; 501066, 3684494; 501066, 
3684464; 501036, 3684464; 501036, 3684434; 501006, 3684434; 501006, 
3684404; 500946, 3684404; 500946, 3684374; 500916, 3684374; 500916, 
3684404; 500886, 3684404; 500886, 3684464; 500856, 3684464; 500856, 
3684554; 500826, 3684554; 500826, 3684614; 500766, 3684614; 500766, 
3684674; 500736, 3684674; 500736, 3684704; 500766, 3684704; 500766, 
3684884; 500736, 3684884; 500736, 3684914; 500706, 3684914; 500706, 
3684974; 500676, 3684974; 500676, 3685004; 500646, 3685004; 500646, 
3684974; 500496, 3684974; 500496, 3684944; 500406, 3684944; 500406, 
3684914; 500376, 3684914; 500376, 3684944; 500316, 3684944; 500316, 
3684914; 500286, 3684914; 500286, 3684854; 500316, 3684854; 500316, 
3684704; 500286, 3684704; 500286, 3684674; 500256, 3684674; 500256, 
3684644; 500226, 3684644; 500226, 3684614; 500166, 3684614; 500166, 
3684584; 500136, 3684584; 500136, 3684554; 500046, 3684554; 500046, 
3684524; 499986, 3684524; 499986, 3684554; 499926, 3684554; 499926, 
3684584; 499896, 3684584; 499896, 3684614; 499866, 3684614; 499866, 
3685184; 499836, 3685184; 499836, 3685214; 499806, 3685214; 499806, 
3685244; 499566, 3685244; 499566, 3685274; 499536, 3685274; 499536, 
3685304; 499506, 3685304; 499506, 3685364; 499476, 3685364; 499476, 
3685394; 499416, 3685394; 499416, 3685424; 499356, 3685424; 499356, 
3685394; 499296, 3685394; 499296, 3685364; 499236, 3685364; 499236, 
3685334; 499176, 3685334; 499176, 3685364; 499146, 3685364; 499146, 
3685394; 499056, 3685394; 499056, 3685424; 499026, 3685424; 499026, 
3685454; 498966, 3685454; 498966, 3685484; 498756, 3685484; 498756, 
3685514; 498726, 3685514; 498726, 3685484; 498606, 3685484; 498606, 
3685514; 498396, 3685514; 498396, 3685544; 498366, 3685544; 498366, 
3685604; 498336, 3685604; 498336, 3685634; 498306, 3685634; 498306, 
3685694; 498336, 3685694; 498336, 3685724; 498366, 3685724; 498366, 
3685754; 498396, 3685754; 498396, 3685874; 498366, 3685874; 498366, 
3685964; 498396, 3685964; 498396, 3686114; 498426, 3686114; 498426, 
3686174; 498456, 3686174; 498456, 3686234; 498486, 3686234; 498486, 
3686264; 498576, 3686264; 498576, 3686234; 498696, 3686234; 498696, 
3686204; 498726, 3686204; 498726, 3686234; 498846, 3686234; 498846, 
3686264; 498906, 3686264; 498906, 3686294; 498936, 3686294; 498936, 
3686324; 498966, 3686324; 498966, 3686444; 498936, 3686444; 498936, 
3686474; 498876, 3686474; 498876, 3686504; 498786, 3686504; 498786, 
3686534; 498756, 3686534; 498756, 3686564; 498636, 3686564; 498636, 
3686594; 498576, 3686594; 498426, 3686594; 498426, 3686564; 498276, 
3686564; 498276, 3686654; 498306, 3686654; 498306, 3686774; 498276, 
3686774; 498276, 3686804; 498246, 3686804; 498246, 3686834; 498216, 
3686834; 498216, 3686864; 498186, 3686864; 498186, 3686894; 498156, 
3686894; 498156, 3686924; 498096, 3686924; 498096, 3686954; 498066, 
3686954; 498066, 3686984; 498036, 3686984; 498036, 3687014; 497976, 
3687014; 497976, 3687044; 497946, 3687044; 497946, 3687104; 497916, 
3687104; 497916, 3687164; 497946, 3687164; 497946, 3687224; 498186, 
3687224; 498186, 3687254; 498216, 3687254; 498216, 3687284; 498246, 
3687284; 498246, 3687314; 498276, 3687314; 498276, 3687344; 498306, 
3687344; 498306, 3687374; 498336, 3687374; 498336, 3687404; 498366, 
3687404; 498366, 3687434; 498396, 3687434; 498396, 3687464; 498426, 
3687464; 498426, 3687494; 498396, 3687494; 498396, 3687554; 498366, 
3687554; 498366, 3687584; 498336, 3687584; 498336, 3687614; 498276, 
3687614; 498276, 3687644; 498216, 3687644; 498216, 3687704; 498246, 
3687704; 498246, 3687734; 498276, 3687734; 498276, 3687794; 498306, 
3687794; 498306, 3687824; 498336, 3687824; 498336, 3687914; 498366, 
3687914; 498366, 3687944; 498396, 3687944; 498396, 3688004; 498426, 
3688004; 498426, 3688034; 498456, 3688034; 498456, 3688064; 498486, 
3688064; 498486, 3688094; 498516, 3688094; 498516, 3688154; 498546, 
3688154; 498546, 3688274; 498576, 3688274; 498576, 3688304; 498546, 
3688304; 498546, 3688484; 498516, 3688484; 498516, 3688544; 498486, 
3688544; 498486, 3688574; 498456, 3688574; 498456, 3688604; 498426, 
3688604; 498426, 3688694; 498396, 3688694; 498396, 3688724; 498366, 
3688724; 498366, 3688754; 498336, 3688754; 498336, 3688784; 498306, 
3688784; 498306, 3688814; 498216, 3688814; 498216, 3688874; 498186, 
3688874; 498186, 3688904; 498156, 3688904; 498156, 3688934; 498066, 
3688934; 498066, 3688964; 498006, 3688964; 498006, 3688994; 497976, 
3688994; 497976, 3689024; 497946, 3689024; 497946, 3689144; 497916, 
3689144; 497916, 3689174; 497886, 3689174; 497886, 3689204; 497556, 
3689204; 497556, 3689234; 497526, 3689234; 497526, 3689264; 497466, 
3689264; 497466, 3689294; 497436, 3689294; 497436, 3689324; 497406, 
3689324; 497406, 3689354; 497376, 3689354; 497376, 3689384; 497357, 
3689384; 497333, 3689706; 497256, 3689706; 497256, 3689804; 497226, 
3689804; 497226, 3689864; 497196, 3689864; 497196, 3689894; 497166, 
3689894; 497166, 3689954; 497136, 3689954; 497136, 3689984; 497106, 
3689984; 497106, 3690014; 497076, 3690014; 497076, 3690044; 497046, 
3690044; 497046, 3690074; 497016, 3690074; 497016, 3690104; 496986, 
3690104; 496986, 3690134; 496836, 3690134; 496836, 3690104; 496686, 
3690104; 496686, 3690074; 496596, 3690074; 496596, 3690104; 496506, 
3690104; 496506, 3690164; 496446, 3690164; 496446, 3690194; 496386, 
3690194; 496386, 3690224; 496326, 3690224; 496326, 3690254; 496266, 
3690254; 496266, 3690284; 496206, 3690284; 496206, 3690314; 496176, 
3690314; 496176, 3690374; 496146, 3690374; 496146, 3690404; 496116, 
3690404; 496116, 3690434; 496086, 3690434; 496086, 3690464; 496056, 
3690464; 496056, 3690524; 496026, 3690524; 496026, 3690554; 495996, 
3690554; 495996, 3690584; 495966, 3690584; 495966, 3690644; 495936, 
3690644; 495936, 3690674; 495906, 3690674; 495906, 3690734; 495876, 
3690734; 495876, 3690794; 495846, 3690794; 495846, 3690824; 495816, 
3690824; 495816, 3690854; 495666, 3690854; 495666, 3690884; 495636, 
3690884; 495636, 3690914; 495606, 3690914; 495606, 3690944; 495456, 
3690944; 495456, 3690974; 495366, 3690974; 495366, 3691004; 495276, 
3691004; 495276, 3691010; returning to 496083, 3690984.
    (iii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 496086, 
3691274; 496085, 3691274; 496085, 3691304; 496086, 3691304; returning to 
496086, 3691274.
    (iv) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 494886, 
3691724; 494886, 3691694; 494946, 3691694; 494946, 3691664; 494916,

[[Page 423]]

3691664; 494916, 3691574; 494976, 3691574; 494976, 3691604; 495006, 
3691604; 495006, 3691634; 495036, 3691634; 495036, 3691664; 495126, 
3691664; 495126, 3691574; 495096, 3691574; 495096, 3691544; 495126, 
3691544; 495126, 3691514; 495186, 3691514; 495186, 3691484; 495265, 
3691484; 495265, 3691426; 495265, 3691426; 495266, 3691034; 495216, 
3691034; 495216, 3691064; 495186, 3691064; 495186, 3691094; 494946, 
3691094; 494946, 3691064; 494847, 3691064; 494847, 3691104; 494848, 
3691249; 494850, 3691724; returning to 494886, 3691724.
    (v) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 490926, 
3692474; 490926, 3692444; 490956, 3692444; 490956, 3692414; 490986, 
3692414; 490986, 3692384; 491016, 3692384; 491016, 3692324; 491076, 
3692324; 491076, 3692174; 491106, 3692174; 491106, 3692144; 491136, 
3692144; 491136, 3692114; 491196, 3692114; 491196, 3692144; 491256, 
3692144; 491256, 3692174; 491346, 3692174; 491346, 3692204; 491406, 
3692204; 491406, 3692234; 491436, 3692234; 491436, 3692264; 491466, 
3692264; 491466, 3692267; 491596, 3692267; 491595, 3692414; 491646, 
3692414; 491646, 3692324; 491676, 3692324; 491676, 3692144; 491646, 
3692144; 491646, 3692114; 491616, 3692114; 491616, 3691964; 491646, 
3691964; 491646, 3691858; 491596, 3691858; 491596, 3691849; 491596, 
3691822; 491596, 3691803; 491596, 3691803; 491596, 3691584; 491596, 
3691442; 491998, 3691441; 492404, 3691435; 492405, 3691020; 492304, 
3691021; 492101, 3691024; 491999, 3691026; 491996, 3690621; 491797, 
3690620; 491736, 3690620; 491736, 3690644; 491706, 3690644; 491706, 
3690674; 491676, 3690674; 491676, 3690704; 491646, 3690704; 491646, 
3690734; 491526, 3690734; 491526, 3690794; 491406, 3690794; 491406, 
3690824; 491286, 3690824; 491286, 3690854; 491196, 3690854; 491196, 
3690884; 491166, 3690884; 491166, 3690914; 491076, 3690914; 491076, 
3690884; 490986, 3690884; 490986, 3690854; 490806, 3690854; 490806, 
3690824; 490776, 3690824; 490776, 3690794; 490746, 3690794; 490746, 
3690764; 490716, 3690764; 490716, 3690704; 490686, 3690704; 490686, 
3690644; 490656, 3690644; 490656, 3690614; 490626, 3690614; 490626, 
3690584; 490536, 3690584; 490536, 3690554; 490506, 3690554; 490506, 
3690524; 490476, 3690524; 490476, 3690494; 490446, 3690494; 490446, 
3690464; 490416, 3690464; 490416, 3690434; 490386, 3690434; 490386, 
3690374; 490356, 3690374; 490356, 3690344; 490326, 3690344; 490326, 
3690284; 490266, 3690284; 490266, 3690254; 490206, 3690254; 490206, 
3690224; 490176, 3690224; 490176, 3690194; 490146, 3690194; 490146, 
3690134; 490116, 3690134; 490116, 3690014; 490086, 3690014; 490086, 
3689924; 490056, 3689924; 490056, 3689894; 490026, 3689894; 490026, 
3689834; 489996, 3689834; 489996, 3689804; 489966, 3689804; 489966, 
3689774; 489936, 3689774; 489936, 3689624; 489906, 3689624; 489906, 
3689564; 489876, 3689564; 489876, 3689534; 489846, 3689534; 489846, 
3689444; 489816, 3689444; 489816, 3689414; 489756, 3689414; 489756, 
3689444; 489696, 3689444; 489696, 3689474; 489636, 3689474; 489636, 
3689624; 489606, 3689624; 489606, 3689654; 489576, 3689654; 489576, 
3689624; 489546, 3689624; 489546, 3689564; 489576, 3689564; 489576, 
3689534; 489606, 3689534; 489606, 3689474; 489576, 3689474; 489576, 
3689414; 489546, 3689414; 489546, 3689354; 489516, 3689354; 489516, 
3689324; 489486, 3689324; 489486, 3689234; 489456, 3689234; 489456, 
3689114; 489426, 3689114; 489426, 3689024; 489396, 3689024; 489396, 
3688994; 489366, 3688994; 489366, 3688964; 489306, 3688964; 489306, 
3688934; 489276, 3688934; 489276, 3688904; 489246, 3688904; 489246, 
3688874; 489216, 3688874; 489216, 3688844; 489156, 3688844; 489156, 
3688814; 489066, 3688814; 489066, 3688784; 489036, 3688784; 489036, 
3688814; 488946, 3688814; 488946, 3688844; 488916, 3688844; 488916, 
3688874; 488856, 3688874; 488856, 3688904; 488826, 3688904; 488826, 
3688934; 488736, 3688934; 488736, 3688964; 488676, 3688964; 488676, 
3688874; 488706, 3688874; 488706, 3688784; 488676, 3688784; 488676, 
3688754; 488616, 3688754; 488616, 3688724; 488556, 3688724; 488556, 
3688634; 488526, 3688634; 488526, 3688604; 488496, 3688604; 488496, 
3688574; 488406, 3688574; 488406, 3688544; 488376, 3688544; 488376, 
3688454; 488466, 3688454; 488466, 3688274; 488496, 3688274; 488496, 
3688244; 488526, 3688244; 488526, 3688154; 488586, 3688154; 488586, 
3688124; 488676, 3688124; 488676, 3688034; 488706, 3688034; 488706, 
3688004; 488736, 3688004; 488736, 3687974; 488856, 3687974; 488856, 
3687884; 488886, 3687884; 488886, 3687794; 488856, 3687794; 488856, 
3687824; 488796, 3687824; 488796, 3687854; 488676, 3687854; 488676, 
3687884; 488556, 3687884; 488556, 3687824; 488526, 3687824; 488526, 
3687794; 488496, 3687794; 488496, 3687764; 488466, 3687764; 488466, 
3687794; 488436, 3687794; 488436, 3687764; 488346, 3687764; 488346, 
3687854; 488316, 3687854; 488316, 3687914; 488286, 3687914; 488286, 
3687974; 488136, 3687974; 488136, 3687944; 488106, 3687944; 488106, 
3687974; 488076, 3687974; 488076, 3688004; 488016, 3688004; 488016, 
3688064; 487986, 3688064; 487986, 3688094; 487956, 3688094; 487956, 
3688124; 487926, 3688124; 487926, 3688184; 487896, 3688184; 487896, 
3688214; 487836, 3688214; 487836, 3688244; 487806, 3688244; 487806, 
3688274; 487776, 3688274; 487776, 3688304; 487746, 3688304; 487746, 
3688334; 487656, 3688334; 487656, 3688364; 487566, 3688364; 487566, 
3688394; 487536, 3688394; 487536, 3688424; 487506, 3688424; 487506, 
3688454; 487536, 3688454; 487536, 3688484; 487536, 3688514; 487506, 
3688514; 487506, 3688544; 487326, 3688544; 487326, 3688574; 487266, 
3688574; 487266, 3688604; 487236, 3688604; 487236, 3688634; 487206, 
3688634; 487206, 3688664; 487026, 3688664; 487026, 3688634; 486966, 
3688634; 486966, 3688604; 486936, 3688604; 486936, 3688574; 486906, 
3688574; 486906, 3688454; 486876, 3688454; 486876, 3688334; 486846, 
3688334; 486846, 3688244; 486816, 3688244; 486816, 3688154; 486786, 
3688154; 486786, 3688124; 486756, 3688124; 486756, 3688094; 486726, 
3688094; 486726, 3688064; 486696, 3688064; 486696, 3688034; 486666, 
3688034; 486666, 3687944; 486636, 3687944; 486636, 3687914; 486486, 
3687914; 486486, 3687884; 486366, 3687884; 486366, 3687914; 486306, 
3687914; 486306, 3687944; 486276, 3687944; 486276, 3687974; 486246, 
3687974; 486246, 3688004; 486216, 3688004; 486216, 3688034; 486156, 
3688034; 486156, 3688004; 486130, 3688004; 486107, 3688037; 485992, 
3687967; 485960, 3687920; 485802, 3687621; 485377, 3687264; 485730, 
3686693; 485950, 3686677; 486081, 3686729; 486189, 3686891; 486203, 
3686645; 486287, 3686645; 486246, 3686864; 486276, 3686864; 486276, 
3686804; 486306, 3686804; 486306, 3686774; 486366, 3686774; 486366, 
3686714; 486396, 3686714; 486396, 3686624; 486426, 3686624; 486426, 
3686564; 486456, 3686564; 486456, 3686504; 486486, 3686504; 486486, 
3686444; 486636, 3686444; 486636, 3686414; 486666, 3686414; 486666,

[[Page 424]]

3686384; 486696, 3686384; 486696, 3686354; 486726, 3686354; 486726, 
3686324; 486756, 3686324; 486756, 3686294; 486786, 3686294; 486786, 
3686234; 486816, 3686234; 486816, 3686204; 486846, 3686204; 486846, 
3686144; 486876, 3686144; 486876, 3686114; 486906, 3686114; 486906, 
3686054; 486966, 3686054; 486966, 3686024; 486996, 3686024; 486996, 
3685994; 487056, 3685994; 487056, 3685964; 487086, 3685964; 487086, 
3685934; 487146, 3685934; 487146, 3685904; 487176, 3685904; 487176, 
3685874; 487206, 3685874; 487206, 3685844; 487236, 3685844; 487236, 
3685814; 487266, 3685814; 487266, 3685754; 487296, 3685754; 487296, 
3685544; 487326, 3685544; 487326, 3685484; 487176, 3685484; 487176, 
3685514; 487086, 3685514; 487086, 3685544; 487056, 3685544; 487056, 
3685574; 486996, 3685574; 486996, 3685604; 486966, 3685604; 486966, 
3685634; 486936, 3685634; 486936, 3685664; 486906, 3685664; 486906, 
3685694; 486876, 3685694; 486876, 3685724; 486846, 3685724; 486846, 
3685754; 486816, 3685754; 486816, 3685784; 486786, 3685784; 486786, 
3685814; 486696, 3685814; 486696, 3685844; 486666, 3685844; 486666, 
3685874; 486636, 3685874; 486636, 3685904; 486576, 3685904; 486576, 
3685934; 486546, 3685934; 486546, 3686024; 486516, 3686024; 486516, 
3686054; 486486, 3686054; 486486, 3686084; 486396, 3686084; 486396, 
3686054; 486366, 3686054; 486366, 3686024; 486336, 3686024; 486336, 
3685934; 486306, 3685934; 486306, 3685904; 486216, 3685904; 486216, 
3685874; 486156, 3685874; 486156, 3685844; 486126, 3685844; 486126, 
3685814; 486096, 3685814; 486096, 3685784; 486066, 3685784; 486066, 
3685754; 486036, 3685754; 486036, 3685784; 486006, 3685784; 486006, 
3685904; 485976, 3685904; 485976, 3685934; 485946, 3685934; 485946, 
3685994; 485916, 3685994; 485916, 3686054; 485856, 3686054; 485856, 
3686084; 485796, 3686084; 485796, 3686114; 485706, 3686114; 485706, 
3686144; 485676, 3686144; 485676, 3686174; 485616, 3686174; 485616, 
3686204; 485586, 3686204; 485586, 3686234; 485526, 3686234; 485526, 
3686264; 485466, 3686264; 485466, 3686294; 485436, 3686294; 485436, 
3686324; 485406, 3686324; 485406, 3686384; 485283, 3686384; 485159, 
3686533; 485070, 3686702; 484924, 3686747; 484800, 3686772; 484575, 
3686540; 484587, 3686207; 484596, 3686198; 484596, 3686174; 484566, 
3686174; 484566, 3686114; 484536, 3686114; 484536, 3686084; 484506, 
3686084; 484506, 3686054; 484476, 3686054; 484476, 3686024; 484446, 
3686024; 484446, 3685994; 484326, 3685994; 484326, 3685964; 484296, 
3685964; 484296, 3685934; 484266, 3685934; 484266, 3685904; 484236, 
3685904; 484236, 3685874; 484176, 3685874; 484176, 3685844; 484116, 
3685844; 484116, 3685814; 484026, 3685814; 484026, 3685844; 483876, 
3685844; 483876, 3685814; 483816, 3685814; 483816, 3685784; 483786, 
3685784; 483786, 3685754; 483756, 3685754; 483756, 3685574; 483726, 
3685574; 483726, 3685544; 483696, 3685544; 483696, 3685514; 483726, 
3685514; 483726, 3685484; 483876, 3685484; 483876, 3685274; 483906, 
3685274; 483906, 3685214; 483936, 3685214; 483936, 3685064; 483786, 
3685064; 483786, 3685124; 483756, 3685124; 483756, 3685154; 483636, 
3685154; 483636, 3685124; 483606, 3685124; 483606, 3685094; 483576, 
3685094; 483576, 3685124; 483456, 3685124; 483456, 3685094; 483426, 
3685094; 483426, 3685064; 483396, 3685064; 483396, 3685004; 483366, 
3685004; 483366, 3684914; 483336, 3684914; 483336, 3684884; 483156, 
3684884; 483156, 3684854; 483096, 3684854; 483096, 3684824; 482946, 
3684824; 482946, 3684794; 482886, 3684794; 482886, 3684764; 482856, 
3684764; 482856, 3684734; 482526, 3684734; 482526, 3684704; 482436, 
3684704; 482436, 3684734; 482316, 3684734; 482316, 3684764; 482256, 
3684764; 482256, 3684794; 482196, 3684794; 482196, 3684824; 482166, 
3684824; 482166, 3684854; 482106, 3684854; 482106, 3684884; 482046, 
3684884; 482046, 3684914; 481986, 3684914; 481986, 3684944; 481896, 
3684944; 481896, 3684914; 481866, 3684914; 481866, 3684884; 481836, 
3684884; 481836, 3684854; 481746, 3684854; 481746, 3684824; 481716, 
3684824; 481716, 3684764; 481776, 3684764; 481776, 3684734; 481806, 
3684734; 481806, 3684704; 481866, 3684704; 481866, 3684674; 481926, 
3684674; 481926, 3684584; 481896, 3684584; 481896, 3684554; 481866, 
3684554; 481866, 3684464; 481656, 3684464; 481656, 3684434; 481596, 
3684434; 481596, 3684374; 481536, 3684374; 481536, 3684404; 481566, 
3684404; 481566, 3684434; 481536, 3684434; 481536, 3684524; 481506, 
3684524; 481506, 3684554; 481476, 3684554; 481476, 3684584; 481416, 
3684584; 481416, 3684614; 481236, 3684614; 481236, 3684584; 481146, 
3684584; 481146, 3684554; 481056, 3684554; 481056, 3684524; 480966, 
3684524; 480966, 3684494; 480936, 3684494; 480936, 3684464; 480876, 
3684464; 480876, 3684434; 480816, 3684434; 480816, 3684494; 480666, 
3684494; 480666, 3684434; 480636, 3684434; 480636, 3684404; 480606, 
3684404; 480606, 3684314; 480636, 3684314; 480636, 3684254; 480666, 
3684254; 480666, 3684194; 480606, 3684194; 480606, 3684224; 480546, 
3684224; 480546, 3684254; 480516, 3684254; 480516, 3684224; 480456, 
3684224; 480456, 3684254; 480396, 3684254; 480396, 3684284; 480306, 
3684284; 480306, 3684254; 480276, 3684254; 480276, 3684224; 480246, 
3684224; 480246, 3684194; 480186, 3684194; 480186, 3684164; 480156, 
3684164; 480156, 3684104; 480126, 3684104; 480126, 3684074; 480066, 
3684074; 480066, 3684044; 480036, 3684044; 480036, 3683984; 480006, 
3683984; 480006, 3683954; 480036, 3683954; 480036, 3683894; 480126, 
3683894; 480126, 3683864; 480142, 3683864; 480138, 3683713; 479842, 
3683713; 479821, 3683751; 479803, 3683778; 479425, 3683781; 479392, 
3683647; 479349, 3683471; 479330, 3683394; 479244, 3683232; 479207, 
3683050; 479187, 3682919; 479174, 3682724; 479172, 3682420; 479155, 
3682295; 479337, 3682250; 479436, 3682094; 479406, 3682094; 479406, 
3682064; 479346, 3682064; 479346, 3682034; 479316, 3682034; 479316, 
3682004; 479286, 3682004; 479286, 3681974; 479316, 3681974; 479316, 
3681914; 479346, 3681914; 479346, 3681884; 479376, 3681884; 479376, 
3681854; 479346, 3681854; 479346, 3681824; 479196, 3681824; 479196, 
3681854; 479106, 3681854; 479106, 3681884; 478986, 3681884; 478986, 
3681854; 478926, 3681854; 478926, 3681704; 478956, 3681704; 478956, 
3681614; 478596, 3681614; 478596, 3681584; 478536, 3681584; 478536, 
3681554; 478476, 3681554; 478476, 3681524; 478446, 3681524; 478446, 
3681494; 478416, 3681494; 478416, 3681404; 478446, 3681404; 478446, 
3681374; 478506, 3681374; 478506, 3681314; 478476, 3681314; 478476, 
3681254; 478446, 3681254; 478446, 3681224; 478416, 3681224; 478416, 
3681194; 478386, 3681194; 478386, 3681164; 478416, 3681164; 478416, 
3681074; 478446, 3681074; 478446, 3681044; 478476, 3681044; 478476, 
3681014; 478536, 3681014; 478536, 3681044; 478596, 3681044; 478596, 
3681074; 478626, 3681074; 478626, 3681104; 478656, 3681104; 478656, 
3681134; 478746, 3681134; 478746, 3681074; 478716, 3681074; 478716, 
3680984; 478686, 3680984; 478686,

[[Page 425]]

3680954; 478716, 3680954; 478716, 3680864; 478746, 3680864; 478746, 
3680834; 478776, 3680834; 478776, 3680804; 478806, 3680804; 478806, 
3680744; 478866, 3680744; 478866, 3680714; 478926, 3680714; 478926, 
3680684; 478956, 3680684; 478956, 3680624; 478986, 3680624; 478986, 
3680594; 479046, 3680594; 479046, 3680564; 479076, 3680564; 479076, 
3680534; 479106, 3680534; 479106, 3680474; 479136, 3680474; 479136, 
3680444; 479196, 3680444; 479196, 3680414; 479046, 3680414; 479046, 
3680444; 478956, 3680444; 478956, 3680474; 478926, 3680474; 478926, 
3680504; 478896, 3680504; 478896, 3680534; 478866, 3680534; 478866, 
3680564; 478746, 3680564; 478746, 3680534; 478656, 3680534; 478656, 
3680564; 478626, 3680564; 478626, 3680594; 478566, 3680594; 478566, 
3680684; 478536, 3680684; 478536, 3680714; 478476, 3680714; 478476, 
3680744; 478386, 3680744; 478386, 3680714; 478326, 3680714; 478326, 
3680474; 478296, 3680474; 478296, 3680444; 478266, 3680444; 478266, 
3680414; 478206, 3680414; 478206, 3680384; 478176, 3680384; 478176, 
3680324; 478146, 3680324; 478146, 3680294; 478116, 3680294; 478116, 
3680204; 478146, 3680204; 478146, 3680144; 478176, 3680144; 478176, 
3680084; 478146, 3680084; 478146, 3680054; 478086, 3680054; 478086, 
3680024; 478056, 3680024; 478056, 3679994; 477996, 3679994; 477996, 
3680024; 477906, 3680024; 477906, 3679994; 477876, 3679994; 477876, 
3679964; 477846, 3679964; 477846, 3679814; 477786, 3679814; 477786, 
3679784; 477756, 3679784; 477756, 3679664; 477666, 3679664; 477666, 
3679634; 477636, 3679634; 477636, 3679604; 477606, 3679604; 477606, 
3679574; 477576, 3679574; 477576, 3679544; 477546, 3679544; 477546, 
3679514; 477486, 3679514; 477486, 3679484; 477456, 3679484; 477456, 
3679454; 477426, 3679454; 477426, 3679424; 477396, 3679424; 477396, 
3679394; 477366, 3679394; 477366, 3679364; 477336, 3679364; 477336, 
3679274; 477366, 3679274; 477366, 3679214; 477306, 3679214; 477306, 
3679244; 477246, 3679244; 477246, 3679274; 477216, 3679274; 477216, 
3679304; 477156, 3679304; 477156, 3679274; 477126, 3679274; 477126, 
3679214; 477066, 3679214; 477066, 3679244; 477036, 3679244; 477036, 
3679274; 476856, 3679274; 476856, 3679304; 476826, 3679304; 476826, 
3679274; 476796, 3679274; 476796, 3679214; 476768, 3679214; 476783, 
3679429; 476396, 3679439; 476196, 3679437; 476083, 3679419; 475983, 
3679409; 475896, 3679375; 475866, 3679361; 475866, 3679364; 475806, 
3679364; 475806, 3679394; 475731, 3679394; 475796, 3679447; 476014, 
3679526; 475973, 3679644; 475870, 3679624; 475771, 3679611; 475738, 
3679706; 475602, 3679726; 475582, 3679860; 475466, 3679871; 475390, 
3679907; 475222, 3679909; 475171, 3679892; 474883, 3679930; 474740, 
3679934; 474719, 3679609; 474718, 3679610; 474661, 3679517; 474476, 
3679411; 474344, 3679284; 474164, 3679173; 474053, 3679041; 474053, 
3678908; 474107, 3678799; 474011, 3678761; 473771, 3678623; 473746, 
3678654; 473529, 3678575; 473386, 3678623; 473249, 3678559; 473074, 
3678802; 473053, 3678964; 472964, 3679205; 473085, 3679419; 472967, 
3679535; 472894, 3679564; 472672, 3679522; 472540, 3679437; 472386, 
3679226; 472280, 3679041; 472291, 3678903; 472291, 3678792; 472259, 
3678691; 472148, 3678527; 472127, 3678416; 472079, 3678173; 472037, 
3678167; 472035, 3678164; 472026, 3678164; 472026, 3678194; 471996, 
3678194; 471996, 3678224; 471966, 3678224; 471966, 3678254; 471936, 
3678254; 471936, 3678284; 471906, 3678284; 471906, 3678314; 471876, 
3678314; 471876, 3678374; 471846, 3678374; 471846, 3678404; 471816, 
3678404; 471816, 3678464; 471786, 3678464; 471786, 3678474; 471841, 
3678570; 471968, 3678855; 472074, 3679104; 472047, 3679152; 472069, 
3679300; 472127, 3679570; 472370, 3679559; 472487, 3679570; 472651, 
3679670; 472815, 3679697; 472961, 3679693; 473026, 3679685; 473042, 
3680104; 473196, 3680104; 473196, 3680168; 473199, 3680174; 473286, 
3680174; 473286, 3680144; 473406, 3680144; 473406, 3680174; 473436, 
3680174; 473436, 3680234; 473466, 3680234; 473466, 3680264; 473436, 
3680264; 473436, 3680324; 473466, 3680324; 473466, 3680444; 473526, 
3680444; 473526, 3680474; 473556, 3680474; 473556, 3680444; 473586, 
3680444; 473586, 3680414; 473616, 3680414; 473616, 3680354; 473646, 
3680354; 473646, 3680264; 473676, 3680264; 473676, 3680204; 473706, 
3680204; 473706, 3680234; 473736, 3680234; 473736, 3680264; 473976, 
3680264; 473976, 3680294; 474006, 3680294; 474006, 3680354; 474036, 
3680354; 474036, 3680384; 474066, 3680384; 474066, 3680444; 474126, 
3680444; 474126, 3680474; 474186, 3680474; 474186, 3680534; 474156, 
3680534; 474156, 3680624; 474276, 3680624; 474276, 3680654; 474306, 
3680654; 474306, 3680624; 474366, 3680624; 474366, 3680654; 474486, 
3680654; 474486, 3680684; 474546, 3680684; 474546, 3680864; 474576, 
3680864; 474576, 3680894; 474636, 3680894; 474636, 3680834; 474666, 
3680834; 474666, 3680804; 474756, 3680804; 474756, 3680834; 474786, 
3680834; 474786, 3680774; 474816, 3680774; 474816, 3680624; 474846, 
3680624; 474846, 3680564; 474906, 3680564; 474906, 3680534; 474996, 
3680534; 474996, 3680504; 475026, 3680504; 475026, 3680474; 474996, 
3680474; 474996, 3680414; 474966, 3680414; 474966, 3680354; 474966, 
3680294; 475026, 3680294; 475026, 3680264; 475086, 3680264; 475086, 
3680294; 475116, 3680294; 475116, 3680264; 475146, 3680264; 475146, 
3680324; 475176, 3680324; 475176, 3680384; 475206, 3680384; 475206, 
3680444; 475386, 3680444; 475386, 3680474; 475416, 3680474; 475416, 
3680444; 475446, 3680444; 475446, 3680354; 475476, 3680354; 475476, 
3680234; 475596, 3680234; 475596, 3680264; 475626, 3680264; 475626, 
3680324; 475656, 3680324; 475656, 3680354; 475686, 3680354; 475686, 
3680324; 475746, 3680324; 475746, 3680294; 475866, 3680294; 475866, 
3680324; 476076, 3680324; 476076, 3680354; 476136, 3680354; 476136, 
3680384; 476226, 3680384; 476226, 3680444; 476256, 3680444; 476256, 
3680504; 476346, 3680504; 476346, 3680474; 476376, 3680474; 476376, 
3680504; 476436, 3680504; 476436, 3680534; 476586, 3680534; 476586, 
3680504; 476646, 3680504; 476646, 3680474; 476616, 3680474; 476616, 
3680444; 476586, 3680444; 476586, 3680414; 476646, 3680414; 476646, 
3680384; 476676, 3680384; 476676, 3680444; 476706, 3680444; 476706, 
3680474; 476736, 3680474; 476736, 3680504; 476766, 3680504; 476766, 
3680534; 476856, 3680534; 476856, 3680564; 476886, 3680564; 476886, 
3680474; 476856, 3680474; 476856, 3680444; 476886, 3680444; 476886, 
3680384; 476856, 3680384; 476856, 3680324; 476886, 3680324; 476886, 
3680294; 476916, 3680294; 476916, 3680264; 476856, 3680264; 476856, 
3680234; 476796, 3680234; 476796, 3680144; 476766, 3680144; 476766, 
3680114; 476796, 3680114; 476796, 3680084; 476826, 3680084; 476826, 
3680054; 476856, 3680054; 476856, 3679934; 476916, 3679934; 476916, 
3679904; 476946, 3679904; 476946, 3679934; 476976, 3679934; 476976, 
3679904; 477066, 3679904; 477066, 3679874; 477126, 3679874; 477126, 
3679844; 477156, 3679844; 477156,

[[Page 426]]

3679814; 477186, 3679814; 477186, 3679784; 477216, 3679784; 477216, 
3679814; 477276, 3679814; 477276, 3679844; 477336, 3679844; 477336, 
3679904; 477366, 3679904; 477366, 3679934; 477516, 3679934; 477516, 
3679964; 477546, 3679964; 477546, 3679994; 477576, 3679994; 477576, 
3680024; 477606, 3680024; 477606, 3680054; 477636, 3680054; 477636, 
3680174; 477606, 3680174; 477606, 3680204; 477636, 3680204; 477636, 
3680234; 477696, 3680234; 477696, 3680264; 477726, 3680264; 477726, 
3680324; 477756, 3680324; 477756, 3680354; 477786, 3680354; 477786, 
3680384; 477816, 3680384; 477816, 3680444; 477786, 3680444; 477786, 
3680474; 477756, 3680474; 477756, 3680504; 477756, 3680534; 477786, 
3680534; 477786, 3680564; 477816, 3680564; 477816, 3680684; 477786, 
3680684; 477786, 3680714; 477756, 3680714; 477756, 3680744; 477666, 
3680744; 477666, 3680774; 477636, 3680774; 477636, 3680954; 477606, 
3680954; 477606, 3681014; 477636, 3681014; 477636, 3681044; 477696, 
3681044; 477696, 3681014; 477726, 3681014; 477726, 3680984; 477756, 
3680984; 477756, 3680954; 477786, 3680954; 477786, 3680984; 477876, 
3680984; 477876, 3681014; 477906, 3681014; 477906, 3681134; 477936, 
3681134; 477936, 3681374; 477966, 3681374; 477966, 3681584; 477936, 
3681584; 477936, 3681794; 477906, 3681794; 477906, 3682004; 477876, 
3682004; 477876, 3682034; 478056, 3682034; 478056, 3682064; 478086, 
3682064; 478086, 3682094; 478116, 3682094; 478116, 3682124; 478206, 
3682124; 478206, 3682094; 478266, 3682094; 478266, 3682124; 478326, 
3682124; 478326, 3682154; 478356, 3682154; 478356, 3682184; 478386, 
3682184; 478386, 3682214; 478416, 3682214; 478416, 3682244; 478446, 
3682244; 478446, 3682304; 478476, 3682304; 478476, 3682334; 478506, 
3682334; 478506, 3682364; 478656, 3682364; 478656, 3682394; 478686, 
3682394; 478686, 3682424; 478716, 3682424; 478716, 3682454; 478746, 
3682454; 478746, 3682634; 478776, 3682634; 478776, 3682664; 478806, 
3682664; 478806, 3682694; 478836, 3682694; 478836, 3682634; 478866, 
3682634; 478866, 3682604; 478896, 3682604; 478896, 3682634; 478926, 
3682634; 478926, 3682754; 478956, 3682754; 478956, 3683114; 478986, 
3683114; 478986, 3683174; 478956, 3683174; 478956, 3683204; 478896, 
3683204; 478896, 3683174; 478866, 3683174; 478866, 3683144; 478836, 
3683144; 478836, 3683174; 478806, 3683174; 478806, 3683204; 478776, 
3683204; 478776, 3683234; 478746, 3683234; 478746, 3683264; 478716, 
3683264; 478716, 3683294; 478686, 3683294; 478686, 3683324; 478656, 
3683324; 478656, 3683354; 478566, 3683354; 478566, 3683384; 478506, 
3683384; 478506, 3683414; 478476, 3683414; 478476, 3683444; 478296, 
3683444; 478296, 3683504; 478326, 3683504; 478326, 3683534; 478356, 
3683534; 478356, 3683564; 478416, 3683564; 478416, 3683594; 478476, 
3683594; 478476, 3683624; 478506, 3683624; 478506, 3683654; 478536, 
3683654; 478536, 3683684; 478566, 3683684; 478566, 3683774; 478626, 
3683774; 478626, 3683804; 478686, 3683804; 478686, 3684104; 478656, 
3684104; 478656, 3684164; 478626, 3684164; 478626, 3684254; 478746, 
3684254; 478746, 3684404; 478656, 3684404; 478656, 3684434; 478626, 
3684434; 478626, 3684404; 478596, 3684404; 478596, 3684434; 478536, 
3684434; 478536, 3684464; 478596, 3684464; 478596, 3684494; 478656, 
3684494; 478656, 3684524; 478626, 3684524; 478626, 3684674; 478596, 
3684674; 478596, 3684764; 478566, 3684764; 478566, 3684854; 478566, 
3684884; 478596, 3684884; 478596, 3684974; 478626, 3684974; 478626, 
3685034; 478596, 3685034; 478596, 3685094; 478626, 3685094; 478626, 
3685124; 478656, 3685124; 478656, 3685274; 478626, 3685274; 478626, 
3685364; 478596, 3685364; 478596, 3685394; 478596, 3685544; 478626, 
3685544; 478626, 3685574; 478656, 3685574; 478656, 3685604; 478716, 
3685604; 478716, 3685574; 478746, 3685574; 478746, 3685544; 478776, 
3685544; 478776, 3685514; 478806, 3685514; 478806, 3685424; 478836, 
3685424; 478836, 3685364; 478866, 3685364; 478866, 3685274; 478896, 
3685274; 478896, 3685244; 478866, 3685244; 478866, 3685124; 478896, 
3685124; 478896, 3685094; 478956, 3685094; 478956, 3685034; 478926, 
3685034; 478926, 3684944; 478896, 3684944; 478896, 3684884; 478926, 
3684884; 478926, 3684824; 479046, 3684824; 479046, 3684734; 479016, 
3684734; 479016, 3684704; 479016, 3684584; 479046, 3684584; 479046, 
3684434; 479106, 3684434; 479106, 3684404; 479136, 3684404; 479136, 
3684314; 479166, 3684314; 479166, 3684254; 479196, 3684254; 479196, 
3684224; 479226, 3684224; 479226, 3684194; 479196, 3684194; 479196, 
3684134; 479256, 3684134; 479256, 3684194; 479316, 3684194; 479316, 
3684224; 479346, 3684224; 479346, 3684254; 479406, 3684254; 479406, 
3684284; 479436, 3684284; 479436, 3684374; 479406, 3684374; 479406, 
3684404; 479376, 3684404; 479376, 3684464; 479346, 3684464; 479346, 
3684644; 479316, 3684644; 479316, 3684674; 479346, 3684674; 479346, 
3684854; 479316, 3684854; 479316, 3684944; 479286, 3684944; 479286, 
3685154; 479316, 3685154; 479316, 3685214; 479346, 3685214; 479346, 
3685244; 479376, 3685244; 479376, 3685304; 479406, 3685304; 479406, 
3685364; 479436, 3685364; 479436, 3685334; 479466, 3685334; 479466, 
3685304; 479496, 3685304; 479496, 3685274; 479526, 3685274; 479526, 
3685214; 479556, 3685214; 479556, 3685184; 479586, 3685184; 479586, 
3685154; 479616, 3685154; 479616, 3685124; 479646, 3685124; 479646, 
3685034; 479676, 3685034; 479676, 3684914; 479736, 3684914; 479736, 
3684944; 479766, 3684944; 479766, 3685034; 479796, 3685034; 479796, 
3685154; 479826, 3685154; 479826, 3685214; 479856, 3685214; 479856, 
3685184; 479886, 3685184; 479886, 3685124; 479916, 3685124; 479916, 
3685064; 479946, 3685064; 479946, 3685034; 480006, 3685034; 480006, 
3685064; 480036, 3685064; 480036, 3685094; 480066, 3685094; 480066, 
3685124; 480126, 3685124; 480126, 3685154; 480156, 3685154; 480156, 
3685424; 480276, 3685424; 480276, 3685574; 480306, 3685574; 480306, 
3685604; 480396, 3685604; 480396, 3685634; 480426, 3685634; 480426, 
3685724; 480486, 3685724; 480486, 3685694; 480516, 3685694; 480516, 
3685634; 480546, 3685634; 480546, 3685574; 480576, 3685574; 480576, 
3685544; 480666, 3685544; 480666, 3685574; 480696, 3685574; 480696, 
3685604; 480726, 3685604; 480726, 3685694; 480696, 3685694; 480696, 
3685874; 480666, 3685874; 480666, 3685904; 480606, 3685904; 480606, 
3686024; 480666, 3686024; 480666, 3686054; 480696, 3686054; 480696, 
3686084; 480726, 3686084; 480726, 3686144; 480756, 3686144; 480756, 
3686174; 480786, 3686174; 480786, 3686144; 480816, 3686144; 480816, 
3686114; 480936, 3686114; 480936, 3686024; 481056, 3686024; 481056, 
3685994; 481116, 3685994; 481116, 3685964; 481176, 3685964; 481176, 
3685994; 481206, 3685994; 481206, 3686054; 481236, 3686054; 481236, 
3686174; 481266, 3686174; 481266, 3686234; 481296, 3686234; 481296, 
3686264; 481326, 3686264; 481326, 3686414; 481296, 3686414; 481296, 
3686444; 481266, 3686444; 481266, 3686474; 481236, 3686474; 481236, 
3686504; 481206, 3686504; 481206,

[[Page 427]]

3686714; 481176, 3686714; 481176, 3686774; 481206, 3686774; 481206, 
3686804; 481266, 3686804; 481266, 3686774; 481296, 3686774; 481326, 
3686774; 481326, 3686804; 481386, 3686804; 481386, 3686774; 481416, 
3686774; 481416, 3686894; 481446, 3686894; 481446, 3686924; 481506, 
3686924; 481506, 3686864; 481536, 3686864; 481536, 3686714; 481566, 
3686714; 481566, 3686624; 481596, 3686624; 481596, 3686684; 481626, 
3686684; 481626, 3686744; 481656, 3686744; 481656, 3686774; 481686, 
3686774; 481686, 3686804; 481746, 3686804; 481746, 3686834; 481866, 
3686834; 481866, 3686924; 481836, 3686924; 481836, 3686984; 481806, 
3686984; 481806, 3687044; 481926, 3687044; 481926, 3687134; 481896, 
3687134; 481896, 3687164; 481866, 3687164; 481866, 3687194; 481896, 
3687194; 481896, 3687224; 481986, 3687224; 481986, 3687254; 482106, 
3687254; 482106, 3687284; 482196, 3687284; 482196, 3687254; 482166, 
3687254; 482166, 3687224; 482166, 3687014; 482196, 3687014; 482196, 
3686984; 482166, 3686984; 482166, 3686894; 482196, 3686894; 482196, 
3686864; 482166, 3686864; 482166, 3686834; 482136, 3686834; 482136, 
3686804; 482106, 3686804; 482106, 3686714; 482076, 3686714; 482076, 
3686684; 482106, 3686684; 482106, 3686624; 482076, 3686624; 482076, 
3686564; 482106, 3686564; 482106, 3686474; 482076, 3686474; 482076, 
3686444; 482106, 3686444; 482106, 3686354; 482166, 3686354; 482166, 
3686324; 482226, 3686324; 482226, 3686294; 482256, 3686294; 482256, 
3686264; 482466, 3686264; 482466, 3686234; 482496, 3686234; 482496, 
3686264; 482556, 3686264; 482556, 3686294; 482796, 3686294; 482796, 
3686264; 482886, 3686264; 482886, 3686294; 482976, 3686294; 482976, 
3686324; 483006, 3686324; 483006, 3686354; 483036, 3686354; 483036, 
3686384; 483066, 3686384; 483066, 3686414; 483096, 3686414; 483096, 
3686474; 483156, 3686474; 483156, 3686504; 483186, 3686504; 483186, 
3686294; 483306, 3686294; 483306, 3686324; 483396, 3686324; 483396, 
3686354; 483486, 3686354; 483486, 3686474; 483456, 3686474; 483456, 
3686534; 483486, 3686534; 483486, 3686594; 483546, 3686594; 483546, 
3686624; 483576, 3686624; 483576, 3686654; 483606, 3686654; 483606, 
3686684; 483636, 3686684; 483636, 3686744; 483696, 3686744; 483696, 
3686864; 483726, 3686864; 483726, 3686894; 483846, 3686894; 483846, 
3686924; 483876, 3686924; 483876, 3687044; 483846, 3687044; 483846, 
3687074; 483876, 3687074; 483876, 3687104; 483906, 3687104; 483906, 
3687074; 484026, 3687074; 484026, 3687104; 484146, 3687104; 484146, 
3687134; 484236, 3687134; 484236, 3687104; 484296, 3687104; 484296, 
3687074; 484326, 3687074; 484326, 3687104; 484356, 3687104; 484356, 
3687134; 484416, 3687134; 484416, 3687164; 484446, 3687164; 484446, 
3687224; 484476, 3687224; 484476, 3687254; 484506, 3687254; 484506, 
3687344; 484536, 3687344; 484536, 3687494; 484506, 3687494; 484506, 
3687584; 484626, 3687584; 484626, 3687614; 484806, 3687614; 484806, 
3687584; 484836, 3687584; 484836, 3687554; 484866, 3687554; 484866, 
3687494; 484896, 3687494; 484896, 3687464; 484986, 3687464; 484986, 
3687494; 485016, 3687494; 485016, 3687564; 485087, 3687596; 485061, 
3687747; 484954, 3687867; 484866, 3687915; 484866, 3687974; 484896, 
3687974; 484896, 3688094; 484926, 3688094; 484926, 3688214; 484956, 
3688214; 484956, 3688304; 484986, 3688304; 484986, 3688334; 485016, 
3688334; 485016, 3688364; 485046, 3688364; 485046, 3688394; 485106, 
3688394; 485106, 3688514; 485136, 3688514; 485136, 3688544; 485106, 
3688544; 485106, 3688574; 485136, 3688574; 485136, 3688604; 485166, 
3688604; 485166, 3688634; 485196, 3688634; 485196, 3688664; 485226, 
3688664; 485226, 3688724; 485196, 3688724; 485196, 3688784; 485166, 
3688784; 485166, 3688814; 485136, 3688814; 485136, 3688844; 485106, 
3688844; 485106, 3688934; 485166, 3688934; 485166, 3689054; 485256, 
3689054; 485256, 3689084; 485196, 3689084; 485196, 3689114; 485166, 
3689114; 485166, 3689144; 485106, 3689144; 485106, 3689234; 485286, 
3689234; 485286, 3689264; 485256, 3689264; 485256, 3689384; 485226, 
3689384; 485226, 3689354; 485166, 3689354; 485166, 3689384; 485196, 
3689384; 485196, 3689414; 485226, 3689414; 485226, 3689444; 485256, 
3689444; 485256, 3689474; 485286, 3689474; 485286, 3689534; 485316, 
3689534; 485316, 3689564; 485346, 3689564; 485346, 3689594; 485376, 
3689594; 485376, 3689624; 485406, 3689624; 485406, 3689684; 485436, 
3689684; 485436, 3689714; 485466, 3689714; 485466, 3689744; 485496, 
3689744; 485496, 3689774; 485526, 3689774; 485526, 3689804; 485556, 
3689804; 485556, 3689834; 485586, 3689834; 485586, 3689864; 485616, 
3689864; 485616, 3689894; 485646, 3689894; 485646, 3689924; 485676, 
3689924; 485676, 3689954; 485706, 3689954; 485706, 3689984; 485736, 
3689984; 485736, 3689894; 485793, 3689894; 485794, 3689807; 485850, 
3689697; 485856, 3689686; 485856, 3689624; 485886, 3689624; 485886, 
3689564; 485916, 3689564; 485916, 3689504; 485946, 3689504; 485946, 
3689474; 485964, 3689474; 486004, 3689396; 486011, 3689301; 486011, 
3689301; 486011, 3689301; 486013, 3689279; 486013, 3689279; 486061, 
3688610; 486062, 3688604; 486069, 3688607; 486100, 3688622; 486230, 
3688694; 486276, 3688714; 486313, 3688725; 486366, 3688736; 486395, 
3688740; 486432, 3688738; 486459, 3688733; 486490, 3688731; 486500, 
3688732; 486511, 3688735; 486519, 3688738; 486526, 3688742; 486545, 
3688758; 486586, 3688800; 486610, 3688832; 486653, 3688901; 486661, 
3688912; 486670, 3688923; 486681, 3688937; 486845, 3689124; 486866, 
3689139; 486884, 3689143; 486902, 3689139; 486906, 3689137; 486906, 
3689114; 486942, 3689114; 486947, 3689109; 486966, 3689095; 486966, 
3689084; 487116, 3689084; 487116, 3689114; 487266, 3689114; 487266, 
3689084; 487296, 3689084; 487296, 3689054; 487356, 3689054; 487356, 
3689024; 487386, 3689024; 487386, 3688994; 487416, 3688994; 487416, 
3688964; 487446, 3688964; 487446, 3688934; 487506, 3688934; 487506, 
3689024; 487536, 3689024; 487536, 3689084; 487566, 3689084; 487566, 
3689234; 487536, 3689234; 487536, 3689264; 487506, 3689264; 487506, 
3689294; 487476, 3689294; 487476, 3689354; 487446, 3689354; 487446, 
3689384; 487416, 3689384; 487416, 3689414; 487386, 3689414; 487386, 
3689474; 487356, 3689474; 487356, 3689564; 487326, 3689564; 487326, 
3689624; 487266, 3689624; 487266, 3689654; 487236, 3689654; 487236, 
3689714; 487266, 3689714; 487266, 3689804; 487236, 3689804; 487236, 
3689834; 487266, 3689834; 487266, 3689894; 487326, 3689894; 487326, 
3689924; 487356, 3689924; 487356, 3690074; 487326, 3690074; 487326, 
3690254; 487356, 3690254; 487356, 3690374; 487446, 3690374; 487446, 
3690344; 487476, 3690344; 487476, 3690314; 487566, 3690314; 487566, 
3690344; 487596, 3690344; 487596, 3690404; 487626, 3690404; 487626, 
3690374; 487656, 3690374; 487656, 3690344; 487686, 3690344; 487686, 
3690284; 487716, 3690284; 487716, 3690194; 487746, 3690194; 487746, 
3690134; 487776, 3690134; 487776, 3690044; 487806, 3690044; 487806, 
3689984; 487896, 3689984; 487896,

[[Page 428]]

3689804; 487926, 3689804; 487926, 3689684; 487986, 3689684; 487986, 
3689654; 488016, 3689654; 488016, 3689594; 488046, 3689594; 488046, 
3689564; 488106, 3689564; 488106, 3689534; 488136, 3689534; 488136, 
3689504; 488166, 3689504; 488166, 3689474; 488286, 3689474; 488286, 
3689444; 488346, 3689444; 488436, 3689444; 488436, 3689474; 488736, 
3689474; 488736, 3689444; 488826, 3689444; 488826, 3689564; 488856, 
3689564; 488856, 3689594; 488886, 3689594; 488886, 3689624; 488916, 
3689624; 488916, 3689684; 488886, 3689684; 488886, 3689774; 488916, 
3689774; 488916, 3689924; 488946, 3689924; 488946, 3690074; 488976, 
3690074; 488976, 3690104; 489186, 3690104; 489186, 3690134; 489216, 
3690134; 489216, 3690164; 489456, 3690164; 489456, 3690194; 489486, 
3690194; 489486, 3690284; 489456, 3690284; 489456, 3690314; 489426, 
3690314; 489426, 3690374; 489396, 3690374; 489396, 3690464; 489426, 
3690464; 489426, 3690524; 489456, 3690524; 489456, 3690554; 489486, 
3690554; 489486, 3690614; 489456, 3690614; 489456, 3690644; 489426, 
3690644; 489426, 3690674; 489456, 3690674; 489456, 3690824; 489486, 
3690824; 489486, 3690914; 489456, 3690914; 489456, 3691004; 489576, 
3691004; 489576, 3691034; 489636, 3691034; 489636, 3691064; 489666, 
3691064; 489666, 3691094; 489726, 3691094; 489726, 3691124; 489756, 
3691124; 489756, 3691154; 489786, 3691154; 489786, 3691184; 489906, 
3691184; 489906, 3691214; 489936, 3691214; 489936, 3691244; 489966, 
3691244; 489966, 3691184; 489996, 3691184; 489996, 3691154; 490086, 
3691154; 490086, 3691184; 490116, 3691184; 490116, 3691214; 490146, 
3691214; 490146, 3691244; 490176, 3691244; 490176, 3691304; 490206, 
3691304; 490206, 3691424; 490266, 3691424; 490266, 3691454; 490356, 
3691454; 490356, 3691484; 490476, 3691484; 490476, 3691514; 490506, 
3691514; 490506, 3691544; 490536, 3691544; 490536, 3691574; 490566, 
3691574; 490566, 3691664; 490536, 3691664; 490536, 3691694; 490566, 
3691694; 490566, 3691754; 490596, 3691754; 490596, 3691784; 490626, 
3691784; 490626, 3691904; 490656, 3691904; 490656, 3691964; 490686, 
3691964; 490686, 3692024; 490716, 3692024; 490716, 3692144; 490746, 
3692144; 490746, 3692234; 490776, 3692234; 490776, 3692294; 490746, 
3692294; 490746, 3692354; 490776, 3692354; 490776, 3692444; 490806, 
3692444; 490806, 3692474; 490866, 3692474; 490866, 3692504; 490896, 
3692504; 490896, 3692594; 490926, 3692594; returning to 490926, 3692474. 
Excluding land bounded by 491046, 3691844; 491046, 3691814; 491136, 
3691814; 491136, 3691874; 491076, 3691874; 491076, 3691844; returning to 
491046, 3691844. Excluding land bounded by 487380, 3688941; 487317, 
3688978; 487260, 3688914; 487274, 3688884; 487264, 3688870; 487293, 
3688841; 487294, 3688813; 487286, 3688797; 487295, 3688785; 487355, 
3688728; 487434, 3688667; 487470, 3688716; 487409, 3688798; 487418, 
3688806; 487447, 3688814; 487485, 3688852; returning to 487380, 3688941. 
Excluding land bounded by 487275, 3688977; 487311, 3689038; 487290, 
3689056; 487153, 3689064; 487024, 3689055; 487023, 3689052; 487028, 
3689051; 487034, 3689049; 487040, 3689047; 487046, 3689045; 487052, 
3689042; 487057, 3689039; 487063, 3689037; 487068, 3689033; 487074, 
3689030; 487079, 3689027; 487084, 3689023; 487089, 3689019; 487093, 
3689015; 487097, 3689011; 487133, 3688976; 487223, 3688904; 487236, 
3688934; returning to 487275, 3688977. Excluding land bounded by 485376, 
3688154; 485376, 3688124; 485406, 3688124; 485406, 3688094; 485436, 
3688094; 485436, 3688034; 485466, 3688034; 485466, 3687974; 485496, 
3687974; 485496, 3687914; 485526, 3687914; 485526, 3687884; 485556, 
3687884; 485556, 3687854; 485646, 3687854; 485646, 3687884; 485676, 
3687884; 485676, 3687914; 485706, 3687914; 485706, 3688034; 485736, 
3688034; 485736, 3688124; 485706, 3688124; 485706, 3688154; 485646, 
3688154; 485646, 3688184; 485586, 3688184; 485586, 3688214; 485556, 
3688214; 485376, 3688214; returning to 485376, 3688154. Excluding land 
bounded by 477756, 3680924; 477756, 3680894; 477786, 3680894; 477786, 
3680924; returning to 477756, 3680924. Excluding land bounded by 475573, 
3679947; 475582, 3680096; 475504, 3680120; 475495, 3680123; 475485, 
3680125; 475474, 3680128; 475464, 3680130; 475454, 3680132; 475452, 
3680132; 475452, 3680131; 475452, 3680131; 475441, 3680133; 475431, 
3680134; 475421, 3680136; 475410, 3680137; 475400, 3680137; 475389, 
3680138; 475379, 3680138; 475369, 3680138; 475358, 3680138; 475348, 
3680137; 475337, 3680136; 475327, 3680135; 475317, 3680134; 475306, 
3680133; 475296, 3680131; 475286, 3680129; 475276, 3680127; 475265, 
3680124; 475255, 3680122; 475245, 3680119; 475235, 3680116; 475226, 
3680112; 475218, 3680109; 475218, 3680111; 475209, 3680107; 475200, 
3680104; 475197, 3680102; 475198, 3679944; returning to 475573, 3679947. 
Excluding land bounded by 476556, 3680384; 476556, 3680414; 476526, 
3680414; 476526, 3680384; returning to 476556, 3680384.
    (vi) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 492402, 
3693080; 492402, 3693012; 492400, 3692673; 492366, 3692673; 492366, 
3692714; 492336, 3692714; 492336, 3692744; 492276, 3692744; 492276, 
3692774; 492246, 3692774; 492246, 3692924; 492216, 3692924; 492216, 
3692984; 492186, 3692984; 492186, 3693074; 492156, 3693074; 492156, 
3693085; 492366, 3693082; 492402, 3693082; returning to 492402, 3693080.
    (vii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 492606, 
3696884; 492606, 3696854; 492636, 3696854; 492636, 3696794; 492666, 
3696794; 492666, 3696584; 492696, 3696584; 492696, 3696404; 492726, 
3696404; 492726, 3696314; 492756, 3696314; 492756, 3696284; 492786, 
3696284; 492786, 3696194; 492726, 3696194; 492726, 3696164; 492696, 
3696164; 492696, 3696134; 492666, 3696134; 492666, 3696104; 492636, 
3696104; 492636, 3696074; 492606, 3696074; 492606, 3696014; 492636, 
3696014; 492636, 3695984; 492606, 3695984; 492606, 3695954; 492576, 
3695954; 492576, 3695924; 492546, 3695924; 492546, 3695864; 492516, 
3695864; 492516, 3695804; 492486, 3695804; 492486, 3695564; 492456, 
3695564; 492456, 3695504; 492426, 3695504; 492426, 3695444; 492396, 
3695444; 492396, 3695384; 492426, 3695384; 492426, 3695354; 492396, 
3695354; 492396, 3695264; 492366, 3695264; 492366, 3695144; 492336, 
3695144; 492336, 3695114; 492306, 3695114; 492306, 3695054; 492276, 
3695054; 492276, 3694994; 492246, 3694994; 492246, 3694664; 492216, 
3694664; 492216, 3694574; 492186, 3694574; 492186, 3694514; 492156, 
3694514; 492156, 3694334; 492126, 3694334; 492126, 3694317; 492019, 
3694320; 491976, 3694320; 491976, 3694514; 492006, 3694514; 492006, 
3694574; 492036, 3694574; 492036, 3694604; 492066, 3694604; 492066, 
3694664; 492096, 3694664; 492096, 3694694; 492126, 3694694; 492126, 
3694994; 492096, 3694994; 492096, 3695114; 492126,

[[Page 429]]

3695114; 492126, 3695294; 492156, 3695294; 492156, 3695414; 492186, 
3695414; 492186, 3695594; 492216, 3695594; 492216, 3695654; 492246, 
3695654; 492246, 3695804; 492216, 3695804; 492216, 3695864; 492246, 
3695864; 492246, 3695954; 492306, 3695954; 492306, 3695984; 492336, 
3695984; 492336, 3696014; 492396, 3696014; 492396, 3696044; 492426, 
3696044; 492426, 3696104; 492456, 3696104; 492456, 3696164; 492486, 
3696164; 492486, 3696194; 492516, 3696194; 492516, 3696254; 492546, 
3696254; 492546, 3696344; 492516, 3696344; 492516, 3696374; 492546, 
3696374; 492546, 3696434; 492516, 3696434; 492516, 3696734; 492546, 
3696734; 492546, 3696824; 492576, 3696824; 492576, 3696884; returning to 
492606, 3696884.
    (viii) Note: Map of Unit 14 is provided at paragraph (17)(iii) of 
this entry.
    (20) Unit 15: Upper San Luis Rey Basin, San Diego County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Palomar Observatory, and 
Warner Springs, land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 
529742, 3680834; 529742, 3680862; 529770, 3680862; 529770, 3680834; 
returning to 529742, 3680834.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 533799, 
3683983;533827, 3683983; 533827, 3683954; 533799, 3683954; 533799, 
3683983; thence from land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, 
N): 521912, 3684068; 522111, 3683784; 522082, 3683784; 522082, 3683813; 
522054, 3683813; 522054, 3683841; 522026, 3683841; 522026, 3683898; 
521997, 3683898; 521997, 3683926; 521969, 3683926; 521969, 3683983; 
521941, 3683983; 521941, 3684011; 521912, 3684011; returning to 521912, 
3684068; thence from land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, 
N): 521912, 3684068; 521884, 3684068; 521884, 3684096; 521855, 3684096; 
521855, 3684149; returning to 521912, 3684068; thence from land bounded 
by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 528806, 3684664; 528806, 
3684644; 528796, 3684664; returning to 528806, 3684664; thence from land 
bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 533799, 3683983; 
533685, 3683983; 533685, 3683954; 533657, 3683954; 533657, 3683926; 
533600, 3683926; 533600, 3683869; 533629, 3683869; 533629, 3683813; 
533487, 3683813; 533487, 3683784; 533458, 3683784; 533458, 3683756; 
533203, 3683756; 533203, 3683727; 533175, 3683727; 533175, 3683699; 
533118, 3683699; 533118, 3683671; 533090, 3683671; 533090, 3683614; 
533061, 3683614; 533061, 3683586; 533033, 3683586; 533033, 3683529; 
533004, 3683529; 533004, 3683501; 533033, 3683501; 533033, 3683472; 
533061, 3683472; 533061, 3683444; 533004, 3683444; 533004, 3683387; 
532976, 3683387; 532976, 3683330; 532948, 3683330; 532948, 3683302; 
532976, 3683302; 532976, 3683245; 533004, 3683245; 533004, 3683217; 
533033, 3683217; 533033, 3683188; 533090, 3683188; 533090, 3683160; 
533118, 3683160; 533118, 3683132; 533146, 3683132; 533146, 3683047; 
533175, 3683047; 533175, 3682962; 533203, 3682962; 533203, 3682820; 
533175, 3682820; 533175, 3682763; 533146, 3682763; 533146, 3682735; 
533118, 3682735; 533118, 3682706; 533090, 3682706; 533090, 3682649; 
533061, 3682649; 533061, 3682621; 532891, 3682621; 532891, 3682649; 
532834, 3682649; 532834, 3682791; 532806, 3682791; 532806, 3682848; 
532778, 3682848; 532778, 3682876; 532721, 3682876; 532721, 3682933; 
532692, 3682933; 532692, 3682962; 532664, 3682962; 532664, 3682990; 
532636, 3682990; 532636, 3683018; 532607, 3683018; 532607, 3683047; 
532579, 3683047; 532579, 3683075; 532551, 3683075; 532551, 3683103; 
532522, 3683103; 532522, 3683132; 532494, 3683132; 532494, 3683160; 
532437, 3683160; 532437, 3683103; 532409, 3683103; 532409, 3683075; 
532380, 3683075; 532380, 3683047; 532352, 3683047; 532352, 3683018; 
532324, 3683018; 532324, 3682990; 532295, 3682990; 532295, 3682933; 
532324, 3682933; 532324, 3682876; 532352, 3682876; 532352, 3682848; 
532380, 3682848; 532380, 3682791; 532352, 3682791; 532352, 3682820; 
532295, 3682820; 532295, 3682848; 532239, 3682848; 532239, 3682876; 
532153, 3682876; 532153, 3682848; 532125, 3682848; 532125, 3682791; 
532153, 3682791; 532153, 3682735; 532182, 3682735; 532182, 3682678; 
532210, 3682678; 532210, 3682649; 532182, 3682649; 532182, 3682593; 
532210, 3682593; 532210, 3682536; 532239, 3682536; 532239, 3682508; 
532267, 3682508; 532267, 3682451; 532465, 3682451; 532465, 3682422; 
532494, 3682422; 532494, 3682451; 532551, 3682451; 532551, 3682337; 
532522, 3682337; 532522, 3682252; 532551, 3682252; 532551, 3682224; 
532579, 3682224; 532579, 3682167; 532465, 3682167; 532465, 3682196; 
532380, 3682196; 532380, 3682139; 532352, 3682139; 532352, 3682110; 
532295, 3682110; 532295, 3682082; 532267, 3682082; 532267, 3682025; 
532239, 3682025; 532239, 3681997; 532210, 3681997; 532210, 3681969; 
532182, 3681969; 532182, 3681940; 532153, 3681940; 532153, 3681855; 
532182, 3681855; 532182, 3681827; 532210, 3681827; 532210, 3681798; 
532239, 3681798; 532239, 3681770; 532210, 3681770; 532210, 3681742; 
532182, 3681742; 532182, 3681713; 532153, 3681713; 532153, 3681657; 
532125, 3681657; 532125, 3681628; 532097, 3681628; 532097, 3681600; 
532068, 3681600; 532068, 3681628; 532012, 3681628; 532012, 3681657; 
531955, 3681657; 531955, 3681600; 531926, 3681600; 531926, 3681571; 
531898, 3681571; 531898, 3681543; 531813, 3681543; 531813, 3681515; 
531700, 3681515; 531700, 3681486; 531529, 3681486; 531529, 3681458; 
531473, 3681458; 531473, 3681515; 531444, 3681515; 531444, 3681571; 
531416, 3681571; 531416, 3681628; 531387, 3681628; 531387, 3681685; 
531359, 3681685; 531359, 3681657; 531217, 3681657; 531217, 3681628; 
531189, 3681628; 531189, 3681657; 531104, 3681657; 531104, 3681685; 
531047, 3681685; 531047, 3681742; 531019, 3681742; 531019, 3681770; 
530990, 3681770; 530990, 3681798; 530934, 3681798; 530934, 3681827; 
530848, 3681827; 530848, 3681685; 530820, 3681685; 530820, 3681657; 
530735, 3681657; 530735, 3681685; 530707, 3681685; 530707, 3681713; 
530678, 3681713; 530678, 3681742; 530593, 3681742; 530593, 3681685; 
530536, 3681685; 530536, 3681571; 530508, 3681571; 530508, 3681543; 
530480, 3681543; 530480, 3681515; 530451, 3681515; 530451, 3681458; 
530423, 3681458; 530423, 3681401; 530366, 3681401; 530366, 3681344; 
530423, 3681344; 530423, 3681316; 530565, 3681316; 530565, 3681259; 
530423, 3681259; 530423, 3681288; 530338, 3681288; 530338, 3681316; 
530309, 3681316; 530309, 3681373; 530281, 3681373; 530281, 3681401; 
530253, 3681401; 530253, 3681430; 530224, 3681430; 530224, 3681486; 
530196, 3681486; 530196, 3681543; 530168, 3681543; 530168, 3681571; 
530139, 3681571; 530139, 3681628; 530111, 3681628; 530111, 3681770; 
530082, 3681770; 530082, 3681798; 530054, 3681798; 530054, 3681827; 
530026, 3681827; 530026, 3681798; 530054,

[[Page 430]]

3681798; 530054, 3681742; 530082, 3681742; 530082, 3681571; 530054, 
3681571; 530054, 3681515; 530026, 3681515; 530026, 3681373; 529969, 
3681373; 529969, 3681344; 529941, 3681344; 529941, 3681288; 529884, 
3681288; 529884, 3681259; 529827, 3681259; 529827, 3681288; 529770, 
3681288; 529770, 3681316; 529742, 3681316; 529742, 3681344; 529770, 
3681344; 529770, 3681373; 529799, 3681373; 529799, 3681401; 529770, 
3681401; 529770, 3681373; 529657, 3681373; 529657, 3681288; 529600, 
3681288; 529600, 3681259; 529572, 3681259; 529572, 3681288; 529430, 
3681288; 529430, 3681231; 529458, 3681231; 529458, 3681203; 529600, 
3681203; 529600, 3681231; 529657, 3681231; 529657, 3681259; 529685, 
3681259; 529685, 3681231; 529770, 3681231; 529770, 3681118; 529799, 
3681118; 529799, 3681061; 529827, 3681061; 529827, 3681032; 529799, 
3681032; 529799, 3680976; 529714, 3680976; 529714, 3680947; 529657, 
3680947; 529657, 3680891; 529685, 3680891; 529685, 3680834; 529742, 
3680834; 529742, 3680805; 529685, 3680805; 529685, 3680777; 529600, 
3680777; 529600, 3680749; 529515, 3680749; 529515, 3680720; 529430, 
3680720; 529430, 3680692; 529288, 3680692; 529288, 3680664; 529118, 
3680664; 529118, 3680635; 528721, 3680635; 528721, 3680664; 528579, 
3680664; 528579, 3680692; 528437, 3680692; 528437, 3680720; 528352, 
3680720; 528352, 3680749; 528295, 3680749; 528295, 3680777; 528097, 
3680777; 528097, 3680749; 528012, 3680749; 527416, 3680749; 527416, 
3680777; 527132, 3680777; 527132, 3680749; 526990, 3680749; 526990, 
3680720; 526962, 3680720; 526962, 3680692; 526934, 3680692; 526934, 
3680664; 526905, 3680664; 526905, 3680635; 526877, 3680635; 526877, 
3680607; 526848, 3680607; 526848, 3680579; 526820, 3680579; 526820, 
3680550; 526792, 3680550; 526792, 3680522; 526735, 3680522; 526735, 
3680493; 526707, 3680493; 526707, 3680465; 526678, 3680465; 526678, 
3680437; 526650, 3680437; 526650, 3680408; 526621, 3680408; 526621, 
3680380; 526565, 3680380; 526565, 3680352; 526536, 3680352; 526536, 
3680323; 526480, 3680323; 526480, 3680295; 526395, 3680295; 526395, 
3680266; 526366, 3680266; 526366, 3680238; 526338, 3680238; 526338, 
3680210; 526281, 3680210; 526281, 3680181; 526224, 3680181; 526224, 
3680153; 526196, 3680153; 526196, 3680125; 526168, 3680125; 526168, 
3680096; 526139, 3680096; 526139, 3680068; 526082, 3680068; 526082, 
3680039; 526026, 3680039; 526026, 3680011; 525969, 3680011; 525969, 
3679983; 525912, 3679983; 525912, 3679954; 525856, 3679954; 525856, 
3679926; 525799, 3679926; 525799, 3679898; 525742, 3679898; 525742, 
3679869; 525685, 3679869; 525685, 3679841; 525629, 3679841; 525629, 
3679813; 525572, 3679813; 525572, 3679784; 525515, 3679784; 525515, 
3679756; 525458, 3679756; 525458, 3679727; 525402, 3679727; 525402, 
3679699; 525316, 3679699; 525316, 3679671; 525260, 3679671; 525260, 
3679642; 525175, 3679642; 525175, 3679614; 525118, 3679614; 525118, 
3679586; 525061, 3679586; 525061, 3679557; 524976, 3679557; 524976, 
3679529; 524891, 3679529; 524891, 3679500; 524834, 3679500; 524834, 
3679472; 524749, 3679472; 524749, 3679444; 524636, 3679444; 524636, 
3679415; 524607, 3679415; 524607, 3679387; 524579, 3679387; 524579, 
3679359; 524522, 3679359; 524522, 3679330; 524494, 3679330; 524494, 
3679302; 524465, 3679302; 524465, 3679274; 524437, 3679274; 524437, 
3679245; 524380, 3679245; 524380, 3679217; 524352, 3679217; 524352, 
3679188; 524324, 3679188; 524324, 3679160; 524267, 3679160; 524267, 
3679132; 524210, 3679132; 524210, 3679103; 524153, 3679103; 524153, 
3679075; 524068, 3679075; 524068, 3679047; 524012, 3679047; 524012, 
3679018; 523926, 3679018; 523926, 3678990; 523785, 3678990; 523785, 
3678961; 523274, 3678961; 523274, 3678990; 523160, 3678990; 523160, 
3679018; 523047, 3679018; 523047, 3679047; 522990, 3679047; 522990, 
3679075; 522905, 3679075; 522905, 3679103; 522848, 3679103; 522848, 
3679132; 522792, 3679132; 522792, 3679188; 522877, 3679188; 522877, 
3679217; 522905, 3679217; 522905, 3679330; 522934, 3679330; 522934, 
3679415; 522962, 3679415; 522962, 3679500; 522934, 3679500; 522934, 
3679557; 522905, 3679557; 522905, 3679586; 522877, 3679586; 522877, 
3679699; 522848, 3679699; 522848, 3679926; 522877, 3679926; 522877, 
3680011; 522848, 3680011; 522848, 3680068; 522820, 3680068; 522820, 
3680096; 522792, 3680096; 522792, 3680181; 522763, 3680181; 522763, 
3680266; 522820, 3680266; 522820, 3680238; 522848, 3680238; 522848, 
3680210; 522905, 3680210; 522905, 3680238; 522877, 3680238; 522877, 
3680295; 522934, 3680295; 522934, 3680323; 522962, 3680323; 522962, 
3680352; 523019, 3680352; 523019, 3680380; 523104, 3680380; 523104, 
3680437; 523075, 3680437; 523075, 3680493; 523104, 3680493; 523104, 
3680522; 523160, 3680522; 523160, 3680692; 523189, 3680692; 523189, 
3680749; 523217, 3680749; 523217, 3681032; 523246, 3681032; 523246, 
3681089; 523302, 3681089; 523302, 3681118; 523274, 3681118; 523274, 
3681174; 523302, 3681174; 523302, 3681259; 523274, 3681259; 523274, 
3681288; 523274, 3681316; 523302, 3681316; 523302, 3681458; 523331, 
3681458; 523331, 3681486; 523359, 3681486; 523359, 3681515; 523387, 
3681515; 523387, 3681543; 523416, 3681543; 523416, 3681628; 523387, 
3681628; 523387, 3681685; 523416, 3681685; 523416, 3681827; 523444, 
3681827; 523444, 3681855; 523416, 3681855; 523416, 3681969; 523387, 
3681969; 523387, 3682025; 523359, 3682025; 523359, 3682082; 523331, 
3682082; 523331, 3682196; 523302, 3682196; 523302, 3682224; 523274, 
3682224; 523274, 3682252; 523246, 3682252; 523246, 3682309; 523217, 
3682309; 523217, 3682337; 523189, 3682337; 523189, 3682366; 523160, 
3682366; 523160, 3682394; 523132, 3682394; 523132, 3682422; 523104, 
3682422; 523104, 3682451; 523047, 3682451; 523047, 3682479; 522990, 
3682479; 522990, 3682508; 522962, 3682508; 522962, 3682536; 522934, 
3682536; 522934, 3682593; 522905, 3682593; 522905, 3682678; 522877, 
3682678; 522877, 3682735; 522848, 3682735; 522848, 3682791; 522820, 
3682791; 522820, 3682820; 522792, 3682820; 522792, 3682848; 522763, 
3682848; 522763, 3682876; 522735, 3682876; 522735, 3682905; 522678, 
3682905; 522678, 3682933; 522650, 3682933; 522650, 3682962; 522593, 
3682962; 522593, 3682990; 522565, 3682990; 522565, 3683018; 522536, 
3683018; 522536, 3683075; 522508, 3683075; 522508, 3683103; 522480, 
3683103; 522480, 3683132; 522423, 3683132; 522423, 3683160; 522394, 
3683160; 522394, 3683188; 522338, 3683188; 522338, 3683217; 522309, 
3683217; 522309, 3683274; 522338, 3683274; 522338, 3683302; 522394, 
3683302; 522394, 3683359; 522423, 3683359; 522423, 3683388; 525125, 
3682875; 527107, 3683110; 528942, 3684375; 528915, 3684427; 528810, 
3684635; 528863, 3684635; 528863, 3684579; 528891, 3684579; 528891, 
3684550; 528919, 3684550; 528919, 3684522; 528948, 3684522; 528948, 
3684493; 528976, 3684493; 528976, 3684408; 528948, 3684408; 528948, 
3684295; 528919, 3684295; 528919, 3684210; 528948, 3684210; 528948, 
3684068; 528976, 3684068; 528976,

[[Page 431]]

3684011; 529004, 3684011; 529004, 3683983; 529061, 3683983; 529061, 
3683954; 529090, 3683954; 529090, 3683983; 529175, 3683983; 529175, 
3683954; 529203, 3683954; 529203, 3683926; 529260, 3683926; 529260, 
3683898; 529317, 3683898; 529317, 3683869; 529345, 3683869; 529345, 
3683813; 529430, 3683813; 529430, 3683784; 529487, 3683784; 529487, 
3683756; 529515, 3683756; 529515, 3683727; 529543, 3683727; 529543, 
3683671; 529600, 3683671; 529600, 3683642; 529685, 3683642; 529685, 
3683699; 529714, 3683699; 529714, 3683727; 529742, 3683727; 529742, 
3683756; 529799, 3683756; 529799, 3683727; 529827, 3683727; 529827, 
3683756; 529884, 3683756; 529884, 3683784; 529969, 3683784; 529969, 
3683813; 529997, 3683813; 529997, 3683841; 530026, 3683841; 530026, 
3683869; 530054, 3683869; 530054, 3683898; 530082, 3683898; 530082, 
3683954; 530139, 3683954; 530139, 3683926; 530253, 3683926; 530395, 
3683926; 530395, 3683954; 530621, 3683954; 530621, 3683926; 530593, 
3683926; 530593, 3683898; 530565, 3683898; 530565, 3683841; 530536, 
3683841; 530536, 3683756; 530508, 3683756; 530508, 3683699; 530480, 
3683699; 530480, 3683671; 530451, 3683671; 530451, 3683529; 530480, 
3683529; 530480, 3683586; 530565, 3683586; 530565, 3683557; 530593, 
3683557; 530593, 3683529; 530650, 3683529; 530650, 3683501; 530678, 
3683501; 530678, 3683444; 530707, 3683444; 530707, 3683415; 530735, 
3683415; 530735, 3683387; 530820, 3683387; 530820, 3683415; 530848, 
3683415; 530848, 3683444; 530934, 3683444; 530934, 3683302; 530962, 
3683302; 530962, 3683274; 530990, 3683274; 530990, 3683217; 531132, 
3683217; 531132, 3683245; 531161, 3683245; 531161, 3683274; 531217, 
3683274; 531217, 3683302; 531246, 3683302; 531246, 3683359; 531274, 
3683359; 531274, 3683330; 531302, 3683330; 531302, 3683245; 531331, 
3683245; 531331, 3683188; 531473, 3683188; 531473, 3683103; 531529, 
3683103; 531529, 3683132; 531558, 3683132; 531558, 3683217; 531586, 
3683217; 531586, 3683274; 531614, 3683274; 531614, 3683302; 531643, 
3683302; 531643, 3683330; 531700, 3683330; 531700, 3683359; 531728, 
3683359; 531728, 3683415; 531813, 3683415; 531813, 3683387; 531870, 
3683387; 531870, 3683359; 531841, 3683359; 531841, 3683330; 531870, 
3683330; 531870, 3683359; 531898, 3683359; 531898, 3683444; 531926, 
3683444; 531926, 3683472; 531955, 3683472; 531955, 3683501; 532068, 
3683501; 532068, 3683557; 532125, 3683557; 532125, 3683586; 532153, 
3683586; 532153, 3683557; 532239, 3683557; 532239, 3683586; 532267, 
3683586; 532267, 3683642; 532295, 3683642; 532295, 3683699; 532324, 
3683699; 532324, 3683671; 532380, 3683671; 532380, 3683642; 532409, 
3683642; 532409, 3683671; 532437, 3683671; 532437, 3683699; 532465, 
3683699; 532465, 3683727; 532494, 3683727; 532494, 3683784; 532551, 
3683784; 532551, 3683813; 532579, 3683813; 532579, 3683841; 532607, 
3683841; 532607, 3683869; 532636, 3683869; 532636, 3684068; 532664, 
3684068; 532664, 3684096; 532692, 3684096; 532692, 3684153; 532721, 
3684153; 532721, 3684181; 532749, 3684181; 532749, 3684210; 532778, 
3684210; 532778, 3683983; 532891, 3683983; 532891, 3684011; 533033, 
3684011; 533033, 3684040; 533061, 3684040; 533061, 3684068; 533090, 
3684068; 533090, 3684181; 533061, 3684181; 533061, 3684210; 533033, 
3684210; 533033, 3684295; 533175, 3684295; 533175, 3684266; 533203, 
3684266; 533203, 3684238; 533231, 3684238; 533231, 3684295; 533430, 
3684295; 533430, 3684266; 533458, 3684266; 533458, 3684238; 533487, 
3684238; 533487, 3684210; 533515, 3684210; 533515, 3684181; 533544, 
3684181; 533544, 3684210; 533515, 3684210; 533515, 3684238; 533544, 
3684238; 533544, 3684266; 533572, 3684266; 533572, 3684295; 533600, 
3684295; 533600, 3684323; 533629, 3684323; 533629, 3684352; 533657, 
3684352; 533657, 3684380; 533685, 3684380; 533685, 3684522; 533714, 
3684522; 533714, 3684607; 533685, 3684607; 533685, 3684777; 533714, 
3684777; 533714, 3684805; 533742, 3684805; 533742, 3684834; 533799, 
3684834; 533799, 3685004; 533827, 3685004; 533827, 3685089; 533856, 
3685089; 533856, 3685146; 533884, 3685146; 533884, 3685203; 533912, 
3685203; 533912, 3685231; 533941, 3685231; 533941, 3685259; 534054, 
3685259; 534054, 3685430; 534083, 3685430; 534083, 3685458; 534139, 
3685458; 534139, 3685486; 534196, 3685486; 534196, 3685515; 534224, 
3685515; 534224, 3685571; 534253, 3685571; 534253, 3685600; 534281, 
3685600; 534281, 3685571; 534309, 3685571; 534309, 3685600; 534338, 
3685600; 534338, 3685628; 534366, 3685628; 534366, 3685657; 534395, 
3685657; 534395, 3685685; 534423, 3685685; 534423, 3685571; 534395, 
3685571; 534395, 3685486; 534423, 3685486; 534423, 3685430; 534451, 
3685430; 534451, 3685401; 534423, 3685401; 534423, 3685344; 534253, 
3685344; 534253, 3685373; 534196, 3685373; 534196, 3685344; 534168, 
3685344; 534168, 3685174; 534139, 3685174; 534139, 3685146; 534111, 
3685146; 534111, 3685118; 534083, 3685118; 534083, 3685032; 534054, 
3685032; 534054, 3685004; 533997, 3685004; 533997, 3684976; 533969, 
3684976; 533969, 3684947; 533941, 3684947; 533941, 3684891; 533912, 
3684891; 533912, 3684777; 533884, 3684777; 533884, 3684749; 533856, 
3684749; 533856, 3684720; 533827, 3684720; 533827, 3684692; 533799, 
3684692; 533799, 3684635; 533827, 3684635; 533827, 3684408; 533856, 
3684408; 533856, 3684380; 533827, 3684380; 533827, 3684352; 533799, 
3684352; 533799, 3684266; 533770, 3684266; 533770, 3684210; 533742, 
3684210; 533742, 3684125; 533770, 3684125; 533770, 3684040; 533799, 
3684040; returning to 533799, 3683983. Excluding land bounded by 532125, 
3682422; 532125, 3682394; 532097, 3682394; 532097, 3682309; 532182, 
3682309; 532182, 3682337; 532210, 3682337; 532210, 3682422; returning to 
532125, 3682422. Excluding land bounded by 531841, 3682082; 531841, 
3682025; 531898, 3682025; 531898, 3681997; 531983, 3681997; 531983, 
3682025; 532012, 3682025; 532012, 3682054; 532040, 3682054; 532040, 
3682110; 532012, 3682110; 532012, 3682139; 531983, 3682139; 531983, 
3682167; 531870, 3682167; 531870, 3682139; 531841, 3682139; returning to 
531841, 3682082. Excluding land bounded by 527728, 3680947; 527728, 
3680919; 527785, 3680919; 527785, 3680947; returning to 527728, 3680947.
    (iii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 529657, 
3687727; 529657, 3687699; 529685, 3687699; 529685, 3687501; 529714, 
3687501; 529714, 3687472; 529742, 3687472; 529742, 3687415; 529770, 
3687415; 529770, 3687387; 529827, 3687387; 529827, 3687330; 529856, 
3687330; 529856, 3687274; 529884, 3687274; 529884, 3687245; 529856, 
3687245; 529856, 3687188; 529827, 3687188; 529827, 3687160; 529856, 
3687160; 529856, 3687103; 529884, 3687103; 529884, 3687018; 529912, 
3687018; 529912, 3686990; 529969, 3686990; 529969, 3686962; 529997, 
3686962; 529997, 3686933; 530026, 3686933; 530026, 3686735; 530054, 
3686735; 530054, 3686678; 530111, 3686678; 530111, 3686649; 530139, 
3686649; 530139,

[[Page 432]]

3686621; 530168, 3686621; 530168, 3686593; 530196, 3686593; 530196, 
3686564; 530224, 3686564; 530224, 3686536; 530253, 3686536; 530253, 
3686479; 530281, 3686479; 530281, 3686423; 530338, 3686423; 530338, 
3686394; 530366, 3686394; 530366, 3686337; 530395, 3686337; 530395, 
3686309; 530366, 3686309; 530366, 3686167; 530338, 3686167; 530338, 
3686139; 530253, 3686139; 530253, 3686167; 530224, 3686167; 530224, 
3686139; 530139, 3686139; 530139, 3686167; 530082, 3686167; 530082, 
3686139; 530054, 3686139; 530054, 3686082; 530026, 3686082; 530026, 
3686054; 529997, 3686054; 529997, 3686025; 529969, 3686025; 529969, 
3685997; 529997, 3685997; 529997, 3685940; 529969, 3685940; 529969, 
3685912; 529912, 3685912; 529912, 3685884; 529856, 3685884; 529856, 
3685855; 529827, 3685855; 529827, 3685827; 529799, 3685827; 529799, 
3685770; 529827, 3685770; 529827, 3685742; 529856, 3685742; 529856, 
3685713; 529941, 3685713; 529941, 3685685; 530026, 3685685; 530026, 
3685713; 530111, 3685713; 530111, 3685685; 530139, 3685685; 530139, 
3685657; 530082, 3685657; 530082, 3685628; 530054, 3685628; 530054, 
3685600; 529997, 3685600; 529997, 3685571; 529884, 3685571; 529884, 
3685543; 529742, 3685543; 529742, 3685486; 529714, 3685486; 529714, 
3685430; 529515, 3685430; 529515, 3685401; 529487, 3685401; 529487, 
3685373; 529458, 3685373; 529458, 3685259; 529487, 3685259; 529487, 
3685231; 529515, 3685231; 529515, 3685174; 529543, 3685174; 529543, 
3685146; 529430, 3685146; 529430, 3685174; 529402, 3685174; 529402, 
3685203; 529345, 3685203; 529345, 3685231; 529317, 3685231; 529317, 
3685259; 529260, 3685259; 529260, 3685288; 529231, 3685288; 529231, 
3685316; 529118, 3685316; 529118, 3685259; 529090, 3685259; 529090, 
3685231; 529061, 3685231; 529061, 3685203; 528976, 3685203; 528976, 
3685118; 528919, 3685118; 528919, 3685032; 528948, 3685032; 528948, 
3685004; 528806, 3685004; 528806, 3684947; 528778, 3684947; 528778, 
3684919; 528741, 3684919; 528743, 3684972; 528746, 3685031; 528745, 
3685079; 528736, 3685131; 528719, 3685194; 528693, 3685250; 528678, 
3685279; 528704, 3685288; 528753, 3685300; 528784, 3685315; 528802, 
3685332; 528886, 3685441; 528991, 3685577; 529304, 3685967; 529323, 
3686005; 529338, 3686042; 529348, 3686088; 529373, 3686234; 529437, 
3686647; 529485, 3686938; 529491, 3686988; 529486, 3687025; 529464, 
3687132; 529289, 3687131; 529274, 3687345; 529457, 3687589; 529620, 
3687563; 529544, 3687770; 529657, 3687771; returning to 529657, 3687727, 
Excluding land bounded by 529856, 3686167; 529827, 3686167; 529827, 
3686139; 529856, 3686139; 529856, 3686167; 529884, 3686167; 529884, 
3686196; 529856, 3686196; returning to 529856, 3686167. Excluding land 
bounded by 529770, 3686054; 529742, 3686054; 529742, 3686025; 529770, 
3686025; 529770, 3686054; 529799, 3686054; 529799, 3686082; 529770, 
3686082; returning to 529770, 3686054. Excluding land bounded by 529317, 
3685713; 529260, 3685713; 529260, 3685685; 529317, 3685685; 529317, 
3685713; 529458, 3685713; 529458, 3685742; 529515, 3685742; 529515, 
3685770; 529572, 3685770; 529572, 3685798; 529600, 3685798; 529600, 
3685827; 529629, 3685827; 529629, 3685855; 529657, 3685855; 529657, 
3685912; 529685, 3685912; 529685, 3685940; 529629, 3685940; 529629, 
3685912; 529600, 3685912; 529600, 3685884; 529572, 3685884; 529572, 
3685855; 529487, 3685855; 529487, 3685827; 529458, 3685827; 529458, 
3685798; 529373, 3685798; 529373, 3685770; 529317, 3685770; returning to 
529317, 3685713.
    (iv) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 527100, 
3688218; 527189, 3688133; 527274, 3688045; 527260, 3687961; 527240, 
3687969; 527188, 3687979; 527132, 3687990; 527094, 3688001; 527049, 
3688024; 526996, 3688057; 526979, 3688074; 526981, 3688142; 527035, 
3688139; returning to 527100, 3688218.
    (v) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 527302, 
3688720; 527302, 3688715; 527295, 3688720; returning to 527302, 3688720.
    (vi) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 527274, 
3688749; 527274, 3688735; 527254, 3688749; returning to 527274, 3688749.
    (vii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 527217, 
3688806; 527217, 3688777; 527246, 3688777; 527246, 3688754; 527171, 
3688806; returning to 527217, 3688806.
    (viii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 516777, 
3689146; 516777, 3689118; 516806, 3689118; 516806, 3689032; 516834, 
3689032; 516834, 3689061; 516891, 3689061; 516891, 3689032; 516919, 
3689032; 516919, 3688976; 516948, 3688976; 516948, 3688919; 516976, 
3688919; 516976, 3688891; 516948, 3688891; 516948, 3688834; 516976, 
3688834; 516976, 3688806; 517004, 3688806; 517004, 3688777; 517033, 
3688777; 517033, 3688749; 517061, 3688749; 517061, 3688579; 517033, 
3688579; 517033, 3688550; 516948, 3688550; 516948, 3688522; 516976, 
3688522; 516976, 3688493; 517004, 3688493; 517004, 3688465; 517033, 
3688465; 517033, 3688408; 517004, 3688408; 517004, 3688380; 517033, 
3688380; 517033, 3688238; 517004, 3688238; 517004, 3688210; 517089, 
3688210; 517089, 3688096; 517118, 3688096; 517118, 3688040; 517175, 
3688040; 517175, 3688011; 517288, 3688011; 517288, 3687954; 517345, 
3687954; 517345, 3687926; 517373, 3687926; 517373, 3687898; 517402, 
3687898; 517402, 3687869; 517430, 3687869; 517430, 3687841; 517600, 
3687841; 517600, 3687869; 517685, 3687869; 517685, 3687841; 517714, 
3687841; 517714, 3687784; 517742, 3687784; 517742, 3687727; 517770, 
3687727; 517770, 3687699; 517827, 3687699; 517827, 3687671; 517884, 
3687671; 517884, 3687699; 517912, 3687699; 517912, 3687727; 517969, 
3687727; 517969, 3687699; 517997, 3687699; 517997, 3687614; 517969, 
3687614; 517969, 3687557; 517941, 3687557; 517941, 3687501; 517969, 
3687501; 517969, 3687529; 517997, 3687529; 517997, 3687557; 518026, 
3687557; 518026, 3687529; 518054, 3687529; 518054, 3687557; 518082, 
3687557; 518082, 3687586; 518111, 3687586; 518111, 3687642; 518139, 
3687642; 518139, 3687699; 518168, 3687699; 518168, 3687727; 518338, 
3687727; 518338, 3687756; 518366, 3687756; 518366, 3687784; 518451, 
3687784; 518451, 3687813; 518650, 3687813; 518650, 3687784; 518707, 
3687784; 518707, 3687614; 518735, 3687614; 518735, 3687642; 518763, 
3687642; 518763, 3687671; 518792, 3687671; 518792, 3687614; 518820, 
3687614; 518820, 3687557; 518848, 3687557; 518848, 3687529; 518877, 
3687529; 518877, 3687501; 518933, 3687501; 518933, 3687472; 518962, 
3687472; 518962, 3687188; 518990, 3687188; 518990, 3687132; 519019, 
3687132; 519019, 3687047; 519047, 3687047; 519047, 3686990; 519075, 
3686990; 519075, 3686933; 519104, 3686933; 519104, 3686905; 519160, 
3686905; 519160,

[[Page 433]]

3686876; 519331, 3686876; 519331, 3686933; 519359, 3686933; 519359, 
3686848; 519387, 3686848; 519387, 3686791; 519444, 3686791; 519444, 
3686763; 519614, 3686763; 519614, 3686735; 519671, 3686735; 519671, 
3686706; 519699, 3686706; 519699, 3686678; 519728, 3686678; 519728, 
3686649; 519756, 3686649; 519756, 3686621; 519728, 3686621; 519728, 
3686593; 519785, 3686593; 519785, 3686536; 519813, 3686536; 519813, 
3686451; 519841, 3686451; 519841, 3686423; 519898, 3686423; 519898, 
3686394; 519955, 3686394; 519955, 3686366; 519983, 3686366; 519983, 
3686337; 520011, 3686337; 520011, 3686309; 520068, 3686309; 520068, 
3686281; 520097, 3686281; 520097, 3686252; 520153, 3686252; 520153, 
3686224; 520182, 3686224; 520182, 3686196; 520210, 3686196; 520210, 
3686167; 520238, 3686167; 520238, 3686139; 520267, 3686139; 520267, 
3686110; 520295, 3686110; 520295, 3686082; 520324, 3686082; 520324, 
3686054; 520352, 3686054; 520352, 3686025; 520380, 3686025; 520380, 
3685997; 520437, 3685997; 520437, 3685969; 520465, 3685969; 520465, 
3685940; 520494, 3685940; 520494, 3685912; 520522, 3685912; 520522, 
3685884; 520551, 3685884; 520551, 3685855; 520607, 3685855; 520607, 
3685827; 520636, 3685827; 520636, 3685798; 520664, 3685798; 520664, 
3685770; 520692, 3685770; 520692, 3685742; 520749, 3685742; 520749, 
3685713; 520806, 3685713; 520806, 3685742; 520881, 3685742; 520882, 
3685736; 520890, 3685720; 520891, 3685718; 520891, 3685685; 520863, 
3685685; 520863, 3685657; 520834, 3685657; 520834, 3685628; 520891, 
3685628; 520891, 3685600; 520919, 3685600; 520919, 3685486; 521004, 
3685486; 521004, 3685458; 521118, 3685458; 521118, 3685430; 521175, 
3685430; 521175, 3685401; 521231, 3685401; 521231, 3685430; 521260, 
3685430; 521260, 3685458; 521314, 3685458; 521318, 3685322; 521072, 
3685269; 521833, 3684181; 521770, 3684181; 521770, 3684210; 521714, 
3684210; 521714, 3684238; 521515, 3684238; 521515, 3684266; 521373, 
3684266; 521373, 3684295; 521288, 3684295; 521288, 3684323; 521260, 
3684323; 521260, 3684352; 521231, 3684352; 521231, 3684380; 521146, 
3684380; 521146, 3684408; 521090, 3684408; 521090, 3684493; 521033, 
3684493; 521033, 3684380; 520948, 3684380; 520948, 3684408; 520919, 
3684408; 520919, 3684437; 520891, 3684437; 520891, 3684522; 520919, 
3684522; 520919, 3684635; 520863, 3684635; 520863, 3684692; 520806, 
3684692; 520806, 3684749; 520777, 3684749; 520777, 3684834; 520749, 
3684834; 520749, 3684891; 520721, 3684891; 520721, 3684947; 520692, 
3684947; 520692, 3685032; 520664, 3685032; 520664, 3685089; 520692, 
3685089; 520692, 3685373; 520664, 3685373; 520664, 3685401; 520636, 
3685401; 520636, 3685458; 520607, 3685458; 520607, 3685571; 520579, 
3685571; 520579, 3685628; 520551, 3685628; 520551, 3685657; 520494, 
3685657; 520494, 3685685; 520465, 3685685; 520465, 3685713; 520437, 
3685713; 520437, 3685742; 520409, 3685742; 520409, 3685770; 520352, 
3685770; 520352, 3685798; 520324, 3685798; 520324, 3685827; 520295, 
3685827; 520295, 3685855; 520267, 3685855; 520267, 3685884; 520238, 
3685884; 520238, 3685912; 520210, 3685912; 520210, 3685940; 520182, 
3685940; 520182, 3685997; 520153, 3685997; 520153, 3686054; 520125, 
3686054; 520125, 3686110; 520097, 3686110; 520097, 3686139; 520040, 
3686139; 520040, 3686167; 519983, 3686167; 519983, 3686196; 519955, 
3686196; 519955, 3686224; 519926, 3686224; 519926, 3686252; 519841, 
3686252; 519841, 3686281; 519813, 3686281; 519813, 3686309; 519756, 
3686309; 519756, 3686337; 519728, 3686337; 519728, 3686366; 519699, 
3686366; 519699, 3686423; 519671, 3686423; 519671, 3686508; 519643, 
3686508; 519643, 3686593; 519586, 3686593; 519586, 3686621; 519472, 
3686621; 519472, 3686649; 519359, 3686649; 519359, 3686678; 519302, 
3686678; 519302, 3686706; 519274, 3686706; 519274, 3686735; 519246, 
3686735; 519246, 3686763; 519104, 3686763; 519104, 3686791; 519019, 
3686791; 519019, 3686848; 518990, 3686848; 518990, 3686933; 518962, 
3686933; 518962, 3687018; 518933, 3687018; 518933, 3687075; 518877, 
3687075; 518877, 3687132; 518848, 3687132; 518848, 3687387; 518820, 
3687387; 518820, 3687444; 518735, 3687444; 518735, 3687472; 518678, 
3687472; 518678, 3687444; 518593, 3687444; 518593, 3687472; 518565, 
3687472; 518565, 3687557; 518593, 3687557; 518593, 3687614; 518565, 
3687614; 518565, 3687699; 518508, 3687699; 518508, 3687671; 518394, 
3687671; 518394, 3687642; 518338, 3687642; 518338, 3687614; 518224, 
3687614; 518224, 3687557; 518196, 3687557; 518196, 3687501; 518168, 
3687501; 518168, 3687444; 518139, 3687444; 518139, 3687415; 518026, 
3687415; 518026, 3687359; 517969, 3687359; 517969, 3687330; 517941, 
3687330; 517941, 3687359; 517884, 3687359; 517884, 3687387; 517827, 
3687387; 517827, 3687415; 517799, 3687415; 517799, 3687387; 517770, 
3687387; 517770, 3687330; 517742, 3687330; 517742, 3687274; 517629, 
3687274; 517629, 3687302; 517543, 3687302; 517543, 3687330; 517515, 
3687330; 517515, 3687359; 517487, 3687359; 517487, 3687387; 517458, 
3687387; 517458, 3687444; 517430, 3687444; 517430, 3687472; 517402, 
3687472; 517402, 3687501; 517316, 3687501; 517316, 3687529; 517288, 
3687529; 517288, 3687557; 517231, 3687557; 517231, 3687586; 517203, 
3687586; 517203, 3687614; 517175, 3687614; 517175, 3687642; 517146, 
3687642; 517146, 3687671; 517118, 3687671; 517118, 3687699; 517061, 
3687699; 517061, 3687727; 517033, 3687727; 517033, 3687756; 517004, 
3687756; 517004, 3687784; 516976, 3687784; 516976, 3687841; 516948, 
3687841; 516948, 3687869; 516919, 3687869; 516919, 3687898; 516891, 
3687898; 516891, 3687926; 516834, 3687926; 516834, 3687954; 516806, 
3687954; 516806, 3687983; 516749, 3687983; 516749, 3688011; 516664, 
3688011; 516664, 3688040; 516636, 3688040; 516636, 3688068; 516607, 
3688068; 516607, 3688096; 516579, 3688096; 516579, 3688125; 516522, 
3688125; 516522, 3688153; 516465, 3688153; 516465, 3688181; 516380, 
3688181; 516380, 3688210; 516352, 3688210; 516352, 3688238; 516324, 
3688238; 516324, 3688267; 516238, 3688267; 516238, 3688295; 516182, 
3688295; 516182, 3688323; 516125, 3688323; 516125, 3688352; 516068, 
3688352; 516068, 3688323; 515983, 3688323; 515983, 3688352; 515955, 
3688352; 515955, 3688408; 515898, 3688408; 515898, 3688437; 515870, 
3688437; 515870, 3688465; 515841, 3688465; 515841, 3688493; 515785, 
3688493; 515785, 3688522; 515728, 3688522; 515728, 3688550; 515671, 
3688550; 515671, 3688607; 515728, 3688607; 515728, 3688635; 515785, 
3688635; 515785, 3688720; 515813, 3688720; 515813, 3688834; 515841, 
3688834; 515841, 3688862; 515870, 3688862; 515870, 3688834; 515955, 
3688834; 515955, 3688862; 515983, 3688862; 515983, 3688834; 516068, 
3688834; 516068, 3688862; 516097, 3688862; 516097, 3688891; 516125, 
3688891; 516125, 3688862; 516295, 3688862; 516295, 3688834; 516352, 
3688834; 516352, 3688806; 516409, 3688806; 516409, 3688749; 516437, 
3688749; 516437, 3688579; 516465, 3688579; 516465, 3688664; 516494, 
3688664; 516494, 3688919; 516522,

[[Page 434]]

3688919; 516522, 3689032; 516550, 3689032; 516550, 3689089; 516721, 
3689089; 516721, 3689118; 516749, 3689118; 516749, 3689146; returning to 
516777, 3689146.
    (ix) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 530905, 
3689118; 530905, 3689089; 530763, 3689089; 530763, 3689118; 530735, 
3689118; 530735, 3689089; 530707, 3689089; 530707, 3688891; 530735, 
3688891; 530735, 3688834; 530763, 3688834; 530763, 3688806; 530792, 
3688806; 530792, 3688749; 530820, 3688749; 530820, 3688720; 530848, 
3688720; 530848, 3688692; 530877, 3688692; 530877, 3688635; 530820, 
3688635; 530820, 3688664; 530792, 3688664; 530792, 3688692; 530763, 
3688692; 530763, 3688720; 530707, 3688720; 530707, 3688749; 530678, 
3688749; 530678, 3688777; 530593, 3688777; 530593, 3688806; 530508, 
3688806; 530508, 3688862; 530480, 3688862; 530480, 3688891; 530451, 
3688891; 530451, 3688947; 530423, 3688947; 530423, 3688976; 530366, 
3688976; 530366, 3689004; 530312, 3689004; 530717, 3689283; 530990, 
3689238; 530990, 3689231; 530962, 3689231; 530962, 3689203; 530934, 
3689203; 530934, 3689118; returning to 530905, 3689118.
    (x) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 533203, 
3689884; 533203, 3689855; 533288, 3689855; 533288, 3689827; 533317, 
3689827; 533317, 3689798; 533288, 3689798; 533288, 3689770; 533231, 
3689770; 533231, 3689713; 533203, 3689713; 533203, 3689515; 533231, 
3689515; 533231, 3689430; 533203, 3689430; 533203, 3689231; 533231, 
3689231; 533231, 3689032; 533203, 3689032; 533203, 3688982; 533200, 
3688985; 533115, 3689037; 533039, 3689061; 532931, 3689099; 532888, 
3689136; 532855, 3689184; 532827, 3689250; 532827, 3689325; 532808, 
3689382; 532789, 3689448; 532742, 3689486; 532624, 3689542; 532553, 
3689566; 532506, 3689575; 532440, 3689613; 532416, 3689628; 532465, 
3689628; 532465, 3689657; 532636, 3689657; 532636, 3689685; 532749, 
3689685; 532749, 3689657; 532834, 3689657; 532834, 3689685; 532806, 
3689685; 532806, 3689742; 532834, 3689742; 532834, 3689770; 532863, 
3689770; 532863, 3689798; 533033, 3689798; 533033, 3689827; 533118, 
3689827; 533118, 3689855; 533175, 3689855; 533175, 3689884; returning to 
533203, 3689884.
    (xi) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 525004, 
3689940; 525004, 3689912; 525061, 3689912; 525061, 3689884; 525175, 
3689884; 525175, 3689912; 525231, 3689912; 525231, 3689855; 525288, 
3689855; 525288, 3689827; 525430, 3689827; 525430, 3689657; 525458, 
3689657; 525458, 3689628; 525487, 3689628; 525487, 3689600; 525770, 
3689600; 525770, 3689628; 525790, 3689628; 525775, 3689579; 525757, 
3689503; 525768, 3689445; 525945, 3689372; 525854, 3689406; 525765, 
3689436; 525641, 3689482; 525630, 3689473; 525526, 3689521; 525524, 
3689317; 525483, 3689320; 525478, 3688981; 525862, 3688727; 526129, 
3688570; 526141, 3688573; 526141, 3688571; 526139, 3688295; 526139, 
3688295; 526139, 3688352; 526111, 3688352; 526111, 3688408; 526082, 
3688408; 526082, 3688465; 525997, 3688465; 525997, 3688493; 525912, 
3688493; 525912, 3688465; 525884, 3688465; 525884, 3688493; 525856, 
3688493; 525856, 3688522; 525827, 3688522; 525827, 3688550; 525799, 
3688550; 525799, 3688579; 525770, 3688579; 525770, 3688607; 525714, 
3688607; 525714, 3688635; 525657, 3688635; 525657, 3688664; 525629, 
3688664; 525629, 3688692; 525515, 3688692; 525515, 3688720; 525487, 
3688720; 525487, 3688749; 525458, 3688749; 525458, 3688777; 525430, 
3688777; 525430, 3688749; 525345, 3688749; 525345, 3688777; 525316, 
3688777; 525316, 3688806; 525146, 3688806; 525146, 3688834; 525118, 
3688834; 525118, 3688862; 525061, 3688862; 525061, 3688919; 525033, 
3688919; 525033, 3689004; 525061, 3689004; 525061, 3689061; 525090, 
3689061; 525090, 3689118; 525061, 3689118; 525061, 3689174; 525033, 
3689174; 525033, 3689203; 525118, 3689203; 525118, 3689231; 525175, 
3689231; 525175, 3689259; 525146, 3689259; 525146, 3689288; 525118, 
3689288; 525118, 3689345; 525090, 3689345; 525090, 3689401; 525061, 
3689401; 525061, 3689458; 525033, 3689458; 525033, 3689486; 524976, 
3689486; 524976, 3689515; 524948, 3689515; 524948, 3689543; 524976, 
3689543; 524976, 3689571; 525004, 3689571; 525004, 3689628; 524834, 
3689628; 524834, 3689685; 524863, 3689685; 524863, 3689713; 524834, 
3689713; 524834, 3689742; 524863, 3689742; 524863, 3689827; 524891, 
3689827; 524891, 3689912; 524976, 3689912; 524976, 3689940; returning to 
525004, 3689940.
    (xii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 530792, 
3691018; 530792, 3691011; 530791, 3691012; 530786, 3691018; returning to 
530792, 3691018.
    (xiii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 531331, 
3691160; 531331, 3691132; 531359, 3691132; 531359, 3691075; 531387, 
3691075; 531387, 3690990; 531359, 3690990; 531359, 3690961; 531317, 
3690970; 531271, 3690976; 531225, 3690973; 531199, 3690980; 531176, 
3691003; 531130, 3691019; 531110, 3691026; 531080, 3691022; 531064, 
3691016; 531047, 3691013; 531039, 3691012; 531039, 3691013; 531029, 
3691029; 531007, 3691022; 530983, 3691008; 530962, 3690999; 530941, 
3690991; 530908, 3690976; 530874, 3690968; 530847, 3690968; 530818, 
3690981; 530810, 3690990; 530934, 3690990; 530934, 3691018; 530962, 
3691018; 530962, 3691047; 531019, 3691047; 531019, 3691075; 531047, 
3691075; 531047, 3691132; 531075, 3691132; 531075, 3691160; 531132, 
3691160; 531132, 3691189; 531189, 3691189; 531189, 3691217; 531331, 
3691217; returning to 531331, 3691160.
    (xiv) Note: Map of Unit 15 is provided at paragraph (17)(v) of this 
entry.
    (21) Unit 16: Santa Ysabel Creek, San Diego County, California.
    (i) Subunit 16a: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Rodriquez Mtn., 
Mesa Grande, Ramona, San Pasqual, and Escondido. Land bounded by the 
following UTM coordinates (E, N): 508579, 3674706; 508579, 3674678; 
508607, 3674678; 508607, 3674649; 508692, 3674649; 508692, 3674621; 
508721, 3674621; 508721, 3674649; 508806, 3674649; 508806, 3674621; 
508834, 3674621; 508834, 3674593; 508862, 3674593; 508862, 3674536; 
508891, 3674536; 508891, 3674451; 508919, 3674451; 508919, 3674366; 
508976, 3674366; 508976, 3674337; 509004, 3674337; 509004, 3674394; 
509033, 3674394; 509033, 3674422; 509061, 3674422; 509061, 3674479; 
509033, 3674479; 509033, 3674508; 509004, 3674508; 509004, 3674536; 
509033, 3674536; 509033, 3674593; 509089, 3674593; 509089, 3674621; 
509146, 3674621; 509146, 3674649; 509175, 3674649; 509203, 3674649; 
509203, 3674621; 509231, 3674621; 509231, 3674649; 509316, 3674649; 
509316, 3674593; 509345, 3674593; 509345, 3674564; 509316, 3674564; 
509316, 3674508; 509288,

[[Page 435]]

3674508; 509288, 3674479; 509260, 3674479; 509260, 3674422; 509231, 
3674422; 509231, 3674337; 509203, 3674337; 509203, 3674281; 509175, 
3674281; 509175, 3674224; 509146, 3674224; 509146, 3674195; 509118, 
3674195; 509118, 3674139; 509089, 3674139; 509089, 3673912; 509118, 
3673912; 509118, 3673770; 509089, 3673770; 509089, 3673685; 509061, 
3673685; 509061, 3673486; 509089, 3673486; 509089, 3673401; 509118, 
3673401; 509118, 3673373; 509146, 3673373; 509146, 3673344; 509175, 
3673344; 509175, 3673316; 509203, 3673316; 509203, 3673288; 509260, 
3673288; 509260, 3673316; 509288, 3673316; 509288, 3673344; 509316, 
3673344; 509316, 3673373; 509430, 3673373; 509430, 3673401; 509515, 
3673401; 509515, 3673146;
509487, 3673146; 509487, 3673089; 509458, 3673089; 509458, 3672891; 
509401, 3672891; 509401, 3672862; 509373, 3672862; 509373, 3672834; 
509345, 3672834; 509345, 3672749; 509373, 3672749; 509373, 3672692; 
509345, 3672692; 509345, 3672664; 509260, 3672664; 509260, 3672720; 
509175, 3672720; 509175, 3672692; 509118, 3672692; 509118, 3672607; 
509146, 3672607; 509146, 3672578; 509203, 3672578; 509203, 3672522; 
509175, 3672522; 509175, 3672493; 509146, 3672493; 509146, 3672408; 
509089, 3672408; 509089, 3672437; 508692, 3672437; 508692, 3672408; 
508522, 3672408; 508522, 3672380; 508267, 3672380; 508267, 3672408; 
508182, 3672408; 508182, 3672437; 508097, 3672437; 508097, 3672408; 
508040, 3672408; 508040, 3672380; 508011, 3672380; 508011, 3672351; 
507983, 3672351; 507983, 3672266; 507955, 3672266; 507955, 3672238; 
507870, 3672238; 507870, 3672210; 507841, 3672210; 507841, 3672153; 
507813, 3672153; 507813, 3672125; 507841, 3672125; 507841, 3672068; 
507756, 3672068; 507756, 3672039; 507671, 3672039; 507671, 3672011; 
507643, 3672011; 507643, 3672039; 507558, 3672039; 507558, 3672068; 
507416, 3672068; 507416, 3672039; 507387, 3672039; 507387, 3672011; 
507359, 3672011; 507359, 3671926; 507387, 3671926; 507387, 3671898; 
507416, 3671898; 507416, 3671869; 507472, 3671869; 507472, 3671841; 
507529, 3671841; 507529, 3671812; 507699, 3671812; 507699, 3671841; 
507756, 3671841; 507756, 3671812; 507841, 3671812; 507841, 3671784; 
507870, 3671784; 507870, 3671756; 507926, 3671756; 507926, 3671727; 
508153, 3671727; 508153, 3671699; 508295, 3671699; 508295, 3671671; 
508380, 3671671; 508380, 3671642; 508437, 3671642; 508437, 3671614; 
508352, 3671614; 508352, 3671586; 508323, 3671586; 508323, 3671557; 
508295, 3671557; 508295, 3671529; 508267, 3671529; 508267, 3671500; 
508210, 3671500; 508210, 3671472; 508153, 3671472; 508153, 3671444; 
507983, 3671444; 507983, 3671472; 507926, 3671472; 507926, 3671415; 
507955, 3671415; 507955, 3671387; 507983, 3671387; 507983, 3671330; 
508011, 3671330; 508011, 3671302; 508040, 3671302; 508040, 3671273; 
508097, 3671273; 508097, 3671245; 508153, 3671245; 508153, 3671217; 
508210, 3671217; 508210, 3671188; 508267, 3671188; 508267, 3671132; 
508238, 3671132; 508238, 3671103; 508182, 3671103; 508182, 3671075; 
508097, 3671075; 508097, 3671047; 507955, 3671047; 507955, 3671075; 
507841, 3671075; 507841, 3671047; 507784, 3671047; 507784, 3671018; 
507728, 3671018; 507728, 3670990; 507614, 3670990; 507614, 3670961; 
507558, 3670961; 507558, 3670876; 507529, 3670876; 507529, 3670820; 
507558, 3670820; 507558, 3670678; 507586, 3670678; 507586, 3670649; 
507558, 3670649; 507558, 3670621; 507444, 3670621; 507444, 3670508; 
507331, 3670508; 507331, 3670536; 507302, 3670536; 507302, 3670593; 
507274, 3670593; 507274, 3670621; 507245, 3670621; 507245, 3670649; 
507189, 3670649; 507189, 3670621; 507160, 3670621; 507160, 3670536; 
507189, 3670536; 507189, 3670451; 507075, 3670451; 507075, 3670422; 
507047, 3670422; 507047, 3670394; 506990, 3670394; 506990, 3670366; 
506962, 3670366; 506962, 3670337; 506848, 3670337; 506848, 3670309; 
506820, 3670309; 506820, 3670167; 506792, 3670167; 506792, 3670054; 
506763, 3670054; 506763, 3669997; 506735, 3669997; 506735, 3669855; 
506706, 3669855; 506706, 3669798; 506678, 3669798; 506678, 3669742; 
506650, 3669742; 506650, 3669656; 506678, 3669656; 506678, 3669628; 
506650, 3669628; 506650, 3669600; 506621, 3669600; 506621, 3669571; 
506593, 3669571; 506593, 3669543; 506565, 3669543; 506565, 3669486; 
506536, 3669486; 506536, 3669373; 506508, 3669373; 506508, 3669288; 
506479, 3669288; 506479, 3669259; 506508, 3669259; 506508, 3669174; 
506479, 3669174; 506479, 3669146; 506451, 3669146; 506451, 3669174; 
506338, 3669174; 506338, 3669146; 506309, 3669146; 506309, 3669117; 
506281, 3669117; 506281, 3669032; 506224, 3669032; 506224, 3669004; 
506196, 3669004; 506196, 3668976; 506167, 3668976; 506167, 3668919; 
506139, 3668919; 506139, 3668890;
505997, 3668890; 505997, 3668919; 505912, 3668919; 505912, 3668890; 
505855, 3668890; 505855, 3668805; 505884, 3668805; 505884, 3668749; 
505912, 3668749; 505912, 3668692; 505827, 3668692; 505827, 3668664; 
505742, 3668664; 505742, 3668692; 505714, 3668692; 505714, 3668720; 
505600, 3668720; 505600, 3668692; 505572, 3668692; 505572, 3668550; 
505487, 3668550; 505487, 3668522; 505458, 3668522; 505458, 3668493; 
505430, 3668493; 505430, 3668465; 505316, 3668465; 505316, 3668437; 
505288, 3668437; 505288, 3668295; 505316, 3668295; 505316, 3668266; 
505373, 3668266; 505373, 3668181; 505401, 3668181; 505401, 3668125; 
505373, 3668125; 505373, 3668068; 505345, 3668068; 505345, 3668011; 
505373, 3668011; 505373, 3667983; 505401, 3667983; 505401, 3667869; 
505430, 3667869; 505430, 3667784; 505401, 3667784; 505401, 3667671; 
505430, 3667671; 505430, 3667642; 505458, 3667642; 505458, 3667614; 
505487, 3667614; 505487, 3667586; 505515, 3667586; 505515, 3667557; 
505543, 3667557; 505543, 3667500; 505628, 3667500; 505628, 3667415; 
505657, 3667415; 505657, 3667188; 505628, 3667188; 505628, 3667160; 
505657, 3667160; 505657, 3667132; 505600, 3667132; 505600, 3667103; 
505628, 3667103; 505628, 3667075; 505657, 3667075; 505657, 3667046; 
505685, 3667046; 505685, 3666961; 505714, 3666961; 505714, 3666791; 
505884, 3666791; 505884, 3666621; 505912, 3666621; 505912, 3666479; 
505940, 3666479; 505940, 3666451; 505997, 3666451; 505997, 3666479; 
506082, 3666479; 506082, 3666422; 506054, 3666422; 506054, 3666337; 
506026, 3666337; 506026, 3666309; 505997, 3666309; 505997, 3666252; 
505969, 3666252; 505969, 3666139; 506167, 3666139; 506167, 3666110; 
506224, 3666110; 506224, 3666025; 506196, 3666025; 506196, 3665997; 
506167, 3665997; 506167, 3665968; 506139, 3665968; 506139, 3665940; 
506082, 3665940; 506082, 3665912; 506054, 3665912; 506054, 3665883; 
505912, 3665883; 505912, 3665855; 505884, 3665855; 505884, 3665827; 
505855, 3665827; 505855, 3665770; 505827, 3665770; 505827, 3665685; 
505799, 3665685; 505799, 3665628; 505770, 3665628; 505770, 3665543; 
505742, 3665543; 505742, 3665486; 505714, 3665486; 505714, 3665458; 
505742, 3665458; 505742, 3665429; 505770, 3665429; 505770, 3665373; 
505799,

[[Page 436]]

3665373; 505799, 3665288; 505770, 3665288; 505770, 3665174; 505714, 
3665174; 505714, 3665203; 505657, 3665203; 505657, 3665231; 505628, 
3665231; 505628, 3665203; 505572, 3665203; 505572, 3665061; 505543, 
3665061; 505543, 3665032; 505515, 3665032; 505515, 3664976; 505487, 
3664976; 505487, 3664947; 505458, 3664947; 505458, 3664919; 505373, 
3664919; 505373, 3664862; 505345, 3664862; 505345, 3664692; 505260, 
3664692; 505260, 3664720; 505231, 3664720; 505203, 3664720; 505203, 
3664692; 505146, 3664692; 505146, 3664607; 505118, 3664607; 505118, 
3664522; 505061, 3664522; 505061, 3664550; 504891, 3664550; 504891, 
3664493; 504862, 3664493; 504862, 3664465; 504834, 3664465; 504834, 
3664437; 504806, 3664437; 504806, 3664408; 504777, 3664408; 504777, 
3664351; 504749, 3664351; 504749, 3664323; 504692, 3664323; 504692, 
3664238; 504664, 3664238; 504664, 3664210; 504636, 3664210; 504636, 
3664096; 504579, 3664096; 504579, 3664068; 504409, 3664068; 504409, 
3664039; 504323, 3664039; 504323, 3664011; 504267, 3664011; 504267, 
3663954; 504238, 3663954; 504238, 3663869; 504267, 3663869; 504267, 
3663841; 504295, 3663841; 504295, 3663784; 504267, 3663784; 504267, 
3663756; 504238, 3663756; 504238, 3663727; 504210, 3663727; 504210, 
3663642; 504238, 3663642; 504238, 3663500; 504210, 3663500; 504210, 
3663387; 504182, 3663387; 504182, 3663359; 504210, 3663359; 504210, 
3663302; 504267, 3663302; 504267, 3663330; 504352, 3663330; 504352, 
3663273; 504323, 3663273; 504323, 3663217; 504295, 3663217; 504295, 
3663188; 504267, 3663188; 504267, 3663160; 504238, 3663160; 504238, 
3663075; 504210, 3663075; 504210, 3662990; 504238, 3662990; 504238, 
3662933; 504267, 3662933; 504267, 3662820; 504238, 3662820; 504238, 
3662763; 504210, 3662763; 504210, 3662734;
504182, 3662734; 504182, 3662621; 504153, 3662621; 504153, 3662507; 
504125, 3662507; 504125, 3662422; 504096, 3662422; 504096, 3662366; 
504068, 3662366; 504068, 3662337; 504040, 3662337; 504040, 3662167; 
504068, 3662167; 504068, 3662139; 504096, 3662139; 504096, 3662082; 
504125, 3662082; 504125, 3661940; 504153, 3661940; 504153, 3661883; 
504210, 3661883; 504210, 3661855; 504295, 3661855; 504295, 3661883; 
504352, 3661883; 504352, 3661912; 504380, 3661912; 504380, 3661940; 
504522, 3661940; 504522, 3661968; 504579, 3661968; 504579, 3661940; 
504607, 3661940; 504607, 3661883; 504692, 3661883; 504692, 3661912; 
504721, 3661912; 504721, 3661940; 504834, 3661940; 504834, 3661912; 
504919, 3661912; 504976, 3661912; 504976, 3661940; 505260, 3661940; 
505260, 3661912; 505316, 3661912; 505316, 3661883; 505345, 3661883; 
505345, 3661827; 505401, 3661827; 505401, 3661798; 505458, 3661798; 
505458, 3661770; 505543, 3661770; 505543, 3661798; 505572, 3661798; 
505572, 3661770; 505628, 3661770; 505628, 3661741; 505685, 3661741; 
505685, 3661713; 505714, 3661713; 505714, 3661685; 505770, 3661685; 
505770, 3661656; 505855, 3661656; 505855, 3661628; 505912, 3661628; 
505912, 3661571; 505940, 3661571; 505940, 3661543; 505969, 3661543; 
505969, 3661458; 505997, 3661458; 505997, 3661429; 506054, 3661429; 
506054, 3661401; 506111, 3661401; 506111, 3661316; 506139, 3661316; 
506139, 3661259; 506167, 3661259; 506167, 3661231; 506196, 3661231; 
506196, 3661202; 506253, 3661202; 506253, 3661174; 506479, 3661174; 
506479, 3661202; 506565, 3661202; 506565, 3661231; 506621, 3661231; 
506621, 3661259; 506706, 3661259; 506706, 3661288; 506763, 3661288; 
506763, 3661259; 506792, 3661259; 506792, 3661231; 506820, 3661231; 
506820, 3661259; 506877, 3661259; 506877, 3661288; 506962, 3661288; 
506962, 3661259; 507018, 3661259; 507018, 3661202; 507047, 3661202; 
507047, 3661174; 507075, 3661174; 507075, 3661146; 507132, 3661146; 
507132, 3661174; 507160, 3661174; 507359, 3661174; 507359, 3661146; 
507416, 3661146; 507416, 3661117; 507444, 3661117; 507444, 3661089; 
507472, 3661089; 507472, 3661061; 507501, 3661061; 507501, 3661004; 
507529, 3661004; 507529, 3660947; 507558, 3660947; 507558, 3660834; 
507529, 3660834; 507529, 3660805; 507558, 3660805; 507558, 3660777; 
507643, 3660777; 507643, 3660805; 507699, 3660805; 507699, 3660862; 
507728, 3660862; 507728, 3660919; 507756, 3660919; 507756, 3660976; 
507813, 3660976; 507813, 3661004; 507870, 3661004; 507870, 3661032; 
507898, 3661032; 507898, 3661061; 507926, 3661061; 507926, 3661032; 
507955, 3661032; 507955, 3661004; 508040, 3661004; 508040, 3660976; 
508097, 3660976; 508097, 3660947; 508125, 3660947; 508125, 3660919; 
508238, 3660919; 508238, 3661089; 508267, 3661089; 508267, 3661146; 
508295, 3661146; 508295, 3661174; 508323, 3661174; 508323, 3661202; 
508380, 3661202; 508380, 3661231; 508437, 3661231; 508437, 3661202; 
508465, 3661202; 508465, 3661174; 508494, 3661174; 508494, 3661202; 
508522, 3661202; 508522, 3661231; 508579, 3661231; 508579, 3661259; 
508636, 3661259; 508636, 3661288; 508692, 3661288; 508692, 3661316; 
508806, 3661316; 508806, 3661288; 508891, 3661288; 508891, 3661259; 
508919, 3661259; 508919, 3661231; 508976, 3661231; 508976, 3661259; 
509004, 3661259; 509004, 3661288; 509061, 3661288; 509061, 3661316; 
509203, 3661316; 509203, 3661288; 509231, 3661288; 509231, 3661231; 
509260, 3661231; 509260, 3661202; 509288, 3661202; 509288, 3661174; 
509316, 3661174; 509316, 3661146; 509345, 3661146; 509345, 3661117; 
509458, 3661117; 509458, 3661089; 509487, 3661089; 509487, 3661458; 
509515, 3661458; 509515, 3661628; 509487, 3661628; 509487, 3661656; 
509458, 3661656; 509458, 3661713; 509430, 3661713; 509430, 3661770; 
509458, 3661770; 509458, 3661883; 509600, 3661883; 509600, 3661912; 
509628, 3661912; 509628, 3661968; 509600, 3661968; 509600, 3662025; 
509572, 3662025; 509572, 3662082; 509543, 3662082; 509543, 3662110; 
509600, 3662110; 509600, 3662139;
 509628, 3662139; 509628, 3662281; 509657, 3662281; 509657, 3662394; 
509685, 3662394; 509685, 3662451; 509714, 3662451; 509714, 3662507; 
509742, 3662507; 509742, 3662621; 509770, 3662621; 509770, 3662678; 
509799, 3662678; 509799, 3662734; 509855, 3662734; 509855, 3662763; 
509884, 3662763; 509884, 3662848; 509855, 3662848; 509855, 3662876; 
509827, 3662876; 509827, 3662905; 509799, 3662905; 509799, 3662933; 
509770, 3662933; 509770, 3662990; 509742, 3662990; 509742, 3663132; 
509770, 3663132; 509770, 3663188; 509799, 3663188; 509799, 3663359; 
509770, 3663359; 509770, 3663415; 509742, 3663415; 509742, 3663444; 
509770, 3663444; 509770, 3663500; 509742, 3663500; 509742, 3663529; 
509714, 3663529; 509714, 3663557; 509742, 3663557; 509742, 3663614; 
509714, 3663614; 509714, 3663642; 509657, 3663642; 509657, 3663727; 
509628, 3663727; 509628, 3663756; 509657, 3663756; 509657, 3663784; 
509742, 3663784; 509742, 3663841; 509714, 3663841; 509714, 3663898; 
509742, 3663898; 509742, 3663954; 509685, 3663954; 509685, 3663983; 
509657, 3663983; 509657, 3664011; 509685, 3664011; 509685, 3664039; 
509657, 3664039; 509657,

[[Page 437]]

3664096; 509628, 3664096; 509628, 3664153; 509600, 3664153; 509600, 
3664181; 509628, 3664181; 509628, 3664323; 509600, 3664323; 509600, 
3664408; 509628, 3664408; 509628, 3664465; 509657, 3664465; 509657, 
3664493; 509628, 3664493; 509628, 3664607; 509600, 3664607; 509600, 
3664749; 509572, 3664749; 509572, 3664862; 509543, 3664862; 509543, 
3664919; 509572, 3664919; 509572, 3664976; 509600, 3664976; 509600, 
3665032; 509628, 3665032; 509628, 3665089; 509657, 3665089; 509657, 
3665146; 509685, 3665146; 509685, 3665174; 509742, 3665174; 509742, 
3665146; 509770, 3665146; 509770, 3665061; 509799, 3665061; 509799, 
3665004; 509827, 3665004; 509827, 3664976; 509855, 3664976; 509855, 
3664919; 509912, 3664919; 509912, 3664834; 509941, 3664834; 509941, 
3664749; 509969, 3664749; 509969, 3664664; 509997, 3664664; 509997, 
3664635; 510026, 3664635; 510026, 3664607; 510054, 3664607; 510054, 
3664550; 510082, 3664550; 510082, 3664522; 510111, 3664522; 510111, 
3664493; 510139, 3664493; 510139, 3664351; 510111, 3664351; 510111, 
3664295; 510082, 3664295; 510082, 3664266; 510054, 3664266; 510054, 
3664210; 510026, 3664210; 510026, 3664096; 510054, 3664096; 510054, 
3663869; 510082, 3663869; 510082, 3663756; 510111, 3663756; 510111, 
3663727; 510139, 3663727; 510139, 3663756; 510196, 3663756; 510196, 
3663585; 510224, 3663585; 510224, 3663557; 510111, 3663557; 510111, 
3663585; 510054, 3663585; 510054, 3663529; 510026, 3663529; 510026, 
3663500; 510054, 3663500; 510054, 3663415; 510026, 3663415; 510026, 
3663387; 509997, 3663387; 509997, 3663330; 509969, 3663330; 509969, 
3663302; 509941, 3663302; 509941, 3663188; 509912, 3663188; 509912, 
3663075; 509941, 3663075; 509941, 3663018; 509969, 3663018; 509969, 
3663046; 510054, 3663046; 510054, 3663075; 510082, 3663075; 510082, 
3663103; 510111, 3663103; 510111, 3663132; 510196, 3663132; 510196, 
3662990; 510167, 3662990; 510167, 3662876; 510139, 3662876; 510139, 
3662820; 510111, 3662820; 510111, 3662734; 510082, 3662734; 510082, 
3662621; 510054, 3662621; 510054, 3662507; 510026, 3662507; 510026, 
3662479; 509997, 3662479; 509997, 3662451; 509969, 3662451; 509969, 
3662422; 509941, 3662422; 509941, 3662394; 509855, 3662394; 509855, 
3662337; 509827, 3662337; 509827, 3662309; 509799, 3662309; 509799, 
3662281; 509827, 3662281; 509827, 3662252; 509855, 3662252; 509855, 
3662224; 509884, 3662224; 509884, 3662167; 509912, 3662167; 509912, 
3662110; 509884, 3662110; 509884, 3661940; 509855, 3661940; 509855, 
3661912; 509827, 3661912; 509827, 3661855; 509799, 3661855; 509799, 
3661770; 509770, 3661770; 509770, 3661685; 509742, 3661685; 509742, 
3661628; 509714, 3661628; 509714, 3661600; 509742, 3661600; 509742, 
3661515; 509799, 3661515; 509799, 3661486; 509827, 3661486; 509827, 
3661429; 509855, 3661429; 509855, 3661373; 509912, 3661373; 509912, 
3661344;
509941, 3661344; 509941, 3661515; 509969, 3661515; 509969, 3661600; 
509997, 3661600; 509997, 3661656; 510026, 3661656; 510026, 3661685; 
510054, 3661685; 510054, 3661713; 510082, 3661713; 510082, 3661685; 
510167, 3661685; 510167, 3661713; 510394, 3661713; 510394, 3661741; 
510423, 3661741; 510423, 3661798; 510451, 3661798; 510451, 3661827; 
510480, 3661827; 510480, 3661855; 510508, 3661855; 510508, 3661827; 
510565, 3661827; 510565, 3661855; 510621, 3661855; 510621, 3661883; 
510650, 3661883; 510650, 3661912; 510706, 3661912; 510706, 3661855; 
510763, 3661855; 510763, 3661827; 510848, 3661827; 510848, 3661855; 
510877, 3661855; 510877, 3661912; 510905, 3661912; 510905, 3661940; 
510962, 3661940; 510962, 3661968; 510990, 3661968; 510990, 3662110; 
511019, 3662110; 511019, 3662139; 511047, 3662139; 511047, 3662167; 
511104, 3662167; 511104, 3662195; 511132, 3662195; 511132, 3662224; 
511160, 3662224; 511160, 3662281; 511189, 3662281; 511189, 3662366; 
511217, 3662366; 511217, 3662422; 511245, 3662422; 511245, 3662451; 
511274, 3662451; 511274, 3662507; 511302, 3662507; 511302, 3662536; 
511359, 3662536; 511359, 3662621; 511331, 3662621; 511331, 3662649; 
511387, 3662649; 511387, 3662678; 511501, 3662678; 511501, 3662593; 
511558, 3662593; 511558, 3662621; 511643, 3662621; 511643, 3662649; 
511699, 3662649; 511699, 3662678; 511728, 3662678; 511728, 3662734; 
511898, 3662734; 511898, 3662763; 511955, 3662763; 511955, 3662791; 
511983, 3662791; 511983, 3662820; 512011, 3662820; 512011, 3662848; 
512040, 3662848; 512040, 3662933; 512068, 3662933; 512068, 3662961; 
512125, 3662961; 512125, 3663018; 512153, 3663018; 512153, 3663132; 
512182, 3663132; 512182, 3663188; 512210, 3663188; 512210, 3663217; 
512238, 3663217; 512238, 3663273; 512352, 3663273; 512352, 3663245; 
512465, 3663245; 512465, 3663273; 512550, 3663273; 512550, 3663302; 
512607, 3663302; 512607, 3663330; 512806, 3663330; 512806, 3663359; 
512891, 3663359; 512891, 3663330; 512948, 3663330; 512948, 3663302; 
512976, 3663302; 512976, 3663273; 513033, 3663273; 513033, 3663217; 
513061, 3663217; 513061, 3663188; 513089, 3663188; 513089, 3663160; 
513203, 3663160; 513203, 3663245; 513231, 3663245; 513231, 3663273; 
513203, 3663273; 513203, 3663614; 513288, 3663614; 513288, 3663841; 
513345, 3663841; 513345, 3663898; 513373, 3663898; 513373, 3663954; 
513345, 3663954; 513345, 3664011; 513288, 3664011; 513288, 3664124; 
513316, 3664124; 513316, 3664210; 513345, 3664210; 513345, 3664238; 
513316, 3664238; 513316, 3664351; 513288, 3664351; 513288, 3664380; 
513316, 3664380; 513316, 3664408; 513345, 3664408; 513345, 3664493; 
513316, 3664493; 513316, 3664522; 513373, 3664522; 513373, 3664550; 
513402, 3664550; 513402, 3664635; 513430, 3664635; 513430, 3664805; 
513402, 3664805; 513402, 3664834; 513430, 3664834; 513430, 3664862; 
513487, 3664862; 513487, 3664834; 513515, 3664834; 513515, 3664862; 
513543, 3664862; 513543, 3664947; 513515, 3664947; 513515, 3665004; 
513543, 3665004; 513543, 3665032; 513572, 3665032; 513572, 3665117; 
513543, 3665117; 513543, 3665146; 513487, 3665146; 513487, 3665174; 
513430, 3665174; 513430, 3665231; 513373, 3665231; 513373, 3665259; 
513345, 3665259; 513345, 3665316; 513316, 3665316; 513316, 3665344; 
513288, 3665344; 513288, 3665401; 513345, 3665401; 513345, 3665458; 
513373, 3665458; 513373, 3665486; 513345, 3665486; 513345, 3665515; 
513316, 3665515; 513316, 3665543; 513260, 3665543; 513260, 3665600; 
513288, 3665600; 513288, 3665628; 513316, 3665628; 513316, 3665656; 
513345, 3665656; 513345, 3665742; 513316, 3665742; 513316, 3665883; 
513288, 3665883; 513288, 3665912; 513260, 3665912; 513260, 3665968; 
513231, 3665968; 513231, 3665997; 513260, 3665997; 513260, 3666110; 
513288, 3666110; 513288, 3666167; 513316, 3666167; 513316, 3666224; 
513316, 3666309; 513288, 3666309; 513288, 3666366; 513260, 3666366; 
513260, 3666422; 513231, 3666422; 513231, 3666507; 513345, 3666507; 
513345, 3666536;
 513373, 3666536; 513373, 3666564; 513402, 3666564; 513402, 3666621; 
513430, 3666621; 513430,

[[Page 438]]

3666706; 513458, 3666706; 513458, 3666848; 513430, 3666848; 513430, 
3666905; 513458, 3666905; 513458, 3666961; 513487, 3666961; 513487, 
3666990; 513458, 3666990; 513458, 3667018; 513430, 3667018; 513430, 
3667103; 513402, 3667103; 513402, 3667132; 513373, 3667132; 513373, 
3667160; 513402, 3667160; 513402, 3667188; 513430, 3667188; 513430, 
3667217; 513458, 3667217; 513458, 3667359; 513430, 3667359; 513430, 
3667387; 513402, 3667387; 513402, 3667415; 513345, 3667415; 513345, 
3667444; 513316, 3667444; 513316, 3667472; 513288, 3667472; 513288, 
3667500; 513316, 3667500; 513316, 3667529; 513345, 3667529; 513345, 
3667557; 513430, 3667557; 513430, 3667586; 513487, 3667586; 513487, 
3667614; 513515, 3667614; 513515, 3667699; 513628, 3667699; 513628, 
3667784; 513657, 3667784; 513657, 3667812; 513742, 3667812; 513742, 
3667841; 513714, 3667841; 513714, 3667869; 513742, 3667869; 513742, 
3667898; 513714, 3667898; 513714, 3667926; 513657, 3667926; 513657, 
3667983; 513628, 3667983; 513628, 3668011; 513600, 3668011; 513600, 
3668039; 513600, 3668096; 513714, 3668096; 513714, 3668125; 513742, 
3668125; 513742, 3668210; 513714, 3668210; 513714, 3668295; 513685, 
3668295; 513685, 3668323; 513628, 3668323; 513628, 3668380; 513600, 
3668380; 513600, 3668408; 513572, 3668408; 513572, 3668437; 513543, 
3668437; 513543, 3668465; 513458, 3668465; 513458, 3668493; 513430, 
3668493; 513430, 3668522; 513402, 3668522; 513402, 3668550; 513373, 
3668550; 513373, 3668578; 513345, 3668578; 513345, 3668607; 513316, 
3668607; 513316, 3668635; 513345, 3668635; 513345, 3668692; 513316, 
3668692; 513316, 3668720; 513231, 3668720; 513231, 3668749; 513203, 
3668749; 513203, 3668777; 513033, 3668777; 513033, 3668890; 513004, 
3668890; 513004, 3668919; 512976, 3668919; 512976, 3668947; 512948, 
3668947; 512948, 3669146; 512976, 3669146; 512976, 3669203; 512948, 
3669203; 512948, 3669373; 512976, 3669373; 512976, 3669429; 513004, 
3669429; 513004, 3669543; 512976, 3669543; 512976, 3669571; 512919, 
3669571; 512919, 3669543; 512891, 3669543; 512891, 3669600; 512863, 
3669600; 512863, 3669628; 512834, 3669628; 512834, 3669656; 512749, 
3669656; 512749, 3669685; 512664, 3669685; 512664, 3669713; 512692, 
3669713; 512692, 3669742; 512721, 3669742; 512721, 3669770; 512777, 
3669770; 512777, 3669798; 512834, 3669798; 512834, 3669883; 512863, 
3669883; 512863, 3669912; 512891, 3669912; 512891, 3669940; 512948, 
3669940; 512948, 3669997; 513033, 3669997; 513033, 3670110; 513061, 
3670110; 513061, 3670139; 513118, 3670139; 513118, 3670167; 513146, 
3670167; 513146, 3670252; 513175, 3670252; 513175, 3670309; 513146, 
3670309; 513146, 3670394; 513231, 3670394; 513231, 3670422; 513260, 
3670422; 513260, 3670479; 513316, 3670479; 513316, 3670508; 513345, 
3670508; 513345, 3670536; 513373, 3670536; 513373, 3670564; 513402, 
3670564; 513402, 3670593; 513430, 3670593; 513430, 3670621; 513458, 
3670621; 513458, 3670649; 513487, 3670649; 513487, 3670678; 513515, 
3670678; 513515, 3670706; 513572, 3670706; 513572, 3670734; 513600, 
3670734; 513600, 3670763; 513628, 3670763; 513628, 3670820; 513714, 
3670820; 513714, 3670848; 513742, 3670848; 513742, 3670876; 513799, 
3670876; 513799, 3670905; 513855, 3670905; 513855, 3670933; 513884, 
3670933; 513884, 3670961; 513941, 3670961; 513941, 3670990; 514026, 
3670990; 514026, 3671018; 514111, 3671018; 514111, 3670990; 514139, 
3670990; 514139, 3670876; 514167, 3670876; 514167, 3670763; 514139, 
3670763; 514139, 3670706; 514111, 3670706; 514111, 3670649; 514082, 
3670649; 514082, 3670593; 514054, 3670593; 514054, 3670479; 514026, 
3670479; 514026, 3670394; 513997, 3670394; 513997, 3670224; 513969, 
3670224; 513969, 3670110; 513997, 3670110; 513997, 3669969; 513969, 
3669969; 513969, 3669770; 513941, 3669770; 513941, 3669713; 513912, 
3669713; 513912, 3669685; 513941, 3669685; 513941, 3669628; 513941, 
3669600;
513912, 3669600; 513912, 3669486; 513941, 3669486; 513941, 3669401; 
513969, 3669401; 513969, 3669231; 513941, 3669231; 513941, 3669203; 
513969, 3669203; 513969, 3669061; 513997, 3669061; 513997, 3669032; 
513969, 3669032; 513969, 3668947; 513941, 3668947; 513941, 3668919; 
513969, 3668919; 513969, 3668890; 513997, 3668890; 513997, 3668862; 
514026, 3668862; 514026, 3668720; 514054, 3668720; 514054, 3668692; 
514111, 3668692; 514111, 3668664; 514139, 3668664; 514139, 3668635; 
514167, 3668635; 514167, 3668607; 514196, 3668607; 514196, 3668550; 
514224, 3668550; 514224, 3668522; 514253, 3668522; 514253, 3668493; 
514281, 3668493; 514281, 3668465; 514338, 3668465; 514338, 3668493; 
514508, 3668493; 514508, 3668522; 514678, 3668522; 514678, 3668437; 
514650, 3668437; 514650, 3668380; 514621, 3668380; 514621, 3668125; 
514593, 3668125; 514593, 3667983; 514394, 3667983; 514394, 3667954; 
514366, 3667954; 514366, 3667926; 514338, 3667926; 514338, 3667699; 
514366, 3667699; 514366, 3667671; 514394, 3667671; 514394, 3667642; 
514423, 3667642; 514423, 3667614; 514451, 3667614; 514451, 3667557; 
514480, 3667557; 514480, 3667387; 514451, 3667387; 514451, 3667302; 
514423, 3667302; 514423, 3667273; 514366, 3667273; 514366, 3667217; 
514338, 3667217; 514338, 3667188; 514281, 3667188; 514281, 3667160; 
514167, 3667160; 514167, 3667132; 514139, 3667132; 514139, 3667075; 
514167, 3667075; 514167, 3666905; 514196, 3666905; 514196, 3666791; 
514167, 3666791; 514167, 3666734; 514196, 3666734; 514196, 3666678; 
514111, 3666678; 514111, 3666649; 514082, 3666649; 514082, 3666621; 
514054, 3666621; 514054, 3666536; 513884, 3666536; 513884, 3666507; 
513855, 3666507; 513855, 3666451; 513827, 3666451; 513827, 3666337; 
513855, 3666337; 513855, 3666309; 513912, 3666309; 513912, 3666337; 
513969, 3666337; 513969, 3666366; 514054, 3666366; 514054, 3666252; 
514026, 3666252; 514026, 3666195; 514054, 3666195; 514054, 3666167; 
514082, 3666167; 514082, 3666110; 514054, 3666110; 514054, 3666082; 
514026, 3666082; 514026, 3666054; 513969, 3666054; 513969, 3666025; 
513912, 3666025; 513912, 3665997; 513884, 3665997; 513884, 3665940; 
513912, 3665940; 513912, 3665855; 513855, 3665855; 513855, 3665827; 
513827, 3665827; 513827, 3665742; 513855, 3665742; 513855, 3665713; 
513884, 3665713; 513884, 3665685; 513912, 3665685; 513912, 3665656; 
513941, 3665656; 513941, 3665515; 513997, 3665515; 513997, 3665486; 
514111, 3665486; 514111, 3665458; 514139, 3665458; 514139, 3665373; 
514111, 3665373; 514111, 3665316; 514082, 3665316; 514082, 3665089; 
514054, 3665089; 514054, 3664976; 514082, 3664976; 514082, 3664947; 
514054, 3664947; 514054, 3664862; 514082, 3664862; 514082, 3664805; 
514111, 3664805; 514111, 3664749; 514139, 3664749; 514139, 3664720; 
514167, 3664720; 514167, 3664692; 514196, 3664692; 514196, 3664607; 
514253, 3664607; 514253, 3664578; 514309, 3664578; 514309, 3664607; 
514423, 3664607; 514423, 3664578; 514480, 3664578; 514480, 3664522; 
514536, 3664522; 514536, 3664493; 514593, 3664493; 514593, 3664522; 
514650,

[[Page 439]]

3664522; 514650, 3664550; 514678, 3664550; 514678, 3664607; 514706, 
3664607; 514706, 3664635; 514735, 3664635; 514735, 3664664; 514792, 
3664664; 514792, 3664692; 514820, 3664692; 514820, 3664749; 514848, 
3664749; 514848, 3664777; 514877, 3664777; 514877, 3664805; 514905, 
3664805; 514905, 3664834; 514933, 3664834; 514933, 3664862; 514990, 
3664862; 514990, 3664890; 515019, 3664890; 515019, 3664919; 515047, 
3664919; 515047, 3664947; 515075, 3664947; 515075, 3665004; 515104, 
3665004; 515104, 3665117; 515189, 3665117; 515189, 3665146; 515217, 
3665146; 515217, 3665174; 515274, 3665174; 515274, 3665203; 515302, 
3665203; 515302, 3665231; 515387, 3665231; 515387, 3665203; 515444, 
3665203; 515444, 3665174; 515501, 3665174; 515501, 3665146; 515558, 
3665146; 515558, 3665117; 515586, 3665117; 515586, 3665089; 515643, 
3665089; 515643, 3665061; 515699, 3665061; 515699, 3665032; 515671, 
3665032; 515671, 3665004; 515529, 3665004;
 15529, 3664976; 515416, 3664976; 515416, 3664947; 515359, 3664947; 
515359, 3664919; 515302, 3664919; 515302, 3664890; 515246, 3664890; 
515246, 3664862; 515189, 3664862; 515189, 3664834; 515132, 3664834; 
515132, 3664805; 515104, 3664805; 515104, 3664777; 515075, 3664777; 
515075, 3664749; 515047, 3664749; 515047, 3664720; 515019, 3664720; 
515019, 3664692; 514962, 3664692; 514962, 3664664; 514933, 3664664; 
514933, 3664578; 514877, 3664578; 514877, 3664550; 514848, 3664550; 
514848, 3664522; 514820, 3664522; 514820, 3664493; 514792, 3664493; 
514792, 3664437; 514763, 3664437; 514763, 3664408; 514706, 3664408; 
514706, 3664380; 514678, 3664380; 514678, 3664351; 514650, 3664351; 
514650, 3664323; 514621, 3664323; 514621, 3664295; 514593, 3664295; 
514593, 3664266; 514536, 3664266; 514536, 3664238; 514423, 3664238; 
514423, 3664266; 514366, 3664266; 514366, 3664295; 514224, 3664295; 
514224, 3664323; 514054, 3664323; 514054, 3664266; 514026, 3664266; 
514026, 3664238; 513997, 3664238; 513997, 3664210; 513941, 3664210; 
513941, 3664238; 513912, 3664238; 513912, 3664210; 513799, 3664210; 
513799, 3664181; 513770, 3664181; 513770, 3664039; 513742, 3664039; 
513742, 3663869; 513714, 3663869; 513714, 3663699; 513685, 3663699; 
513685, 3663614; 513714, 3663614; 513714, 3663529; 513742, 3663529; 
513742, 3663472; 513714, 3663472; 513714, 3663415; 513685, 3663415; 
513685, 3663359; 513657, 3663359; 513657, 3663330; 513685, 3663330; 
513685, 3663273; 513657, 3663273; 513657, 3663245; 513714, 3663245; 
513714, 3663217; 513742, 3663217; 513855, 3663217; 513855, 3663245; 
513884, 3663245; 513884, 3663217; 513912, 3663217; 513912, 3663188; 
513969, 3663188; 513969, 3663132; 513941, 3663132; 513941, 3663103; 
513912, 3663103; 513912, 3663075; 513855, 3663075; 513855, 3663046; 
513827, 3663046; 513827, 3663018; 513770, 3663018; 513770, 3662990; 
513714, 3662990; 513714, 3662961; 513685, 3662961; 513685, 3662933; 
513657, 3662933; 513657, 3662905; 513600, 3662905; 513600, 3662876; 
513572, 3662876; 513572, 3662848; 513543, 3662848; 513543, 3662820; 
513515, 3662820; 513515, 3662791; 513458, 3662791; 513458, 3662706; 
513316, 3662706; 513316, 3662649; 513288, 3662649; 513288, 3662621; 
513260, 3662621; 513260, 3662593; 513231, 3662593; 513231, 3662649; 
513203, 3662649; 513203, 3662734; 513175, 3662734; 513175, 3662791; 
513146, 3662791; 513146, 3662848; 513118, 3662848; 513118, 3662876; 
513089, 3662876; 513089, 3662905; 513033, 3662905; 513033, 3662933; 
513004, 3662933; 513004, 3662961; 512976, 3662961; 512976, 3662990; 
512919, 3662990; 512919, 3663018; 512863, 3663018; 512863, 3663046; 
512806, 3663046; 512806, 3663075; 512721, 3663075; 512721, 3663018; 
512579, 3663018; 512579, 3663046; 512409, 3663046; 512409, 3663018; 
512323, 3663018; 512323, 3662933; 512295, 3662933; 512295, 3662820; 
512267, 3662820; 512267, 3662791; 512238, 3662791; 512238, 3662763; 
512182, 3662763; 512182, 3662649; 512097, 3662649; 512097, 3662621; 
512068, 3662621; 512068, 3662593; 512040, 3662593; 512040, 3662564; 
511983, 3662564; 511983, 3662536; 511926, 3662536; 511926, 3662564; 
511813, 3662564; 511813, 3662536; 511756, 3662536; 511756, 3662507; 
511699, 3662507; 511699, 3662479; 511671, 3662479; 511671, 3662451; 
511643, 3662451; 511643, 3662422; 511614, 3662422; 511614, 3662394; 
511586, 3662394; 511586, 3662366; 511501, 3662366; 511501, 3662337; 
511444, 3662337; 511444, 3662281; 511416, 3662281; 511416, 3662224; 
511387, 3662224; 511387, 3662195; 511359, 3662195; 511359, 3662139; 
511331, 3662139; 511331, 3662110; 511302, 3662110; 511302, 3662082; 
511245, 3662082; 511245, 3662054; 511217, 3662054; 511217, 3662025; 
511189, 3662025; 511189, 3661997; 511160, 3661997; 511160, 3661968; 
511132, 3661968; 511132, 3661912; 511104, 3661912; 511104, 3661855; 
511075, 3661855; 511075, 3661827; 511047, 3661827; 511047, 3661770; 
510990, 3661770; 510990, 3661741; 510962, 3661741; 510962, 3661713; 
510848, 3661713; 510848, 3661685; 510792, 3661685; 510792, 3661656; 
510735, 3661656; 510735, 3661628; 510706, 3661628; 510706, 3661656; 
510536, 3661656; 510536, 3661628; 510480, 3661628; 510480, 3661600; 
510451, 3661600; 510451, 3661571; 510394, 3661571; 510394, 3661543; 
510253, 3661543; 510253, 3661515; 510111, 3661515; 510111, 3661486; 
510082, 3661486; 510082, 3661429; 510111, 3661429; 510111, 3661373; 
510139, 3661373; 510139, 3661316; 510111, 3661316; 510111, 3661259; 
510082, 3661259; 510082, 3661231; 510054, 3661231; 510054, 3661202; 
509969, 3661202; 509969, 3661174; 509855, 3661174; 509855, 3661202; 
509799, 3661202; 509799, 3661231; 509770, 3661231; 509770, 3661259; 
509742, 3661259; 509742, 3661288; 509657, 3661288; 509657, 3661282; 
509657, 3661259; 509657, 3661202; 509685, 3661202; 509685, 3661117; 
509657, 3661117; 509657, 3661032; 509628, 3661032; 509628, 3660947; 
509401, 3660947; 509401, 3660976; 509260, 3660976; 509260, 3661004; 
509175, 3661004; 509175, 3661032; 509118, 3661032; 509118, 3661004; 
509089, 3661004; 509089, 3661032; 509061, 3661032; 509061, 3661089; 
509033, 3661089; 509033, 3661117; 509004, 3661117; 509004, 3661089; 
508919, 3661089; 508919, 3661117; 508834, 3661117; 508834, 3661146; 
508806, 3661146; 508806, 3661174; 508749, 3661174; 508749, 3661146; 
508692, 3661146; 508692, 3661117; 508636, 3661117; 508636, 3661061; 
508607, 3661061; 508607, 3661032; 508550, 3661032; 508550, 3661004; 
508437, 3661004; 508437, 3660976; 508409, 3660976; 508409, 3660947; 
508380, 3660947; 508380, 3660890; 508352, 3660890; 508352, 3660862; 
508323, 3660862; 508323, 3660805; 508295, 3660805; 508295, 3660777; 
508097, 3660777; 508097, 3660805; 508011, 3660805; 508011, 3660834; 
507926, 3660834; 507926, 3660805; 507841, 3660805; 507841, 3660777; 
507813, 3660777; 507813, 3660749; 507784, 3660749; 507784, 3660720; 
507756, 3660720; 507756, 3660692; 507728, 3660692; 507728, 3660663; 
507699, 3660663; 507699, 3660635; 507671, 3660635; 507671, 3660607; 
507643,

[[Page 440]]

3660607; 507643, 3660578; 507586, 3660578; 507586, 3660550; 507472, 
3660550; 507472, 3660578; 507444, 3660578; 507444, 3660607; 507416, 
3660607; 507416, 3660635; 507387, 3660635; 507387, 3660692; 507359, 
3660692; 507359, 3660749; 507331, 3660749; 507331, 3660777; 507359, 
3660777; 507359, 3660834; 507387, 3660834; 507387, 3660919; 507359, 
3660919; 507359, 3660947; 507331, 3660947; 507331, 3660976; 507302, 
3660976; 507302, 3660947; 507274, 3660947; 507274, 3660919; 507245, 
3660919; 507245, 3660890; 507132, 3660890; 507132, 3660862; 507104, 
3660862; 507104, 3660834; 507075, 3660834; 507075, 3660805; 506905, 
3660805; 506905, 3660834; 506848, 3660834; 506848, 3660862; 506763, 
3660862; 506763, 3660890; 506678, 3660890; 506678, 3660919; 506508, 
3660919; 506508, 3660805; 506536, 3660805; 506536, 3660720; 506479, 
3660720; 506479, 3660749; 506394, 3660749; 506394, 3660720; 506281, 
3660720; 506281, 3660692; 506139, 3660692; 506139, 3660720; 506082, 
3660720; 506082, 3660749; 506026, 3660749; 506026, 3660777; 505969, 
3660777; 505969, 3660805; 505940, 3660805; 505940, 3660834; 505884, 
3660834; 505884, 3660862; 505855, 3660862; 505855, 3660919; 505827, 
3660919; 505827, 3660947; 505799, 3660947; 505799, 3661117; 505770, 
3661117; 505770, 3661231; 505742, 3661231; 505742, 3661259; 505685, 
3661259; 505685, 3661288; 505628, 3661288; 505628, 3661316; 505543, 
3661316; 505543, 3661344; 505373, 3661344; 505373, 3661316; 505316, 
3661316; 505316, 3661288; 505260, 3661288; 505260, 3661259; 505203, 
3661259; 505203, 3661231; 505175, 3661231; 505175, 3661202; 505146, 
3661202; 505146, 3661174; 505118, 3661174; 505118, 3661032; 505102, 
3661032; 505102, 3661034; 505068, 3661131; 505029, 3661130; 505012, 
3661089; 504999, 3661028; 504518, 3661017; 504518, 3660959; 504528, 
3660857; 504597, 3660855; 504605, 3660720; 504579, 3660720; 504579, 
3660692; 504494, 3660692; 504494, 3660663; 504465, 3660663; 504465, 
3660635; 504437, 3660635; 504437, 3660607; 504409, 3660607;
504409, 3660550; 504380, 3660550; 504380, 3660522; 504352, 3660522; 
504352, 3660493; 504323, 3660493; 504323, 3660465; 504238, 3660465; 
504238, 3660493; 504210, 3660493; 504210, 3660522; 504125, 3660522; 
504125, 3660493; 504096, 3660493; 504096, 3660465; 504011, 3660465; 
504011, 3660493; 503898, 3660493; 503898, 3660522; 503756, 3660522; 
503756, 3660493; 503699, 3660493; 503699, 3660465; 503586, 3660465; 
503586, 3660437; 503529, 3660437; 503529, 3660408; 503416, 3660408; 
503416, 3660380; 503387, 3660380; 503387, 3660351; 503331, 3660351; 
503331, 3660323; 503274, 3660323; 503274, 3660295; 503189, 3660295; 
503189, 3660266; 503160, 3660266; 503160, 3660295; 503132, 3660295; 
503132, 3660266; 503075, 3660266; 503075, 3660295; 503018, 3660295; 
503018, 3660323; 502962, 3660323; 502962, 3660351; 502933, 3660351; 
502933, 3660380; 502848, 3660380; 502848, 3660351; 502820, 3660351; 
502820, 3660210; 502848, 3660210; 502848, 3660124; 502763, 3660124; 
502763, 3660096; 502735, 3660096; 502735, 3660068; 502706, 3660068; 
502706, 3660039; 502678, 3660039; 502678, 3660011; 502565, 3660011; 
502565, 3659983; 502508, 3659983; 502508, 3659926; 502479, 3659926; 
502479, 3659784; 502451, 3659784; 502451, 3659727; 502479, 3659727; 
502479, 3659642; 502508, 3659642; 502508, 3659585; 502536, 3659585; 
502536, 3659444; 502565, 3659444; 502565, 3659415; 502593, 3659415; 
502593, 3659359; 502621, 3659359; 502621, 3659217; 502565, 3659217; 
502565, 3659132; 502536, 3659132; 502536, 3659075; 502565, 3659075; 
502565, 3658933; 502593, 3658933; 502593, 3658791; 502650, 3658791; 
502650, 3658763; 502706, 3658763; 502706, 3658791; 502877, 3658791; 
502877, 3658763; 502905, 3658763; 502905, 3658734; 502933, 3658734; 
502933, 3658706; 502990, 3658706; 502990, 3658678; 503018, 3658678; 
503018, 3658706; 503160, 3658706; 503160, 3658678; 503245, 3658678; 
503245, 3658593; 503274, 3658593; 503274, 3658564; 503331, 3658564; 
503331, 3658536; 503359, 3658536; 503359, 3658507; 503387, 3658507; 
503387, 3658479; 503416, 3658479; 503416, 3658451; 503444, 3658451; 
503444, 3658422; 503472, 3658422; 503472, 3658394; 503501, 3658394; 
503501, 3658337; 503529, 3658337; 503529, 3658280; 503557, 3658280; 
503557, 3658309; 503586, 3658309; 503586, 3658337; 503614, 3658337; 
503614, 3658366; 503671, 3658366; 503671, 3658394; 503756, 3658394; 
503756, 3658422; 503784, 3658422; 503784, 3658394; 503898, 3658394; 
503898, 3658422; 503926, 3658422; 503926, 3658451; 504068, 3658451; 
504068, 3658479; 504125, 3658479; 504125, 3658507; 504210, 3658507; 
504210, 3658479; 504380, 3658479; 504380, 3658451; 504437, 3658451; 
504437, 3658422; 504494, 3658422; 504494, 3658366; 504522, 3658366; 
504522, 3658337; 504579, 3658337; 504579, 3658366; 504636, 3658366; 
504636, 3658337; 504664, 3658337; 504664, 3658309; 504692, 3658309; 
504692, 3658195; 504664, 3658195; 504664, 3658167; 504692, 3658167; 
504692, 3658139; 504749, 3658139; 504749, 3658110; 504834, 3658110; 
504834, 3658082; 504891, 3658082; 504891, 3658025; 504919, 3658025; 
504919, 3657912; 504976, 3657912; 504976, 3657713; 505004, 3657713; 
505004, 3657656; 505033, 3657656; 505033, 3657628; 505061, 3657628; 
505061, 3657600; 505146, 3657600; 505146, 3657628; 505175, 3657628; 
505175, 3657656; 505203, 3657656; 505203, 3657685; 505231, 3657685; 
505231, 3657827; 505260, 3657827; 505260, 3657912; 505316, 3657912; 
505316, 3657940; 505373, 3657940; 505373, 3657798; 505401, 3657798; 
505401, 3657770; 505430, 3657770; 505430, 3657713; 505458, 3657713; 
505458, 3657600; 505487, 3657600; 505487, 3657515; 505458, 3657515; 
505458, 3657401; 505487, 3657401; 505487, 3657373; 505515, 3657373; 
505515, 3657344; 505657, 3657344; 505657, 3657373; 505742, 3657373; 
505742, 3657316; 505827, 3657316; 505827, 3657288; 505884, 3657288; 
505884, 3657316; 505969, 3657316; 505969, 3657288; 506026, 3657288; 
506026, 3657231; 506054, 3657231; 506054, 3657202; 506082, 3657202; 
506082, 3657174; 506111, 3657174;
506111, 3657146; 506139, 3657146; 506139, 3657117; 506167, 3657117; 
506167, 3657089; 506451, 3657089; 506451, 3657061; 506479, 3657061; 
506479, 3657032; 506508, 3657032; 506508, 3657004; 506536, 3657004; 
506536, 3656947; 506593, 3656947; 506593, 3656862; 506565, 3656862; 
506565, 3656607; 506536, 3656607; 506536, 3656465; 506565, 3656465; 
506565, 3656436; 506621, 3656436; 506621, 3656408; 506650, 3656408; 
506650, 3656380; 506706, 3656380; 506706, 3656351; 506735, 3656351; 
506735, 3656323; 506763, 3656323; 506763, 3656295; 506792, 3656295; 
506792, 3656266; 506820, 3656266; 506820, 3656238; 506877, 3656238; 
506877, 3656210; 506905, 3656210; 506905, 3656181; 506933, 3656181; 
506933, 3656153; 506990, 3656153; 506990, 3656124; 507018, 3656124; 
507018, 3656096; 507047, 3656096; 507047, 3656068; 507075, 3656068; 
507075, 3656039; 507104, 3656039; 507104, 3656011; 507132, 3656011; 
507132, 3655983; 507189,

[[Page 441]]

3655983; 507189, 3656011; 507699, 3656011; 507699, 3656039; 507784, 
3656039; 507784, 3656068; 507841, 3656068; 507841, 3656096; 507898, 
3656096; 507898, 3656124; 508011, 3656124; 508011, 3656153; 508153, 
3656153; 508153, 3656181; 508380, 3656181; 508380, 3656210; 508494, 
3656210; 508494, 3656238; 508579, 3656238; 508579, 3656266; 508749, 
3656266; 508749, 3656295; 509458, 3656295; 509458, 3656266; 509572, 
3656266; 509572, 3656238; 509589, 3656238; 509589, 3656234; 509593, 
3655775; 510336, 3655774; 510338, 3655774; 510338, 3655756; 510366, 
3655756; 510366, 3655727; 510394, 3655727; 510394, 3655671; 510423, 
3655671; 510423, 3655642; 510451, 3655642; 510451, 3655614; 510480, 
3655614; 510480, 3655557; 510508, 3655557; 510508, 3655500; 510536, 
3655500; 510536, 3655452; 510494, 3655449; 510368, 3655428; 510281, 
3655417; 510208, 3655382; 510156, 3655340; 510121, 3655299; 510086, 
3655243; 510013, 3655177; 509901, 3655103; 509786, 3655068; 509716, 
3655030; 509632, 3654974; 509549, 3654939; 509483, 3654887; 509210, 
3654688; 509235, 3653886; 509305, 3653813; 509367, 3653778; 509448, 
3653785; 509514, 3653813; 509580, 3653806; 509657, 3653781; 509776, 
3653767; 509929, 3653774; 510041, 3653760; 510048, 3653571; 510026, 
3653571; 510026, 3653543; 509969, 3653543; 509969, 3653514; 509941, 
3653514; 509941, 3653486; 509884, 3653486; 509884, 3653458; 509799, 
3653458; 509799, 3653429; 509742, 3653429; 509742, 3653401; 509685, 
3653401; 509685, 3653373; 509572, 3653373; 509572, 3653344; 509458, 
3653344; 509458, 3653316; 509288, 3653316; 509288, 3653288; 509203, 
3653288; 509203, 3653259; 509146, 3653259; 509146, 3653231; 509061, 
3653231; 509061, 3653202; 509033, 3653202; 509033, 3653174; 509004, 
3653174; 509004, 3653146; 508976, 3653146; 508976, 3653117; 508919, 
3653117; 508919, 3653174; 508948, 3653174; 508948, 3653231; 508976, 
3653231; 508976, 3653259; 509004, 3653259; 509004, 3653401; 508976, 
3653401; 508976, 3653429; 508891, 3653429; 508891, 3653401; 508834, 
3653401; 508834, 3653373; 508607, 3653373; 508607, 3653316; 508579, 
3653316; 508579, 3653288; 508465, 3653288; 508465, 3653259; 508437, 
3653259; 508437, 3653146; 508465, 3653146; 508465, 3653117; 508494, 
3653117; 508494, 3653089; 508550, 3653089; 508550, 3653061; 508607, 
3653061; 508607, 3653032; 508636, 3653032; 508636, 3653004; 508664, 
3653004; 508664, 3652975; 508636, 3652975; 508636, 3652947; 508579, 
3652947; 508579, 3652919; 508494, 3652919; 508494, 3652890; 508409, 
3652890; 508409, 3652862; 508323, 3652862; 508323, 3652834; 508210, 
3652834; 508210, 3652947; 508182, 3652947; 508182, 3652975; 508153, 
3652975; 508153, 3653004; 508125, 3653004; 508125, 3653032; 508068, 
3653032; 508068, 3653061; 507983, 3653061; 507983, 3653089; 507756, 
3653089; 507756, 3653061; 507699, 3653061; 507699, 3653032; 507614, 
3653032; 507614, 3653004; 507558, 3653004; 507558, 3653061; 507586, 
3653061; 507586, 3653089; 507529, 3653089; 507529, 3653061; 507501, 
3653061; 507501, 3653032; 507444, 3653032; 507444, 3653089; 507416, 
3653089;
    507416, 3653117; 507387, 3653117; 507387, 3653174; 507331, 3653174; 
507331, 3653202; 507274, 3653202; 507274, 3653231; 507189, 3653231; 
507189, 3653259; 507160, 3653259; 507160, 3653288; 507104, 3653288; 
507104, 3653344; 507075, 3653344; 507075, 3653373; 506933, 3653373; 
506933, 3653344; 506848, 3653344; 506848, 3653316; 506792, 3653316; 
506792, 3653486; 506763, 3653486; 506763, 3653514; 506593, 3653514; 
506593, 3653458; 506565, 3653458; 506565, 3653316; 506536, 3653316; 
506536, 3653288; 506451, 3653288; 506451, 3653344; 506423, 3653344; 
506423, 3653373; 506366, 3653373; 506366, 3653429; 506338, 3653429; 
506338, 3653486; 506309, 3653486; 506309, 3653514; 506253, 3653514; 
506253, 3653543; 506196, 3653543; 506196, 3653628; 506139, 3653628; 
506139, 3653656; 506111, 3653656; 506111, 3653628; 506082, 3653628; 
506082, 3653600; 506054, 3653600; 506054, 3653514; 506026, 3653514; 
506026, 3653543; 505969, 3653543; 505969, 3653571; 505940, 3653571; 
505940, 3653600; 505912, 3653600; 505912, 3653628; 505884, 3653628; 
505884, 3653656; 505855, 3653656; 505855, 3653685; 505770, 3653685; 
505770, 3653770; 505742, 3653770; 505742, 3653827; 505714, 3653827; 
505714, 3653855; 505600, 3653855; 505600, 3653883; 505458, 3653883; 
505458, 3654054; 505401, 3654054; 505401, 3654082; 505146, 3654082; 
505146, 3654054; 505118, 3654054; 505118, 3654082; 505061, 3654082; 
505061, 3654054; 505033, 3654054; 505033, 3654082; 504919, 3654082; 
504919, 3654110; 504891, 3654110; 504891, 3654139; 504862, 3654139; 
504862, 3654195; 504834, 3654195; 504834, 3654224; 504806, 3654224; 
504806, 3654309; 504862, 3654309; 504862, 3654366; 504891, 3654366; 
504891, 3654479; 504862, 3654479; 504862, 3654507; 504834, 3654507; 
504834, 3654536; 504806, 3654536; 504806, 3654564; 504777, 3654564; 
504777, 3654593; 504749, 3654593; 504749, 3654564; 504664, 3654564; 
504664, 3654593; 504607, 3654593; 504607, 3654621; 504579, 3654621; 
504579, 3654593; 504494, 3654593; 504494, 3654564; 504465, 3654564; 
504465, 3654507; 504352, 3654507; 504352, 3654479; 504295, 3654479; 
504295, 3654451; 504267, 3654451; 504267, 3654422; 504238, 3654422; 
504238, 3654564; 504267, 3654564; 504267, 3654678; 504210, 3654678; 
504210, 3654706; 504125, 3654706; 504125, 3654734; 504068, 3654734; 
504068, 3654791; 504096, 3654791; 504096, 3654819; 504125, 3654819; 
504125, 3654848; 504153, 3654848; 504153, 3654876; 504125, 3654876; 
504125, 3654933; 504096, 3654933; 504096, 3655018; 504210, 3655018; 
504210, 3655075; 504238, 3655075; 504238, 3655132; 504295, 3655132; 
504295, 3655160; 504323, 3655160; 504323, 3655188; 504437, 3655188; 
504437, 3655217; 504465, 3655217; 504465, 3655273; 504494, 3655273; 
504494, 3655302; 504409, 3655302; 504409, 3655330; 504380, 3655330; 
504380, 3655387; 504295, 3655387; 504295, 3655358; 504267, 3655358; 
504267, 3655330; 504210, 3655330; 504210, 3655302; 504096, 3655302; 
504096, 3655330; 503955, 3655330; 503955, 3655358; 503926, 3655358; 
503926, 3655387; 503898, 3655387; 503898, 3655415; 503955, 3655415; 
503955, 3655444; 504011, 3655444; 504011, 3655472; 504040, 3655472; 
504040, 3655529; 504068, 3655529; 504068, 3655585; 504125, 3655585; 
504125, 3655557; 504153, 3655557; 504153, 3655585; 504238, 3655585; 
504238, 3655614; 504295, 3655614; 504295, 3655642; 504323, 3655642; 
504323, 3655671; 504352, 3655671; 504352, 3655784; 504494, 3655784; 
504494, 3655812; 504380, 3655812; 504380, 3655841; 504352, 3655841; 
504352, 3655897; 504380, 3655897; 504380, 3655954; 504409, 3655954; 
504409, 3655983; 504437, 3655983; 504437, 3656068; 504409, 3656068; 
504409, 3656096; 504352, 3656096; 504352, 3656124; 504323, 3656124; 
504323, 3656266; 504295, 3656266; 504295, 3656295; 504267, 3656295; 
504267, 3656323; 504238, 3656323; 504238, 3656380; 504210, 3656380; 
504210, 3656436; 504182, 3656436; 504182, 3656493; 504437, 3656493; 
504437,

[[Page 442]]

3656578; 504465, 3656578; 504465, 3656692; 504409, 3656692; 504409, 
3656720; 504352, 3656720; 504352, 3656749; 504295, 3656749; 504295, 
3656777; 504267, 3656777; 504267, 3656805; 504238, 3656805; 504238, 
3656834; 504210, 3656834; 504210, 3656862; 504182, 3656862; 504182, 
3656890; 504153, 3656890; 504153, 3656919; 504182, 3656919; 504182, 
3657004; 504210, 3657004; 504210, 3657202; 504267, 3657202; 504267, 
3657231; 504295, 3657231; 504295, 3657202; 504323, 3657202; 504323, 
3657117; 504352, 3657117; 504352, 3657061; 504380, 3657061; 504380, 
3657032; 504494, 3657032; 504494, 3657061; 504522, 3657061; 504522, 
3657089; 504579, 3657089; 504579, 3657117; 504607, 3657117; 504607, 
3657146; 504664, 3657146; 504664, 3657117; 504721, 3657117; 504721, 
3657146; 504749, 3657146; 504749, 3657174; 504806, 3657174; 504806, 
3657231; 504777, 3657231; 504777, 3657288; 504749, 3657288; 504749, 
3657316; 504777, 3657316; 504777, 3657401; 504749, 3657401; 504749, 
3657429; 504721, 3657429; 504721, 3657486; 504692, 3657486; 504692, 
3657515; 504636, 3657515; 504636, 3657543; 504494, 3657543; 504494, 
3657515; 504437, 3657515; 504437, 3657543; 504409, 3657543; 504409, 
3657571; 504380, 3657571; 504380, 3657600; 504352, 3657600; 504352, 
3657656; 504295, 3657656; 504295, 3657685; 504267, 3657685; 504267, 
3657741; 504295, 3657741; 504295, 3657798; 504323, 3657798; 504323, 
3657855; 504352, 3657855; 504352, 3657968; 504380, 3657968; 504380, 
3658054; 504409, 3658054; 504409, 3658195; 504380, 3658195; 504380, 
3658309; 504352, 3658309; 504352, 3658337; 504011, 3658337; 504011, 
3658309; 503983, 3658309; 503983, 3658280; 503955, 3658280; 503955, 
3658252; 503926, 3658252; 503926, 3658224; 503728, 3658224; 503728, 
3658195; 503472, 3658195; 503472, 3658224; 503444, 3658224; 503444, 
3658252; 503416, 3658252; 503416, 3658309; 503387, 3658309; 503387, 
3658337; 503359, 3658337; 503359, 3658366; 503331, 3658366; 503331, 
3658394; 503302, 3658394; 503302, 3658422; 503274, 3658422; 503274, 
3658451; 503217, 3658451; 503217, 3658479; 503189, 3658479; 503189, 
3658507; 503160, 3658507; 503160, 3658536; 503075, 3658536; 503075, 
3658564; 502933, 3658564; 502933, 3658593; 502848, 3658593; 502848, 
3658621; 502820, 3658621; 502820, 3658649; 502792, 3658649; 502792, 
3658678; 502735, 3658678; 502735, 3658649; 502565, 3658649; 502565, 
3658621; 502536, 3658621; 502536, 3658649; 502508, 3658649; 502508, 
3658678; 502479, 3658678; 502479, 3658706; 502451, 3658706; 502451, 
3658734; 502423, 3658734; 502423, 3658791; 502394, 3658791; 502394, 
3658819; 502338, 3658819; 502338, 3658791; 502167, 3658791; 502167, 
3658933; 502196, 3658933; 502196, 3659075; 502139, 3659075; 502139, 
3659132; 502111, 3659132; 502111, 3659217; 502082, 3659217; 502082, 
3659245; 502054, 3659245; 502054, 3659273; 501940, 3659273; 501940, 
3659330; 501912, 3659330; 501912, 3659359; 501884, 3659359; 501884, 
3659387; 501855, 3659387; 501855, 3659388; 501855, 3659415; 501827, 
3659415; 501827, 3659444; 501799, 3659444; 501799, 3659472; 501770, 
3659472; 501770, 3659500; 501742, 3659500; 501742, 3659529; 501685, 
3659529; 501685, 3659557; 501657, 3659557; 501657, 3659585; 501572, 
3659585; 501572, 3659614; 501515, 3659614; 501515, 3659642; 501458, 
3659642; 501458, 3659671; 501401, 3659671; 501401, 3659699; 501345, 
3659699; 501345, 3659727; 501316, 3659727; 501316, 3659756; 501260, 
3659756; 501260, 3659784; 501089, 3659784; 501089, 3659756; 500749, 
3659756; 500749, 3659727; 500635, 3659727; 500635, 3659699; 500522, 
3659699; 500522, 3659671; 500437, 3659671; 500437, 3659642; 500238, 
3659642; 500238, 3659614; 500040, 3659614; 500040, 3659642; 499983, 
3659642; 499983, 3659614; 499870, 3659614; 499870, 3659585; 499841, 
3659585; 499841, 3659614; 499813, 3659614; 499813, 3659585; 499529, 
3659585; 499529, 3659557; 499472, 3659557; 499472, 3659585; 499444, 
3659585; 499444, 3659614; 499387, 3659614; 499387, 3659642; 499359, 
3659642; 499359, 3659671; 499274, 3659671; 499274, 3659699; 499217, 
3659699; 499217, 3659727; 499132, 3659727; 499132, 3659756;
 99104, 3659756; 499104, 3659784; 499047, 3659784; 499047, 3659812; 
499018, 3659812; 499018, 3659841; 498962, 3659841; 498962, 3659869; 
498877, 3659869; 498877, 3659898; 498848, 3659898; 498848, 3659926; 
498820, 3659926; 498820, 3659954; 498791, 3659954; 498791, 3660011; 
498763, 3660011; 498763, 3660068; 498735, 3660068; 498735, 3660124; 
498706, 3660124; 498706, 3660153; 498678, 3660153; 498678, 3660210; 
498650, 3660210; 498650, 3660238; 498621, 3660238; 498621, 3660266; 
498565, 3660266; 498565, 3660323; 498536, 3660323; 498536, 3660380; 
498508, 3660380; 498508, 3660408; 498451, 3660408; 498451, 3660437; 
498423, 3660437; 498423, 3660465; 498366, 3660465; 498366, 3660493; 
498338, 3660493; 498338, 3660522; 498224, 3660522; 498224, 3660493; 
498196, 3660493; 498196, 3660380; 498167, 3660380; 498167, 3660351; 
498111, 3660351; 498111, 3660323; 498054, 3660323; 498054, 3660295; 
498026, 3660295; 498026, 3660210; 497997, 3660210; 497997, 3660153; 
497940, 3660153; 497940, 3660124; 497884, 3660124; 497884, 3660096; 
497827, 3660096; 497827, 3660068; 497770, 3660068; 497770, 3660039; 
497685, 3660039; 497685, 3660011; 497572, 3660011; 497572, 3659983; 
497515, 3659983; 497515, 3659954; 497487, 3659954; 497487, 3659898; 
497458, 3659898; 497458, 3659841; 497430, 3659841; 497430, 3659784; 
497401, 3659784; 497401, 3659557; 497430, 3659557; 497430, 3659529; 
497458, 3659529; 497458, 3659472; 497430, 3659472; 497430, 3659330; 
497458, 3659330; 497458, 3659245; 497430, 3659245; 497430, 3659217; 
497373, 3659217; 497373, 3659188; 497288, 3659188; 497288, 3659160; 
497231, 3659160; 497231, 3659132; 497203, 3659132; 497203, 3659075; 
497174, 3659075; 497174, 3659018; 497146, 3659018; 497146, 3658933; 
497174, 3658933; 497174, 3658678; 497203, 3658678; 497203, 3658593; 
497231, 3658593; 497231, 3658479; 497203, 3658479; 497203, 3658422; 
497231, 3658422; 497231, 3658366; 497288, 3658366; 497288, 3658309; 
497316, 3658309; 497316, 3658252; 497430, 3658252; 497430, 3658280; 
497515, 3658280; 497515, 3658252; 497600, 3658252; 497600, 3658224; 
497657, 3658224; 497657, 3658195; 497685, 3658195; 497685, 3658167; 
497713, 3658167; 497713, 3658139; 497742, 3658139; 497742, 3658110; 
497747, 3658110; 497770, 3658110; 497827, 3658110; 497827, 3658139; 
497940, 3658139; 497940, 3658110; 497969, 3658110; 497969, 3658025; 
497997, 3658025; 497997, 3657997; 497969, 3657997; 497969, 3657968; 
497912, 3657968; 497912, 3657912; 497855, 3657912; 497855, 3657883; 
497838, 3657883; 497838, 3657921; 497822, 3657905; 497790, 3657927; 
497719, 3657924; 497707, 3657911; 497713, 3657882; 497722, 3657829; 
497739, 3657803; 497742, 3657799; 497714, 3657779; 497696, 3657777; 
497650, 3657771; 497602, 3657734; 497573, 3657685; 497572, 3657685; 
497572, 3657683; 497569, 3657678; 497571, 3657661; 497554, 3657666; 
497538,

[[Page 443]]

3657656; 497525, 3657649; 497540, 3657637; 497541, 3657637; 497516, 
3657626; 497493, 3657652; 497440, 3657615; 497421, 3657592; 497414, 
3657583; 497381, 3657575; 497371, 3657575; 497342, 3657575; 497235, 
3657445; 497235, 3657429; 497231, 3657429; 497231, 3657411; 497209, 
3657388; 497191, 3657370; 497192, 3657335; 497203, 3657323; 497203, 
3657316; 497174, 3657316; 497174, 3657274; 497174, 3657273; 497174, 
3657273; 497174, 3657242; 497174, 3657242; 497174, 3657242; 497174, 
3657089; 497146, 3657089; 497146, 3657068; 497128, 3657061; 497089, 
3657061; 497089, 3657089; 497062, 3657089; 497061, 3657090; 497061, 
3657117; 497049, 3657117; 497046, 3657125; 497037, 3657129; 497038, 
3657150; 497033, 3657162; 497033, 3657174; 497028, 3657174; 497017, 
3657199; 496997, 3657229; 496964, 3657236; 496958, 3657235; 496924, 
3657231; 496897, 3657231; 496895, 3657235; 496874, 3657266; 496855, 
3657278; 496824, 3657273; 496810, 3657266; 496796, 3657259; 496777, 
3657259; 496777, 3657247; 496771, 3657243; 496756, 3657231; 496749, 
3657231; 496721, 3657231; 496721, 3657214; 496711, 3657212; 496695, 
3657202; 496692, 3657202;
496692, 3657201; 496690, 3657199; 496680, 3657174; 496664, 3657174; 
496664, 3657061; 496692, 3657061; 496692, 3657032; 496664, 3657032; 
496664, 3657004; 496635, 3657004; 496635, 3656976; 496607, 3656976; 
496607, 3656933; 496597, 3656922; 496596, 3656919; 496579, 3656919; 
496579, 3656890; 496550, 3656890; 496550, 3656840; 496537, 3656840; 
496476, 3656837; 496470, 3656834; 496437, 3656834; 496437, 3656806; 
496436, 3656805; 496408, 3656805; 496408, 3656465; 496380, 3656465; 
496380, 3656351; 496352, 3656351; 496352, 3656266; 496323, 3656266; 
496323, 3656238; 496295, 3656238; 496295, 3656181; 496267, 3656181; 
496267, 3656167; 496168, 3656167; 496167, 3656167; 496163, 3656158; 
496146, 3656123; 496139, 3656126; 496092, 3656081; 496080, 3656067; 
496072, 3656021; 496067, 3656011; 495898, 3656011; 495898, 3656068; 
495869, 3656068; 495869, 3656124; 495841, 3656124; 495841, 3656181; 
495813, 3656181; 495813, 3656295; 495841, 3656295; 495841, 3656323; 
495869, 3656323; 495869, 3656295; 495926, 3656295; 495926, 3656323; 
495955, 3656323; 495955, 3656351; 495983, 3656351; 495983, 3656436; 
495955, 3656436; 495955, 3656465; 495955, 3656550; 495983, 3656550; 
495983, 3656607; 495926, 3656607; 495926, 3656663; 495898, 3656663; 
495898, 3656692; 495869, 3656692; 495869, 3656777; 495841, 3656777; 
495841, 3656805; 495813, 3656805; 495813, 3656834; 495756, 3656834; 
495756, 3656862; 495728, 3656862; 495728, 3656890; 495671, 3656890; 
495671, 3656919; 495586, 3656919; 495586, 3656947; 495472, 3656947; 
495472, 3656919; 495274, 3656919; 495274, 3656890; 495189, 3656890; 
495189, 3656919; 495104, 3656919; 495104, 3656947; 495075, 3656947; 
495075, 3656976; 494990, 3656976; 494990, 3657004; 494933, 3657004; 
494933, 3657032; 494848, 3657032; 494848, 3657061; 494706, 3657061; 
494706, 3657089; 494678, 3657089; 494678, 3657117; 494650, 3657117; 
494650, 3657146; 494536, 3657146; 494536, 3657061; 494508, 3657061; 
494508, 3657032; 494479, 3657032; 494479, 3657004; 494451, 3657004; 
494451, 3656947; 494394, 3656947; 494394, 3657202; 494366, 3657202; 
494366, 3657288; 494394, 3657288; 494394, 3657543; 494423, 3657543; 
494423, 3657656; 494451, 3657656; 494451, 3657741; 494479, 3657741; 
494479, 3657827; 494508, 3657827; 494508, 3657883; 494536, 3657883; 
494536, 3657940; 494565, 3657940; 494565, 3657997; 494593, 3657997; 
494593, 3658054; 494621, 3658054; 494621, 3658082; 494650, 3658082; 
494650, 3658110; 494678, 3658110; 494678, 3658139; 494706, 3658139; 
494706, 3658082; 494877, 3658082; 494877, 3658054; 494905, 3658054; 
494905, 3658025; 494877, 3658025; 494877, 3657912; 494848, 3657912; 
494848, 3657883; 494877, 3657883; 494877, 3657827; 494905, 3657827; 
494905, 3657798; 494962, 3657798; 494962, 3657770; 495104, 3657770; 
495104, 3657798; 495132, 3657798; 495132, 3657827; 495160, 3657827; 
495160, 3657883; 495217, 3657883; 495217, 3657855; 495245, 3657855; 
495245, 3657827; 495444, 3657827; 495444, 3657855; 495643, 3657855; 
495643, 3657883; 495699, 3657883; 495699, 3657855; 495841, 3657855; 
495841, 3657883; 495869, 3657883; 495869, 3657912; 495926, 3657912; 
495926, 3657940; 495983, 3657940; 495983, 3657997; 496011, 3657997; 
496011, 3658082; 496210, 3658082; 496210, 3658110; 496238, 3658110; 
496238, 3658167; 496267, 3658167; 496267, 3658195; 496295, 3658195; 
496295, 3658224; 496323, 3658224; 496323, 3658252; 496352, 3658252; 
496352, 3658280; 496380, 3658280; 496380, 3658337; 496408, 3658337; 
496408, 3658422; 496437, 3658422; 496437, 3658507; 496408, 3658507; 
496408, 3658536; 496323, 3658536; 496323, 3658564; 496295, 3658564; 
496295, 3658593; 496323, 3658593; 496323, 3658678; 496267, 3658678; 
496267, 3658706; 496238, 3658706; 496238, 3658734; 496210, 3658734; 
496210, 3658819; 496295, 3658819; 496295, 3658791; 496437, 3658791; 
496437, 3658819; 496465, 3658819; 496465, 3658848; 496550, 3658848; 
496550, 3658876; 496635, 3658876; 496635, 3658905; 496721, 3658905; 
496721, 3658933; 496749, 3658933;
    496749, 3659075; 496721, 3659075; 496721, 3659103; 496635, 3659103; 
496635, 3659132; 496522, 3659132; 496522, 3659103; 496437, 3659103; 
496437, 3659075; 496380, 3659075; 496380, 3659188; 496352, 3659188; 
496352, 3659217; 496295, 3659217; 496295, 3659245; 496210, 3659245; 
496210, 3659273; 496153, 3659273; 496153, 3659302; 496182, 3659302; 
496182, 3659330; 496210, 3659330; 496210, 3659359; 496267, 3659359; 
496267, 3659387; 496295, 3659387; 496295, 3659415; 496323, 3659415; 
496323, 3659444; 496380, 3659444; 496380, 3659472; 496408, 3659472; 
496408, 3659529; 496437, 3659529; 496437, 3659585; 496465, 3659585; 
496465, 3659614; 496494, 3659614; 496494, 3659671; 496522, 3659671; 
496522, 3659727; 496607, 3659727; 496607, 3659756; 496635, 3659756; 
496635, 3659841; 496664, 3659841; 496664, 3659898; 496692, 3659898; 
496692, 3660068; 496635, 3660068; 496635, 3660096; 496579, 3660096; 
496579, 3660153; 496607, 3660153; 496607, 3660238; 496635, 3660238; 
496635, 3660295; 496607, 3660295; 496607, 3660380; 496635, 3660380; 
496635, 3660408; 496664, 3660408; 496664, 3660522; 496692, 3660522; 
496692, 3660550; 496749, 3660550; 496749, 3660522; 496806, 3660522; 
496806, 3660493; 496834, 3660493; 496891, 3660493; 496891, 3660522; 
496948, 3660522; 496948, 3660550; 496976, 3660550; 496976, 3660607; 
497004, 3660607; 497004, 3660663; 497033, 3660663; 497033, 3660777; 
497061, 3660777; 497061, 3660919; 497089, 3660919; 497089, 3660976; 
497118, 3660976; 497118, 3661032; 497146, 3661032; 497146, 3661061; 
497174, 3661061; 497174, 3661089; 497260, 3661089; 497260, 3660976; 
497288, 3660976; 497288, 3660919; 497316, 3660919; 497316, 3660890; 
497345, 3660890; 497345, 3660862; 497572, 3660862; 497572, 3660890; 
497600, 3660890; 497600, 3660919; 497713, 3660919; 497713, 3660947; 
497770,

[[Page 444]]

3660947; 497770, 3660976; 497799, 3660976; 497799, 3661004; 497827, 
3661004; 497827, 3661032; 497855, 3661032; 497855, 3661061; 497884, 
3661061; 497884, 3661117; 497912, 3661117; 497912, 3661202; 497940, 
3661202; 497940, 3661231; 497969, 3661231; 497969, 3661259; 497997, 
3661259; 497997, 3661316; 497969, 3661316; 497969, 3661344; 497940, 
3661344; 497940, 3661373; 497912, 3661373; 497912, 3661429; 497884, 
3661429; 497884, 3661458; 497855, 3661458; 497855, 3661600; 497827, 
3661600; 497827, 3661628; 497799, 3661628; 497799, 3661656; 497827, 
3661656; 497827, 3661741; 497770, 3661741; 497770, 3661770; 497713, 
3661770; 497713, 3661883; 497685, 3661883; 497685, 3661912; 497713, 
3661912; 497713, 3661940; 497770, 3661940; 497770, 3662025; 497799, 
3662025; 497799, 3662054; 497855, 3662054; 497855, 3662082; 497884, 
3662082; 497884, 3662139; 497912, 3662139; 497912, 3662167; 498167, 
3662167; 498167, 3662082; 498196, 3662082; 498196, 3661968; 498224, 
3661968; 498224, 3661940; 498252, 3661940; 498252, 3661968; 498281, 
3661968; 498281, 3661997; 498281, 3662082; 498252, 3662082; 498252, 
3662139; 498224, 3662139; 498224, 3662167; 498423, 3662167; 498423, 
3662139; 498536, 3662139; 498536, 3662110; 498650, 3662110; 498650, 
3662082; 498735, 3662082; 498735, 3662054; 498820, 3662054; 498820, 
3662025; 498848, 3662025; 498848, 3661968; 498905, 3661968; 498905, 
3661940; 498962, 3661940; 498962, 3661912; 499018, 3661912; 499018, 
3661940; 499047, 3661940; 499047, 3661912; 499104, 3661912; 499104, 
3661935; 499220, 3661914; 499321, 3661904; 499359, 3661898; 499359, 
3661855; 499331, 3661855; 499331, 3661827; 499302, 3661827; 499302, 
3661685; 499387, 3661685; 499387, 3661713; 499416, 3661713; 499416, 
3661770; 499444, 3661770; 499444, 3661827; 499472, 3661827; 499472, 
3661855; 499501, 3661855; 499501, 3661861; 499571, 3661831; 499806, 
3661742; 500019, 3661645; 500300, 3661526; 500441, 3661465; 500572, 
3661393; 500673, 3661308; 500722, 3661264; 500761, 3661264; 500789, 
3661288; 500834, 3661288; 500834, 3661146; 500862, 3661146; 500862, 
3661032; 500834, 3661032; 500834, 3660947; 500862, 3660947; 500862, 
3660919; 500891, 3660919;
    500891, 3660907; 500878, 3660902; 500861, 3660865; 500864, 3660860; 
500883, 3660843; 500884, 3660843; 500885, 3660842; 500887, 3660841; 
500888, 3660840; 500889, 3660839; 500890, 3660839; 500892, 3660838; 
500893, 3660837; 500894, 3660836; 500896, 3660835; 500897, 3660835; 
500898, 3660834; 500900, 3660833; 500901, 3660832; 500902, 3660832; 
500904, 3660831; 500905, 3660830; 500906, 3660830; 500908, 3660829; 
500909, 3660828; 500910, 3660828; 500912, 3660827; 500912, 3660827; 
500914, 3660826; 500915, 3660826; 500917, 3660825; 500918, 3660825; 
500919, 3660824; 500921, 3660824; 500922, 3660824; 500924, 3660823; 
500925, 3660823; 500927, 3660822; 500928, 3660822; 500930, 3660821; 
500931, 3660821; 500933, 3660821; 500934, 3660820; 500936, 3660820; 
500937, 3660820; 500939, 3660819; 500940, 3660819; 500941, 3660819; 
500943, 3660818; 500944, 3660818; 500946, 3660818; 500947, 3660817; 
500949, 3660817; 500950, 3660817; 500952, 3660817; 500953, 3660816; 
500955, 3660816; 500956, 3660816; 500958, 3660816; 500959, 3660815; 
500960, 3660815; 500960, 3660862; 501004, 3660862; 501004, 3660834; 
501061, 3660834; 501061, 3660862; 501089, 3660862; 501089, 3660890; 
501146, 3660890; 501146, 3660919; 501203, 3660919; 501203, 3660947; 
501260, 3660947; 501260, 3660976; 501288, 3660976; 501288, 3661004; 
501316, 3661004; 501316, 3661032; 501345, 3661032; 501345, 3661061; 
501373, 3661061; 501373, 3661089; 501458, 3661089; 501458, 3661117; 
501515, 3661117; 501515, 3661174; 501543, 3661174; 501543, 3661231; 
501657, 3661231; 501657, 3661259; 501685, 3661259; 501685, 3661288; 
501713, 3661288; 501713, 3661316; 501742, 3661316; 501742, 3661344; 
501912, 3661344; 501912, 3661373; 501997, 3661373; 501997, 3661401; 
502196, 3661401; 502196, 3661429; 502253, 3661429; 502253, 3661458; 
502423, 3661458; 502423, 3661486; 502621, 3661486; 502621, 3661458; 
502706, 3661458; 502706, 3661486; 502820, 3661486; 502820, 3661458; 
502905, 3661458; 502905, 3661486; 502933, 3661486; 502933, 3661515; 
502962, 3661515; 502962, 3661571; 502990, 3661571; 502990, 3661600; 
503018, 3661600; 503018, 3661628; 503160, 3661628; 503160, 3661600; 
503245, 3661600; 503245, 3661628; 503302, 3661628; 503302, 3661656; 
503331, 3661656; 503331, 3661685; 503359, 3661685; 503359, 3661713; 
503387, 3661713; 503387, 3661741; 503416, 3661741; 503416, 3661770; 
503444, 3661770; 503444, 3661798; 503472, 3661798; 503472, 3661855; 
503501, 3661855; 503501, 3661940; 503529, 3661940; 503529, 3662082; 
503501, 3662082; 503501, 3662167; 503529, 3662167; 503529, 3662224; 
503557, 3662224; 503557, 3662337; 503529, 3662337; 503529, 3662366; 
503501, 3662366; 503501, 3662394; 503529, 3662394; 503529, 3662451; 
503557, 3662451; 503557, 3662536; 503586, 3662536; 503586, 3662678; 
503614, 3662678; 503614, 3662706; 503643, 3662706; 503643, 3662763; 
503671, 3662763; 503671, 3662820; 503699, 3662820; 503699, 3663103; 
503728, 3663103; 503728, 3663160; 503756, 3663160; 503756, 3663217; 
503784, 3663217; 503784, 3663273; 503813, 3663273; 503813, 3663330; 
503841, 3663330; 503841, 3663415; 503870, 3663415; 503870, 3663444; 
503926, 3663444; 503926, 3663500; 503955, 3663500; 503955, 3663585; 
503983, 3663585; 503983, 3663671; 504011, 3663671; 504011, 3663869; 
504040, 3663869; 504040, 3664096; 504068, 3664096; 504068, 3664181; 
504096, 3664181; 504096, 3664266; 504125, 3664266; 504125, 3664323; 
504153, 3664323; 504153, 3664266; 504182, 3664266; 504182, 3664210; 
504210, 3664210; 504210, 3664153; 504267, 3664153; 504267, 3664181; 
504409, 3664181; 504409, 3664153; 504437, 3664153; 504465, 3664153; 
504465, 3664181; 504522, 3664181; 504522, 3664238; 504550, 3664238; 
504550, 3664295; 504579, 3664295; 504579, 3664380; 504607, 3664380; 
504607, 3664408; 504692, 3664408; 504692, 3664437; 504721, 3664437; 
504721, 3664493; 504749, 3664493; 504749, 3664522; 504777, 3664522; 
504777, 3664578; 504806, 3664578; 504806, 3664607; 504834, 3664607; 
504834, 3664635; 504862, 3664635; 504862, 3664664; 504919, 3664664; 
504919, 3664692; 504948, 3664692; 504948, 3664720; 505004, 3664720; 
505004, 3664777; 505033, 3664777; 505033, 3664805; 505061, 3664805; 
505061, 3664834; 505118, 3664834; 505118, 3664862; 505203, 3664862; 
505203, 3664890; 505231, 3664890; 505231, 3664947; 505260, 3664947; 
505260, 3665032; 505288, 3665032; 505288, 3665117; 505316, 3665117; 
505316, 3665146; 505345, 3665146; 505345, 3665231; 505316, 3665231; 
505316, 3665344; 505345, 3665344; 505345, 3665429; 505373, 3665429; 
505373, 3665486; 505401, 3665486; 505401, 3665628; 505430, 3665628; 
505430, 3665827; 505458, 3665827; 505458, 3665855; 505430, 3665855; 
505430, 3665912; 505458, 3665912; 505458, 3666167; 505487, 3666167; 
505487, 3666281; 505515, 3666281; 505515, 3666366; 505543,

[[Page 445]]

3666366; 505543, 3666394; 505572, 3666394; 505572, 3666422; 505600, 
3666422; 505600, 3666451; 505628, 3666451; 505628, 3666479; 505657, 
3666479; 505657, 3666536; 505685, 3666536; 505685, 3666649; 505600, 
3666649; 505600, 3666678; 505543, 3666678; 505543, 3666706; 505515, 
3666706; 505515, 3666734; 505487, 3666734; 505487, 3666763; 505458, 
3666763; 505458, 3666791; 505487, 3666791; 505487, 3666820; 505458, 
3666820; 505458, 3666848; 505430, 3666848; 505430, 3666876; 505345, 
3666876; 505345, 3667018; 505316, 3667018; 505316, 3667046; 505288, 
3667046; 505288, 3667132; 505316, 3667132; 505316, 3667160; 505345, 
3667160; 505345, 3667302; 505316, 3667302; 505316, 3667387; 505288, 
3667387; 505288, 3667444; 505146, 3667444; 505146, 3667472; 505118, 
3667472; 505118, 3667557; 505146, 3667557; 505146, 3667699; 505118, 
3667699; 505118, 3667784; 505089, 3667784; 505089, 3667954; 505033, 
3667954; 505033, 3667983; 505004, 3667983; 505004, 3668125; 504919, 
3668125; 504919, 3668323; 504891, 3668323; 504891, 3668380; 504948, 
3668380; 504948, 3668408; 504976, 3668408; 504976, 3668437; 505004, 
3668437; 505004, 3668550; 505033, 3668550; 505033, 3668664; 505004, 
3668664; 505004, 3668720; 505033, 3668720; 505033, 3668862; 505061, 
3668862; 505061, 3668947; 505089, 3668947; 505089, 3668976; 505146, 
3668976; 505146, 3669032; 505175, 3669032; 505175, 3669117; 505203, 
3669117; 505203, 3669174; 505231, 3669174; 505231, 3669117; 505288, 
3669117; 505288, 3669089; 505316, 3669089; 505316, 3669061; 505401, 
3669061; 505401, 3669089; 505487, 3669089; 505487, 3669117; 505515, 
3669117; 505515, 3669203; 505543, 3669203; 505543, 3669259; 505572, 
3669259; 505572, 3669401; 505600, 3669401; 505600, 3669429; 505628, 
3669429; 505628, 3669401; 505742, 3669401; 505742, 3669429; 505770, 
3669429; 505770, 3669486; 505799, 3669486; 505799, 3669515; 505827, 
3669515; 505827, 3669486; 505912, 3669486; 505912, 3669515; 505969, 
3669515; 505969, 3669543; 505997, 3669543; 505997, 3669571; 506026, 
3669571; 506026, 3669742; 505997, 3669742; 505997, 3669770; 506026, 
3669770; 506026, 3669912; 506054, 3669912; 506054, 3670082; 506082, 
3670082; 506082, 3670110; 506111, 3670110; 506111, 3670139; 506082, 
3670139; 506082, 3670167; 506054, 3670167; 506054, 3670224; 506026, 
3670224; 506026, 3670281; 505997, 3670281; 505997, 3670309; 505969, 
3670309; 505969, 3670337; 505912, 3670337; 505912, 3670366; 505884, 
3670366; 505884, 3670451; 505855, 3670451; 505855, 3670508; 505799, 
3670508; 505799, 3670536; 505770, 3670536; 505770, 3670564; 505799, 
3670564; 505799, 3670593; 505827, 3670593; 505827, 3670791; 505912, 
3670791; 505912, 3670763; 505940, 3670763; 505940, 3670734; 505969, 
3670734; 505969, 3670706; 506139, 3670706; 506139, 3670734; 506196, 
3670734; 506196, 3670763; 506253, 3670763; 506253, 3670791; 506309, 
3670791; 506309, 3670876; 506281, 3670876; 506281, 3670905; 506253, 
3670905; 506253, 3670933; 506281, 3670933; 506281, 3670990; 506309, 
3670990; 506309, 3671047; 506338, 3671047; 506338, 3671075; 506366, 
3671075; 506366, 3671132; 506394, 3671132; 506394, 3671302; 506451, 
3671302; 506451, 3671330; 506508, 3671330; 506508, 3671387; 506536, 
3671387;
    506536, 3671415; 506593, 3671415; 506593, 3671444; 506621, 3671444; 
506621, 3671472; 506678, 3671472; 506678, 3671500; 506735, 3671500; 
506735, 3671557; 506763, 3671557; 506763, 3671586; 506820, 3671586; 
506820, 3671614; 506848, 3671614; 506848, 3671642; 506877, 3671642; 
506877, 3671699; 506905, 3671699; 506905, 3671812; 506877, 3671812; 
506877, 3671841; 506848, 3671841; 506848, 3671869; 506877, 3671869; 
506877, 3671898; 506905, 3671898; 506905, 3671954; 506933, 3671954; 
506933, 3671983; 507018, 3671983; 507018, 3671954; 507047, 3671954; 
507047, 3671926; 507132, 3671926; 507132, 3672125; 507104, 3672125; 
507104, 3672181; 507075, 3672181; 507075, 3672210; 507047, 3672210; 
507047, 3672238; 507018, 3672238; 507018, 3672266; 506990, 3672266; 
506990, 3672408; 506933, 3672408; 506933, 3672437; 506905, 3672437; 
506905, 3672522; 506933, 3672522; 506933, 3672550; 506905, 3672550; 
506905, 3672578; 506933, 3672578; 506933, 3672607; 507104, 3672607; 
507104, 3672692; 507132, 3672692; 507132, 3672720; 507160, 3672720; 
507160, 3672862; 507302, 3672862; 507302, 3672834; 507331, 3672834; 
507331, 3672805; 507387, 3672805; 507387, 3672777; 507472, 3672777; 
507472, 3672805; 507558, 3672805; 507558, 3672834; 507586, 3672834; 
507586, 3672891; 507643, 3672891; 507643, 3672919; 507671, 3672919; 
507671, 3672947; 507728, 3672947; 507728, 3673004; 507699, 3673004; 
507699, 3673089; 507671, 3673089; 507671, 3673146; 507643, 3673146; 
507643, 3673203; 507614, 3673203; 507614, 3673231; 507643, 3673231; 
507643, 3673316; 507614, 3673316; 507614, 3673401; 507643, 3673401; 
507643, 3673628; 507614, 3673628; 507614, 3673685; 507643, 3673685; 
507643, 3673713; 507671, 3673713; 507671, 3673742; 507756, 3673742; 
507756, 3673770; 507784, 3673770; 507784, 3673798; 507813, 3673798; 
507813, 3673827; 507784, 3673827; 507784, 3673883; 507756, 3673883; 
507756, 3673997; 507728, 3673997; 507728, 3674110; 507756, 3674110; 
507756, 3674224; 507841, 3674224; 507841, 3674252; 507870, 3674252; 
507870, 3674281; 507926, 3674281; 507926, 3674309; 507955, 3674309; 
507955, 3674394; 507983, 3674394; 507983, 3674422; 508097, 3674422; 
508097, 3674451; 508153, 3674451; 508153, 3674479; 508182, 3674479; 
508182, 3674564; 508238, 3674564; 508238, 3674593; 508323, 3674593; 
508323, 3674621; 508409, 3674621; 508409, 3674649; 508465, 3674649; 
508465, 3674706; returning to 508579, 3674706. Excluding land bounded by 
496806, 3657458; 496806, 3657429; 496862, 3657429; 496862, 3657458; 
496834, 3657458; 496834, 3657486; 496806, 3657486; returning to 496806, 
3657458. Excluding land bounded by 505770, 3654110; 505770, 3654082; 
505827, 3654082; 505827, 3654110; returning to 505770, 3654110. 
Excluding land bounded by 507756, 3653912; 507756, 3653883; 507728, 
3653883; 507671, 3653883; 507671, 3653912; 507586, 3653912; 507586, 
3653883; 507558, 3653883; 507558, 3653855; 507586, 3653855; 507586, 
3653827; 507614, 3653827; 507614, 3653798; 507643, 3653798; 507643, 
3653770; 507614, 3653770; 507614, 3653741; 507586, 3653741; 507586, 
3653713; 507558, 3653713; 507558, 3653685; 507472, 3653685; 507472, 
3653656; 507444, 3653656; 507444, 3653628; 507359, 3653628; 507359, 
3653600; 507331, 3653600; 507331, 3653373; 507359, 3653373; 507359, 
3653344; 507444, 3653344; 507444, 3653316; 507643, 3653316; 507643, 
3653344; 507671, 3653344; 507671, 3653429; 507699, 3653429; 507699, 
3653486; 507756, 3653486; 507756, 3653514; 507870, 3653514; 507870, 
3653543; 507898, 3653543; 507898, 3653600; 508153, 3653600; 508153, 
3653571; 508267, 3653571; 508267, 3653543; 508323, 3653543; 508323, 
3653628; 508295, 3653628; 508295, 3653685; 508267, 3653685; 508267, 
3653713; 508238,

[[Page 446]]

3653713; 508238, 3653741; 508210, 3653741; 508210, 3653770; 508153, 
3653770; 508153, 3653798; 508125, 3653798; 508125, 3653827; 508097, 
3653827; 508097, 3653883; 508040, 3653883; 508040, 3653912; 507955, 
3653912; 507955, 3653940; 507784, 3653940; 507784, 3653912; returning to 
507756, 3653912.
    (ii) Subunit 16d: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Warners Ranch, 
Santa Ysabel, and Ramona. Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates 
(E, N): 522905, 3664181; 522905, 3664153; 522962, 3664153; 522962, 
3664124; 522990, 3664124; 522990, 3664096; 523217, 3664096; 523217, 
3664068; 523274, 3664068; 523274, 3664039; 523302, 3664039; 523302, 
3664011; 523359, 3664011; 523359, 3663954; 523387, 3663954; 523387, 
3663926; 523416, 3663926; 523416, 3663898; 523444, 3663898; 523444, 
3663869; 523614, 3663869; 523614, 3663841; 523671, 3663841; 523671, 
3663812; 523699, 3663812; 523699, 3663784; 523756, 3663784; 523756, 
3663756; 523841, 3663756; 523841, 3663727; 524012, 3663727; 524012, 
3663699; 524068, 3663699; 524068, 3663671; 524153, 3663671; 524153, 
3663642; 524238, 3663642; 524238, 3663614; 524256, 3663614; 524256, 
3663584; 524286, 3663584; 524286, 3663494; 524316, 3663494; 524316, 
3663464; 524346, 3663464; 524346, 3663434; 524376, 3663434; 524376, 
3663374; 524406, 3663374; 524406, 3663344; 524436, 3663344; 524436, 
3663314; 524526, 3663314; 524526, 3663284; 524556, 3663284; 524556, 
3663314; 524706, 3663314; 524706, 3663344; 524796, 3663344; 524796, 
3663374; 524826, 3663374; 524826, 3663404; 524856, 3663404; 524856, 
3663421; 524948, 3663421; 524950, 3663314; 524946, 3663314; 524946, 
3663284; 524916, 3663284; 524916, 3663254; 524886, 3663254; 524886, 
3663194; 524826, 3663194; 524826, 3663164; 524676, 3663164; 524676, 
3663194; 524616, 3663194; 524616, 3663164; 524586, 3663164; 524586, 
3663074; 524526, 3663074; 524526, 3663044; 524466, 3663044; 524466, 
3663014; 524496, 3663014; 524496, 3662984; 524526, 3662984; 524526, 
3662954; 524586, 3662954; 524586, 3662924; 524616, 3662924; 524616, 
3662834; 524646, 3662834; 524646, 3662804; 524676, 3662804; 524676, 
3662774; 524706, 3662774; 524706, 3662744; 524736, 3662744; 524736, 
3662714; 524796, 3662714; 524796, 3662684; 524856, 3662684; 524856, 
3662624; 524916, 3662624; 524916, 3662594; 524946, 3662594; 524946, 
3662564; 524976, 3662564; 524976, 3662534; 524946, 3662534; 524946, 
3662504; 524976, 3662504; 524976, 3662384; 524946, 3662384; 524946, 
3662294; 524916, 3662294; 524916, 3662324; 524886, 3662324; 524886, 
3662354; 524826, 3662354; 524826, 3662384; 524766, 3662384; 524766, 
3662354; 524736, 3662354; 524736, 3662294; 524676, 3662294; 524676, 
3662354; 524646, 3662354; 524646, 3662384; 524616, 3662384; 524616, 
3662414; 524586, 3662414; 524586, 3662444; 524496, 3662444; 524496, 
3662474; 524466, 3662474; 524466, 3662564; 524436, 3662564; 524436, 
3662594; 524376, 3662594; 524376, 3662624; 524316, 3662624; 524316, 
3662654; 524286, 3662654; 524286, 3662684; 524256, 3662684; 524256, 
3662714; 524196, 3662714; 524196, 3662744; 524166, 3662744; 524166, 
3662804; 524136, 3662804; 524136, 3662834; 524106, 3662834; 524106, 
3662894; 524136, 3662894; 524136, 3662924; 524166, 3662924; 524166, 
3662984; 524196, 3662984; 524196, 3663014; 524166, 3663014; 524166, 
3663104; 524136, 3663104; 524136, 3663314; 524106, 3663314; 524106, 
3663374; 524076, 3663374; 524076, 3663404; 524046, 3663404; 524046, 
3663464; 524016, 3663464; 524016, 3663494; 523986, 3663494; 523986, 
3663500; 523898, 3663500; 523898, 3663529; 523841, 3663529; 523841, 
3663557; 523785, 3663557; 523785, 3663585; 523699, 3663585; 523699, 
3663614; 523643, 3663614; 523643, 3663642; 523586, 3663642; 523586, 
3663671; 523529, 3663671; 523529, 3663699; 523444, 3663699; 523444, 
3663727; 523359, 3663727; 523359, 3663756; 523302, 3663756; 523302, 
3663784; 523217, 3663784; 523217, 3663812; 523019, 3663812; 523019, 
3663756; 522990, 3663756; 522990, 3663699; 522962, 3663699; 522962, 
3663671; 522934, 3663671; 522934, 3663642; 522877, 3663642; 522877, 
3663614; 522820, 3663614; 522820, 3663585; 522792, 3663585; 522792, 
3663557; 522735, 3663557; 522735, 3663529; 522621, 3663529; 522621, 
3663500; 522537, 3663500; 522525, 3663557; 522536, 3663557; 522536, 
3663585; 522593, 3663585; 522593, 3663614; 522621, 3663614; 522621, 
3663699; 522650, 3663699; 522650, 3663727; 522678, 3663727; 522678, 
3663784; 522707, 3663784; 522707, 3663812; 522735, 3663812; 522735, 
3663926; 522763, 3663926; 522763, 3663954; 522792, 3663954; 522792, 
3663983; 522820, 3663983; 522820, 3664011; 522848, 3664011; 522848, 
3664039; 522877, 3664039; 522877, 3664124; 522848, 3664124; 522848, 
3664153; 522877, 3664153; 522877, 3664181; returning to 522905, 3664181.
    (iii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 530226, 
3665264; 530226, 3665294; 530196, 3665294; 530196, 3665264; 530226, 
3665264; 530226, 3665234; 530256, 3665234; 530256, 3665054; 530286, 
3665054; 530286, 3665024; 530316, 3665024; 530316, 3664994; 530346, 
3664994; 530346, 3664784; 530376, 3664784; 530376, 3664724; 530406, 
3664724; 530406, 3664634; 530316, 3664634; 530316, 3664604; 530286, 
3664604; 530286, 3664574; 530256, 3664574; 530256, 3664544; 530226, 
3664544; 530226, 3664514; 530196, 3664514; 530196, 3664454; 530226, 
3664454; 530226, 3664394; 530196, 3664394; 530196, 3664274; 530166, 
3664274; 530166, 3664214; 530136, 3664214; 530136, 3664184; 530106, 
3664184; 530106, 3664154; 530046, 3664154; 530046, 3664124; 530016, 
3664124; 530016, 3664094; 529986, 3664094; 529986, 3664064; 529956, 
3664064; 529956, 3664004; 529926, 3664004; 529926, 3663914; 529896, 
3663914; 529896, 3663884; 529866, 3663884; 529866, 3663854; 529836, 
3663854; 529836, 3663884; 529806, 3663884; 529806, 3663914; 529746, 
3663914; 529746, 3663974; 529716, 3663974; 529716, 3664124; 529686, 
3664124; 529686, 3664154; 529656, 3664154; 529656, 3664184; 529596, 
3664184; 529596, 3663944; 529566, 3663944; 529566, 3663884; 529506, 
3663884; 529506, 3663854; 529476, 3663854; 529476, 3663824; 529326, 
3663824; 529326, 3663794; 529296, 3663794; 529296, 3663734; 529266, 
3663734; 529266, 3663704; 529206, 3663704; 529206, 3663644; 529176, 
3663644; 529176, 3663584; 529146, 3663584; 529146, 3663494; 529116, 
3663494; 529116, 3663434; 529086, 3663434; 529086, 3663494; 529056, 
3663494; 529056, 3663614; 529026, 3663614; 529026, 3663704; 528996, 
3663704; 528996, 3663884; 528966, 3663884; 528966, 3663914; 528906, 
3663914; 528906, 3663884; 528696, 3663884; 528696, 3663914; 528666, 
3663914; 528666, 3663944; 528636, 3663944; 528636, 3663974; 528606, 
3663974; 528606, 3664004; 528576, 3664004; 528576, 3664034; 528516, 
3664034; 528516, 3664064; 528276, 3664064; 528276, 3664094; 528216, 
3664094; 528216, 3664124; 528156, 3664124; 528156, 3664154; 528126, 
3664154; 528126, 3664184; 528066,

[[Page 447]]

3664184; 528066, 3664154; 527976, 3664154; 527976, 3664124; 527916, 
3664124; 527916, 3664094; 527796, 3664094; 527796, 3664124; 527766, 
3664124; 527766, 3664154; 527676, 3664154; 527676, 3664034; 527646, 
3664034; 527646, 3664004; 527616, 3664004; 527616, 3663944; 527556, 
3663944; 527556, 3663914; 527526, 3663914; 527526, 3663854; 527436, 
3663854; 527436, 3663884; 527376, 3663884; 527376, 3663854; 527316, 
3663854; 527316, 3663824; 527286, 3663824; 527286, 3663794; 527226, 
3663794; 527226, 3663764; 527136, 3663764; 527136, 3663734; 527016, 
3663734; 527016, 3663704; 526806, 3663704; 526806, 3663734; 526746, 
3663734; 526746, 3663764; 526656, 3663764; 526656, 3663734; 526596, 
3663734; 526596, 3663674; 526566, 3663674; 526566, 3663524; 526536, 
3663524; 526536, 3663434; 526476, 3663434; 526476, 3663404; 526446, 
3663404; 526446, 3663434; 526416, 3663434; 526416, 3663464; 526266, 
3663464; 526266, 3663494; 526206, 3663494; 526206, 3663524; 526086, 
3663524; 526086, 3663554; 526026, 3663554; 526026, 3663524; 525996, 
3663524; 525996, 3663494; 525876, 3663494; 525876, 3663524; 525636, 
3663524; 525636, 3663554; 525426, 3663554; 525426, 3663524; 525340, 
3663524; 525338, 3663734; 525366, 3663734; 525366, 3663704; 525426, 
3663704; 525426, 3663674; 525456, 3663674; 525456, 3663704; 525696, 
3663704; 525696, 3663734; 525726, 3663734; 525726, 3663764; 525756, 
3663764; 525756, 3663824; 525786, 3663824; 525786, 3663884; 525816, 
3663884; 525816, 3663824; 525846, 3663824; 525846, 3663734; 525876, 
3663734; 525876, 3663704; 525906, 3663704; 525906, 3663674; 525996, 
3663674; 525996, 3663644; 526116, 3663644; 526116, 3663674; 526206, 
3663674; 526206, 3663734; 526236, 3663734; 526236, 3663764; 526356, 
3663764; 526356, 3663854; 526386, 3663854; 526386, 3663944; 526416, 
3663944; 526416, 3664034; 526476, 3664034; 526476, 3664064; 526506, 
3664064; 526506, 3664094; 526536, 3664094; 526536, 3664154; 526566, 
3664154; 526566, 3664124; 526596, 3664124; 526596, 3664034; 526626, 
3664034; 526626, 3664004; 526686, 3664004; 526686, 3663974; 526836, 
3663974; 526836, 3664034; 526896, 3664034; 526896, 3664004; 526926, 
3664004; 526926, 3663974; 527106, 3663974; 527106, 3664004; 527166, 
3664004; 527166, 3664034; 527196, 3664034; 527196, 3664064; 527226, 
3664064; 527226, 3664094; 527286, 3664094; 527286, 3664124; 527316, 
3664124; 527316, 3664424; 527346, 3664424; 527346, 3664484; 527376, 
3664484; 527376, 3664514; 527466, 3664514; 527466, 3664544; 527526, 
3664544; 527526, 3664604; 527556, 3664604; 527556, 3664754; 527646, 
3664754; 527646, 3664724; 527736, 3664724; 527736, 3664754; 527766, 
3664754; 527766, 3664784; 527796, 3664784; 527796, 3664814; 527826, 
3664814; 527826, 3664844; 527856, 3664844; 527856, 3664814; 527886, 
3664814; 527886, 3664694; 527856, 3664694; 527856, 3664634; 527826, 
3664634; 527826, 3664604; 527856, 3664604; 527856, 3664634; 527886, 
3664634; 527886, 3664604; 527916, 3664604; 527916, 3664634; 527976, 
3664634; 527976, 3664694; 528066, 3664694; 528066, 3664724; 528126, 
3664724; 528126, 3664694; 528156, 3664694; 528156, 3664664; 528216, 
3664664; 528216, 3664634; 528246, 3664634; 528246, 3664574; 528306, 
3664574; 528306, 3664544; 528336, 3664544; 528336, 3664514; 528366, 
3664514; 528366, 3664484; 528396, 3664484; 528396, 3664454; 528456, 
3664454; 528456, 3664424; 528546, 3664424; 528546, 3664394; 528576, 
3664394; 528576, 3664424; 528606, 3664424; 528606, 3664484; 528636, 
3664484; 528636, 3664514; 528636, 3664544; 528606, 3664544; 528606, 
3664574; 528576, 3664574; 528576, 3664634; 528546, 3664634; 528546, 
3664694; 528576, 3664694; 528576, 3664784; 528606, 3664784; 528606, 
3664874; 528576, 3664874; 528576, 3664904; 528606, 3664904; 528606, 
3664994; 528636, 3664994; 528636, 3665054; 528696, 3665054; 528696, 
3665084; 528726, 3665084; 528726, 3665114; 528756, 3665114; 528756, 
3665144; 528816, 3665144; 528816, 3665174; 528876, 3665174; 528876, 
3665204; 528906, 3665204; 528906, 3665264; 528936, 3665264; 528936, 
3665294; 528966, 3665294; 528966, 3665384; 528996, 3665384; 528996, 
3665534; 528966, 3665534; 528966, 3665564; 528936, 3665564; 528936, 
3665654; 528966, 3665654; 528966, 3665744; 528996, 3665744; 528996, 
3665834; 529026, 3665834; 529026, 3666044; 529056, 3666044; 529056, 
3666134; 529086, 3666134; 529086, 3666224; 529056, 3666224; 529056, 
3666284; 529026, 3666284; 529026, 3666314; 528996, 3666314; 528996, 
3666344; 528966, 3666344; 528966, 3666434; 528996, 3666434; 528996, 
3666494; 529026, 3666494; 529026, 3666554; 529056, 3666554; 529056, 
3666584; 529026, 3666584; 529026, 3666644; 528996, 3666644; 528996, 
3666674; 529026, 3666674; 529026, 3666704; 529116, 3666704; 529116, 
3666674; 529176, 3666674; 529176, 3666644; 529266, 3666644; 529266, 
3666674; 529356, 3666674; 529356, 3666704; 529416, 3666704; 529416, 
3666674; 529446, 3666674; 529446, 3666644; 529506, 3666644; 529506, 
3666614; 529536, 3666614; 529536, 3666584; 529566, 3666584; 529566, 
3666554; 529626, 3666554; 529626, 3666524; 529656, 3666524; 529656, 
3666494; 529716, 3666494; 529716, 3666464; 529806, 3666464; 529806, 
3666434; 529836, 3666434; 529836, 3666344; 529716, 3666344; 529716, 
3666314; 529686, 3666314; 529686, 3666194; 529716, 3666194; 529716, 
3666164; 529806, 3666164; 529806, 3666134; 529836, 3666134; 529836, 
3666074; 529956, 3666074; 529956, 3666044; 530016, 3666044; 530016, 
3666014; 530076, 3666014; 530076, 3665954; 530106, 3665954; 530106, 
3665894; 530136, 3665894; 530136, 3665834; 530166, 3665834; 530166, 
3665744; 530376, 3665744; 530376, 3665774; 530496, 3665774; 530496, 
3665744; 530526, 3665744; 530526, 3665714; 530676, 3665714; 530676, 
3665744; 530796, 3665744; 530796, 3665774; 530916, 3665774; 530916, 
3665804; 531036, 3665804; 531036, 3665834; 531066, 3665834; 531066, 
3665804; 531096, 3665804; 531096, 3665774; 531126, 3665774; 531126, 
3665744; 531186, 3665744; 531186, 3665774; 531246, 3665774; 531246, 
3665804; 531276, 3665804; 531276, 3665714; 531246, 3665714; 531246, 
3665684; 531216, 3665684; 531216, 3665654; 531186, 3665654; 531186, 
3665624; 531006, 3665624; 531006, 3665594; 530916, 3665594; 530916, 
3665564; 530886, 3665564; 530886, 3665504; 530856, 3665504; 530856, 
3665324; 530826, 3665324; 530826, 3665294; 530706, 3665294; 530706, 
3665324; 530556, 3665324; 530556, 3665354; 530526, 3665354; 530526, 
3665384; 530466, 3665384; 530466, 3665414; 530436, 3665414; 530436, 
3665444; 530346, 3665444; 530346, 3665414; 530316, 3665414; 530316, 
3665264; returning to 530226, 3665264. Excluding land bounded by 530100, 
3665675; 530099, 3665819; 530072, 3665782; 530036, 3665732; 530017, 
3665705; 530016, 3665770; 530016, 3665851; 530003, 3665874; 529983, 
3665911; 529945, 3665994; 529926, 3665986; 529910, 3665980; 529888, 
3665980; 529888, 3665980; 529898, 3665876; 529907, 3665824; 529911, 
3665795; 529932, 3665662; 529949, 3665551; 529954, 3665554; 529958, 
3665557; 530003,

[[Page 448]]

3665558; 530102, 3665559; returning to 530100, 3665675. Excluding land 
bounded by 529176, 3664124; 529176, 3664004; 529236, 3664004; 529236, 
3663974; 529266, 3663974; 529266, 3664004; 529296, 3664004; 529296, 
3664034; 529206, 3664034; 529206, 3664124; returning to 529176, 3664124.
    (iv) Note: Map of Unit 16 is provided at paragraph (17)(v) of this 
entry.
    (22) Unit 17: San Diego River Basin, San Diego County, California.
    (i) Subunit 17a: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps El Cajon Mtn., 
Tule Springs and Santa Ysabel, land bounded by the following UTM 
coordinates (E, N): 524451, 3648049; 524450, 3647699; 524437, 3647699; 
524437, 3647670; 524409, 3647670; 524409, 3647653; 524248, 3647653; 
524104, 3647654; 524040, 3647654; 524040, 3647670; 523926, 3647670; 
523926, 3647654; 523844, 3647655; 523846, 3647557; 523841, 3647557; 
523841, 3647500; 523813, 3647500; 523813, 3647415; 523785, 3647415; 
523785, 3647358; 523756, 3647358; 523756, 3647302; 523728, 3647302; 
523728, 3647273; 523699, 3647273; 523699, 3647245; 523671, 3647245; 
523671, 3647188; 523643, 3647188; 523643, 3647103; 523614, 3647103; 
523614, 3647075; 523586, 3647075; 523586, 3647046; 523558, 3647046; 
523558, 3647018; 523501, 3647018; 523501, 3646990; 523473, 3646990; 
523473, 3646961; 523444, 3646961; 523444, 3646876; 523387, 3646876; 
523387, 3646875; 523367, 3646875; 523362, 3646848; 523359, 3646848; 
523359, 3646831; 523352, 3646791; 523274, 3646791; 523274, 3646763; 
523217, 3646763; 523217, 3646734; 523189, 3646734; 523189, 3646678; 
523047, 3646678; 523047, 3646649; 522990, 3646649; 522990, 3646621; 
522962, 3646621; 522962, 3646564; 522990, 3646564; 522990, 3646536; 
523019, 3646536; 523019, 3646507; 522962, 3646507; 522962, 3646500; 
522934, 3646500; 522934, 3646507; 522848, 3646507; 522848, 3646479; 
522820, 3646479; 522820, 3646451; 522848, 3646451; 522848, 3646286; 
522837, 3646224; 522820, 3646224; 522820, 3646195; 522763, 3646195; 
522763, 3646139; 522735, 3646139; 522735, 3646110; 522763, 3646110; 
522763, 3646082; 522735, 3646082; 522735, 3646025; 522650, 3646025; 
522650, 3645997; 522621, 3645997; 522621, 3645968; 522593, 3645968; 
522593, 3645912; 522565, 3645912; 522565, 3645883; 522480, 3645883; 
522480, 3645770; 522508, 3645770; 522508, 3645741; 522536, 3645741; 
522536, 3645656; 522557, 3645656; 522555, 3645458; 522451, 3645458; 
522451, 3645486; 522366, 3645486; 522366, 3645514; 522309, 3645514; 
522309, 3645543; 522253, 3645543; 522253, 3645571; 522196, 3645571; 
522196, 3645600; 522139, 3645600; 522139, 3645628; 522082, 3645628; 
522082, 3645656; 522054, 3645656; 522054, 3645685; 522026, 3645685; 
522026, 3645713; 521969, 3645713; 521969, 3645741; 521941, 3645741; 
521941, 3645770; 521912, 3645770; 521912, 3645798; 521884, 3645798; 
521884, 3645826; 521855, 3645826; 521855, 3645855; 521827, 3645855; 
521827, 3645883; 521799, 3645883; 521799, 3645912; 521770, 3645912; 
521770, 3645940; 521742, 3645940; 521742, 3645968; 521714, 3645968; 
521714, 3646025; 521685, 3646025; 521685, 3646053; 521657, 3646053; 
521657, 3646110; 521629, 3646110; 521629, 3646125; 521641, 3646125; 
521652, 3646195; 521657, 3646195; 521657, 3646226; 521666, 3646280; 
521685, 3646280; 521685, 3646337; 521742, 3646337; 521742, 3646309; 
521799, 3646309; 521799, 3646280; 521855, 3646280; 521855, 3646309; 
521884, 3646309; 521884, 3646422; 521912, 3646422; 521912, 3646451; 
521941, 3646451; 521941, 3646536; 521912, 3646536; 521912, 3646564; 
521905, 3646564; 521932, 3646734; 521941, 3646734; 521941, 3646788; 
521950, 3646848; 521969, 3646848; 521969, 3646876; 521997, 3646876; 
521997, 3646848; 522026, 3646848; 522026, 3647018; 522139, 3647018; 
522139, 3647046; 522196, 3647046; 522196, 3647075; 522253, 3647075; 
522253, 3647046; 522281, 3647046; 522281, 3647103; 522338, 3647103; 
522338, 3647131; 522366, 3647131; 522366, 3647217; 522394, 3647217; 
522394, 3647245; 522451, 3647245; 522451, 3647249; 522613, 3647249; 
522954, 3647249; 523019, 3647250; 523019, 3647245; 523217, 3647245; 
523217, 3647273; 523246, 3647273; 523246, 3647302; 523302, 3647302; 
523302, 3647330; 523331, 3647330; 523331, 3647358; 523359, 3647358; 
523359, 3647387; 523387, 3647387; 523387, 3647415; 523416, 3647415; 
523416, 3647529; 523444, 3647529; 523444, 3647557; 523473, 3647557; 
523473, 3647585; 523501, 3647585; 523501, 3647614; 523529, 3647614; 
523529, 3647670; 523558, 3647670; 523558, 3647699; 523586, 3647699; 
523586, 3647756; 523614, 3647756; 523614, 3647812; 523643, 3647812; 
523643, 3647841; 523671, 3647841; 523671, 3647869; 523699, 3647869; 
523699, 3647897; 523728, 3647897; 523728, 3647926; 523785, 3647926; 
523785, 3647954; 523955, 3647954; 523955, 3647926; 524012, 3647926; 
524012, 3647897; 524097, 3647897; 524097, 3647869; 524153, 3647869; 
524153, 3647897; 524182, 3647897; 524182, 3647983; 524153, 3647983; 
524153, 3648053; 524246, 3648052; returning to 524451, 3648049.
 (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 524664, 
3648748; 524664, 3648720; 524721, 3648720; 524721, 3648692; 524749, 
3648692; 524749, 3648663; 524806, 3648663; 524806, 3648635; 524863, 
3648635; 524863, 3648607; 524834, 3648607; 524834, 3648578; 524777, 
3648578; 524777, 3648550; 524721, 3648550; 524721, 3648522; 524692, 
3648522; 524692, 3648493; 524664, 3648493; 524664, 3648465; 524646, 
3648465; 524641, 3648748; returning to 524664, 3648748.
(iii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 528778, 
3657741; 528778, 3657713; 528863, 3657713; 528863, 3657685; 528891, 
3657685; 528891, 3657628; 528919, 3657628; 528919, 3657543; 528948, 
3657543; 528948, 3657515; 528976, 3657515; 528976, 3657486; 528948, 
3657486; 528948, 3657458; 528863, 3657458; 528863, 3657429; 528778, 
3657429; 528778, 3657373; 528749, 3657373; 528749, 3657316; 528721, 
3657316; 528721, 3657231; 528692, 3657231; 528692, 3657174; 528664, 
3657174; 528664, 3657146; 528636, 3657146; 528636, 3657117; 528607, 
3657117; 528607, 3657089; 528579, 3657089; 528579, 3657061; 528522, 
3657061; 528522, 3657004; 528494, 3657004; 528494, 3656976; 528465, 
3656976; 528465, 3656947; 528437, 3656947; 528437, 3656862; 528324, 
3656862; 528324, 3656834; 528295, 3656834; 528295, 3656805; 528239, 
3656805; 528239, 3656777; 528210, 3656777; 528210, 3656749; 528182, 
3656749; 528182, 3656720; 528153, 3656720; 528153, 3656663; 528125, 
3656663; 528125, 3656635; 528097, 3656635; 528097, 3656578; 528068, 
3656578; 528068, 3656408; 528040, 3656408; 528040, 3656380; 527983, 
3656380; 527983, 3656351; 527955, 3656351; 527955, 3656323; 527926, 
3656323; 527926, 3656295; 527898, 3656295; 527898, 3656266; 527870, 
3656266; 527870, 3656210; 527841, 3656210; 527841, 3656153; 527813, 
3656153; 527813,

[[Page 449]]

3656124; 527785, 3656124; 527785, 3656096; 527756, 3656096; 527756, 
3656068; 527728, 3656068; 527728, 3656011; 527699, 3656011; 527699, 
3655983; 527671, 3655983; 527671, 3655954; 527643, 3655954; 527643, 
3655926; 527614, 3655926; 527614, 3655897; 527586, 3655897; 527586, 
3655841; 527558, 3655841; 527558, 3655784; 527529, 3655784; 527529, 
3655727; 527501, 3655727; 527501, 3655699; 527473, 3655699; 527473, 
3655642; 527444, 3655642; 527444, 3655614; 527416, 3655614; 527416, 
3655585; 527387, 3655585; 527387, 3655557; 527359, 3655557; 527359, 
3655500; 527302, 3655500; 527302, 3655444; 527274, 3655444; 527274, 
3655387; 527246, 3655387; 527246, 3655330; 527217, 3655330; 527217, 
3655302; 527189, 3655302; 527189, 3655273; 527160, 3655273; 527160, 
3655245; 527132, 3655245; 527132, 3655217; 527104, 3655217; 527104, 
3655160; 527075, 3655160; 527075, 3655103; 527047, 3655103; 527047, 
3655075; 527019, 3655075; 527019, 3655018; 526990, 3655018; 526990, 
3654961; 526962, 3654961; 526962, 3654933; 526934, 3654933; 526934, 
3654876; 526905, 3654876; 526905, 3654791; 526877, 3654791; 526877, 
3654678; 526848, 3654678; 526848, 3654649; 526792, 3654649; 526792, 
3654621; 526763, 3654621; 526763, 3654593; 526735, 3654593; 526735, 
3654564; 526707, 3654564; 526707, 3654536; 526678, 3654536; 526678, 
3654479; 526650, 3654479; 526650, 3654280; 526621, 3654280; 526621, 
3654224; 526593, 3654224; 526593, 3654167; 526536, 3654167; 526536, 
3654139; 526480, 3654139; 526480, 3654110; 526451, 3654110; 526451, 
3654082; 526423, 3654082; 526423, 3654025; 526395, 3654025; 526395, 
3653968; 526366, 3653968; 526366, 3653883; 526338, 3653883; 526338, 
3653798; 526281, 3653798; 526281, 3653770; 526253, 3653770; 526253, 
3653741; 526224, 3653741; 526224, 3653713; 526196, 3653713; 526196, 
3653486; 526168, 3653486; 526168, 3653458; 525912, 3653458; 525912, 
3653429; 525884, 3653429; 525884, 3653288; 525856, 3653288; 525856, 
3653231; 525827, 3653231; 525827, 3653202; 525799, 3653202; 525799, 
3653174; 525770, 3653174; 525770, 3653146; 525742, 3653146; 525742, 
3653117; 525714, 3653117; 525714, 3653061; 525685, 3653061; 525685, 
3653032; 525657, 3653032; 525657, 3652919; 525629, 3652919; 525629, 
3652862; 525600, 3652862; 525600, 3652805; 525657, 3652805; 525657, 
3652777; 525714, 3652777; 525714, 3652720; 525742, 3652720; 525742, 
3652578; 525714, 3652578; 525714, 3652522; 525685, 3652522; 525685, 
3652465; 525657, 3652465; 525657, 3652323; 525685, 3652323; 525685, 
3652238; 525657, 3652238; 525657, 3652181; 525629, 3652181; 525629, 
3652153; 525600, 3652153; 525600, 3652124; 525572, 3652124; 525572, 
3652096; 525543, 3652096; 525543, 3652068; 525515, 3652068; 525515, 
3651954; 525572, 3651954; 525572, 3651897; 525543, 3651897; 525543, 
3651869; 525515, 3651869; 525515, 3651812; 525487, 3651812; 525487, 
3651699; 525458, 3651699; 525458, 3651671; 525430, 3651671; 525430, 
3651642; 525402, 3651642; 525402, 3651614; 525373, 3651614; 525373, 
3651585; 525345, 3651585; 525345, 3651529; 525316, 3651529; 525316, 
3651500; 525288, 3651500; 525288, 3651415; 525260, 3651415; 525260, 
3651358; 525231, 3651358; 525231, 3651302; 525203, 3651302; 525203, 
3651188; 525175, 3651188; 525175, 3651131; 525146, 3651131; 525146, 
3651046; 525118, 3651046; 525118, 3650961; 525090, 3650961; 525090, 
3650706; 525061, 3650706; 525061, 3650678; 525033, 3650678; 525033, 
3650649; 525004, 3650649; 525004, 3650621; 524976, 3650621; 524976, 
3650592; 524948, 3650592; 524948, 3650564; 524919, 3650564; 524919, 
3650536; 524863, 3650536; 524863, 3650479; 524834, 3650479; 524834, 
3650451; 524806, 3650451; 524806, 3650422; 524777, 3650422; 524777, 
3650394; 524749, 3650394; 524749, 3650337; 524721, 3650337; 524721, 
3650252; 524777, 3650252; 524777, 3650224; 524806, 3650224; 524806, 
3650252; 524891, 3650252; 524891, 3650224; 524976, 3650224; 524976, 
3650195; 525033, 3650195; 525033, 3650167; 525090, 3650167; 525090, 
3650195; 525118, 3650195; 525118, 3650224; 525203, 3650224; 525203, 
3650252; 525260, 3650252; 525260, 3650280; 525288, 3650280; 525288, 
3650309; 525316, 3650309; 525316, 3650366; 525345, 3650366; 525345, 
3650394; 525402, 3650394; 525402, 3650422; 525458, 3650422; 525458, 
3650451; 525572, 3650451; 525572, 3650422; 525685, 3650422; 525685, 
3650394; 525742, 3650394; 525742, 3650422; 525799, 3650422; 525799, 
3650451; 525912, 3650451; 525912, 3650422; 525884, 3650422; 525884, 
3650337; 525856, 3650337; 525856, 3650309; 525799, 3650309; 525799, 
3650280; 525742, 3650280; 525742, 3650252; 525685, 3650252; 525685, 
3650224; 525487, 3650224; 525487, 3650195; 525402, 3650195; 525402, 
3650167; 525288, 3650167; 525288, 3650139; 525260, 3650139; 525260, 
3650167; 525231, 3650167; 525231, 3650139; 525203, 3650139; 525203, 
3650053; 525175, 3650053; 525175, 3650025; 525118, 3650025; 525118, 
3649997; 525033, 3649997; 525033, 3650025; 524976, 3650025; 524976, 
3650053; 524834, 3650053; 524834, 3650025; 524806, 3650025; 524806, 
3650053; 524777, 3650053; 524777, 3650025; 524721, 3650025; 524721, 
3649997; 524692, 3649997; 524692, 3650025; 524664, 3650025; 524664, 
3650053; 524607, 3650053; 524607, 3650082; 524465, 3650082; 524465, 
3649940; 524494, 3649940; 524494, 3649912; 524465, 3649912; 524465, 
3649883; 524409, 3649883; 524409, 3649855; 524380, 3649855; 524380, 
3649827; 524352, 3649827; 524352, 3649798; 524324, 3649798; 524324, 
3649741; 524295, 3649741; 524295, 3649713; 524267, 3649713; 524267, 
3649656; 524238, 3649656; 524238, 3649600; 524210, 3649600; 524210, 
3649543; 524182, 3649543; 524182, 3649514; 524153, 3649514; 524153, 
3649458; 524125, 3649458; 524125, 3649429; 524097, 3649429; 524097, 
3649401; 524068, 3649401; 524068, 3649344; 524040, 3649344; 524040, 
3649231; 524068, 3649231; 524068, 3649202; 524097, 3649202; 524097, 
3649174; 524125, 3649174; 524125, 3649146; 524182, 3649146; 524182, 
3649061; 524210, 3649061; 524210, 3649032; 524238, 3649032; 524238, 
3649004; 524352, 3649004; 524352, 3648975; 524409, 3648975; 524409, 
3648947; 524437, 3648947; 524437, 3648919; 524465, 3648919; 524465, 
3648862; 524494, 3648862; 524494, 3648855; 524231, 3648849; 524040, 
3648846; 524040, 3648862; 524012, 3648862; 524012, 3648890; 523983, 
3648890; 523983, 3648919; 523926, 3648919; 523926, 3648947; 523898, 
3648947; 523898, 3648975; 523841, 3648975; 523841, 3649004; 523785, 
3649004; 523785, 3649032; 523699, 3649032; 523699, 3649089; 523728, 
3649089; 523728, 3649146; 523756, 3649146; 523756, 3649288; 523785, 
3649288; 523785, 3649429; 523841, 3649429; 523841, 3649486; 523870, 
3649486; 523870, 3649543; 523841, 3649543; 523841, 3649571; 523813, 
3649571; 523813, 3649600; 523841, 3649600; 523841, 3649628; 523870, 
3649628; 523870, 3649656; 523898, 3649656; 523898, 3649685; 523926, 
3649685; 523926, 3649770; 523955, 3649770; 523955, 3649798; 523983, 
3649798; 523983, 3649827; 524012, 3649827; 524012, 3649883; 524040, 
3649883; 524040, 3650025; 524012,

[[Page 450]]

3650025; 524012, 3650082; 523983, 3650082; 523983, 3650167; 524040, 
3650167; 524040, 3650224; 524068, 3650224; 524068, 3650280; 524125, 
3650280; 524125, 3650337; 524153, 3650337; 524153, 3650366; 524210, 
3650366; 524210, 3650394; 524238, 3650394; 524238, 3650422; 524267, 
3650422; 524267, 3650479; 524295, 3650479; 524295, 3650592; 524465, 
3650592; 524465, 3650621; 524551, 3650621; 524551, 3650649; 524579, 
3650649; 524579, 3650678; 524607, 3650678; 524607, 3650706; 524636, 
3650706; 524636, 3650734; 524749, 3650734; 524749, 3650763; 524806, 
3650763; 524806, 3650791; 524834, 3650791; 524834, 3650819; 524863, 
3650819; 524863, 3650961; 524891, 3650961; 524891, 3650990; 524919, 
3650990; 524919, 3651018; 524948, 3651018; 524948, 3651103; 524976, 
3651103; 524976, 3651188; 525004, 3651188; 525004, 3651245; 525033, 
3651245; 525033, 3651330; 525061, 3651330; 525061, 3651358; 525090, 
3651358; 525090, 3651444; 525118, 3651444; 525118, 3651500; 525146, 
3651500; 525146, 3651557; 525175, 3651557; 525175, 3651614; 525203, 
3651614; 525203, 3651642; 525231, 3651642; 525231, 3651699; 525260, 
3651699; 525260, 3651727; 525316, 3651727; 525316, 3651756; 525345, 
3651756; 525345, 3651812; 525373, 3651812; 525373, 3651983; 525402, 
3651983; 525402, 3652096; 525430, 3652096; 525430, 3652181; 525458, 
3652181; 525458, 3652210; 525487, 3652210; 525487, 3652266; 525515, 
3652266; 525515, 3652323; 525487, 3652323; 525487, 3652408; 525515, 
3652408; 525515, 3652493; 525543, 3652493; 525543, 3652550; 525572, 
3652550; 525572, 3652635; 525543, 3652635; 525543, 3652663; 525515, 
3652663; 525515, 3652692; 525487, 3652692; 525487, 3652749; 525458, 
3652749; 525458, 3652777; 525487, 3652777; 525487, 3653061; 525458, 
3653061; 525458, 3653117; 525430, 3653117; 525430, 3653174; 525543, 
3653174; 525543, 3653146; 525600, 3653146; 525600, 3653174; 525657, 
3653174; 525657, 3653231; 525685, 3653231; 525685, 3653259; 525742, 
3653259; 525742, 3653288; 525770, 3653288; 525770, 3653401; 525799, 
3653401; 525799, 3653429; 525770, 3653429; 525770, 3653486; 525799, 
3653486; 525799, 3653543; 525827, 3653543; 525827, 3653571; 526082, 
3653571; 526082, 3653600; 526111, 3653600; 526111, 3653798; 526139, 
3653798; 526139, 3653827; 526168, 3653827; 526168, 3653855; 526196, 
3653855; 526196, 3653883; 526224, 3653883; 526224, 3653912; 526253, 
3653912; 526253, 3653968; 526281, 3653968; 526281, 3654054; 526309, 
3654054; 526309, 3654139; 526338, 3654139; 526338, 3654195; 526366, 
3654195; 526366, 3654280; 526395, 3654280; 526395, 3654337; 526423, 
3654337; 526423, 3654366; 526451, 3654366; 526451, 3654394; 526480, 
3654394; 526480, 3654479; 526508, 3654479; 526508, 3654536; 526536, 
3654536; 526536, 3654593; 526565, 3654593; 526565, 3654621; 526593, 
3654621; 526593, 3654649; 526621, 3654649; 526621, 3654678; 526650, 
3654678; 526650, 3654734; 526678, 3654734; 526678, 3654791; 526707, 
3654791; 526707, 3654905; 526735, 3654905; 526735, 3654990; 526763, 
3654990; 526763, 3655018; 526792, 3655018; 526792, 3655046; 526820, 
3655046; 526820, 3655075; 526848, 3655075; 526848, 3655103; 526877, 
3655103; 526877, 3655160; 526905, 3655160; 526905, 3655217; 526934, 
3655217; 526934, 3655273; 526962, 3655273; 526962, 3655302; 526990, 
3655302; 526990, 3655358; 527047, 3655358; 527047, 3655387; 527075, 
3655387; 527075, 3655415; 527132, 3655415; 527132, 3655444; 527160, 
3655444; 527160, 3655500; 527189, 3655500; 527189, 3655585; 527217, 
3655585; 527217, 3655671; 527274, 3655671; 527274, 3655699; 527302, 
3655699; 527302, 3655727; 527331, 3655727; 527331, 3655756; 527359, 
3655756; 527359, 3655784; 527387, 3655784; 527387, 3655841; 527416, 
3655841; 527416, 3655869; 527444, 3655869; 527444, 3655954; 527473, 
3655954; 527473, 3656011; 527501, 3656011; 527501, 3656039; 527558, 
3656039; 527558, 3656068; 527586, 3656068; 527586, 3656096; 527614, 
3656096; 527614, 3656153; 527671, 3656153; 527671, 3656210; 527699, 
3656210; 527699, 3656238; 527728, 3656238; 527728, 3656266; 527756, 
3656266; 527756, 3656323; 527785, 3656323; 527785, 3656380; 527813, 
3656380; 527813, 3656408; 527841, 3656408; 527841, 3656436; 527870, 
3656436; 527870, 3656465; 527898, 3656465; 527898, 3656493; 527926, 
3656493; 527926, 3656550; 527955, 3656550; 527955, 3656663; 527983, 
3656663; 527983, 3656720; 528040, 3656720; 528040, 3656749; 528068, 
3656749; 528068, 3656777; 528097, 3656777; 528097, 3656890; 528125, 
3656890; 528125, 3656919; 528182, 3656919; 528182, 3656947; 528239, 
3656947; 528239, 3656976; 528267, 3656976; 528267, 3657032; 528295, 
3657032; 528295, 3657089; 528352, 3657089; 528352, 3657146; 528380, 
3657146; 528380, 3657174; 528437, 3657174; 528437, 3657202; 528465, 
3657202; 528465, 3657231; 528494, 3657231; 528494, 3657259; 528522, 
3657259; 528522, 3657316; 528551, 3657316; 528551, 3657458; 528579, 
3657458; 528579, 3657515; 528607, 3657515; 528607, 3657571; 528636, 
3657571; 528636, 3657600; 528721, 3657600; 528721, 3657628; 528749, 
3657628; 528749, 3657656; 528778, 3657656; 528778, 3657685; 528749, 
3657685; 528749, 3657741; returning to 528778, 3657741.
    (iv) Subunit 17b: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle map El Cajon Mtn. 
San Vicente Reservoir, and El Cajon, land bounded by the following UTM 
coordinates (E, N): 514386, 3639704; 514386, 3639674; 514446, 3639674; 
514446, 3639644; 514536, 3639644; 514536, 3639614; 514566, 3639614; 
514566, 3639584; 514596, 3639584; 514596, 3639614; 514866, 3639614; 
514866, 3639584; 514926, 3639584; 514926, 3639554; 514956, 3639554; 
514956, 3639524; 514986, 3639524; 514986, 3639494; 515016, 3639494; 
515016, 3639404; 515046, 3639404; 515046, 3639374; 515076, 3639374; 
515076, 3639344; 515226, 3639344; 515226, 3639314; 515235, 3639314; 
515286, 3639314; 515286, 3639344; 515376, 3639344; 515376, 3639314; 
515406, 3639314; 515406, 3639254; 515436, 3639254; 515436, 3639224; 
515496, 3639224; 515496, 3639164; 515526, 3639164; 515526, 3639134; 
515586, 3639134; 515586, 3639104; 515646, 3639104; 515646, 3639134; 
515796, 3639134; 515796, 3639104; 515856, 3639104; 515856, 3639074; 
515916, 3639074; 515916, 3639044; 516006, 3639044; 516006, 3639014; 
516066, 3639014; 516066, 3638984; 516126, 3638984; 516126, 3638924; 
516156, 3638924; 516156, 3638894; 516186, 3638894; 516186, 3638834; 
516216, 3638834; 516216, 3638804; 516336, 3638804; 516336, 3638774; 
516426, 3638774; 516426, 3638744; 516516, 3638744; 516516, 3638714; 
516606, 3638714; 516606, 3638684; 516726, 3638684; 516726, 3638654; 
517176, 3638654; 517176, 3638684; 517206, 3638684; 517206, 3638714; 
517266, 3638714; 517266, 3638744; 517296, 3638744; 517296, 3638774; 
517326, 3638774; 517326, 3638834; 517386, 3638834; 517386, 3638864; 
517446, 3638864; 517446, 3638834; 517506, 3638834; 517506, 3638804; 
517536, 3638804; 517536, 3638744; 517566, 3638744; 517566, 3638714; 
517626, 3638714; 517626, 3638684; 517926,

[[Page 451]]

3638684; 517926, 3638666; 517746, 3638558; 517746, 3638564; 517716, 
3638564; 517716, 3638354; 517686, 3638354; 517686, 3638324; 517446, 
3638324; 517446, 3638294; 517176, 3638294; 517176, 3638264; 517116, 
3638264; 517116, 3638294; 517026, 3638294; 517026, 3638324; 516906, 
3638324; 516906, 3638294; 516756, 3638294; 516756, 3638324; 516726, 
3638324; 516726, 3638354; 516606, 3638354; 516606, 3638384; 516546, 
3638384; 516546, 3638414; 516486, 3638414; 516486, 3638444; 516426, 
3638444; 516426, 3638474; 516276, 3638474; 516276, 3638504; 516126, 
3638504; 516126, 3638534; 516096, 3638534; 516096, 3638564; 516036, 
3638564; 516036, 3638594; 516006, 3638594; 516006, 3638624; 515976, 
3638624; 515976, 3638654; 515946, 3638654; 515946, 3638684; 515766, 
3638684; 515766, 3638714; 515646, 3638714; 515646, 3638744; 515436, 
3638744; 515436, 3638774; 515406, 3638774; 515406, 3638804; 515376, 
3638804; 515376, 3638834; 515316, 3638834; 515316, 3638864; 515256, 
3638864; 515256, 3638894; 515226, 3638894; 515226, 3638924; 515166, 
3638924; 515166, 3638954; 515106, 3638954; 515106, 3638984; 515046, 
3638984; 515046, 3639014; 514926, 3639014; 514926, 3638984; 514866, 
3638984; 514866, 3639014; 514836, 3639014; 514836, 3639044; 514806, 
3639044; 514806, 3639074; 514746, 3639074; 514746, 3639104; 514686, 
3639104; 514686, 3639134; 514626, 3639134; 514626, 3639194; 514596, 
3639194; 514596, 3639224; 514566, 3639224; 514566, 3639194; 514536, 
3639194; 514536, 3639164; 514446, 3639164; 514446, 3639134; 514356, 
3639134; 514356, 3639104; 514296, 3639104; 514296, 3639074; 514236, 
3639074; 514236, 3639044; 514176, 3639044; 514176, 3639014; 514146, 
3639014; 514146, 3638984; 514116, 3638984; 514116, 3638954; 514086, 
3638954; 514086, 3638894; 514116, 3638894; 514116, 3638864; 514146, 
3638864; 514146, 3638834; 514176, 3638834; 514176, 3638804; 514206, 
3638804; 514206, 3638714; 514176, 3638714; 514176, 3638684; 514146, 
3638684; 514146, 3638654; 514086, 3638654; 514086, 3638624; 514026, 
3638624; 514026, 3638594; 513966, 3638594; 513966, 3638564; 513876, 
3638564; 513876, 3638534; 513846, 3638534; 513846, 3638504; 513786, 
3638504; 513786, 3638474; 513756, 3638474; 513756, 3638444; 513726, 
3638444; 513726, 3638414; 513696, 3638414; 513696, 3638384; 513666, 
3638384; 513666, 3638234; 513576, 3638234; 513576, 3638204; 513516, 
3638204; 513516, 3638174; 513486, 3638174; 513486, 3638204; 513456, 
3638204; 513456, 3638234; 513366, 3638234; 513366, 3638204; 513336, 
3638204; 513336, 3638144; 513306, 3638144; 513306, 3637964; 513276, 
3637964; 513276, 3637934; 513216, 3637934; 513216, 3637904; 513186, 
3637904; 513186, 3637874; 513156, 3637874; 513156, 3637844; 513126, 
3637844; 513126, 3637814; 513096, 3637814; 513096, 3637784; 513066, 
3637784; 513066, 3637754; 513036, 3637754; 513036, 3637544; 512766, 
3637544; 512766, 3637514; 512646, 3637514; 512646, 3637484; 512556, 
3637484; 512556, 3637454; 512466, 3637454; 512466, 3637484; 512376, 
3637484; 512376, 3637514; 512346, 3637514; 512346, 3637544; 512226, 
3637544; 512226, 3637514; 512196, 3637514; 512196, 3637544; 512136, 
3637544; 512136, 3637574; 512046, 3637574; 512046, 3637544; 512016, 
3637544; 512016, 3637484; 511986, 3637484; 511986, 3637394; 511956, 
3637394; 511956, 3637334; 511926, 3637334; 511926, 3637274; 511896, 
3637274; 511896, 3637244; 511836, 3637244; 511836, 3637214; 511476, 
3637214; 511476, 3637184; 511386, 3637184; 511386, 3637214; 511356, 
3637214; 511356, 3637244; 511296, 3637244; 511296, 3637214; 511236, 
3637214; 511236, 3637184; 511146, 3637184; 511146, 3637154; 511086, 
3637154; 511086, 3637124; 511056, 3637124; 511056, 3637034; 511026, 
3637034; 511026, 3637004; 510876, 3637004; 510876, 3636974; 510846, 
3636974; 510846, 3636884; 510816, 3636884; 510816, 3636854; 510756, 
3636854; 510756, 3636824; 510726, 3636824; 510726, 3636794; 510696, 
3636794; 510696, 3636764; 510666, 3636764; 510666, 3636734; 510636, 
3636734; 510636, 3636704; 510606, 3636704; 510606, 3636674; 510576, 
3636674; 510576, 3636644; 510486, 3636644; 510486, 3636614; 510186, 
3636614; 510186, 3636584; 510036, 3636584; 510036, 3636554; 510006, 
3636554; 510006, 3636494; 510036, 3636494; 510036, 3636434; 510066, 
3636434; 510066, 3636374; 509886, 3636374; 509886, 3636344; 509856, 
3636344; 509856, 3636314; 509826, 3636314; 509826, 3636284; 509796, 
3636284; 509796, 3636254; 509736, 3636254; 509736, 3636224; 509706, 
3636224; 509706, 3636194; 509676, 3636194; 509676, 3636164; 509586, 
3636164; 509586, 3636134; 509556, 3636134; 509556, 3636104; 509526, 
3636104; 509526, 3636074; 509496, 3636074; 509496, 3636044; 509466, 
3636044; 509466, 3636014; 509406, 3636014; 509406, 3636134; 509256, 
3636134; 509256, 3636164; 509226, 3636164; 509226, 3636194; 509166, 
3636194; 509166, 3636224; 509106, 3636224; 509106, 3636254; 509076, 
3636254; 509076, 3636284; 509046, 3636284; 509046, 3636314; 509016, 
3636314; 509016, 3636344; 508986, 3636344; 508986, 3636404; 508956, 
3636404; 508956, 3636464; 508986, 3636464; 508986, 3636494; 509046, 
3636494; 509046, 3636614; 509016, 3636614; 509016, 3636644; 508986, 
3636644; 508986, 3636764; 508896, 3636764; 508896, 3636734; 508836, 
3636734; 508836, 3636764; 508806, 3636764; 508806, 3636794; 508566, 
3636794; 508566, 3636824; 508506, 3636824; 508506, 3636794; 508446, 
3636794; 508446, 3636764; 508326, 3636764; 508326, 3636734; 508176, 
3636734; 508176, 3636764; 508116, 3636764; 508116, 3636824; 508086, 
3636824; 508086, 3636854; 508026, 3636854; 508026, 3636824; 507996, 
3636824; 507996, 3636764; 507966, 3636764; 507965, 3636955; 508024, 
3637077; 507850, 3637102; 508032, 3637367; 508070, 3637532; 508385, 
3637457; 508865, 3637342; 508896, 3637424; 508896, 3637454; 508926, 
3637454; 508926, 3637424; 508986, 3637424; 508986, 3637394; 509106, 
3637394; 509106, 3637424; 509166, 3637424; 509166, 3637454; 509196, 
3637454; 509196, 3637484; 509256, 3637484; 509256, 3637514; 509316, 
3637514; 509316, 3637484; 509346, 3637484; 509346, 3637454; 509406, 
3637454; 509406, 3637424; 509466, 3637424; 509466, 3637394; 509496, 
3637394; 509496, 3637364; 509526, 3637364; 509526, 3637334; 509586, 
3637334; 509586, 3637244; 509616, 3637244; 509616, 3637214; 509706, 
3637214; 509706, 3637244; 509736, 3637244; 509736, 3637274; 509766, 
3637274; 509766, 3637304; 509796, 3637304; 509796, 3637334; 509826, 
3637334; 509826, 3637304; 509856, 3637304; 509856, 3637274; 509886, 
3637274; 509886, 3637214; 509916, 3637214; 509916, 3637184; 509946, 
3637184; 509946, 3637154; 509976, 3637154; 509976, 3637124; 510186, 
3637124; 510186, 3637094; 510306, 3637094; 510306, 3637124; 510336, 
3637124; 510336, 3637214; 510366, 3637214; 510366, 3637244; 510396, 
3637244; 510396, 3637304; 510426, 3637304; 510426, 3637334; 510456, 
3637334; 510456, 3637364; 510486, 3637364; 510486, 3637424; 510516, 
3637424; 510516, 3637454; 510546, 3637454; 510546, 3637484; 510576, 
3637484; 510576, 3637514; 510606,

[[Page 452]]

3637514; 510606, 3637544; 510636, 3637544; 510636, 3637604; 510657, 
3637604; 510666, 3637604; 510666, 3637634; 510696, 3637634; 510696, 
3637664; 510726, 3637664; 510726, 3637694; 510756, 3637694; 510756, 
3637754; 510786, 3637754; 510786, 3637784; 510846, 3637784; 510846, 
3637814; 510876, 3637814; 510876, 3637874; 510906, 3637874; 510906, 
3637904; 510966, 3637904; 510966, 3637874; 510996, 3637874; 510996, 
3637844; 511176, 3637844; 511176, 3637874; 511206, 3637874; 511206, 
3637904; 511266, 3637904; 511266, 3637934; 511296, 3637934; 511296, 
3638114; 511476, 3638114; 511476, 3638174; 511506, 3638174; 511506, 
3638324; 511566, 3638324; 511566, 3638354; 511716, 3638354; 511716, 
3638384; 511746, 3638384; 511746, 3638414; 511776, 3638414; 511776, 
3638444; 511836, 3638444; 511836, 3638474; 511926, 3638474; 511926, 
3638504; 511956, 3638504; 511956, 3638534; 511986, 3638534; 511986, 
3638564; 512016, 3638564; 512016, 3638594; 512076, 3638594; 512076, 
3638654; 512106, 3638654; 512106, 3638684; 512136, 3638684; 512136, 
3638714; 512166, 3638714; 512166, 3638684; 512196, 3638684; 512196, 
3638654; 512226, 3638654; 512226, 3638594; 512286, 3638594; 512286, 
3638564; 512316, 3638564; 512316, 3638534; 512436, 3638534; 512436, 
3638564; 512496, 3638564; 512496, 3638534; 512736, 3638534; 512736, 
3638504; 512856, 3638504; 512856, 3638534; 512886, 3638534; 512886, 
3638654; 512856, 3638654; 512856, 3638684; 512886, 3638684; 512886, 
3638774; 512916, 3638774; 512916, 3638804; 512946, 3638804; 512946, 
3638834; 513036, 3638834; 513036, 3638864; 513096, 3638864; 513096, 
3638894; 513156, 3638894; 513156, 3638954; 513186, 3638954; 513186, 
3639044; 513216, 3639044; 513216, 3639134; 513246, 3639134; 513246, 
3639194; 513276, 3639194; 513276, 3639254; 513306, 3639254; 513306, 
3639344; 513276, 3639344; 513276, 3639374; 513246, 3639374; 513246, 
3639404; 513276, 3639404; 513276, 3639494; 513306, 3639494; 513306, 
3639554; 513336, 3639554; 513336, 3639614; 513366, 3639614; 513366, 
3639644; 513516, 3639644; 513516, 3639674; 513666, 3639674; 513666, 
3639644; 513756, 3639644; 513756, 3639584; 513816, 3639584; 513816, 
3639554; 513876, 3639554; 513876, 3639524; 513906, 3639524; 513906, 
3639554; 513936, 3639554; 513936, 3639584; 513966, 3639584; 513966, 
3639614; 513996, 3639614; 513996, 3639644; 514026, 3639644; 514026, 
3639674; 514266, 3639674; 514266, 3639704; returning to 514386, 3639704.
    (v) Subunit 17d: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps El Cajon Mtn., 
Ramona, and San Vicente Reservoir. Land bounded by the following UTM 
coordinates (E, N): 516538, 3651895; 516538, 3651738; 516595, 3651747; 
516826, 3651690; 516843, 3651620; 516850, 3651614; 516846, 3651614; 
516846, 3651524; 516876, 3651524; 516876, 3651434; 516726, 3651434; 
516726, 3651404; 516666, 3651404; 516666, 3651374; 516606, 3651374; 
516606, 3651344; 516456, 3651344; 516456, 3651314; 516396, 3651314; 
516396, 3651284; 516216, 3651284; 516216, 3651254; 516186, 3651254; 
516186, 3651224; 516156, 3651224; 516156, 3651194; 516126, 3651194; 
516126, 3651164; 516036, 3651164; 516036, 3651104; 515976, 3651104; 
515976, 3651074; 515905, 3651074; 515905, 3651177; 515844, 3651227; 
515651, 3651214; 515498, 3651180; 515417, 3651156; 515395, 3651211; 
515168, 3651025; 514977, 3650964; 514856, 3650913; 514642, 3650849; 
514659, 3650833; 514685, 3650804; 514698, 3650791; 514722, 3650758; 
514801, 3650601; 514823, 3650568; 514605, 3650564; 514608, 3650502; 
514656, 3650454; 514722, 3650376; 514781, 3650355; 514826, 3650360; 
514826, 3650264; 514707, 3650264; 514698, 3650285; 514615, 3650380; 
514557, 3650470; 514524, 3650489; 514410, 3650476; 514339, 3650501; 
514204, 3650496; 514149, 3650502; 514098, 3650460; 514061, 3650426; 
514092, 3650289; 514108, 3650234; 514086, 3650234; 514086, 3650204; 
514056, 3650204; 514056, 3650144; 513996, 3650144; 513996, 3650114; 
513906, 3650114; 513906, 3650144; 513786, 3650144; 513786, 3650114; 
513696, 3650114; 513696, 3650144; 513636, 3650144; 513636, 3650174; 
513546, 3650174; 513546, 3650114; 513516, 3650114; 513516, 3650084; 
513306, 3650084; 513306, 3650054; 513186, 3650054; 513186, 3650084; 
513156, 3650084; 513156, 3650054; 513096, 3650054; 513096, 3650024; 
513066, 3650024; 513066, 3649994; 513036, 3649994; 513036, 3649964; 
513006, 3649964; 513006, 3649724; 512976, 3649724; 512976, 3649664; 
512946, 3649664; 512946, 3649604; 512976, 3649604; 512976, 3649484; 
512946, 3649484; 512946, 3649454; 512916, 3649454; 512916, 3649424; 
512886, 3649424; 512886, 3649394; 512766, 3649394; 512766, 3649364; 
512706, 3649364; 512706, 3649334; 512526, 3649334; 512526, 3649304; 
512496, 3649304; 512496, 3649244; 512436, 3649244; 512436, 3649214; 
512376, 3649214; 512376, 3649184; 512346, 3649184; 512346, 3649154; 
512316, 3649154; 512316, 3649064; 512226, 3649064; 512226, 3649034; 
512196, 3649034; 512196, 3649004; 512166, 3649004; 512166, 3648944; 
512136, 3648944; 512136, 3648914; 512076, 3648914; 512076, 3648884; 
512046, 3648884; 512046, 3648854; 512016, 3648854; 512016, 3648794; 
511986, 3648794; 511986, 3648764; 511956, 3648764; 511956, 3648734; 
511896, 3648734; 511896, 3648704; 511866, 3648704; 511866, 3648644; 
511836, 3648644; 511836, 3648614; 511866, 3648614; 511866, 3648524; 
511896, 3648524; 511896, 3648494; 511926, 3648494; 511926, 3648464; 
511956, 3648464; 511956, 3648434; 511986, 3648434; 511986, 3648374; 
511926, 3648374; 511926, 3648404; 511836, 3648404; 511836, 3648434; 
511776, 3648434; 511776, 3648464; 511746, 3648464; 511746, 3648494; 
511686, 3648494; 511686, 3648524; 511296, 3648524; 511296, 3648494; 
511236, 3648494; 511236, 3648464; 511206, 3648464; 511206, 3648434; 
511176, 3648434; 511176, 3648404; 511146, 3648404; 511146, 3648374; 
511116, 3648374; 511116, 3648344; 511086, 3648344; 511086, 3648314; 
510996, 3648314; 510996, 3648284; 510786, 3648284; 510786, 3648254; 
510756, 3648254; 510756, 3648224; 510726, 3648224; 510726, 3648194; 
510696, 3648194; 510696, 3648164; 510426, 3648164; 510426, 3648194; 
510336, 3648194; 510336, 3648164; 510306, 3648164; 510306, 3648134; 
510246, 3648134; 510246, 3648104; 510216, 3648104; 510216, 3648074; 
510186, 3648074; 510186, 3647864; 510216, 3647864; 510216, 3647624; 
510426, 3647624; 510426, 3647564; 510456, 3647564; 510456, 3647504; 
510486, 3647504; 510486, 3647474; 510546, 3647474; 510546, 3647384; 
510516, 3647384; 510516, 3647354; 510396, 3647354; 510396, 3647384; 
510336, 3647384; 510336, 3647414; 510036, 3647414; 510036, 3647354; 
510006, 3647354; 510006, 3647324; 509976, 3647324; 509976, 3647294; 
509946, 3647294; 509946, 3647264; 509916, 3647264; 509916, 3647204; 
509886, 3647204; 509886, 3647174; 509916, 3647174; 509916, 3647144; 
509946, 3647144; 509946, 3647114; 509976, 3647114; 509976, 3647084; 
510006, 3647084; 510006, 3647054; 509886, 3647054; 509886, 3647024; 
509796, 3647024; 509796, 3646994; 509766,

[[Page 453]]

3646994; 509766, 3646964; 509706, 3646964; 509706, 3646934; 509556, 
3646934; 509556, 3646904; 509586, 3646904; 509586, 3646874; 509676, 
3646874; 509676, 3646814; 509646, 3646814; 509646, 3646754; 509616, 
3646754; 509616, 3646724; 509586, 3646724; 509586, 3646634; 509556, 
3646634; 509556, 3646604; 509436, 3646604; 509436, 3646574; 509346, 
3646574; 509346, 3646544; 509286, 3646544; 509286, 3646514; 509256, 
3646514; 509256, 3646484; 509196, 3646484; 509196, 3646424; 509166, 
3646424; 509166, 3646394; 509136, 3646394; 509136, 3646364; 509106, 
3646364; 509106, 3646334; 509076, 3646334; 509076, 3646304; 509046, 
3646304; 509046, 3646274; 508986, 3646274; 508986, 3646244; 508956, 
3646244; 508956, 3646214; 508926, 3646214; 508926, 3646154; 508896, 
3646154; 508896, 3645884; 508866, 3645884; 508866, 3645824; 508836, 
3645824; 508836, 3645764; 508866, 3645764; 508866, 3645674; 508896, 
3645674; 508896, 3645614; 508926, 3645614; 508926, 3645554; 508956, 
3645554; 508956, 3645494; 508986, 3645494; 508986, 3645264; 508806, 
3645259; 508806, 3645404; 508776, 3645404; 508776, 3645494; 508746, 
3645494; 508746, 3645614; 508716, 3645614; 508716, 3645734; 508686, 
3645734; 508686, 3645884; 508656, 3645884; 508656, 3645914; 508626, 
3645914; 508626, 3645944; 508596, 3645944; 508596, 3645974; 508566, 
3645974; 508566, 3646184; 508596, 3646184; 508596, 3646214; 508686, 
3646214; 508686, 3646244; 508746, 3646244; 508746, 3646274; 508776, 
3646274; 508776, 3646304; 508806, 3646304; 508806, 3646364; 508866, 
3646364; 508866, 3646454; 508896, 3646454; 508896, 3646514; 508926, 
3646514; 508926, 3646574; 508956, 3646574; 508956, 3646724; 508986, 
3646724; 508986, 3646754; 509016, 3646754; 509016, 3646784; 509046, 
3646784; 509046, 3646904; 509016, 3646904; 509016, 3646964; 508986, 
3646964; 508986, 3647024; 509136, 3647024; 509136, 3646994; 509286, 
3646994; 509286, 3647024; 509316, 3647024; 509316, 3647084; 509346, 
3647084; 509346, 3647144; 509316, 3647144; 509316, 3647204; 509286, 
3647204; 509286, 3647234; 509316, 3647234; 509316, 3647264; 509346, 
3647264; 509346, 3647294; 509406, 3647294; 509406, 3647324; 509436, 
3647324; 509436, 3647474; 509496, 3647474; 509496, 3647504; 509526, 
3647504; 509526, 3647534; 509556, 3647534; 509556, 3647594; 509586, 
3647594; 509586, 3647624; 509616, 3647624; 509616, 3647654; 509646, 
3647654; 509646, 3647684; 509676, 3647684; 509676, 3647714; 509706, 
3647714; 509706, 3647744; 509736, 3647744; 509736, 3647774; 509766, 
3647774; 509766, 3647894; 509796, 3647894; 509796, 3647954; 509826, 
3647954; 509826, 3648014; 509856, 3648014; 509856, 3648044; 509886, 
3648044; 509886, 3648074; 509916, 3648074; 509916, 3648134; 509946, 
3648134; 509946, 3648164; 510006, 3648164; 510006, 3648194; 510096, 
3648194; 510096, 3648224; 510156, 3648224; 510156, 3648254; 510216, 
3648254; 510216, 3648284; 510276, 3648284; 510276, 3648314; 510336, 
3648314; 510336, 3648344; 510456, 3648344; 510456, 3648374; 510486, 
3648374; 510486, 3648404; 510546, 3648404; 510546, 3648434; 510576, 
3648434; 510576, 3648464; 510606, 3648464; 510606, 3648884; 510576, 
3648884; 510576, 3648944; 510546, 3648944; 510546, 3649034; 510546, 
3649061; 510546, 3649064; 510546, 3649124; 510606, 3649124; 510606, 
3649064; 510636, 3649064; 510636, 3649004; 510666, 3649004; 510666, 
3648974; 510696, 3648974; 510696, 3648944; 510726, 3648944; 510726, 
3648914; 510786, 3648914; 510786, 3648854; 510816, 3648854; 510816, 
3648794; 510876, 3648794; 510876, 3648824; 511026, 3648824; 511026, 
3648854; 511146, 3648854; 511146, 3648884; 511176, 3648884; 511176, 
3648914; 511236, 3648914; 511236, 3648944; 511386, 3648944; 511386, 
3648974; 511416, 3648974; 511416, 3649094; 511446, 3649094; 511446, 
3649124; 511416, 3649124; 511416, 3649154; 511446, 3649154; 511446, 
3649214; 511476, 3649214; 511476, 3649274; 511536, 3649274; 511536, 
3649304; 511566, 3649304; 511566, 3649334; 511626, 3649334; 511626, 
3649304; 511686, 3649304; 511686, 3649274; 511716, 3649274; 511716, 
3649244; 511746, 3649244; 511746, 3649214; 511776, 3649214; 511776, 
3649154; 511836, 3649154; 511836, 3649184; 511866, 3649184; 511866, 
3649214; 511836, 3649214; 511836, 3649304; 511896, 3649304; 511896, 
3649334; 511926, 3649334; 511926, 3649304; 512016, 3649304; 512016, 
3649334; 512076, 3649334; 512076, 3649364; 512106, 3649364; 512106, 
3649454; 512136, 3649454; 512136, 3649544; 512166, 3649544; 512166, 
3649574; 512196, 3649574; 512196, 3649634; 512226, 3649634; 512226, 
3649664; 512256, 3649664; 512256, 3649724; 512286, 3649724; 512286, 
3649754; 512346, 3649754; 512346, 3649784; 512496, 3649784; 512496, 
3649814; 512526, 3649814; 512526, 3649844; 512556, 3649844; 512556, 
3649904; 512586, 3649904; 512586, 3649934; 512676, 3649934; 512676, 
3649964; 512736, 3649964; 512736, 3649994; 512766, 3649994; 512766, 
3650024; 512796, 3650024; 512796, 3650084; 512826, 3650084; 512826, 
3650294; 512856, 3650294; 512856, 3650384; 513036, 3650384; 513036, 
3650414; 513246, 3650414; 513246, 3650444; 513306, 3650444; 513306, 
3650474; 513366, 3650474; 513366, 3650504; 513456, 3650504; 513456, 
3650474; 513516, 3650474; 513516, 3650444; 513576, 3650444; 513576, 
3650414; 513696, 3650414; 513696, 3650564; 513726, 3650564; 513726, 
3650594; 513846, 3650594; 513846, 3650624; 513876, 3650624; 513876, 
3650744; 513906, 3650744; 513906, 3650864; 513936, 3650864; 513936, 
3650924; 513906, 3650924; 513906, 3650954; 513846, 3650954; 513846, 
3651014; 513816, 3651014; 513816, 3651104; 513906, 3651104; 513906, 
3651134; 513936, 3651134; 513936, 3651164; 513966, 3651164; 513966, 
3651224; 513996, 3651224; 513996, 3651194; 514026, 3651194; 514026, 
3651164; 514116, 3651164; 514116, 3651194; 514146, 3651194; 514146, 
3651224; 514296, 3651224; 514296, 3651254; 514356, 3651254; 514356, 
3651284; 514416, 3651284; 514416, 3651314; 514446, 3651314; 514446, 
3651344; 514476, 3651344; 514476, 3651374; 514506, 3651374; 514506, 
3651426; 514609, 3651361; 514590, 3651257; 514673, 3651243; 514676, 
3651076; 515008, 3651103; 515126, 3651146; 515201, 3651206; 515231, 
3651282; 515232, 3651344; 515316, 3651344; 515316, 3651374; 515346, 
3651374; 515346, 3651404; 515376, 3651404; 515376, 3651434; 515496, 
3651434; 515496, 3651464; 515586, 3651464; 515586, 3651494; 515646, 
3651494; 515646, 3651524; 515706, 3651524; 515706, 3651554; 515796, 
3651554; 515796, 3651584; 515856, 3651584; 515856, 3651614; 515886, 
3651614; 515886, 3651644; 515916, 3651644; 515916, 3651794; 515946, 
3651794; 515946, 3651854; 515976, 3651854; 515976, 3651856; 515980, 
3651851; 515988, 3651751; 516102, 3651808; 516151, 3651733; 516426, 
3651859; returning to 516538, 3651895. Excluding land bounded by 514026, 
3650954; 514026, 3650924; 513966, 3650924; 513966, 3650894; 513996, 
3650894; 513996, 3650864; 514026, 3650864; 514026, 3650894; 514056, 
3650894; 514056, 3650954; returning to 514026, 3650954. Excluding land 
bounded

[[Page 454]]

by 510816, 3648437; 510816, 3648434; 510906, 3648434; 510906, 3648524; 
510876, 3648524; 510876, 3648554; 510846, 3648554; 510846, 3648464; 
510816, 3648464; returning to 510816, 3648437.
    (vi) Note: Map of Unit 17 is provided at paragraph (17)(v) of this 
entry.
    (23) Unit 18: Sweetwater River Basin, San Diego County, California.
    (i) Subunit 18a: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Alpine, Viejas 
Mountain, Descanso, and Cuyamaca Peak, land bounded by the following UTM 
coordinates (E, N): 523206, 3628484; 523206, 3628454; 523236, 3628454; 
523236, 3628484; 523206, 3628484; 523206, 3628574; 523176, 3628574; 
523176, 3628604; 523146, 3628604; 523146, 3628634; 523116, 3628634; 
523116, 3628664; 523086, 3628664; 523086, 3628724; 523056, 3628724; 
523056, 3628754; 523026, 3628754; 523026, 3628784; 522996, 3628784; 
522996, 3628844; 522966, 3628844; 522966, 3628874; 522936, 3628874; 
522936, 3628904; 522966, 3628904; 522966, 3628934; 523056, 3628934; 
523056, 3628964; 523086, 3628964; 523086, 3629024; 523116, 3629024; 
523116, 3629084; 523266, 3629084; 523266, 3629114; 523356, 3629114; 
523356, 3629144; 523416, 3629144; 523416, 3629174; 523446, 3629174; 
523446, 3629204; 523506, 3629204; 523506, 3629234; 523566, 3629234; 
523566, 3629264; 523626, 3629264; 523626, 3629294; 523656, 3629294; 
523656, 3629354; 523686, 3629354; 523686, 3629624; 523656, 3629624; 
523656, 3629774; 523686, 3629774; 523686, 3629834; 523716, 3629834; 
523716, 3629864; 523776, 3629864; 523776, 3629894; 523926, 3629894; 
523926, 3629864; 523986, 3629864; 523986, 3629954; 523956, 3629954; 
523956, 3630074; 523926, 3630074; 523926, 3630404; 523836, 3630404; 
523836, 3630374; 523596, 3630374; 523596, 3630464; 523566, 3630464; 
523566, 3630494; 523536, 3630494; 523536, 3630554; 523476, 3630554; 
523476, 3630584; 523386, 3630584; 523386, 3630614; 523146, 3630614; 
523146, 3630644; 523116, 3630644; 523116, 3630764; 523086, 3630764; 
523086, 3630794; 523056, 3630794; 523056, 3630854; 522996, 3630854; 
522996, 3630944; 522966, 3630944; 522966, 3631154; 522936, 3631154; 
522936, 3631184; 522906, 3631184; 522906, 3631244; 522876, 3631244; 
522876, 3631274; 522846, 3631274; 522846, 3631304; 522786, 3631304; 
522786, 3631364; 522756, 3631364; 522756, 3631394; 522786, 3631394; 
522786, 3631424; 522816, 3631424; 522816, 3631454; 522876, 3631454; 
522876, 3631484; 522906, 3631484; 522906, 3631514; 522936, 3631514; 
522936, 3631574; 522966, 3631574; 522966, 3631634; 522996, 3631634; 
522996, 3631694; 523026, 3631694; 523026, 3631724; 523086, 3631724; 
523086, 3631694; 523236, 3631694; 523236, 3631784; 523206, 3631784; 
523206, 3631874; 523266, 3631874; 523266, 3631844; 523416, 3631844; 
523416, 3631874; 523471, 3631874; 523482, 3631836; 523543, 3631812; 
523666, 3631897; 523781, 3631955; 523778, 3632054; 523836, 3632054; 
523836, 3632114; 523866, 3632114; 523866, 3632294; 523836, 3632294; 
523836, 3632354; 523806, 3632354; 523806, 3632444; 523776, 3632444; 
523776, 3632474; 523746, 3632474; 523746, 3632504; 523716, 3632504; 
523716, 3632521; 523846, 3632524; 523844, 3632718; 523746, 3632717; 
523746, 3632774; 523776, 3632774; 523776, 3632834; 523836, 3632834; 
523836, 3632864; 523926, 3632864; 523926, 3632882; 524324, 3632835; 
524324, 3632662; 524365, 3632665; 524470, 3632717; 524533, 3632707; 
524570, 3632752; 524570, 3632806; 524672, 3632795; 524734, 3632795; 
524790, 3632798; 524886, 3632823; 524886, 3632804; 524856, 3632804; 
524856, 3632774; 524796, 3632774; 524796, 3632744; 524766, 3632744; 
524766, 3632684; 524736, 3632684; 524736, 3632654; 524706, 3632654; 
524706, 3632534; 524766, 3632534; 524766, 3632504; 524826, 3632504; 
524826, 3632534; 524856, 3632534; 524856, 3632564; 524886, 3632564; 
524886, 3632714; 524916, 3632714; 524916, 3632744; 524946, 3632744; 
524946, 3632774; 524976, 3632774; 524976, 3632804; 525036, 3632804; 
525036, 3632841; 525080, 3632802; 525120, 3632775; 525184, 3632775; 
525229, 3632788; 525275, 3632806; 525339, 3632840; 525417, 3632859; 
525557, 3632876; 525714, 3632864; 525829, 3632968; 526147, 3633170; 
526126, 3633229; 526094, 3633314; 526236, 3633314; 526236, 3633344; 
526266, 3633344; 526266, 3633404; 526296, 3633404; 526296, 3633434; 
526326, 3633434; 526326, 3633464; 526356, 3633464; 526356, 3633494; 
526386, 3633494; 526386, 3633554; 526416, 3633554; 526416, 3633584; 
526446, 3633584; 526446, 3633614; 526596, 3633614; 526596, 3633644; 
526656, 3633644; 526656, 3633674; 526806, 3633674; 526806, 3633704; 
526866, 3633704; 526866, 3633734; 526896, 3633734; 526896, 3633764; 
526926, 3633764; 526926, 3633794; 526956, 3633794; 526956, 3633914; 
526986, 3633914; 526986, 3633944; 527030, 3633944; 527039, 3633791; 
527039, 3633783; 527039, 3633675; 527041, 3633574; 527047, 3633401; 
527049, 3633344; 526986, 3633344; 526986, 3633314; 526806, 3633314; 
526806, 3633284; 526686, 3633284; 526686, 3633224; 526656, 3633224; 
526656, 3633194; 526566, 3633194; 526566, 3633164; 526536, 3633164; 
526536, 3633134; 526506, 3633134; 526506, 3633104; 526476, 3633104; 
526476, 3633044; 526446, 3633044; 526446, 3633014; 526416, 3633014; 
526416, 3632924; 526386, 3632924; 526386, 3632864; 526356, 3632864; 
526356, 3632774; 526266, 3632774; 526266, 3632744; 526236, 3632744; 
526236, 3632714; 526116, 3632714; 526116, 3632684; 526086, 3632684; 
526086, 3632654; 526056, 3632654; 526056, 3632594; 525996, 3632594; 
525996, 3632564; 526026, 3632564; 526026, 3632354; 526056, 3632354; 
526056, 3632324; 526026, 3632324; 526026, 3632264; 525786, 3632264; 
525786, 3632294; 525726, 3632294; 525726, 3632324; 525636, 3632324; 
525636, 3632264; 525606, 3632264; 525606, 3632174; 525576, 3632174; 
525576, 3632144; 525546, 3632144; 525546, 3632114; 525456, 3632114; 
525456, 3632084; 525426, 3632084; 525426, 3632114; 525396, 3632114; 
525396, 3632144; 525366, 3632144; 525366, 3632204; 525336, 3632204; 
525336, 3632234; 525306, 3632234; 525306, 3632294; 525276, 3632294; 
525276, 3632324; 525246, 3632324; 525246, 3632504; 525126, 3632504; 
525126, 3632474; 525036, 3632474; 525036, 3632444; 524976, 3632444; 
524976, 3632414; 524916, 3632414; 524916, 3632384; 524886, 3632384; 
524886, 3632354; 524856, 3632354; 524856, 3632324; 524796, 3632324; 
524796, 3632354; 524706, 3632354; 524706, 3632384; 524646, 3632384; 
524646, 3632414; 524526, 3632414; 524526, 3632444; 524256, 3632444; 
524256, 3632414; 524226, 3632414; 524226, 3632384; 524196, 3632384; 
524196, 3632354; 524166, 3632354; 524166, 3632294; 524136, 3632294; 
524136, 3632234; 524106, 3632234; 524106, 3632174; 524046, 3632174; 
524046, 3632144; 523986, 3632144; 523986, 3631874; 523956, 3631874; 
523956, 3631664; 523896, 3631664; 523896, 3631634; 523746, 3631634; 
523746, 3631544; 523686, 3631544; 523686, 3631514; 523596, 3631514; 
523596, 3631484; 523566, 3631484; 523566, 3631424;

[[Page 455]]

523536, 3631424; 523536, 3631304; 523566, 3631304; 523566, 3631214; 
523506, 3631214; 523506, 3631184; 523386, 3631184; 523386, 3631124; 
523356, 3631124; 523356, 3631094; 523326, 3631094; 523326, 3631034; 
523266, 3631034; 523266, 3631004; 523296, 3631004; 523296, 3630974; 
523326, 3630974; 523326, 3630944; 523296, 3630944; 523296, 3630914; 
523266, 3630914; 523266, 3630884; 523296, 3630884; 523296, 3630854; 
523326, 3630854; 523326, 3630824; 523412, 3630824; 523432, 3630793; 
523456, 3630765; 523539, 3630752; 523634, 3630720; 523692, 3630665; 
523749, 3630655; 523796, 3630603; 523848, 3630572; 523942, 3630572; 
523979, 3630605; 524000, 3630663; 524106, 3630748; 524301, 3630830; 
524386, 3630821; 524468, 3630802; 524536, 3630778; 524557, 3630722; 
524611, 3630681; 524715, 3630624; 524796, 3630603; 524796, 3630554; 
524826, 3630554; 524826, 3630524; 524856, 3630524; 524856, 3630494; 
524886, 3630494; 524886, 3630404; 524916, 3630404; 524916, 3630374; 
524976, 3630374; 524976, 3630344; 525066, 3630344; 525066, 3630374; 
525096, 3630374; 525096, 3630404; 525066, 3630404; 525066, 3630434; 
525036, 3630434; 525036, 3630494; 525006, 3630494; 525006, 3630554; 
524976, 3630554; 524976, 3630674; 525126, 3630674; 525126, 3630704; 
525186, 3630704; 525186, 3630734; 525216, 3630734; 525216, 3630764; 
525246, 3630764; 525246, 3630734; 525306, 3630734; 525306, 3630704; 
525336, 3630704; 525336, 3630674; 525366, 3630674; 525366, 3630644; 
525396, 3630644; 525396, 3630614; 525426, 3630614; 525426, 3630584; 
525666, 3630584; 525666, 3630614; 525696, 3630614; 525696, 3630644; 
525846, 3630644; 525846, 3630674; 525906, 3630674; 525906, 3630734; 
526116, 3630734; 526116, 3630704; 526146, 3630704; 526146, 3630674; 
526176, 3630674; 526176, 3630644; 526206, 3630644; 526206, 3630614; 
526236, 3630614; 526236, 3630584; 526296, 3630584; 526296, 3630554; 
526476, 3630554; 526476, 3630584; 526506, 3630584; 526506, 3630614; 
526536, 3630614; 526536, 3630644; 526566, 3630644; 526566, 3630674; 
526626, 3630674; 526626, 3630704; 526656, 3630704; 526656, 3630674; 
526686, 3630674; 526686, 3630764; 526716, 3630764; 526716, 3630794; 
526746, 3630794; 526746, 3630824; 526776, 3630824; 526776, 3630884; 
526806, 3630884; 526806, 3630914; 526836, 3630914; 526836, 3630944; 
526866, 3630944; 526866, 3631004; 526896, 3631004; 526896, 3631034; 
526926, 3631034; 526926, 3631064; 526956, 3631064; 526956, 3631094; 
526986, 3631094; 526986, 3631154; 527016, 3631154; 527016, 3631184; 
527046, 3631184; 527046, 3631214; 527076, 3631214; 527076, 3631244; 
527166, 3631244; 527166, 3631274; 527226, 3631274; 527226, 3631304; 
527286, 3631304; 527286, 3631334; 527346, 3631334; 527346, 3631364; 
527406, 3631364; 527406, 3631394; 527436, 3631394; 527436, 3631424; 
527466, 3631424; 527466, 3631454; 527526, 3631454; 527526, 3631514; 
527556, 3631514; 527556, 3631544; 527586, 3631544; 527586, 3631574; 
527616, 3631574; 527616, 3631604; 527646, 3631604; 527646, 3631664; 
527706, 3631664; 527706, 3631694; 527856, 3631694; 527856, 3631664; 
527976, 3631664; 527976, 3631634; 528036, 3631634; 528036, 3631664; 
528156, 3631664; 528156, 3631634; 528246, 3631634; 528246, 3631604; 
528396, 3631604; 528396, 3631634; 528486, 3631634; 528486, 3631664; 
528606, 3631664; 528606, 3631634; 528756, 3631634; 528756, 3631664; 
528816, 3631664; 528816, 3631694; 528906, 3631694; 528906, 3631634; 
528876, 3631634; 528876, 3631544; 528906, 3631544; 528906, 3631514; 
528936, 3631514; 528936, 3631544; 529056, 3631544; 529056, 3631574; 
529116, 3631574; 529116, 3631604; 529146, 3631604; 529146, 3631664; 
529176, 3631664; 529176, 3631694; 529266, 3631694; 529266, 3631724; 
529296, 3631724; 529296, 3631754; 529356, 3631754; 529356, 3631724; 
529386, 3631724; 529386, 3631694; 529446, 3631694; 529446, 3631664; 
529476, 3631664; 529476, 3631634; 529506, 3631634; 529506, 3631604; 
529656, 3631604; 529656, 3631634; 529686, 3631634; 529686, 3631694; 
529716, 3631694; 529716, 3631724; 529746, 3631724; 529746, 3631754; 
529776, 3631754; 529776, 3631784; 529806, 3631784; 529806, 3631814; 
529836, 3631814; 529836, 3631844; 529926, 3631844; 529926, 3631874; 
529986, 3631874; 529986, 3631934; 530046, 3631934; 530046, 3631904; 
530106, 3631904; 530106, 3631964; 530136, 3631964; 530136, 3632024; 
530166, 3632024; 530166, 3632054; 530196, 3632054; 530196, 3632084; 
530226, 3632084; 530226, 3632144; 530406, 3632144; 530406, 3632174; 
530466, 3632174; 530466, 3632204; 530496, 3632204; 530496, 3632234; 
530586, 3632234; 530586, 3632324; 530556, 3632324; 530556, 3632384; 
530526, 3632384; 530526, 3632414; 530496, 3632414; 530496, 3632444; 
530466, 3632444; 530466, 3632504; 530436, 3632504; 530436, 3632714; 
530466, 3632714; 530466, 3632744; 530526, 3632744; 530526, 3632714; 
530586, 3632714; 530586, 3632684; 530616, 3632684; 530616, 3632654; 
530646, 3632654; 530646, 3632624; 530736, 3632624; 530736, 3632654; 
530766, 3632654; 530766, 3632714; 530826, 3632714; 530826, 3632744; 
530886, 3632744; 530886, 3632774; 530916, 3632774; 530916, 3632744; 
530946, 3632744; 531066, 3632744; 531066, 3632774; 531156, 3632774; 
531156, 3632744; 531186, 3632744; 531186, 3632714; 531336, 3632714; 
531336, 3632774; 531366, 3632774; 531366, 3632834; 531396, 3632834; 
531396, 3632864; 531426, 3632864; 531426, 3632834; 531516, 3632834; 
531516, 3632864; 531576, 3632864; 531576, 3632894; 531606, 3632894; 
531606, 3632924; 531636, 3632924; 531636, 3632954; 531666, 3632954; 
531666, 3632984; 531726, 3632984; 531726, 3632954; 531816, 3632954; 
531816, 3632984; 531906, 3632984; 531906, 3633014; 531936, 3633014; 
531936, 3633044; 531996, 3633044; 531996, 3633074; 532056, 3633074; 
532056, 3633104; 532086, 3633104; 532086, 3633134; 532176, 3633134; 
532176, 3633164; 532236, 3633164; 532236, 3633194; 532296, 3633194; 
532296, 3633224; 532326, 3633224; 532326, 3633194; 532416, 3633194; 
532416, 3633134; 532446, 3633134; 532446, 3633074; 532476, 3633074; 
532476, 3633044; 532446, 3633044; 532446, 3633014; 532476, 3633014; 
532476, 3632924; 532506, 3632924; 532506, 3632894; 532536, 3632894; 
532536, 3632864; 532566, 3632864; 532566, 3632804; 532596, 3632804; 
532596, 3632774; 532626, 3632774; 532626, 3632714; 532686, 3632714; 
532686, 3632744; 532746, 3632744; 532746, 3632774; 532776, 3632774; 
532776, 3632744; 532806, 3632744; 532806, 3632714; 532836, 3632714; 
532836, 3632684; 532956, 3632684; 532956, 3632654; 533016, 3632654; 
533016, 3632624; 533046, 3632624; 533046, 3632594; 533136, 3632594; 
533136, 3632624; 533196, 3632624; 533196, 3632654; 533226, 3632654; 
533226, 3632684; 533256, 3632684; 533256, 3632774; 533286, 3632774; 
533286, 3632984; 533256, 3632984; 533256, 3633014; 533226, 3633014; 
533226, 3633074; 533196, 3633074; 533196, 3633194; 533256, 3633194; 
533256, 3633224; 533286, 3633224; 533286, 3633254; 533316, 3633254; 
533316, 3633314; 533346, 3633314; 533346, 3633374; 533376, 3633374; 
533376, 3633404; 533466, 3633404;

[[Page 456]]

533466, 3633434; 533496, 3633434; 533496, 3633404; 533586, 3633404; 
533586, 3633494; 533556, 3633494; 533556, 3633524; 533586, 3633524; 
533586, 3633554; 533946, 3633554; 533946, 3633524; 534246, 3633524; 
534246, 3633494; 534306, 3633494; 534306, 3633404; 534336, 3633404; 
534336, 3633224; 534366, 3633224; 534366, 3633194; 534396, 3633194; 
534396, 3633164; 534456, 3633164; 534456, 3633194; 534486, 3633194; 
534486, 3633344; 534516, 3633344; 534516, 3633374; 534546, 3633374; 
534546, 3633404; 534606, 3633404; 534606, 3633434; 534636, 3633434; 
534636, 3633464; 534666, 3633464; 534666, 3633494; 534696, 3633494; 
534696, 3633554; 534726, 3633554; 534726, 3633584; 534696, 3633584; 
534696, 3633614; 534666, 3633614; 534666, 3633644; 534636, 3633644; 
534636, 3633674; 534666, 3633674; 534666, 3633704; 534876, 3633704; 
534876, 3633674; 534936, 3633674; 534936, 3633614; 535026, 3633614; 
535026, 3633554; 535056, 3633554; 535056, 3633434; 535086, 3633434; 
535086, 3633404; 535116, 3633404; 535116, 3633374; 535176, 3633374; 
535176, 3633344; 535236, 3633344; 535236, 3633314; 535446, 3633314; 
535446, 3633344; 535476, 3633344; 535476, 3633374; 535506, 3633374; 
535506, 3633404; 535536, 3633404; 535536, 3633434; 535566, 3633434; 
535566, 3633494; 535596, 3633494; 535596, 3633524; 535656, 3633524; 
535656, 3633494; 535806, 3633494; 535806, 3633524; 535836, 3633524; 
535836, 3633554; 535866, 3633554; 535866, 3633584; 535896, 3633584; 
535896, 3633614; 535926, 3633614; 535926, 3633644; 535956, 3633644; 
535956, 3633734; 535986, 3633734; 535986, 3633824; 535956, 3633824; 
535956, 3633944; 535926, 3633944; 535926, 3634094; 535956, 3634094; 
535956, 3634184; 535986, 3634184; 535986, 3634244; 536016, 3634244; 
536016, 3634274; 536046, 3634274; 536046, 3634364; 536016, 3634364; 
536016, 3634394; 535986, 3634394; 535986, 3634424; 535956, 3634424; 
535956, 3634454; 535926, 3634454; 535926, 3634484; 535896, 3634484; 
535896, 3634514; 535866, 3634514; 535866, 3634574; 535776, 3634574; 
535776, 3634544; 535626, 3634544; 535626, 3634604; 535596, 3634604; 
535596, 3634664; 535566, 3634664; 535566, 3634784; 535536, 3634784; 
535536, 3634814; 535506, 3634814; 535506, 3634844; 535446, 3634844; 
535446, 3634874; 535416, 3634874; 535416, 3634904; 535386, 3634904; 
535386, 3634934; 535356, 3634934; 535356, 3634964; 535326, 3634964; 
535326, 3635024; 535296, 3635024; 535296, 3635114; 535326, 3635114; 
535326, 3635144; 535356, 3635144; 535356, 3635114; 535446, 3635114; 
535446, 3635084; 535506, 3635084; 535506, 3635054; 535596, 3635054; 
535596, 3635024; 535712, 3635024; 535732, 3634993; 535817, 3634951; 
535894, 3634948; 535944, 3634977; 535983, 3634993; 535986, 3635053; 
535989, 3635126; 536056, 3635285; 536068, 3635402; 536014, 3635437; 
535989, 3635529; 535986, 3635602; 535929, 3635643; 535906, 3635720; 
535821, 3635720; 535719, 3635701; 535686, 3635705; 535686, 3635774; 
535656, 3635774; 535656, 3635804; 535626, 3635804; 535626, 3635834; 
535596, 3635834; 535596, 3635864; 535536, 3635864; 535536, 3635924; 
535506, 3635924; 535506, 3635954; 535446, 3635954; 535446, 3635984; 
535356, 3635984; 535356, 3636014; 535266, 3636014; 535266, 3635984; 
535236, 3635984; 535236, 3636014; 535206, 3636014; 535206, 3636044; 
535176, 3636044; 535176, 3636074; 535116, 3636074; 535116, 3636104; 
535086, 3636104; 535086, 3636134; 535056, 3636134; 535056, 3636164; 
535026, 3636164; 535026, 3636194; 534966, 3636194; 534966, 3636224; 
534936, 3636224; 534936, 3636284; 534906, 3636284; 534906, 3636314; 
534876, 3636314; 534876, 3636344; 534846, 3636344; 534846, 3636374; 
534816, 3636374; 534816, 3636404; 534846, 3636404; 534846, 3636434; 
534906, 3636434; 534906, 3636494; 534936, 3636494; 534936, 3636524; 
534906, 3636524; 534906, 3636554; 534876, 3636554; 534876, 3636584; 
534846, 3636584; 534846, 3636644; 534996, 3636644; 534996, 3636674; 
535026, 3636674; 535026, 3636734; 535056, 3636734; 535056, 3636824; 
535086, 3636824; 535086, 3636854; 535116, 3636854; 535116, 3636884; 
535146, 3636884; 535146, 3636914; 535176, 3636914; 535176, 3637184; 
535146, 3637184; 535146, 3637304; 535176, 3637304; 535176, 3637334; 
535206, 3637334; 535206, 3637454; 535236, 3637454; 535236, 3637634; 
535206, 3637634; 535206, 3637694; 535176, 3637694; 535176, 3637724; 
535146, 3637724; 535146, 3637814; 535176, 3637814; 535176, 3637844; 
535266, 3637844; 535266, 3637814; 535356, 3637814; 535356, 3637784; 
535386, 3637784; 535386, 3637754; 535416, 3637754; 535416, 3637724; 
535446, 3637724; 535446, 3637694; 535476, 3637694; 535476, 3637664; 
535536, 3637664; 535536, 3637634; 535626, 3637634; 535626, 3637604; 
535776, 3637604; 535776, 3637574; 535806, 3637574; 535806, 3637544; 
535866, 3637544; 535866, 3637514; 535896, 3637514; 535896, 3637484; 
535926, 3637484; 535926, 3637454; 535986, 3637454; 535986, 3637424; 
536046, 3637424; 536046, 3637394; 536076, 3637394; 536076, 3637364; 
536106, 3637364; 536106, 3637334; 536136, 3637334; 536136, 3637304; 
536166, 3637304; 536166, 3637244; 536196, 3637244; 536196, 3637214; 
536256, 3637214; 536256, 3637154; 536226, 3637154; 536226, 3637124; 
536256, 3637124; 536256, 3637064; 536316, 3637064; 536316, 3637094; 
536406, 3637094; 536406, 3637064; 536466, 3637064; 536466, 3637034; 
536496, 3637034; 536496, 3637004; 536526, 3637004; 536526, 3637064; 
536556, 3637064; 536556, 3637094; 536586, 3637094; 536586, 3637274; 
536616, 3637274; 536616, 3637364; 536646, 3637364; 536646, 3637394; 
536676, 3637394; 536676, 3637454; 536706, 3637454; 536706, 3637484; 
536676, 3637484; 536676, 3637574; 536706, 3637574; 536706, 3637604; 
536736, 3637604; 536736, 3637664; 536766, 3637664; 536766, 3637694; 
536796, 3637694; 536796, 3637724; 536826, 3637724; 536826, 3637754; 
536856, 3637754; 536856, 3637784; 536886, 3637784; 536886, 3637814; 
536916, 3637814; 536916, 3637874; 536946, 3637874; 536946, 3637934; 
536976, 3637934; 536976, 3637964; 537006, 3637964; 537006, 3638054; 
537036, 3638054; 537036, 3638084; 537066, 3638084; 537066, 3638234; 
537036, 3638234; 537036, 3638264; 537006, 3638264; 537006, 3638294; 
536976, 3638294; 536976, 3638324; 537006, 3638324; 537006, 3638354; 
537066, 3638354; 537066, 3638414; 537096, 3638414; 537096, 3638474; 
537126, 3638474; 537126, 3638534; 537156, 3638534; 537156, 3638594; 
537186, 3638594; 537186, 3638624; 537276, 3638624; 537276, 3638654; 
537306, 3638654; 537306, 3638864; 537276, 3638864; 537276, 3638924; 
537246, 3638924; 537246, 3638954; 537216, 3638954; 537216, 3639014; 
537246, 3639014; 537246, 3639044; 537276, 3639044; 537276, 3639074; 
537396, 3639074; 537396, 3639104; 537456, 3639104; 537456, 3639134; 
537486, 3639134; 537486, 3639164; 537516, 3639164; 537516, 3639224; 
537546, 3639224; 537546, 3639254; 537576, 3639254; 537576, 3639344; 
537606, 3639344; 537606, 3639374; 537576, 3639374; 537576, 3639464; 
537546, 3639464; 537546, 3639524; 537576, 3639524; 537576, 3639674; 
537606, 3639674; 537606, 3639704;

[[Page 457]]

537636, 3639704; 537636, 3639764; 537666, 3639764; 537666, 3639824; 
537696, 3639824; 537696, 3639884; 537726, 3639884; 537726, 3639974; 
537756, 3639974; 537756, 3640034; 537816, 3640034; 537816, 3640064; 
537846, 3640064; 537846, 3640184; 537816, 3640184; 537816, 3640214; 
537846, 3640214; 537846, 3640244; 537876, 3640244; 537876, 3640304; 
537906, 3640304; 537906, 3640334; 537936, 3640334; 537936, 3640364; 
538056, 3640364; 538056, 3640394; 538116, 3640394; 538116, 3640424; 
538176, 3640424; 538176, 3640454; 538266, 3640454; 538266, 3640424; 
538296, 3640424; 538296, 3640394; 538326, 3640394; 538326, 3640364; 
538416, 3640364; 538416, 3640334; 538476, 3640334; 538476, 3640304; 
538626, 3640304; 538626, 3640274; 538746, 3640274; 538746, 3640364; 
538776, 3640364; 538776, 3640394; 538806, 3640394; 538806, 3640424; 
538866, 3640424; 538866, 3640544; 538836, 3640544; 538836, 3640514; 
538806, 3640514; 538806, 3640544; 538776, 3640544; 538776, 3640574; 
538746, 3640574; 538746, 3640604; 538716, 3640604; 538716, 3640694; 
538686, 3640694; 538686, 3640844; 538656, 3640844; 538656, 3640934; 
538626, 3640934; 538626, 3640994; 538596, 3640994; 538596, 3641024; 
538566, 3641024; 538566, 3641054; 538536, 3641054; 538536, 3641084; 
538506, 3641084; 538506, 3641144; 538476, 3641144; 538476, 3641204; 
538446, 3641204; 538446, 3641264; 538506, 3641264; 538506, 3641234; 
538596, 3641234; 538596, 3641204; 538716, 3641204; 538716, 3641174; 
538776, 3641174; 538776, 3641144; 538806, 3641144; 538806, 3641114; 
538866, 3641114; 538866, 3641084; 538896, 3641084; 538896, 3641174; 
538926, 3641174; 538926, 3641204; 539106, 3641204; 539106, 3641234; 
539166, 3641234; 539166, 3641264; 539196, 3641264; 539196, 3641324; 
539286, 3641324; 539286, 3641354; 539406, 3641354; 539406, 3641384; 
539526, 3641384; 539526, 3641504; 539556, 3641504; 539556, 3641564; 
539616, 3641564; 539616, 3641594; 539646, 3641594; 539646, 3641624; 
539706, 3641624; 539706, 3641744; 539676, 3641744; 539676, 3641804; 
539736, 3641804; 539736, 3641834; 539796, 3641834; 539796, 3641864; 
539856, 3641864; 539856, 3641894; 539886, 3641894; 539886, 3641954; 
539916, 3641954; 539916, 3642014; 539946, 3642014; 539946, 3642044; 
539976, 3642044; 539976, 3642224; 539946, 3642224; 539946, 3642284; 
539916, 3642284; 539916, 3642464; 539976, 3642464; 539976, 3642434; 
540006, 3642434; 540006, 3642404; 540036, 3642404; 540036, 3642374; 
540126, 3642374; 540126, 3642404; 540156, 3642404; 540156, 3642464; 
540186, 3642464; 540186, 3642524; 540246, 3642524; 540246, 3642584; 
540306, 3642584; 540306, 3642614; 540366, 3642614; 540366, 3642674; 
540396, 3642674; 540396, 3642704; 540426, 3642704; 540426, 3642764; 
540516, 3642764; 540516, 3642824; 540546, 3642824; 540546, 3642854; 
540576, 3642854; 540576, 3642944; 540606, 3642944; 540606, 3642974; 
540636, 3642974; 540636, 3643034; 540666, 3643034; 540666, 3643094; 
540726, 3643094; 540726, 3643154; 540756, 3643154; 540756, 3643214; 
540786, 3643214; 540786, 3643274; 540816, 3643274; 540816, 3643424; 
540846, 3643424; 540846, 3643514; 540876, 3643514; 540876, 3643574; 
540906, 3643574; 540906, 3643604; 540936, 3643604; 540936, 3643664; 
540966, 3643664; 540966, 3643694; 540996, 3643694; 540996, 3643724; 
541026, 3643724; 541026, 3643784; 541056, 3643784; 541056, 3643724; 
541086, 3643724; 541086, 3643664; 541116, 3643664; 541116, 3643544; 
541146, 3643544; 541146, 3643514; 541206, 3643514; 541206, 3643544; 
541266, 3643544; 541266, 3643574; 541296, 3643574; 541296, 3643604; 
541326, 3643604; 541326, 3643634; 541356, 3643634; 541356, 3643664; 
541386, 3643664; 541386, 3643754; 541416, 3643754; 541416, 3643964; 
541446, 3643964; 541446, 3643994; 541476, 3643994; 541476, 3644024; 
541506, 3644024; 541506, 3644054; 541536, 3644054; 541536, 3644084; 
541566, 3644084; 541566, 3644144; 541536, 3644144; 541536, 3644174; 
541506, 3644174; 541506, 3644294; 541536, 3644294; 541536, 3644354; 
541566, 3644354; 541566, 3644444; 541596, 3644444; 541596, 3644594; 
541626, 3644594; 541626, 3644714; 541656, 3644714; 541656, 3644774; 
541626, 3644774; 541626, 3644864; 541596, 3644864; 541596, 3645014; 
541656, 3645014; 541656, 3644984; 541716, 3644984; 541716, 3644954; 
541866, 3644954; 541866, 3644984; 541926, 3644984; 541926, 3645134; 
541956, 3645134; 541956, 3645194; 541986, 3645194; 541986, 3645224; 
542016, 3645224; 542016, 3645254; 542046, 3645254; 542046, 3645314; 
542076, 3645314; 542076, 3645374; 542106, 3645374; 542106, 3645434; 
542076, 3645434; 542076, 3645494; 542106, 3645494; 542106, 3645584; 
542136, 3645584; 542136, 3645644; 542166, 3645644; 542166, 3645674; 
542196, 3645674; 542196, 3645644; 542256, 3645644; 542256, 3645674; 
542286, 3645674; 542286, 3645704; 542316, 3645704; 542316, 3645734; 
542346, 3645734; 542346, 3645764; 542376, 3645764; 542376, 3645854; 
542436, 3645854; 542436, 3645974; 542466, 3645974; 542466, 3646064; 
542436, 3646064; 542436, 3646124; 542496, 3646124; 542496, 3646094; 
542586, 3646094; 542586, 3646124; 542616, 3646124; 542616, 3646304; 
542646, 3646304; 542646, 3646364; 542706, 3646364; 542706, 3646484; 
542736, 3646484; 542736, 3646664; 542766, 3646664; 542766, 3646754; 
542796, 3646754; 542796, 3646874; 542826, 3646874; 542826, 3646964; 
542796, 3646964; 542796, 3647084; 542826, 3647084; 542826, 3647114; 
542856, 3647114; 542856, 3647264; 542886, 3647264; 542886, 3647384; 
542916, 3647384; 542916, 3647474; 542946, 3647474; 542946, 3647564; 
542976, 3647564; 542976, 3647654; 543006, 3647654; 543006, 3647744; 
543036, 3647744; 543036, 3648104; 543066, 3648104; 543066, 3648284; 
543036, 3648284; 543036, 3648374; 543066, 3648374; 543066, 3648434; 
543096, 3648434; 543096, 3648494; 543126, 3648494; 543126, 3648554; 
543156, 3648554; 543156, 3648584; 543186, 3648584; 543186, 3648614; 
543216, 3648614; 543216, 3648644; 543246, 3648644; 543246, 3648704; 
543276, 3648704; 543276, 3648734; 543306, 3648734; 543306, 3648674; 
543336, 3648674; 543336, 3648584; 543366, 3648584; 543366, 3648554; 
543486, 3648554; 543486, 3648464; 543366, 3648464; 543366, 3648434; 
543306, 3648434; 543306, 3648374; 543276, 3648374; 543276, 3648314; 
543246, 3648314; 543246, 3648194; 543276, 3648194; 543276, 3647864; 
543306, 3647864; 543306, 3647804; 543276, 3647804; 543276, 3647774; 
543246, 3647774; 543246, 3647534; 543216, 3647534; 543216, 3647504; 
543186, 3647504; 543186, 3647204; 543156, 3647204; 543156, 3647084; 
543126, 3647084; 543126, 3646934; 543096, 3646934; 543096, 3646874; 
543126, 3646874; 543126, 3646844; 543096, 3646844; 543096, 3646784; 
543066, 3646784; 543066, 3646694; 543036, 3646694; 543036, 3646634; 
543006, 3646634; 543006, 3646604; 542976, 3646604; 542976, 3646484; 
543006, 3646484; 543006, 3646454; 543066, 3646454; 543066, 3646394; 
543036, 3646394; 543036, 3646364; 543006, 3646364; 543006, 3646304; 
542976, 3646304; 542976, 3646274; 542946, 3646274; 542946, 3646154; 
542916, 3646154; 542916, 3646094;

[[Page 458]]

542886, 3646094; 542886, 3646064; 542856, 3646064; 542856, 3646004; 
542826, 3646004; 542826, 3645974; 542796, 3645974; 542796, 3645764; 
542766, 3645764; 542766, 3645734; 542736, 3645734; 542736, 3645674; 
542676, 3645674; 542676, 3645584; 542646, 3645584; 542646, 3645494; 
542616, 3645494; 542616, 3645374; 542586, 3645374; 542586, 3645314; 
542556, 3645314; 542556, 3645284; 542526, 3645284; 542526, 3645254; 
542556, 3645254; 542556, 3645224; 542526, 3645224; 542526, 3645164; 
542496, 3645164; 542496, 3645104; 542466, 3645104; 542466, 3645074; 
542436, 3645074; 542436, 3645044; 542406, 3645044; 542406, 3644984; 
542376, 3644984; 542376, 3644954; 542346, 3644954; 542346, 3644834; 
542316, 3644834; 542316, 3644774; 542286, 3644774; 542286, 3644714; 
542256, 3644714; 542256, 3644684; 542226, 3644684; 542226, 3644444; 
542256, 3644444; 542256, 3644354; 542226, 3644354; 542226, 3644294; 
542196, 3644294; 542196, 3644234; 542226, 3644234; 542226, 3644114; 
542256, 3644114; 542256, 3644054; 542316, 3644054; 542316, 3644024; 
542346, 3644024; 542346, 3643964; 542376, 3643964; 542376, 3643934; 
542406, 3643934; 542406, 3643874; 542256, 3643874; 542256, 3643904; 
542136, 3643904; 542136, 3643934; 542046, 3643934; 542046, 3643874; 
542016, 3643874; 542016, 3643844; 541986, 3643844; 541986, 3643814; 
541956, 3643814; 541956, 3643784; 541926, 3643784; 541926, 3643724; 
541896, 3643724; 541896, 3643694; 541866, 3643694; 541866, 3643634; 
541836, 3643634; 541836, 3643544; 541806, 3643544; 541806, 3643454; 
541776, 3643454; 541776, 3643364; 541746, 3643364; 541746, 3643334; 
541716, 3643334; 541716, 3643304; 541686, 3643304; 541686, 3643274; 
541506, 3643274; 541506, 3643244; 541476, 3643244; 541476, 3643214; 
541446, 3643214; 541446, 3643184; 541416, 3643184; 541416, 3643154; 
541386, 3643154; 541386, 3643124; 541356, 3643124; 541356, 3643094; 
541326, 3643094; 541326, 3643004; 541296, 3643004; 541296, 3642794; 
541266, 3642794; 541266, 3642614; 541236, 3642614; 541236, 3642554; 
541206, 3642554; 541206, 3642464; 541176, 3642464; 541176, 3642434; 
541146, 3642434; 541146, 3642404; 541056, 3642404; 541056, 3642374; 
540996, 3642374; 540996, 3642344; 540966, 3642344; 540966, 3642374; 
540936, 3642374; 540936, 3642404; 540906, 3642404; 540906, 3642434; 
540816, 3642434; 540816, 3642404; 540786, 3642404; 540786, 3642374; 
540756, 3642374; 540756, 3642344; 540726, 3642344; 540726, 3642254; 
540696, 3642254; 540696, 3642194; 540666, 3642194; 540666, 3642134; 
540636, 3642134; 540636, 3642104; 540606, 3642104; 540606, 3642074; 
540576, 3642074; 540576, 3642014; 540546, 3642014; 540546, 3641984; 
540576, 3641984; 540576, 3641924; 540666, 3641924; 540666, 3641894; 
540726, 3641894; 540726, 3641864; 540666, 3641864; 540666, 3641834; 
540606, 3641834; 540606, 3641804; 540426, 3641804; 540426, 3641774; 
540366, 3641774; 540366, 3641714; 540336, 3641714; 540336, 3641684; 
540306, 3641684; 540306, 3641654; 540276, 3641654; 540276, 3641624; 
540246, 3641624; 540246, 3641594; 540186, 3641594; 540186, 3641534; 
540156, 3641534; 540156, 3641504; 540126, 3641504; 540126, 3641444; 
540096, 3641444; 540096, 3641414; 540066, 3641414; 540066, 3641384; 
539916, 3641384; 539916, 3641354; 539856, 3641354; 539856, 3641294; 
539826, 3641294; 539826, 3641204; 539796, 3641204; 539796, 3641144; 
539766, 3641144; 539766, 3641114; 539736, 3641114; 539736, 3641084; 
539676, 3641084; 539676, 3641114; 539586, 3641114; 539586, 3641174; 
539556, 3641174; 539556, 3641204; 539526, 3641204; 539526, 3641174; 
539466, 3641174; 539466, 3641144; 539406, 3641144; 539406, 3641114; 
539376, 3641114; 539376, 3641084; 539346, 3641084; 539346, 3641024; 
539316, 3641024; 539316, 3640874; 539256, 3640874; 539256, 3640844; 
539226, 3640844; 539226, 3640814; 539196, 3640814; 539196, 3640784; 
539226, 3640784; 539226, 3640724; 539256, 3640724; 539256, 3640694; 
539316, 3640694; 539316, 3640634; 539346, 3640634; 539346, 3640574; 
539316, 3640574; 539316, 3640514; 539286, 3640514; 539286, 3640364; 
539256, 3640364; 539256, 3640064; 539226, 3640064; 539226, 3640094; 
539196, 3640094; 539196, 3640124; 539166, 3640124; 539166, 3640154; 
539136, 3640154; 539136, 3640184; 539106, 3640184; 539106, 3640214; 
539076, 3640214; 539076, 3640244; 538926, 3640244; 538926, 3640214; 
538896, 3640214; 538896, 3640094; 538836, 3640094; 538836, 3640064; 
538806, 3640064; 538806, 3640034; 538716, 3640034; 538716, 3640064; 
538626, 3640064; 538626, 3640094; 538506, 3640094; 538506, 3640124; 
538416, 3640124; 538416, 3640094; 538386, 3640094; 538386, 3640064; 
538296, 3640064; 538296, 3640094; 538236, 3640094; 538236, 3640124; 
538206, 3640124; 538206, 3640094; 538176, 3640094; 538176, 3640064; 
538086, 3640064; 538086, 3640034; 538116, 3640034; 538116, 3639944; 
538146, 3639944; 538146, 3639884; 538176, 3639884; 538176, 3639794; 
538146, 3639794; 538146, 3639764; 538116, 3639764; 538116, 3639734; 
538056, 3639734; 538056, 3639704; 537996, 3639704; 537996, 3639734; 
537906, 3639734; 537906, 3639704; 537876, 3639704; 537876, 3639674; 
537846, 3639674; 537846, 3639644; 537816, 3639644; 537816, 3639434; 
537786, 3639434; 537786, 3639344; 537816, 3639344; 537816, 3639224; 
537786, 3639224; 537786, 3639194; 537816, 3639194; 537816, 3639104; 
537786, 3639104; 537786, 3639074; 537606, 3639074; 537606, 3639044; 
537576, 3639044; 537576, 3639014; 537546, 3639014; 537546, 3638984; 
537486, 3638984; 537486, 3638774; 537516, 3638774; 537516, 3638684; 
537546, 3638684; 537546, 3638624; 537576, 3638624; 537576, 3638324; 
537606, 3638324; 537606, 3638174; 537576, 3638174; 537576, 3638114; 
537516, 3638114; 537516, 3638144; 537426, 3638144; 537426, 3638174; 
537336, 3638174; 537336, 3638144; 537276, 3638144; 537276, 3638114; 
537246, 3638114; 537246, 3638054; 537216, 3638054; 537216, 3637994; 
537186, 3637994; 537186, 3637934; 537156, 3637934; 537156, 3637844; 
537126, 3637844; 537126, 3637784; 537096, 3637784; 537096, 3637754; 
537066, 3637754; 537066, 3637694; 537036, 3637694; 537036, 3637634; 
537006, 3637634; 537006, 3637604; 536976, 3637604; 536976, 3637574; 
536946, 3637574; 536946, 3637544; 536916, 3637544; 536916, 3637484; 
536886, 3637484; 536886, 3637454; 536856, 3637454; 536856, 3637424; 
536796, 3637424; 536796, 3637364; 536766, 3637364; 536766, 3637274; 
536736, 3637274; 536736, 3637244; 536706, 3637244; 536706, 3637004; 
536676, 3637004; 536676, 3636974; 536646, 3636974; 536646, 3636914; 
536616, 3636914; 536616, 3636854; 536556, 3636854; 536556, 3636824; 
536526, 3636824; 536526, 3636794; 536406, 3636794; 536406, 3636824; 
536316, 3636824; 536316, 3636854; 536226, 3636854; 536226, 3636884; 
536196, 3636884; 536196, 3636914; 536136, 3636914; 536136, 3636944; 
536076, 3636944; 536076, 3637004; 536046, 3637004; 536046, 3637094; 
536016, 3637094; 536016, 3637124; 535956, 3637124; 535956, 3637154; 
535926, 3637154; 535926, 3637184; 535896, 3637184; 535896, 3637214; 
535836, 3637214; 535836, 3637244;

[[Page 459]]

535806, 3637244; 535806, 3637274; 535746, 3637274; 535746, 3637304; 
535656, 3637304; 535656, 3637334; 535536, 3637334; 535536, 3636974; 
535506, 3636974; 535506, 3636854; 535416, 3636854; 535416, 3636524; 
535386, 3636524; 535386, 3636494; 535326, 3636494; 535326, 3636464; 
535296, 3636464; 535296, 3636374; 535326, 3636374; 535326, 3636344; 
535356, 3636344; 535356, 3636314; 535386, 3636314; 535386, 3636284; 
535416, 3636284; 535416, 3636254; 535566, 3636254; 535566, 3636284; 
535596, 3636284; 535596, 3636344; 535626, 3636344; 535626, 3636374; 
535806, 3636374; 535806, 3636404; 535836, 3636404; 535836, 3636434; 
535986, 3636434; 535986, 3636404; 536046, 3636404; 536046, 3636374; 
536136, 3636374; 536136, 3636344; 536166, 3636344; 536166, 3636314; 
536226, 3636314; 536226, 3636284; 536286, 3636284; 536286, 3636314; 
536376, 3636314; 536376, 3636134; 536406, 3636134; 536406, 3636104; 
536376, 3636104; 536376, 3635984; 536406, 3635984; 536406, 3635924; 
536436, 3635924; 536436, 3635894; 536466, 3635894; 536466, 3635864; 
536496, 3635864; 536496, 3635774; 536526, 3635774; 536526, 3635744; 
536556, 3635744; 536556, 3635714; 536586, 3635714; 536586, 3635684; 
536616, 3635684; 536616, 3635654; 536676, 3635654; 536676, 3635624; 
536826, 3635624; 536826, 3635594; 536856, 3635594; 536856, 3635564; 
536886, 3635564; 536886, 3635534; 536856, 3635534; 536856, 3635504; 
536826, 3635504; 536826, 3635474; 536796, 3635474; 536796, 3635414; 
536736, 3635414; 536736, 3635384; 536676, 3635384; 536676, 3635324; 
536616, 3635324; 536616, 3635234; 536646, 3635234; 536646, 3635204; 
536676, 3635204; 536676, 3635174; 536706, 3635174; 536706, 3635144; 
536736, 3635144; 536736, 3635114; 536766, 3635114; 536766, 3634994; 
536646, 3634994; 536646, 3635024; 536586, 3635024; 536586, 3635054; 
536526, 3635054; 536526, 3635084; 536466, 3635084; 536466, 3635114; 
536436, 3635114; 536436, 3635144; 536316, 3635144; 536316, 3635114; 
536286, 3635114; 536286, 3635084; 536316, 3635084; 536316, 3635054; 
536346, 3635054; 536346, 3634874; 536316, 3634874; 536316, 3634724; 
536346, 3634724; 536346, 3634664; 536406, 3634664; 536406, 3634634; 
536436, 3634634; 536436, 3634604; 536466, 3634604; 536466, 3634544; 
536436, 3634544; 536436, 3634514; 536406, 3634514; 536406, 3634454; 
536376, 3634454; 536376, 3634424; 536346, 3634424; 536346, 3634364; 
536316, 3634364; 536316, 3634244; 536286, 3634244; 536286, 3634124; 
536256, 3634124; 536256, 3634094; 536286, 3634094; 536286, 3634034; 
536316, 3634034; 536316, 3634004; 536346, 3634004; 536346, 3633974; 
536406, 3633974; 536406, 3633914; 536436, 3633914; 536436, 3633884; 
536466, 3633884; 536466, 3633854; 536556, 3633854; 536556, 3633884; 
536586, 3633884; 536586, 3633794; 536556, 3633794; 536556, 3633764; 
536526, 3633764; 536526, 3633734; 536436, 3633734; 536436, 3633764; 
536316, 3633764; 536316, 3633734; 536286, 3633734; 536286, 3633704; 
536256, 3633704; 536256, 3633674; 536226, 3633674; 536226, 3633644; 
536196, 3633644; 536196, 3633614; 536166, 3633614; 536166, 3633554; 
536136, 3633554; 536136, 3633524; 536106, 3633524; 536106, 3633494; 
536076, 3633494; 536076, 3633464; 536016, 3633464; 536016, 3633434; 
535986, 3633434; 535986, 3633404; 535956, 3633404; 535956, 3633374; 
535896, 3633374; 535896, 3633344; 535836, 3633344; 535836, 3633314; 
535776, 3633314; 535776, 3633284; 535746, 3633284; 535746, 3633254; 
535686, 3633254; 535686, 3633224; 535656, 3633224; 535656, 3633164; 
535626, 3633164; 535626, 3633134; 535596, 3633134; 535596, 3633104; 
535536, 3633104; 535536, 3632984; 535476, 3632984; 535476, 3632954; 
535446, 3632954; 535446, 3632894; 535476, 3632894; 535476, 3632774; 
535446, 3632774; 535446, 3632714; 535416, 3632714; 535416, 3632684; 
535386, 3632684; 535386, 3632654; 535356, 3632654; 535356, 3632564; 
535326, 3632564; 535326, 3632504; 535296, 3632504; 535296, 3632474; 
535236, 3632474; 535236, 3632504; 535176, 3632504; 535176, 3632534; 
535146, 3632534; 535146, 3632714; 535086, 3632714; 535086, 3632744; 
535026, 3632744; 535026, 3632714; 534966, 3632714; 534966, 3632744; 
534936, 3632744; 534936, 3632834; 534996, 3632834; 534996, 3632864; 
534876, 3632864; 534876, 3633014; 534846, 3633014; 534846, 3633074; 
534816, 3633074; 534816, 3633104; 534786, 3633104; 534786, 3633134; 
534756, 3633134; 534756, 3633224; 534726, 3633224; 534726, 3633164; 
534696, 3633164; 534696, 3633134; 534666, 3633134; 534666, 3633074; 
534636, 3633074; 534636, 3633014; 534606, 3633014; 534606, 3632984; 
534546, 3632984; 534546, 3632954; 534456, 3632954; 534456, 3632924; 
534306, 3632924; 534306, 3632954; 534276, 3632954; 534276, 3632984; 
534246, 3632984; 534246, 3633044; 534216, 3633044; 534216, 3633074; 
534186, 3633074; 534186, 3633194; 534156, 3633194; 534156, 3633224; 
534126, 3633224; 534126, 3633254; 534066, 3633254; 534066, 3633284; 
534036, 3633284; 534036, 3633314; 533976, 3633314; 533976, 3633284; 
533946, 3633284; 533946, 3633254; 533766, 3633254; 533766, 3633134; 
533736, 3633134; 533736, 3633074; 533706, 3633074; 533706, 3633104; 
533646, 3633104; 533646, 3633164; 533586, 3633164; 533586, 3633134; 
533466, 3633134; 533466, 3633194; 533436, 3633194; 533436, 3633164; 
533406, 3633164; 533406, 3633074; 533436, 3633074; 533436, 3633044; 
533466, 3633044; 533466, 3632744; 533406, 3632744; 533406, 3632714; 
533376, 3632714; 533376, 3632594; 533346, 3632594; 533346, 3632564; 
533316, 3632564; 533316, 3632534; 533286, 3632534; 533286, 3632504; 
533226, 3632504; 533226, 3632474; 533196, 3632474; 533196, 3632444; 
533136, 3632444; 533136, 3632414; 532986, 3632414; 532986, 3632444; 
532926, 3632444; 532926, 3632474; 532896, 3632474; 532896, 3632504; 
532746, 3632504; 532746, 3632534; 532656, 3632534; 532656, 3632564; 
532536, 3632564; 532536, 3632594; 532476, 3632594; 532476, 3632624; 
532446, 3632624; 532446, 3632714; 532416, 3632714; 532416, 3632744; 
532356, 3632744; 532356, 3632774; 532326, 3632774; 532326, 3632804; 
532266, 3632804; 532266, 3632864; 532236, 3632864; 532236, 3632954; 
532176, 3632954; 532176, 3632924; 532116, 3632924; 532116, 3632834; 
532086, 3632834; 532086, 3632804; 531816, 3632804; 531816, 3632774; 
531726, 3632774; 531726, 3632744; 531666, 3632744; 531666, 3632714; 
531636, 3632714; 531636, 3632684; 531606, 3632684; 531606, 3632654; 
531576, 3632654; 531576, 3632624; 531546, 3632624; 531546, 3632504; 
531516, 3632504; 531516, 3632474; 531486, 3632474; 531486, 3632504; 
531396, 3632504; 531396, 3632474; 531306, 3632474; 531306, 3632444; 
531246, 3632444; 531246, 3632414; 531126, 3632414; 531126, 3632444; 
531066, 3632444; 531066, 3632474; 531036, 3632474; 531036, 3632504; 
530976, 3632504; 530976, 3632534; 530946, 3632534; 530946, 3632564; 
530856, 3632564; 530856, 3632534; 530826, 3632534; 530826, 3632504; 
530796, 3632504; 530796, 3632474; 530736, 3632474; 530736, 3632354; 
530766, 3632354; 530766, 3632294; 530796, 3632294; 530796, 3632114; 
530766, 3632114; 530766, 3632084;

[[Page 460]]

530706, 3632084; 530706, 3632054; 530586, 3632054; 530586, 3632084; 
530526, 3632084; 530526, 3632054; 530436, 3632054; 530436, 3632024; 
530346, 3632024; 530346, 3631994; 530286, 3631994; 530286, 3631934; 
530256, 3631934; 530256, 3631874; 530226, 3631874; 530226, 3631784; 
530196, 3631784; 530196, 3631724; 530136, 3631724; 530136, 3631694; 
529986, 3631694; 529986, 3631664; 529896, 3631664; 529896, 3631634; 
529866, 3631634; 529866, 3631574; 529836, 3631574; 529836, 3631544; 
529866, 3631544; 529866, 3631484; 529656, 3631484; 529656, 3631424; 
529626, 3631424; 529626, 3631394; 529566, 3631394; 529566, 3631364; 
529536, 3631364; 529536, 3631394; 529506, 3631394; 529506, 3631364; 
529326, 3631364; 529326, 3631334; 529266, 3631334; 529266, 3631304; 
529206, 3631304; 529206, 3631274; 529146, 3631274; 529146, 3631244; 
529086, 3631244; 529086, 3631214; 529056, 3631214; 529056, 3631244; 
528996, 3631244; 528996, 3631274; 528966, 3631274; 528966, 3631304; 
528666, 3631304; 528666, 3631334; 528636, 3631334; 528636, 3631364; 
528606, 3631364; 528606, 3631394; 528576, 3631394; 528576, 3631454; 
528546, 3631454; 528546, 3631484; 528396, 3631484; 528396, 3631454; 
527976, 3631454; 527976, 3631484; 527886, 3631484; 527886, 3631514; 
527706, 3631514; 527706, 3631484; 527676, 3631484; 527676, 3631454; 
527646, 3631454; 527646, 3631424; 527616, 3631424; 527616, 3631394; 
527586, 3631394; 527586, 3631364; 527556, 3631364; 527556, 3631334; 
527526, 3631334; 527526, 3631304; 527496, 3631304; 527496, 3631274; 
527466, 3631274; 527466, 3631244; 527406, 3631244; 527406, 3631214; 
527346, 3631214; 527346, 3631184; 527256, 3631184; 527256, 3631154; 
527196, 3631154; 527196, 3631124; 527136, 3631124; 527136, 3631094; 
527106, 3631094; 527106, 3631064; 527076, 3631064; 527076, 3631004; 
527046, 3631004; 527046, 3630944; 527016, 3630944; 527016, 3630914; 
526986, 3630914; 526986, 3630884; 526956, 3630884; 526956, 3630824; 
526926, 3630824; 526926, 3630584; 526866, 3630584; 526866, 3630554; 
526836, 3630554; 526836, 3630524; 526776, 3630524; 526776, 3630494; 
526746, 3630494; 526746, 3630464; 526686, 3630464; 526686, 3630434; 
526656, 3630434; 526656, 3630404; 526626, 3630404; 526626, 3630374; 
526596, 3630374; 526596, 3630344; 526536, 3630344; 526536, 3630314; 
526506, 3630314; 526506, 3630284; 526356, 3630284; 526356, 3630314; 
526176, 3630314; 526176, 3630344; 525936, 3630344; 525936, 3630374; 
525786, 3630374; 525786, 3630344; 525486, 3630344; 525486, 3630314; 
525456, 3630314; 525456, 3630284; 525336, 3630284; 525336, 3630314; 
525216, 3630314; 525216, 3630254; 525186, 3630254; 525186, 3630224; 
525126, 3630224; 525126, 3630194; 525006, 3630194; 525006, 3630164; 
524976, 3630164; 524976, 3630134; 524946, 3630134; 524946, 3630164; 
524916, 3630164; 524916, 3630194; 524886, 3630194; 524886, 3630224; 
524856, 3630224; 524856, 3630254; 524826, 3630254; 524826, 3630284; 
524796, 3630284; 524796, 3630314; 524736, 3630314; 524736, 3630344; 
524646, 3630344; 524646, 3630374; 524586, 3630374; 524586, 3630404; 
524406, 3630404; 524406, 3630434; 524346, 3630434; 524346, 3630464; 
524256, 3630464; 524256, 3630494; 524196, 3630494; 524196, 3630464; 
524136, 3630464; 524136, 3630344; 524106, 3630344; 524106, 3630254; 
524136, 3630254; 524136, 3630224; 524166, 3630224; 524166, 3630194; 
524196, 3630194; 524196, 3630134; 524226, 3630134; 524226, 3630104; 
524196, 3630104; 524196, 3630074; 524166, 3630074; 524166, 3630014; 
524136, 3630014; 524136, 3629984; 524106, 3629984; 524106, 3629774; 
524046, 3629774; 524046, 3629744; 523836, 3629744; 523836, 3629714; 
523806, 3629714; 523806, 3629414; 523836, 3629414; 523836, 3629324; 
523806, 3629324; 523806, 3629264; 523776, 3629264; 523776, 3629234; 
523746, 3629234; 523746, 3629204; 523716, 3629204; 523716, 3629174; 
523656, 3629174; 523656, 3629144; 523626, 3629144; 523626, 3629114; 
523596, 3629114; 523596, 3628964; 523626, 3628964; 523626, 3628874; 
523656, 3628874; 523656, 3628784; 523686, 3628784; 523686, 3628724; 
523836, 3628724; 523836, 3628694; 523896, 3628694; 523896, 3628664; 
524226, 3628664; 524226, 3628694; 524436, 3628694; 524436, 3628664; 
524466, 3628664; 524466, 3628634; 524496, 3628634; 524496, 3628604; 
524556, 3628604; 524556, 3628634; 524586, 3628634; 524586, 3628604; 
524616, 3628604; 524616, 3628634; 524736, 3628634; 524736, 3628604; 
524796, 3628604; 524796, 3628634; 524886, 3628634; 524886, 3628664; 
524976, 3628664; 524976, 3628694; 525066, 3628694; 525066, 3628724; 
525156, 3628724; 525156, 3628754; 525186, 3628754; 525186, 3628724; 
525246, 3628724; 525246, 3628694; 525336, 3628694; 525336, 3628664; 
525426, 3628664; 525426, 3628634; 525546, 3628634; 525546, 3628664; 
525636, 3628664; 525636, 3628634; 525666, 3628634; 525666, 3628604; 
525876, 3628604; 525876, 3628574; 526086, 3628574; 526086, 3628604; 
526116, 3628604; 526116, 3628634; 526176, 3628634; 526176, 3628664; 
526206, 3628664; 526206, 3628694; 526266, 3628694; 526266, 3628724; 
526386, 3628724; 526386, 3628694; 526416, 3628694; 526416, 3628664; 
526476, 3628664; 526476, 3628634; 526506, 3628634; 526506, 3628604; 
526536, 3628604; 526536, 3628574; 526446, 3628574; 526446, 3628544; 
526236, 3628544; 526236, 3628514; 526176, 3628514; 526176, 3628454; 
526146, 3628454; 526146, 3628394; 526176, 3628394; 526176, 3628364; 
526206, 3628364; 526206, 3628334; 526236, 3628334; 526236, 3628274; 
526266, 3628274; 526266, 3628244; 526176, 3628244; 526176, 3628274; 
526056, 3628274; 526056, 3628304; 525966, 3628304; 525966, 3628334; 
525936, 3628334; 525936, 3628364; 525606, 3628364; 525606, 3628394; 
525546, 3628394; 525546, 3628364; 525306, 3628364; 525306, 3628394; 
525246, 3628394; 525246, 3628424; 525186, 3628424; 525186, 3628514; 
525156, 3628514; 525156, 3628544; 525126, 3628544; 525126, 3628574; 
525066, 3628574; 525066, 3628544; 524976, 3628544; 524976, 3628514; 
524916, 3628514; 524916, 3628454; 524886, 3628454; 524886, 3628394; 
524856, 3628394; 524856, 3628334; 524826, 3628334; 524826, 3628304; 
524616, 3628304; 524616, 3628334; 524436, 3628334; 524436, 3628364; 
524346, 3628364; 524346, 3628394; 524316, 3628394; 524316, 3628364; 
524286, 3628364; 524286, 3628394; 524256, 3628394; 524256, 3628304; 
524196, 3628304; 524196, 3628274; 524046, 3628274; 524046, 3628214; 
524076, 3628214; 524076, 3628184; 524166, 3628184; 524166, 3628154; 
524196, 3628154; 524196, 3628094; 524166, 3628094; 524166, 3628034; 
524196, 3628034; 524196, 3628004; 524226, 3628004; 524226, 3627974; 
524286, 3627974; 524286, 3627944; 524316, 3627944; 524316, 3627914; 
524346, 3627914; 524346, 3627884; 524376, 3627884; 524376, 3627794; 
524286, 3627794; 524286, 3627824; 524046, 3627824; 524046, 3627854; 
524016, 3627854; 524016, 3627884; 523986, 3627884; 523986, 3627914; 
523956, 3627914; 523956, 3627944; 523926, 3627944; 523926, 3627974; 
523866, 3627974; 523866, 3628004; 523836, 3628004; 523836, 3628034; 
523806, 3628034; 523806, 3628064;

[[Page 461]]

523776, 3628064; 523776, 3628094; 523716, 3628094; 523716, 3628124; 
523686, 3628124; 523686, 3628154; 523626, 3628154; 523626, 3628184; 
523536, 3628184; 523536, 3628154; 523326, 3628154; 523326, 3628124; 
523176, 3628124; 523176, 3628154; 523168, 3628154; 523171, 3628394; 
523176, 3628394; 523176, 3628424; 523146, 3628424; 523146, 3628454; 
523176, 3628454; 523176, 3628484; returning to 523206, 3628484.
    (ii) Subunit 18c: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle map Alpine, land 
bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 513673, 3626397; 
513674, 3626074; 514075, 3626046; 514077, 3625994; 514026, 3625994; 
514026, 3625964; 513966, 3625964; 513966, 3625934; 513816, 3625934; 
513816, 3625964; 513696, 3625964; 513696, 3626054; 513666, 3626054; 
513666, 3626354; 513636, 3626354; 513636, 3626450; 513673, 3626447; 
returning to 513673, 3626397.
(iiii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 518196, 
3626114; 518226, 3626114; 518226, 3626144; 518196, 3626144; 518196, 
3626174; 518166, 3626174; 518166, 3626144; 518196, 3626144; 518196, 
3626114; 518166, 3626114; 518166, 3626054; 518136, 3626054; 518136, 
3625994; 518076, 3625994; 518076, 3625964; 517986, 3625964; 517986, 
3625934; 517836, 3625934; 517836, 3625904; 517806, 3625904; 517806, 
3625874; 517776, 3625874; 517776, 3625844; 517716, 3625844; 517716, 
3625814; 517656, 3625814; 517656, 3625754; 517536, 3625754; 517536, 
3625724; 517476, 3625724; 517476, 3625694; 517386, 3625694; 517386, 
3625724; 517176, 3625724; 517176, 3625754; 517116, 3625754; 517116, 
3625784; 517056, 3625784; 517056, 3625814; 517026, 3625814; 517026, 
3625844; 516996, 3625844; 516996, 3625874; 516936, 3625874; 516936, 
3625904; 516786, 3625904; 516786, 3625874; 516666, 3625874; 516666, 
3625904; 516606, 3625904; 516606, 3625934; 516456, 3625934; 516456, 
3625964; 516186, 3625964; 516186, 3625934; 516066, 3625934; 516066, 
3625904; 516006, 3625904; 516006, 3625874; 515976, 3625874; 515976, 
3625814; 515946, 3625814; 515946, 3625784; 515916, 3625784; 515916, 
3625754; 515886, 3625754; 515886, 3625694; 515916, 3625694; 515916, 
3625664; 515946, 3625664; 515946, 3625634; 515916, 3625634; 515916, 
3625364; 515856, 3625364; 515856, 3625334; 515826, 3625334; 515826, 
3625304; 515766, 3625304; 515766, 3625274; 515736, 3625274; 515736, 
3625184; 515556, 3625184; 515556, 3625154; 515406, 3625154; 515406, 
3625124; 515346, 3625124; 515346, 3625094; 515316, 3625094; 515316, 
3625124; 515226, 3625124; 515226, 3625154; 515076, 3625154; 515076, 
3625124; 514956, 3625124; 514956, 3625094; 514866, 3625094; 514866, 
3625064; 514836, 3625064; 514836, 3625034; 514806, 3625034; 514806, 
3625004; 514686, 3625004; 514686, 3624974; 514626, 3624974; 514626, 
3624944; 514506, 3624944; 514506, 3624914; 514476, 3624914; 514476, 
3624884; 514416, 3624884; 514416, 3624854; 514296, 3624854; 514296, 
3624884; 514266, 3624884; 514266, 3624944; 514236, 3624944; 514236, 
3624974; 514176, 3624974; 514176, 3625004; 514146, 3625004; 514146, 
3625034; 514116, 3625034; 514116, 3625124; 514086, 3625124; 514086, 
3625184; 514056, 3625184; 514056, 3625244; 513996, 3625244; 513996, 
3625274; 513966, 3625274; 513966, 3625304; 513936, 3625304; 513936, 
3625334; 513966, 3625334; 513966, 3625364; 514056, 3625364; 514056, 
3625394; 514116, 3625394; 514116, 3625424; 514146, 3625424; 514146, 
3625454; 514176, 3625454; 514176, 3625544; 514206, 3625544; 514206, 
3625574; 514236, 3625574; 514236, 3625667; 514276, 3625667; 514296, 
3625665; 514466, 3625663; 514459, 3626042; 514626, 3626041; 514626, 
3626024; 514596, 3626024; 514596, 3625934; 514626, 3625934; 514626, 
3625904; 514656, 3625904; 514656, 3625844; 514596, 3625844; 514596, 
3625814; 514566, 3625814; 514566, 3625754; 514536, 3625754; 514536, 
3625664; 514506, 3625664; 514506, 3625574; 514536, 3625574; 514536, 
3625544; 514506, 3625544; 514506, 3625424; 514536, 3625424; 514536, 
3625394; 514506, 3625394; 514506, 3625364; 514446, 3625364; 514446, 
3625334; 514416, 3625334; 514416, 3625304; 514386, 3625304; 514386, 
3625274; 514446, 3625274; 514446, 3625244; 514626, 3625244; 514626, 
3625274; 514746, 3625274; 514746, 3625304; 514806, 3625304; 514806, 
3625334; 514836, 3625334; 514836, 3625364; 514866, 3625364; 514866, 
3625394; 514896, 3625394; 514896, 3625424; 514926, 3625424; 514926, 
3625454; 515076, 3625454; 515076, 3625424; 515136, 3625424; 515136, 
3625394; 515226, 3625394; 515226, 3625364; 515316, 3625364; 515316, 
3625394; 515406, 3625394; 515406, 3625424; 515436, 3625424; 515436, 
3625454; 515466, 3625454; 515466, 3625484; 515496, 3625484; 515496, 
3625514; 515526, 3625514; 515526, 3625544; 515556, 3625544; 515556, 
3625574; 515616, 3625574; 515616, 3625604; 515676, 3625604; 515676, 
3625694; 515646, 3625694; 515646, 3625724; 515616, 3625724; 515616, 
3625784; 515586, 3625784; 515586, 3625844; 515616, 3625844; 515616, 
3625874; 515646, 3625874; 515646, 3625904; 515676, 3625904; 515676, 
3625934; 515736, 3625934; 515736, 3625964; 515766, 3625964; 515766, 
3625994; 515826, 3625994; 515826, 3626054; 515886, 3626054; 515886, 
3626072; 516106, 3626077; 516507, 3626087; 516505, 3626144; 516516, 
3626144; 516516, 3626114; 516576, 3626114; 516576, 3626084; 516696, 
3626084; 516696, 3626114; 516876, 3626114; 516876, 3626084; 516966, 
3626084; 516966, 3626054; 517026, 3626054; 517026, 3626024; 517056, 
3626024; 517056, 3625994; 517086, 3625994; 517086, 3625964; 517116, 
3625964; 517116, 3625934; 517206, 3625934; 517206, 3625904; 517326, 
3625904; 517326, 3625934; 517506, 3625934; 517506, 3625964; 517566, 
3625964; 517566, 3625994; 517626, 3625994; 517626, 3626024; 517656, 
3626024; 517656, 3626084; 517716, 3626084; 517716, 3626114; 517746, 
3626114; 517746, 3626174; 517776, 3626174; 517776, 3626204; 517806, 
3626204; 517806, 3626234; 517836, 3626234; 517836, 3626294; 517896, 
3626294; 517896, 3626324; 517926, 3626324; 517926, 3626354; 517956, 
3626354; 517956, 3626384; 518226, 3626384; 518226, 3626414; 518286, 
3626414; 518286, 3626384; 518346, 3626384; 518346, 3626414; 518376, 
3626414; 518376, 3626444; 518466, 3626444; 518466, 3626384; 518496, 
3626384; 518496, 3626324; 518526, 3626324; 518526, 3626294; 518556, 
3626294; 518556, 3626234; 518586, 3626234; 518586, 3626204; 518616, 
3626204; 518616, 3626174; 518676, 3626174; 518676, 3626144; 518736, 
3626144; 518736, 3626114; 518796, 3626114; 518796, 3626144; 518856, 
3626144; 518856, 3626174; 519006, 3626174; 519006, 3626204; 519096, 
3626204; 519096, 3626234; 519156, 3626234; 519156, 3626264; 519186, 
3626264; 519186, 3626294; 519246, 3626294; 519246, 3626384; 519276, 
3626384; 519276, 3626474; 519246, 3626474; 519246, 3626504; 519276, 
3626504; 519276, 3626594; 519306, 3626594; 519306, 3626624; 519336, 
3626624; 519336, 3626654; 519366, 3626654; 519366, 3626684; 519396, 
3626684; 519396, 3626714; 519426, 3626714; 519426,

[[Page 462]]

3626774; 519456, 3626774; 519456, 3626894; 519516, 3626894; 519516, 
3626864; 519546, 3626864; 519546, 3626834; 519576, 3626834; 519576, 
3626684; 519546, 3626684; 519546, 3626654; 519516, 3626654; 519516, 
3626624; 519486, 3626624; 519486, 3626534; 519456, 3626534; 519456, 
3626324; 519426, 3626324; 519426, 3626204; 519396, 3626204; 519396, 
3626144; 519306, 3626144; 519306, 3626114; 519276, 3626114; 519276, 
3626084; 519246, 3626084; 519246, 3626054; 519186, 3626054; 519186, 
3626024; 519126, 3626024; 519126, 3625994; 519096, 3625994; 519096, 
3625964; 519006, 3625964; 519006, 3625934; 518976, 3625934; 518976, 
3625844; 518946, 3625844; 518946, 3625754; 518916, 3625754; 518916, 
3625784; 518856, 3625784; 518856, 3625814; 518826, 3625814; 518826, 
3625844; 518796, 3625844; 518796, 3625874; 518736, 3625874; 518736, 
3625904; 518586, 3625904; 518586, 3625934; 518556, 3625934; 518556, 
3625964; 518496, 3625964; 518496, 3625994; 518316, 3625994; 518316, 
3626024; 518286, 3626024; 518286, 3626054; 518226, 3626054; 518226, 
3626084; 518196, 3626084; 518196, 3626114
    (iv) Note: Map of Units 18 and 19 follows.

[[Page 463]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09FE11.009

    (24) Unit 19: Cottonwood Creek Basin, San Diego County, California.
    (i) Subunit 19a: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Morena 
Reservoir, Cameron Corners and Mount Laguna, land bounded by the 
following UTM coordinates (E,N): 544887, 3619754; 544891, 3619395; 
544918, 3619372; 544919, 3619283; 545309, 3618949; 545299, 3619235; 
545332,

[[Page 464]]

3619274; 545346, 3619274; 545346, 3619244; 545376, 3619244; 545376, 
3619214; 545436, 3619214; 545436, 3619184; 545496, 3619184; 545496, 
3619124; 545526, 3619124; 545526, 3619094; 545616, 3619094; 545616, 
3619064; 545826, 3619064; 545826, 3619094; 545856, 3619094; 545856, 
3619124; 545886, 3619124; 545886, 3619154; 546036, 3619154; 546036, 
3619124; 546156, 3619124; 546156, 3619154; 546186, 3619154; 546186, 
3619184; 546276, 3619184; 546276, 3619214; 546306, 3619214; 546306, 
3619514; 546276, 3619514; 546276, 3619604; 546306, 3619604; 546306, 
3619694; 546336, 3619694; 546336, 3619724; 546366, 3619724; 546366, 
3619754; 546396, 3619754; 546396, 3619784; 546456, 3619784; 546456, 
3619814; 546486, 3619814; 546486, 3619904; 546516, 3619904; 546516, 
3619994; 546486, 3619994; 546486, 3620054; 546456, 3620054; 546456, 
3620114; 546426, 3620114; 546426, 3620144; 546396, 3620144; 546396, 
3620234; 546456, 3620234; 546456, 3620264; 546486, 3620264; 546486, 
3620294; 546576, 3620294; 546576, 3620264; 546636, 3620264; 546636, 
3620234; 546666, 3620234; 546666, 3620204; 546756, 3620204; 546756, 
3620234; 546906, 3620234; 546906, 3620264; 546936, 3620264; 546936, 
3620324; 546966, 3620324; 546966, 3620354; 546996, 3620354; 546996, 
3620414; 546966, 3620414; 546966, 3620444; 546936, 3620444; 546936, 
3620504; 546966, 3620504; 546966, 3620594; 547026, 3620594; 547026, 
3620654; 547056, 3620654; 547056, 3620804; 547026, 3620804; 547026, 
3620984; 547056, 3620984; 547056, 3621014; 547086, 3621014; 547086, 
3621044; 547116, 3621044; 547116, 3621074; 547146, 3621074; 547146, 
3621164; 547176, 3621164; 547176, 3621314; 547146, 3621314; 547146, 
3621584; 547116, 3621584; 547116, 3621704; 547146, 3621704; 547146, 
3621734; 547176, 3621734; 547176, 3621794; 547206, 3621794; 547206, 
3621854; 547176, 3621854; 547176, 3621884; 547206, 3621884; 547206, 
3621914; 547176, 3621914; 547176, 3621974; 547206, 3621974; 547206, 
3622034; 547176, 3622034; 547176, 3622094; 547146, 3622094; 547146, 
3622154; 547116, 3622154; 547116, 3622244; 547146, 3622244; 547146, 
3622334; 547176, 3622334; 547176, 3622394; 547206, 3622394; 547206, 
3622454; 547236, 3622454; 547236, 3622514; 547206, 3622514; 547206, 
3622574; 547176, 3622574; 547176, 3622604; 547146, 3622604; 547146, 
3622664; 547116, 3622664; 547116, 3622724; 547086, 3622724; 547086, 
3622784; 547056, 3622784; 547056, 3622814; 547026, 3622814; 547026, 
3622844; 546996, 3622844; 546996, 3622904; 546966, 3622904; 546966, 
3622994; 546936, 3622994; 546936, 3623084; 546906, 3623084; 546906, 
3623114; 546936, 3623114; 546936, 3623294; 546966, 3623294; 546966, 
3623324; 546996, 3623324; 546996, 3623414; 547026, 3623414; 547026, 
3623564; 547056, 3623564; 547056, 3623774; 547026, 3623774; 547026, 
3623804; 547056, 3623804; 547056, 3623864; 547086, 3623864; 547086, 
3623924; 547116, 3623924; 547116, 3624194; 547146, 3624194; 547146, 
3624254; 547176, 3624254; 547176, 3624314; 547206, 3624314; 547206, 
3624344; 547176, 3624344; 547176, 3624404; 547146, 3624404; 547146, 
3624464; 547176, 3624464; 547176, 3624554; 547206, 3624554; 547206, 
3624644; 547236, 3624644; 547236, 3624944; 547266, 3624944; 547266, 
3625004; 547296, 3625004; 547296, 3625214; 547266, 3625214; 547266, 
3625244; 547236, 3625244; 547236, 3625274; 547206, 3625274; 547206, 
3625334; 547176, 3625334; 547176, 3625424; 547206, 3625424; 547206, 
3625454; 547236, 3625454; 547236, 3625484; 547266, 3625484; 547266, 
3626084; 547296, 3626084; 547296, 3626174; 547236, 3626174; 547236, 
3626354; 547206, 3626354; 547206, 3626474; 547176, 3626474; 547176, 
3626564; 547146, 3626564; 547146, 3626624; 547116, 3626624; 547116, 
3626714; 547086, 3626714; 547086, 3626804; 547056, 3626804; 547056, 
3626894; 547086, 3626894; 547086, 3626924; 547116, 3626924; 547116, 
3626954; 547146, 3626954; 547146, 3626984; 547266, 3626984; 547266, 
3627014; 547296, 3627014; 547296, 3627134; 547356, 3627134; 547356, 
3627104; 547386, 3627104; 547386, 3627044; 547416, 3627044; 547416, 
3627014; 547446, 3627014; 547446, 3626894; 547476, 3626894; 547476, 
3626774; 547446, 3626774; 547446, 3626564; 547476, 3626564; 547476, 
3626504; 547506, 3626504; 547506, 3626474; 547536, 3626474; 547536, 
3626414; 547566, 3626414; 547566, 3626384; 547596, 3626384; 547596, 
3626354; 547626, 3626354; 547626, 3626234; 547656, 3626234; 547656, 
3626114; 547716, 3626114; 547716, 3626084; 547746, 3626084; 547746, 
3625964; 547776, 3625964; 547776, 3625934; 547806, 3625934; 547806, 
3625904; 547836, 3625904; 547836, 3625814; 547866, 3625814; 547866, 
3625784; 547926, 3625784; 547926, 3625754; 547956, 3625754; 547956, 
3625724; 547986, 3625724; 547986, 3625694; 548046, 3625694; 548046, 
3625664; 548076, 3625664; 548076, 3625634; 548136, 3625634; 548136, 
3625544; 548196, 3625544; 548196, 3625484; 548226, 3625484; 548226, 
3625454; 548256, 3625454; 548256, 3625424; 548286, 3625424; 548286, 
3625394; 548316, 3625394; 548316, 3625364; 548346, 3625364; 548346, 
3625184; 548376, 3625184; 548376, 3625004; 548346, 3625004; 548346, 
3624974; 548376, 3624974; 548376, 3624884; 548406, 3624884; 548406, 
3624854; 548436, 3624854; 548436, 3624794; 548466, 3624794; 548466, 
3624704; 548496, 3624704; 548496, 3624644; 548526, 3624644; 548526, 
3624554; 548556, 3624554; 548556, 3624344; 548526, 3624344; 548526, 
3624314; 548496, 3624314; 548496, 3624284; 548526, 3624284; 548526, 
3624134; 548556, 3624134; 548556, 3624104; 548526, 3624104; 548526, 
3624074; 548556, 3624074; 548556, 3623834; 548586, 3623834; 548586, 
3623684; 548616, 3623684; 548616, 3623624; 548646, 3623624; 548646, 
3623534; 548676, 3623534; 548676, 3623474; 548706, 3623474; 548706, 
3623414; 548736, 3623414; 548736, 3623354; 548766, 3623354; 548766, 
3623294; 548796, 3623294; 548796, 3623204; 548826, 3623204; 548826, 
3622994; 548856, 3622994; 548856, 3622964; 548886, 3622964; 548886, 
3622904; 548916, 3622904; 548916, 3622844; 548946, 3622844; 548946, 
3622784; 548976, 3622784; 548976, 3622724; 549066, 3622724; 549066, 
3622694; 549096, 3622694; 549096, 3622634; 549156, 3622634; 549156, 
3622604; 549186, 3622604; 549186, 3622574; 549246, 3622574; 549246, 
3622544; 549276, 3622544; 549276, 3622604; 549306, 3622604; 549306, 
3622664; 549276, 3622664; 549276, 3622724; 549306, 3622724; 549306, 
3622754; 549486, 3622754; 549486, 3622784; 549516, 3622784; 549516, 
3622814; 549576, 3622814; 549576, 3622844; 549636, 3622844; 549636, 
3622814; 549696, 3622814; 549696, 3622754; 549756, 3622754; 549756, 
3622784; 549786, 3622784; 549786, 3622904; 549816, 3622904; 549816, 
3622994; 549936, 3622994; 549936, 3623024; 549966, 3623024; 549966, 
3623054; 549996, 3623054; 549996, 3623084; 550026, 3623084; 550026, 
3623114; 550116, 3623114; 550116, 3623144; 550146, 3623144; 550146, 
3623204; 550176, 3623204; 550176, 3623324; 550146, 3623324; 550146, 
3623594; 550176, 3623594; 550176, 3623654; 550236, 3623654; 550236, 
3623834; 550296, 3623834; 550296,

[[Page 465]]

3623864; 550356, 3623864; 550356, 3623894; 550386, 3623894; 550386, 
3623924; 550356, 3623924; 550356, 3623984; 550386, 3623984; 550386, 
3624014; 550446, 3624014; 550446, 3624044; 550476, 3624044; 550476, 
3623834; 550446, 3623834; 550446, 3623804; 550476, 3623804; 550476, 
3623834; 550506, 3623834; 550506, 3623864; 550536, 3623864; 550536, 
3623834; 550566, 3623834; 550566, 3623864; 550596, 3623864; 550596, 
3623894; 550866, 3623894; 550866, 3623924; 550896, 3623924; 550896, 
3623894; 550926, 3623894; 550926, 3623864; 551046, 3623864; 551046, 
3623834; 551106, 3623834; 551106, 3623804; 551136, 3623804; 551136, 
3623834; 551166, 3623834; 551166, 3623894; 551196, 3623894; 551196, 
3624014; 551226, 3624014; 551226, 3624104; 551256, 3624104; 551256, 
3624194; 551286, 3624194; 551286, 3624374; 551316, 3624374; 551316, 
3624494; 551286, 3624494; 551286, 3624614; 551316, 3624614; 551316, 
3624824; 551286, 3624824; 551286, 3625004; 551256, 3625004; 551256, 
3625064; 551226, 3625064; 551226, 3625124; 551196, 3625124; 551196, 
3625184; 551226, 3625184; 551226, 3625274; 551256, 3625274; 551256, 
3625394; 551286, 3625394; 551286, 3625484; 551316, 3625484; 551316, 
3625544; 551346, 3625544; 551346, 3625694; 551376, 3625694; 551376, 
3625964; 551346, 3625964; 551346, 3626054; 551376, 3626054; 551376, 
3626264; 551406, 3626264; 551406, 3626564; 551436, 3626564; 551436, 
3626684; 551466, 3626684; 551466, 3626864; 551496, 3626864; 551496, 
3626954; 551526, 3626954; 551526, 3627104; 551556, 3627104; 551556, 
3627164; 551646, 3627164; 551646, 3627134; 551676, 3627134; 551676, 
3627044; 551706, 3627044; 551706, 3626984; 551736, 3626984; 551736, 
3626954; 551766, 3626954; 551766, 3626924; 551796, 3626924; 551796, 
3626894; 551856, 3626894; 551856, 3626864; 551916, 3626864; 551916, 
3626894; 551976, 3626894; 551976, 3626864; 552036, 3626864; 552036, 
3626714; 552006, 3626714; 552006, 3626684; 551976, 3626684; 551976, 
3626654; 551946, 3626654; 551946, 3626624; 551886, 3626624; 551886, 
3626594; 551856, 3626594; 551856, 3626564; 551796, 3626564; 551796, 
3626534; 551736, 3626534; 551736, 3626564; 551616, 3626564; 551616, 
3626474; 551586, 3626474; 551586, 3626324; 551556, 3626324; 551556, 
3625574; 551526, 3625574; 551526, 3625544; 551496, 3625544; 551496, 
3625454; 551466, 3625454; 551466, 3625334; 551436, 3625334; 551436, 
3625184; 551406, 3625184; 551406, 3625154; 551436, 3625154; 551436, 
3625094; 551406, 3625094; 551406, 3625064; 551436, 3625064; 551436, 
3625034; 551466, 3625034; 551466, 3624944; 551586, 3624944; 551586, 
3624974; 551616, 3624974; 551616, 3624914; 551586, 3624914; 551586, 
3624764; 551556, 3624764; 551556, 3624674; 551526, 3624674; 551526, 
3624614; 551496, 3624614; 551496, 3624494; 551466, 3624494; 551466, 
3624404; 551496, 3624404; 551496, 3624104; 551466, 3624104; 551466, 
3623954; 551436, 3623954; 551436, 3623864; 551406, 3623864; 551406, 
3623564; 551376, 3623564; 551376, 3623534; 551346, 3623534; 551346, 
3623564; 551316, 3623564; 551316, 3623534; 551256, 3623534; 551256, 
3623504; 551196, 3623504; 551196, 3623444; 551166, 3623444; 551166, 
3623384; 551106, 3623384; 551106, 3623324; 551016, 3623324; 551016, 
3623564; 550986, 3623564; 550986, 3623594; 550956, 3623594; 550956, 
3623624; 550836, 3623624; 550836, 3623654; 550746, 3623654; 550746, 
3623624; 550686, 3623624; 550686, 3623594; 550596, 3623594; 550596, 
3623564; 550536, 3623564; 550536, 3623534; 550416, 3623534; 550416, 
3623504; 550386, 3623504; 550386, 3623474; 550356, 3623474; 550356, 
3623444; 550326, 3623444; 550326, 3623384; 550296, 3623384; 550296, 
3623354; 550326, 3623354; 550326, 3623174; 550296, 3623174; 550296, 
3623054; 550266, 3623054; 550266, 3622994; 550236, 3622994; 550236, 
3622904; 550206, 3622904; 550206, 3622874; 550176, 3622874; 550176, 
3622784; 550146, 3622784; 550146, 3622754; 550086, 3622754; 550086, 
3622784; 550056, 3622784; 550056, 3622814; 549996, 3622814; 549996, 
3622844; 549966, 3622844; 549966, 3622874; 549936, 3622874; 549936, 
3622844; 549906, 3622844; 549906, 3622724; 549876, 3622724; 549876, 
3622664; 549846, 3622664; 549846, 3622634; 549786, 3622634; 549786, 
3622604; 549756, 3622604; 549756, 3622574; 549726, 3622574; 549726, 
3622604; 549666, 3622604; 549666, 3622634; 549636, 3622634; 549636, 
3622664; 549546, 3622664; 549546, 3622604; 549516, 3622604; 549516, 
3622334; 549486, 3622334; 549486, 3622214; 549456, 3622214; 549456, 
3622154; 549426, 3622154; 549426, 3622064; 549396, 3622064; 549396, 
3621944; 549366, 3621944; 549366, 3621884; 549336, 3621884; 549336, 
3621854; 549306, 3621854; 549306, 3621824; 549276, 3621824; 549276, 
3621794; 549246, 3621794; 549246, 3621734; 549216, 3621734; 549216, 
3621704; 549186, 3621704; 549186, 3621644; 549156, 3621644; 549156, 
3621614; 549096, 3621614; 549096, 3621644; 549066, 3621644; 549066, 
3621674; 549036, 3621674; 549036, 3621704; 548946, 3621704; 548946, 
3621734; 548856, 3621734; 548856, 3621764; 548706, 3621764; 548706, 
3621734; 548586, 3621734; 548586, 3621704; 548526, 3621704; 548526, 
3621674; 548496, 3621674; 548496, 3621644; 548466, 3621644; 548466, 
3621494; 548496, 3621494; 548496, 3621434; 548526, 3621434; 548526, 
3621404; 548556, 3621404; 548556, 3621284; 548526, 3621284; 548526, 
3621224; 548466, 3621224; 548466, 3621194; 548406, 3621194; 548406, 
3621164; 548286, 3621164; 548286, 3621194; 548166, 3621194; 548166, 
3621254; 548136, 3621254; 548136, 3621194; 548106, 3621194; 548106, 
3621134; 548076, 3621134; 548076, 3621104; 548016, 3621104; 548016, 
3621074; 547956, 3621074; 547956, 3621044; 547926, 3621044; 547926, 
3621014; 547896, 3621014; 547896, 3620654; 547866, 3620654; 547866, 
3620594; 547836, 3620594; 547836, 3620474; 547806, 3620474; 547806, 
3620414; 547836, 3620414; 547836, 3620354; 547866, 3620354; 547866, 
3620324; 547926, 3620324; 547926, 3620294; 547986, 3620294; 547986, 
3620144; 547956, 3620144; 547956, 3619994; 547986, 3619994; 547986, 
3619754; 547956, 3619754; 547956, 3619724; 547926, 3619724; 547926, 
3619574; 547956, 3619574; 547956, 3619544; 547956, 3619304; 547926, 
3619304; 547926, 3619154; 547956, 3619154; 547956, 3619004; 547986, 
3619004; 547986, 3618944; 548016, 3618944; 548016, 3618914; 548106, 
3618914; 548106, 3618854; 548076, 3618854; 548076, 3618764; 548046, 
3618764; 548046, 3618674; 548076, 3618674; 548076, 3618644; 548106, 
3618644; 548106, 3618524; 548136, 3618524; 548136, 3618494; 548166, 
3618494; 548166, 3618464; 548196, 3618464; 548196, 3618554; 548286, 
3618554; 548286, 3618524; 548376, 3618524; 548376, 3618494; 548436, 
3618494; 548436, 3618434; 548496, 3618434; 548496, 3618404; 548526, 
3618404; 548526, 3618374; 548556, 3618374; 548556, 3618344; 548586, 
3618344; 548586, 3618314; 548616, 3618314; 548616, 3618224; 548796, 
3618224; 548796, 3618254; 548826, 3618254; 548826, 3618284; 548856, 
3618284; 548856, 3618344; 548886, 3618344; 548886, 3618404; 548916, 
3618404; 548916, 3618494; 548946,

[[Page 466]]

3618494; 548946, 3618674; 548976, 3618674; 548976, 3618854; 549006, 
3618854; 549006, 3618944; 549036, 3618944; 549036, 3619064; 549066, 
3619064; 549066, 3619544; 549096, 3619544; 549096, 3619694; 549126, 
3619694; 549126, 3619874; 549186, 3619874; 549186, 3619904; 549156, 
3619904; 549156, 3619994; 549126, 3619994; 549126, 3620024; 549156, 
3620024; 549156, 3620084; 549186, 3620084; 549186, 3620264; 549230, 
3620264; 549274, 3620200; 549475, 3620068; 549647, 3620014; 549946, 
3620048; 550371, 3620106; 550743, 3620154; 550868, 3620166; 550902, 
3620230; 551166, 3620375; 551166, 3620354; 551256, 3620354; 551256, 
3620384; 551286, 3620384; 551286, 3620441; 551433, 3620565; 551596, 
3620663; 551832, 3620775; 552006, 3620833; 552006, 3620744; 552036, 
3620744; 552036, 3620714; 551976, 3620714; 551976, 3620684; 551916, 
3620684; 551916, 3620654; 551886, 3620654; 551886, 3620624; 551856, 
3620624; 551856, 3620594; 551826, 3620594; 551826, 3620564; 551796, 
3620564; 551796, 3620504; 551766, 3620504; 551766, 3620234; 551796, 
3620234; 551796, 3620084; 551766, 3620084; 551766, 3620024; 551736, 
3620024; 551736, 3619934; 551706, 3619934; 551706, 3619874; 551676, 
3619874; 551676, 3619814; 551646, 3619814; 551646, 3619754; 551586, 
3619754; 551586, 3619724; 551556, 3619724; 551556, 3619694; 551496, 
3619694; 551496, 3619664; 551346, 3619664; 551346, 3619694; 551316, 
3619694; 551316, 3619724; 551256, 3619724; 551256, 3619754; 551136, 
3619754; 551136, 3619724; 551016, 3619724; 551016, 3619754; 550746, 
3619754; 550746, 3619724; 550656, 3619724; 550656, 3619754; 550536, 
3619754; 550536, 3619784; 550476, 3619784; 550476, 3619814; 550416, 
3619814; 550416, 3619844; 550356, 3619844; 550356, 3619814; 550266, 
3619814; 550266, 3619784; 550236, 3619784; 550236, 3619724; 550206, 
3619724; 550206, 3619634; 550176, 3619634; 550176, 3619604; 550146, 
3619604; 550146, 3619544; 550116, 3619544; 550116, 3619484; 550086, 
3619484; 550086, 3619394; 550056, 3619394; 550056, 3619304; 550026, 
3619304; 550026, 3619244; 549996, 3619244; 549996, 3619154; 549966, 
3619154; 549966, 3619094; 549936, 3619094; 549936, 3618944; 549906, 
3618944; 549906, 3618794; 549936, 3618794; 549936, 3618734; 549906, 
3618734; 549906, 3618614; 549876, 3618614; 549876, 3618554; 549846, 
3618554; 549846, 3618524; 549816, 3618524; 549816, 3618494; 549696, 
3618494; 549696, 3618464; 549636, 3618464; 549636, 3618224; 549606, 
3618224; 549606, 3618104; 549576, 3618104; 549576, 3618014; 549546, 
3618014; 549546, 3617924; 549516, 3617924; 549516, 3617894; 549486, 
3617894; 549486, 3617864; 549456, 3617864; 549456, 3617804; 549426, 
3617804; 549426, 3617744; 549456, 3617744; 549456, 3617714; 549426, 
3617714; 549426, 3617654; 549366, 3617654; 549366, 3617624; 549336, 
3617624; 549336, 3617594; 549306, 3617594; 549306, 3617564; 549276, 
3617564; 549276, 3617534; 549246, 3617534; 549246, 3617504; 549216, 
3617504; 549216, 3617444; 549186, 3617444; 549186, 3617414; 549156, 
3617414; 549156, 3617384; 549126, 3617384; 549126, 3617354; 549096, 
3617354; 549096, 3617384; 549066, 3617384; 549066, 3617444; 549036, 
3617444; 549036, 3617534; 549006, 3617534; 549006, 3617594; 548976, 
3617594; 548976, 3617654; 548946, 3617654; 548946, 3617684; 548916, 
3617684; 548916, 3617714; 548886, 3617714; 548886, 3617774; 548856, 
3617774; 548856, 3617894; 548796, 3617894; 548796, 3617924; 548736, 
3617924; 548736, 3618044; 548706, 3618044; 548706, 3618074; 548646, 
3618074; 548646, 3618044; 548556, 3618044; 548556, 3618074; 548496, 
3618074; 548496, 3618104; 548436, 3618104; 548436, 3618134; 548406, 
3618134; 548406, 3618164; 548376, 3618164; 548376, 3618194; 548286, 
3618194; 548286, 3618164; 548256, 3618164; 548256, 3618074; 548226, 
3618074; 548226, 3618014; 548136, 3618014; 548136, 3617984; 548076, 
3617984; 548076, 3617954; 548046, 3617954; 548046, 3617894; 548016, 
3617894; 548016, 3617804; 547986, 3617804; 547986, 3617774; 547956, 
3617774; 547956, 3617744; 547926, 3617744; 547926, 3617774; 547896, 
3617774; 547896, 3617804; 547806, 3617804; 547806, 3617834; 547776, 
3617834; 547776, 3618074; 547746, 3618074; 547746, 3618104; 547716, 
3618104; 547716, 3618134; 547686, 3618134; 547686, 3618194; 547656, 
3618194; 547656, 3618254; 547686, 3618254; 547686, 3618284; 547716, 
3618284; 547716, 3618554; 547686, 3618554; 547686, 3618584; 547656, 
3618584; 547656, 3618614; 547626, 3618614; 547626, 3618674; 547596, 
3618674; 547596, 3618704; 547566, 3618704; 547566, 3618734; 547536, 
3618734; 547536, 3618824; 547566, 3618824; 547566, 3618974; 547536, 
3618974; 547536, 3619034; 547506, 3619034; 547506, 3619064; 547476, 
3619064; 547476, 3619094; 547446, 3619094; 547446, 3619124; 547416, 
3619124; 547416, 3619154; 547386, 3619154; 547386, 3619304; 547356, 
3619304; 547356, 3619364; 547326, 3619364; 547326, 3619394; 547296, 
3619394; 547296, 3619424; 547266, 3619424; 547266, 3619454; 547236, 
3619454; 547236, 3619484; 547146, 3619484; 547146, 3619514; 547086, 
3619514; 547086, 3619544; 546996, 3619544; 546996, 3619514; 546966, 
3619514; 546966, 3619484; 546936, 3619484; 546936, 3619454; 546906, 
3619454; 546906, 3619424; 546876, 3619424; 546876, 3619394; 546846, 
3619394; 546846, 3619334; 546816, 3619334; 546816, 3618974; 546786, 
3618974; 546786, 3618944; 546726, 3618944; 546726, 3618854; 546696, 
3618854; 546696, 3618614; 546726, 3618614; 546726, 3618464; 546756, 
3618464; 546756, 3618404; 546726, 3618404; 546726, 3618164; 546756, 
3618164; 546756, 3617954; 546726, 3617954; 546726, 3617924; 546696, 
3617924; 546696, 3617894; 546576, 3617894; 546576, 3617954; 546546, 
3617954; 546546, 3617984; 546486, 3617984; 546486, 3618014; 546396, 
3618014; 546396, 3617984; 546366, 3617984; 546366, 3617954; 546336, 
3617954; 546336, 3617924; 546306, 3617924; 546306, 3617894; 546276, 
3617894; 546276, 3617864; 546246, 3617864; 546246, 3617834; 546216, 
3617834; 546216, 3617864; 546186, 3617864; 546186, 3617834; 546156, 
3617834; 546156, 3617774; 546126, 3617774; 546126, 3617744; 546096, 
3617744; 546096, 3617714; 546066, 3617714; 546066, 3617654; 546036, 
3617654; 546036, 3617564; 546006, 3617564; 546006, 3617534; 545976, 
3617534; 545976, 3617444; 545946, 3617444; 545946, 3617384; 545916, 
3617384; 545916, 3617324; 545886, 3617324; 545886, 3617264; 545856, 
3617264; 545856, 3617234; 545796, 3617234; 545796, 3617204; 545736, 
3617204; 545736, 3617174; 545676, 3617174; 545676, 3617114; 545616, 
3617114; 545616, 3616994; 545586, 3616994; 545586, 3616934; 545556, 
3616934; 545556, 3616874; 545526, 3616874; 545526, 3616844; 545496, 
3616844; 545496, 3616784; 545466, 3616784; 545466, 3616724; 545436, 
3616724; 545436, 3616574; 545286, 3616574; 545286, 3616604; 545166, 
3616604; 545166, 3616634; 545076, 3616634; 545076, 3616694; 545046, 
3616694; 545046, 3616784; 545076, 3616784; 545076, 3616814; 545106, 
3616814; 545106, 3617024; 545076, 3617024; 545076, 3617054; 545046, 
3617054; 545046, 3617114; 544986,

[[Page 467]]

3617114; 544986, 3617144; 544956, 3617144; 544956, 3617264; 544986, 
3617264; 544986, 3617354; 544956, 3617354; 544956, 3617384; 544926, 
3617384; 544926, 3617474; 544896, 3617474; 544896, 3617594; 544819, 
3617594; 544908, 3617848; 544866, 3617885; 544866, 3617894; 544896, 
3617894; 544896, 3617924; 544926, 3617924; 544926, 3617954; 544956, 
3617954; 544956, 3618134; 544926, 3618134; 544926, 3618164; 544896, 
3618164; 544896, 3618194; 544836, 3618194; 544836, 3618224; 544776, 
3618224; 544776, 3618254; 544746, 3618254; 544746, 3618284; 544716, 
3618284; 544716, 3618374; 544746, 3618374; 544746, 3618404; 544836, 
3618404; 544836, 3618434; 544866, 3618434; 544866, 3618464; 544776, 
3618464; 544776, 3618494; 544716, 3618494; 544716, 3618524; 544566, 
3618524; 544566, 3618494; 544536, 3618494; 544536, 3618404; 544506, 
3618404; 544506, 3618284; 544505, 3618284; 544423, 3618642; 544308, 
3618612; 544278, 3618673; 544199, 3618776; 544102, 3618879; 544023, 
3618885; 544090, 3618806; 544084, 3618703; 543999, 3618642; 543859, 
3618303; 543865, 3618085; 543822, 3617924; 543816, 3617924; 543816, 
3617984; 543786, 3617984; 543786, 3618014; 543756, 3618014; 543756, 
3618074; 543726, 3618074; 543726, 3618134; 543696, 3618134; 543696, 
3618194; 543666, 3618194; 543666, 3618224; 543636, 3618224; 543636, 
3618314; 543606, 3618314; 543606, 3618374; 543576, 3618374; 543576, 
3618404; 543546, 3618404; 543546, 3618434; 543396, 3618434; 543396, 
3618494; 543366, 3618494; 543366, 3618524; 543246, 3618524; 543246, 
3618584; 543216, 3618584; 543216, 3618644; 543336, 3618644; 543336, 
3618674; 543366, 3618674; 543366, 3618704; 543396, 3618704; 543396, 
3618734; 543426, 3618734; 543426, 3618824; 543456, 3618824; 543456, 
3618884; 543486, 3618884; 543486, 3618914; 543456, 3618914; 543456, 
3619034; 543486, 3619034; 543486, 3619184; 543456, 3619184; 543456, 
3619244; 543486, 3619244; 543486, 3619304; 543516, 3619304; 543516, 
3619334; 543606, 3619334; 543606, 3619364; 543636, 3619364; 543636, 
3619394; 543666, 3619394; 543666, 3619424; 543696, 3619424; 543696, 
3619484; 543726, 3619484; 543726, 3619514; 543756, 3619514; 543756, 
3619664; 543726, 3619664; 543726, 3619724; 543696, 3619724; 543696, 
3619814; 543666, 3619814; 543666, 3619844; 543606, 3619844; 543606, 
3619904; 543576, 3619904; 543576, 3619934; 543546, 3619934; 543546, 
3619964; 543516, 3619964; 543516, 3619994; 543486, 3619994; 543486, 
3620174; 543456, 3620174; 543456, 3620294; 543516, 3620294; 543516, 
3620324; 543546, 3620324; 543546, 3620354; 543516, 3620354; 543516, 
3620384; 543486, 3620384; 543486, 3620414; 543456, 3620414; 543456, 
3620564; 543426, 3620564; 543426, 3620594; 543246, 3620594; 543246, 
3620534; 543186, 3620534; 543186, 3620504; 543126, 3620504; 543126, 
3620474; 543036, 3620474; 543036, 3620594; 543066, 3620594; 543066, 
3620684; 543036, 3620684; 543036, 3620714; 542976, 3620714; 542976, 
3620804; 542946, 3620804; 542946, 3620864; 542916, 3620864; 542916, 
3620894; 542886, 3620894; 542886, 3620954; 542826, 3620954; 542826, 
3620984; 542796, 3620984; 542796, 3621014; 542766, 3621014; 542766, 
3621044; 542736, 3621044; 542736, 3621074; 542646, 3621074; 542646, 
3621044; 542586, 3621044; 542586, 3621014; 542466, 3621014; 542466, 
3621074; 542436, 3621074; 542436, 3621104; 542406, 3621104; 542406, 
3621194; 542436, 3621194; 542436, 3621254; 542466, 3621254; 542466, 
3621284; 542496, 3621284; 542496, 3621314; 542436, 3621314; 542436, 
3621344; 542406, 3621344; 542406, 3621374; 542376, 3621374; 542376, 
3621404; 542346, 3621404; 542346, 3621434; 542316, 3621434; 542316, 
3621464; 542256, 3621464; 542256, 3621494; 542196, 3621494; 542196, 
3621524; 542016, 3621524; 542016, 3621554; 541896, 3621554; 541896, 
3621584; 541866, 3621584; 541866, 3621614; 541806, 3621614; 541806, 
3621644; 541716, 3621644; 541716, 3621674; 541656, 3621674; 541656, 
3621704; 541596, 3621704; 541596, 3621764; 541566, 3621764; 541566, 
3621824; 541536, 3621824; 541536, 3621884; 541506, 3621884; 541506, 
3621944; 541476, 3621944; 541476, 3622064; 541506, 3622064; 541506, 
3622094; 541536, 3622094; 541536, 3622124; 541626, 3622124; 541626, 
3622094; 541746, 3622094; 541746, 3622124; 541776, 3622124; 541776, 
3622154; 541806, 3622154; 541806, 3622184; 541926, 3622184; 541926, 
3622154; 541956, 3622154; 541956, 3622124; 542016, 3622124; 542016, 
3622094; 542076, 3622094; 542076, 3622064; 542106, 3622064; 542106, 
3622034; 542136, 3622034; 542136, 3621974; 542166, 3621974; 542166, 
3621914; 542226, 3621914; 542226, 3621884; 542256, 3621884; 542256, 
3621854; 542316, 3621854; 542316, 3621824; 542676, 3621824; 542676, 
3621854; 542766, 3621854; 542766, 3621884; 542796, 3621884; 542796, 
3621914; 542826, 3621914; 542826, 3621944; 542856, 3621944; 542856, 
3621974; 542826, 3621974; 542826, 3622124; 542796, 3622124; 542796, 
3622094; 542766, 3622094; 542766, 3622064; 542736, 3622064; 542736, 
3622094; 542706, 3622094; 542706, 3622124; 542676, 3622124; 542676, 
3622394; 542706, 3622394; 542706, 3622484; 542766, 3622484; 542766, 
3622424; 542796, 3622424; 542796, 3622394; 542826, 3622394; 542826, 
3622334; 542856, 3622334; 542856, 3622364; 543006, 3622364; 543006, 
3622244; 542946, 3622244; 542946, 3622214; 542976, 3622214; 542976, 
3622184; 543006, 3622184; 543006, 3622094; 543036, 3622094; 543036, 
3622064; 543066, 3622064; 543066, 3622034; 543096, 3622034; 543096, 
3622004; 543186, 3622004; 543186, 3621974; 543216, 3621974; 543216, 
3621944; 543246, 3621944; 543246, 3621914; 543216, 3621914; 543216, 
3621884; 543186, 3621884; 543186, 3621854; 543126, 3621854; 543126, 
3621824; 543096, 3621824; 543096, 3621584; 543126, 3621584; 543126, 
3621524; 543216, 3621524; 543216, 3621494; 543426, 3621494; 543426, 
3621464; 543486, 3621464; 543486, 3621434; 543546, 3621434; 543546, 
3621404; 543636, 3621404; 543636, 3621374; 543666, 3621374; 543666, 
3621314; 543726, 3621314; 543726, 3621284; 543756, 3621284; 543756, 
3621254; 543816, 3621254; 543816, 3621224; 543906, 3621224; 543906, 
3621194; 543966, 3621194; 543966, 3621164; 543996, 3621164; 543996, 
3621104; 544026, 3621104; 544026, 3621044; 544056, 3621044; 544056, 
3620924; 544086, 3620924; 544086, 3620894; 544116, 3620894; 544116, 
3620864; 544146, 3620864; 544146, 3620834; 544176, 3620834; 544176, 
3620804; 544206, 3620804; 544206, 3620774; 544236, 3620774; 544236, 
3620744; 544266, 3620744; 544266, 3620684; 544326, 3620684; 544326, 
3620654; 544356, 3620654; 544356, 3620624; 544386, 3620624; 544386, 
3620474; 544416, 3620474; 544416, 3620414; 544446, 3620414; 544446, 
3620384; 544476, 3620384; 544476, 3620354; 544506, 3620354; 544506, 
3620294; 544536, 3620294; 544536, 3620264; 544506, 3620264; 544506, 
3620204; 544416, 3620204; 544416, 3620144; 544386, 3620144; 544386, 
3620084; 544416, 3620084; 544416, 3620024; 544476, 3620024; 544476, 
3619994; 544536, 3619994; 544536, 3619964; 544566, 3619964; 544566, 
3619904; 544686, 3619904; 544686,

[[Page 468]]

3619874; 544716, 3619874; 544716, 3619844; 544776, 3619844; 544776, 
3619814; 544836, 3619814; 544836, 3619784; 544866, 3619784; 544866, 
3619754; returning to 544887, 3619754. Excluding land bounded by 543246, 
3620804; 543246, 3620834; 543186, 3620834; 543186, 3620804; returning to 
543246, 3620804. Excluding land bounded by 544266, 3618914; 544266, 
3618884; 544296, 3618884; 544296, 3618914; returning to 544266, 3618914.
    (ii) Subunit 19b: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Barrett Lake, 
Tecate, Potrero and Morena Reservoir, land bounded by the following UTM 
coordinates (E, N): 529986, 3613334; 529986, 3613304; 530016, 3613304; 
530016, 3613274; 530046, 3613274; 530046, 3613244; 530076, 3613244; 
530076, 3613184; 530106, 3613184; 530106, 3613154; 530136, 3613154; 
530136, 3613124; 530166, 3613124; 530166, 3613034; 530196, 3613034; 
530196, 3612794; 530166, 3612794; 530166, 3612644; 530196, 3612644; 
530196, 3612584; 530406, 3612584; 530406, 3612554; 530466, 3612554; 
530466, 3612524; 530406, 3612524; 530406, 3612494; 530376, 3612494; 
530376, 3612434; 530346, 3612434; 530346, 3612404; 530316, 3612404; 
530316, 3612374; 530286, 3612374; 530286, 3612344; 530256, 3612344; 
530256, 3612314; 530226, 3612314; 530226, 3612284; 530136, 3612284; 
530136, 3612224; 530106, 3612224; 530106, 3612164; 530136, 3612164; 
530136, 3612104; 530106, 3612104; 530106, 3611864; 530136, 3611864; 
530136, 3611834; 530106, 3611834; 530106, 3611774; 530076, 3611774; 
530076, 3611744; 530046, 3611744; 530046, 3611714; 530016, 3611714; 
530016, 3611594; 530046, 3611594; 530046, 3611564; 530016, 3611564; 
530016, 3611534; 529956, 3611534; 529956, 3611504; 529926, 3611504; 
529926, 3611474; 529836, 3611474; 529836, 3611444; 529656, 3611444; 
529656, 3611414; 529476, 3611414; 529476, 3611384; 529446, 3611384; 
529446, 3611264; 529476, 3611264; 529476, 3611234; 529506, 3611234; 
529506, 3611204; 529596, 3611204; 529596, 3611174; 529686, 3611174; 
529686, 3611144; 529716, 3611144; 529716, 3611114; 529746, 3611114; 
529746, 3611084; 529776, 3611084; 529776, 3611024; 529806, 3611024; 
529806, 3610904; 529836, 3610904; 529836, 3610604; 529866, 3610604; 
529866, 3610574; 529896, 3610574; 529896, 3610544; 529866, 3610544; 
529866, 3610484; 529806, 3610484; 529806, 3610454; 529776, 3610454; 
529776, 3610484; 529746, 3610484; 529746, 3610424; 529926, 3610424; 
529926, 3610394; 529956, 3610394; 529956, 3610364; 529986, 3610364; 
529986, 3610334; 530016, 3610334; 530016, 3610304; 530046, 3610304; 
530046, 3610274; 530016, 3610274; 530016, 3610244; 529986, 3610244; 
529986, 3610184; 529956, 3610184; 529956, 3610154; 529926, 3610154; 
529926, 3610094; 529896, 3610094; 529896, 3610064; 529866, 3610064; 
529866, 3610034; 529836, 3610034; 529836, 3609944; 529746, 3609944; 
529746, 3609914; 529686, 3609914; 529686, 3609884; 529656, 3609884; 
529656, 3609824; 529626, 3609824; 529626, 3609794; 529596, 3609794; 
529596, 3609734; 529536, 3609734; 529536, 3609704; 529476, 3609704; 
529476, 3609674; 529446, 3609674; 529446, 3609644; 529416, 3609644; 
529416, 3609614; 529386, 3609614; 529386, 3609584; 529326, 3609584; 
529326, 3609554; 529266, 3609554; 529266, 3609524; 529236, 3609524; 
529236, 3609494; 529206, 3609494; 529206, 3609464; 529176, 3609464; 
529176, 3609434; 529146, 3609434; 529146, 3609404; 529116, 3609404; 
529116, 3609374; 529086, 3609374; 529086, 3609344; 529056, 3609344; 
529056, 3609314; 529026, 3609314; 529026, 3609254; 528996, 3609254; 
528996, 3609194; 528966, 3609194; 528966, 3609134; 528936, 3609134; 
528936, 3609104; 528906, 3609104; 528906, 3609044; 528876, 3609044; 
528876, 3608984; 528846, 3608984; 528846, 3608746; 528679, 3608752; 
528618, 3608690; 528561, 3608612; 528500, 3608530; 528467, 3608433; 
528425, 3608358; 528816, 3608383; 528816, 3608354; 528846, 3608354; 
528846, 3608324; 528816, 3608324; 528816, 3608294; 528786, 3608294; 
528786, 3608264; 528816, 3608264; 528816, 3608234; 528816, 3608174; 
528786, 3608174; 528786, 3608084; 528816, 3608084; 528816, 3608024; 
528846, 3608024; 528846, 3607994; 528876, 3607994; 528876, 3607964; 
528906, 3607964; 528906, 3607874; 528936, 3607874; 528936, 3607814; 
528996, 3607814; 528996, 3607784; 529026, 3607784; 529026, 3607754; 
529056, 3607754; 529056, 3607724; 529116, 3607724; 529116, 3607694; 
529146, 3607694; 529146, 3607664; 529176, 3607664; 529176, 3607694; 
529266, 3607694; 529266, 3607724; 529296, 3607724; 529296, 3607694; 
529356, 3607694; 529356, 3607664; 529536, 3607664; 529536, 3607694; 
529596, 3607694; 529596, 3607664; 529626, 3607664; 529626, 3607634; 
529806, 3607634; 529806, 3607664; 529836, 3607664; 529836, 3607634; 
529956, 3607634; 529956, 3607574; 529986, 3607574; 529986, 3607484; 
530016, 3607484; 530016, 3607454; 530046, 3607454; 530046, 3607424; 
530076, 3607424; 530076, 3607394; 530196, 3607394; 530196, 3607364; 
530226, 3607364; 530226, 3607304; 530196, 3607304; 530196, 3607274; 
530166, 3607274; 530166, 3607184; 530136, 3607184; 530136, 3607154; 
530166, 3607154; 530166, 3607124; 530136, 3607124; 530136, 3606974; 
530106, 3606974; 530106, 3606914; 530076, 3606914; 530076, 3606884; 
530106, 3606884; 530106, 3606854; 530166, 3606854; 530166, 3606824; 
530196, 3606824; 530196, 3606794; 530256, 3606794; 530256, 3606764; 
530316, 3606764; 530316, 3606734; 530466, 3606734; 530466, 3606704; 
530526, 3606704; 530526, 3606674; 530616, 3606674; 530616, 3606644; 
530706, 3606644; 530706, 3606614; 530946, 3606614; 530946, 3606584; 
530976, 3606584; 530976, 3606554; 531006, 3606554; 531006, 3606584; 
531066, 3606584; 531066, 3606554; 531126, 3606554; 531126, 3606584; 
531246, 3606584; 531246, 3606554; 531336, 3606554; 531336, 3606524; 
531366, 3606524; 531366, 3606464; 531456, 3606464; 531456, 3606494; 
531486, 3606494; 531486, 3606524; 531516, 3606524; 531516, 3606554; 
531576, 3606554; 531576, 3606584; 531606, 3606584; 531606, 3606614; 
531636, 3606614; 531636, 3606644; 531666, 3606644; 531666, 3606674; 
531696, 3606674; 531696, 3606704; 531726, 3606704; 531726, 3606734; 
531756, 3606734; 531756, 3606764; 531816, 3606764; 531816, 3606794; 
532086, 3606794; 532086, 3606824; 532206, 3606824; 532206, 3606854; 
532236, 3606854; 532236, 3606944; 532296, 3606944; 532296, 3606914; 
532416, 3606914; 532416, 3606884; 532566, 3606884; 532566, 3606914; 
532626, 3606914; 532626, 3606944; 532656, 3606944; 532656, 3607004; 
532686, 3607004; 532686, 3607034; 532926, 3607034; 532926, 3606974; 
532956, 3606974; 532956, 3606944; 532986, 3606944; 532986, 3606914; 
533136, 3606914; 533136, 3606944; 533166, 3606944; 533166, 3606974; 
533226, 3606974; 533226, 3607034; 533256, 3607034; 533256, 3607064; 
533286, 3607064; 533286, 3607124; 533256, 3607124; 533256, 3607154; 
533286, 3607154; 533286, 3607184; 533316, 3607184; 533316, 3607244; 
533346, 3607244; 533346, 3607334; 533376, 3607334; 533376, 3607394; 
533406,

[[Page 469]]

3607394; 533406, 3607484; 533496, 3607484; 533496, 3607424; 533586, 
3607424; 533586, 3607394; 533766, 3607394; 533766, 3607424; 534066, 
3607424; 534066, 3607454; 534126, 3607454; 534126, 3607574; 534186, 
3607574; 534186, 3607604; 534216, 3607604; 534216, 3607634; 534186, 
3607634; 534186, 3607754; 534156, 3607754; 534156, 3607784; 534156, 
3607844; 534186, 3607844; 534186, 3607934; 534156, 3607934; 534156, 
3607994; 534186, 3607994; 534186, 3608084; 534216, 3608084; 534216, 
3608114; 534276, 3608114; 534276, 3608144; 534336, 3608144; 534336, 
3608174; 534456, 3608174; 534456, 3608204; 534516, 3608204; 534516, 
3608234; 534606, 3608234; 534606, 3608264; 534636, 3608264; 534636, 
3608294; 534756, 3608294; 534756, 3608324; 534846, 3608324; 534846, 
3608354; 534876, 3608354; 534876, 3608384; 534906, 3608384; 534906, 
3608414; 534936, 3608414; 534936, 3608594; 534966, 3608594; 534966, 
3608624; 534996, 3608624; 534996, 3608654; 535056, 3608654; 535056, 
3608684; 535086, 3608684; 535086, 3608714; 535146, 3608714; 535146, 
3608744; 535236, 3608744; 535236, 3608774; 535266, 3608774; 535266, 
3608804; 535296, 3608804; 535296, 3608834; 535356, 3608834; 535356, 
3608864; 535446, 3608864; 535446, 3608894; 535506, 3608894; 535506, 
3608924; 535566, 3608924; 535566, 3608954; 535596, 3608954; 535596, 
3608984; 535626, 3608984; 535626, 3609014; 535686, 3609014; 535686, 
3609044; 535716, 3609044; 535716, 3609344; 535686, 3609344; 535686, 
3609374; 535656, 3609374; 535656, 3609404; 535626, 3609404; 535626, 
3609434; 535596, 3609434; 535596, 3609464; 535566, 3609464; 535566, 
3609524; 535536, 3609524; 535536, 3609584; 535506, 3609584; 535506, 
3609644; 535476, 3609644; 535476, 3609734; 535446, 3609734; 535446, 
3609764; 535476, 3609764; 535476, 3609884; 535806, 3609884; 535806, 
3609914; 535836, 3609914; 535836, 3609884; 535896, 3609884; 535896, 
3609914; 535956, 3609914; 535956, 3609944; 536016, 3609944; 536016, 
3609974; 536076, 3609974; 536076, 3610004; 536166, 3610004; 536166, 
3610034; 536226, 3610034; 536226, 3610064; 536256, 3610064; 536256, 
3610094; 536286, 3610094; 536286, 3610124; 536316, 3610124; 536316, 
3610154; 536346, 3610154; 536346, 3610244; 536466, 3610244; 536466, 
3610214; 536586, 3610214; 536586, 3610244; 536616, 3610244; 536616, 
3610304; 536646, 3610304; 536646, 3610334; 536676, 3610334; 536676, 
3610424; 536706, 3610424; 536706, 3610514; 536736, 3610514; 536736, 
3610544; 536856, 3610544; 536856, 3610574; 536886, 3610574; 536886, 
3610544; 536916, 3610544; 536916, 3610574; 536946, 3610574; 536946, 
3610604; 537006, 3610604; 537006, 3610634; 537066, 3610634; 537066, 
3610604; 537276, 3610604; 537276, 3610634; 537336, 3610634; 537336, 
3610664; 537366, 3610664; 537366, 3610694; 537426, 3610694; 537426, 
3610724; 537546, 3610724; 537546, 3610694; 537576, 3610694; 537576, 
3610784; 537636, 3610784; 537636, 3610844; 537606, 3610844; 537606, 
3610904; 537576, 3610904; 537576, 3610964; 537516, 3610964; 537516, 
3610994; 537306, 3610994; 537306, 3611054; 537336, 3611054; 537336, 
3611084; 537366, 3611084; 537366, 3611114; 537456, 3611114; 537456, 
3611144; 537516, 3611144; 537516, 3611174; 537546, 3611174; 537546, 
3611204; 537576, 3611204; 537576, 3611234; 537696, 3611234; 537696, 
3611204; 537726, 3611204; 537726, 3611174; 537786, 3611174; 537786, 
3611264; 537816, 3611264; 537816, 3611294; 537876, 3611294; 537876, 
3611324; 537906, 3611324; 537906, 3611354; 537936, 3611354; 537936, 
3611384; 537906, 3611384; 537906, 3611504; 537936, 3611504; 537936, 
3611564; 537996, 3611564; 537996, 3611594; 538206, 3611594; 538206, 
3611624; 538296, 3611624; 538296, 3611654; 538326, 3611654; 538326, 
3611774; 538356, 3611774; 538356, 3611804; 538416, 3611804; 538416, 
3611834; 538446, 3611834; 538446, 3611864; 538476, 3611864; 538476, 
3612074; 538506, 3612074; 538506, 3612314; 538476, 3612314; 538476, 
3612434; 538446, 3612434; 538446, 3612494; 538416, 3612494; 538416, 
3612584; 538476, 3612584; 538476, 3612614; 538836, 3612614; 538836, 
3612644; 538896, 3612644; 538896, 3612674; 538926, 3612674; 538926, 
3612794; 539106, 3612794; 539106, 3612824; 539136, 3612824; 539136, 
3612914; 539166, 3612914; 539166, 3612974; 539196, 3612974; 539196, 
3613004; 539226, 3613004; 539226, 3613064; 539256, 3613064; 539256, 
3613094; 539226, 3613094; 539226, 3613184; 539196, 3613184; 539196, 
3613304; 539226, 3613304; 539226, 3613334; 539256, 3613334; 539256, 
3613364; 539286, 3613364; 539286, 3613394; 539316, 3613394; 539316, 
3613424; 539346, 3613424; 539346, 3613484; 539376, 3613484; 539376, 
3613514; 539466, 3613514; 539466, 3613544; 539526, 3613544; 539526, 
3613574; 539556, 3613574; 539556, 3613844; 539646, 3613844; 539646, 
3613814; 539706, 3613814; 539706, 3613784; 539766, 3613784; 539766, 
3613754; 539856, 3613754; 539856, 3613724; 539976, 3613724; 539976, 
3613604; 539946, 3613604; 539946, 3613544; 539916, 3613544; 539916, 
3613454; 539946, 3613454; 539946, 3613394; 540006, 3613394; 540006, 
3613424; 540246, 3613424; 540246, 3613334; 540276, 3613334; 540276, 
3613304; 540246, 3613304; 540246, 3613244; 540216, 3613244; 540216, 
3613154; 540186, 3613154; 540186, 3613124; 540156, 3613124; 540156, 
3613004; 540186, 3613004; 540186, 3612974; 540246, 3612974; 540246, 
3612944; 540306, 3612944; 540306, 3612914; 540336, 3612914; 540336, 
3612884; 540366, 3612884; 540366, 3612854; 540396, 3612854; 540396, 
3612824; 540426, 3612824; 540426, 3612764; 540456, 3612764; 540456, 
3612734; 540486, 3612734; 540486, 3612704; 540516, 3612704; 540516, 
3612674; 540546, 3612674; 540546, 3612644; 540516, 3612644; 540516, 
3612614; 540456, 3612614; 540456, 3612584; 540426, 3612584; 540426, 
3612524; 540366, 3612524; 540366, 3612494; 540276, 3612494; 540276, 
3612464; 540126, 3612464; 540126, 3612224; 540096, 3612224; 540096, 
3612194; 540066, 3612194; 540066, 3612164; 540036, 3612164; 540036, 
3612104; 540006, 3612104; 540006, 3611954; 540036, 3611954; 540036, 
3611894; 540066, 3611894; 540066, 3611864; 540096, 3611864; 540096, 
3611744; 540276, 3611744; 540276, 3611654; 540246, 3611654; 540246, 
3611624; 540216, 3611624; 540216, 3611594; 540186, 3611594; 540186, 
3611564; 540126, 3611564; 540126, 3611534; 540096, 3611534; 540096, 
3611504; 540066, 3611504; 540066, 3611474; 540036, 3611474; 540036, 
3611414; 540066, 3611414; 540066, 3611354; 540036, 3611354; 540036, 
3611324; 539976, 3611324; 539976, 3611294; 539946, 3611294; 539946, 
3611264; 539916, 3611264; 539916, 3611234; 539886, 3611234; 539886, 
3611204; 539856, 3611204; 539856, 3611144; 539796, 3611144; 539796, 
3611114; 539766, 3611114; 539766, 3611144; 539496, 3611144; 539496, 
3611024; 539466, 3611024; 539466, 3610904; 539496, 3610904; 539496, 
3610814; 539526, 3610814; 539526, 3610724; 539556, 3610724; 539556, 
3610664; 539616, 3610664; 539616, 3610574; 539226, 3610574; 539226, 
3610604; 539166, 3610604; 539166, 3610634; 538986, 3610634; 538986, 
3610604; 538926, 3610604; 538926,

[[Page 470]]

3610634; 538806, 3610634; 538806, 3610604; 538656, 3610604; 538656, 
3610574; 538566, 3610574; 538566, 3610544; 538536, 3610544; 538536, 
3610514; 538506, 3610514; 538506, 3610454; 538476, 3610454; 538476, 
3610424; 538416, 3610424; 538416, 3610394; 538356, 3610394; 538356, 
3610364; 538296, 3610364; 538296, 3610334; 538236, 3610334; 538236, 
3610304; 538206, 3610304; 538206, 3610274; 538176, 3610274; 538176, 
3610244; 538146, 3610244; 538146, 3610184; 538116, 3610184; 538116, 
3610124; 538146, 3610124; 538146, 3610004; 538176, 3610004; 538176, 
3609914; 538056, 3609914; 538056, 3609884; 538086, 3609884; 538086, 
3609824; 538146, 3609824; 538146, 3609764; 538116, 3609764; 538116, 
3609704; 538086, 3609704; 538086, 3609614; 537906, 3609614; 537906, 
3609584; 537846, 3609584; 537846, 3609524; 537786, 3609524; 537786, 
3609494; 537756, 3609494; 537756, 3609374; 537726, 3609374; 537726, 
3609344; 537606, 3609344; 537606, 3609374; 537576, 3609374; 537576, 
3609434; 537546, 3609434; 537546, 3609494; 537576, 3609494; 537576, 
3609524; 537516, 3609524; 537516, 3609494; 537486, 3609494; 537426, 
3609494; 537426, 3609524; 537396, 3609524; 537396, 3609554; 537306, 
3609554; 537306, 3609524; 537246, 3609524; 537246, 3609554; 537216, 
3609554; 537216, 3609584; 537186, 3609584; 537186, 3609644; 537096, 
3609644; 537096, 3609614; 537066, 3609614; 537066, 3609644; 537036, 
3609644; 537036, 3609734; 537006, 3609734; 537006, 3609764; 536976, 
3609764; 536976, 3609734; 536946, 3609734; 536946, 3609674; 536886, 
3609674; 536886, 3609644; 536946, 3609644; 536946, 3609614; 536976, 
3609614; 536976, 3609584; 537036, 3609584; 537036, 3609524; 537126, 
3609524; 537126, 3609494; 537156, 3609494; 537156, 3609464; 537186, 
3609464; 537186, 3609434; 537306, 3609434; 537306, 3609404; 537366, 
3609404; 537366, 3609374; 537396, 3609374; 537396, 3609344; 537516, 
3609344; 537516, 3609374; 537546, 3609374; 537546, 3609344; 537576, 
3609344; 537576, 3609284; 537606, 3609284; 537606, 3609194; 537636, 
3609194; 537636, 3609104; 537666, 3609104; 537666, 3608894; 537636, 
3608894; 537636, 3608834; 537606, 3608834; 537606, 3608774; 537576, 
3608774; 537576, 3608744; 537516, 3608744; 537516, 3608714; 537456, 
3608714; 537456, 3608684; 537396, 3608684; 537396, 3608654; 537246, 
3608654; 537246, 3608684; 537126, 3608684; 537126, 3608714; 536826, 
3608714; 536826, 3608684; 536736, 3608684; 536736, 3608654; 536706, 
3608654; 536706, 3608624; 536676, 3608624; 536676, 3608594; 536616, 
3608594; 536616, 3608534; 536586, 3608534; 536586, 3608474; 536556, 
3608474; 536556, 3608324; 536526, 3608324; 536526, 3608204; 536496, 
3608204; 536496, 3607964; 536466, 3607964; 536466, 3607904; 536496, 
3607904; 536496, 3607814; 536526, 3607814; 536526, 3607604; 536496, 
3607604; 536496, 3607574; 536466, 3607574; 536466, 3607544; 536406, 
3607544; 536406, 3607514; 536076, 3607514; 536076, 3607544; 535926, 
3607544; 535896, 3607544; 535896, 3607514; 535716, 3607514; 535716, 
3607544; 535686, 3607544; 535686, 3607574; 535656, 3607574; 535656, 
3607604; 535566, 3607604; 535566, 3607634; 535476, 3607634; 535476, 
3607664; 535416, 3607664; 535416, 3607694; 535206, 3607694; 535206, 
3607664; 535146, 3607664; 535146, 3607634; 535086, 3607634; 535086, 
3607604; 534996, 3607604; 534996, 3607574; 534966, 3607574; 534966, 
3607604; 534936, 3607604; 534936, 3607634; 534966, 3607634; 534966, 
3607664; 534996, 3607664; 534996, 3607694; 535026, 3607694; 535026, 
3607814; 534936, 3607814; 534936, 3607844; 534906, 3607844; 534906, 
3607874; 534666, 3607874; 534666, 3607844; 534636, 3607844; 534636, 
3607814; 534606, 3607814; 534606, 3607754; 534576, 3607754; 534576, 
3607664; 534546, 3607664; 534546, 3607634; 534516, 3607634; 534516, 
3607604; 534456, 3607604; 534456, 3607574; 534426, 3607574; 534426, 
3607544; 534396, 3607544; 534396, 3607514; 534366, 3607514; 534366, 
3607484; 534336, 3607484; 534336, 3607454; 534306, 3607454; 534306, 
3607424; 534276, 3607424; 534276, 3607394; 534246, 3607394; 534246, 
3607364; 534216, 3607364; 534216, 3607274; 534246, 3607274; 534246, 
3607184; 534186, 3607184; 534186, 3607154; 534066, 3607154; 534066, 
3607184; 533946, 3607184; 533886, 3607184; 533886, 3607154; 533856, 
3607154; 533856, 3607184; 533796, 3607184; 533796, 3607124; 533766, 
3607124; 533766, 3607064; 533736, 3607064; 533736, 3607034; 533676, 
3607034; 533676, 3607064; 533616, 3607064; 533616, 3607094; 533526, 
3607094; 533526, 3607064; 533496, 3607064; 533496, 3607034; 533466, 
3607034; 533466, 3607004; 533406, 3607004; 533406, 3606974; 533376, 
3606974; 533376, 3606914; 533346, 3606914; 533346, 3606854; 533316, 
3606854; 533316, 3606824; 533286, 3606824; 533286, 3606764; 533316, 
3606764; 533316, 3606734; 533286, 3606734; 533286, 3606704; 533226, 
3606704; 533226, 3606674; 533106, 3606674; 532986, 3606674; 532986, 
3606704; 532746, 3606704; 532746, 3606824; 532686, 3606824; 532686, 
3606674; 532626, 3606674; 532626, 3606644; 532506, 3606644; 532506, 
3606674; 532416, 3606674; 532416, 3606704; 532356, 3606704; 532356, 
3606674; 532266, 3606674; 532266, 3606644; 532206, 3606644; 532206, 
3606614; 531966, 3606614; 531966, 3606584; 531936, 3606584; 531936, 
3606554; 531876, 3606554; 531876, 3606524; 531846, 3606524; 531846, 
3606494; 531816, 3606494; 531816, 3606464; 531786, 3606464; 531786, 
3606434; 531756, 3606434; 531756, 3606404; 531726, 3606404; 531726, 
3606374; 531696, 3606374; 531696, 3606284; 531726, 3606284; 531726, 
3606254; 531756, 3606254; 531756, 3606194; 531666, 3606194; 531666, 
3606224; 531576, 3606224; 531576, 3606254; 531486, 3606254; 531486, 
3606224; 531366, 3606224; 531366, 3606194; 531306, 3606194; 531306, 
3606224; 531246, 3606224; 531246, 3606254; 531216, 3606254; 531216, 
3606314; 531186, 3606314; 531186, 3606344; 531156, 3606344; 531156, 
3606374; 531066, 3606374; 531066, 3606344; 530916, 3606344; 530916, 
3606374; 530886, 3606374; 530886, 3606404; 530856, 3606404; 530856, 
3606434; 530766, 3606434; 530766, 3606464; 530676, 3606464; 530676, 
3606494; 530616, 3606494; 530616, 3606524; 530556, 3606524; 530556, 
3606554; 530466, 3606554; 530466, 3606584; 530406, 3606584; 530406, 
3606614; 530226, 3606614; 530226, 3606644; 530136, 3606644; 530136, 
3606674; 530076, 3606674; 530076, 3606704; 529986, 3606704; 529986, 
3606764; 529956, 3606764; 529956, 3606794; 529926, 3606794; 529926, 
3606854; 529896, 3606854; 529896, 3606884; 529926, 3606884; 529926, 
3606944; 529956, 3606944; 529956, 3607004; 529986, 3607004; 529986, 
3607094; 529956, 3607094; 529956, 3607124; 529926, 3607124; 529926, 
3607184; 529896, 3607184; 529896, 3607214; 529866, 3607214; 529866, 
3607244; 529716, 3607244; 529716, 3607214; 529686, 3607214; 529686, 
3607184; 529656, 3607184; 529656, 3607244; 529626, 3607244; 529626, 
3607274; 529596, 3607274; 529596, 3607304; 529536, 3607304; 529536, 
3607334; 529476, 3607334; 529476, 3607364; 529416, 3607364; 529416, 
3607424; 529386, 3607424; 529386,

[[Page 471]]

3607454; 529326, 3607454; 529326, 3607424; 529236, 3607424; 529236, 
3607394; 529176, 3607394; 529176, 3607364; 529146, 3607364; 529146, 
3607334; 529056, 3607334; 529056, 3607364; 528996, 3607364; 528996, 
3607394; 528936, 3607394; 528936, 3607424; 528906, 3607424; 528906, 
3607454; 528606, 3607454; 528606, 3607484; 528546, 3607484; 528546, 
3607514; 528336, 3607514; 528336, 3607574; 528306, 3607574; 528306, 
3607604; 528246, 3607604; 528246, 3607634; 528216, 3607634; 528216, 
3607664; 528186, 3607664; 528186, 3607694; 528036, 3607694; 528036, 
3607664; 527886, 3607664; 527886, 3607694; 527826, 3607694; 527826, 
3607724; 527796, 3607724; 527796, 3607754; 527766, 3607754; 527766, 
3607784; 527346, 3607784; 527346, 3607754; 527256, 3607754; 527256, 
3607724; 527136, 3607724; 527136, 3607694; 527106, 3607694; 527106, 
3607664; 527076, 3607664; 527076, 3607634; 527016, 3607634; 527016, 
3607604; 526956, 3607604; 526956, 3607574; 526926, 3607574; 526926, 
3607544; 526896, 3607544; 526896, 3607484; 526866, 3607484; 526866, 
3607454; 526716, 3607454; 526716, 3607424; 526686, 3607424; 526686, 
3607364; 526656, 3607364; 526656, 3607304; 526626, 3607304; 526626, 
3607244; 526596, 3607244; 526596, 3607214; 526536, 3607214; 526536, 
3607184; 526506, 3607184; 526506, 3607094; 526476, 3607094; 526476, 
3607034; 526416, 3607034; 526416, 3607004; 526386, 3607004; 526386, 
3606974; 526356, 3606974; 526356, 3606944; 526326, 3606944; 526326, 
3606914; 526356, 3606914; 526356, 3606854; 526326, 3606854; 526326, 
3606794; 526266, 3606794; 526266, 3606764; 526236, 3606764; 526236, 
3606734; 526206, 3606734; 526206, 3606644; 526176, 3606644; 526176, 
3606554; 526146, 3606554; 526146, 3606434; 526116, 3606434; 526116, 
3606374; 526086, 3606374; 526086, 3606344; 526056, 3606344; 526056, 
3606314; 526026, 3606314; 526026, 3606284; 525996, 3606284; 525996, 
3606254; 525936, 3606254; 525936, 3606224; 525906, 3606224; 525906, 
3606194; 525876, 3606194; 525876, 3606134; 525846, 3606134; 525846, 
3606074; 525786, 3606074; 525786, 3606044; 525726, 3606044; 525726, 
3606014; 525696, 3606014; 525696, 3605984; 525606, 3605984; 525606, 
3605954; 525576, 3605954; 525576, 3605924; 525516, 3605924; 525516, 
3605894; 525456, 3605894; 525456, 3605864; 525336, 3605864; 525336, 
3605834; 525186, 3605834; 525186, 3605804; 524946, 3605804; 524946, 
3605774; 524886, 3605774; 524886, 3605744; 524826, 3605744; 524826, 
3605714; 524796, 3605714; 524796, 3605684; 524736, 3605684; 524736, 
3605654; 524676, 3605654; 524676, 3605624; 524616, 3605624; 524616, 
3605594; 524466, 3605594; 524466, 3605564; 524076, 3605564; 524076, 
3605504; 524046, 3605504; 524046, 3605294; 524076, 3605294; 524076, 
3605054; 524106, 3605054; 524106, 3604904; 524136, 3604904; 524136, 
3604844; 524106, 3604844; 524106, 3604694; 524076, 3604694; 524076, 
3604574; 524046, 3604574; 524046, 3604364; 523836, 3604364; 523836, 
3604334; 523806, 3604334; 523806, 3604304; 523746, 3604304; 523746, 
3604274; 523716, 3604274; 523716, 3604244; 523686, 3604244; 523686, 
3604124; 523626, 3604124; 523626, 3604094; 523566, 3604094; 523566, 
3604034; 523536, 3604034; 523536, 3603854; 523506, 3603854; 523506, 
3603824; 523416, 3603824; 523416, 3603794; 523326, 3603794; 523326, 
3603824; 523176, 3603824; 523176, 3603854; 522966, 3603854; 522966, 
3603884; 522846, 3603884; 522846, 3603854; 522816, 3603854; 522816, 
3603794; 522786, 3603794; 522786, 3603494; 522756, 3603494; 522756, 
3603374; 522726, 3603374; 522726, 3603284; 522696, 3603284; 522696, 
3603224; 522846, 3603224; 522846, 3603254; 522876, 3603254; 522876, 
3603284; 522996, 3603284; 522996, 3603254; 523116, 3603254; 523116, 
3603224; 523146, 3603224; 523146, 3603202; 523089, 3603196; 523059, 
3603192; 522777, 3603163; 522739, 3603156; 522535, 3603133; 522468, 
3603126; 522199, 3603096; 521787, 3603049; 521526, 3603020; 521526, 
3603044; 521466, 3603044; 521466, 3603074; 521406, 3603074; 521406, 
3603104; 521376, 3603104; 521376, 3603134; 521316, 3603134; 521316, 
3603164; 521196, 3603164; 521196, 3603194; 521166, 3603194; 521166, 
3603134; 521076, 3603134; 521076, 3603104; 521016, 3603104; 521016, 
3603074; 520956, 3603074; 520956, 3603044; 520836, 3603044; 520836, 
3603014; 520806, 3603014; 520806, 3602984; 520746, 3602984; 520746, 
3602954; 520686, 3602954; 520686, 3602936; 520570, 3602924; 520566, 
3602924; 520566, 3602924; 520487, 3602916; 520291, 3602896; 520086, 
3602876; 520086, 3602894; 520056, 3602894; 520056, 3602924; 520086, 
3602924; 520086, 3602954; 520116, 3602954; 520116, 3602984; 520236, 
3602984; 520236, 3603014; 520326, 3603014; 520326, 3603044; 520356, 
3603044; 520356, 3603464; 520386, 3603464; 520386, 3603584; 520416, 
3603584; 520416, 3603614; 520446, 3603614; 520446, 3603674; 520476, 
3603674; 520476, 3603734; 520506, 3603734; 520506, 3603794; 520536, 
3603794; 520536, 3603974; 520506, 3603974; 520506, 3604064; 520476, 
3604064; 520476, 3604154; 520566, 3604154; 520566, 3604124; 520596, 
3604124; 520596, 3604094; 520626, 3604094; 520626, 3604064; 520686, 
3604064; 520686, 3604034; 520716, 3604034; 520716, 3604004; 520776, 
3604004; 520776, 3603974; 520896, 3603974; 520896, 3603944; 521076, 
3603944; 521076, 3603974; 521346, 3603974; 521346, 3604004; 521406, 
3604004; 521406, 3603974; 521466, 3603974; 521466, 3603944; 521556, 
3603944; 521556, 3603914; 521856, 3603914; 521856, 3603884; 521916, 
3603884; 521916, 3603854; 521976, 3603854; 521976, 3603824; 522066, 
3603824; 522066, 3603794; 522126, 3603794; 522126, 3603734; 522096, 
3603734; 522096, 3603614; 522186, 3603614; 522186, 3603644; 522216, 
3603644; 522216, 3603674; 522246, 3603674; 522246, 3603734; 522276, 
3603734; 522276, 3603764; 522306, 3603764; 522306, 3603794; 522336, 
3603794; 522336, 3603854; 522366, 3603854; 522366, 3603914; 522396, 
3603914; 522396, 3603944; 522426, 3603944; 522426, 3604004; 522456, 
3604004; 522456, 3604034; 522486, 3604034; 522486, 3604094; 522516, 
3604094; 522516, 3604124; 522546, 3604124; 522546, 3604214; 522576, 
3604214; 522576, 3604304; 522606, 3604304; 522606, 3604364; 522636, 
3604364; 522636, 3604334; 522666, 3604334; 522666, 3604304; 522816, 
3604304; 522816, 3604274; 523086, 3604274; 523086, 3604304; 523146, 
3604304; 523146, 3604334; 523296, 3604334; 523296, 3604364; 523356, 
3604364; 523356, 3604394; 523386, 3604394; 523386, 3604424; 523416, 
3604424; 523416, 3604454; 523446, 3604454; 523446, 3604484; 523506, 
3604484; 523506, 3604514; 523536, 3604514; 523536, 3604544; 523566, 
3604544; 523566, 3604574; 523596, 3604574; 523596, 3604604; 523656, 
3604604; 523656, 3604634; 523686, 3604634; 523686, 3604664; 523716, 
3604664; 523716, 3604694; 523746, 3604694; 523746, 3604814; 523776, 
3604814; 523776, 3604874; 523806, 3604874; 523806, 3604964; 523836, 
3604964; 523836, 3605054; 523806, 3605054; 523806, 3605084; 523776, 
3605084; 523776, 3605144; 523746, 3605144; 523746, 3605174; 523716, 
3605174; 523716, 3605234; 523686,

[[Page 472]]

3605234; 523686, 3605264; 523656, 3605264; 523656, 3605294; 523626, 
3605294; 523626, 3605354; 523596, 3605354; 523596, 3605414; 523566, 
3605414; 523566, 3605444; 523536, 3605444; 523536, 3605504; 523506, 
3605504; 523506, 3605564; 523476, 3605564; 523476, 3605624; 523506, 
3605624; 523506, 3605684; 523536, 3605684; 523536, 3605744; 523506, 
3605744; 523506, 3605834; 523476, 3605834; 523476, 3605864; 523506, 
3605864; 523506, 3605924; 523566, 3605924; 523566, 3605894; 523656, 
3605894; 523656, 3605864; 523806, 3605864; 523806, 3605804; 523836, 
3605804; 523836, 3605774; 523866, 3605774; 523866, 3605744; 523956, 
3605744; 523956, 3605714; 524046, 3605714; 524046, 3605744; 524136, 
3605744; 524136, 3605714; 524166, 3605714; 524166, 3605744; 524196, 
3605744; 524196, 3605714; 524226, 3605714; 524226, 3605744; 524376, 
3605744; 524376, 3605774; 524466, 3605774; 524466, 3605744; 524496, 
3605744; 524496, 3605774; 524586, 3605774; 524586, 3605804; 524676, 
3605804; 524676, 3605834; 524736, 3605834; 524736, 3605864; 524766, 
3605864; 524766, 3605894; 524856, 3605894; 524856, 3605924; 524946, 
3605924; 524946, 3605954; 525036, 3605954; 525036, 3605984; 525096, 
3605984; 525096, 3606014; 525156, 3606014; 525156, 3606044; 525246, 
3606044; 525246, 3606074; 525306, 3606074; 525306, 3606104; 525366, 
3606104; 525366, 3606134; 525456, 3606134; 525456, 3606164; 525486, 
3606164; 525486, 3606194; 525546, 3606194; 525546, 3606224; 525576, 
3606224; 525576, 3606254; 525606, 3606254; 525606, 3606284; 525666, 
3606284; 525666, 3606314; 525696, 3606314; 525696, 3606344; 525726, 
3606344; 525726, 3606374; 525756, 3606374; 525756, 3606404; 525816, 
3606404; 525816, 3606434; 525846, 3606434; 525846, 3606464; 525876, 
3606464; 525876, 3606494; 525906, 3606494; 525906, 3606524; 525936, 
3606524; 525936, 3606614; 525966, 3606614; 525966, 3606734; 525996, 
3606734; 525996, 3606854; 526026, 3606854; 526026, 3606914; 526056, 
3606914; 526056, 3606944; 526086, 3606944; 526086, 3607004; 526116, 
3607004; 526116, 3607034; 526146, 3607034; 526146, 3607094; 526176, 
3607094; 526176, 3607214; 526206, 3607214; 526206, 3607394; 526236, 
3607394; 526236, 3607454; 526326, 3607454; 526326, 3607484; 526356, 
3607484; 526356, 3607514; 526386, 3607514; 526386, 3607544; 526416, 
3607544; 526416, 3607664; 526446, 3607664; 526446, 3607754; 526476, 
3607754; 526476, 3608144; 526446, 3608144; 526446, 3608204; 526416, 
3608204; 526416, 3608234; 526356, 3608234; 526356, 3608264; 526326, 
3608264; 526326, 3608294; 526296, 3608294; 526296, 3608324; 526356, 
3608324; 526356, 3608354; 526435, 3608354; 526481, 3608298; 526566, 
3608209; 526627, 3608091; 526674, 3608060; 526805, 3608139; 526938, 
3608199; 527049, 3608228; 527116, 3608253; 527205, 3608282; 527271, 
3608247; 527357, 3608209; 527459, 3608180; 527541, 3608165; 527589, 
3608187; 527589, 3608374; 527476, 3608414; 527556, 3608414; 527556, 
3608444; 527766, 3608444; 527766, 3608414; 527796, 3608414; 527796, 
3608324; 527826, 3608324; 527826, 3608294; 527856, 3608294; 527856, 
3608264; 527886, 3608264; 527886, 3608234; 527916, 3608234; 527916, 
3608204; 527976, 3608204; 527976, 3608174; 528036, 3608174; 528036, 
3608354; 528006, 3608354; 528006, 3608474; 527976, 3608474; 527976, 
3608504; 527916, 3608504; 527916, 3608534; 527886, 3608534; 527886, 
3608594; 527916, 3608594; 527916, 3608624; 527976, 3608624; 527976, 
3608654; 528036, 3608654; 528036, 3608684; 528096, 3608684; 528096, 
3608714; 528156, 3608714; 528156, 3608744; 528216, 3608744; 528216, 
3608774; 528246, 3608774; 528246, 3608804; 528276, 3608804; 528276, 
3608864; 528306, 3608864; 528306, 3608894; 528336, 3608894; 528336, 
3608924; 528396, 3608924; 528396, 3608954; 528456, 3608954; 528456, 
3608984; 528486, 3608984; 528486, 3609014; 528516, 3609014; 528516, 
3609134; 528546, 3609134; 528546, 3609194; 528606, 3609194; 528606, 
3609224; 528636, 3609224; 528636, 3609254; 528666, 3609254; 528666, 
3609284; 528696, 3609284; 528696, 3609374; 528726, 3609374; 528726, 
3609404; 528748, 3609404; 528803, 3609328; 528921, 3609344; 528981, 
3609497; 529030, 3609575; 529013, 3609644; 529026, 3609644; 529026, 
3609674; 529056, 3609674; 529056, 3609704; 529086, 3609704; 529086, 
3609734; 529116, 3609734; 529116, 3609764; 529146, 3609764; 529146, 
3609794; 529176, 3609794; 529176, 3609824; 529206, 3609824; 529206, 
3609854; 529236, 3609854; 529236, 3609884; 529266, 3609884; 529266, 
3609914; 529296, 3609914; 529296, 3610034; 529326, 3610034; 529326, 
3610064; 529266, 3610064; 529266, 3610094; 529236, 3610094; 529236, 
3610124; 529206, 3610124; 529206, 3610154; 529176, 3610154; 529176, 
3610184; 529206, 3610184; 529206, 3610214; 529266, 3610214; 529266, 
3610244; 529296, 3610244; 529296, 3610334; 529266, 3610334; 529266, 
3610364; 529236, 3610364; 529236, 3610394; 529206, 3610394; 529206, 
3610454; 529176, 3610454; 529176, 3610634; 529206, 3610634; 529206, 
3610724; 529236, 3610724; 529236, 3610754; 529296, 3610754; 529296, 
3610784; 529536, 3610784; 529536, 3610814; 529566, 3610814; 529566, 
3610964; 529536, 3610964; 529536, 3610994; 529476, 3610994; 529476, 
3611024; 529386, 3611024; 529386, 3611054; 529326, 3611054; 529326, 
3611084; 529266, 3611084; 529266, 3611114; 529236, 3611114; 529236, 
3611144; 529206, 3611144; 529206, 3611174; 529176, 3611174; 529176, 
3611294; 529206, 3611294; 529206, 3611414; 529236, 3611414; 529236, 
3611474; 529266, 3611474; 529266, 3611534; 529296, 3611534; 529296, 
3611564; 529326, 3611564; 529326, 3611624; 529356, 3611624; 529356, 
3611654; 529386, 3611654; 529386, 3611684; 529446, 3611684; 529446, 
3611714; 529506, 3611714; 529506, 3611744; 529566, 3611744; 529566, 
3611774; 529626, 3611774; 529626, 3611804; 529656, 3611804; 529656, 
3611834; 529686, 3611834; 529686, 3611864; 529746, 3611864; 529746, 
3611924; 529776, 3611924; 529776, 3611984; 529746, 3611984; 529746, 
3612044; 529716, 3612044; 529716, 3612104; 529746, 3612104; 529746, 
3612134; 529806, 3612134; 529806, 3612164; 529836, 3612164; 529836, 
3612254; 529866, 3612254; 529866, 3612464; 529896, 3612464; 529896, 
3612584; 529926, 3612584; 529926, 3612674; 529956, 3612674; 529956, 
3612764; 529986, 3612764; 529986, 3612854; 530016, 3612854; 530016, 
3612974; 529986, 3612974; 529986, 3613004; 529956, 3613004; 529956, 
3613064; 529926, 3613064; 529926, 3613094; 529896, 3613094; 529896, 
3613124; 529866, 3613124; 529866, 3613184; 529836, 3613184; 529836, 
3613394; 529866, 3613394; 529866, 3613544; 529896, 3613544; 529896, 
3613604; 529926, 3613604; 529926, 3613724; 529956, 3613724; 529956, 
3613844; 529986, 3613844; 529986, 3613904; 530046, 3613904; 530046, 
3613934; 530076, 3613934; 530076, 3613964; 530106, 3613964; 530106, 
3613994; 530136, 3613994; 530136, 3614024; 530166, 3614024; 530166, 
3614054; 530196, 3614054; 530196, 3614114; 530226, 3614114; 530226, 
3614144; 530256, 3614144; 530256, 3614204; 530286, 3614204; 530286, 
3614294; 530316, 3614294; 530316,

[[Page 473]]

3614384; 530346, 3614384; 530346, 3614504; 530376, 3614504; 530376, 
3614624; 530406, 3614624; 530406, 3614684; 530436, 3614684; 530436, 
3614744; 530466, 3614744; 530466, 3614774; 530496, 3614774; 530496, 
3614804; 530526, 3614804; 530526, 3614864; 530556, 3614864; 530556, 
3614984; 530586, 3614984; 530586, 3615074; 530616, 3615074; 530616, 
3615224; 530646, 3615224; 530646, 3615374; 530676, 3615374; 530676, 
3615584; 530706, 3615584; 530706, 3615674; 530736, 3615674; 530736, 
3615734; 530766, 3615734; 530766, 3615764; 530796, 3615764; 530796, 
3615780; 530848, 3615755; 530890, 3615719; 530909, 3615701; 530933, 
3615674; 530916, 3615674; 530916, 3615644; 530856, 3615644; 530856, 
3615524; 530826, 3615524; 530826, 3615434; 530796, 3615434; 530796, 
3615284; 530766, 3615284; 530766, 3615194; 530736, 3615194; 530736, 
3615044; 530706, 3615044; 530706, 3614894; 530676, 3614894; 530676, 
3614834; 530646, 3614834; 530646, 3614774; 530616, 3614774; 530616, 
3614714; 530586, 3614714; 530586, 3614684; 530556, 3614684; 530556, 
3614624; 530526, 3614624; 530526, 3614594; 530496, 3614594; 530496, 
3614474; 530466, 3614474; 530466, 3614354; 530436, 3614354; 530436, 
3614234; 530406, 3614234; 530406, 3614174; 530376, 3614174; 530376, 
3614084; 530346, 3614084; 530346, 3614054; 530316, 3614054; 530316, 
3613994; 530286, 3613994; 530286, 3613934; 530256, 3613934; 530256, 
3613904; 530226, 3613904; 530226, 3613874; 530196, 3613874; 530196, 
3613844; 530166, 3613844; 530166, 3613784; 530136, 3613784; 530136, 
3613694; 530106, 3613694; 530106, 3613664; 530076, 3613664; 530076, 
3613574; 530046, 3613574; 530046, 3613514; 530016, 3613514; 530016, 
3613424; 529986, 3613424; returning to 529986, 3613334.
    (iii) Subunit 19c: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Descanso, and 
Cuyamaca Peak, land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 
544040, 3639046; 544040, 3639018; 544068, 3639018; 544068, 3638990; 
544097, 3638990; 544097, 3638961; 544125, 3638961; 544125, 3638876; 
544324, 3638876; 544324, 3638905; 544380, 3638905; 544380, 3638848; 
544409, 3638848; 544409, 3638678; 544437, 3638678; 544437, 3638649; 
544494, 3638649; 544494, 3638593; 544579, 3638593; 544579, 3638422; 
544607, 3638422; 544607, 3638337; 544636, 3638337; 544636, 3638309; 
544664, 3638309; 544664, 3638280; 544693, 3638280; 544693, 3638252; 
544721, 3638252; 544721, 3638224; 544749, 3638224; 544749, 3638195; 
544778, 3638195; 544778, 3638054; 544806, 3638054; 544806, 3637997; 
544834, 3637997; 544834, 3637912; 544863, 3637912; 544863, 3637883; 
544834, 3637883; 544834, 3637827; 544948, 3637827; 544948, 3637798; 
544976, 3637798; 544976, 3637741; 545005, 3637741; 545005, 3637685; 
545033, 3637685; 545033, 3637656; 545090, 3637656; 545090, 3637628; 
545118, 3637628; 545118, 3637571; 545146, 3637571; 545146, 3637543; 
545175, 3637543; 545175, 3637486; 545232, 3637486; 545232, 3637344; 
545260, 3637344; 545260, 3637259; 545288, 3637259; 545288, 3637231; 
545317, 3637231; 545317, 3637146; 545288, 3637146; 545288, 3637061; 
545317, 3637061; 545317, 3636947; 545345, 3636947; 545345, 3636890; 
545373, 3636890; 545373, 3636749; 545402, 3636749; 545402, 3636692; 
545430, 3636692; 545430, 3636663; 545515, 3636663; 545515, 3636578; 
545572, 3636578; 545572, 3636522; 545600, 3636522; 545600, 3636493; 
545657, 3636493; 545657, 3636465; 545714, 3636465; 545714, 3636436; 
545742, 3636436; 545742, 3636408; 545799, 3636408; 545799, 3636380; 
545856, 3636380; 545856, 3636408; 545998, 3636408; 545998, 3636436; 
546054, 3636436; 546054, 3636493; 546083, 3636493; 546083, 3636550; 
546111, 3636550; 546111, 3636522; 546139, 3636522; 546139, 3636493; 
546168, 3636493; 546168, 3636295; 546196, 3636295; 546196, 3636238; 
546253, 3636238; 546253, 3636210; 546139, 3636210; 546111, 3636210; 
546111, 3636238; 545998, 3636238; 545998, 3636210; 545969, 3636210; 
545969, 3636181; 545941, 3636181; 545941, 3636153; 545912, 3636153; 
545912, 3635983; 545884, 3635983; 545884, 3635897; 545856, 3635897; 
545856, 3635841; 545827, 3635841; 545827, 3635869; 545799, 3635869; 
545799, 3635897; 545771, 3635897; 545771, 3636039; 545742, 3636039; 
545742, 3636096; 545714, 3636096; 545714, 3636124; 545629, 3636124; 
545629, 3636238; 545600, 3636238; 545600, 3636295; 545572, 3636295; 
545572, 3636323; 545515, 3636323; 545515, 3636351; 545487, 3636351; 
545487, 3636380; 545459, 3636380; 545459, 3636351; 545430, 3636351; 
545430, 3636323; 545402, 3636323; 545402, 3636295; 545373, 3636295; 
545373, 3636266; 545345, 3636266; 545345, 3636210; 545317, 3636210; 
545317, 3636181; 545288, 3636181; 545288, 3636096; 545260, 3636096; 
545260, 3636068; 545232, 3636068; 545232, 3636011; 545203, 3636011; 
545203, 3635983; 545175, 3635983; 545175, 3635954; 545146, 3635954; 
545146, 3635926; 545118, 3635926; 545118, 3635869; 545090, 3635869; 
545090, 3635841; 545061, 3635841; 545061, 3635699; 545033, 3635699; 
545033, 3635671; 545005, 3635671; 545005, 3635642; 544976, 3635642; 
544976, 3635614; 544948, 3635614; 544948, 3635585; 544920, 3635585; 
544920, 3635529; 544891, 3635529; 544891, 3635472; 544863, 3635472; 
544863, 3635415; 544834, 3635415; 544834, 3635245; 544806, 3635245; 
544806, 3635188; 544778, 3635188; 544778, 3635103; 544806, 3635103; 
544806, 3634990; 544778, 3634990; 544778, 3634905; 544749, 3634905; 
544749, 3634876; 544721, 3634876; 544721, 3634848; 544749, 3634848; 
544749, 3634706; 544721, 3634706; 544721, 3634621; 544693, 3634621; 
544693, 3634592; 544664, 3634592; 544664, 3634564; 544636, 3634564; 
544636, 3634536; 544579, 3634536; 544579, 3634507; 544522, 3634507; 
544522, 3634479; 544494, 3634479; 544494, 3634422; 544466, 3634422; 
544466, 3634224; 544437, 3634224; 544437, 3634167; 544466, 3634167; 
544466, 3634110; 544437, 3634110; 544437, 3634056; 544428, 3634057; 
544391, 3634054; 544388, 3634002; 544376, 3633884; 544381, 3633826; 
544361, 3633716; 544363, 3633616; 544336, 3633484; 544296, 3633349; 
544211, 3633208; 544146, 3633181; 544136, 3632811; 544081, 3632813; 
544078, 3632716; 544043, 3632716; 544056, 3632643; 544088, 3632628; 
544133, 3632566; 544193, 3632553; 544273, 3632558; 544321, 3632558; 
544446, 3632523; 544524, 3632478; 544611, 3632463; 544613, 3632465; 
544721, 3632465; 544721, 3632493; 544749, 3632493; 544749, 3632550; 
544778, 3632550; 544778, 3632635; 544749, 3632635; 544749, 3632692; 
544778, 3632692; 544778, 3632805; 544806, 3632805; 544806, 3632890; 
544834, 3632890; 544834, 3633061; 544863, 3633061; 544863, 3633117; 
544834, 3633117; 544834, 3633174; 544806, 3633174; 544806, 3633231; 
544834, 3633231; 544834, 3633316; 544863, 3633316; 544863, 3633344; 
544891, 3633344; 544891, 3633373; 544948, 3633373; 544948, 3633429; 
544976, 3633429; 544976, 3633486; 545005, 3633486; 545005, 3633543; 
545033, 3633543; 545033, 3633600; 545061, 3633600; 545061, 3633656; 
545090, 3633656; 545090, 3633685;

[[Page 474]]

545118, 3633685; 545118, 3633656; 545203, 3633656; 545203, 3633628; 
545232, 3633628; 545232, 3633600; 545373, 3633600; 545373, 3633571; 
545459, 3633571; 545459, 3633543; 545487, 3633543; 545487, 3633514; 
545459, 3633514; 545459, 3633401; 545430, 3633401; 545430, 3633202; 
545373, 3633202; 545373, 3633231; 545232, 3633231; 545232, 3633089; 
545203, 3633089; 545203, 3632975; 545175, 3632975; 545175, 3632890; 
545146, 3632890; 545146, 3632834; 545118, 3632834; 545118, 3632777; 
545090, 3632777; 545090, 3632522; 545061, 3632522; 545061, 3632493; 
545005, 3632493; 545005, 3632522; 544920, 3632522; 544920, 3632493; 
544891, 3632493; 544891, 3632408; 544834, 3632408; 544834, 3632351; 
544806, 3632351; 544806, 3632274; 544756, 3632255; 544681, 3632208; 
544649, 3632155; 544661, 3632105; 544731, 3632085; 544814, 3632070; 
544829, 3632030; 544836, 3632015; 545374, 3632033; 545372, 3632238; 
545572, 3632238; 545572, 3632210; 545600, 3632210; 545600, 3632238; 
545629, 3632238; 545629, 3632210; 545685, 3632210; 545685, 3632124; 
545657, 3632124; 545657, 3632011; 545742, 3632011; 545742, 3632039; 
545827, 3632039; 545827, 3632068; 545969, 3632068; 545969, 3632096; 
545941, 3632096; 545941, 3632181; 545969, 3632181; 545969, 3632210; 
546083, 3632210; 546083, 3632238; 546139, 3632238; 546139, 3632266; 
546168, 3632266; 546168, 3632323; 546224, 3632323; 546224, 3632351; 
546253, 3632351; 546253, 3632380; 546338, 3632380; 546338, 3632408; 
546366, 3632408; 546366, 3632465; 546338, 3632465; 546338, 3632578; 
546395, 3632578; 546395, 3632607; 546423, 3632607; 546423, 3632550; 
546451, 3632550; 546451, 3632465; 546480, 3632465; 546480, 3632436; 
546508, 3632436; 546508, 3632408; 546593, 3632408; 546593, 3632380; 
546650, 3632380; 546650, 3632351; 546678, 3632351; 546678, 3632323; 
546650, 3632323; 546650, 3632295; 546622, 3632295; 546622, 3632266; 
546593, 3632266; 546593, 3632210; 546480, 3632210; 546480, 3632181; 
546451, 3632181; 546451, 3632210; 546338, 3632210; 546338, 3632153; 
546281, 3632153; 546281, 3632124; 546253, 3632124; 546253, 3632096; 
546224, 3632096; 546224, 3632039; 546196, 3632039; 546196, 3632011; 
546168, 3632011; 546168, 3631983; 546139, 3631983; 546139, 3631869; 
546054, 3631869; 546054, 3631897; 545969, 3631897; 545969, 3631869; 
545912, 3631869; 545912, 3631841; 545856, 3631841; 545856, 3631869; 
545827, 3631869; 545827, 3631841; 545799, 3631841; 545799, 3631670; 
545771, 3631670; 545771, 3631642; 545685, 3631642; 545685, 3631614; 
545657, 3631614; 545657, 3631585; 545629, 3631585; 545629, 3631557; 
545600, 3631557; 545600, 3631500; 545572, 3631500; 545572, 3631444; 
545544, 3631444; 545544, 3631415; 545515, 3631415; 545515, 3631387; 
545459, 3631387; 545459, 3631358; 545430, 3631358; 545430, 3631302; 
545402, 3631302; 545402, 3631273; 545345, 3631273; 545345, 3631302; 
545317, 3631302; 545317, 3631330; 545288, 3631330; 545288, 3631358; 
545260, 3631358; 545260, 3631387; 545118, 3631387; 545118, 3631415; 
545005, 3631415; 545005, 3631444; 544920, 3631444; 544920, 3631585; 
544948, 3631585; 544948, 3631608; 544991, 3631632; 545091, 3631665; 
545194, 3631627; 545216, 3631657; 545154, 3631727; 545081, 3631762; 
544986, 3631800; 544924, 3631837; 544874, 3631780; 544856, 3631750; 
544834, 3631740; 544654, 3631868; 544594, 3631963; 544566, 3632015; 
544519, 3632078; 544463, 3632140; 544408, 3632178; 544358, 3632200; 
544323, 3632208; 544278, 3632175; 544251, 3632130; 544291, 3631837; 
544288, 3631752; 544316, 3631705; 544333, 3631637; 544361, 3631532; 
544313, 3631535; 544231, 3631592; 544163, 3631640; 544091, 3631762; 
543976, 3632063; 543978, 3632175; 543951, 3632238; 543720, 3632235; 
543723, 3632315; 543738, 3632408; 543748, 3632488; 543748, 3632543; 
543735, 3632608; 543728, 3632623; 543586, 3632566; 543586, 3632720; 
543558, 3632720; 543558, 3632890; 543529, 3632890; 543529, 3632919; 
543501, 3632919; 543501, 3632947; 543473, 3632947; 543473, 3632975; 
543416, 3632975; 543416, 3633061; 543388, 3633061; 543388, 3633174; 
543359, 3633174; 543359, 3633202; 543331, 3633202; 543331, 3633231; 
543302, 3633231; 543302, 3633259; 543274, 3633259; 543274, 3633288; 
543246, 3633288; 543246, 3633316; 543189, 3633316; 543189, 3633344; 
543132, 3633344; 543132, 3633373; 543047, 3633373; 543047, 3633344; 
543019, 3633344; 543019, 3633288; 542962, 3633288; 542962, 3633259; 
542934, 3633259; 542934, 3633231; 542905, 3633231; 542905, 3633202; 
542849, 3633202; 542849, 3633174; 542820, 3633174; 542820, 3633146; 
542792, 3633146; 542792, 3633117; 542763, 3633117; 542763, 3633061; 
542735, 3633061; 542735, 3633032; 542707, 3633032; 542707, 3633004; 
542678, 3633004; 542678, 3632975; 542650, 3632975; 542650, 3632947; 
542622, 3632947; 542622, 3632919; 542593, 3632919; 542593, 3632890; 
542537, 3632890; 542537, 3632862; 542508, 3632862; 542508, 3632834; 
542480, 3632834; 542480, 3632805; 542451, 3632805; 542451, 3632777; 
542423, 3632777; 542423, 3632749; 542139, 3632749; 542139, 3632720; 
542111, 3632720; 542111, 3632635; 542083, 3632635; 542083, 3632578; 
542054, 3632578; 542054, 3632522; 542026, 3632522; 542026, 3632493; 
541997, 3632493; 541997, 3632380; 541969, 3632380; 541969, 3632323; 
541941, 3632323; 541941, 3632238; 541912, 3632238; 541912, 3632181; 
541884, 3632181; 541884, 3632153; 541856, 3632153; 541856, 3632124; 
541799, 3632124; 541799, 3632096; 541714, 3632096; 541714, 3632124; 
541629, 3632124; 541629, 3632096; 541600, 3632096; 541600, 3632039; 
541572, 3632039; 541572, 3632011; 541458, 3632011; 541458, 3631983; 
541373, 3631983; 541373, 3631954; 541317, 3631954; 541317, 3631926; 
541288, 3631926; 541288, 3631897; 541260, 3631897; 541260, 3631869; 
541232, 3631869; 541232, 3631727; 541203, 3631727; 541203, 3631642; 
541175, 3631642; 541175, 3631557; 541146, 3631557; 541146, 3631500; 
541118, 3631500; 541118, 3631444; 541090, 3631444; 541090, 3631387; 
541061, 3631387; 541061, 3631330; 541033, 3631330; 541033, 3631273; 
541005, 3631273; 541005, 3631217; 540976, 3631217; 540976, 3631188; 
540948, 3631188; 540948, 3631160; 540919, 3631160; 540919, 3631131; 
540721, 3631131; 540721, 3631103; 540693, 3631103; 540693, 3630876; 
540664, 3630876; 540664, 3630905; 540636, 3630905; 540636, 3630961; 
540607, 3630961; 540607, 3631018; 540579, 3631018; 540579, 3631075; 
540551, 3631075; 540551, 3631160; 540579, 3631160; 540579, 3631217; 
540607, 3631217; 540607, 3631245; 540636, 3631245; 540636, 3631273; 
540834, 3631273; 540834, 3631358; 540863, 3631358; 540863, 3631387; 
540919, 3631387; 540919, 3631415; 540948, 3631415; 540948, 3631472; 
540976, 3631472; 540976, 3631529; 541005, 3631529; 541005, 3631585; 
541033, 3631585; 541033, 3631642; 541061, 3631642; 541061, 3631727; 
541090, 3631727; 541090, 3631812; 541118, 3631812; 541118, 3631926; 
541146, 3631926; 541146, 3631983; 541175, 3631983; 541175, 3632011; 
541203, 3632011; 541203, 3632068; 541288, 3632068; 541288, 3632096; 
541373, 3632096; 541373, 3632124;

[[Page 475]]

541402, 3632124; 541402, 3632153; 541430, 3632153; 541430, 3632210; 
541458, 3632210; 541458, 3632238; 541487, 3632238; 541487, 3632266; 
541600, 3632266; 541600, 3632295; 541629, 3632295; 541629, 3632351; 
541600, 3632351; 541600, 3632380; 541572, 3632380; 541572, 3632436; 
541544, 3632436; 541544, 3632465; 541515, 3632465; 541515, 3632578; 
541544, 3632578; 541544, 3632720; 541572, 3632720; 541572, 3632749; 
541685, 3632749; 541685, 3632777; 541771, 3632777; 541771, 3632720; 
541856, 3632720; 541856, 3632692; 541912, 3632692; 541912, 3632720; 
541941, 3632720; 541941, 3632749; 541969, 3632749; 541969, 3632805; 
541997, 3632805; 541997, 3632834; 542026, 3632834; 542026, 3632890; 
542054, 3632890; 542054, 3632919; 542338, 3632919; 542338, 3632947; 
542395, 3632947; 542395, 3632975; 542423, 3632975; 542423, 3633004; 
542451, 3633004; 542451, 3633032; 542480, 3633032; 542480, 3633061; 
542508, 3633061; 542508, 3633089; 542537, 3633089; 542537, 3633117; 
542565, 3633117; 542565, 3633146; 542593, 3633146; 542593, 3633174; 
542622, 3633174; 542622, 3633231; 542650, 3633231; 542650, 3633259; 
542678, 3633259; 542678, 3633316; 542735, 3633316; 542735, 3633344; 
542763, 3633344; 542763, 3633373; 542820, 3633373; 542820, 3633401; 
542849, 3633401; 542849, 3633429; 542820, 3633429; 542820, 3633486; 
542792, 3633486; 542792, 3633543; 542763, 3633543; 542763, 3633600; 
542735, 3633600; 542735, 3633628; 542763, 3633628; 542763, 3633656; 
542849, 3633656; 542849, 3633685; 542877, 3633685; 542877, 3633713; 
542934, 3633713; 542934, 3633741; 542962, 3633741; 542962, 3633713; 
542965, 3633713; 542977, 3633489; 543243, 3633486; 543246, 3633489; 
543246, 3633486; 543331, 3633486; 543331, 3633458; 543473, 3633458; 
543473, 3633486; 543501, 3633486; 543501, 3633628; 543529, 3633628; 
543529, 3633685; 543615, 3633685; 543615, 3633713; 543643, 3633713; 
543643, 3633770; 543671, 3633770; 543671, 3633855; 543643, 3633855; 
543643, 3633912; 543615, 3633912; 543615, 3634053; 543586, 3634053; 
543586, 3634224; 543615, 3634224; 543615, 3634252; 543643, 3634252; 
543643, 3634280; 543671, 3634280; 543671, 3634592; 543728, 3634592; 
543728, 3634536; 543756, 3634536; 543756, 3634451; 543785, 3634451; 
543785, 3634394; 543813, 3634394; 543813, 3634366; 543870, 3634366; 
543870, 3634394; 543898, 3634394; 543898, 3634422; 543927, 3634422; 
543927, 3634451; 543983, 3634451; 543983, 3634479; 544125, 3634479; 
544125, 3634451; 544154, 3634451; 544154, 3634507; 544210, 3634507; 
544210, 3634564; 544125, 3634564; 544125, 3634649; 544154, 3634649; 
544154, 3634706; 544210, 3634706; 544210, 3634734; 544239, 3634734; 
544239, 3634763; 544267, 3634763; 544267, 3634791; 544324, 3634791; 
544324, 3634819; 544352, 3634819; 544352, 3634990; 544380, 3634990; 
544380, 3635075; 544409, 3635075; 544409, 3635188; 544380, 3635188; 
544380, 3635245; 544409, 3635245; 544409, 3635472; 544437, 3635472; 
544437, 3635500; 544466, 3635500; 544466, 3635529; 544494, 3635529; 
544494, 3635557; 544522, 3635557; 544522, 3635585; 544551, 3635585; 
544551, 3635614; 544579, 3635614; 544579, 3635727; 544607, 3635727; 
544607, 3635812; 544636, 3635812; 544636, 3635869; 544664, 3635869; 
544664, 3635983; 544693, 3635983; 544693, 3636068; 544664, 3636068; 
544664, 3636096; 544693, 3636096; 544693, 3636153; 544721, 3636153; 
544721, 3636210; 544749, 3636210; 544749, 3636238; 544778, 3636238; 
544778, 3636351; 544806, 3636351; 544806, 3636380; 544834, 3636380; 
544834, 3636408; 544863, 3636408; 544863, 3636436; 544891, 3636436; 
544891, 3636465; 544920, 3636465; 544920, 3636522; 544948, 3636522; 
544948, 3636550; 544976, 3636550; 544976, 3636635; 545005, 3636635; 
545005, 3636663; 544976, 3636663; 544976, 3636692; 544948, 3636692; 
544948, 3636777; 544976, 3636777; 544976, 3636862; 545005, 3636862; 
545005, 3636975; 544976, 3636975; 544976, 3637117; 545005, 3637117; 
545005, 3637202; 545033, 3637202; 545033, 3637316; 544948, 3637316; 
544948, 3637344; 544920, 3637344; 544920, 3637373; 544891, 3637373; 
544891, 3637401; 544863, 3637401; 544863, 3637429; 544834, 3637429; 
544834, 3637486; 544806, 3637486; 544806, 3637515; 544749, 3637515; 
544749, 3637543; 544721, 3637543; 544721, 3637600; 544693, 3637600; 
544693, 3637628; 544664, 3637628; 544664, 3637685; 544636, 3637685; 
544636, 3637827; 544607, 3637827; 544607, 3637855; 544579, 3637855; 
544579, 3637997; 544551, 3637997; 544551, 3638110; 544494, 3638110; 
544494, 3638139; 544466, 3638139; 544466, 3638167; 544437, 3638167; 
544437, 3638224; 544409, 3638224; 544409, 3638422; 544380, 3638422; 
544380, 3638507; 544324, 3638507; 544324, 3638536; 544295, 3638536; 
544295, 3638593; 544267, 3638593; 544267, 3638649; 544239, 3638649; 
544239, 3638706; 544210, 3638706; 544210, 3638734; 544097, 3638734; 
544097, 3638763; 544068, 3638763; 544068, 3638791; 544012, 3638791; 
544012, 3638819; 543983, 3638819; 543983, 3638848; 543955, 3638848; 
543955, 3638876; 543927, 3638876; 543927, 3638905; 543955, 3638905; 
543955, 3638961; 543983, 3638961; 543983, 3639132; 544012, 3639132; 
544012, 3639160; 544040, 3639160; 544040, 3639188; 544068, 3639188; 
544068, 3639132; 544040, 3639132; returning to 544040, 3639046.
    (iv) Subunit 19d: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Barrett Lake, 
Viejas Mtn., and Descanso, land bounded by the following UTM coordinates 
(E, N): 536796, 3629174; 536796, 3629144; 536826, 3629144; 536826, 
3629054; 536856, 3629054; 536856, 3629024; 536886, 3629024; 536886, 
3628994; 536916, 3628994; 536916, 3628964; 536946, 3628964; 536946, 
3628934; 536976, 3628934; 536976, 3628904; 537036, 3628904; 537036, 
3628874; 537066, 3628874; 537066, 3628844; 537246, 3628844; 537246, 
3628814; 537036, 3628814; 537036, 3628784; 537006, 3628784; 537006, 
3628814; 536886, 3628814; 536886, 3628844; 536736, 3628844; 536736, 
3628814; 536706, 3628814; 536706, 3628784; 536676, 3628784; 536676, 
3628754; 536646, 3628754; 536646, 3628724; 536616, 3628724; 536616, 
3628694; 536586, 3628694; 536586, 3628574; 536556, 3628574; 536556, 
3628544; 536526, 3628544; 536526, 3628514; 536466, 3628514; 536466, 
3628484; 536406, 3628484; 536406, 3628454; 536346, 3628454; 536346, 
3628394; 536316, 3628394; 536316, 3628334; 536286, 3628334; 536286, 
3628304; 536226, 3628304; 536226, 3628244; 536136, 3628244; 536136, 
3628214; 536076, 3628214; 536076, 3628244; 535986, 3628244; 535986, 
3628214; 535956, 3628214; 535956, 3628154; 535926, 3628154; 535926, 
3628094; 535896, 3628094; 535896, 3628064; 535866, 3628064; 535866, 
3627944; 535836, 3627944; 535836, 3627914; 535806, 3627914; 535806, 
3627884; 535776, 3627884; 535776, 3627854; 535746, 3627854; 535746, 
3627794; 535716, 3627794; 535716, 3627764; 535656, 3627764; 535656, 
3627734; 535506, 3627734; 535506, 3627704; 535476, 3627704; 535476, 
3627734; 535446, 3627734; 535446, 3627704; 535386, 3627704; 535386, 
3627674; 535356, 3627674; 535356, 3627644; 535326, 3627644;

[[Page 476]]

535326, 3627614; 535266, 3627614; 535266, 3627554; 535206, 3627554; 
535206, 3627524; 535266, 3627524; 535266, 3627404; 535236, 3627404; 
535236, 3627314; 535146, 3627314; 535146, 3627284; 535116, 3627284; 
535116, 3627254; 535056, 3627254; 535056, 3627224; 534726, 3627224; 
534726, 3627164; 534756, 3627164; 534756, 3627104; 534726, 3627104; 
534726, 3627074; 534696, 3627074; 534696, 3627044; 534666, 3627044; 
534666, 3627014; 534636, 3627014; 534636, 3626984; 534576, 3626984; 
534576, 3626954; 534546, 3626954; 534546, 3626924; 534516, 3626924; 
534516, 3626864; 534486, 3626864; 534486, 3626624; 534456, 3626624; 
534456, 3626564; 534426, 3626564; 534426, 3626534; 534366, 3626534; 
534366, 3626504; 534246, 3626504; 534246, 3626414; 534216, 3626414; 
534216, 3626384; 534186, 3626384; 534186, 3626324; 534156, 3626324; 
534156, 3626294; 534096, 3626294; 534096, 3626264; 534036, 3626264; 
534036, 3626144; 534006, 3626144; 534006, 3626084; 533946, 3626084; 
533946, 3626054; 533766, 3626054; 533766, 3626024; 533706, 3626024; 
533706, 3625994; 533676, 3625994; 533676, 3625934; 533706, 3625934; 
533706, 3625904; 533736, 3625904; 533736, 3625844; 533766, 3625844; 
533766, 3625784; 533796, 3625784; 533796, 3625604; 533766, 3625604; 
533766, 3625574; 533736, 3625574; 533736, 3625544; 533706, 3625544; 
533706, 3625514; 533676, 3625514; 533676, 3625454; 533646, 3625454; 
533646, 3625394; 533616, 3625394; 533616, 3625334; 533586, 3625334; 
533586, 3625274; 533556, 3625274; 533556, 3625244; 533526, 3625244; 
533526, 3625184; 533586, 3625184; 533586, 3625154; 533616, 3625154; 
533616, 3625064; 533646, 3625064; 533646, 3625034; 533706, 3625034; 
533706, 3625004; 533736, 3625004; 533736, 3624974; 533766, 3624974; 
533766, 3624944; 533796, 3624944; 533796, 3624914; 533676, 3624914; 
533676, 3624944; 533616, 3624944; 533616, 3624914; 533586, 3624914; 
533586, 3624884; 533556, 3624884; 533556, 3624824; 533526, 3624824; 
533526, 3624794; 533496, 3624794; 533496, 3624734; 533466, 3624734; 
533466, 3624674; 533436, 3624674; 533436, 3624644; 533406, 3624644; 
533406, 3624614; 533316, 3624614; 533316, 3624584; 533226, 3624584; 
533226, 3624554; 533166, 3624554; 533166, 3624524; 533106, 3624524; 
533106, 3624494; 533076, 3624494; 533076, 3624464; 533016, 3624464; 
533016, 3624314; 533046, 3624314; 533046, 3624104; 533076, 3624104; 
533076, 3624044; 533106, 3624044; 533106, 3624014; 533136, 3624014; 
533136, 3623984; 533166, 3623984; 533166, 3623924; 533136, 3623924; 
533136, 3623894; 533076, 3623894; 533076, 3623864; 533046, 3623864; 
533046, 3623804; 533016, 3623804; 533016, 3623744; 532986, 3623744; 
532986, 3623714; 532956, 3623714; 532956, 3623624; 532986, 3623624; 
532986, 3623504; 532956, 3623504; 532956, 3623474; 532926, 3623474; 
532926, 3623384; 532896, 3623384; 532896, 3623324; 532866, 3623324; 
532866, 3623144; 532896, 3623144; 532896, 3623114; 532926, 3623114; 
532926, 3623054; 532956, 3623054; 532956, 3622994; 532986, 3622994; 
532986, 3622964; 533016, 3622964; 533016, 3622934; 532986, 3622934; 
532986, 3622904; 532896, 3622904; 532896, 3622874; 532956, 3622874; 
532956, 3622814; 532926, 3622814; 532926, 3622784; 532896, 3622784; 
532896, 3622754; 532866, 3622754; 532866, 3622724; 532836, 3622724; 
532836, 3622634; 532806, 3622634; 532806, 3622544; 532836, 3622544; 
532836, 3622514; 532806, 3622514; 532806, 3622424; 532776, 3622424; 
532776, 3622304; 532746, 3622304; 532746, 3622274; 532686, 3622274; 
532686, 3622244; 532536, 3622244; 532536, 3622274; 532506, 3622274; 
532506, 3622214; 532476, 3622214; 532476, 3622184; 532506, 3622184; 
532506, 3622124; 532536, 3622124; 532536, 3622094; 532566, 3622094; 
532566, 3622064; 532596, 3622064; 532596, 3622034; 532656, 3622034; 
532656, 3622004; 532686, 3622004; 532686, 3621974; 532716, 3621974; 
532716, 3621914; 532776, 3621914; 532776, 3621884; 532806, 3621884; 
532806, 3621824; 532776, 3621824; 532776, 3621794; 532746, 3621794; 
532746, 3621764; 532716, 3621764; 532716, 3621734; 532686, 3621734; 
532686, 3621704; 532656, 3621704; 532656, 3621674; 532626, 3621674; 
532626, 3621644; 532596, 3621644; 532596, 3621614; 532566, 3621614; 
532566, 3621554; 532536, 3621554; 532536, 3621464; 532506, 3621464; 
532506, 3621404; 532476, 3621404; 532476, 3621254; 532446, 3621254; 
532446, 3621194; 532416, 3621194; 532416, 3621164; 532386, 3621164; 
532386, 3621104; 532356, 3621104; 532356, 3621044; 532326, 3621044; 
532326, 3620984; 532296, 3620984; 532296, 3620924; 532266, 3620924; 
532266, 3620894; 532236, 3620894; 532236, 3620834; 532206, 3620834; 
532206, 3620774; 532176, 3620774; 532176, 3620654; 532146, 3620654; 
532146, 3620534; 532116, 3620534; 532116, 3620444; 532086, 3620444; 
532086, 3620384; 532056, 3620384; 532056, 3620354; 532026, 3620354; 
532026, 3620324; 531996, 3620324; 531996, 3620294; 531966, 3620294; 
531966, 3620264; 531936, 3620264; 531936, 3620234; 531876, 3620234; 
531876, 3620264; 531846, 3620264; 531846, 3620324; 531816, 3620324; 
531816, 3620354; 531786, 3620354; 531786, 3620384; 531756, 3620384; 
531756, 3620414; 531726, 3620414; 531726, 3620444; 531576, 3620444; 
531576, 3620474; 531546, 3620474; 531546, 3620444; 531516, 3620444; 
531516, 3620414; 531486, 3620414; 531486, 3620354; 531456, 3620354; 
531456, 3620204; 531486, 3620204; 531486, 3620084; 531456, 3620084; 
531456, 3619814; 531426, 3619814; 531426, 3619724; 531396, 3619724; 
531396, 3619544; 531366, 3619544; 531366, 3619244; 531396, 3619244; 
531396, 3619169; 531338, 3619145; 531252, 3619130; 531199, 3619135; 
531152, 3619176; 531102, 3619261; 531090, 3619295; 531086, 3619304; 
531126, 3619304; 531126, 3619364; 531156, 3619364; 531156, 3619484; 
531186, 3619484; 531186, 3619634; 531216, 3619634; 531216, 3619724; 
531246, 3619724; 531246, 3619784; 531276, 3619784; 531276, 3619874; 
531306, 3619874; 531306, 3620024; 531336, 3620024; 531336, 3620324; 
531366, 3620324; 531366, 3620414; 531396, 3620414; 531396, 3620504; 
531426, 3620504; 531426, 3620534; 531396, 3620534; 531396, 3620594; 
531426, 3620594; 531426, 3620654; 531456, 3620654; 531456, 3620684; 
531576, 3620684; 531576, 3620654; 531636, 3620654; 531636, 3620594; 
531846, 3620594; 531846, 3620564; 531906, 3620564; 531906, 3620534; 
531966, 3620534; 531966, 3620774; 531996, 3620774; 531996, 3620864; 
532026, 3620864; 532026, 3620924; 532056, 3620924; 532056, 3620954; 
532086, 3620954; 532086, 3620984; 532116, 3620984; 532116, 3621044; 
532146, 3621044; 532146, 3621134; 532236, 3621134; 532236, 3621164; 
532266, 3621164; 532266, 3621194; 532296, 3621194; 532296, 3621254; 
532326, 3621254; 532326, 3621284; 532356, 3621284; 532356, 3621434; 
532386, 3621434; 532386, 3621524; 532416, 3621524; 532416, 3621614; 
532446, 3621614; 532446, 3621674; 532476, 3621674; 532476, 3621734; 
532506, 3621734; 532506, 3621794; 532536, 3621794; 532536, 3621884; 
532506, 3621884; 532506, 3621914; 532476, 3621914; 532476, 3621944; 
532446, 3621944; 532446, 3621974;

[[Page 477]]

532356, 3621974; 532356, 3622244; 532326, 3622244; 532326, 3622304; 
532296, 3622304; 532296, 3622394; 532326, 3622394; 532326, 3622454; 
532386, 3622454; 532386, 3622484; 532416, 3622484; 532416, 3622514; 
532446, 3622514; 532446, 3622544; 532416, 3622544; 532416, 3622664; 
532446, 3622664; 532446, 3622724; 532506, 3622724; 532506, 3622754; 
532536, 3622754; 532536, 3622784; 532566, 3622784; 532566, 3622814; 
532596, 3622814; 532596, 3622844; 532626, 3622844; 532626, 3622874; 
532566, 3622874; 532566, 3622904; 532536, 3622904; 532536, 3622934; 
532506, 3622934; 532506, 3622964; 532476, 3622964; 532476, 3622994; 
532506, 3622994; 532506, 3623024; 532536, 3623024; 532536, 3623084; 
532566, 3623084; 532566, 3623114; 532596, 3623114; 532596, 3623144; 
532626, 3623144; 532626, 3623204; 532656, 3623204; 532656, 3623294; 
532686, 3623294; 532686, 3623414; 532716, 3623414; 532716, 3623474; 
532686, 3623474; 532686, 3623564; 532656, 3623564; 532656, 3623804; 
532626, 3623804; 532626, 3623834; 532596, 3623834; 532596, 3623864; 
532566, 3623864; 532566, 3623894; 532536, 3623894; 532536, 3623924; 
532326, 3623924; 532326, 3623954; 532266, 3623954; 532206, 3623954; 
532206, 3623924; 531936, 3623924; 531936, 3623894; 531816, 3623894; 
531816, 3623864; 531576, 3623864; 531576, 3623834; 531516, 3623834; 
531516, 3623804; 531486, 3623804; 531486, 3623774; 531426, 3623774; 
531426, 3623864; 531396, 3623864; 531396, 3623894; 531366, 3623894; 
531366, 3623924; 531336, 3623924; 531336, 3623954; 531306, 3623954; 
531306, 3623984; 531336, 3623984; 531336, 3624014; 531366, 3624014; 
531366, 3624044; 531396, 3624044; 531396, 3624134; 531426, 3624134; 
531426, 3624164; 531456, 3624164; 531456, 3624194; 531516, 3624194; 
531516, 3624224; 531546, 3624224; 531546, 3624254; 531576, 3624254; 
531576, 3624314; 531606, 3624314; 531606, 3624374; 531636, 3624374; 
531636, 3624464; 531666, 3624464; 531666, 3624494; 531696, 3624494; 
531696, 3624524; 531756, 3624524; 531756, 3624554; 531786, 3624554; 
531786, 3624584; 531846, 3624584; 531846, 3624614; 531876, 3624614; 
531876, 3624674; 531906, 3624674; 531906, 3624704; 531936, 3624704; 
531936, 3624734; 531966, 3624734; 531966, 3624764; 531996, 3624764; 
531996, 3624794; 532056, 3624794; 532056, 3624824; 532086, 3624824; 
532086, 3624944; 532116, 3624944; 532116, 3625034; 532146, 3625034; 
532146, 3625064; 532206, 3625064; 532206, 3625094; 532236, 3625094; 
532236, 3625124; 532296, 3625124; 532296, 3625154; 532356, 3625154; 
532356, 3625184; 532416, 3625184; 532416, 3625124; 532386, 3625124; 
532386, 3625064; 532356, 3625064; 532356, 3625034; 532326, 3625034; 
532326, 3625004; 532296, 3625004; 532296, 3624914; 532266, 3624914; 
532266, 3624824; 532236, 3624824; 532236, 3624734; 532206, 3624734; 
532206, 3624704; 532176, 3624704; 532176, 3624674; 532146, 3624674; 
532146, 3624644; 532086, 3624644; 532086, 3624614; 532056, 3624614; 
532056, 3624584; 532026, 3624584; 532026, 3624554; 531996, 3624554; 
531996, 3624524; 531966, 3624524; 531966, 3624494; 531936, 3624494; 
531936, 3624464; 531906, 3624464; 531906, 3624434; 531876, 3624434; 
531876, 3624404; 531846, 3624404; 531846, 3624344; 531816, 3624344; 
531816, 3624284; 531786, 3624284; 531786, 3624104; 531846, 3624104; 
531846, 3624074; 532026, 3624074; 532026, 3624104; 532086, 3624104; 
532086, 3624134; 532116, 3624134; 532116, 3624104; 532176, 3624104; 
532176, 3624134; 532206, 3624134; 532206, 3624164; 532236, 3624164; 
532236, 3624194; 532296, 3624194; 532296, 3624224; 532326, 3624224; 
532326, 3624194; 532356, 3624194; 532356, 3624164; 532416, 3624164; 
532416, 3624134; 532536, 3624134; 532536, 3624104; 532656, 3624104; 
532656, 3624134; 532836, 3624134; 532836, 3624164; 532866, 3624164; 
532866, 3624194; 532896, 3624194; 532896, 3624374; 532866, 3624374; 
532866, 3624464; 532836, 3624464; 532836, 3624494; 532866, 3624494; 
532866, 3624554; 532896, 3624554; 532896, 3624614; 532986, 3624614; 
532986, 3624644; 533046, 3624644; 533046, 3624674; 533136, 3624674; 
533136, 3624704; 533256, 3624704; 533256, 3624734; 533316, 3624734; 
533316, 3624764; 533346, 3624764; 533346, 3624824; 533376, 3624824; 
533376, 3624854; 533406, 3624854; 533406, 3624914; 533436, 3624914; 
533436, 3624974; 533466, 3624974; 533466, 3625034; 533406, 3625034; 
533406, 3625064; 533376, 3625064; 533376, 3625124; 533346, 3625124; 
533346, 3625214; 533316, 3625214; 533316, 3625274; 533346, 3625274; 
533346, 3625334; 533376, 3625334; 533376, 3625424; 533466, 3625424; 
533466, 3625454; 533496, 3625454; 533496, 3625484; 533526, 3625484; 
533526, 3625514; 533556, 3625514; 533556, 3625604; 533586, 3625604; 
533586, 3625694; 533616, 3625694; 533616, 3625784; 533586, 3625784; 
533586, 3625844; 533556, 3625844; 533556, 3625874; 533526, 3625874; 
533526, 3625934; 533496, 3625934; 533496, 3626054; 533526, 3626054; 
533526, 3626114; 533556, 3626114; 533556, 3626144; 533616, 3626144; 
533616, 3626174; 533736, 3626174; 533736, 3626204; 533766, 3626204; 
533766, 3626294; 533736, 3626294; 533736, 3626474; 533766, 3626474; 
533766, 3626504; 533826, 3626504; 533826, 3626534; 533946, 3626534; 
533946, 3626504; 533976, 3626504; 533976, 3626564; 534006, 3626564; 
534006, 3626654; 534036, 3626654; 534036, 3626684; 534066, 3626684; 
534066, 3626714; 534096, 3626714; 534096, 3626744; 534276, 3626744; 
534276, 3626774; 534246, 3626774; 534246, 3626864; 534216, 3626864; 
534216, 3626924; 534186, 3626924; 534186, 3626984; 534216, 3626984; 
534216, 3627014; 534246, 3627014; 534246, 3627074; 534276, 3627074; 
534276, 3627104; 534306, 3627104; 534306, 3627134; 534336, 3627134; 
534336, 3627194; 534396, 3627194; 534396, 3627224; 534426, 3627224; 
534426, 3627284; 534456, 3627284; 534456, 3627314; 534486, 3627314; 
534486, 3627374; 534546, 3627374; 534546, 3627404; 534606, 3627404; 
534606, 3627434; 534636, 3627434; 534636, 3627464; 534726, 3627464; 
534726, 3627494; 534756, 3627494; 534756, 3627464; 534876, 3627464; 
534876, 3627584; 534846, 3627584; 534846, 3627644; 534816, 3627644; 
534816, 3627734; 534846, 3627734; 534846, 3627824; 534906, 3627824; 
534906, 3627884; 534936, 3627884; 534936, 3627944; 534966, 3627944; 
534966, 3627974; 535056, 3627974; 535056, 3627944; 535086, 3627944; 
535086, 3627914; 535116, 3627914; 535116, 3627884; 535206, 3627884; 
535206, 3627854; 535266, 3627854; 535266, 3627884; 535296, 3627884; 
535296, 3627914; 535326, 3627914; 535326, 3627944; 535356, 3627944; 
535356, 3628004; 535386, 3628004; 535386, 3628034; 535566, 3628034; 
535566, 3628094; 535596, 3628094; 535596, 3628124; 535626, 3628124; 
535626, 3628154; 535686, 3628154; 535686, 3628184; 535716, 3628184; 
535716, 3628244; 535776, 3628244; 535776, 3628274; 535806, 3628274; 
535806, 3628304; 535836, 3628304; 535836, 3628334; 535896, 3628334; 
535896, 3628364; 535956, 3628364; 535956, 3628394; 536046, 3628394; 
536046, 3628514; 536076, 3628514; 536076, 3628544; 536106, 3628544; 
536106, 3628574; 536136, 3628574;

[[Page 478]]

536136, 3628694; 536166, 3628694; 536166, 3628754; 536196, 3628754; 
536196, 3628784; 536256, 3628784; 536256, 3628814; 536316, 3628814; 
536316, 3628844; 536346, 3628844; 536346, 3628874; 536376, 3628874; 
536376, 3628934; 536406, 3628934; 536406, 3628964; 536466, 3628964; 
536466, 3628994; 536496, 3628994; 536496, 3629024; 536526, 3629024; 
536526, 3629054; 536556, 3629054; 536556, 3629114; 536586, 3629114; 
536586, 3629144; 536676, 3629144; 536676, 3629204; 536706, 3629204; 
536706, 3629234; 536796, 3629234; returning to 536796, 3629174.
    (v) Subunit 19e: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Potrero and 
Campo, land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 544664, 
3605968; 544693, 3605968; 544693, 3605997; 544664, 3605997; 544664, 
3605968; 544551, 3605968; 544551, 3605940; 544494, 3605940; 544494, 
3605968; 544466, 3605968; 544466, 3605940; 544380, 3605940; 544380, 
3605911; 544352, 3605911; 544352, 3605883; 544295, 3605883; 544295, 
3605911; 544267, 3605911; 544267, 3605940; 544239, 3605940; 544239, 
3605968; 544012, 3605968; 544012, 3605997; 543785, 3605997; 543785, 
3605940; 543756, 3605940; 543756, 3605826; 543785, 3605826; 543785, 
3605770; 543813, 3605770; 543813, 3605684; 543785, 3605684; 543785, 
3605628; 543756, 3605628; 543756, 3605599; 543728, 3605599; 543728, 
3605571; 543700, 3605571; 543700, 3605514; 543643, 3605514; 543643, 
3605486; 543615, 3605486; 543615, 3605458; 543586, 3605458; 543586, 
3605429; 543558, 3605429; 543558, 3605401; 543501, 3605401; 543501, 
3605372; 543473, 3605372; 543473, 3605344; 543444, 3605344; 543444, 
3605316; 543274, 3605316; 543274, 3605287; 543302, 3605287; 543302, 
3605261; 543273, 3605258; 543003, 3605233; 542990, 3605228; 542990, 
3605287; 543019, 3605287; 543019, 3605316; 543047, 3605316; 543047, 
3605344; 543076, 3605344; 543076, 3605372; 543104, 3605372; 543104, 
3605401; 543161, 3605401; 543161, 3605429; 543189, 3605429; 543189, 
3605458; 543246, 3605458; 543246, 3605486; 543388, 3605486; 543388, 
3605514; 543416, 3605514; 543416, 3605543; 543444, 3605543; 543444, 
3605571; 543473, 3605571; 543473, 3605599; 543501, 3605599; 543501, 
3605628; 543529, 3605628; 543529, 3605741; 543558, 3605741; 543558, 
3605855; 543529, 3605855; 543529, 3605883; 543558, 3605883; 543558, 
3605911; 543586, 3605911; 543586, 3606082; 543558, 3606082; 543558, 
3606138; 543529, 3606138; 543529, 3606224; 543558, 3606224; 543558, 
3606252; 543586, 3606252; 543586, 3606280; 543615, 3606280; 543615, 
3606309; 543671, 3606309; 543671, 3606337; 543728, 3606337; 543728, 
3606365; 543785, 3606365; 543785, 3606252; 544012, 3606252; 544012, 
3606280; 544097, 3606280; 544097, 3606337; 544125, 3606337; 544125, 
3606365; 544182, 3606365; 544182, 3606337; 544210, 3606337; 544210, 
3606280; 544267, 3606280; 544267, 3606365; 544239, 3606365; 544239, 
3606422; 544210, 3606422; 544210, 3606536; 544267, 3606536; 544267, 
3606564; 544352, 3606564; 544352, 3606536; 544409, 3606536; 544409, 
3606507; 544466, 3606507; 544466, 3606592; 544749, 3606592; 544749, 
3606536; 544721, 3606536; 544721, 3606507; 544778, 3606507; 544778, 
3606536; 544863, 3606536; 544863, 3606564; 544891, 3606564; 544891, 
3606536; 544976, 3606536; 544976, 3606507; 545005, 3606507; 545005, 
3606337; 545033, 3606337; 545033, 3606224; 545090, 3606224; 545090, 
3606167; 545118, 3606167; 545118, 3606138; 545146, 3606138; 545146, 
3606053; 545175, 3606053; 545175, 3606025; 545288, 3606025; 545288, 
3606053; 545317, 3606053; 545317, 3606082; 545373, 3606082; 545373, 
3606110; 545402, 3606110; 545402, 3606138; 545430, 3606138; 545430, 
3606167; 545459, 3606167; 545459, 3606195; 545487, 3606195; 545487, 
3606280; 545515, 3606280; 545515, 3606309; 545544, 3606309; 545544, 
3606337; 545572, 3606337; 545572, 3606479; 545600, 3606479; 545600, 
3606536; 545657, 3606536; 545657, 3606564; 545685, 3606564; 545685, 
3606592; 545714, 3606592; 545714, 3606621; 545742, 3606621; 545742, 
3606677; 545771, 3606677; 545771, 3606763; 545742, 3606763; 545742, 
3606819; 545685, 3606819; 545685, 3606848; 545572, 3606848; 545572, 
3606933; 545544, 3606933; 545544, 3606989; 545685, 3606989; 545685, 
3607018; 545742, 3607018; 545742, 3607046; 545799, 3607046; 545799, 
3607075; 545827, 3607075; 545827, 3607103; 545856, 3607103; 545856, 
3607160; 545884, 3607160; 545884, 3607216; 546026, 3607216; 546026, 
3607245; 546083, 3607245; 546083, 3607302; 546111, 3607302; 546111, 
3607358; 546253, 3607358; 546253, 3607387; 546281, 3607387; 546281, 
3607415; 546310, 3607415; 546310, 3607443; 546338, 3607443; 546338, 
3607472; 546366, 3607472; 546366, 3607500; 546451, 3607500; 546451, 
3607528; 546480, 3607528; 546480, 3607557; 546516, 3607557; 546527, 
3607516; 546570, 3607380; 546671, 3607416; 546680, 3607367; 546783, 
3607397; 546756, 3607636; 546737, 3607699; 546763, 3607699; 546763, 
3607755; 546792, 3607755; 546792, 3607784; 546849, 3607784; 546849, 
3607812; 546905, 3607812; 546905, 3607784; 546877, 3607784; 546877, 
3607670; 546905, 3607670; 546905, 3607642; 546962, 3607642; 546962, 
3607614; 546990, 3607614; 546990, 3607557; 546962, 3607557; 546962, 
3607472; 546990, 3607472; 546990, 3607387; 547019, 3607387; 547019, 
3607302; 547076, 3607302; 547076, 3607273; 547104, 3607273; 547104, 
3607245; 547132, 3607245; 547132, 3607216; 547161, 3607216; 547161, 
3607188; 547189, 3607188; 547189, 3607160; 547217, 3607160; 547217, 
3607188; 547246, 3607188; 547246, 3607160; 547302, 3607160; 547302, 
3607131; 547331, 3607131; 547331, 3607160; 547444, 3607160; 547444, 
3607188; 547501, 3607188; 547501, 3607216; 547558, 3607216; 547558, 
3607273; 547529, 3607273; 547529, 3607358; 547558, 3607358; 547558, 
3607387; 547586, 3607387; 547586, 3607443; 547615, 3607443; 547615, 
3607557; 547643, 3607557; 547643, 3607585; 547728, 3607585; 547728, 
3607614; 547756, 3607614; 547756, 3607699; 547785, 3607699; 547785, 
3607727; 547813, 3607727; 547813, 3607755; 547842, 3607755; 547842, 
3607869; 547955, 3607869; 547955, 3607926; 547927, 3607926; 547927, 
3608181; 547955, 3608181; 547955, 3608209; 547983, 3608209; 547983, 
3608323; 548012, 3608323; 548012, 3608351; 548040, 3608351; 548040, 
3608550; 548097, 3608550; 548097, 3608578; 548125, 3608578; 548125, 
3608550; 548154, 3608550; 548154, 3608521; 548210, 3608521; 548210, 
3608465; 548239, 3608465; 548239, 3608408; 548267, 3608408; 548267, 
3608351; 548295, 3608351; 548295, 3608323; 548324, 3608323; 548324, 
3608294; 548352, 3608294; 548352, 3608266; 548381, 3608266; 548381, 
3608238; 548437, 3608238; 548437, 3608209; 548466, 3608209; 548466, 
3608181; 548494, 3608181; 548494, 3608153; 548551, 3608153; 548551, 
3608124; 548579, 3608124; 548579, 3608096; 548607, 3608096; 548607, 
3608039; 548636, 3608039; 548636, 3607982; 548721, 3607982; 548721, 
3607954; 548749, 3607954; 548749, 3607869; 548721, 3607869; 548721, 
3607841; 548693, 3607841; 548693, 3607812; 548664, 3607812;

[[Page 479]]

548664, 3607784; 548636, 3607784; 548636, 3607755; 548607, 3607755; 
548607, 3607727; 548579, 3607727; 548579, 3607670; 548551, 3607670; 
548551, 3607642; 548522, 3607642; 548522, 3607614; 548494, 3607614; 
548494, 3607557; 548466, 3607557; 548466, 3607500; 548437, 3607500; 
548437, 3607472; 548210, 3607472; 548210, 3607443; 548182, 3607443; 
548182, 3607415; 548154, 3607415; 548154, 3607387; 548125, 3607387; 
548125, 3607358; 548097, 3607358; 548097, 3607330; 548068, 3607330; 
548068, 3607302; 548040, 3607302; 548040, 3607273; 548012, 3607273; 
548012, 3607245; 547983, 3607245; 547983, 3607216; 547955, 3607216; 
547955, 3607188; 547898, 3607188; 547898, 3607160; 547870, 3607160; 
547870, 3607103; 547842, 3607103; 547842, 3607075; 547813, 3607075; 
547813, 3607046; 547785, 3607046; 547785, 3606989; 547756, 3606989; 
547756, 3606961; 547728, 3606961; 547728, 3606933; 547700, 3606933; 
547700, 3606904; 547643, 3606904; 547643, 3606876; 547558, 3606876; 
547558, 3606819; 547529, 3606819; 547529, 3606734; 547558, 3606734; 
547558, 3606677; 547501, 3606677; 547501, 3606649; 547444, 3606649; 
547444, 3606592; 547416, 3606592; 547416, 3606564; 547331, 3606564; 
547331, 3606592; 547274, 3606592; 547274, 3606621; 547189, 3606621; 
547189, 3606649; 547132, 3606649; 547132, 3606706; 547047, 3606706; 
547047, 3606677; 547019, 3606677; 547019, 3606649; 546962, 3606649; 
546962, 3606621; 546934, 3606621; 546934, 3606564; 546877, 3606564; 
546877, 3606536; 546707, 3606536; 546707, 3606564; 546678, 3606564; 
546678, 3606592; 546650, 3606592; 546650, 3606621; 546622, 3606621; 
546622, 3606706; 546565, 3606706; 546565, 3606677; 546508, 3606677; 
546508, 3606621; 546480, 3606621; 546480, 3606536; 546451, 3606536; 
546451, 3606507; 546423, 3606507; 546423, 3606536; 546338, 3606536; 
546338, 3606479; 546366, 3606479; 546366, 3606394; 546338, 3606394; 
546338, 3606365; 546281, 3606365; 546281, 3606337; 546168, 3606337; 
546168, 3606309; 546139, 3606309; 546139, 3606252; 546111, 3606252; 
546111, 3606224; 546083, 3606224; 546083, 3606195; 546054, 3606195; 
546054, 3606167; 546026, 3606167; 546026, 3606138; 545998, 3606138; 
545998, 3606110; 545969, 3606110; 545969, 3606082; 545941, 3606082; 
545941, 3606025; 545912, 3606025; 545912, 3605997; 545884, 3605997; 
545884, 3605940; 545856, 3605940; 545856, 3605883; 545799, 3605883; 
545799, 3605826; 545714, 3605826; 545714, 3605798; 545657, 3605798; 
545657, 3605826; 545629, 3605826; 545629, 3605883; 545600, 3605883; 
545600, 3605911; 545544, 3605911; 545544, 3605883; 545515, 3605883; 
545515, 3605855; 545459, 3605855; 545459, 3605826; 545430, 3605826; 
545430, 3605656; 545402, 3605656; 545402, 3605628; 545345, 3605628; 
545345, 3605656; 545288, 3605656; 545288, 3605684; 545203, 3605684; 
545203, 3605713; 545118, 3605713; 545118, 3605684; 545090, 3605684; 
545090, 3605656; 545033, 3605656; 545033, 3605628; 544948, 3605628; 
544948, 3605599; 544920, 3605599; 544920, 3605628; 544891, 3605628; 
544891, 3605713; 544863, 3605713; 544863, 3605741; 544806, 3605741; 
544806, 3605770; 544721, 3605770; 544721, 3605798; 544664, 3605798; 
544664, 3605826; 544636, 3605826; 544636, 3605855; 544607, 3605855; 
544607, 3605911; 544636, 3605911; 544636, 3605940; 544664, 3605940; 
returning to 544664, 3605968. Excluding land bounded by 548466, 3607727; 
548466, 3607755; 548409, 3607755; 548409, 3607784; 548381, 3607784; 
548381, 3607727; 548409, 3607727; 548409, 3607699; 548437, 3607699; 
548437, 3607670; 548466, 3607670; returning to 548466, 3607727.
    (vi) Note: Map of Unit 19 is provided at paragraph (24)(v) of this 
entry.
    (25) Unit 20: Upper Santa Ana River Basin, San Bernardino County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Cajon and Devore, land 
bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 457095, 3792110; 
457067, 3792110; 457067, 3792138; 457095, 3792138; returning to 457095, 
3792110.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 457208, 
3796209; 457208, 3796237; 457236, 3796237; 457236, 3796209; returning to 
457208, 3796209; thence from land bounded by the following UTM 
coordinates (E, N): 457208, 3796209; 457208, 3796153; 457180, 3796153; 
457180, 3796069; 457208, 3796069; 457208, 3796040; 457236, 3796040; 
457236, 3796012; 457264, 3796012; 457264, 3795984; 457320, 3795984; 
457320, 3795956; 457404, 3795956; 457404, 3795928; 457517, 3795928; 
457517, 3795872; 457545, 3795872; 457545, 3795816; 457573, 3795816; 
457573, 3795760; 457601, 3795760; 457601, 3795704; 457629, 3795704; 
457629, 3795676; 457657, 3795676; 457657, 3795647; 457685, 3795647; 
457685, 3795619; 457713, 3795619; 457713, 3795591; 457741, 3795591; 
457741, 3795563; 457769, 3795563; 457769, 3795535; 457797, 3795535; 
457797, 3795507; 457825, 3795507; 457825, 3795451; 457853, 3795451; 
457853, 3795395; 457910, 3795395; 457910, 3795339; 457994, 3795339; 
457994, 3795254; 458022, 3795254; 458022, 3795086; 458050, 3795086; 
458050, 3794974; 458078, 3794974; 458078, 3794946; 458106, 3794946; 
458106, 3794889; 458134, 3794889; 458134, 3794777; 458162, 3794777; 
458162, 3794749; 458190, 3794749; 458190, 3794693; 458218, 3794693; 
458218, 3794637; 458246, 3794637; 458246, 3794553; 458275, 3794553; 
458275, 3794244; 458303, 3794244; 458303, 3794131; 458331, 3794131; 
458331, 3793823; 458359, 3793823; 458359, 3793738; 458387, 3793738; 
458387, 3793710; 458359, 3793710; 458359, 3793654; 458331, 3793654; 
458331, 3793486; 458303, 3793486; 458303, 3793402; 458275, 3793402; 
458275, 3793205; 458303, 3793205; 458303, 3793149; 458331, 3793149; 
458331, 3793121; 458415, 3793121; 458415, 3793037; 458387, 3793037; 
458387, 3792980; 458359, 3792980; 458359, 3792868; 458387, 3792868; 
458387, 3792812; 458415, 3792812; 458415, 3792784; 458471, 3792784; 
458471, 3792756; 458527, 3792756; 458527, 3792700; 458499, 3792700; 
458499, 3792616; 458527, 3792616; 458527, 3792503; 458555, 3792503; 
458555, 3792447; 458527, 3792447; 458527, 3792363; 458499, 3792363; 
458499, 3792335; 458471, 3792335; 458471, 3792138; 458443, 3792138; 
458443, 3792054; 458415, 3792054; 458415, 3791998; 458387, 3791998; 
458387, 3791970; 458359, 3791970; 458359, 3791914; 458331, 3791914; 
458331, 3791858; 458359, 3791858; 458359, 3791801; 458331, 3791801; 
458331, 3791829; 458275, 3791829; 458275, 3791858; 458190, 3791858; 
458190, 3791829; 458078, 3791829; 458078, 3791858; 457966, 3791858; 
457966, 3791829; 457910, 3791829; 457910, 3791801; 457881, 3791801; 
457881, 3791773; 457853, 3791773; 457853, 3791745; 457825, 3791745; 
457825, 3791717; 457769, 3791717; 457769, 3791689; 457601, 3791689; 
457601, 3791661; 457404, 3791661; 457404, 3791689; 457320, 3791689; 
457320, 3791661; 457264, 3791661; 457264, 3791633; 457236, 3791633; 
457236, 3791577; 457208,

[[Page 480]]

3791577; 457208, 3791549; 457152, 3791549; 457152, 3791521; 457095, 
3791521; 457095, 3791493; 457067, 3791493; 457067, 3791465; 457039, 
3791465; 457039, 3791408; 457011, 3791408; 457011, 3791212; 456983, 
3791212; 456983, 3791100; 457011, 3791100; 457011, 3790959; 457039, 
3790959; 457039, 3790903; 457067, 3790903; 457067, 3790875; 457095, 
3790875; 457095, 3790819; 457124, 3790819; 457124, 3790678; 457152, 
3790678; 457152, 3790650; 457180, 3790650; 457180, 3790622; 457264, 
3790622; 457264, 3790594; 457320, 3790594; 457320, 3790566; 457348, 
3790566; 457348, 3790510; 457376, 3790510; 457376, 3790482; 457404, 
3790482; 457404, 3790454; 457573, 3790454; 457573, 3790426; 457601, 
3790426; 457601, 3790454; 457629, 3790454; 457629, 3790482; 457657, 
3790482; 457657, 3790454; 457685, 3790454; 457685, 3790426; 457713, 
3790426; 457713, 3790398; 457769, 3790398; 457769, 3790426; 457797, 
3790426; 457797, 3790482; 457825, 3790482; 457825, 3790454; 457853, 
3790454; 457853, 3790426; 457881, 3790426; 457881, 3790370; 457910, 
3790370; 457910, 3790342; 457938, 3790342; 457938, 3790314; 457966, 
3790314; 457966, 3790342; 458106, 3790342; 458106, 3790314; 458162, 
3790314; 458162, 3790285; 458190, 3790285; 458190, 3790257; 458246, 
3790257; 458246, 3790229; 458275, 3790229; 458275, 3790257; 458387, 
3790257; 458387, 3790229; 458443, 3790229; 458443, 3790201; 458527, 
3790201; 458527, 3790173; 458555, 3790173; 458555, 3790117; 458583, 
3790117; 458583, 3790061; 458611, 3790061; 458611, 3790033; 458668, 
3790033; 458668, 3790005; 458696, 3790005; 458696, 3789977; 458724, 
3789977; 458724, 3789949; 458780, 3789949; 458780, 3789892; 458808, 
3789892; 458808, 3789864; 458836, 3789864; 458836, 3789808; 458864, 
3789808; 458864, 3789752; 458892, 3789752; 458892, 3789724; 458948, 
3789724; 458948, 3789668; 458976, 3789668; 458976, 3789640; 459004, 
3789640; 459004, 3789584; 459032, 3789584; 459032, 3789527; 459117, 
3789527; 459117, 3789584; 459229, 3789584; 459229, 3789556; 459257, 
3789556; 459257, 3789527; 459285, 3789527; 459285, 3789499; 459313, 
3789499; 459313, 3789443; 459341, 3789443; 459341, 3789387; 459397, 
3789387; 459397, 3789303; 459426, 3789303; 459426, 3789275; 459482, 
3789275; 459482, 3789219; 459510, 3789219; 459510, 3789134; 459538, 
3789134; 459538, 3789106; 459566, 3789106; 459566, 3789078; 459594, 
3789078; 459594, 3789022; 459622, 3789022; 459622, 3788994; 459678, 
3788994; 459678, 3788966; 459706, 3788966; 459706, 3788938; 459762, 
3788938; 459762, 3788910; 459790, 3788910; 459790, 3788882; 459819, 
3788882; 459819, 3788854; 459847, 3788854; 459847, 3788826; 459875, 
3788826; 459875, 3788798; 459903, 3788798; 459903, 3788770; 459931, 
3788770; 459931, 3788713; 459987, 3788713; 459987, 3788685; 460015, 
3788685; 460015, 3788657; 460127, 3788657; 460127, 3788629; 460212, 
3788629; 460212, 3788601; 460268, 3788601; 460268, 3788573; 460324, 
3788573; 460324, 3788545; 460408, 3788545; 460408, 3788517; 460464, 
3788517; 460464, 3788489; 460520, 3788489; 460520, 3788433; 460548, 
3788433; 460548, 3788405; 460577, 3788405; 460577, 3788376; 460605, 
3788376; 460605, 3788320; 460661, 3788320; 460661, 3788292; 460689, 
3788292; 460689, 3788264; 460745, 3788264; 460745, 3788236; 460801, 
3788236; 460801, 3788208; 460829, 3788208; 460829, 3788180; 460885, 
3788180; 460885, 3788152; 460913, 3788152; 460913, 3788124; 460941, 
3788124; 460941, 3788096; 460998, 3788096; 460998, 3788068; 461026, 
3788068; 461026, 3788040; 461054, 3788040; 461054, 3788012; 461082, 
3788012; 461082, 3787983; 461110, 3787983; 461110, 3787927; 461138, 
3787927; 461138, 3787899; 461166, 3787899; 461166, 3787871; 461222, 
3787871; 461222, 3787843; 461250, 3787843; 461250, 3787759; 461278, 
3787759; 461278, 3787703; 461306, 3787703; 461306, 3787619; 461334, 
3787619; 461334, 3787562; 461363, 3787562; 461363, 3787534; 461391, 
3787534; 461391, 3787506; 461419, 3787506; 461419, 3787478; 461447, 
3787478; 461447, 3787450; 461503, 3787450; 461503, 3787422; 461615, 
3787422; 461615, 3787394; 461671, 3787394; 461671, 3787310; 461699, 
3787310; 461699, 3787282; 461728, 3787282; 461728, 3787197; 461699, 
3787197; 461699, 3787169; 461728, 3787169; 461728, 3787029; 461699, 
3787029; 461699, 3787001; 461559, 3787001; 461559, 3786973; 461475, 
3786973; 461475, 3786945; 461447, 3786945; 461447, 3786917; 461419, 
3786917; 461419, 3786861; 461391, 3786861; 461391, 3786832; 461363, 
3786832; 461363, 3786804; 461306, 3786804; 461306, 3786776; 461278, 
3786776; 461278, 3786804; 461222, 3786804; 461222, 3786832; 461194, 
3786832; 461194, 3786861; 461166, 3786861; 461166, 3786889; 461138, 
3786889; 461138, 3787029; 461110, 3787029; 461110, 3787057; 461082, 
3787057; 461082, 3787085; 461054, 3787085; 461054, 3787141; 461026, 
3787141; 461026, 3787169; 460998, 3787169; 460998, 3787141; 460913, 
3787141; 460913, 3787169; 460773, 3787169; 460773, 3787197; 460745, 
3787197; 460745, 3787225; 460689, 3787225; 460689, 3787282; 460661, 
3787282; 460661, 3787310; 460633, 3787310; 460633, 3787338; 460605, 
3787338; 460605, 3787422; 460577, 3787422; 460577, 3787450; 460520, 
3787450; 460520, 3787478; 460492, 3787478; 460492, 3787506; 460436, 
3787506; 460436, 3787562; 460408, 3787562; 460408, 3787590; 460380, 
3787590; 460380, 3787619; 460324, 3787619; 460324, 3787647; 460296, 
3787647; 460296, 3787675; 460268, 3787675; 460268, 3787731; 460240, 
3787731; 460240, 3787759; 460212, 3787759; 460212, 3787815; 460155, 
3787815; 460155, 3787843; 460127, 3787843; 460127, 3787871; 460099, 
3787871; 460099, 3787899; 460071, 3787899; 460071, 3787927; 460015, 
3787927; 460015, 3787955; 459987, 3787955; 459987, 3787983; 459959, 
3787983; 459959, 3788012; 459903, 3788012; 459903, 3788040; 459847, 
3788040; 459847, 3788068; 459819, 3788068; 459819, 3788096; 459790, 
3788096; 459790, 3788124; 459734, 3788124; 459734, 3788152; 459706, 
3788152; 459706, 3788180; 459650, 3788180; 459650, 3788208; 459622, 
3788208; 459622, 3788236; 459594, 3788236; 459594, 3788264; 459538, 
3788264; 459538, 3788292; 459510, 3788292; 459510, 3788320; 459482, 
3788320; 459482, 3788348; 459454, 3788348; 459454, 3788376; 459426, 
3788376; 459426, 3788405; 459369, 3788405; 459369, 3788433; 459341, 
3788433; 459341, 3788461; 459313, 3788461; 459313, 3788489; 459285, 
3788489; 459285, 3788517; 459257, 3788517; 459257, 3788545; 459229, 
3788545; 459229, 3788573; 459201, 3788573; 459201, 3788629; 459173, 
3788629; 459173, 3788657; 459145, 3788657; 459145, 3788713; 459117, 
3788713; 459117, 3788798; 459089, 3788798; 459089, 3788854; 459061, 
3788854; 459061, 3788882; 459004, 3788882; 459004, 3788910; 458976, 
3788910; 458976, 3788938; 458920, 3788938; 458920, 3788966; 458948, 
3788966; 458948, 3788994; 458976, 3788994; 458976, 3789022; 458948, 
3789022; 458948, 3789078; 458892, 3789078; 458892, 3789106; 458864, 
3789106; 458864, 3789134; 458808, 3789134; 458808, 3789163; 458752, 
3789163; 458752, 3789191; 458639,

[[Page 481]]

3789191; 458639, 3789219; 458583, 3789219; 458583, 3789247; 458527, 
3789247; 458527, 3789275; 458471, 3789275; 458471, 3789303; 458415, 
3789303; 458415, 3789331; 458359, 3789331; 458359, 3789359; 458303, 
3789359; 458303, 3789387; 458275, 3789387; 458275, 3789415; 458246, 
3789415; 458246, 3789471; 458218, 3789471; 458218, 3789499; 458162, 
3789499; 458162, 3789527; 458134, 3789527; 458134, 3789556; 458106, 
3789556; 458106, 3789584; 458078, 3789584; 458078, 3789612; 458050, 
3789612; 458050, 3789640; 458022, 3789640; 458022, 3789668; 457966, 
3789668; 457966, 3789696; 457938, 3789696; 457938, 3789724; 457910, 
3789724; 457910, 3789752; 457881, 3789752; 457881, 3789780; 457853, 
3789780; 457853, 3789808; 457797, 3789808; 457797, 3789836; 457769, 
3789836; 457769, 3789892; 457741, 3789892; 457741, 3789921; 457713, 
3789921; 457713, 3789949; 457685, 3789949; 457685, 3789977; 457629, 
3789977; 457629, 3790005; 457488, 3790005; 457488, 3789977; 457460, 
3789977; 457460, 3790005; 457404, 3790005; 457404, 3790033; 457348, 
3790033; 457348, 3790061; 457292, 3790061; 457292, 3790089; 457180, 
3790089; 457180, 3790117; 457124, 3790117; 457124, 3790145; 457067, 
3790145; 457067, 3790173; 456955, 3790173; 456955, 3790314; 456927, 
3790314; 456927, 3790370; 456899, 3790370; 456899, 3790398; 456871, 
3790398; 456871, 3790454; 456843, 3790454; 456843, 3790482; 456815, 
3790482; 456815, 3790510; 456787, 3790510; 456787, 3790566; 456759, 
3790566; 456759, 3790650; 456730, 3790650; 456730, 3790735; 456702, 
3790735; 456702, 3790819; 456674, 3790819; 456674, 3790987; 456646, 
3790987; 456646, 3791072; 456618, 3791072; 456618, 3791268; 456590, 
3791268; 456590, 3791296; 456618, 3791296; 456618, 3791380; 456646, 
3791380; 456646, 3791436; 456674, 3791436; 456674, 3791465; 456702, 
3791465; 456702, 3791493; 456759, 3791493; 456759, 3791521; 456843, 
3791521; 456843, 3791549; 456871, 3791549; 456871, 3791577; 456899, 
3791577; 456899, 3791661; 456983, 3791661; 456983, 3791689; 457039, 
3791689; 457039, 3791717; 457095, 3791717; 457095, 3791801; 457124, 
3791801; 457124, 3791829; 457152, 3791829; 457152, 3791914; 457152, 
3791942; 457124, 3791942; 457124, 3791998; 457095, 3791998; 457095, 
3792110; 457152, 3792110; 457152, 3792082; 457180, 3792082; 457180, 
3792054; 457292, 3792054; 457292, 3792082; 457348, 3792082; 457348, 
3792138; 457404, 3792138; 457404, 3792110; 457432, 3792110; 457432, 
3792026; 457517, 3792026; 457517, 3792054; 457545, 3792054; 457545, 
3792082; 457629, 3792082; 457629, 3792110; 457769, 3792110; 457769, 
3792138; 457797, 3792138; 457797, 3792166; 457825, 3792166; 457825, 
3792194; 457853, 3792194; 457853, 3792223; 457881, 3792223; 457881, 
3792251; 457966, 3792251; 457966, 3792279; 457994, 3792279; 457994, 
3792307; 458022, 3792307; 458022, 3792335; 458078, 3792335; 458078, 
3792363; 458134, 3792363; 458134, 3792391; 458162, 3792391; 458162, 
3792419; 458190, 3792419; 458190, 3792531; 458218, 3792531; 458218, 
3792672; 458190, 3792672; 458190, 3792700; 458162, 3792700; 458162, 
3792756; 458134, 3792756; 458134, 3792784; 458106, 3792784; 458106, 
3792812; 458078, 3792812; 458078, 3792840; 458050, 3792840; 458050, 
3792868; 458022, 3792868; 458022, 3793009; 457994, 3793009; 457994, 
3793065; 457966, 3793065; 457966, 3793121; 457938, 3793121; 457938, 
3793205; 457910, 3793205; 457910, 3793289; 457938, 3793289; 457938, 
3793345; 457966, 3793345; 457966, 3793458; 457938, 3793458; 457938, 
3793514; 457910, 3793514; 457910, 3793626; 457881, 3793626; 457881, 
3793682; 457853, 3793682; 457853, 3793710; 457825, 3793710; 457825, 
3793767; 457966, 3793767; 457966, 3793935; 457938, 3793935; 457938, 
3794047; 457910, 3794047; 457910, 3794075; 457881, 3794075; 457881, 
3794131; 457910, 3794131; 457910, 3794244; 457881, 3794244; 457881, 
3794328; 457938, 3794328; 457938, 3794300; 457966, 3794300; 457966, 
3794328; 457994, 3794328; 457994, 3794384; 457966, 3794384; 457966, 
3794440; 457938, 3794440; 457938, 3794468; 457910, 3794468; 457910, 
3794496; 457881, 3794496; 457881, 3794525; 457853, 3794525; 457853, 
3794581; 457825, 3794581; 457825, 3794609; 457769, 3794609; 457769, 
3794637; 457713, 3794637; 457713, 3794609; 457657, 3794609; 457657, 
3794581; 457601, 3794581; 457601, 3794665; 457629, 3794665; 457629, 
3794693; 457657, 3794693; 457657, 3794721; 457685, 3794721; 457685, 
3794918; 457657, 3794918; 457657, 3794946; 457601, 3794946; 457601, 
3794974; 457545, 3794974; 457545, 3795002; 457488, 3795002; 457488, 
3795030; 457460, 3795030; 457460, 3795058; 457432, 3795058; 457432, 
3795086; 457404, 3795086; 457404, 3795058; 457320, 3795058; 457320, 
3795086; 457292, 3795086; 457292, 3795114; 457320, 3795114; 457320, 
3795142; 457348, 3795142; 457348, 3795198; 457320, 3795198; 457320, 
3795226; 457292, 3795226; 457292, 3795282; 457264, 3795282; 457264, 
3795311; 457152, 3795311; 457152, 3795395; 457124, 3795395; 457124, 
3795451; 457011, 3795451; 457011, 3795479; 456983, 3795479; 456983, 
3795535; 457011, 3795535; 457011, 3795591; 457039, 3795591; 457039, 
3795676; 457011, 3795676; 457011, 3795704; 456983, 3795704; 456983, 
3795732; 456955, 3795732; 456955, 3795760; 456927, 3795760; 456927, 
3795816; 456899, 3795816; 456899, 3795844; 456843, 3795844; 456843, 
3795872; 456815, 3795872; 456815, 3795928; 456759, 3795928; 456759, 
3795956; 456730, 3795956; 456730, 3795984; 456702, 3795984; 456702, 
3796012; 456534, 3796012; 456534, 3796040; 456450, 3796040; 456450, 
3796097; 456394, 3796097; 456394, 3796125; 456366, 3796125; 456366, 
3796153; 456337, 3796153; 456337, 3796181; 456309, 3796181; 456309, 
3796209; 456281, 3796209; 456281, 3796237; 456225, 3796237; 456225, 
3796293; 456197, 3796293; 456197, 3796321; 456225, 3796321; 456225, 
3796377; 456253, 3796377; 456253, 3796405; 456225, 3796405; 456225, 
3796433; 456085, 3796433; 456085, 3796405; 456029, 3796405; 456029, 
3796433; 456001, 3796433; 456001, 3796462; 455944, 3796462; 455944, 
3796490; 455860, 3796490; 455860, 3796518; 455776, 3796518; 455776, 
3796546; 455720, 3796546; 455720, 3796602; 455692, 3796602; 455692, 
3796658; 455664, 3796658; 455664, 3796714; 455636, 3796714; 455636, 
3796770; 455608, 3796770; 455608, 3796855; 455579, 3796855; 455579, 
3796883; 455608, 3796883; 455608, 3796911; 455579, 3796911; 455579, 
3796995; 455608, 3796995; 455608, 3797023; 455664, 3797023; 455664, 
3797051; 455720, 3797051; 455720, 3797079; 455776, 3797079; 455776, 
3797107; 455804, 3797107; 455804, 3797023; 455832, 3797023; 455832, 
3796967; 455860, 3796967; 455860, 3796939; 455917, 3796939; 455919, 
3796888; 455947, 3796829; 456030, 3796759; 456087, 3796733; 456061, 
3797051; 456085, 3797051; 456085, 3797079; 456169, 3797079; 456169, 
3797051; 456197, 3797051; 456197, 3796995; 456225, 3796995; 456225, 
3796967; 456253, 3796967; 456253, 3796939; 456281, 3796939; 456281, 
3796911; 456309, 3796911; 456309, 3796883; 456366, 3796883; 456366, 
3796855; 456422, 3796855; 456422,

[[Page 482]]

3796827; 456478, 3796827; 456478, 3796798; 456674, 3796798; 456674, 
3796742; 456646, 3796742; 456646, 3796726; 456555, 3796722; 456581, 
3796626; 456629, 3796561; 456738, 3796438; 456793, 3796546; 456815, 
3796546; 456815, 3796574; 456871, 3796574; 456871, 3796602; 456899, 
3796602; 456899, 3796574; 456927, 3796574; 456927, 3796433; 456955, 
3796433; 456955, 3796377; 456983, 3796377; 456983, 3796321; 457011, 
3796321; 457011, 3796293; 457039, 3796293; 457039, 3796237; 457067, 
3796237; 457067, 3796209; returning to 457208, 3796209.
    (iii) Note: Map of Units 20 and 22 follows.

[[Page 483]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09FE11.010

    (26) Unit 21: Little Rock Creek Basin, Los Angeles County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Juniper Hills and Pacifico 
Mtn., land bounded by the following UTM coordinates (E, N): 406323, 
3814876; 406323, 3814756; 406353, 3814756; 406353, 3814726; 406383, 
3814726; 406383, 3814696; 406413, 3814696; 406413, 3814426; 406383, 
3814426;

[[Page 484]]

406383, 3814396; 406413, 3814396; 406413, 3814216; 406443, 3814216; 
406443, 3814186; 406473, 3814186; 406473, 3814156; 406503, 3814156; 
406503, 3813796; 406533, 3813796; 406533, 3813766; 406563, 3813766; 
406563, 3813736; 406593, 3813736; 406593, 3813706; 406623, 3813706; 
406623, 3813676; 406593, 3813676; 406593, 3813646; 406563, 3813646; 
406563, 3813616; 406533, 3813616; 406533, 3813556; 406563, 3813556; 
406563, 3813496; 406593, 3813496; 406593, 3813436; 406623, 3813436; 
406623, 3813376; 406653, 3813376; 406653, 3813316; 406683, 3813316; 
406683, 3813196; 406713, 3813196; 406713, 3813166; 406683, 3813166; 
406683, 3813136; 406653, 3813136; 406653, 3813076; 406623, 3813076; 
406623, 3813046; 406653, 3813046; 406653, 3812926; 406683, 3812926; 
406683, 3812896; 406743, 3812896; 406743, 3812746; 406713, 3812746; 
406713, 3812626; 406743, 3812626; 406743, 3812566; 406773, 3812566; 
406773, 3812506; 406803, 3812506; 406803, 3812416; 406863, 3812416; 
406863, 3812386; 407043, 3812386; 407043, 3812266; 407073, 3812266; 
407073, 3812206; 407103, 3812206; 407103, 3812086; 407133, 3812086; 
407133, 3812056; 407163, 3812056; 407163, 3812026; 407193, 3812026; 
407193, 3811966; 407223, 3811966; 407223, 3811936; 407253, 3811936; 
407253, 3811876; 407313, 3811876; 407313, 3811846; 407343, 3811846; 
407343, 3811816; 407403, 3811816; 407403, 3811726; 407433, 3811726; 
407433, 3811606; 407463, 3811606; 407463, 3811576; 407553, 3811576; 
407553, 3811546; 407673, 3811546; 407673, 3811486; 407703, 3811486; 
407703, 3811396; 407733, 3811396; 407733, 3811366; 407853, 3811366; 
407853, 3811396; 408033, 3811396; 408033, 3811366; 408063, 3811366; 
408063, 3811336; 408093, 3811336; 408093, 3811276; 408123, 3811276; 
408123, 3811246; 408153, 3811246; 408153, 3811276; 408393, 3811276; 
408393, 3811186; 408543, 3811186; 408543, 3811126; 408573, 3811126; 
408573, 3811036; 408603, 3811036; 408603, 3811006; 408753, 3811006; 
408753, 3811036; 408813, 3811036; 408813, 3811066; 408873, 3811066; 
408873, 3810946; 408903, 3810946; 408903, 3810916; 408933, 3810916; 
408933, 3810886; 408963, 3810886; 408963, 3810796; 408993, 3810796; 
408993, 3810736; 409023, 3810736; 409023, 3810676; 409083, 3810676; 
409083, 3810646; 409113, 3810646; 409113, 3810556; 409143, 3810556; 
409143, 3810466; 409173, 3810466; 409173, 3810436; 409203, 3810436; 
409203, 3810406; 409263, 3810406; 409263, 3810286; 409293, 3810286; 
409293, 3810256; 409323, 3810256; 409323, 3810166; 409443, 3810166; 
409443, 3810136; 409473, 3810136; 409473, 3810106; 409623, 3810106; 
409623, 3810076; 409683, 3810076; 409683, 3810046; 409713, 3810046; 
409713, 3810016; 409743, 3810016; 409743, 3809986; 409773, 3809986; 
409773, 3809956; 409743, 3809956; 409743, 3809926; 409773, 3809926; 
409773, 3809896; 409803, 3809896; 409803, 3809836; 409983, 3809836; 
409983, 3809746; 410013, 3809746; 410013, 3809656; 410043, 3809656; 
410043, 3809626; 410073, 3809626; 410073, 3809596; 410163, 3809596; 
410163, 3809476; 410193, 3809476; 410193, 3809386; 410253, 3809386; 
410253, 3809356; 410283, 3809356; 410283, 3809326; 410313, 3809326; 
410313, 3809266; 410343, 3809266; 410343, 3809236; 410373, 3809236; 
410373, 3809206; 410403, 3809206; 410403, 3809176; 410433, 3809176; 
410433, 3809146; 410523, 3809146; 410523, 3809176; 410553, 3809176; 
410553, 3809146; 410583, 3809146; 410583, 3809086; 410613, 3809086; 
410613, 3809056; 410643, 3809056; 410643, 3809026; 410673, 3809026; 
410673, 3808966; 410703, 3808966; 410703, 3808876; 410733, 3808876; 
410733, 3808846; 410703, 3808846; 410703, 3808786; 410733, 3808786; 
410733, 3808726; 410763, 3808726; 410763, 3808696; 410793, 3808696; 
410793, 3808636; 410823, 3808636; 410823, 3808486; 410853, 3808486; 
410853, 3808456; 410913, 3808456; 410913, 3808426; 410943, 3808426; 
410943, 3808396; 410973, 3808396; 410973, 3808306; 411003, 3808306; 
411003, 3808276; 411033, 3808276; 411033, 3808246; 411063, 3808246; 
411063, 3808126; 411093, 3808126; 411093, 3808096; 411123, 3808096; 
411123, 3808066; 411153, 3808066; 411153, 3808006; 411183, 3808006; 
411183, 3807916; 411213, 3807916; 411213, 3807736; 411243, 3807736; 
411243, 3807706; 411273, 3807706; 411273, 3807676; 411243, 3807676; 
411243, 3807646; 411213, 3807646; 411213, 3807676; 411153, 3807676; 
411153, 3807706; 411123, 3807706; 411123, 3807736; 411033, 3807736; 
411033, 3807766; 411003, 3807766; 411003, 3807796; 410973, 3807796; 
410973, 3807826; 410943, 3807826; 410943, 3807976; 410913, 3807976; 
410913, 3808036; 410883, 3808036; 410883, 3808216; 410853, 3808216; 
410853, 3808276; 410823, 3808276; 410823, 3808306; 410793, 3808306; 
410793, 3808336; 410763, 3808336; 410763, 3808366; 410733, 3808366; 
410733, 3808426; 410703, 3808426; 410703, 3808456; 410673, 3808456; 
410673, 3808546; 410643, 3808546; 410643, 3808576; 410553, 3808576; 
410553, 3808726; 410523, 3808726; 410523, 3808846; 410463, 3808846; 
410463, 3808876; 410403, 3808876; 410403, 3808906; 410373, 3808906; 
410373, 3808996; 410343, 3808996; 410343, 3809056; 410313, 3809056; 
410313, 3809086; 410253, 3809086; 410253, 3809146; 410223, 3809146; 
410223, 3809206; 410163, 3809206; 410163, 3809236; 410103, 3809236; 
410103, 3809266; 410043, 3809266; 410043, 3809296; 410013, 3809296; 
410013, 3809356; 409983, 3809356; 409983, 3809416; 409923, 3809416; 
409923, 3809476; 409863, 3809476; 409863, 3809506; 409833, 3809506; 
409833, 3809536; 409803, 3809536; 409803, 3809596; 409773, 3809596; 
409773, 3809686; 409743, 3809686; 409743, 3809716; 409713, 3809716; 
409713, 3809746; 409623, 3809746; 409623, 3809776; 409593, 3809776; 
409593, 3809806; 409563, 3809806; 409563, 3809866; 409533, 3809866; 
409533, 3809896; 409503, 3809896; 409503, 3809926; 409533, 3809926; 
409533, 3809986; 409473, 3809986; 409473, 3809956; 409413, 3809956; 
409413, 3809986; 409263, 3809986; 409263, 3810046; 409233, 3810046; 
409233, 3810076; 409203, 3810076; 409203, 3810106; 409173, 3810106; 
409173, 3810166; 409143, 3810166; 409143, 3810226; 409083, 3810226; 
409083, 3810256; 409053, 3810256; 409053, 3810286; 409023, 3810286; 
409023, 3810346; 408993, 3810346; 408993, 3810406; 408963, 3810406; 
408963, 3810526; 408933, 3810526; 408933, 3810556; 408903, 3810556; 
408903, 3810616; 408873, 3810616; 408873, 3810646; 408843, 3810646; 
408843, 3810676; 408813, 3810676; 408813, 3810706; 408783, 3810706; 
408783, 3810736; 408633, 3810736; 408633, 3810766; 408573, 3810766; 
408573, 3810796; 408543, 3810796; 408543, 3810826; 408483, 3810826; 
408483, 3810856; 408363, 3810856; 408363, 3810886; 408243, 3810886; 
408243, 3810856; 408213, 3810856; 408213, 3810886; 408183, 3810886; 
408183, 3810976; 408153, 3810976; 408153, 3811036; 407853, 3811036; 
407853, 3811066; 407823, 3811066; 407823, 3811126; 407793, 3811126; 
407793, 3811186; 407703, 3811186; 407703, 3811216; 407673, 3811216; 
407673, 3811246; 407613, 3811246; 407613, 3811276; 407553, 3811276; 
407553, 3811306; 407523, 3811306;

[[Page 485]]

407523, 3811336; 407493, 3811336; 407493, 3811366; 407463, 3811366; 
407463, 3811396; 407433, 3811396; 407433, 3811456; 407373, 3811456; 
407373, 3811486; 407343, 3811486; 407343, 3811516; 407313, 3811516; 
407313, 3811546; 407253, 3811546; 407253, 3811576; 407223, 3811576; 
407223, 3811636; 407193, 3811636; 407193, 3811696; 407133, 3811696; 
407133, 3811666; 407163, 3811666; 407163, 3811606; 407103, 3811606; 
407103, 3811636; 407043, 3811636; 407043, 3811696; 407013, 3811696; 
407013, 3811786; 406983, 3811786; 406983, 3811816; 406953, 3811816; 
406953, 3811846; 406923, 3811846; 406923, 3811876; 406893, 3811876; 
406893, 3811906; 406863, 3811906; 406863, 3811966; 406803, 3811966; 
406803, 3812026; 406773, 3812026; 406773, 3812086; 406623, 3812086; 
406623, 3812146; 406593, 3812146; 406593, 3812236; 406563, 3812236; 
406563, 3812536; 406533, 3812536; 406533, 3812746; 406563, 3812746; 
406563, 3812806; 406533, 3812806; 406533, 3812836; 406503, 3812836; 
406503, 3812926; 406473, 3812926; 406473, 3813016; 406503, 3813016; 
406503, 3813046; 406473, 3813046; 406473, 3813286; 406503, 3813286; 
406503, 3813316; 406473, 3813316; 406473, 3813346; 406443, 3813346; 
406443, 3813316; 406353, 3813316; 406353, 3813346; 406323, 3813346; 
406323, 3813406; 406293, 3813406; 406293, 3813466; 406263, 3813466; 
406263, 3813556; 406293, 3813556; 406293, 3813616; 406323, 3813616; 
406323, 3813706; 406353, 3813706; 406353, 3813946; 406323, 3813946; 
406323, 3814066; 406293, 3814066; 406293, 3814156; 406263, 3814156; 
406263, 3814186; 406233, 3814186; 406233, 3814246; 406203, 3814246; 
406203, 3814306; 406173, 3814306; 406173, 3814396; 406143, 3814396; 
406143, 3814366; 406083, 3814366; 406083, 3814336; 406053, 3814336; 
406053, 3814306; 406023, 3814306; 406023, 3814276; 405993, 3814276; 
405993, 3814246; 405963, 3814246; 405963, 3814216; 405993, 3814216; 
405993, 3814156; 406023, 3814156; 406023, 3814096; 405993, 3814096; 
405993, 3814036; 405933, 3814036; 405933, 3814006; 405873, 3814006; 
405873, 3813946; 405843, 3813946; 405843, 3813916; 405723, 3813916; 
405723, 3813886; 405663, 3813886; 405663, 3813856; 405633, 3813856; 
405633, 3813826; 405603, 3813826; 405603, 3813766; 405543, 3813766; 
405543, 3813736; 405513, 3813736; 405513, 3813706; 405483, 3813706; 
405483, 3813676; 405453, 3813676; 405453, 3813646; 405423, 3813646; 
405423, 3813616; 405393, 3813616; 405393, 3813586; 405363, 3813586; 
405363, 3813556; 405333, 3813556; 405333, 3813526; 405303, 3813526; 
405303, 3813376; 405273, 3813376; 405273, 3813346; 405243, 3813346; 
405243, 3813376; 405213, 3813376; 405213, 3813406; 405183, 3813406; 
405183, 3813436; 405153, 3813436; 405153, 3813406; 405123, 3813406; 
405123, 3813376; 405093, 3813376; 405093, 3813316; 405063, 3813316; 
405063, 3813286; 405033, 3813286; 405033, 3813256; 404913, 3813256; 
404913, 3813226; 404883, 3813226; 404883, 3813166; 404853, 3813166; 
404853, 3813106; 404793, 3813106; 404793, 3813166; 404823, 3813166; 
404823, 3813196; 404793, 3813196; 404793, 3813286; 404823, 3813286; 
404823, 3813316; 404853, 3813316; 404853, 3813346; 404883, 3813346; 
404883, 3813406; 404913, 3813406; 404913, 3813436; 404943, 3813436; 
404943, 3813496; 404973, 3813496; 404973, 3813526; 405033, 3813526; 
405033, 3813556; 405063, 3813556; 405063, 3813616; 405183, 3813616; 
405183, 3813676; 405213, 3813676; 405213, 3813766; 405363, 3813766; 
405363, 3813796; 405393, 3813796; 405393, 3813826; 405423, 3813826; 
405423, 3813856; 405453, 3813856; 405453, 3813886; 405483, 3813886; 
405483, 3813916; 405543, 3813916; 405543, 3813946; 405573, 3813946; 
405573, 3813976; 405603, 3813976; 405603, 3814006; 405573, 3814006; 
405573, 3814066; 405633, 3814066; 405633, 3814036; 405783, 3814036; 
405783, 3814096; 405813, 3814096; 405813, 3814126; 405843, 3814126; 
405843, 3814306; 405873, 3814306; 405873, 3814336; 405903, 3814336; 
405903, 3814366; 405933, 3814366; 405933, 3814396; 405963, 3814396; 
405963, 3814426; 406023, 3814426; 406023, 3814456; 406053, 3814456; 
406053, 3814516; 406083, 3814516; 406083, 3814546; 406233, 3814546; 
406233, 3814666; 406173, 3814666; 406173, 3814696; 406143, 3814696; 
406143, 3814726; 406083, 3814726; 406083, 3814786; 406053, 3814786; 
406053, 3814816; 406023, 3814816; 406023, 3814846; 405993, 3814846; 
405993, 3814876; 405963, 3814876; 405963, 3814977; 406183, 3814937; 
406323, 3814927; returning to 406323, 3814876.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 21 is provided at paragraph (12)(iii) of this 
entry
    (27) Unit 22: Upper Mojave River Basin, San Bernardino County, 
California.
    (i) Subunit 22a: From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Cajon, 
Silverwood Lake, Lake Arrowhead and Butler Peak, land bounded by the 
following UTM coordinates (E, N): 478323, 3800176; 478263, 3800176; 
478263, 3800146; 478323, 3800146; 478323, 3800176; 478383, 3800176; 
478383, 3800206; 478473, 3800206; 478473, 3800236; 478503, 3800236; 
478503, 3800266; 478563, 3800266; 478563, 3800296; 478623, 3800296; 
478623, 3800326; 478743, 3800326; 478743, 3800356; 478773, 3800356; 
478773, 3800386; 478803, 3800386; 478803, 3800416; 478833, 3800416; 
478833, 3800446; 478863, 3800446; 478863, 3800476; 478923, 3800476; 
478923, 3800506; 479073, 3800506; 479073, 3800476; 479103, 3800476; 
479103, 3800446; 479133, 3800446; 479133, 3800416; 479163, 3800416; 
479163, 3800386; 479193, 3800386; 479193, 3800326; 479223, 3800326; 
479223, 3800146; 479253, 3800146; 479253, 3800056; 479283, 3800056; 
479283, 3800026; 479313, 3800026; 479313, 3799996; 479373, 3799996; 
479373, 3800056; 479403, 3800056; 479403, 3800116; 479433, 3800116; 
479433, 3800206; 479463, 3800206; 479463, 3800236; 479523, 3800236; 
479523, 3800266; 479583, 3800266; 479583, 3800296; 479763, 3800296; 
479763, 3800266; 479793, 3800266; 479793, 3800236; 479823, 3800236; 
479823, 3800176; 479853, 3800176; 479853, 3800146; 479883, 3800146; 
479883, 3800116; 479973, 3800116; 479973, 3800146; 480003, 3800146; 
480003, 3800176; 480093, 3800176; 480093, 3800206; 480423, 3800206; 
480423, 3800176; 480513, 3800176; 480513, 3800146; 480543, 3800146; 
480543, 3800116; 480603, 3800116; 480603, 3800086; 480633, 3800086; 
480633, 3800056; 480663, 3800056; 480663, 3800026; 480783, 3800026; 
480783, 3800056; 480843, 3800056; 480843, 3800086; 480903, 3800086; 
480903, 3800116; 480933, 3800116; 480933, 3800146; 480993, 3800146; 
480993, 3800176; 481113, 3800176; 481113, 3800206; 481323, 3800206; 
481323, 3800236; 481383, 3800236; 481383, 3800266; 481413, 3800266; 
481413, 3800296; 481443, 3800296; 481443, 3800266; 481533, 3800266; 
481533, 3800296; 481593, 3800296; 481593, 3800326; 481803, 3800326; 
481803, 3800296; 481863, 3800296; 481863, 3800266; 481893, 3800266; 
481893, 3800296; 481923, 3800296; 481923, 3800326; 481953, 3800326; 
481953, 3800446; 481983, 3800446; 481983, 3800476; 482013, 3800476; 
482013, 3800506; 482163,

[[Page 486]]

3800506; 482163, 3800476; 482223, 3800476; 482223, 3800416; 482283, 
3800416; 482283, 3800356; 482313, 3800356; 482313, 3800326; 482373, 
3800326; 482373, 3800296; 482403, 3800296; 482403, 3800266; 482433, 
3800266; 482433, 3800236; 482463, 3800236; 482463, 3800206; 482493, 
3800206; 482493, 3800236; 482583, 3800236; 482583, 3800266; 482643, 
3800266; 482643, 3800296; 482733, 3800296; 482733, 3800266; 482793, 
3800266; 482793, 3800236; 482823, 3800236; 482823, 3800206; 482853, 
3800206; 482853, 3800176; 482883, 3800176; 482883, 3800146; 482913, 
3800146; 482913, 3800116; 483063, 3800116; 483063, 3800146; 483123, 
3800146; 483123, 3800176; 483153, 3800176; 483153, 3800296; 483183, 
3800296; 483183, 3800326; 483333, 3800326; 483333, 3800296; 483363, 
3800296; 483363, 3800266; 483393, 3800266; 483393, 3800236; 483423, 
3800236; 483423, 3800206; 483453, 3800206; 483453, 3800026; 483483, 
3800026; 483483, 3799906; 483573, 3799906; 483573, 3799966; 483603, 
3799966; 483603, 3800176; 483633, 3800176; 483633, 3800236; 483693, 
3800236; 483693, 3800266; 483753, 3800266; 483753, 3800296; 483813, 
3800296; 483813, 3800326; 483903, 3800326; 483903, 3800296; 483933, 
3800296; 483933, 3800266; 483963, 3800266; 483963, 3800236; 483993, 
3800236; 483993, 3800146; 484053, 3800146; 484053, 3800116; 484263, 
3800116; 484263, 3800146; 484323, 3800146; 484323, 3800116; 484443, 
3800116; 484443, 3800086; 484473, 3800086; 484473, 3800056; 484443, 
3800056; 484443, 3800026; 484473, 3800026; 484473, 3799816; 484533, 
3799816; 484533, 3799786; 484653, 3799786; 484653, 3799816; 484773, 
3799816; 484773, 3799786; 484803, 3799786; 484803, 3799726; 484833, 
3799726; 484833, 3799696; 484863, 3799696; 484863, 3799666; 484893, 
3799666; 484893, 3799636; 484983, 3799636; 484983, 3799606; 485193, 
3799606; 485193, 3799546; 485163, 3799546; 485163, 3799516; 485193, 
3799516; 485193, 3799486; 485223, 3799486; 485223, 3799456; 485253, 
3799456; 485253, 3799426; 485313, 3799426; 485313, 3799396; 485343, 
3799396; 485343, 3799366; 485373, 3799366; 485373, 3799336; 485403, 
3799336; 485403, 3799246; 485433, 3799246; 485433, 3799126; 485403, 
3799126; 485403, 3799096; 485373, 3799096; 485373, 3799066; 485343, 
3799066; 485343, 3799036; 485313, 3799036; 485313, 3799006; 485283, 
3799006; 485283, 3798946; 485253, 3798946; 485253, 3798886; 485283, 
3798886; 485283, 3798796; 485313, 3798796; 485313, 3798766; 485343, 
3798766; 485343, 3798736; 485373, 3798736; 485373, 3798706; 485433, 
3798706; 485433, 3798646; 485463, 3798646; 485463, 3798586; 485493, 
3798586; 485493, 3798556; 485523, 3798556; 485523, 3798526; 485583, 
3798526; 485583, 3798496; 485733, 3798496; 485733, 3798466; 485943, 
3798466; 485943, 3798436; 486003, 3798436; 486003, 3798406; 486033, 
3798406; 486033, 3798316; 486063, 3798316; 486063, 3798256; 486123, 
3798256; 486123, 3798286; 486153, 3798286; 486153, 3798316; 486183, 
3798316; 486183, 3798376; 486213, 3798376; 486213, 3798406; 486273, 
3798406; 486273, 3798436; 486303, 3798436; 486303, 3798466; 486363, 
3798466; 486363, 3798496; 486543, 3798496; 486543, 3798466; 486573, 
3798466; 486573, 3798436; 486633, 3798436; 486633, 3798376; 486663, 
3798376; 486663, 3798316; 486693, 3798316; 486693, 3798286; 486723, 
3798286; 486723, 3798256; 486783, 3798256; 486783, 3798226; 486813, 
3798226; 486813, 3798166; 486843, 3798166; 486843, 3798106; 486873, 
3798106; 486873, 3797986; 486843, 3797986; 486843, 3797956; 486813, 
3797956; 486813, 3797926; 486783, 3797926; 486783, 3797716; 486813, 
3797716; 486813, 3797656; 486843, 3797656; 486843, 3797626; 486873, 
3797626; 486873, 3797596; 486903, 3797596; 486903, 3797566; 486963, 
3797566; 486963, 3797536; 487023, 3797536; 487023, 3797506; 487083, 
3797506; 487083, 3797476; 487143, 3797476; 487143, 3797446; 487263, 
3797446; 487263, 3797416; 487323, 3797416; 487323, 3797386; 487353, 
3797386; 487353, 3797326; 487383, 3797326; 487383, 3797296; 487413, 
3797296; 487413, 3797266; 487473, 3797266; 487473, 3797236; 487443, 
3797236; 487443, 3797206; 487353, 3797206; 487353, 3797176; 487323, 
3797176; 487323, 3797146; 487293, 3797146; 487293, 3797116; 487263, 
3797116; 487263, 3797026; 487293, 3797026; 487293, 3796996; 487323, 
3796996; 487323, 3796906; 487353, 3796906; 487353, 3796816; 487383, 
3796816; 487383, 3796756; 487413, 3796756; 487413, 3796546; 487383, 
3796546; 487383, 3796516; 487353, 3796516; 487353, 3796486; 487293, 
3796486; 487293, 3796426; 487263, 3796426; 487263, 3796396; 487293, 
3796396; 487293, 3796366; 487383, 3796366; 487383, 3796336; 487533, 
3796336; 487533, 3796306; 487593, 3796306; 487593, 3796276; 487623, 
3796276; 487623, 3796246; 487653, 3796246; 487653, 3796216; 487863, 
3796216; 487863, 3796186; 487893, 3796186; 487893, 3796156; 487953, 
3796156; 487953, 3796126; 487983, 3796126; 487983, 3796096; 488013, 
3796096; 488013, 3796066; 488043, 3796066; 488043, 3795916; 488073, 
3795916; 488073, 3795886; 488193, 3795886; 488193, 3795796; 488223, 
3795796; 488223, 3795706; 488253, 3795706; 488253, 3795676; 488283, 
3795676; 488283, 3795646; 488343, 3795646; 488343, 3795616; 488373, 
3795616; 488373, 3795646; 488433, 3795646; 488433, 3795616; 488553, 
3795616; 488553, 3795586; 488583, 3795586; 488583, 3795556; 488613, 
3795556; 488613, 3795526; 488643, 3795526; 488643, 3795406; 488673, 
3795406; 488673, 3795196; 488643, 3795196; 488643, 3795016; 488583, 
3795016; 488583, 3794986; 488553, 3794986; 488553, 3794956; 488523, 
3794956; 488523, 3794866; 488493, 3794866; 488493, 3794836; 488463, 
3794836; 488463, 3794746; 488493, 3794746; 488493, 3794686; 488463, 
3794686; 488463, 3794596; 488433, 3794596; 488433, 3794506; 488403, 
3794506; 488403, 3794476; 488373, 3794476; 488373, 3794446; 488343, 
3794446; 488343, 3794416; 488283, 3794416; 488283, 3794386; 488253, 
3794386; 488253, 3794356; 488283, 3794356; 488283, 3794326; 488313, 
3794326; 488313, 3794296; 488343, 3794296; 488343, 3794236; 488373, 
3794236; 488373, 3794206; 488403, 3794206; 488403, 3794086; 488433, 
3794086; 488433, 3794056; 488403, 3794056; 488403, 3794026; 488343, 
3794026; 488343, 3793996; 488313, 3793996; 488313, 3794086; 488283, 
3794086; 488283, 3794146; 488253, 3794146; 488253, 3794176; 488223, 
3794176; 488223, 3794206; 488193, 3794206; 488193, 3794236; 488133, 
3794236; 488133, 3794356; 488103, 3794356; 488103, 3794386; 488133, 
3794386; 488133, 3794476; 488163, 3794476; 488163, 3794506; 488223, 
3794506; 488223, 3794536; 488253, 3794536; 488253, 3794566; 488283, 
3794566; 488283, 3794656; 488313, 3794656; 488313, 3794686; 488343, 
3794686; 488343, 3794896; 488373, 3794896; 488373, 3794956; 488403, 
3794956; 488403, 3794986; 488433, 3794986; 488433, 3795016; 488463, 
3795016; 488463, 3795076; 488493, 3795076; 488493, 3795226; 488463, 
3795226; 488463, 3795256; 488433, 3795256; 488433, 3795286; 488403, 
3795286; 488403, 3795316; 488373, 3795316; 488373, 3795346; 488403, 
3795346; 488403, 3795376; 488433,

[[Page 487]]

3795376; 488433, 3795436; 488463, 3795436; 488463, 3795496; 488313, 
3795496; 488313, 3795466; 488223, 3795466; 488223, 3795496; 488163, 
3795496; 488163, 3795526; 488133, 3795526; 488133, 3795556; 488103, 
3795556; 488103, 3795616; 488073, 3795616; 488073, 3795736; 488043, 
3795736; 488043, 3795796; 487983, 3795796; 487983, 3795826; 487953, 
3795826; 487953, 3795976; 487923, 3795976; 487923, 3796036; 487893, 
3796036; 487893, 3796066; 487833, 3796066; 487833, 3796036; 487623, 
3796036; 487623, 3796066; 487593, 3796066; 487593, 3796096; 487563, 
3796096; 487563, 3796156; 487533, 3796156; 487533, 3796186; 487503, 
3796186; 487503, 3796216; 487353, 3796216; 487353, 3796246; 487293, 
3796246; 487293, 3796276; 487173, 3796276; 487173, 3796336; 487143, 
3796336; 487143, 3796456; 487173, 3796456; 487173, 3796516; 487203, 
3796516; 487203, 3796576; 487293, 3796576; 487293, 3796636; 487323, 
3796636; 487323, 3796696; 487293, 3796696; 487293, 3796756; 487263, 
3796756; 487263, 3796816; 487233, 3796816; 487233, 3796936; 487203, 
3796936; 487203, 3796966; 487173, 3796966; 487173, 3796996; 487143, 
3796996; 487143, 3797176; 487173, 3797176; 487173, 3797236; 487203, 
3797236; 487203, 3797296; 487173, 3797296; 487173, 3797326; 487053, 
3797326; 487053, 3797386; 486963, 3797386; 486963, 3797416; 486903, 
3797416; 486903, 3797446; 486843, 3797446; 486843, 3797476; 486813, 
3797476; 486813, 3797506; 486753, 3797506; 486753, 3797536; 486693, 
3797536; 486693, 3797596; 486663, 3797596; 486663, 3797626; 486633, 
3797626; 486633, 3797656; 486603, 3797656; 486603, 3797686; 486573, 
3797686; 486573, 3797716; 486543, 3797716; 486543, 3797836; 486513, 
3797836; 486513, 3797956; 486543, 3797956; 486543, 3798016; 486603, 
3798016; 486603, 3798046; 486663, 3798046; 486663, 3798076; 486723, 
3798076; 486723, 3798106; 486693, 3798106; 486693, 3798136; 486663, 
3798136; 486663, 3798166; 486633, 3798166; 486633, 3798196; 486603, 
3798196; 486603, 3798226; 486573, 3798226; 486573, 3798256; 486543, 
3798256; 486543, 3798286; 486513, 3798286; 486513, 3798316; 486483, 
3798316; 486483, 3798346; 486363, 3798346; 486363, 3798316; 486333, 
3798316; 486333, 3798286; 486303, 3798286; 486303, 3798256; 486273, 
3798256; 486273, 3798226; 486243, 3798226; 486243, 3798196; 486213, 
3798196; 486213, 3798166; 486183, 3798166; 486183, 3798106; 486153, 
3798106; 486153, 3798076; 486123, 3798076; 486123, 3798046; 486063, 
3798046; 486063, 3798016; 486003, 3798016; 486003, 3798106; 485973, 
3798106; 485973, 3798166; 485943, 3798166; 485943, 3798256; 485913, 
3798256; 485913, 3798316; 485523, 3798316; 485523, 3798346; 485493, 
3798346; 485493, 3798376; 485463, 3798376; 485463, 3798406; 485433, 
3798406; 485433, 3798436; 485373, 3798436; 485373, 3798466; 485343, 
3798466; 485343, 3798496; 485313, 3798496; 485313, 3798526; 485283, 
3798526; 485283, 3798556; 485253, 3798556; 485253, 3798586; 485223, 
3798586; 485223, 3798646; 485193, 3798646; 485193, 3798676; 485163, 
3798676; 485163, 3798736; 485133, 3798736; 485133, 3798766; 485103, 
3798766; 485103, 3798796; 485043, 3798796; 485043, 3798826; 484953, 
3798826; 484953, 3798856; 484983, 3798856; 484983, 3798886; 485013, 
3798886; 485013, 3798916; 485043, 3798916; 485043, 3798946; 485073, 
3798946; 485073, 3799096; 485103, 3799096; 485103, 3799126; 485133, 
3799126; 485133, 3799156; 485193, 3799156; 485193, 3799186; 485223, 
3799186; 485223, 3799216; 485253, 3799216; 485253, 3799276; 485223, 
3799276; 485223, 3799306; 485193, 3799306; 485193, 3799336; 485103, 
3799336; 485103, 3799396; 485073, 3799396; 485073, 3799426; 485043, 
3799426; 485043, 3799456; 485013, 3799456; 485013, 3799486; 484923, 
3799486; 484923, 3799516; 484863, 3799516; 484863, 3799546; 484773, 
3799546; 484773, 3799576; 484743, 3799576; 484743, 3799636; 484713, 
3799636; 484713, 3799666; 484473, 3799666; 484473, 3799696; 484413, 
3799696; 484413, 3799726; 484383, 3799726; 484383, 3799756; 484353, 
3799756; 484353, 3799786; 484323, 3799786; 484323, 3799846; 484293, 
3799846; 484293, 3799876; 484263, 3799876; 484263, 3799936; 484233, 
3799936; 484233, 3799966; 484143, 3799966; 484143, 3799936; 484113, 
3799936; 484113, 3799966; 484083, 3799966; 484083, 3799936; 484053, 
3799936; 484053, 3799966; 483993, 3799966; 483993, 3799996; 483963, 
3799996; 483963, 3800026; 483933, 3800026; 483933, 3800056; 483903, 
3800056; 483903, 3800116; 483873, 3800116; 483873, 3800176; 483813, 
3800176; 483813, 3800146; 483723, 3800146; 483723, 3800026; 483753, 
3800026; 483753, 3799936; 483783, 3799936; 483783, 3799876; 483813, 
3799876; 483813, 3799816; 483783, 3799816; 483783, 3799786; 483753, 
3799786; 483753, 3799756; 483693, 3799756; 483693, 3799726; 483543, 
3799726; 483543, 3799756; 483423, 3799756; 483423, 3799816; 483393, 
3799816; 483393, 3799876; 483363, 3799876; 483363, 3800086; 483333, 
3800086; 483333, 3800146; 483303, 3800146; 483303, 3800176; 483243, 
3800176; 483243, 3800086; 483183, 3800086; 483183, 3800056; 483123, 
3800056; 483123, 3800026; 483063, 3800026; 483063, 3799996; 482913, 
3799996; 482913, 3799966; 482883, 3799966; 482883, 3799996; 482823, 
3799996; 482823, 3800026; 482793, 3800026; 482793, 3800056; 482733, 
3800056; 482733, 3800086; 482703, 3800086; 482703, 3800116; 482673, 
3800116; 482673, 3800146; 482613, 3800146; 482613, 3800116; 482583, 
3800116; 482583, 3800086; 482553, 3800086; 482553, 3799936; 482583, 
3799936; 482583, 3799876; 482553, 3799876; 482553, 3799846; 482523, 
3799846; 482523, 3799816; 482493, 3799816; 482493, 3799786; 482433, 
3799786; 482433, 3799606; 482403, 3799606; 482403, 3799576; 482433, 
3799576; 482433, 3799516; 482463, 3799516; 482463, 3799426; 482493, 
3799426; 482493, 3799156; 482523, 3799156; 482523, 3799066; 482493, 
3799066; 482493, 3799006; 482523, 3799006; 482523, 3798976; 482553, 
3798976; 482553, 3798826; 482583, 3798826; 482583, 3798796; 482553, 
3798796; 482553, 3798676; 482583, 3798676; 482583, 3798646; 482553, 
3798646; 482553, 3798466; 482463, 3798466; 482463, 3798346; 482493, 
3798346; 482493, 3798316; 482463, 3798316; 482463, 3798256; 482433, 
3798256; 482433, 3798046; 482403, 3798046; 482403, 3797986; 482373, 
3797986; 482373, 3797926; 482313, 3797926; 482313, 3797896; 482283, 
3797896; 482283, 3797776; 482253, 3797776; 482253, 3797686; 482223, 
3797686; 482223, 3797656; 482193, 3797656; 482193, 3797626; 482223, 
3797626; 482223, 3797566; 482163, 3797566; 482163, 3797596; 482103, 
3797596; 482103, 3797536; 482163, 3797536; 482163, 3797506; 482193, 
3797506; 482193, 3797446; 482163, 3797446; 482163, 3797266; 482133, 
3797266; 482133, 3797206; 481983, 3797206; 481983, 3797176; 481953, 
3797176; 481953, 3797146; 481923, 3797146; 481923, 3797116; 481833, 
3797116; 481833, 3797056; 481803, 3797056; 481803, 3797026; 481773, 
3797026; 481773, 3796936; 481743, 3796936; 481743, 3796846; 481713, 
3796846; 481713, 3796786; 481683, 3796786; 481683, 3796726; 481653, 
3796726; 481653, 3796666; 481623,

[[Page 488]]

3796666; 481623, 3796546; 481593, 3796546; 481593, 3796516; 481563, 
3796516; 481563, 3796456; 481533, 3796456; 481533, 3796396; 481503, 
3796396; 481503, 3796366; 481473, 3796366; 481473, 3796396; 481413, 
3796396; 481413, 3796456; 481383, 3796456; 481383, 3796546; 481353, 
3796546; 481353, 3796666; 481323, 3796666; 481323, 3796726; 481293, 
3796726; 481293, 3796786; 481323, 3796786; 481323, 3796846; 481293, 
3796846; 481293, 3796876; 481233, 3796876; 481233, 3796906; 481173, 
3796906; 481173, 3796936; 481143, 3796936; 481143, 3796966; 481083, 
3796966; 481083, 3796996; 480963, 3796996; 480963, 3797026; 480933, 
3797026; 480933, 3797056; 480963, 3797056; 480963, 3797086; 481053, 
3797086; 481053, 3797116; 481083, 3797116; 481083, 3797086; 481113, 
3797086; 481113, 3797056; 481203, 3797056; 481203, 3797026; 481293, 
3797026; 481293, 3797056; 481323, 3797056; 481323, 3797086; 481353, 
3797086; 481353, 3797326; 481383, 3797326; 481383, 3797386; 481323, 
3797386; 481323, 3797506; 481353, 3797506; 481353, 3797536; 481383, 
3797536; 481383, 3797596; 481473, 3797596; 481473, 3797566; 481533, 
3797566; 481533, 3797596; 481563, 3797596; 481563, 3797626; 481593, 
3797626; 481593, 3797686; 481623, 3797686; 481623, 3797716; 481683, 
3797716; 481683, 3797836; 481653, 3797836; 481653, 3797956; 481683, 
3797956; 481683, 3797986; 481713, 3797986; 481713, 3797956; 481773, 
3797956; 481773, 3797926; 481863, 3797926; 481863, 3797956; 481923, 
3797956; 481923, 3798016; 481953, 3798016; 481953, 3797926; 482043, 
3797926; 482043, 3797896; 482073, 3797896; 482073, 3797776; 482103, 
3797776; 482103, 3797806; 482133, 3797806; 482133, 3797896; 482163, 
3797896; 482163, 3797986; 482193, 3797986; 482193, 3798016; 482223, 
3798016; 482223, 3798046; 482283, 3798046; 482283, 3798106; 482313, 
3798106; 482313, 3798226; 482283, 3798226; 482283, 3798466; 482313, 
3798466; 482313, 3798526; 482343, 3798526; 482343, 3798556; 482373, 
3798556; 482373, 3798736; 482403, 3798736; 482403, 3798796; 482433, 
3798796; 482433, 3798886; 482403, 3798886; 482403, 3798946; 482373, 
3798946; 482373, 3799006; 482403, 3799006; 482403, 3799036; 482373, 
3799036; 482373, 3799216; 482403, 3799216; 482403, 3799306; 482373, 
3799306; 482373, 3799426; 482343, 3799426; 482343, 3799546; 482313, 
3799546; 482313, 3799726; 482343, 3799726; 482343, 3799756; 482313, 
3799756; 482313, 3799786; 482343, 3799786; 482343, 3799846; 482373, 
3799846; 482373, 3799876; 482433, 3799876; 482433, 3799966; 482403, 
3799966; 482403, 3800056; 482373, 3800056; 482373, 3800086; 482343, 
3800086; 482343, 3800176; 482313, 3800176; 482313, 3800206; 482283, 
3800206; 482283, 3800236; 482223, 3800236; 482223, 3800266; 482193, 
3800266; 482193, 3800296; 482163, 3800296; 482163, 3800326; 482133, 
3800326; 482133, 3800386; 482073, 3800386; 482073, 3800296; 482043, 
3800296; 482043, 3800206; 482013, 3800206; 482013, 3800176; 481983, 
3800176; 481983, 3800146; 481923, 3800146; 481923, 3800116; 481833, 
3800116; 481833, 3800146; 481803, 3800146; 481803, 3800176; 481743, 
3800176; 481743, 3800206; 481683, 3800206; 481683, 3800176; 481593, 
3800176; 481593, 3800146; 481533, 3800146; 481533, 3800116; 481233, 
3800116; 481233, 3800086; 481203, 3800086; 481203, 3800056; 481173, 
3800056; 481173, 3800026; 481143, 3800026; 481143, 3799996; 481113, 
3799996; 481113, 3800026; 481023, 3800026; 481023, 3799996; 480963, 
3799996; 480963, 3799966; 480903, 3799966; 480903, 3799936; 480873, 
3799936; 480873, 3799906; 480813, 3799906; 480813, 3799876; 480753, 
3799876; 480753, 3799906; 480603, 3799906; 480603, 3799936; 480573, 
3799936; 480573, 3799966; 480543, 3799966; 480543, 3799996; 480513, 
3799996; 480513, 3800026; 480483, 3800026; 480483, 3800056; 480363, 
3800056; 480363, 3800086; 480333, 3800086; 480333, 3800056; 480273, 
3800056; 480273, 3800026; 480153, 3800026; 480153, 3799996; 480123, 
3799996; 480123, 3799966; 480063, 3799966; 480063, 3799936; 479853, 
3799936; 479853, 3799966; 479823, 3799966; 479823, 3799996; 479763, 
3799996; 479763, 3800056; 479733, 3800056; 479733, 3800116; 479703, 
3800116; 479703, 3800146; 479553, 3800146; 479553, 3800086; 479523, 
3800086; 479523, 3799996; 479493, 3799996; 479493, 3799936; 479523, 
3799936; 479523, 3799906; 479553, 3799906; 479553, 3799846; 479463, 
3799846; 479463, 3799816; 479433, 3799816; 479433, 3799786; 479403, 
3799786; 479403, 3799756; 479373, 3799756; 479373, 3799726; 479343, 
3799726; 479343, 3799696; 479313, 3799696; 479313, 3799726; 479253, 
3799726; 479253, 3799786; 479223, 3799786; 479223, 3799816; 479193, 
3799816; 479193, 3799846; 479163, 3799846; 479163, 3799906; 479133, 
3799906; 479133, 3800086; 479103, 3800086; 479103, 3800236; 479073, 
3800236; 479073, 3800266; 479043, 3800266; 479043, 3800296; 478983, 
3800296; 478983, 3800236; 478953, 3800236; 478953, 3800206; 478923, 
3800206; 478923, 3800086; 478893, 3800086; 478893, 3800056; 478683, 
3800056; 478683, 3800086; 478653, 3800086; 478653, 3800056; 478593, 
3800056; 478593, 3800026; 478503, 3800026; 478503, 3799996; 478443, 
3799996; 478443, 3799966; 478413, 3799966; 478413, 3799936; 478353, 
3799936; 478353, 3799966; 478113, 3799966; 478113, 3799936; 477933, 
3799936; 477933, 3799906; 477903, 3799906; 477903, 3799876; 477723, 
3799876; 477723, 3799906; 477693, 3799906; 477693, 3799876; 477633, 
3799876; 477633, 3799846; 477603, 3799846; 477603, 3799816; 477573, 
3799816; 477573, 3799786; 477543, 3799786; 477543, 3799756; 477513, 
3799756; 477513, 3799696; 477483, 3799696; 477483, 3799666; 477423, 
3799666; 477423, 3799636; 477363, 3799636; 477363, 3799606; 477273, 
3799606; 477273, 3799576; 477243, 3799576; 477243, 3799456; 477213, 
3799456; 477213, 3799396; 477183, 3799396; 477183, 3799336; 477123, 
3799336; 477123, 3799306; 477093, 3799306; 477093, 3799216; 477063, 
3799216; 477063, 3799156; 477003, 3799156; 477003, 3799186; 476973, 
3799186; 476973, 3799216; 476913, 3799216; 476913, 3799246; 476823, 
3799246; 476823, 3799216; 476793, 3799216; 476793, 3799186; 476763, 
3799186; 476763, 3799156; 476733, 3799156; 476733, 3799216; 476703, 
3799216; 476703, 3799306; 476673, 3799306; 476673, 3799366; 476643, 
3799366; 476643, 3799396; 476523, 3799396; 476523, 3799366; 476463, 
3799366; 476463, 3799396; 476433, 3799396; 476433, 3799336; 476403, 
3799336; 476403, 3799276; 476373, 3799276; 476373, 3799216; 476343, 
3799216; 476343, 3799156; 476313, 3799156; 476313, 3799126; 476253, 
3799126; 476253, 3799276; 476133, 3799276; 476133, 3799306; 476103, 
3799306; 476103, 3799276; 476043, 3799276; 476043, 3799306; 476013, 
3799306; 476013, 3799336; 475983, 3799336; 475983, 3799366; 475893, 
3799366; 475893, 3799336; 475863, 3799336; 475863, 3799306; 475412, 
3799303; 475384, 3799122; 475392, 3798424; 475393, 3798365; 475395, 
3798344; 475565, 3797970; 475611, 3797843; 475886, 3797689; 475892, 
3797686; 475923, 3797686; 475923, 3797656; 475953, 3797656; 475953, 
3797626; 475983, 3797626; 475983,

[[Page 489]]

3797506; 475953, 3797506; 475953, 3797476; 475923, 3797476; 475923, 
3797446; 475803, 3797446; 475803, 3797401; 475803, 3797386; 475773, 
3797386; 475773, 3797356; 475743, 3797356; 475743, 3797386; 475653, 
3797386; 475653, 3797401; 475653, 3797446; 475623, 3797446; 475623, 
3797476; 475593, 3797476; 475593, 3797506; 475443, 3797506; 475443, 
3797476; 475413, 3797476; 475413, 3797416; 475383, 3797416; 475383, 
3797236; 475413, 3797236; 475413, 3797206; 475443, 3797206; 475443, 
3797116; 475473, 3797116; 475473, 3797086; 475443, 3797086; 475443, 
3797056; 475353, 3797056; 475353, 3797086; 475323, 3797086; 475323, 
3797146; 475233, 3797146; 475233, 3797176; 475203, 3797176; 475203, 
3797206; 475173, 3797206; 475173, 3797296; 475143, 3797296; 475143, 
3797326; 475113, 3797326; 475113, 3797236; 475143, 3797236; 475143, 
3797206; 475113, 3797206; 475113, 3797176; 475053, 3797176; 475053, 
3797146; 474993, 3797146; 474993, 3797086; 474963, 3797086; 474963, 
3797056; 474933, 3797056; 474933, 3797026; 474843, 3797026; 474843, 
3797086; 474873, 3797086; 474873, 3797146; 474903, 3797146; 474903, 
3797236; 474723, 3797236; 474723, 3797266; 474717, 3797266; 474693, 
3797266; 474693, 3797386; 474663, 3797386; 474663, 3797416; 474633, 
3797416; 474633, 3797446; 474603, 3797446; 474603, 3797476; 474590, 
3797476; 474573, 3797476; 474573, 3797506; 474543, 3797506; 474543, 
3797596; 474573, 3797596; 474573, 3797626; 474590, 3797626; 474603, 
3797626; 474603, 3797656; 474633, 3797656; 474633, 3797686; 474693, 
3797686; 474693, 3797746; 474723, 3797746; 474723, 3797806; 474693, 
3797806; 474693, 3797836; 474663, 3797836; 474663, 3797866; 474633, 
3797866; 474633, 3797896; 474603, 3797896; 474603, 3797986; 474591, 
3797986; 474573, 3797986; 474573, 3798016; 474543, 3798016; 474543, 
3798046; 474513, 3798046; 474513, 3798076; 474483, 3798076; 474483, 
3798106; 474393, 3798106; 474393, 3798136; 474333, 3798136; 474333, 
3798166; 474183, 3798166; 474183, 3798196; 474153, 3798196; 474153, 
3798226; 474123, 3798226; 474123, 3798256; 474093, 3798256; 474093, 
3798226; 474063, 3798226; 474063, 3798046; 474093, 3798046; 474093, 
3797986; 474123, 3797986; 474123, 3797896; 474153, 3797896; 474153, 
3797836; 474213, 3797836; 474213, 3797746; 474243, 3797746; 474243, 
3797686; 474273, 3797686; 474273, 3797656; 474303, 3797656; 474303, 
3797596; 474333, 3797596; 474333, 3797536; 474363, 3797536; 474363, 
3797476; 474333, 3797476; 474333, 3797416; 474213, 3797416; 474213, 
3797446; 474033, 3797446; 474033, 3797416; 473913, 3797416; 473913, 
3797476; 473823, 3797476; 473823, 3797386; 473793, 3797386; 473793, 
3797356; 473733, 3797356; 473733, 3797326; 473703, 3797326; 473703, 
3797356; 473673, 3797356; 473673, 3797446; 473673, 3797506; 473696, 
3797506; 473703, 3797506; 473703, 3797570; 473703, 3797596; 473553, 
3797596; 473553, 3797566; 473433, 3797566; 473433, 3797536; 473403, 
3797536; 473403, 3797506; 473373, 3797506; 473373, 3797386; 473403, 
3797386; 473403, 3797356; 473433, 3797356; 473433, 3797176; 473403, 
3797176; 473403, 3797116; 473373, 3797116; 473373, 3797086; 473343, 
3797086; 473343, 3797056; 473313, 3797056; 473313, 3797026; 473253, 
3797026; 473253, 3796999; 473253, 3796996; 473245, 3796996; 473223, 
3796996; 473223, 3796987; 473223, 3796966; 473193, 3796966; 473193, 
3796936; 473163, 3796936; 473163, 3796906; 473103, 3796906; 473103, 
3796876; 473073, 3796876; 473073, 3796846; 473043, 3796846; 473043, 
3796816; 473019, 3796816; 472983, 3796816; 472983, 3796786; 472953, 
3796786; 472953, 3796756; 472893, 3796756; 472893, 3796726; 472833, 
3796726; 472833, 3796700; 472833, 3796696; 472773, 3796696; 472773, 
3796666; 472683, 3796666; 472683, 3796636; 472623, 3796636; 472623, 
3796606; 472533, 3796606; 472533, 3796576; 472443, 3796576; 472443, 
3796546; 472293, 3796546; 472293, 3796516; 471753, 3796516; 471753, 
3796486; 471723, 3796486; 471723, 3796456; 471693, 3796456; 471693, 
3796426; 471662, 3796426; 471578, 3796412; 471549, 3796410; 471408, 
3796402; 471265, 3796402; 471095, 3796423; 470867, 3796470; 470769, 
3796494; 470768, 3796498; 470812, 3796631; 470759, 3796733; 470407, 
3796733; 470399, 3796877; 470311, 3796874; 470135, 3796812; 470115, 
3796781; 470021, 3796771; 469959, 3796694; 470059, 3796592; 470348, 
3796592; 470251, 3796410; 470185, 3796374; 470059, 3796332; 469938, 
3796317; 469814, 3796319; 469740, 3796312; 469474, 3796314; 469422, 
3796251; 469145, 3796156; 468633, 3796156; 468633, 3796186; 468543, 
3796186; 468543, 3796216; 468513, 3796216; 468513, 3796246; 468483, 
3796246; 468483, 3796276; 468423, 3796276; 468423, 3796306; 468363, 
3796306; 468363, 3796336; 468303, 3796336; 468303, 3796366; 468243, 
3796366; 468243, 3796396; 468183, 3796396; 468183, 3796426; 468153, 
3796426; 468153, 3796456; 468033, 3796456; 468033, 3796486; 467943, 
3796486; 467943, 3796456; 467913, 3796456; 467913, 3796396; 467883, 
3796396; 467883, 3796366; 467763, 3796366; 467763, 3796396; 467643, 
3796396; 467643, 3796426; 467613, 3796426; 467613, 3796456; 467583, 
3796456; 467583, 3796486; 467553, 3796486; 467553, 3796516; 467523, 
3796516; 467523, 3796546; 467493, 3796546; 467493, 3796576; 467433, 
3796576; 467433, 3796606; 467373, 3796606; 467373, 3796636; 467313, 
3796636; 467313, 3796666; 467253, 3796666; 467253, 3796696; 467163, 
3796696; 467163, 3796666; 467073, 3796666; 467073, 3796636; 466983, 
3796636; 466983, 3796606; 466953, 3796606; 466953, 3796576; 466803, 
3796576; 466803, 3796546; 466743, 3796546; 466743, 3796516; 466653, 
3796516; 466653, 3796486; 466413, 3796486; 466413, 3796456; 466383, 
3796456; 466383, 3796426; 466263, 3796426; 466263, 3796396; 466233, 
3796396; 466233, 3796366; 466203, 3796366; 466203, 3796306; 466143, 
3796306; 466143, 3796276; 465993, 3796276; 465993, 3796246; 465933, 
3796246; 465933, 3796216; 465843, 3796216; 465843, 3796186; 465753, 
3796186; 465753, 3796156; 465723, 3796156; 465723, 3796126; 465633, 
3796126; 465633, 3796096; 465603, 3796096; 465603, 3796066; 465543, 
3796066; 465543, 3796036; 465483, 3796036; 465483, 3795976; 465423, 
3795976; 465423, 3795946; 465333, 3795946; 465333, 3796006; 465363, 
3796006; 465363, 3796036; 465273, 3796036; 465273, 3796006; 465243, 
3796006; 465243, 3795946; 465183, 3795946; 465183, 3795976; 465153, 
3795976; 465153, 3796006; 465123, 3796006; 465123, 3795976; 465093, 
3795976; 465093, 3796006; 465003, 3796006; 465003, 3796036; 464823, 
3796036; 464823, 3796066; 464793, 3796066; 464793, 3796156; 464763, 
3796156; 464763, 3796186; 464673, 3796186; 464673, 3796156; 464613, 
3796156; 464613, 3796186; 464553, 3796186; 464553, 3796216; 464523, 
3796216; 464523, 3796246; 464433, 3796246; 464433, 3796276; 464403, 
3796276; 464403, 3796306; 464343, 3796306; 464343, 3796336; 464313, 
3796336; 464313, 3796396; 464283, 3796396; 464283, 3796426; 464223, 
3796426; 464223, 3796456; 464103, 3796456; 464103, 3796486; 464013, 
3796486; 464013, 3796516; 463953,

[[Page 490]]

3796516; 463953, 3796546; 463893, 3796546; 463893, 3796576; 463863, 
3796576; 463863, 3796606; 463833, 3796606; 463833, 3796636; 463743, 
3796636; 463743, 3796726; 463623, 3796726; 463623, 3796696; 463533, 
3796696; 463533, 3796726; 463353, 3796726; 463353, 3796756; 463203, 
3796756; 463203, 3796786; 463143, 3796786; 463143, 3796816; 463083, 
3796816; 463083, 3796846; 462993, 3796846; 462993, 3796876; 462933, 
3796876; 462933, 3796846; 462873, 3796846; 462873, 3796876; 462753, 
3796876; 462753, 3796846; 462573, 3796846; 462573, 3796816; 462483, 
3796816; 462483, 3796846; 462423, 3796846; 462423, 3796876; 462513, 
3796876; 462513, 3796906; 462573, 3796906; 462573, 3796966; 462603, 
3796966; 462603, 3796996; 462633, 3796996; 462633, 3797026; 462663, 
3797026; 462663, 3797116; 462633, 3797116; 462633, 3797146; 462483, 
3797146; 462483, 3797176; 462393, 3797176; 462393, 3797206; 462303, 
3797206; 462303, 3797236; 462153, 3797236; 462153, 3797296; 462033, 
3797296; 462033, 3797386; 462063, 3797386; 462063, 3797446; 462093, 
3797446; 462093, 3797506; 462063, 3797506; 462063, 3797536; 461943, 
3797536; 461943, 3797506; 461883, 3797506; 461883, 3797536; 461853, 
3797536; 461853, 3797566; 461793, 3797566; 461793, 3797536; 461673, 
3797536; 461673, 3797566; 461433, 3797566; 461433, 3797596; 461373, 
3797596; 461373, 3797656; 461403, 3797656; 461403, 3797686; 461493, 
3797686; 461493, 3797716; 461553, 3797716; 461553, 3797746; 461583, 
3797746; 461583, 3797716; 461793, 3797716; 461793, 3797746; 461943, 
3797746; 461943, 3797716; 462003, 3797716; 462003, 3797746; 462153, 
3797746; 462153, 3797716; 462183, 3797716; 462183, 3797686; 462213, 
3797686; 462213, 3797596; 462243, 3797596; 462243, 3797566; 462273, 
3797566; 462273, 3797536; 462363, 3797536; 462363, 3797476; 462423, 
3797476; 462423, 3797446; 462453, 3797446; 462453, 3797476; 462483, 
3797476; 462483, 3797446; 462513, 3797446; 462513, 3797416; 462633, 
3797416; 462633, 3797386; 462693, 3797386; 462693, 3797416; 462753, 
3797416; 462753, 3797356; 462783, 3797356; 462783, 3797326; 462813, 
3797326; 462813, 3797266; 462843, 3797266; 462843, 3797236; 462873, 
3797236; 462873, 3797206; 462903, 3797206; 462903, 3797176; 462933, 
3797176; 462933, 3797146; 462993, 3797146; 462993, 3797176; 463023, 
3797176; 463023, 3797206; 463053, 3797206; 463053, 3797176; 463083, 
3797176; 463083, 3797146; 463113, 3797146; 463113, 3797116; 463143, 
3797116; 463143, 3797086; 463173, 3797086; 463173, 3797026; 463203, 
3797026; 463203, 3796996; 463353, 3796996; 463353, 3796966; 463413, 
3796966; 463413, 3796936; 463533, 3796936; 463533, 3796966; 463593, 
3796966; 463593, 3796936; 463743, 3796936; 463743, 3796966; 463773, 
3796966; 463773, 3796936; 463803, 3796936; 463803, 3796906; 463863, 
3796906; 463863, 3796876; 463953, 3796876; 463953, 3796846; 464013, 
3796846; 464013, 3796816; 464133, 3796816; 464133, 3796786; 464193, 
3796786; 464193, 3796756; 464313, 3796756; 464313, 3796726; 464433, 
3796726; 464433, 3796696; 464463, 3796696; 464463, 3796666; 464523, 
3796666; 464523, 3796636; 464643, 3796636; 464643, 3796606; 464733, 
3796606; 464733, 3796576; 464823, 3796576; 464823, 3796546; 464853, 
3796546; 464853, 3796516; 464973, 3796516; 464973, 3796546; 465033, 
3796546; 465033, 3796516; 465063, 3796516; 465063, 3796486; 465153, 
3796486; 465153, 3796456; 465183, 3796456; 465183, 3796426; 465273, 
3796426; 465273, 3796396; 465333, 3796396; 465333, 3796366; 465363, 
3796366; 465363, 3796306; 465423, 3796306; 465423, 3796276; 465483, 
3796276; 465483, 3796246; 465543, 3796246; 465543, 3796216; 465573, 
3796216; 465573, 3796336; 465543, 3796336; 465543, 3796426; 465603, 
3796426; 465603, 3796456; 465663, 3796456; 465663, 3796486; 465693, 
3796486; 465693, 3796516; 465813, 3796516; 465813, 3796546; 465843, 
3796546; 465843, 3796576; 465873, 3796576; 465873, 3796606; 465903, 
3796606; 465903, 3796636; 465993, 3796636; 465993, 3796666; 465903, 
3796666; 465903, 3796696; 465843, 3796696; 465843, 3796726; 465753, 
3796726; 465753, 3796756; 465723, 3796756; 465723, 3796786; 465753, 
3796786; 465753, 3796816; 465783, 3796816; 465783, 3796846; 465813, 
3796846; 465813, 3796876; 465873, 3796876; 465873, 3796906; 465933, 
3796906; 465933, 3796876; 466113, 3796876; 466113, 3796846; 466173, 
3796846; 466173, 3796816; 466233, 3796816; 466233, 3796846; 466323, 
3796846; 466323, 3796876; 466293, 3796876; 466293, 3796906; 466263, 
3796906; 466263, 3796936; 466113, 3796936; 466113, 3796966; 465903, 
3796966; 465903, 3796996; 465753, 3796996; 465753, 3797026; 465723, 
3797026; 465723, 3797086; 465663, 3797086; 465663, 3797116; 465603, 
3797116; 465603, 3797146; 465513, 3797146; 465513, 3797206; 465483, 
3797206; 465483, 3797236; 465453, 3797236; 465453, 3797266; 465363, 
3797266; 465363, 3797356; 465393, 3797356; 465393, 3797416; 465423, 
3797416; 465423, 3797446; 465483, 3797446; 465483, 3797476; 465543, 
3797476; 465543, 3797506; 465573, 3797506; 465573, 3797535; 465883, 
3797470; 466092, 3797420; 466293, 3797383; 466569, 3797325; 466760, 
3797279; 466967, 3797234; 467146, 3797193; 467227, 3797175; 467352, 
3797146; 467350, 3796851; 467675, 3796756; 467662, 3797070; 467662, 
3797078; 467773, 3797057; 467818, 3797048; 467966, 3797011; 468106, 
3796899; 468130, 3796869; 468236, 3796862; 468310, 3796824; 468345, 
3796798; 468454, 3796716; 468553, 3796713; 468553, 3796698; 468548, 
3796431; 468665, 3796406; 468948, 3796562; 469047, 3796627; 469047, 
3796696; 469047, 3796698; 469153, 3796760; 469155, 3796761; 469164, 
3796766; 469342, 3796758; 469383, 3796846; 469623, 3796846; 469623, 
3796876; 469683, 3796876; 469683, 3796906; 469743, 3796906; 469743, 
3796966; 469776, 3796966; 469803, 3796966; 469803, 3796996; 469863, 
3796996; 469863, 3797086; 469775, 3797086; 469773, 3797086; 469773, 
3797116; 469743, 3797116; 469743, 3797146; 469653, 3797146; 469653, 
3797176; 469713, 3797176; 469713, 3797206; 469653, 3797206; 469653, 
3797236; 469623, 3797236; 469623, 3797296; 469563, 3797296; 469563, 
3797326; 469533, 3797326; 469533, 3797356; 469473, 3797356; 469473, 
3797386; 469443, 3797386; 469443, 3797416; 469383, 3797416; 469383, 
3797446; 469323, 3797446; 469323, 3797476; 469383, 3797476; 469383, 
3797506; 469413, 3797506; 469413, 3797536; 469443, 3797536; 469443, 
3797566; 469503, 3797566; 469503, 3797626; 469533, 3797626; 469533, 
3797716; 469593, 3797716; 469593, 3797686; 469623, 3797686; 469623, 
3797656; 469713, 3797656; 469713, 3797686; 469770, 3797686; 469893, 
3797686; 469893, 3797716; 469983, 3797716; 469983, 3797806; 469953, 
3797806; 469953, 3797836; 469923, 3797836; 469923, 3797866; 469893, 
3797866; 469893, 3797895; 469893, 3797896; 469923, 3797896; 469923, 
3797926; 470013, 3797926; 470013, 3797956; 469953, 3797956; 469953, 
3797986; 469893, 3797986; 469893, 3798016; 469803, 3798016; 469803, 
3798046; 469773, 3798046; 469773, 3798076; 469767, 3798076; 469743, 
3798076; 469743, 3798106; 469767,

[[Page 491]]

3798106; 469893, 3798106; 469893, 3798136; 469923, 3798136; 469923, 
3798226; 470043, 3798226; 470043, 3798196; 470163, 3798196; 470163, 
3798226; 470223, 3798226; 470223, 3798297; 470223, 3798436; 470193, 
3798436; 470193, 3798496; 470163, 3798496; 470163, 3798616; 470253, 
3798616; 470253, 3798586; 470283, 3798586; 470283, 3798526; 470313, 
3798526; 470313, 3798496; 470343, 3798496; 470343, 3798466; 470403, 
3798466; 470403, 3798406; 470433, 3798406; 470433, 3798376; 470463, 
3798376; 470463, 3798346; 470493, 3798346; 470493, 3798298; 470493, 
3798286; 470523, 3798286; 470523, 3798226; 470553, 3798226; 470553, 
3798196; 470583, 3798196; 470583, 3798226; 470613, 3798226; 470613, 
3798196; 470645, 3798196; 470963, 3798300; 471034, 3798323; 471365, 
3798318; 471468, 3798316; 471584, 3798495; 471873, 3799006; 472053, 
3799006; 472053, 3799036; 472143, 3799036; 472143, 3799006; 472173, 
3799006; 472173, 3798976; 472203, 3798976; 472203, 3798946; 472263, 
3798946; 472263, 3798916; 472323, 3798916; 472323, 3798886; 472353, 
3798886; 472353, 3798856; 472383, 3798856; 472383, 3798826; 472443, 
3798826; 472443, 3798856; 472451, 3798856; 472473, 3798856; 472473, 
3798886; 472503, 3798886; 472503, 3798916; 472743, 3798916; 472743, 
3798946; 472893, 3798946; 472893, 3798976; 472923, 3798976; 472923, 
3799006; 472953, 3799006; 472953, 3798976; 473073, 3798976; 473073, 
3799006; 473193, 3799006; 473193, 3799036; 473264, 3799036; 473283, 
3799036; 473283, 3799049; 473283, 3799066; 473308, 3799066; 473343, 
3799066; 473343, 3799090; 473343, 3799096; 473352, 3799096; 473373, 
3799096; 473373, 3799110; 473373, 3799126; 473403, 3799126; 473403, 
3799156; 473433, 3799156; 473433, 3799186; 473493, 3799186; 473493, 
3799216; 473553, 3799216; 473553, 3799246; 473613, 3799246; 473613, 
3799276; 473643, 3799276; 473643, 3799306; 473703, 3799306; 473703, 
3799336; 473733, 3799336; 473733, 3799366; 473793, 3799366; 473793, 
3799396; 473823, 3799396; 473823, 3799426; 473883, 3799426; 473883, 
3799456; 473943, 3799456; 473943, 3799486; 474003, 3799486; 474003, 
3799516; 474033, 3799516; 474033, 3799546; 474063, 3799546; 474063, 
3799576; 474093, 3799576; 474093, 3799606; 474123, 3799606; 474123, 
3799636; 474153, 3799636; 474153, 3799666; 474213, 3799666; 474213, 
3799696; 474243, 3799696; 474243, 3799726; 474303, 3799726; 474303, 
3799756; 474363, 3799756; 474363, 3799786; 474423, 3799786; 474423, 
3799816; 474483, 3799816; 474483, 3799846; 474573, 3799846; 474573, 
3799876; 474753, 3799876; 474753, 3799846; 474783, 3799846; 474783, 
3799876; 474963, 3799876; 474963, 3799906; 475023, 3799906; 475023, 
3799936; 475143, 3799936; 475143, 3799966; 475203, 3799966; 475203, 
3799996; 475353, 3799996; 475353, 3800026; 475413, 3800026; 475413, 
3800056; 475473, 3800056; 475473, 3800086; 475563, 3800086; 475563, 
3800116; 475593, 3800116; 475593, 3800146; 475683, 3800146; 475683, 
3800176; 475803, 3800176; 475803, 3800206; 475953, 3800206; 475953, 
3800176; 476013, 3800176; 476013, 3800146; 476073, 3800146; 476073, 
3800116; 476103, 3800116; 476103, 3800086; 476313, 3800086; 476313, 
3800116; 476403, 3800116; 476403, 3800146; 476493, 3800146; 476493, 
3800176; 476553, 3800176; 476553, 3800206; 476613, 3800206; 476613, 
3800236; 476763, 3800236; 476763, 3800266; 476853, 3800266; 476853, 
3800236; 476973, 3800236; 476973, 3800266; 477123, 3800266; 477123, 
3800296; 477453, 3800296; 477453, 3800266; 477543, 3800266; 477543, 
3800236; 477603, 3800236; 477603, 3800206; 477633, 3800206; 477633, 
3800176; 477663, 3800176; 477663, 3800116; 477693, 3800116; 477693, 
3800026; 477873, 3800026; 477873, 3800056; 477993, 3800056; 477993, 
3800086; 478083, 3800086; 478083, 3800116; 478053, 3800116; 478053, 
3800146; 478023, 3800146; 478023, 3800236; 478053, 3800236; 478053, 
3800296; 478023, 3800296; 478023, 3800326; 477993, 3800326; 477993, 
3800386; 477963, 3800386; 477963, 3800416; 477956, 3800423; 477607, 
3800735; 477395, 3801178; 477400, 3801749; 477789, 3801753; 477948, 
3801309; 478062, 3800926; 478164, 3800353; 478203, 3800297; 478203, 
3800266; 478383, 3800266; 478383, 3800236; 478353, 3800236; 478353, 
3800206; 478323, 3800206; returning to 478323, 3800176.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 22 is provided at paragraph (25)(iii) of this 
entry.

                    Houston Toad (Bufo houstonensis)

    Texas: Areas of land, water, and airspace as follows:
    (1) Bastrop County. From the junction of a line corresponding to 
30[deg]12[min]00[sec] N. and Texas State Highway 95 east along a line 
corresponding to 30[deg]12[min]00[sec] N. to where it intersects a line 
corresponding to 97[deg]7[min]30[sec] W. and south along a line 
corresponding to 97[deg]7[min]30[sec] W. to where it intersects the 
Colorado River, west and northwest along the north bank of the Colorado 
River to the due southward extension of Texas State Highway 95, and 
north along that extension and Texas State Highway 95 to where it 
intersects a line corresponding to 30[deg]12[min]00[sec] N.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.083
    
    (2) Burleson County. A circular area with a 1-mile radius, the 
center being the north entrance to Lake Woodrow from Texas FM 2000.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 492]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.084



    (e) Fishes.

                    Yaqui Catfish (Ictalurus pricei)

    Arizona, Cochise County. All aquatic habitats of San Bernardino NWR 
in S\1/2\ Sec. 11; Sec. 14; S\1/2\ and NE\1/4\ Sec. 15; T24S, R30E.
    Known constituent elements include clean unpolluted permanent water 
in streams with medium current with clear pools in the Rio Yaqui 
drainage. These waters should be without introduced exotic fishes.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.085
    
               Alabama Cavefish (Speoplatyrhinus poulsoni)

    Alabama. Lauderdale County. More Specific locality data for Federal 
agencies fulfilling their obligations under Section 7 of the Endangered 
Species Act of 1973 can be obtained from the Office of Endangered 
Species, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington, DC 20240.

    Note: No map.

                      Bonytail Chub (Gila elegans)

    Description of areas taken from the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) 
1:100,000 scale maps (available from BLM State Offices): Rangely, CO 
1989; Canyon of Lodore, CO 1990; Seep Ridge, UT/CO 1982; La Sal, UT/CO 
1985; Hite Crossing, UT 1982; Parker, AZ/CA 1980; Davis Dam, AZ/NV/CA 
1982; Boulder City, NV/AZ 1978; Needles, CA 1986.
    Colorado: Moffat County. The Yampa River from the boundary of 
Dinosaur National Monument in T.6N., R.99W., sec. 27 (6th Principal 
Meridian) to the confluence with the Green River in T.7N., R.103W., sec. 
28 (6th Principal Meridian).
    Utah: Uintah County; and Colorado: Moffat County. The Green River 
from the confluence with the Yampa River in T.7N., R.103W., sec. 28 (6th 
Principal Meridian) to the boundary of Dinosaur National Monument in 
T.6N., R.24E., sec. 30 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Utah: Uintah and Grand Counties. The Green River (Desolation and 
Gray Canyons) from Sumner's Amphitheater in T.12S., R.18E., sec. 5 (Salt 
Lake Meridian) to Swasey's Rapid in T.20S., R.16E., sec. 3 (Salt Lake 
Meridian).
    Utah: Grand County; and Colorado: Mesa County. The Colorado River 
from Black Rocks in T.10S., R.104W., sec. 25 (6th Principal Meridian) to 
Fish Ford in T.21S., R.24E., sec. 35 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Utah: Garfield and San Juan Counties. The Colorado River from Brown 
Betty Rapid in T.30S., R.18E., sec. 34 (Salt Lake Meridian) to Imperial 
Canyon in T.31S., R.17E., sec. 28 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Arizona: Mohave County; Nevada: Clark County; and California: San 
Bernardino County. The Colorado River from Hoover Dam in T.30N., R.23W., 
sec. 3 (Gila and Salt River Meridian) to Davis Dam in T.21N., R.21W., 
sec. 18 (Gila and Salt River Meridian) including Lake Mohave up to its 
full pool elevation.
    Arizona: Mohave County; and California: San Bernardino County. The 
Colorado River from the northern boundary of Havasu National Wildlife 
Refuge in R.22W., T.16N., sec. 1 (Gila and Salt River Meridian) to 
Parker Dam in T.11N., R.18W., sec. 16 (Gila and Salt River Meridian) 
including Lake Havasu up to its full pool elevation.
    Known constituent elements include water, physical habitat, and 
biological environment as required for each particular life stage for 
each species.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 493]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.086

                    Borax Lake Chub (Gila boraxobius)

    Oregon. Harney County. Borax Lake and environments associated with 
the outflow from Borax Lake located within SW\1/4\ Sec. 11, W\1/2\ Sec. 
14, E\3/4\ of the SE\1/4\ Sec. 15, and the SE\1/4\ of the NE\1/4\ Sec. 
15; T37S; R33E.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.087
    
                       Gila Chub (Gila intermedia)

    (1) Critical habitat for the Gila chub in Grant County, New Mexico, 
and Yavapai, Gila, Greenlee, Graham, Cochise, Pima, Santa Cruz, and 
Pinal Counties in Arizona is described in detail and depicted on the 
following maps below.
    (2) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements are the 
following:
    (i) Perennial pools, areas of higher velocity between pool areas, 
and areas of shallow water among plants or eddies all found in small 
segments of headwaters, springs, or cienegas of smaller tributaries;
    (ii) Water temperatures for spawning ranging from 17 to 24 [deg]C 
(62.6 to 75.2 [deg]F), and seasonally appropriate temperatures for all 
life stages (e.g., varying from approximately 10 [deg]C to 30 [deg]C);
    (iii) Water quality with reduced levels of contaminants, including 
excessive levels of sediments adverse to Gila chub health, and adequate 
levels of pH (e.g., ranging from 6.5 to 9.5), dissolved oxygen (e.g., 
ranging from 3.0 to 10.0) and conductivity (e.g., 100 to 1000 mmhos);
    (iv) Food base consisting of invertebrates (e.g., aquatic and 
terrestrial insects) and aquatic plants (e.g., diatoms and filamentous 
green algae);
    (v) Sufficient cover consisting of downed logs in the water channel, 
submerged aquatic vegetation, submerged large tree root wads, undercut 
banks with sufficient overhanging vegetation, large rocks and boulders 
with overhangs, and a high degree of streambank stability and healthy, 
intact riparian vegetative community;
    (vi) Habitat devoid of nonnative aquatic species detrimental to Gila 
chub or habitat in which detrimental nonnatives are kept at a level that 
allows Gila chub to continue to survive and reproduce; and
    (vii) Streams that maintain a natural flow pattern including 
periodic flooding.
    (3) Each stream segment includes a lateral component that consists 
of 300 feet on either side of the stream channel measured from the 
stream edge at bank full discharge. This lateral component of critical 
habitat is intended as a surrogate for the 100-year floodplain.
    (4) Lands located within the boundaries of the critical habitat 
designation, but are excluded by definition include: Existing paved 
roads; bridges; parking lots; dikes; levees; diversion structures; 
railroad tracks; railroad trestles; water diversion canals outside of 
natural stream channels; active gravel pits; cultivated agricultural 
land; and residential, commercial, and industrial developments. These 
developed areas do not contain any of the primary constituent elements, 
do not provide habitat or biological features essential to the 
conservation of the Gila chub, and generally will not contribute to the 
species' recovery.
    (5) Critical Habitat Map Areas. Data layers defining map areas, and 
mapping of critical habitat areas, was done using Arc GIS and verifying 
with USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles. Legal descriptions for New Mexico and 
Arizona are based on the Public Lands Survey System (PLSS). Within this 
system, all coordinates reported for New Mexico are in the New Mexico 
Principal Meridian (NMPM), while those in Arizona are in the Gila and 
Salt River Meridian (GSRM). Township has been abbreviated as ``T'', 
Range as ``R'', and section as

[[Page 494]]

``sec.'' Where possible, the ending or starting points have been 
described to the nearest quarter-section, abbreviated as ``\1/4\''. 
Cardinal directions are also abbreviated (N = North, S = South, W = 
West, and E = East). All mileage calculations were performed using GIS.
    (6) Note: Map 1 (index map) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO05.036
    

[[Page 495]]


    (7) Area 1: Upper Gila River--Grant County, New Mexico, and Greenlee 
County, Arizona.
    (i) Turkey Creek: 22.3 km (13.8 mi) of creek extending from the edge 
of the Gila Wilderness boundary at T14S, R16W, sec. 15 NW\1/4\ and 
continuing upstream to T13S, R15W, sec. 30 NE\1/4\. Land ownership: Gila 
National Forest and private.
    (ii) Eagle Creek and East Eagle Creek: 39.2 km (24.4 mi) of creek 
extending from its confluence with an unnamed tributary at T1N, R28E, 
sec. 31 SW\1/4\ upstream to the headwaters of East Eagle Creek just 
south of Highway 191 in T3N, R29E, sec. 28 SE\1/4\. Land ownership: 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest and private.
    (iii) Harden Cienega Creek: 22.6 km (14.0 mi) of creek extending 
from its confluence with the San Francisco River in GSRM T3S, R31E, sec. 
3 SE\1/4\ upstream to the headwaters in NMPM T14S, R21W, sec. 6 NE\1/4\. 
Land ownership: Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, Gila National Forest, 
and private.
    (iv) Dix Creek: Portions of the Creek beginning 1.0 mile upstream 
from its confluence with the San Francisco River at a natural rock 
barrier in T3S, R31E, sec. 9 NE\1/4\ continuing upstream for 0.9 km (0.6 
mi.) to the confluence of the right and left prongs of Dix Creek in T3S, 
R31E, sec. 9 center. Includes Left Prong of Dix Creek upstream of its 
confluence with Dix Creek 2.0 km (1.2 mi) to T3S, R31E, section 15 NW\1/
4\. Land ownership: Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest. Includes the 
Right Prong of Dix Creek continuing upstream of its confluence with Dix 
Creek 4.8 km (3.0 mi) to T3S, R31E, section 20 SE\1/4\. Land ownership: 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest.
    (v) Note: Map of Area 1, Gila River, (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 496]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO05.037

    (8) Area 2: Middle Gila River--Gila and Pinal Counties, Arizona.
    (i) Mineral Creek: 14.4 km (9.0 mi) of creek extending from its 
confluence with Devil's Canyon in T2S, R13E, section 35 NW\1/4\ 
continuing upstream to its headwaters in T2S, R14E, sec. 15 center at 
the confluence of Mineral Creek and an unknown drainage. Land ownership: 
Tonto National Forest, State, and private.
    (ii) Note: Map of Area Upper Gila River, (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 497]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO05.038

    (9) Area 3: Babocomari River--Santa Cruz County, Arizona.
    (i) O'Donnell Canyon: 10.0 km (6.2 mi) of creek extending from its 
confluence with Turkey Creek at T21S, R18E, sec. 22 SE\1/4\ upstream to 
the confluences of Western, Middle, and Pauline Canyons in T22S, R18E, 
sec. 17 NE\1/4\. Land ownership: Bureau of Land Management, Coronado 
National Forest, and private.
    (ii) Turkey Creek: 6.3 km (3.9 mi) of creek extending from its 
confluence with

[[Page 498]]

O'Donnell Canyon in T21S, R18E, sec. 22 SE\1/4\ upstream to where Turkey 
Creek crosses AZ Highway 83 in T22S, R18E, sec. 9 NE\1/4\. Land 
ownership: Coronado National Forest, and private.
    (iii) Note: Map of Area 3, Babocomari River, (Map 4) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO05.039
    

[[Page 499]]


    (10) Area 4: Lower San Pedro River--Cochise and Graham Counties, 
Arizona.
    (i) Bass Canyon: 5.5 km (3.4 mi) of creek extending from its 
confluence with Hot Springs Canyon in T12S, R20E, sec. 36 NE\1/4\ 
upstream to the confluence with Pine Canyon in T12S, R21E, sec. 20 SW\1/
4\. Land ownership: Bureau of Land Management and private.
    (ii) Hot Springs Canyon: 10.5 km (6.5 mi) of creek extending from 
T13S R20E, sec. 5 NW\1/4\ continuing upstream to its confluence with 
Bass Canyon in T12S, R20E, sec. 36 NE\1/4\. Land ownership: Bureau of 
Land Management, State, and private (The Nature Conservancy).
    (iii) Redfield Canyon: 9.8 km (6.1 mi) of creek extending from the 
western boundary of T11S, R19E, section 35 upstream to its confluence 
with Sycamore Canyon in T11S, R20E, sec. 28 NE\1/4\. Land ownership: 
Bureau of Land Management, State, and private.
    (iv) Note: Map of Area 4, Lower San Pedro River, (Map 5) follows:

[[Page 500]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO05.040

    (11) Area 5: Lower Santa Cruz River--Pima County, Arizona.
    (i) Cienega Creek: (Two Segments). First segment includes 14.2 km 
(8.8 mi) of creek extending from where Cienega Creek becomes Pantano 
Wash T16S, R16E, at the boundary of sec. 14 and sec. 23 to where it 
crosses Interstate 10 at T17S, R17E, sec. 1 NW\1/4\. Land ownership: 
County and State Trust. Second segment includes 13.6 km (8.4 mi) of 
creek extending from T18S, R18E, sec. 6 S\1/2\ to its confluence with 
Empire Gulch at

[[Page 501]]

T19S, R17E, sec. 3 SE\1/4\. Land ownership: Bureau of Land Management 
and State.
    (ii) Mattie Canyon: 4.0 km (2.5 mi) of creek extending from its 
confluence with Cienega Creek in T18S, R17E, sec. 23 NE\1/4\ upstream to 
the Bureau of Land Management Boundary in T18S, R17E, sec. 25 SW\1/4\. 
Land Ownership: Bureau of Land Management.
    (iii) Empire Gulch: 5.2 km (3.2 mi) of creek extending from its 
confluence with Cienega Creek in T19S, R17E, sec. 3 SE\1/4\ continuing 
upstream to T19S, R17E, sec. 16 NW\1/4\ on the western boundary of 
section 16. Land Ownership: Bureau of Land Management and State.
    (iv) Sabino Canyon: 11.1 km (6.9 mi) of creek extending from the 
southern boundary of the Coronado National Forest in T13S, R15E, sec. 9 
SE\1/4\ upstream to its confluence with the West Fork of Sabino Canyonin 
T12S, R15E, sec. 22 NE\1/4\. Land ownership: Coronado National Forest.
    (v) Note: Map of Area 5, Lower Santa Cruz River, (Map 6) follows:

[[Page 502]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO05.041

    (12) Area 6: Upper Verde River--Yavapai County, Arizona.
    (i) Walker Creek: 7.6 km (4.7 mi) of creek extending from Prescott 
National Forest Road 618 in T15N, R6E, sec. 33 SW\1/4\ upstream to its 
confluence with Spring Creek in T14N, R6E, sec. 1, SE\1/4\. Land 
ownership: Coconino National Forest and private.
    (ii) Red Tank Draw: 11.1 km (6.9 mi) of creek extending from the 
National Park Service boundary just upstream of its confluence with Wet 
Beaver Creek in T15N, R6E,

[[Page 503]]

sec. 31 NE\1/4\ upstream to the confluence of Mullican and Rarick 
canyons in T15N, R6E, sec. 2 NW\1/4\. Land ownership: Coconino National 
Forest and private.
    (iii) Spring Creek: 2.7 km (1.7 mi) of creek including all non-
private land extending from T16N, R4E, sec. 27 SE\1/4\ at the boundary 
of Forest Service land and continuing upstream to the Arizona Highway 
89A crossing in T16N, R4E, sec. 16 SE\1/4\. Land ownership: Coconino 
National Forest, and State.
    (iv) Williamson Valley Wash: 7.2 km (4.4 mi) of creek extending from 
the gauging station in T17N, R3W, sec. 7 SE\1/4\ upstream to the 
crossing of the Williamson Valley Road in T17N, R4W, sec. 36 NE\1/4\. 
Land ownership: private.
    (v) Note: Map of Area 6, Upper Verde River, (Map 7) follows:

[[Page 504]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO05.042

    (13) Area 7: Agua Fria River--Yavapai County, Arizona.
    (i) Little Sycamore Creek: 4.7 km (2.9 mi) of creek extending from 
its confluence with Sycamore Creek in T11N, R4E, sec. 6 SW\1/4\ upstream 
to T11N, R4E, sec. 4 NE\1/4\. Land ownership: Prescott National Forest 
and private.
    (ii) Sycamore Creek: 18.3 km (11.4 mi) of creek extending from its 
confluence with Little Sycamore Creek at T11N, R4E, sec. 6 SW\1/4\ 
upstream to Nelson Place Spring in

[[Page 505]]

T11N, R5E, sec. 21 NE\1/4\. Land ownership: Prescott National Forest and 
private.
    (iii) Indian Creek: 8.4 km (5.2 mi) of creek extending from T11N, 
R3E, sec. 35 NE\1/4\ to Upper Water Springs in T11N, R4E, sec. 16 SE\1/
4\. Land ownership: Bureau of Land Management, Prescott National Forest, 
and private.
    (iv) Silver Creek: 8.5 km (5.3 mi) of creek extending from T10N, 
R3E, sec. 10 SE\1/4\ continuing upstream to the spring in T10N, R4E, 
Sec. 4 SW\1/4\. Land ownership: Tonto National Forest and Bureau of Land 
Management.
    (v) Lousy Canyon: Portions of the creek from the confluence of an 
unnamed tributary upstream to the fork with an unnamed tributary 
approximately 0.6 km (0.4 mi) upstream, all entirely T9N, R3E, sec. 5 
NW\1/4\. Land ownership: Bureau of Land Management.
    (vi) Larry Creek: Portions of the creek from an unnamed tributary 
and continuing upstream 0.7 km (0.4 mi) to the confluence of two 
adjoining unnamed tributaries, entirely within T9N, R3E, sec. 9 NW\1/4\. 
Land ownership: Bureau of Land Management.
    (vii) Note: Map of Area 7, Aqua Fria River, (Map 8) follows:

[[Page 506]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO05.043

                       Humpback Chub (Gila cypha)

    Description of areas taken from BLM 1:100,000 scale maps (available 
from BLM State Offices): Rangely, CO 1989; Canyon of Lodore, CO 1990; 
Seep Ridge, UT/CO 1982; Vernal, UT/CO 1982; Grand Junction, CO 1990; 
Moab, UT/CO 1985; La Sal, UT/CO 1985; Tuba City, AZ 1983; Peach Springs, 
AZ 1980; Grand Canyon, AZ 1980; Mt. Trumbull, AZ 1979.
    Colorado: Moffat County. The Yampa River from the boundary of 
Dinosaur National Monument in T.6N., R.99W., sec. 27 (6th Principal 
Meridian) to the confluence with the

[[Page 507]]

Green River in T.7N., R.103W., sec. 28 (6th Principal Meridian).
    Utah: Uintah County; and Colorado: Moffat County. The Green River 
from the confluence with the Yampa River in T.7N., R.103W., sec. 28 (6th 
Principal Meridian) to the southern boundary of Dinosaur National 
Monument in T.6N., R.24E., sec. 30 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Utah: Uintah and Grand Counties. The Green River (Desolation and 
Gray Canyons) from Sumner's Amphitheater in T.12S., R.18E., sec. 5 (Salt 
Lake Meridian) to Swasey's Rapid in T.20S., R.16E., sec. 3 (Salt Lake 
Meridian).
    Utah: Grand County; and Colorado: Mesa County. The Colorado River 
from Black Rocks in T.10S., R.104W., sec. 25 (6th Principal Meridian) to 
Fish Ford River in T.21S., R.24E., sec. 35 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Utah: Garfield and San Juan Counties. The Colorado River from Brown 
Betty Rapid River in T.30S., R.18E., sec. 34 (Salt Lake Meridian) to 
Imperial Canyon in T.31S., R.17E., sec. 28 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Arizona: Coconino County. The Little Colorado River from river mile 
8 in T.32N., R.6E., sec. 12 (Salt and Gila River Meridian) to the 
confluence with the Colorado River in T.32N., R.5E., sec. 1 (Salt and 
Gila River Meridian).
    Arizona: Coconino County. The Colorado River from Nautiloid Canyon 
in T.36N., R.5E., sec. 35 (Salt and Gila River Meridian) to Granite Park 
in T.30N., R.10W., sec. 25 (Salt and Gila River Meridian).
    Known constituent elements include water, physical habitat, and 
biological environment as required for each particular life stage for 
each species.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.088

                   Oregon Chub (Oregonichthys crameri)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Benton, Lane, Linn, and 
Marion Counties, Oregon, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Oregon chub are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) Off-channel water bodies such as beaver ponds, oxbows, side-
channels, stable backwater sloughs, low-gradient tributaries, and 
flooded marshes, including at least 500 continuous square meters (0.12 
ac) of aquatic surface area at depths between approximately 0.5-2.0 m 
(1.6-6.6 ft).
    (ii) Aquatic vegetation covering a minimum of 250 square meters (.06 
ac) (or between approximately 25 and 100 percent of the total surface 
area of the habitat). This vegetation is primarily submergent for 
purposes of spawning, but also includes emergent and floating vegetation 
and algae, which are important for cover throughout the year. Areas with 
sufficient vegetation are likely to also have the following 
characteristics:
    (A) Gradient less than 2.5 percent;
    (B) No or very low water velocity in late spring and summer;
    (C) Silty, organic substrate; and
    (D) Abundant minute organisms such as rotifers, copepods, 
cladocerans, and chironomid larvae.
    (iii) Late spring and summer subsurface water temperatures between 
15 and 25 [deg]C (59 and 78 [deg]F), with natural diurnal and seasonal 
variation.
    (iv) No or negligible levels of nonnative aquatic predatory or 
competitive species. Negligible is defined for the purpose of this rule 
as a minimal level of nonnative species that will still allow the Oregon 
chub to continue to survive and recover.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (including, 
but not limited to, docks, seawalls, pipelines, runways, or other 
structures or paved areas) and the land or waterway on which they are 
located that exist within the legal boundaries on the effective date of 
this rule.
    (4) Critical Habitat Map Units. The data layer defining critical 
habitat was created using a Trimble GeoXT GPS unit. These critical 
habitat units were mapped using Universal Transverse Mercator, Zone 10, 
North American Datum 1983 (UTM NAD 83) coordinates. These coordinates 
establish the vertices and endpoints of the boundaries of the units. 
From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Albany.
    (5) Note: Index map for critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 508]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.000

    (6) Unit 1A: Santiam I-5 Side Channels, Linn County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit consists of three ponds totaling 1.4 ha (3.3 ac), 
located on a 27-ha (66-ac) property on the south side of the Santiam 
River, upstream of the Interstate Highway 5 bridge crossing in Linn 
County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 495981, 4953649; 495990, 4953647; 496000, 4953645; 496010, 
4953645; 496012, 4953644; 496012, 4953642; 496010, 4953640; 496001, 
4953639; 495992, 4953638; 495980, 4953640; 495975, 4953641; 495966, 
4953644; 495959, 4953647; 495954, 4953648; 495941, 4953649; 495933,

[[Page 509]]

4953648; 495926, 4953649; 495907, 4953654; 495897, 4953656; 495888, 
4953658; 495879, 4953660; 495862, 4953661; 495864, 4953676; 495876, 
4953675; 495889, 4953673; 495900, 4953671; 495912, 4953667; 495922, 
4953664; 495930, 4953660; 495941, 4953660; 495945, 4953659; 495955, 
4953658; 495962, 4953656; 495973, 4953653; 495981, 4953649;
    Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
496146, 4953619; 496158, 4953612; 496173, 4953605; 496182, 4953598; 
496191, 4953592; 496202, 4953587; 496212, 4953583; 496220, 4953581; 
496225, 4953579; 496229, 4953582; 496232, 4953576; 496229, 4953573; 
496231, 4953570; 496238, 4953564; 496242, 4953559; 496247, 4953555; 
496249, 4953550; 496246, 4953547; 496243, 4953547; 496237, 4953552; 
496230, 4953556; 496225, 4953562; 496221, 4953567; 496216, 4953569; 
496214, 4953571; 496209, 4953568; 496202, 4953570; 496196, 4953573; 
496186, 4953578; 496182, 4953575; 496190, 4953567; 496199, 4953563; 
496206, 4953558; 496205, 4953547; 496193, 4953540; 496179, 4953540; 
496168, 4953539; 496161, 4953529; 496147, 4953530; 496139, 4953538; 
496131, 4953549; 496120, 4953561; 496114, 4953571; 496109, 4953580; 
496108, 4953587; 496106, 4953594; 496098, 4953604; 496090, 4953611; 
496082, 4953619; 496084, 4953627; 496077, 4953635; 496068, 4953641; 
496056, 4953649; 496045, 4953656; 496030, 4953662; 496017, 4953668; 
496002, 4953671; 495979, 4953676; 495969, 4953678; 495957, 4953681; 
495947, 4953683; 495935, 4953687; 495925, 4953688; 495917, 4953692; 
495917, 4953699; 495925, 4953705; 495932, 4953707; 495947, 4953708; 
495960, 4953708; 495978, 4953710; 495993, 4953707; 496009, 4953700; 
496024, 4953694; 496038, 4953690; 496051, 4953685; 496061, 4953678; 
496070, 4953672; 496078, 4953665; 496089, 4953655; 496100, 4953646; 
496117, 4953634; 496126, 4953627; 496136, 4953624; 496146, 4953619; and 
excluding land bound by 496163, 4953570; 496160, 4953566; 496153, 
4953567; 496151, 4953564; 496151, 4953561; 496156, 4953559; 496162, 
4953562; 496167, 4953565; 496172, 4953564; 496176, 4953564; 496181, 
4953566; 496176, 4953573; 496173, 4953582; 496167, 4953587; 496161, 
4953586; 496156, 4953588; 496153, 4953592; 496146, 4953596; 496137, 
4953599; 496131, 4953601; 496123, 4953606; 496115, 4953611; 496109, 
4953615; 496104, 4953619; 496109, 4953611; 496110, 4953603; 496117, 
4953598; 496121, 4953592; 496129, 4953587; 496136, 4953580; 496143, 
4953577; 496150, 4953576; 496163, 4953570; and excluding land bound by 
496137, 4953566; 496135, 4953569; 496131, 4953569; 496131, 4953565; 
496134, 4953562; 496136, 4953564; 496137, 4953566;
    (iii) Map of Unit 1A of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 510]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.001

    (7) Unit 1B(1): Geren Island North Channel, Marion County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals approximately 0.8 ha (1.9 ac) and is located on 
the grounds of a water treatment facility owned by the City of Salem in 
Marion County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bound by the following coordinates (EN): 519305, 4960118; 
519312, 4960112; 519322, 4960112; 519338, 4960110; 519360, 4960109; 
519367, 4960111; 519380, 4960106; 519387, 4960105; 519405, 4960103; 
519427, 4960100; 519439, 4960098; 519446, 4960097; 519461, 4960094; 
519468, 4960092; 519490, 4960089; 519511, 4960081; 519526, 4960079;

[[Page 511]]

519540, 4960073; 519553, 4960069; 519560, 4960068; 519564, 4960067; 
519576, 4960062; 519593, 4960056; 519616, 4960047; 519628, 4960039; 
519633, 4960033; 519634, 4960019; 519627, 4960014; 519615, 4960018; 
519606, 4960023; 519595, 4960031; 519590, 4960035; 519581, 4960040; 
519568, 4960045; 519547, 4960053; 519533, 4960057; 519520, 4960062; 
519497, 4960065; 519474, 4960073; 519464, 4960074; 519442, 4960077; 
519413, 4960083; 519381, 4960088; 519366, 4960091; 519355, 4960093; 
519340, 4960091; 519322, 4960089; 519311, 4960089; 519298, 4960090; 
519290, 4960091; 519281, 4960105; 519278, 4960114; 519289, 4960131; 
519293, 4960137; 519299, 4960134; 519301, 4960124; 519305, 4960118;
    (iii) Map of Unit 1B(1) of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 512]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.002

    (8) Unit 1B(2): Stayton Public Works Pond, Marion County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals approximately 0.4 ha (1.0 ac) and is located in 
and owned by the City of Stayton, in Marion County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 516606, 4960109; 516603, 4960102; 516607, 4960099; 516611, 
4960101; 516614, 4960101; 516622, 4960100; 516623, 4960098; 516622, 
4960095; 516614, 4960093; 516608, 4960091; 516606, 4960088; 516603, 
4960084; 516605,

[[Page 513]]

4960079; 516607, 4960077; 516610, 4960080; 516614, 4960084; 516616, 
4960085; 516618, 4960083; 516616, 4960078; 516613, 4960074; 516610, 
4960074; 516608, 4960073; 516605, 4960072; 516605, 4960067; 516604, 
4960064; 516603, 4960058; 516600, 4960051; 516593, 4960046; 516592, 
4960043; 516595, 4960040; 516598, 4960033; 516594, 4960027; 516590, 
4960023; 516583, 4960023; 516574, 4960020; 516568, 4960017; 516560, 
4960012; 516555, 4960010; 516549, 4960011; 516546, 4960011; 516543, 
4960013; 516540, 4960018; 516535, 4960020; 516534, 4960021; 516533, 
4960028; 516535, 4960038; 516540, 4960043; 516544, 4960055; 516547, 
4960061; 516547, 4960066; 516547, 4960077; 516550, 4960087; 516552, 
4960092; 516552, 4960100; 516552, 4960101; 516554, 4960100; 516555, 
4960097; 516554, 4960092; 516553, 4960082; 516550, 4960071; 516551, 
4960067; 516554, 4960067; 516559, 4960070; 516563, 4960072; 516568, 
4960070; 516569, 4960071; 516572, 4960071; 516575, 4960068; 516578, 
4960064; 516583, 4960064; 516589, 4960066; 516589, 4960068; 516590, 
4960072; 516590, 4960080; 516588, 4960086; 516587, 4960086; 516585, 
4960088; 516583, 4960092; 516584, 4960095; 516589, 4960096; 516594, 
4960099; 516598, 4960102; 516599, 4960104; 516602, 4960104; 516604, 
4960110; 516604, 4960114; 516607, 4960114; 516606, 4960109; and 
excluding land bound by 516585, 4960037; 516586, 4960036; 516587, 
4960038; 516586, 4960040; 516585, 4960041; 516583, 4960040; 516584, 
4960039; 516585, 4960037; and excluding land bound by 516558, 4960022; 
516561, 4960022; 516562, 4960023; 516562, 4960025; 516559, 4960025; 
516557, 4960024; 516558, 4960022;
    (iii) See paragraph (10)(iii) for a map showing critical habitat 
unit 1B(2).
    (9) Unit 1B(3): South Stayton Pond, Linn County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals approximately 0.1 ha (0.2 ac), is located in 
Linn County, Oregon, and is owned by the Oregon Department of Fish and 
Wildlife (ODFW).
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 515540, 4959144; 515536, 4959144; 515529, 4959146; 515522, 
4959149; 515513, 4959153; 515509, 4959158; 515507, 4959161; 515511, 
4959166; 515515, 4959169; 515522, 4959173; 515530, 4959177; 515536, 
4959180; 515540, 4959182; 515545, 4959180; 515546, 4959173; 515544, 
4959162; 515543, 4959153; 515543, 4959149; 515542, 4959147; 515540, 
4959144;
    (iii) See paragraph (10)(iii) for a map showing critical habitat 
unit 1B(3).
    (10) Unit 1B(4): Gray Slough, Marion County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals approximately 2.5 ha (6.2 ac), is privately 
owned, and is located in Marion County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 513857, 4957787; 513859, 4957785; 513856, 4957783; 513839, 
4957783; 513822, 4957784; 513807, 4957784; 513791, 4957786; 513775, 
4957786; 513772, 4957784; 513764, 4957785; 513748, 4957780; 513731, 
4957773; 513711, 4957767; 513689, 4957761; 513654, 4957755; 513630, 
4957749; 513605, 4957746; 513585, 4957742; 513558, 4957736; 513532, 
4957730; 513503, 4957727; 513480, 4957723; 513473, 4957717; 513468, 
4957712; 513460, 4957708; 513455, 4957707; 513443, 4957708; 513435, 
4957711; 513424, 4957713; 513415, 4957713; 513406, 4957709; 513397, 
4957703; 513378, 4957700; 513362, 4957696; 513353, 4957691; 513342, 
4957684; 513333, 4957683; 513324, 4957680; 513312, 4957678; 513300, 
4957674; 513286, 4957674; 513279, 4957671; 513270, 4957666; 513264, 
4957660; 513255, 4957658; 513247, 4957663; 513241, 4957662; 513237, 
4957651; 513229, 4957650; 513214, 4957648; 513202, 4957645; 513195, 
4957644; 513188, 4957644; 513181, 4957643; 513172, 4957640; 513161, 
4957637; 513152, 4957634; 513141, 4957631; 513132, 4957630; 513127, 
4957626; 513119, 4957623; 513111, 4957629; 513102, 4957630; 513094, 
4957626; 513084, 4957625; 513074, 4957622; 513066, 4957621; 513062, 
4957613; 513059, 4957610; 513053, 4957605; 513048, 4957598; 513044, 
4957601; 513043, 4957608; 513039, 4957613; 513035, 4957613; 513029, 
4957613; 513025, 4957609; 513021, 4957603; 513016, 4957599; 513011, 
4957591; 513004, 4957580; 512996, 4957571; 512989, 4957558; 512980, 
4957550; 512976, 4957539; 512972, 4957529; 512962, 4957517; 512955, 
4957514; 512948, 4957516; 512944, 4957524; 512948, 4957533; 512954, 
4957540; 512966, 4957547; 512969, 4957553; 512972, 4957564; 512977, 
4957573; 512980, 4957580; 512983, 4957587; 512991, 4957598; 513002, 
4957608; 513011, 4957616; 513022, 4957624; 513036, 4957633; 513045, 
4957636; 513052, 4957639; 513059, 4957645; 513067, 4957648; 513081, 
4957655; 513097, 4957664; 513108, 4957669; 513118, 4957673; 513133, 
4957679; 513148, 4957685; 513161, 4957690; 513178, 4957697; 513184, 
4957699; 513197, 4957703; 513214, 4957707; 513220, 4957709; 513233, 
4957712; 513247, 4957714; 513259, 4957717; 513268, 4957719; 513282, 
4957722; 513298, 4957725; 513310, 4957727; 513319, 4957727; 513332, 
4957730; 513350, 4957734; 513366, 4957734; 513379, 4957735; 513389, 
4957735; 513400, 4957735; 513418, 4957736; 513436, 4957737; 513449, 
4957738; 513461, 4957739; 513468, 4957739; 513497, 4957743; 513519, 
4957748; 513531, 4957752; 513539, 4957753; 513541, 4957752; 513540, 
4957750; 513533, 4957749; 513524, 4957746; 513508, 4957742; 513503, 
4957741; 513501, 4957738; 513505, 4957738; 513513, 4957740; 513522, 
4957742; 513531, 4957744; 513544, 4957748; 513556, 4957750; 513569, 
4957751; 513585, 4957754; 513599, 4957757; 513611, 4957757; 513627, 
4957759; 513639, 4957760; 513668, 4957768; 513700, 4957773; 513727, 
4957780; 513747, 4957787; 513769, 4957793; 513788, 4957791; 513801, 
4957791; 513814, 4957789; 513839, 4957788; 513857, 4957787;
    (iii) Map of Units 1B(2), 1B(3), and 1B(4) of critical habitat for 
the Oregon chub (Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 514]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.003

    (11) Unit 1C: Foster Pullout Pond, Linn County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 0.4 ha (1.0 ac), and is owned by the United 
States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE). The pond is located in Linn 
County, Oregon, on the north shore of Foster Reservoir in the South 
Santiam River drainage.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 529130, 4918726; 529115, 4918723; 529101, 4918725; 529089, 
4918735; 529094, 4918745; 529106, 4918755; 529122, 4918771; 529142, 
4918788; 529159, 4918805; 529175,

[[Page 515]]

4918821; 529175, 4918820; 529179, 4918819; 529180, 4918805; 529177, 
4918789; 529183, 4918787; 529183, 4918784; 529177, 4918778; 529172, 
4918767; 529168, 4918759; 529162, 4918746; 529153, 4918738; 529145, 
4918734; 529130, 4918726;
    (iii) Map of Unit 1C of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.004


[[Page 516]]


    (12) Unit 2A(1): Russell Pond, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals approximately 0.1 ha (0.1 ac), is privately 
owned, and is located in the Mohawk River drainage, Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 514905, 4897668; 514916, 4897667; 514929, 4897668; 514939, 
4897667; 514952, 4897667; 514956, 4897667; 514959, 4897666; 514961, 
4897662; 514964, 4897661; 514969, 4897661; 514975, 4897662; 514976, 
4897659; 514970, 4897657; 514963, 4897656; 514960, 4897654; 514960, 
4897651; 514955, 4897650; 514945, 4897650; 514932, 4897650; 514917, 
4897650; 514908, 4897651; 514900, 4897651; 514898, 4897651; 514897, 
4897653; 514896, 4897656; 514895, 4897663; 514891, 4897663; 514884, 
4897662; 514878, 4897659; 514877, 4897660; 514883, 4897664; 514891, 
4897665; 514895, 4897666; 514897, 4897666; 514905, 4897668;
    (iii) See paragraph (13)(iii) for a map showing critical habitat 
unit 2A(1).
    (13) Unit 2A(2): Shetzline Pond, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals approximately 0.1 ha (0.3 ac), is privately 
owned, and is located in the Mohawk River drainage, Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 515484, 4897250; 515477, 4897249; 515469, 4897250; 515464, 
4897252; 515461, 4897254; 515460, 4897259; 515462, 4897263; 515466, 
4897266; 515476, 4897267; 515485, 4897266; 515489, 4897265; 515493, 
4897262; 515494, 4897258; 515492, 4897254; 515489, 4897251; 515484, 
4897250;
    (iii) Map of Units 2A(1) and 2A(2) of critical habitat for the 
Oregon chub (Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 517]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.005

    (14) Unit 2A(3): Big Island, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 3.3 ha (8.2 ac), is owned by the McKenzie River 
Trust, and is located along the McKenzie River in Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 507093, 4879404; 507095, 4879401; 507097, 4879400; 507099, 
4879398; 507099, 4879396; 507096, 4879397; 507091, 4879401; 507089, 
4879403; 507079, 4879395; 507071, 4879390; 507077, 4879388; 507081, 
4879386; 507085,

[[Page 518]]

4879384; 507091, 4879381; 507097, 4879378; 507099, 4879376; 507104, 
4879373; 507107, 4879371; 507112, 4879369; 507116, 4879368; 507121, 
4879365; 507127, 4879363; 507131, 4879360; 507136, 4879357; 507131, 
4879349; 507125, 4879353; 507120, 4879356; 507115, 4879358; 507110, 
4879360; 507103, 4879362; 507098, 4879366; 507092, 4879370; 507087, 
4879373; 507082, 4879375; 507078, 4879377; 507073, 4879380; 507069, 
4879381; 507064, 4879383; 507047, 4879368; 507030, 4879355; 507010, 
4879343; 507001, 4879338; 506986, 4879326; 506974, 4879317; 506961, 
4879310; 506960, 4879307; 506963, 4879303; 506970, 4879300; 506974, 
4879297; 506971, 4879293; 506965, 4879296; 506955, 4879303; 506946, 
4879298; 506943, 4879287; 506945, 4879279; 506949, 4879278; 506953, 
4879279; 506960, 4879276; 506961, 4879271; 506956, 4879265; 506944, 
4879261; 506929, 4879258; 506913, 4879255; 506902, 4879248; 506892, 
4879241; 506885, 4879236; 506891, 4879226; 506906, 4879239; 506922, 
4879240; 506930, 4879245; 506944, 4879252; 506955, 4879254; 506966, 
4879261; 506973, 4879275; 506982, 4879280; 506990, 4879284; 506999, 
4879289; 507009, 4879288; 507026, 4879290; 507042, 4879291; 507061, 
4879296; 507076, 4879295; 507081, 4879287; 507075, 4879279; 507053, 
4879277; 507035, 4879269; 507020, 4879267; 507013, 4879268; 506997, 
4879265; 506990, 4879259; 506998, 4879253; 507007, 4879251; 507015, 
4879247; 507031, 4879250; 507046, 4879252; 507062, 4879251; 507070, 
4879259; 507078, 4879257; 507084, 4879251; 507100, 4879247; 507111, 
4879242; 507120, 4879245; 507133, 4879246; 507145, 4879245; 507156, 
4879241; 507166, 4879239; 507171, 4879237; 507178, 4879231; 507184, 
4879222; 507190, 4879215; 507202, 4879194; 507202, 4879185; 507208, 
4879174; 507209, 4879156; 507212, 4879135; 507213, 4879127; 507211, 
4879118; 507206, 4879125; 507206, 4879135; 507203, 4879147; 507202, 
4879161; 507199, 4879175; 507193, 4879180; 507190, 4879172; 507189, 
4879166; 507186, 4879148; 507181, 4879137; 507171, 4879126; 507160, 
4879117; 507150, 4879110; 507138, 4879106; 507126, 4879110; 507125, 
4879117; 507133, 4879122; 507140, 4879122; 507147, 4879125; 507151, 
4879132; 507159, 4879140; 507166, 4879150; 507172, 4879157; 507173, 
4879166; 507173, 4879183; 507168, 4879192; 507161, 4879206; 507157, 
4879215; 507152, 4879226; 507145, 4879238; 507143, 4879242; 507136, 
4879243; 507126, 4879242; 507117, 4879241; 507111, 4879239; 507108, 
4879240; 507099, 4879244; 507094, 4879246; 507083, 4879248; 507081, 
4879250; 507077, 4879251; 507073, 4879250; 507068, 4879251; 507065, 
4879249; 507061, 4879247; 507049, 4879248; 507038, 4879247; 507025, 
4879244; 507019, 4879243; 507010, 4879243; 507001, 4879244; 506992, 
4879245; 506982, 4879245; 506983, 4879241; 506989, 4879241; 506999, 
4879237; 507007, 4879236; 507014, 4879233; 507021, 4879232; 507027, 
4879230; 507032, 4879230; 507042, 4879228; 507044, 4879226; 507042, 
4879224; 507033, 4879226; 507025, 4879227; 507018, 4879229; 507008, 
4879232; 506999, 4879233; 506989, 4879235; 506973, 4879236; 506961, 
4879233; 506940, 4879225; 506924, 4879221; 506903, 4879215; 506894, 
4879212; 506883, 4879212; 506869, 4879216; 506857, 4879229; 506843, 
4879242; 506830, 4879242; 506810, 4879244; 506792, 4879240; 506784, 
4879227; 506787, 4879205; 506795, 4879179; 506805, 4879165; 506816, 
4879148; 506817, 4879134; 506812, 4879116; 506826, 4879084; 506843, 
4879058; 506856, 4879043; 506846, 4879034; 506829, 4879053; 506821, 
4879069; 506813, 4879081; 506803, 4879105; 506795, 4879118; 506795, 
4879133; 506797, 4879145; 506796, 4879157; 506794, 4879165; 506790, 
4879173; 506787, 4879177; 506787, 4879174; 506789, 4879170; 506789, 
4879166; 506785, 4879164; 506783, 4879167; 506782, 4879173; 506781, 
4879177; 506780, 4879188; 506777, 4879197; 506774, 4879207; 506766, 
4879226; 506759, 4879234; 506750, 4879245; 506740, 4879250; 506722, 
4879253; 506707, 4879253; 506703, 4879258; 506703, 4879264; 506704, 
4879274; 506701, 4879282; 506699, 4879292; 506696, 4879293; 506688, 
4879290; 506677, 4879287; 506662, 4879284; 506651, 4879278; 506639, 
4879273; 506626, 4879266; 506618, 4879277; 506626, 4879282; 506637, 
4879288; 506649, 4879296; 506658, 4879300; 506669, 4879307; 506681, 
4879313; 506693, 4879320; 506707, 4879328; 506720, 4879335; 506731, 
4879339; 506740, 4879339; 506745, 4879338; 506748, 4879338; 506751, 
4879339; 506754, 4879341; 506756, 4879338; 506752, 4879336; 506749, 
4879332; 506745, 4879325; 506736, 4879319; 506728, 4879315; 506722, 
4879312; 506718, 4879307; 506710, 4879301; 506710, 4879296; 506719, 
4879287; 506730, 4879279; 506744, 4879278; 506755, 4879276; 506767, 
4879274; 506789, 4879276; 506804, 4879274; 506816, 4879274; 506826, 
4879273; 506834, 4879271; 506845, 4879272; 506853, 4879274; 506859, 
4879275; 506864, 4879279; 506869, 4879285; 506876, 4879290; 506884, 
4879296; 506892, 4879301; 506900, 4879307; 506910, 4879315; 506917, 
4879320; 506927, 4879328; 506936, 4879336; 506940, 4879340; 506946, 
4879344; 506953, 4879347; 506959, 4879348; 506957, 4879352; 506956, 
4879355; 506958, 4879357; 506961, 4879360; 506966, 4879360; 506970, 
4879356; 506973, 4879357; 506982, 4879361; 506991, 4879366; 507004, 
4879374; 507012, 4879378; 507020, 4879381; 507028, 4879385; 507044, 
4879392; 507055, 4879398; 507066, 4879405; 507075, 4879413; 507087, 
4879421; 507099, 4879426; 507107, 4879429; 507118, 4879430; 507122, 
4879430; 507121, 4879412; 507119, 4879411; 507111, 4879411; 507102, 
4879409; 507093, 4879406; 507093, 4879404; and excluding land bound by 
506890, 4879274; 506883, 4879269; 506872, 4879263; 506861, 4879256; 
506859, 4879253; 506869, 4879254; 506879, 4879260; 506890, 4879266; 
506902, 4879272; 506907, 4879278; 506907, 4879278; 506900, 4879277; 
506890, 4879274;
    Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
507017, 4879310; 507023, 4879306; 507028, 4879308; 507030, 4879307; 
507028, 4879305; 507015, 4879299; 507008, 4879297; 507002, 4879296; 
506994, 4879293; 506981, 4879288; 506973, 4879286; 506968, 4879288; 
506970, 4879292; 506971, 4879293; 506974, 4879297; 506974, 4879298; 
506983, 4879301; 506991, 4879305; 506999, 4879310; 507009, 4879311; 
507017, 4879310;
    (iii) Map of Unit 2A(3) of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 519]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.006

    (15) Unit 2B(1): Ankeny Willow Marsh , Marion County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 14.0 ha (34.5 ac), and is located in Marion 
County, Oregon, at the Ankeny National Wildlife Refuge.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 494301, 4959127; 494318, 4959124; 494328, 4959126; 494338, 
4959131; 494348, 4959134; 494359, 4959134; 494373, 4959127; 494386, 
4959104; 494396, 4959076; 494413, 4959050; 494434, 4959017; 494451, 
4958983; 494466,

[[Page 520]]

4958953; 494479, 4958932; 494498, 4958911; 494512, 4958896; 494530, 
4958884; 494528, 4958885; 494551, 4958869; 494585, 4958866; 494603, 
4958867; 494618, 4958861; 494628, 4958854; 494642, 4958838; 494675, 
4958818; 494703, 4958792; 494711, 4958776; 494719, 4958752; 494713, 
4958732; 494698, 4958720; 494693, 4958709; 494693, 4958703; 494698, 
4958689; 494705, 4958673; 494716, 4958660; 494718, 4958654; 494714, 
4958642; 494711, 4958623; 494710, 4958612; 494711, 4958605; 494720, 
4958591; 494718, 4958581; 494726, 4958576; 494732, 4958564; 494720, 
4958547; 494708, 4958530; 494696, 4958519; 494684, 4958527; 494670, 
4958544; 494652, 4958566; 494634, 4958589; 494619, 4958606; 494592, 
4958636; 494565, 4958665; 494541, 4958693; 494518, 4958718; 494498, 
4958738; 494465, 4958772; 494447, 4958788; 494420, 4958812; 494397, 
4958835; 494377, 4958859; 494360, 4958882; 494347, 4958900; 494326, 
4958927; 494310, 4958946; 494271, 4958996; 494234, 4959040; 494212, 
4959066; 494168, 4959117; 494144, 4959145; 494127, 4959161; 494091, 
4959202; 494073, 4959226; 494064, 4959244; 494056, 4959257; 494051, 
4959284; 494056, 4959320; 494056, 4959331; 494066, 4959344; 494080, 
4959353; 494094, 4959362; 494112, 4959373; 494123, 4959380; 494137, 
4959388; 494144, 4959387; 494153, 4959369; 494169, 4959341; 494182, 
4959326; 494200, 4959303; 494208, 4959293; 494242, 4959260; 494255, 
4959217; 494262, 4959174; 494278, 4959150; 494283, 4959143; 494301, 
4959127;
    (iii) Map of Unit 2B(1) of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 521]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.007

    (16) Unit 2B(2): Dunn Wetland, Benton County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 6.1 ha (15.2 ac), is privately owned, and is 
located in Benton County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 470225, 4922333; 470235, 4922324; 470236, 4922329; 470238, 
4922344; 470241, 4922357; 470250, 4922355; 470246, 4922340; 470247, 
4922320; 470247, 4922297; 470249,

[[Page 522]]

4922269; 470238, 4922250; 470261, 4922225; 470284, 4922196; 470294, 
4922183; 470307, 4922160; 470331, 4922148; 470348, 4922122; 470353, 
4922112; 470369, 4922092; 470366, 4922064; 470362, 4922042; 470372, 
4922042; 470382, 4922035; 470385, 4922023; 470379, 4922013; 470370, 
4922010; 470364, 4922017; 470358, 4922021; 470350, 4922017; 470349, 
4921978; 470346, 4921960; 470347, 4921943; 470345, 4921932; 470341, 
4921931; 470335, 4921934; 470297, 4921958; 470272, 4921977; 470247, 
4921994; 470230, 4922005; 470217, 4922012; 470202, 4922022; 470188, 
4922033; 470179, 4922048; 470170, 4922062; 470170, 4922073; 470171, 
4922088; 470171, 4922100; 470164, 4922104; 470159, 4922102; 470145, 
4922085; 470137, 4922078; 470132, 4922078; 470129, 4922081; 470125, 
4922088; 470122, 4922098; 470115, 4922121; 470113, 4922135; 470115, 
4922143; 470110, 4922148; 470095, 4922149; 470078, 4922157; 470065, 
4922171; 470054, 4922186; 470056, 4922199; 470063, 4922207; 470082, 
4922221; 470099, 4922232; 470123, 4922248; 470154, 4922273; 470166, 
4922283; 470190, 4922305; 470205, 4922329; 470194, 4922349; 470204, 
4922362; 470212, 4922360; 470225, 4922333;
    (iii) Map of Unit 2B(2) of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 523]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.008

    (17) Unit 2B(3): Finley Display Pond, Benton County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 1.0 ha (2.4 ac) and is located in Benton 
County, Oregon, on the William L. Finley National Wildlife Refuge.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 473297, 4917434; 473299, 4917431; 473303, 4917433; 473308, 
4917433; 473313, 4917430; 473317, 4917425; 473322, 4917418; 473323, 
4917413; 473320, 4917406; 473316, 4917390; 473310, 4917375; 473302, 
4917356; 473297,

[[Page 524]]

4917346; 473294, 4917333; 473287, 4917319; 473278, 4917310; 473273, 
4917315; 473266, 4917321; 473262, 4917328; 473257, 4917337; 473252, 
4917345; 473248, 4917354; 473244, 4917364; 473239, 4917372; 473237, 
4917380; 473232, 4917389; 473228, 4917397; 473226, 4917404; 473225, 
4917412; 473224, 4917424; 473223, 4917431; 473221, 4917445; 473222, 
4917459; 473226, 4917469; 473234, 4917475; 473240, 4917478; 473244, 
4917477; 473251, 4917474; 473260, 4917468; 473265, 4917467; 473274, 
4917462; 473284, 4917451; 473291, 4917445; 473296, 4917440; 473296, 
4917436; 473297, 4917434; and excluding land bound by 473238, 4917400; 
473246, 4917395; 473249, 4917396; 473252, 4917394; 473255, 4917393; 
473258, 4917392; 473260, 4917394; 473258, 4917397; 473258, 4917401; 
473254, 4917409; 473252, 4917413; 473245, 4917423; 473245, 4917425; 
473243, 4917428; 473242, 4917431; 473240, 4917433; 473238, 4917430; 
473236, 4917425; 473234, 4917419; 473233, 4917413; 473234, 4917406; 
473238, 4917400;
    (iii) See paragraph (19)(iii) for a map showing critical habitat 
unit 2B(3).
    (18) Unit 2B(4): Finley Cheadle Pond, Benton County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 0.9 ha (2.3 ac) and is located in Benton 
County, Oregon, on the William L. Finley National Wildlife Refuge.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 475672, 4916089; 475679, 4916070; 475684, 4916056; 475685, 
4916053; 475690, 4916045; 475694, 4916035; 475699, 4916025; 475706, 
4916017; 475714, 4916012; 475725, 4916006; 475730, 4916004; 475735, 
4916003; 475741, 4916001; 475747, 4916003; 475752, 4916002; 475760, 
4916003; 475765, 4916001; 475766, 4915998; 475769, 4915995; 475768, 
4915987; 475768, 4915970; 475766, 4915960; 475763, 4915956; 475762, 
4915951; 475764, 4915947; 475765, 4915940; 475766, 4915931; 475766, 
4915917; 475761, 4915909; 475760, 4915904; 475757, 4915902; 475751, 
4915905; 475747, 4915910; 475741, 4915915; 475732, 4915925; 475721, 
4915937; 475708, 4915950; 475699, 4915960; 475699, 4915963; 475681, 
4915977; 475681, 4915982; 475674, 4915989; 475670, 4915996; 475669, 
4916001; 475666, 4916008; 475663, 4916019; 475661, 4916030; 475660, 
4916035; 475658, 4916041; 475653, 4916051; 475649, 4916056; 475642, 
4916055; 475638, 4916064; 475632, 4916075; 475636, 4916078; 475643, 
4916078; 475649, 4916080; 475654, 4916080; 475658, 4916080; 475657, 
4916087; 475654, 4916099; 475653, 4916104; 475661, 4916105; 475672, 
4916089;
    (iii) See paragraph (19)(iii) for a map showing critical habitat 
unit 2B(4).
    (19) Unit 2B(5): Finley Gray Creek Swamp, Benton County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 3.0 ha (7.4 ac) and is located in Benton 
County, Oregon. Most of the unit is located on the southwest corner of 
the William L. Finley National Wildlife Refuge; however, a small portion 
of the unit is located on private property.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 472786, 4916068; 472780, 4916056; 472772, 4916045; 472756, 
4916036; 472735, 4916028; 472717, 4916022; 472704, 4916028; 472697, 
4916038; 472685, 4916041; 472670, 4916051; 472659, 4916056; 472650, 
4916059; 472641, 4916058; 472634, 4916052; 472627, 4916042; 472618, 
4916033; 472614, 4916026; 472608, 4916021; 472598, 4916017; 472581, 
4916015; 472564, 4916015; 472538, 4916017; 472514, 4916018; 472494, 
4916020; 472487, 4916013; 472474, 4916021; 472450, 4916023; 472428, 
4916026; 472408, 4916029; 472382, 4916034; 472353, 4916038; 472333, 
4916040; 472314, 4916045; 472306, 4916054; 472300, 4916065; 472293, 
4916072; 472282, 4916084; 472270, 4916086; 472259, 4916092; 472246, 
4916094; 472233, 4916092; 472223, 4916085; 472213, 4916085; 472212, 
4916094; 472218, 4916095; 472225, 4916100; 472232, 4916102; 472240, 
4916104; 472250, 4916105; 472255, 4916109; 472261, 4916109; 472266, 
4916105; 472266, 4916098; 472271, 4916096; 472277, 4916094; 472282, 
4916100; 472289, 4916102; 472300, 4916102; 472302, 4916104; 472307, 
4916108; 472312, 4916108; 472318, 4916104; 472323, 4916096; 472329, 
4916086; 472336, 4916074; 472339, 4916071; 472352, 4916068; 472377, 
4916065; 472388, 4916054; 472397, 4916050; 472408, 4916046; 472420, 
4916044; 472430, 4916044; 472440, 4916043; 472447, 4916044; 472460, 
4916046; 472467, 4916048; 472477, 4916050; 472489, 4916050; 472500, 
4916054; 472508, 4916054; 472515, 4916051; 472523, 4916052; 472536, 
4916060; 472545, 4916071; 472551, 4916078; 472559, 4916083; 472566, 
4916096; 472575, 4916098; 472587, 4916100; 472596, 4916113; 472611, 
4916123; 472631, 4916130; 472652, 4916133; 472670, 4916134; 472694, 
4916139; 472717, 4916139; 472738, 4916138; 472759, 4916136; 472763, 
4916133; 472770, 4916126; 472773, 4916124; 472772, 4916112; 472771, 
4916099; 472772, 4916077; 472780, 4916073; 472786, 4916068;
    (iii) Map of Units 2B(3), 2B(4), and 2B(5) of critical habitat for 
the Oregon chub (Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 525]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.009

    (20) Unit 3A: Fall Creek Spillway Ponds, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 1.5 ha (3.8 ac), is owned by the USACE, and is 
located in the overflow channel below Fall Creek Dam in Lane County, 
Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 519284, 4865517; 519298, 4865515; 519305, 4865515; 519311, 
4865508; 519313, 4865502; 519312, 4865488; 519309, 4865483; 519302, 
4865482; 519288, 4865486; 519270, 4865487; 519253, 4865487; 519243, 
4865488; 519236,

[[Page 526]]

4865490; 519225, 4865492; 519211, 4865494; 519193, 4865495; 519166, 
4865501; 519142, 4865506; 519112, 4865514; 519084, 4865520; 519069, 
4865524; 519057, 4865528; 519032, 4865534; 519009, 4865541; 518998, 
4865545; 518977, 4865553; 518959, 4865557; 518950, 4865560; 518928, 
4865565; 518911, 4865570; 518893, 4865575; 518875, 4865582; 518858, 
4865588; 518840, 4865594; 518833, 4865601; 518832, 4865607; 518834, 
4865612; 518841, 4865617; 518851, 4865619; 518874, 4865614; 518889, 
4865613; 518920, 4865605; 518956, 4865589; 518985, 4865579; 519034, 
4865569; 519074, 4865556; 519092, 4865547; 519129, 4865540; 519151, 
4865538; 519170, 4865530; 519195, 4865526; 519231, 4865523; 519243, 
4865519; 519284, 4865517;
    (iii) Map of Unit 3A of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 527]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.010

    (21) Unit 3B: Elijah Bristow State Park Berry Slough, Lane County, 
Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 5.2 ha (12.7 ac) measured at the annual high-
water elevation, is owned by the Oregon Parks and Recreation Department 
(OPRD), and is located in Elijah Bristow State Park in Lane County, 
Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 513039, 4865406; 513039, 4865403; 513044, 4865400; 513049, 
4865395; 513057, 4865390; 513064, 4865385; 513074, 4865379; 513081, 
4865378; 513089, 4865378; 513099, 4865380; 513104, 4865383; 513105, 
4865388; 513107, 4865393; 513109, 4865396; 513113, 4865398; 513117,

[[Page 528]]

4865398; 513121, 4865396; 513123, 4865391; 513122, 4865387; 513117, 
4865377; 513106, 4865366; 513088, 4865355; 513080, 4865345; 513075, 
4865334; 513078, 4865315; 513080, 4865307; 513088, 4865290; 513090, 
4865267; 513098, 4865252; 513110, 4865242; 513123, 4865230; 513132, 
4865222; 513135, 4865219; 513146, 4865215; 513155, 4865213; 513155, 
4865218; 513154, 4865224; 513155, 4865226; 513158, 4865225; 513160, 
4865222; 513160, 4865215; 513159, 4865210; 513170, 4865206; 513190, 
4865204; 513229, 4865204; 513260, 4865194; 513281, 4865200; 513297, 
4865201; 513312, 4865204; 513329, 4865207; 513351, 4865210; 513363, 
4865214; 513371, 4865211; 513370, 4865207; 513365, 4865205; 513357, 
4865203; 513349, 4865201; 513337, 4865200; 513325, 4865199; 513312, 
4865196; 513298, 4865194; 513282, 4865188; 513261, 4865186; 513236, 
4865185; 513218, 4865181; 513193, 4865183; 513181, 4865190; 513163, 
4865196; 513137, 4865203; 513120, 4865211; 513113, 4865220; 513107, 
4865230; 513100, 4865225; 513100, 4865221; 513102, 4865215; 513109, 
4865205; 513118, 4865197; 513137, 4865183; 513160, 4865165; 513171, 
4865159; 513193, 4865152; 513205, 4865141; 513206, 4865125; 513210, 
4865118; 513209, 4865113; 513208, 4865095; 513206, 4865089; 513201, 
4865089; 513198, 4865102; 513196, 4865113; 513189, 4865123; 513182, 
4865135; 513173, 4865143; 513157, 4865151; 513143, 4865154; 513129, 
4865162; 513123, 4865168; 513106, 4865182; 513095, 4865192; 513088, 
4865204; 513084, 4865213; 513081, 4865223; 513073, 4865246; 513065, 
4865266; 513062, 4865273; 513055, 4865273; 513057, 4865265; 513057, 
4865258; 513052, 4865241; 513054, 4865232; 513057, 4865225; 513062, 
4865215; 513075, 4865198; 513083, 4865187; 513090, 4865177; 513091, 
4865171; 513083, 4865175; 513079, 4865180; 513072, 4865189; 513066, 
4865199; 513059, 4865209; 513051, 4865220; 513044, 4865231; 513037, 
4865223; 513030, 4865209; 513024, 4865198; 513016, 4865188; 513007, 
4865176; 513001, 4865169; 512994, 4865152; 512993, 4865124; 512993, 
4865117; 512996, 4865111; 512998, 4865104; 512998, 4865078; 513003, 
4865061; 513008, 4865048; 513001, 4865046; 512997, 4865056; 512989, 
4865066; 512983, 4865081; 512979, 4865105; 512979, 4865129; 512982, 
4865153; 512986, 4865165; 512995, 4865184; 513008, 4865202; 513023, 
4865226; 513031, 4865236; 513034, 4865248; 513035, 4865255; 513037, 
4865271; 513039, 4865286; 513042, 4865297; 513045, 4865307; 513049, 
4865314; 513051, 4865319; 513049, 4865330; 513040, 4865336; 513029, 
4865339; 513022, 4865342; 513015, 4865354; 513009, 4865367; 513000, 
4865383; 513001, 4865389; 513010, 4865399; 513023, 4865406; 513030, 
4865406; 513035, 4865405; 513035, 4865406; 513036, 4865408; 513037, 
4865409; 513039, 4865409; 513039, 4865408; 513039, 4865406; and 
excluding land bound by 513049, 4865347; 513054, 4865346; 513058, 
4865348; 513058, 4865353; 513058, 4865356; 513056, 4865362; 513051, 
4865366; 513043, 4865376; 513035, 4865387; 513029, 4865391; 513022, 
4865391; 513019, 4865386; 513022, 4865380; 513024, 4865375; 513030, 
4865369; 513035, 4865364; 513040, 4865358; 513044, 4865349; 513049, 
4865347;
    Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
512811, 4865560; 512814, 4865555; 512827, 4865553; 512827, 4865554; 
512837, 4865553; 512857, 4865551; 512875, 4865548; 512890, 4865545; 
512908, 4865541; 512923, 4865533; 512932, 4865529; 512945, 4865526; 
512952, 4865527; 512958, 4865527; 512961, 4865529; 512963, 4865532; 
512966, 4865534; 512970, 4865533; 512970, 4865530; 512968, 4865527; 
512960, 4865523; 512947, 4865522; 512938, 4865523; 512926, 4865525; 
512929, 4865522; 512938, 4865520; 512949, 4865517; 512963, 4865512; 
512976, 4865510; 512989, 4865513; 513003, 4865515; 513019, 4865518; 
513034, 4865520; 513048, 4865524; 513060, 4865526; 513079, 4865532; 
513089, 4865531; 513110, 4865536; 513124, 4865542; 513125, 4865536; 
513119, 4865534; 513101, 4865528; 513087, 4865523; 513073, 4865520; 
513057, 4865517; 513032, 4865515; 513009, 4865511; 512993, 4865508; 
512982, 4865504; 512966, 4865503; 512956, 4865506; 512946, 4865510; 
512940, 4865513; 512936, 4865512; 512945, 4865505; 512958, 4865496; 
512977, 4865477; 512986, 4865467; 513007, 4865442; 513015, 4865429; 
513016, 4865423; 513006, 4865412; 512998, 4865404; 512995, 4865407; 
512997, 4865416; 512999, 4865422; 512984, 4865439; 512976, 4865453; 
512958, 4865467; 512940, 4865487; 512923, 4865500; 512905, 4865513; 
512889, 4865520; 512871, 4865522; 512851, 4865523; 512835, 4865523; 
512817, 4865524; 512801, 4865527; 512774, 4865532; 512756, 4865536; 
512741, 4865537; 512736, 4865537; 512730, 4865534; 512726, 4865534; 
512725, 4865533; 512726, 4865528; 512723, 4865528; 512723, 4865532; 
512722, 4865533; 512719, 4865534; 512718, 4865539; 512719, 4865543; 
512717, 4865547; 512706, 4865552; 512697, 4865559; 512702, 4865563; 
512706, 4865566; 512710, 4865565; 512715, 4865562; 512723, 4865559; 
512730, 4865557; 512735, 4865555; 512737, 4865557; 512737, 4865559; 
512733, 4865560; 512731, 4865565; 512735, 4865570; 512750, 4865573; 
512764, 4865573; 512790, 4865567; 512798, 4865565; 512811, 4865560; and 
excluding land bound by 512752, 4865557; 512753, 4865553; 512772, 
4865551; 512786, 4865548; 512793, 4865548; 512792, 4865553; 512782, 
4865556; 512769, 4865557; 512762, 4865558; 512756, 4865559; 512752, 
4865557;
    Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
512517, 4866094; 512512, 4866079; 512511, 4866074; 512512, 4866071; 
512513, 4866068; 512512, 4866067; 512510, 4866069; 512509, 4866072; 
512506, 4866070; 512498, 4866067; 512489, 4866066; 512488, 4866055; 
512495, 4866045; 512506, 4866032; 512515, 4866022; 512524, 4866009; 
512534, 4865998; 512545, 4865989; 512553, 4865977; 512559, 4865964; 
512562, 4865956; 512567, 4865938; 512567, 4865930; 512568, 4865921; 
512572, 4865911; 512578, 4865902; 512580, 4865891; 512580, 4865878; 
512580, 4865864; 512582, 4865850; 512583, 4865827; 512584, 4865806; 
512593, 4865792; 512599, 4865783; 512602, 4865775; 512607, 4865764; 
512610, 4865755; 512612, 4865748; 512623, 4865738; 512629, 4865727; 
512635, 4865720; 512642, 4865712; 512645, 4865707; 512642, 4865701; 
512635, 4865699; 512632, 4865696; 512633, 4865695; 512636, 4865696; 
512641, 4865696; 512644, 4865694; 512651, 4865696; 512657, 4865703; 
512667, 4865715; 512676, 4865727; 512681, 4865731; 512686, 4865732; 
512683, 4865725; 512673, 4865713; 512661, 4865698; 512655, 4865689; 
512641, 4865681; 512630, 4865677; 512622, 4865670; 512621, 4865666; 
512623, 4865662; 512628, 4865661; 512635, 4865660; 512644, 4865658; 
512647, 4865655; 512646, 4865652; 512638, 4865653; 512626, 4865655; 
512621, 4865653; 512623, 4865645; 512629, 4865639; 512635, 4865630; 
512642, 4865625; 512651, 4865619; 512659, 4865610; 512667, 4865602; 
512674, 4865596; 512683, 4865590;

[[Page 529]]

512692, 4865582; 512700, 4865574; 512701, 4865572; 512698, 4865570; 
512693, 4865565; 512689, 4865568; 512678, 4865576; 512662, 4865586; 
512653, 4865595; 512642, 4865606; 512636, 4865610; 512626, 4865616; 
512618, 4865623; 512609, 4865635; 512600, 4865647; 512584, 4865649; 
512571, 4865658; 512570, 4865673; 512580, 4865682; 512579, 4865690; 
512572, 4865706; 512555, 4865727; 512543, 4865737; 512526, 4865749; 
512512, 4865758; 512501, 4865768; 512500, 4865773; 512504, 4865772; 
512515, 4865764; 512525, 4865756; 512539, 4865747; 512549, 4865739; 
512550, 4865739; 512563, 4865733; 512579, 4865724; 512589, 4865721; 
512594, 4865726; 512592, 4865735; 512589, 4865741; 512586, 4865748; 
512579, 4865754; 512572, 4865760; 512565, 4865770; 512557, 4865784; 
512553, 4865793; 512549, 4865816; 512550, 4865834; 512549, 4865851; 
512550, 4865873; 512552, 4865895; 512554, 4865899; 512555, 4865907; 
512555, 4865913; 512550, 4865924; 512541, 4865936; 512533, 4865951; 
512527, 4865963; 512522, 4865972; 512517, 4865981; 512509, 4865989; 
512501, 4866000; 512496, 4866005; 512490, 4866017; 512484, 4866027; 
512475, 4866039; 512468, 4866052; 512465, 4866067; 512420, 4866107; 
512388, 4866124; 512348, 4866132; 512319, 4866134; 512319, 4866146; 
512345, 4866144; 512388, 4866135; 512419, 4866125; 512445, 4866104; 
512465, 4866085; 512479, 4866085; 512496, 4866089; 512504, 4866099; 
512513, 4866123; 512523, 4866135; 512535, 4866144; 512541, 4866154; 
512541, 4866156; 512554, 4866153; 512551, 4866147; 512544, 4866138; 
512536, 4866131; 512531, 4866126; 512525, 4866119; 512523, 4866115; 
512518, 4866102; 512517, 4866094;
    (iii) See paragraph (23)(iii) for a map showing critical habitat 
unit 3B.
    (22) Unit 3C; Elijah Bristow State Park Northeast Slough, Lane 
County Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 2.2 ha (5.4 ac), is owned by the OPRD, and is 
located in Elijah Bristow State Park in Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 514970, 4864567; 514987, 4864557; 514999, 4864551; 515023, 
4864537; 515036, 4864528; 515054, 4864524; 515069, 4864515; 515092, 
4864496; 515116, 4864475; 515137, 4864447; 515154, 4864412; 515168, 
4864385; 515179, 4864364; 515191, 4864344; 515202, 4864316; 515216, 
4864293; 515229, 4864277; 515239, 4864261; 515245, 4864248; 515244, 
4864243; 515235, 4864243; 515219, 4864260; 515202, 4864285; 515185, 
4864311; 515175, 4864338; 515160, 4864364; 515147, 4864389; 515138, 
4864411; 515124, 4864438; 515108, 4864461; 515095, 4864474; 515081, 
4864487; 515063, 4864492; 515064, 4864482; 515066, 4864470; 515074, 
4864465; 515081, 4864461; 515088, 4864451; 515080, 4864455; 515069, 
4864461; 515057, 4864472; 515049, 4864483; 515044, 4864499; 515035, 
4864514; 515015, 4864525; 514990, 4864540; 514971, 4864551; 514955, 
4864559; 514947, 4864566; 514943, 4864559; 514947, 4864546; 514953, 
4864520; 514962, 4864502; 514983, 4864484; 514988, 4864475; 514997, 
4864459; 515007, 4864442; 515015, 4864432; 515025, 4864416; 515038, 
4864404; 515054, 4864391; 515064, 4864373; 515070, 4864353; 515075, 
4864332; 515079, 4864311; 515093, 4864315; 515105, 4864318; 515120, 
4864321; 515123, 4864317; 515116, 4864316; 515106, 4864314; 515098, 
4864311; 515088, 4864303; 515081, 4864299; 515085, 4864290; 515093, 
4864270; 515102, 4864250; 515108, 4864241; 515113, 4864232; 515119, 
4864213; 515125, 4864200; 515142, 4864194; 515156, 4864181; 515153, 
4864175; 515136, 4864189; 515126, 4864191; 515126, 4864188; 515129, 
4864174; 515136, 4864158; 515130, 4864155; 515126, 4864159; 515125, 
4864167; 515120, 4864181; 515113, 4864195; 515107, 4864211; 515099, 
4864235; 515093, 4864241; 515084, 4864263; 515074, 4864285; 515063, 
4864295; 515056, 4864314; 515054, 4864334; 515052, 4864338; 515046, 
4864354; 515044, 4864369; 515028, 4864384; 515012, 4864394; 515002, 
4864409; 514992, 4864422; 514986, 4864433; 514977, 4864442; 514967, 
4864461; 514956, 4864471; 514959, 4864474; 514944, 4864493; 514939, 
4864507; 514934, 4864522; 514927, 4864546; 514921, 4864559; 514909, 
4864572; 514902, 4864582; 514884, 4864597; 514879, 4864607; 514859, 
4864619; 514851, 4864630; 514837, 4864636; 514821, 4864648; 514813, 
4864656; 514799, 4864660; 514797, 4864675; 514809, 4864672; 514821, 
4864668; 514834, 4864666; 514845, 4864665; 514857, 4864664; 514873, 
4864650; 514886, 4864641; 514898, 4864625; 514909, 4864612; 514924, 
4864600; 514939, 4864590; 514959, 4864575; 514970, 4864567;
    (iii) See paragraph (23)(iii) for a map showing critical habitat 
unit 3C.
    (23) Unit 3D: Elijah Bristow Island Pond, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 2.1 ha (5.2 ac), is owned by the OPRD, and is 
located in Elijah Bristow State Park in Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 513941, 4864549; 513945, 4864542; 513958, 4864547; 513962, 
4864552; 513966, 4864555; 513973, 4864557; 513978, 4864556; 513982, 
4864554; 513989, 4864549; 513994, 4864543; 513996, 4864536; 513998, 
4864532; 514001, 4864519; 514004, 4864514; 514006, 4864512; 514019, 
4864508; 514030, 4864499; 514037, 4864494; 514047, 4864488; 514060, 
4864481; 514065, 4864482; 514067, 4864486; 514069, 4864489; 514071, 
4864491; 514075, 4864488; 514074, 4864485; 514072, 4864481; 514072, 
4864477; 514075, 4864470; 514082, 4864459; 514083, 4864448; 514080, 
4864429; 514075, 4864408; 514073, 4864391; 514072, 4864374; 514071, 
4864364; 514083, 4864365; 514084, 4864361; 514083, 4864349; 514081, 
4864341; 514072, 4864327; 514064, 4864318; 514055, 4864310; 514043, 
4864307; 514036, 4864310; 514021, 4864322; 514013, 4864327; 514008, 
4864340; 513999, 4864350; 513988, 4864362; 513979, 4864371; 513972, 
4864380; 513970, 4864388; 513974, 4864396; 513982, 4864404; 513991, 
4864414; 514006, 4864432; 514017, 4864442; 514020, 4864458; 514007, 
4864468; 513999, 4864466; 513993, 4864461; 513985, 4864465; 513986, 
4864475; 513985, 4864488; 513973, 4864496; 513963, 4864499; 513952, 
4864495; 513954, 4864489; 513963, 4864481; 513968, 4864475; 513978, 
4864466; 513982, 4864460; 513981, 4864455; 513976, 4864451; 513969, 
4864452; 513957, 4864458; 513953, 4864460; 513950, 4864466; 513950, 
4864473; 513945, 4864483; 513942, 4864493; 513937, 4864504; 513932, 
4864517; 513929, 4864519; 513920, 4864519; 513913, 4864518; 513904, 
4864523; 513892, 4864533; 513898, 4864552; 513907, 4864564; 513921, 
4864566; 513929, 4864576; 513936, 4864578; 513938, 4864556; 513941, 
4864549;
    (iii) Map of Units 3B, 3C, and 3D of critical habitat for the Oregon 
chub (Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 530]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.011

    (24) Unit 3E: Dexter Reservoir RV Alcove DEX3, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 0.4 ha (0.9 ac) and is owned by the USACE. The 
unit is located on the south side of Highway 58 off Dexter Reservoir 
next to a recreational vehicle (RV) park, in Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 515412, 4862223; 515408, 4862221; 515405, 4862216; 515404, 
4862217; 515403, 4862220; 515402, 4862222; 515400,

[[Page 531]]

4862223; 515392, 4862221; 515388, 4862222; 515378, 4862227; 515374, 
4862237; 515364, 4862250; 515358, 4862257; 515352, 4862262; 515344, 
4862272; 515334, 4862285; 515323, 4862300; 515314, 4862311; 515304, 
4862315; 515297, 4862329; 515292, 4862335; 515285, 4862340; 515286, 
4862342; 515293, 4862339; 515299, 4862333; 515303, 4862327; 515313, 
4862322; 515320, 4862314; 515329, 4862311; 515335, 4862306; 515346, 
4862295; 515353, 4862291; 515364, 4862282; 515376, 4862274; 515388, 
4862267; 515399, 4862261; 515410, 4862255; 515420, 4862250; 515427, 
4862248; 515434, 4862246; 515436, 4862243; 515433, 4862239; 515429, 
4862235; 515425, 4862230; 515422, 4862226; 515419, 4862223; 515412, 
4862223;
    (iii) See paragraph (25)(iii) for a map showing critical habitat 
unit 3E.
    (25) Unit 3F: Dexter Reservoir Alcove PIT1, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 0.1 ha (0.3 ac) measured at the annual high-
water elevation, and is owned by the USACE. The unit is located on the 
south side of Highway 58 off Dexter Reservoir, in Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 517131, 4861681; 517127, 4861680; 517127, 4861680; 517128, 
4861683; 517130, 4861693; 517128, 4861699; 517128, 4861703; 517127, 
4861711; 517123, 4861719; 517123, 4861722; 517123, 4861722; 517126, 
4861721; 517129, 4861719; 517135, 4861717; 517145, 4861712; 517153, 
4861708; 517158, 4861705; 517164, 4861702; 517173, 4861699; 517179, 
4861695; 517182, 4861692; 517182, 4861689; 517181, 4861689; 517171, 
4861688; 517165, 4861686; 517159, 4861685; 517154, 4861684; 517138, 
4861684; 517131, 4861681;
    (iii) Map of Units 3E and 3F of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 532]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.012

    (26) Unit 3G: East Fork Minnow Creek Pond, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 1.3 ha (3.3 ac), is owned by the ODOT, and is a 
large beaver pond located on a small tributary to Minnow Creek that 
drains into Lookout Point Reservoir in Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 521267, 4859872; 521270, 4859868; 521272, 4859872; 521279, 
4859877; 521283, 4859872; 521287, 4859862; 521293,

[[Page 533]]

4859852; 521305, 4859841; 521312, 4859841; 521329, 4859825; 521340, 
4859819; 521345, 4859817; 521350, 4859811; 521354, 4859800; 521347, 
4859790; 521337, 4859797; 521330, 4859794; 521326, 4859791; 521324, 
4859781; 521320, 4859757; 521303, 4859756; 521296, 4859770; 521292, 
4859784; 521283, 4859789; 521262, 4859789; 521243, 4859788; 521224, 
4859785; 521210, 4859776; 521193, 4859770; 521181, 4859777; 521169, 
4859784; 521152, 4859792; 521134, 4859800; 521139, 4859809; 521149, 
4859814; 521161, 4859812; 521165, 4859821; 521173, 4859824; 521177, 
4859826; 521189, 4859838; 521197, 4859843; 521208, 4859850; 521218, 
4859851; 521225, 4859850; 521232, 4859850; 521234, 4859850; 521234, 
4859855; 521231, 4859857; 521226, 4859864; 521223, 4859870; 521227, 
4859875; 521237, 4859876; 521248, 4859866; 521254, 4859873; 521259, 
4859874; 521253, 4859879; 521250, 4859887; 521246, 4859895; 521250, 
4859899; 521254, 4859890; 521258, 4859888; 521260, 4859882; 521267, 
4859872;
    (iii) Map of Unit 3G of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 534]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.013

    (27) Unit 3H: Hospital Pond, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 0.5 ha (1.1 ac), is owned by the USACE, and is 
located on the north side of the gravel road on the north shore of 
Lookout Point Reservoir in Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 533030, 4851782; 533047, 4851779; 533065, 4851779; 533078, 
4851772; 533093, 4851767; 533109, 4851767; 533120,

[[Page 535]]

4851766; 533135, 4851762; 533147, 4851755; 533157, 4851743; 533164, 
4851732; 533169, 4851722; 533173, 4851709; 533175, 4851702; 533174, 
4851698; 533167, 4851699; 533163, 4851705; 533150, 4851705; 533139, 
4851715; 533130, 4851720; 533117, 4851725; 533105, 4851732; 533096, 
4851735; 533079, 4851748; 533067, 4851753; 533050, 4851760; 533027, 
4851769; 533017, 4851777; 533022, 4851781; 533030, 4851782;
    (iii) Map of Unit 3H of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.014


[[Page 536]]


    (28) Unit 3I: Shady Dell Pond, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 1.1 ha (2.8 ac), is owned by the United States 
Forest Service (USFS), and is located in a USFS campground at the far 
southeast end of Lookout Point Reservoir along the south side of State 
Highway 58 in Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 536587, 4848720; 536593, 4848709; 536589, 4848707; 536583, 
4848718; 536580, 4848713; 536581, 4848701; 536587, 4848687; 536597, 
4848678; 536612, 4848659; 536628, 4848646; 536647, 4848637; 536649, 
4848637; 536670, 4848619; 536685, 4848593; 536697, 4848576; 536699, 
4848573; 536706, 4848563; 536716, 4848550; 536722, 4848532; 536730, 
4848513; 536726, 4848496; 536727, 4848475; 536718, 4848472; 536725, 
4848456; 536732, 4848443; 536746, 4848432; 536762, 4848423; 536778, 
4848418; 536799, 4848397; 536797, 4848392; 536786, 4848395; 536766, 
4848401; 536746, 4848410; 536732, 4848424; 536720, 4848433; 536706, 
4848439; 536691, 4848455; 536687, 4848463; 536684, 4848474; 536680, 
4848493; 536681, 4848515; 536684, 4848529; 536685, 4848543; 536683, 
4848563; 536673, 4848570; 536653, 4848574; 536626, 4848570; 536612, 
4848573; 536612, 4848580; 536618, 4848579; 536625, 4848578; 536632, 
4848579; 536641, 4848580; 536638, 4848589; 536634, 4848601; 536630, 
4848611; 536624, 4848619; 536607, 4848638; 536591, 4848651; 536573, 
4848674; 536562, 4848694; 536560, 4848716; 536562, 4848735; 536563, 
4848747; 536567, 4848753; 536572, 4848743; 536576, 4848736; 536587, 
4848720; and excluding land bound by 536675, 4848580; 536681, 4848577; 
536687, 4848573; 536685, 4848579; 536683, 4848582; 536679, 4848588; 
536675, 4848593; 536672, 4848598; 536669, 4848602; 536666, 4848607; 
536662, 4848614; 536658, 4848617; 536654, 4848622; 536650, 4848625; 
536645, 4848628; 536640, 4848626; 536638, 4848623; 536640, 4848618; 
536643, 4848613; 536647, 4848605; 536652, 4848596; 536655, 4848590; 
536657, 4848586; 536663, 4848584; 536669, 4848582; 536675, 4848580;
    (iii) See paragraph (29)(iii) for a map showing critical habitat 
unit 3I.
    (29) Unit 3J: Buckhead Creek, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 3.8 ha (9.3 ac) and is owned by the USFS. 
Buckhead Creek is a tributary flowing into the Middle Fork Willamette 
River at the northeast end of Lookout Point Reservoir in Lane County, 
Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 538138, 4847044; 538137, 4847035; 538128, 4847039; 538122, 
4847041; 538118, 4847040; 538109, 4847040; 538105, 4847038; 538106, 
4847032; 538113, 4847031; 538119, 4847032; 538126, 4847029; 538129, 
4847025; 538128, 4847013; 538123, 4847001; 538120, 4846985; 538113, 
4846970; 538108, 4846947; 538102, 4846919; 538092, 4846888; 538081, 
4846854; 538071, 4846816; 538061, 4846782; 538055, 4846782; 538052, 
4846787; 538055, 4846802; 538053, 4846821; 538047, 4846811; 538041, 
4846802; 538044, 4846781; 538049, 4846775; 538046, 4846764; 538037, 
4846768; 538031, 4846763; 538033, 4846775; 538033, 4846793; 538033, 
4846807; 538038, 4846822; 538041, 4846834; 538049, 4846855; 538056, 
4846894; 538051, 4846903; 538053, 4846916; 538058, 4846927; 538065, 
4846941; 538066, 4846946; 538061, 4846944; 538056, 4846942; 538048, 
4846936; 538038, 4846933; 538033, 4846933; 538022, 4846937; 538016, 
4846936; 538011, 4846935; 538007, 4846937; 538003, 4846941; 538004, 
4846947; 538007, 4846951; 538011, 4846954; 538015, 4846953; 538022, 
4846950; 538028, 4846952; 538036, 4846955; 538045, 4846958; 538053, 
4846959; 538061, 4846963; 538067, 4846970; 538072, 4846980; 538077, 
4846990; 538080, 4847000; 538080, 4847013; 538081, 4847018; 538082, 
4847040; 538082, 4847055; 538099, 4847055; 538112, 4847055; 538120, 
4847055; 538134, 4847048; 538138, 4847044;
 Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
537853, 4848143; 537863, 4848139; 537873, 4848135; 537889, 4848129; 
537907, 4848123; 537925, 4848116; 537946, 4848106; 537968, 4848096; 
537985, 4848085; 537996, 4848080; 538021, 4848066; 538035, 4848057; 
538048, 4848049; 538058, 4848042; 538068, 4848035; 538078, 4848030; 
538089, 4848023; 538102, 4848014; 538112, 4848007; 538120, 4847996; 
538124, 4847987; 538133, 4847973; 538147, 4847961; 538159, 4847947; 
538168, 4847928; 538179, 4847913; 538194, 4847901; 538208, 4847884; 
538215, 4847877; 538237, 4847852; 538253, 4847837; 538266, 4847827; 
538281, 4847806; 538297, 4847786; 538308, 4847767; 538311, 4847761; 
538305, 4847754; 538281, 4847743; 538264, 4847737; 538251, 4847756; 
538229, 4847789; 538198, 4847830; 538185, 4847854; 538178, 4847877; 
538171, 4847890; 538160, 4847902; 538149, 4847918; 538139, 4847935; 
538129, 4847948; 538118, 4847956; 538109, 4847971; 538102, 4847984; 
538096, 4847990; 538083, 4848000; 538064, 4848010; 538045, 4848021; 
538040, 4848031; 538032, 4848038; 538023, 4848044; 538013, 4848051; 
538003, 4848048; 537985, 4848058; 537966, 4848067; 537959, 4848065; 
537948, 4848069; 537936, 4848076; 537921, 4848083; 537903, 4848092; 
537885, 4848098; 537872, 4848103; 537859, 4848107; 537846, 4848114; 
537837, 4848120; 537827, 4848126; 537820, 4848134; 537822, 4848142; 
537827, 4848146; 537833, 4848143; 537840, 4848140; 537842, 4848142; 
537841, 4848146; 537837, 4848149; 537839, 4848152; 537845, 4848149; 
537849, 4848147; 537853, 4848143;
    Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
537076, 4848628; 537077, 4848624; 537075, 4848621; 537064, 4848624; 
537055, 4848627; 537050, 4848626; 537047, 4848623; 537041, 4848625; 
537036, 4848629; 537031, 4848631; 537025, 4848638; 537030, 4848648; 
537037, 4848649; 537048, 4848647; 537056, 4848643; 537063, 4848638; 
537076, 4848628;
    Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
537131, 4848537; 537127, 4848528; 537121, 4848532; 537119, 4848556; 
537116, 4848587; 537112, 4848619; 537111, 4848643; 537102, 4848662; 
537091, 4848676; 537068, 4848696; 537045, 4848721; 537022, 4848739; 
537013, 4848747; 537000, 4848763; 536993, 4848769; 536999, 4848773; 
537010, 4848767; 537024, 4848761; 537067, 4848723; 537103, 4848689; 
537116, 4848670; 537127, 4848647; 537128, 4848621; 537131, 4848596; 
537131, 4848576; 537131, 4848537;
    Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
536751, 4848812; 536749, 4848809; 536747, 4848809; 536732, 4848812; 
536719, 4848818; 536712, 4848820; 536695, 4848827; 536692, 4848831; 
536694, 4848834; 536704, 4848839;

[[Page 537]]

536714, 4848838; 536727, 4848837; 536734, 4848831; 536739, 4848830; 
536747, 4848821; 536749, 4848817; 536751, 4848812;
    (iii) Map of Units 3I and 3J of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.015


[[Page 538]]


    (30) Unit 3K: Wicopee Pond, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 1.4 ha (3.3 ac) and is owned by the USFS. The 
pond, a former borrow pit adjacent to Salt Creek in the upper Middle 
Fork Willamette River drainage, was created when a bridge crossing was 
constructed on a small logging road that crosses Salt Creek, along 
Highway 58 in Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 557923, 4838857; 557919, 4838854; 557919, 4838854; 557926, 
4838841; 557935, 4838835; 557951, 4838829; 557948, 4838819; 557955, 
4838814; 557958, 4838820; 557963, 4838824; 557971, 4838825; 557977, 
4838824; 557982, 4838823; 557984, 4838817; 557978, 4838822; 557972, 
4838823; 557970, 4838823; 557966, 4838816; 557963, 4838813; 557968, 
4838803; 557970, 4838793; 557978, 4838789; 557977, 4838786; 557983, 
4838780; 557994, 4838777; 557996, 4838772; 557997, 4838771; 558006, 
4838770; 558018, 4838760; 558021, 4838741; 558026, 4838725; 558037, 
4838714; 558041, 4838701; 558040, 4838682; 558058, 4838684; 558080, 
4838674; 558079, 4838673; 558077, 4838674; 558068, 4838675; 558058, 
4838674; 558049, 4838677; 558038, 4838677; 558037, 4838684; 558032, 
4838695; 558022, 4838698; 558019, 4838705; 558006, 4838709; 558004, 
4838715; 557997, 4838708; 557990, 4838708; 557986, 4838710; 557978, 
4838715; 557976, 4838722; 557971, 4838727; 557965, 4838732; 557959, 
4838742; 557954, 4838754; 557952, 4838763; 557956, 4838770; 557951, 
4838778; 557947, 4838769; 557948, 4838766; 557935, 4838767; 557924, 
4838776; 557918, 4838781; 557904, 4838782; 557898, 4838786; 557890, 
4838791; 557877, 4838800; 557865, 4838811; 557859, 4838814; 557851, 
4838819; 557846, 4838827; 557840, 4838832; 557834, 4838837; 557833, 
4838844; 557834, 4838850; 557842, 4838858; 557854, 4838868; 557869, 
4838875; 557878, 4838880; 557887, 4838885; 557902, 4838897; 557913, 
4838905; 557919, 4838906; 557922, 4838902; 557923, 4838891; 557918, 
4838889; 557920, 4838884; 557926, 4838876; 557923, 4838863; 557923, 
4838857; and excluding land bound by 557921, 4838792; 557923, 4838788; 
557932, 4838789; 557932, 4838793; 557931, 4838796; 557933, 4838803; 
557929, 4838808; 557925, 4838805; 557922, 4838800; 557922, 4838796; 
557922, 4838793; 557921, 4838792; and excluding land bound by 557990, 
4838734; 557995, 4838729; 558006, 4838731; 558006, 4838730; 558009, 
4838724; 558014, 4838720; 558022, 4838721; 558018, 4838722; 558015, 
4838728; 558012, 4838742; 558007, 4838749; 557993, 4838754; 557987, 
4838754; 557984, 4838747; 557986, 4838741; 557990, 4838734;
    (iii) Map of Unit 3K of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 539]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.016

                  Owens Tui Chub (Gila bicolor snyderi)

    California, Mono County.
    1. Hot Creek, adjacent springs and their outflows in the vicinity of 
Hot Creek Hatchery, and 50 feet of riparian habitat on all sides of the 
creek and springs in T3S, R28E, SW\1/4\ Section 35.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 540]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.089

    2. Owens River, and 50 feet on both sides of the river, from Long 
Valley Dam downstream for 8 stream miles in T4S, R30E, Sections 19, 20, 
21, 22, 23, 24, 25, and 36.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.090
    
    Known constituent elements include high quality, cool water with 
adequate cover in the form of rocks, undercut banks, or aquatic 
vegetation and a sufficient insect food base.

                Slender Chub (Erimystax=(Hybopsis) cahni)

    Tennessee. Claiborne and Hancock Counties. Powell River, main 
channel from backwaters of Norris Lake upstream to the Tennessee-
Virginia State line. Clinch River, main channel from backwaters of 
Norris Lake upstream to the Tennessee-Virginia State line.
    Virginia. Lee and Scott Counties. Powell River, main channel from 
the Tennessee-Virginia State line upstream through Lee County, Va. 
Clinch River, main channel from the Tennessee-Virginia State line 
upstream through Scott County, Va.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.091
    

[[Page 541]]



                       Sonora Chub (Gila ditaenia)

    Arizona, Santa Cruz County. An area of land and water in the 
Coronado National Forest, consisting of the following:
    1. Sycamore Creek, and a riparian zone 25 feet wide along each side 
of the creek, from Yank's Spring downstream approximately 5 stream miles 
to the International Border with Mexico within sections 14, 22, 23, 27, 
33, and 34, T. 23 S.; R. 11 E.
    2. Yank's Spring in the SE\1/4\ of the NW\1/4\ of sec. 14, T. 23 S.; 
R. 11 E.
    3. Penasco Creek, including a riparian zone 25 feet wide along each 
side of the creek, from its confluence with Sycamore Creek (SW\1/4\ of 
the SW\1/4\ of sec. 23, T. 23 S.; R. 11 E.) upstream approximately 1\1/
4\ miles to the east boundary of sec. 26, T. 23 S. R. 11 E.;
    4. An unnamed tributary to Sycamore Creek, from its confluence with 
Sycamore Creek (SW\1/4\ of the NW\1/4\ of sec. 23, T. 23 S.; R. 11 E.) 
upstream approximately \1/4\ mile to the west boundary of the NE\1/4\ of 
the SE\1/4\ of the NE\1/4\ sec. 22, T. 23 S.; R. 11 E.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.092
    
    Known primary constituent elements include clean permanent water 
with pools and intermediate riffle areas and/or intermittent pools 
maintained by bedrock or by subsurface flow in areas shaded by canyon 
walls.

                    Spotfin Chub (Erimonax monachus)

    North Carolina. Macon and Swain Counties. Little Tennessee River, 
main channel from the backwaters of Fontana Lake upstream to the North 
Carolina-Georgia State line.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.093
    
    Tennessee. Cumberland, Fentress, and Morgan Counties. Emory and Obed 
Rivers and Clear and Daddys Creek in Morgan County. Clear Creek in 
Fentress County. Obed River upstream to U.S. Interstate Highway 40, 
Clear Creek upstream to U.S. Interstate Highway 40 and Daddys Creek 
upstream to U.S. Highway 127 in Cumberland County.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.094
    
    Tennessee. Hawkins and Sullivan Counties. North Fork Holston, main 
channel upstream from junction with South Fork Holston River to the 
Tennessee-Virginia State line.
    Virginia. Scott and Washington Counties. North Fork Holston River, 
main channel from the Virginia-Tennessee State line upstream through 
Scott and Washington Counties.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 542]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.095

                    Virgin River Chub (Gila seminuda)

    Legal descriptions for St. George (Utah-Arizona) and Littlefield 
(Arizona) were obtained from the 1987 Bureau of Land Management (BLM) 
maps (Surface Management Status 30x60 Minute Quadrangle). Legal 
descriptions for Overton (Nevada-Arizona) were obtained from the 1989 
BLM maps (Surface Management Status 30x60 Minute Quadrangle). The 100-
year floodplain for many areas is detailed in Flood Insurance Rate Maps 
(FIRM) published by and available through the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA). In areas where a FIRM is not available, the 
presence of alluvium soils or known high water marks can be used to 
determine the extent of the floodplain. Only areas of floodplain 
containing at least one of the constituent elements are considered 
critical habitat. Critical habitat designated for the Virgin River chub 
is as follows:
    Utah, Washington County; Arizona, Mohave County; Nevada, Clark 
County. The Virgin River and its 100-year floodplain from its confluence 
with La Verkin Creek, Utah in T.41S., R.13W., sec.23 (Salt Lake Base and 
Meridian) to Halfway Wash, Nevada T.15S., R.69E., sec.6 (Salt Lake Base 
and Meridian).
    The primary constituent elements of critical habitat determined 
necessary for the survival and recovery of these Virgin River fishes are 
water, physical habitat, and biological environment. The desired 
conditions for each of these elements are further discussed below.
    Water--A sufficient quantity and quality of water (i.e., 
temperature, dissolved oxygen, contaminants, nutrients, turbidity, etc.) 
that is delivered to a specific location in accordance with a hydrologic 
regime that is identified for the particular life stage for each 
species. This includes the following:
    1. Water quality characterized by natural seasonally variable 
temperature, turbidity, and conductivity;
    2. hydrologic regime characterized by the duration, magnitude, and 
frequency of flow events capable of forming and maintaining channel and 
instream habitat necessary for particular life stages at certain times 
of the year; and
    3. flood events inundating the floodplain necessary to provide the 
organic matter that provides or supports the nutrient and food sources 
for the listed fishes.
    Physical Habitat--Areas of the Virgin River that are inhabited or 
potentially habitable by a particular life stage for each species, for 
use in spawning, nursing, feeding, and rearing, or corridors between 
such areas:
    1. River channels, side channels, secondary channels, backwaters, 
and springs, and other areas which provide access to these habitats; and
    2. areas with slow to moderate velocities, within deep runs or 
pools, with predominately sand substrates, particularly habitats which 
contain boulders or other instream cover.
    Biological Environment--Food supply, predation, and competition are 
important elements of the biological environment and are considered 
components of this constituent element. Food supply is a function of 
nutrient supply, productivity, and availability to each life stage of 
the species. Predation and competition, although considered normal 
components of this environment, are out of balance due to nonnative fish 
species in many areas. Fourteen introduced species, including red shiner 
(Cyprinella lutrensis), black bullhead (Ameiurus melas), channel catfish 
(Ictalurus punctatus), and largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides), 
compete with or prey upon the listed fishes. Of these, the red shiner is 
the most numerous and has been the most problematic for the listed 
fishes. Red shiners compete for food and available habitats and are 
known to prey on the eggs and early life stages of the listed fishes. 
Components of this constituent element include the following:
    1. Seasonally flooded areas that contribute to the biological 
productivity of the river system by producing allochthonous (humus, 
silt, organic detritus, colloidal matter, and plants and animals 
produced outside the river and brought into the river) organic matter 
which provides and supports much of the food base of the listed fishes; 
and
    2. few or no predatory or competitive nonnative species in occupied 
Virgin River fishes' habitats or potential reestablishment sites.

[[Page 543]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26JA00.000

                       Yaqui Chub (Gila purpurea)

    Arizona, Cochise County. All aquatic habitats of San Bernardino NWR 
in S\1/2\ Sec. 11; Sec. 14; S\1/2\ and NE\1/4\ Sec. 15; T24S, R30E. 
Known constituent elements include clean permanent water with deep pools 
and intermediate areas with riffles, areas of detritus or heavily 
overgrown cut banks in the Rio Yaqui drainage, and the absence of 
introduced exotic fishes.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 544]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.096

       Ash Meadows Speckled Dace (Rhinichthys osculus nevadensis)

    Nevada, Nye County: Each of the following springs and outflows plus 
surrounding land areas for a distance of 50 meters (164 feet) from these 
springs and outflows:
    Bradford Springs in Section 11, T18S, R50E, and their outflows for a 
distance of 300 meters (984 feet) from the springs.
    Jack Rabbit Spring and its outflow flowing southwest to the boundary 
between Section 24 in T18S, R50E and Section 19, T18S, R51E.
    Big Spring and its outflow to the boundary between Section 19, T18S, 
R51E and Section 24, T18S, R50E.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.097
    
    Known constituent elements include warm-water springs and their 
outflows and surrounding land areas that provide vegetation for cover 
and habitat for insects and other invertebrates on which the species 
feeds.

                     Desert Dace (Eremichthys acros)

    Nevada, Humboldt County. Thermal springs and their outflows plus 
surrounding riparian areas for a distance of 50 feet from these springs 
and outflows in T40N, R25E, SW\1/4\ Section 5, NW\1/4\NW\1/4\ Section 8, 
W\1/2\ Section 18, W\1/2\SW\1/4\ Section 19; T40N, R24E, Section 23, 
N\1/2\SE\1/4\ and S\1/2\NE\1/4\ Section 24, SE\1/4\ Section 25, N\1/2\ 
Section 25, and N\1/2\ Section 26.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.098
    
    Primary constituent elements of the habitat are considered to be 
quantity, and thermal and chemical quality of water in headpools and 
spring outflow streams; presence of a stable, natural substrate 
supporting food plants for the fish; and length of outflow streams; 
adequate for seasonal movements in response to changes of water 
temperature.

                    Amber Darter (Percina antesella)

    Tennessee and Georgia: Conasauga River from the U.S. Route 411 
bridge in Polk County, Tennesee, downstream approximately 33.5 miles 
through Bradley County, Tennessee and Murray and Whitfield Counties, 
Georgia, to the Tibbs Bridge Road bridge (Murray County Road 109 and 
Whitfield County Road 100).
    Constituent elements include high quality water, riffle areas (free 
of silt) composed of sand, gravel, and cobble, which becomes vegetated 
primarily with Podostemum during the summer.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 545]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.099

                 Fountain Darter (Etheostoma fonticola)

    Texas, Hays County; Spring Lake and its outflow, the San Marcos 
River, downstream approximately 0.5 miles below Interstate Highway 35 
bridge.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.100
    
                   Leopard Darter (Percina pantherina)

    Oklahoma. McCurtain and Pushmataha Counties. Little River, main 
channel in Pushmataha County from mouth of Cloudy Creek (T. 3 S.; R. 20 
E.; Section 3) upstream to the Pushmataha-Le Flore County line. Black 
Fork Creek in McCurtain County from its junction with Little River (T. 1 
S.; R. 20 E.; Section 22) upstream to Oklahoma Highway 144 crossing (T. 
1 S.; R. 19 E.; Section 12). Glover Creek, main channel in McCurtain 
County from Oklahoma Highway 7 crossing (T. 5 S.; R. 23 E.; Section 28) 
upstream to the junction of the East Fork and West Fork of Glover Creek. 
East Fork and West Fork of Glover Creek. East Fork of Glover Creek, main 
channel in Pushmataha County from its junction with the West Fork Glover 
Creek (T. 3 S.; R. 23 E.; Section 7) upstream to 4 air miles north-
northeast of the community of Bethel (T. 2 S.; R. 24 E.; Section 5). 
West Fork Glover Creek, main channel in McCurtain County from its 
junction with the East Fork Glover Creek upstream to the community of 
Battiest (T. 2 S.; R. 23 E.; Section 7). Mountain Fork Creek, main 
channel in McCurtain County, from mouth of Boktukola Creek (T. 2 S.; R. 
25 E.; Section 9), 6 air miles south-southwest of Smithville, upstream 
to the Oklahoma-Arkansas State line.
    Arkansas. Polk County. Mountain Fork Creek, main channel from the 
Arkansas-Oklahoma State line upstream to the community of Mountain Fork 
(T. 1 S.; R. 32 W.; Section 29).
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.101
    
                  Maryland Darter (Etheostoma sellare)

    Maryland (Harford County): (1) Deer Creek main channel from the 
junction with Elbow Branch thence downstream to the junction with the 
Susquehanna River. (2) Gasheys Run (also known as Gasheys Creek) main 
channels of east and west forks from their overcrossing by old Penn 
Central Railroad (presently titled to National Railroad Passenger 
Corporation, Amtrak) south to their confluence, thence south to the 
confluence with Swan Creek.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 546]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.102

    Constituent elements of this habitat are considered to be quality 
and permanence of streamflow in shallow areas of the streams (riffles), 
and presence of unsilted rocky crevices for shelter and production of 
aquatic insects and snails for food.

                  Niangua Darter (Etheostoma nianguae)

    Missouri. Big Tavern Creek, Miller County. Big Tavern Creek and 50 
feet along each side of the creek from Highway 52 upstream to Highway 
17.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.103
    
    Missouri. Niangua River, Dallas County. Niangua River and 50 feet on 
each side of the river from county road K upstream to 1 mile beyond 
county road M to the Webster County line.
    Missouri. Pomme de Terre River, Greene County. Pomme de Terre River 
and 50 feet on each side of the river from Highway 65 upstream to the 
Webster County line.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.104
    
    Missouri. Brush Creek, Cedar, and St. Clair Counties. Brush Creek 
and 50 feet on each side of the creek from 1000 feet upstream of county 
road J to the boundary of Sections 34 and 35, Township 36 N, Range 25 W.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.105
    
    Missouri. Little Niangua River, Camden, Dallas, and Hickory 
Counties. Little Niangua River and 50 feet on each side of the river 
from 1 mile below (downstream of) Highway 54, Camden County, to county 
road E, Dallas County.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 547]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.106

    Constituent elements, for all areas designated as critical habitat, 
consist of medium-sized creeks with silt-free pools and riffles and 
moderately clear water draining hilly areas underlain by chert and 
dolomite. Water ranges from 8 to 46 inches in depth over gravel with 
scattered rubble.

                Slackwater Darter (Etheostoma boschungi)

    Alabama. Lauderdale County. All permanent and intermittent streams 
with flowing water from December to June tributary to Cypress Creek and 
its tributaries upstream from the junction of Burcham Creek, including 
Burcham Creek, excluding Threet Creek and its tributaries.
    Tennessee. Wayne County. All permanent and intermittent streams with 
flowing water from December to June tributary to Cypress and Middle 
Cypress Creek drainage.
    Note: Maps follow.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.107
    
    Tennessee. Lawrence County, Buffalo River and its tributaries in 
Lawrence County, Tenn.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.108

                 Vermilion Darter (Etheostoma chermocki)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Jefferson County, 
Alabama, on the map below.
    (2) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements of the 
physical and biological features essential to the conservation of the 
vermilion darter consist of four components:
    (i) Geomorphically stable stream bottoms and banks (stable 
horizontal dimension and vertical profile) in order to maintain bottom

[[Page 548]]

features (riffles, runs, and pools) and transition zones between bottom 
features, to promote connectivity between spawning, foraging, and 
resting sites, and to maintain gene flow throughout the species range.
    (ii) Instream flow regime with an average daily discharge over 50 
cubic feet per second, inclusive of both surface runoff and groundwater 
sources (springs and seepages) and exclusive of flushing flows.
    (iii) Water quality with temperature not exceeding 26.7 [deg]C (80 
[deg]F), dissolved oxygen 6.0 milligrams or greater per liter, turbidity 
of an average monthly reading of 10 NTU and 15mg/l TSS (Nephelometric 
Turbidity Units; units used to measure sediment discharge; Total 
Suspended Solids measured as mg/l of sediment in water) or less; and a 
specific conductance (ability of water to conduct an electric current, 
based on dissolved solids in the water) of no greater than 225 micro 
Siemens per centimeter at 26.7 [deg]C (80 [deg]F).
    (iv) Stable bottom substrates consisting of fine gravel with coarse 
gravel or cobble, or bedrock with sand and gravel, with low amounts of 
fine sand and sediments within the interstitial spaces of the substrates 
along with adequate aquatic vegetation.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures existing on 
the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements, such as buildings, bridges, aqueducts, 
airports, and roads, and the land on which such structures are located.
    (4) Critical habitat unit map. The map was developed from USGS 
7.5[min] quadrangles. Critical habitat unit upstream and downstream 
limits were then identified by longitude and latitude using decimal 
degrees.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for the vermilion 
darter follows:

[[Page 549]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07DE10.005

    (6) Unit 1: Turkey Creek, Jefferson County, Alabama.
    (i) Unit 1 includes the channel in Turkey Creek from Shadow Lake Dam 
(086[deg]38[min]22.50[sec] W long., 033[deg]40[min]44.78[sec] N lat.) 
downstream to the Section 13/14 (T15S, R2W) line 
(086[deg]42[min]31.81[sec] W long., 033[deg]43[min]23.61[sec] N lat.).

[[Page 550]]

    (ii) Map of Unit 1 is provided at paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.
    (7) Unit 2: Dry Branch, Jefferson County, Alabama.
    (i) Unit 2 includes the channel in Dry Branch from the bridge at 
Glenbrook Road (086[deg]41[min]6.05[sec] W long., 
033[deg]41[min]10.65[sec] N lat) downstream to the confluence with 
Beaver Creek (86[deg]41[min]17.39[sec] W long., 
033[deg]41[min]26.94[sec] N lat.).
    (ii) Map of Unit 2 is provided at paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.
    (8) Unit 3: Beaver Creek, Jefferson County, Alabama.
    (i) Unit 3 includes the channel of Beaver Creek from the confluence 
with the unnamed tributary to Beaver Creek and Dry Branch 
(086[deg]41[min]17.54[sec] W long., 033[deg]41[min]26.94[sec] N lat.) 
downstream to its confluence with Turkey Creek (086[deg]41[min]9.16[sec] 
W long., 033[deg]41[min]55.86 N lat.).
    (ii) Map of Unit 3 is provided at paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.
    (9) Unit 4: Dry Creek, Jefferson County, Alabama.
    (i) Unit 4 includes the channel of Dry Creek, from Innsbrook Road 
(086[deg]39[min]53.78[sec] W long., 033[deg]42[min]19.11[sec] N lat) 
downstream to the confluence with Turkey Creek (086[deg]40[min]3.72[sec] 
W long., 033[deg]42[min]1.39[sec] N lat).
    (ii) Map of Unit 4 is provided at paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.
    (10) Unit 5: Unnamed Tributary to Beaver Creek, Jefferson County, 
Alabama.
    (i) Unit 5 includes the channel of the Unnamed Tributary from its 
confluence with Beaver Creek (086[deg]41[min]17.54[sec] W long., 
033[deg]41[min]26.94[sec] N lat.), upstream to the 1/2(T16S, R2W) 
section line (086[deg]42[min]31.70[sec] W long., 
033[deg]39[min]54.15[sec] N lat.)
    (ii) Map of Units 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 551]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07DE10.006


[[Page 552]]



                 San Marcos Gambusia (Gambusia georgei)

    Texas, Hays County; San Marcos River from Highway 12 bridge 
downstream to approximately 0.5 miles below Interstate Highway 35 
bridge.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.109
    
                Tidewater goby (Eucyclogobius newberryi)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Del Norte, Humboldt, 
Mendocino, Sonoma, Marin, San Mateo, Santa Cruz, Monterey, San Luis 
Obispo, Santa Barbara, Ventura, and Los Angeles Counties, California, on 
the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
tidewater goby are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) Persistent, shallow (in the range of about 0.1 to 2 m), still-
to-slow-moving aquatic habitat most commonly ranging in salinity from 
less than 0.5 ppt to about 10 to 12 ppt;
    (ii) Substrates (e.g., sand, silt, mud) suitable for the 
construction of burrows for reproduction;
    (iii) Submerged and emergent aquatic vegetation, such as Potamogeton 
pectinatus and Ruppia maritima, that provides protection from predators; 
and
    (iv) Presence of a sandbar(s) across the mouth of a lagoon or 
estuary during the late spring, summer, and fall that closes or 
partially closes the lagoon or estuary, thereby providing relatively 
stable water levels and salinity.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include man-made structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads, and the land on which such 
structures are located) existing on the effective date of this rule and 
not containing one or more of the PCEs.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Boundaries of critical habitat were 
defined for most units using National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) data 
(both published data available over the internet and in-publication 
provisional data). Where NWI data was lacking, unit boundaries were 
digitized directly on imagery from the Department of Agriculture's 
National Aerial Imagery Program data (NAIP) acquired in 2005. NAIP and 
NWI data were projected to Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM), zones 10 
and 11, on the North American Datum of 1983.
    (5) Index to maps of critical habitat for tidewater goby.
    (i) Note: Map 1 of Index to maps of critical habitat for tidewater 
goby follows.

[[Page 553]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.000

    (ii)
    Note: Map 2 of Index to maps of critical habitat for tidewater goby 
follows.

[[Page 554]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.001

    (6) Unit DN-1; Del Norte County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Crescent City. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 398215, 4631301; 
398219, 4631313; 398228, 4631341; 398279, 4631340; 398325, 4631324; 
398371, 4631334; 398505, 4631467; 398579, 4631522; 398623,

[[Page 555]]

4631595; 398624, 4631645; 398600, 4631737; 398603, 4631783; 398665, 
4631868; 398689, 4631921; 398709, 4631944; 398773, 4631963; 398796, 
4631999; 398808, 4632080; 398826, 4632118; 398947, 4632241; 398965, 
4632271; 398963, 4632327; 398939, 4632408; 398882, 4632465; 398859, 
4632511; 398866, 4632625; 398895, 4632716; 398906, 4632726; 399042, 
4632686; 399052, 4632691; 399053, 4632760; 399066, 4632775; 399135, 
4632782; 399133, 4632845; 399118, 4632863; 399124, 4632921; 399193, 
4632933; 399216, 4632958; 399222, 4633001; 399245, 4633026; 399286, 
4633023; 399404, 4632945; 399553, 4632890; 399608, 4632831; 399638, 
4632823; 399700, 4632835; 399800, 4632920; 399905, 4632967; 399943, 
4632974; 399958, 4632972; 399988, 4632969; 400004, 4632968; 400113, 
4632943; 400184, 4632937; 400229, 4632899; 400302, 4632852; 400410, 
4632749; 400447, 4632700; 400513, 4632666; 400579, 4632657; 400763, 
4632563; 401092, 4632485; 401201, 4632486; 401217, 4632506; 401290, 
4632508; 401308, 4632531; 401307, 4632604; 401277, 4632648; 401244, 
4632839; 401238, 4632974; 401205, 4633104; 401178, 4633167; 401164, 
4633284; 401140, 4633371; 401108, 4633446; 401110, 4633494; 401081, 
4633570; 401052, 4633650; 401017, 4633717; 400970, 4633771; 400929, 
4633861; 400957, 4633954; 400911, 4634017; 400907, 4634099; 400909, 
4634177; 400889, 4634229; 400864, 4634308; 400869, 4634386; 400832, 
4634422; 400925, 4634573; 400940, 4634708; 400911, 4634810; 400810, 
4635094; 400815, 4635251; 400789, 4635356; 400797, 4635462; 400870, 
4635486; 401038, 4635437; 401156, 4635368; 401124, 4635266; 401076, 
4635197; 401062, 4635148; 401147, 4635126; 401131, 4635003; 401194, 
4634989; 401214, 4634885; 401247, 4634833; 401329, 4634850; 401350, 
4634841; 401294, 4634706; 401211, 4634613; 401249, 4634557; 401305, 
4634526; 401355, 4634518; 401421, 4634511; 401410, 4634429; 401464, 
4634365; 401552, 4634320; 401699, 4634412; 401744, 4634384; 401696, 
4634244; 401608, 4634146; 401566, 4634111; 401536, 4634084; 401504, 
4634063; 401480, 4634029; 401490, 4634000; 401575, 4633987; 401577, 
4633949; 401510, 4633917; 401508, 4633894; 401621, 4633845; 401671, 
4633798; 401683, 4633704; 401705, 4633678; 401728, 4633675; 401779, 
4633693; 401809, 4633674; 401885, 4633650; 401889, 4633719; 401924, 
4633721; 402038, 4633671; 402126, 4633606; 402151, 4633606; 402175, 
4633667; 402208, 4633671; 402241, 4633633; 402253, 4633584; 402355, 
4633459; 402377, 4633415; 402380, 4633385; 402402, 4633341; 402477, 
4633241; 402534, 4633187; 402574, 4633105; 402580, 4633018; 402563, 
4632904; 402548, 4632859; 402506, 4632806; 402500, 4632743; 402503, 
4632199; 402497, 4632166; 402429, 4632027; 402352, 4631932; 402346, 
4631909; 402376, 4631845; 402431, 4631783; 402433, 4631707; 402453, 
4631684; 402483, 4631531; 402483, 4631491; 402431, 4631415; 402425, 
4631372; 402433, 4631344; 402463, 4631303; 402465, 4631283; 402368, 
4630918; 402298, 4630820; 402160, 4630568; 402153, 4630383; 402182, 
4630308; 402237, 4630049; 402272, 4629980; 402302, 4629971; 402324, 
4629943; 402324, 4629915; 402255, 4629848; 402170, 4629795; 402002, 
4629757; 401859, 4629698; 401756, 4629646; 401669, 4629581; 401487, 
4629467; 401449, 4629435; 401397, 4629351; 401315, 4629337; 401292, 
4629300; 401210, 4629270; 401102, 4629203; 400998, 4629189; 400952, 
4629170; 400921, 4629129; 400814, 4629118; 400781, 4629103; 400701, 
4629023; 400622, 4629001; 400517, 4628950; 400306, 4628930; 400291, 
4628915; 400280, 4628884; 400262, 4628882; 400214, 4628900; 400161, 
4628906; 400059, 4628872; 399968, 4628873; 399952, 4628853; 399882, 
4628547; 399858, 4628519; 399838, 4628512; 399839, 4628588; 399861, 
4628702; 399862, 4628758; 399850, 4628796; 399879, 4628908; 399870, 
4628984; 399874, 4629121; 399885, 4629134; 399902, 4629134; 399950, 
4629087; 400012, 4628967; 400040, 4628951; 400108, 4628963; 400168, 
4629013; 400169, 4629089; 400069, 4629222; 400024, 4629304; 399990, 
4629406; 399918, 4629514; 399917, 4629649; 399944, 4629714; 399942, 
4629798; 399981, 4629859; 400033, 4629970; 400107, 4629994; 400118, 
4630030; 400130, 4630189; 400096, 4630259; 400067, 4630361; 400015, 
4630443; 400010, 4630473; 399975, 4630535; 399933, 4630632; 399939, 
4630685; 399958, 4630728; 399953, 4630918; 399976, 4630964; 400002, 
4630981; 400068, 4630996; 400135, 4631045; 400326, 4631134; 400399, 
4631220; 400430, 4631267; 400453, 4631280; 400519, 4631292; 400550, 
4631309; 400550, 4631345; 400488, 4631409; 400461, 4631516; 400446, 
4631547; 400440, 4631608; 400423, 4631666; 400336, 4631835; 400337, 
4631866; 400371, 4631952; 400398, 4632068; 400384, 4632144; 400359, 
4632208; 400292, 4632357; 400242, 4632535; 400177, 4632645; 400165, 
4632699; 400130, 4632750; 400063, 4632825; 400037, 4632838; 400007, 
4632841; 399956, 4632826; 399884, 4632792; 399853, 4632766; 399831, 
4632723; 399812, 4632678; 399823, 4632561; 399856, 4632388; 399859, 
4632210; 399781, 4632145; 399737, 4632049; 399631, 4631947; 399601, 
4631929; 399540, 4631945; 399500, 4631997; 399431, 4632158; 399416, 
4632165; 399362, 4632153; 399223, 4632011; 399210, 4631980; 399209, 
4631924; 399226, 4631861; 399225, 4631787; 399181, 4631696; 399145, 
4631514; 399117, 4631451; 399021, 4631353; 398972, 4631262; 398879, 
4631164; 398707, 4631027; 398691, 4631002; 398688, 4630959; 398678, 
4630944; 398644, 4630929; 398561, 4630930; 398561, 4630950; 398620, 
4630993; 398585, 4631026; 398570, 4631077; 398538, 4631108; 398454, 
4631109; 398313, 4631043; 398283, 4631063; 398241, 4631163; 398237, 
4631252; returning to 398215, 4631301; excluding land bounded by: 
399568, 4632334; 399524, 4632296; 399527, 4632273; 399577, 4632222; 
399640, 4632198; 399676, 4632205; 399727, 4632260; 399748, 4632318; 
399744, 4632344; 399716, 4632362; 399655, 4632360; 399645, 4632357; 
returning to 399568, 4632334.
    (ii)
    Note: Map of Unit DNT-1 follows.

[[Page 556]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.002

    (7) Unit HUM-1; Humboldt County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Orick and Rodgers Peak. 
Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 
407547, 4566545; 407550, 4566573; 407596, 4566611; 407600, 4566697; 
407685, 4566848; 407746, 4567008; 407759, 4567078; 407799, 4567202;

[[Page 557]]

407828, 4567303; 407832, 4567384; 407974, 4567789; 408015, 4567860; 
408016, 4567903; 408008, 4567923; 408024, 4567944; 408042, 4567946; 
408057, 4567930; 408084, 4567895; 408094, 4567849; 408121, 4567815; 
408131, 4567787; 408140, 4567691; 408114, 4567594; 408068, 4567595; 
408070, 4567519; 408081, 4567450; 408094, 4567424; 408157, 4567386; 
408316, 4567335; 408524, 4567320; 408565, 4567299; 408605, 4567256; 
408669, 4567113; 408674, 4567067; 408700, 4566955; 408701, 4566818; 
408646, 4566722; 408641, 4566689; 408681, 4566625; 408738, 4566495; 
408790, 4566408; 408830, 4566364; 408890, 4566326; 408963, 4566238; 
408983, 4566187; 408997, 4566116; 409047, 4566042; 409059, 4566011; 
409061, 4565942; 409087, 4565790; 409147, 4565687; 409151, 4565626; 
409115, 4565540; 409114, 4565492; 409134, 4565454; 409153, 4565319; 
409156, 4565200; 409114, 4565098; 409104, 4565050; 409102, 4564916; 
409066, 4564881; 409023, 4564863; 408982, 4564859; 408936, 4564880; 
408858, 4564883; 408751, 4564857; 408484, 4564842; 408402, 4564830; 
408359, 4564805; 408321, 4564806; 408230, 4564835; 408217, 4564848; 
408220, 4564881; 408282, 4564984; 408311, 4565057; 408327, 4565146; 
408385, 4565293; 408380, 4565326; 408314, 4565466; 408304, 4565505; 
408271, 4565548; 408223, 4565572; 408130, 4565596; 408084, 4565629; 
408087, 4565660; 408174, 4565699; 408190, 4565717; 408201, 4565793; 
408222, 4565849; 408220, 4565955; 408181, 4566037; 408164, 4566124; 
408132, 4566175; 407982, 4566169; 407939, 4566197; 407930, 4566266; 
407815, 4566445; 407722, 4566523; 407580, 4566519; returning to 407547, 
4566545.
    (ii)
    Note: Map of Unit HUM-1 follows.

[[Page 558]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.003

    (8) Unit HUM-2; Humboldt County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Rodgers Peak and Trinidad. 
Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 
405094, 4557688; 405100, 4557744; 405129, 4557807; 405137, 4557852; 
405179, 4557936; 405195, 4558006; 405266, 4558196; 405272, 4558252;

[[Page 559]]

405332, 4558393; 405341, 4558464; 405397, 4558649; 405479, 4558879; 
405535, 4559074; 405569, 4559137; 405627, 4559309; 405708, 4559498; 
405732, 4559592; 405763, 4559632; 405847, 4559862; 405850, 4559913; 
405893, 4560073; 405961, 4560234; 405995, 4560300; 406053, 4560459; 
406099, 4560535; 406102, 4560586; 406176, 4560803; 406180, 4560862; 
406260, 4561023; 406274, 4561099; 406336, 4561175; 406349, 4561258; 
406368, 4561312; 406382, 4561388; 406416, 4561524; 406461, 4561618; 
406471, 4561671; 406526, 4561805; 406550, 4561835; 406578, 4561908; 
406600, 4562053; 406611, 4562071; 406639, 4562294; 406643, 4562408; 
406674, 4562489; 406675, 4562563; 406661, 4562616; 406664, 4562654; 
406680, 4562702; 406698, 4562730; 406731, 4562742; 406758, 4562714; 
406780, 4562645; 406770, 4562399; 406752, 4562226; 406782, 4562132; 
406784, 4562089; 406791, 4562079; 406790, 4561964; 406769, 4561896; 
406730, 4561655; 406742, 4561541; 406749, 4561535; 406795, 4561316; 
406817, 4561265; 406857, 4561214; 406872, 4561178; 406871, 4561145; 
406812, 4561055; 406799, 4561024; 406827, 4560877; 406829, 4560546; 
406853, 4560442; 406885, 4560365; 406918, 4560162; 406914, 4560030; 
406935, 4559890; 406950, 4559857; 406957, 4559816; 407017, 4559729; 
407016, 4559635; 407005, 4559581; 407052, 4559464; 407051, 4559439; 
407038, 4559396; 407059, 4559261; 407178, 4559173; 407255, 4559081; 
407305, 4558973; 407340, 4558759; 407348, 4558538; 407367, 4558454; 
407377, 4558449; 407418, 4558456; 407423, 4558245; 407432, 4558207; 
407475, 4558133; 407474, 4558077; 407451, 4558021; 407401, 4557943; 
407260, 4557821; 407078, 4557703; 407035, 4557668; 407006, 4557623; 
406988, 4557555; 406934, 4557532; 406874, 4557490; 406915, 4557415; 
406916, 4557415; 407112, 4557533; 407219, 4557613; 407252, 4557597; 
407310, 4557530; 407325, 4557479; 407362, 4557428; 407458, 4557351; 
407472, 4557318; 407468, 4557163; 407457, 4557112; 407427, 4557125; 
407402, 4557125; 407353, 4557085; 407296, 4556997; 407267, 4556924; 
407259, 4556860; 407276, 4556792; 407310, 4556730; 407310, 4556712; 
407284, 4556690; 407224, 4556719; 407201, 4556711; 407193, 4556688; 
407150, 4556679; 407129, 4556649; 407083, 4556634; 406936, 4556631; 
406840, 4556662; 406792, 4556683; 406726, 4556699; 406686, 4556735; 
406587, 4556795; 406428, 4556840; 406337, 4556884; 406292, 4556946; 
406280, 4557002; 406285, 4557027; 406306, 4557047; 406833, 4557365; 
406795, 4557435; 406716, 4557380; 406588, 4557316; 406361, 4557184; 
406292, 4557149; 406261, 4557149; 406239, 4557173; 406219, 4557239; 
406215, 4557313; 406191, 4557404; 406186, 4557407; 406277, 4557408; 
406168, 4557710; 405948, 4557797; 405948, 4557648; 405763, 4557689; 
405752, 4557707; 405737, 4557738; 405728, 4557779; 405728, 4557810; 
405732, 4557839; 405741, 4557861; 405733, 4557944; 405655, 4557962; 
405615, 4557924; 405524, 4557946; 405456, 4557939; 405392, 4557897; 
405297, 4557858; 405264, 4557828; 405238, 4557790; 405208, 4557684; 
405170, 4557664; 405146, 4557603; 405126, 4557611; returning to 405094, 
4557688.
    (ii)
    Note: HUM-2 included on map with unit HUM-1.
    (9) Unit HUM-3; Humboldt County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tyee City. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 405066, 4529314; 
405079, 4529311; 405089, 4529308; 405101, 4529303; 405111, 4529297; 
405117, 4529288; 405122, 4529288; 405124, 4529293; 405127, 4529303; 
405131, 4529315; 405139, 4529323; 405140, 4529328; 405134, 4529335; 
405126, 4529339; 405121, 4529352; 405117, 4529353; 405108, 4529355; 
405110, 4529361; 405121, 4529366; 405136, 4529367; 405141, 4529362; 
405137, 4529354; 405137, 4529349; 405146, 4529341; 405158, 4529336; 
405161, 4529328; 405161, 4529322; 405154, 4529315; 405146, 4529308; 
405141, 4529295; 405139, 4529273; 405130, 4529262; 405112, 4529252; 
405099, 4529259; 405090, 4529274; 405089, 4529294; 405085, 4529296; 
405075, 4529300; 405070, 4529307; returning to 405066, 4529314.
    (ii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata North. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 405163, 4529039; 
405174, 4529059; 405184, 4529079; 405184, 4529091; 405185, 4529106; 
405204, 4529103; 405209, 4529111; 405220, 4529135; 405232, 4529158; 
405248, 4529168; 405248, 4529155; 405236, 4529137; 405231, 4529113; 
405221, 4529095; 405206, 4529084; 405200, 4529062; 405188, 4529041; 
405185, 4529031; 405213, 4529004; 405244, 4528990; 405259, 4528982; 
405264, 4528990; 405264, 4529004; 405264, 4529023; 405265, 4529041; 
405265, 4529051; 405253, 4529072; 405261, 4529119; 405275, 4529150; 
405283, 4529165; 405296, 4529172; 405310, 4529192; 405332, 4529201; 
405349, 4529201; 405375, 4529219; 405402, 4529231; 405429, 4529227; 
405452, 4529225; 405492, 4529233; 405515, 4529233; 405530, 4529228; 
405554, 4529232; 405574, 4529237; 405595, 4529237; 405595, 4529225; 
405579, 4529223; 405543, 4529213; 405523, 4529208; 405493, 4529217; 
405469, 4529212; 405442, 4529206; 405413, 4529209; 405397, 4529204; 
405355, 4529185; 405343, 4529181; 405327, 4529178; 405295, 4529154; 
405268, 4529082; 405275, 4529064; 405288, 4529045; 405283, 4529028; 
405280, 4529011; 405279, 4528980; 405272, 4528968; 405257, 4528962; 
405253, 4528929; 405240, 4528913; 405237, 4528921; 405237, 4528934; 
405239, 4528952; 405244, 4528972; 405216, 4528981; 405180, 4529007; 
405166, 4529027; returning to 405163, 4529039.
    (iii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tyee City. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 404239, 4528501; 
404247, 4528509; 404275, 4528506; 404290, 4528506; 404312, 4528520; 
404312, 4528532; 404306, 4528550; 404312, 4528567; 404326, 4528569; 
404326, 4528564; 404334, 4528571; 404347, 4528584; 404355, 4528593; 
404368, 4528597; 404393, 4528612; 404430, 4528623; 404444, 4528632; 
404466, 4528628; 404475, 4528623; 404493, 4528623; 404523, 4528629; 
404550, 4528646; 404569, 4528670; 404586, 4528686; 404612, 4528692; 
404660, 4528695; 404679, 4528708; 404694, 4528719; 404707, 4528724; 
404716, 4528726; 404730, 4528744; 404746, 4528757; 404758, 4528770; 
404781, 4528786; 404791, 4528795; 404796, 4528807; 404795, 4528829; 
404775, 4528866; 404761, 4528885; 404740, 4528891; 404724, 4528891; 
404710, 4528879; 404700, 4528869; 404686, 4528869; 404676, 4528879; 
404676, 4528897; 404677, 4528912; 404686, 4528912; 404689, 4528899; 
404691, 4528885; 404698, 4528885; 404712, 4528897; 404730, 4528904; 
404753, 4528903; 404772, 4528897; 404790, 4528871; 404814, 4528822; 
404815, 4528806; 404812, 4528789; 404809, 4528776; 404810, 4528770; 
404834, 4528767; 404854, 4528766;

[[Page 560]]

404885, 4528756; 404905, 4528756; 404918, 4528767; 404924, 4528788; 
404923, 4528837; 404931, 4528838; 404935, 4528832; 404934, 4528784; 
404928, 4528761; 404918, 4528749; 404906, 4528743; 404887, 4528744; 
404861, 4528751; 404846, 4528754; 404822, 4528756; 404803, 4528757; 
404795, 4528762; 404783, 4528753; 404772, 4528745; 404755, 4528741; 
404743, 4528735; 404732, 4528727; 404722, 4528712; 404708, 4528701; 
404696, 4528695; 404682, 4528686; 404672, 4528683; 404638, 4528679; 
404618, 4528675; 404605, 4528672; 404585, 4528658; 404563, 4528639; 
404540, 4528624; 404505, 4528612; 404475, 4528609; 404448, 4528608; 
404417, 4528603; 404385, 4528592; 404358, 4528571; 404346, 4528562; 
404333, 4528544; 404323, 4528518; 404304, 4528498; 404291, 4528492; 
404244, 4528496; returning to 404239, 4528501.
    (iv) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Tyee City. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 404741, 4528632; 
404748, 4528640; 404760, 4528654; 404791, 4528683; 404812, 4528695; 
404832, 4528699; 404854, 4528694; 404890, 4528667; 404915, 4528656; 
404934, 4528658; 404965, 4528679; 404970, 4528702; 404988, 4528718; 
405013, 4528721; 405032, 4528722; 405060, 4528734; 405082, 4528734; 
405098, 4528734; 405123, 4528745; 405151, 4528769; 405173, 4528774; 
405201, 4528780; 405218, 4528778; 405236, 4528789; 405247, 4528774; 
405235, 4528764; 405205, 4528758; 405182, 4528758; 405154, 4528745; 
405127, 4528725; 405103, 4528715; 405076, 4528715; 405055, 4528713; 
405032, 4528702; 405020, 4528698; 404989, 4528681; 404981, 4528648; 
404969, 4528632; 404966, 4528569; 404977, 4528534; 404981, 4528503; 
405000, 4528469; 404998, 4528459; 404981, 4528430; 404980, 4528349; 
404978, 4528329; 404968, 4528332; 404961, 4528355; 404958, 4528423; 
404964, 4528439; 404980, 4528463; 404980, 4528471; 404964, 4528502; 
404961, 4528524; 404945, 4528567; 404945, 4528603; 404945, 4528628; 
404942, 4528638; 404934, 4528623; 404925, 4528616; 404906, 4528626; 
404899, 4528639; 404896, 4528644; 404855, 4528670; 404841, 4528679; 
404828, 4528682; 404811, 4528677; 404782, 4528651; 404762, 4528624; 
404746, 4528624; returning to 404741, 4528632.
    (v) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Tyee City. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 404557, 4528121; 
404567, 4528121; 404584, 4528095; 404593, 4528061; 404619, 4528067; 
404641, 4528069; 404679, 4528071; 404796, 4528068; 404850, 4528078; 
404855, 4528072; 404850, 4528061; 404836, 4528050; 404597, 4528047; 
404575, 4528051; 404572, 4528060; 404572, 4528077; 404572, 4528089; 
404561, 4528100; returning to 404557, 4528121.
    (vi) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Tyee City. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 404115, 4527638; 
404116, 4527670; 404128, 4527680; 404140, 4527673; 404158, 4527668; 
404170, 4527663; 404187, 4527670; 404202, 4527681; 404214, 4527700; 
404220, 4527733; 404225, 4527780; 404234, 4527849; 404259, 4527931; 
404267, 4528007; 404277, 4528012; 404277, 4527958; 404274, 4527924; 
404256, 4527839; 404254, 4527797; 404247, 4527738; 404235, 4527688; 
404227, 4527644; 404207, 4527596; 404180, 4527555; 404165, 4527561; 
404157, 4527577; 404140, 4527591; 404126, 4527611; returning to 404115, 
4527638.
    (vii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tyee City and Arcata 
North. Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, 
N): 404279, 4526903; 404312, 4526977; 404324, 4527086; 404336, 4527131; 
404384, 4527228; 404452, 4527291; 404497, 4527349; 404526, 4527410; 
404563, 4527503; 404609, 4527598; 404671, 4527686; 404788, 4527856; 
404817, 4527901; 404826, 4527940; 404847, 4527983; 404873, 4528016; 
404887, 4528014; 404896, 4528008; 404856, 4527955; 404842, 4527932; 
404842, 4527916; 404837, 4527882; 404819, 4527851; 404790, 4527825; 
404742, 4527759; 404680, 4527670; 404630, 4527603; 404600, 4527558; 
404537, 4527403; 404534, 4527370; 404518, 4527333; 404457, 4527269; 
404397, 4527213; 404379, 4527179; 404351, 4527124; 404339, 4527084; 
404327, 4526981; 404321, 4526967; 404298, 4526905; 404327, 4526903; 
404341, 4526889; 404351, 4526900; 404369, 4526926; 404391, 4526964; 
404418, 4526978; 404439, 4526978; 404452, 4526972; 404473, 4526947; 
404504, 4526949; 404627, 4526966; 404662, 4526983; 404677, 4527004; 
404688, 4527018; 404747, 4527109; 404745, 4527165; 404685, 4527227; 
404623, 4527306; 404628, 4527389; 404668, 4527473; 404794, 4527545; 
404869, 4527609; 404960, 4527661; 404964, 4527713; 404988, 4527771; 
404995, 4527812; 405007, 4527819; 405021, 4527842; 405025, 4527833; 
405015, 4527813; 405003, 4527799; 404993, 4527744; 404981, 4527718; 
404980, 4527666; 405017, 4527667; 405053, 4527647; 405075, 4527630; 
405089, 4527631; 405140, 4527709; 405183, 4527846; 405171, 4527916; 
405165, 4527959; 405167, 4527974; 405187, 4527977; 405209, 4527851; 
405177, 4527710; 405127, 4527653; 405125, 4527623; 405111, 4527606; 
405082, 4527599; 405059, 4527606; 405032, 4527634; 404997, 4527646; 
404900, 4527594; 404727, 4527447; 404675, 4527395; 404678, 4527319; 
404705, 4527257; 404782, 4527192; 404804, 4527136; 404722, 4526997; 
404675, 4526945; 404679, 4526927; 404667, 4526923; 404652, 4526934; 
404460, 4526897; 404410, 4526865; 404386, 4526854; 404360, 4526812; 
404342, 4526814; 404333, 4526799; 404319, 4526753; 404312, 4526708; 
404318, 4526686; 404318, 4526661; 404310, 4526651; 404300, 4526658; 
404296, 4526671; 404303, 4526730; 404304, 4526761; 404313, 4526807; 
404311, 4526834; 404292, 4526877; returning to 404279, 4526903.
    (viii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Tyee City. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 404211, 4526342; 
404305, 4526400; 404370, 4526424; 404419, 4526445; 404531, 4526530; 
404556, 4526562; 404582, 4526596; 404653, 4526642; 404689, 4526689; 
404692, 4526707; 404698, 4526708; 404702, 4526697; 404712, 4526692; 
404706, 4526673; 404684, 4526646; 404686, 4526636; 404696, 4526634; 
404696, 4526627; 404659, 4526616; 404649, 4526603; 404623, 4526592; 
404602, 4526569; 404580, 4526538; 404553, 4526514; 404480, 4526458; 
404482, 4526444; 404473, 4526441; 404463, 4526441; 404430, 4526420; 
404380, 4526402; 404379, 4526385; 404431, 4526403; 404471, 4526421; 
404521, 4526433; 404589, 4526432; 404677, 4526433; 404727, 4526440; 
404741, 4526453; 404749, 4526473; 404752, 4526500; 404759, 4526512; 
404794, 4526550; 404867, 4526594; 404884, 4526635; 404921, 4526646; 
404977, 4526653; 405047, 4526650; 405064, 4526657; 405082, 4526616; 
405098, 4526574; 405131, 4526543; 405195, 4526490; 405193, 4526462; 
405185, 4526451; 405171, 4526459; 405160, 4526473; 405138, 4526510;

[[Page 561]]

405115, 4526532; 405089, 4526556; 405070, 4526580; 405057, 4526621; 
405045, 4526633; 404986, 4526635; 404909, 4526622; 404893, 4526599; 
404871, 4526577; 404806, 4526526; 404781, 4526503; 404770, 4526471; 
404762, 4526439; 404750, 4526427; 404732, 4526416; 404682, 4526413; 
404635, 4526415; 404599, 4526410; 404542, 4526411; 404509, 4526401; 
404453, 4526381; 404403, 4526348; 404328, 4526296; 404283, 4526260; 
404271, 4526261; 404247, 4526282; 404245, 4526300; 404255, 4526304; 
404271, 4526300; 404362, 4526375; 404362, 4526395; 404326, 4526384; 
404297, 4526363; 404266, 4526349; 404242, 4526333; 404234, 4526307; 
404217, 4526318; returning to 404211, 4526342.
    (ix) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Tyee City. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 404159, 4525734; 
404159, 4525748; 404181, 4525799; 404211, 4525818; 404249, 4525862; 
404248, 4525896; 404237, 4525939; 404229, 4525979; 404240, 4525997; 
404240, 4526016; 404226, 4526037; 404220, 4526056; 404230, 4526065; 
404248, 4526069; 404248, 4526063; 404241, 4526050; 404244, 4526042; 
404256, 4526003; 404262, 4526012; 404270, 4526030; 404279, 4526052; 
404291, 4526063; 404294, 4526077; 404303, 4526076; 404302, 4526065; 
404290, 4526049; 404282, 4526037; 404277, 4526013; 404298, 4526005; 
404305, 4526023; 404313, 4526030; 404321, 4526042; 404330, 4526047; 
404341, 4526048; 404352, 4526038; 404366, 4526040; 404382, 4526033; 
404406, 4526019; 404403, 4526008; 404365, 4526029; 404345, 4526025; 
404340, 4526034; 404331, 4526038; 404324, 4526024; 404312, 4526015; 
404311, 4526001; 404303, 4525992; 404289, 4525994; 404275, 4525995; 
404270, 4525978; 404275, 4525948; 404271, 4525923; 404286, 4525920; 
404294, 4525897; 404257, 4525843; 404257, 4525835; 404213, 4525801; 
404177, 4525751; 404197, 4525737; 404215, 4525718; 404207, 4525706; 
404183, 4525724; returning to 404159, 4525734.
    (x) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tyee City, Eureka, Arcata 
North, and Arcata South. Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 
coordinates (E, N): 404222, 4525621; 404233, 4525683; 404286, 4525666; 
404326, 4525712; 404420, 4525729; 404517, 4525742; 404587, 4525721; 
404625, 4525721; 404653, 4525750; 404660, 4525799; 404660, 4525831; 
404655, 4525869; 404666, 4525908; 404691, 4525984; 404736, 4526033; 
404768, 4526042; 404840, 4526076; 404891, 4526105; 404946, 4526120; 
405021, 4526120; 405078, 4526116; 405104, 4526101; 405138, 4526037; 
405133, 4526008; 405133, 4525984; 405140, 4525965; 405155, 4525938; 
405161, 4525918; 405161, 4525897; 405148, 4525861; 405118, 4525844; 
405087, 4525840; 405050, 4525852; 405027, 4525887; 405012, 4525903; 
404984, 4525903; 404942, 4525899; 404900, 4525884; 404861, 4525838; 
404844, 4525797; 404847, 4525731; 404844, 4525704; 404823, 4525661; 
404813, 4525610; 404819, 4525561; 404863, 4525511; 404947, 4525462; 
404975, 4525451; 405013, 4525446; 405041, 4525430; 405084, 4525392; 
405116, 4525387; 405179, 4525398; 405229, 4525398; 405282, 4525379; 
405323, 4525359; 405372, 4525355; 405445, 4525370; 405490, 4525363; 
405570, 4525337; 405605, 4525357; 405637, 4525391; 405686, 4525416; 
405704, 4525443; 405706, 4525469; 405682, 4525524; 405643, 4525569; 
405569, 4525625; 405567, 4525680; 405586, 4525707; 405602, 4525704; 
405589, 4525674; 405589, 4525642; 405610, 4525629; 405663, 4525580; 
405702, 4525537; 405725, 4525478; 405733, 4525427; 405680, 4525385; 
405645, 4525354; 405617, 4525322; 405577, 4525312; 405532, 4525317; 
405474, 4525339; 405428, 4525345; 405365, 4525332; 405310, 4525339; 
405242, 4525366; 405191, 4525370; 405111, 4525358; 405064, 4525369; 
405033, 4525402; 404986, 4525428; 404936, 4525443; 404906, 4525449; 
404819, 4525502; 404800, 4525527; 404781, 4525585; 404783, 4525632; 
404798, 4525678; 404819, 4525704; 404823, 4525725; 404821, 4525768; 
404823, 4525810; 404838, 4525852; 404868, 4525886; 404897, 4525920; 
404950, 4525935; 405018, 4525944; 405031, 4525933; 405046, 4525908; 
405059, 4525872; 405084, 4525861; 405112, 4525863; 405131, 4525874; 
405144, 4525904; 405137, 4525933; 405114, 4525961; 405097, 4525986; 
405103, 4526024; 405106, 4526050; 405080, 4526080; 405052, 4526090; 
405025, 4526092; 404980, 4526093; 404959, 4526078; 404933, 4526069; 
404893, 4526054; 404808, 4526027; 404749, 4525997; 404713, 4525944; 
404708, 4525918; 404708, 4525833; 404693, 4525734; 404687, 4525710; 
404638, 4525676; 404604, 4525665; 404572, 4525680; 404521, 4525702; 
404451, 4525693; 404375, 4525672; 404356, 4525644; 404345, 4525631; 
404288, 4525608; returning to 404222, 4525621.
    (xi) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tyee City, Eureka, and 
Arcata South. Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 
coordinates (E, N): 403248, 4524430; 403254, 4524438; 403270, 4524435; 
403311, 4524427; 403363, 4524406; 403440, 4524395; 403519, 4524392; 
403550, 4524407; 403578, 4524414; 403649, 4524397; 403727, 4524374; 
403760, 4524362; 403801, 4524371; 403818, 4524385; 403839, 4524397; 
403868, 4524417; 403906, 4524432; 403937, 4524432; 404026, 4524424; 
404037, 4524434; 404034, 4524448; 404014, 4524465; 404004, 4524475; 
403985, 4524495; 403978, 4524505; 403957, 4524512; 403930, 4524520; 
403899, 4524527; 403879, 4524535; 403857, 4524558; 403840, 4524573; 
403801, 4524577; 403771, 4524569; 403751, 4524558; 403732, 4524534; 
403712, 4524518; 403707, 4524513; 403674, 4524492; 403626, 4524490; 
403588, 4524495; 403564, 4524514; 403549, 4524543; 403543, 4524563; 
403554, 4524565; 403572, 4524537; 403590, 4524514; 403608, 4524509; 
403643, 4524506; 403680, 4524512; 403707, 4524533; 403737, 4524561; 
403751, 4524575; 403793, 4524591; 403829, 4524591; 403854, 4524581; 
403875, 4524566; 403897, 4524545; 403923, 4524539; 403969, 4524525; 
403996, 4524508; 404007, 4524492; 404020, 4524482; 404045, 4524470; 
404057, 4524469; 404069, 4524482; 404089, 4524511; 404101, 4524542; 
404100, 4524557; 404113, 4524580; 404138, 4524619; 404184, 4524650; 
404217, 4524650; 404271, 4524642; 404311, 4524664; 404344, 4524685; 
404367, 4524687; 404407, 4524678; 404459, 4524688; 404527, 4524713; 
404546, 4524740; 404544, 4524779; 404518, 4524800; 404511, 4524828; 
404516, 4524851; 404544, 4524873; 404586, 4524886; 404625, 4524873; 
404667, 4524862; 404677, 4524870; 404677, 4524886; 404667, 4524918; 
404670, 4524951; 404662, 4524970; 404604, 4525008; 404534, 4525037; 
404513, 4525052; 404507, 4525060; 404504, 4525110; 404494, 4525124; 
404466, 4525133; 404442, 4525147; 404373, 4525195; 404355, 4525211; 
404332, 4525234; 404324, 4525265; 404319, 4525287; 404290, 4525327; 
404263, 4525354; 404260, 4525385; 404268, 4525421; 404273, 4525461; 
404268, 4525495; 404275, 4525525; 404294, 4525552; 404284, 4525597; 
404298, 4525599; 404304, 4525589; 404306, 4525557;

[[Page 562]]

404302, 4525537; 404288, 4525504; 404294, 4525476; 404287, 4525438; 
404280, 4525390; 404280, 4525359; 404309, 4525331; 404339, 4525280; 
404351, 4525244; 404372, 4525214; 404388, 4525205; 404419, 4525184; 
404451, 4525160; 404493, 4525144; 404514, 4525134; 404523, 4525116; 
404523, 4525094; 404527, 4525068; 404539, 4525059; 404563, 4525045; 
404608, 4525031; 404659, 4525002; 404673, 4524991; 404684, 4524976; 
404691, 4524948; 404691, 4524914; 404698, 4524892; 404704, 4524872; 
404695, 4524849; 404680, 4524844; 404653, 4524845; 404615, 4524858; 
404589, 4524863; 404575, 4524863; 404545, 4524849; 404537, 4524835; 
404538, 4524823; 404553, 4524803; 404575, 4524782; 404575, 4524741; 
404542, 4524694; 404488, 4524671; 404440, 4524659; 404393, 4524657; 
404361, 4524661; 404343, 4524661; 404306, 4524635; 404266, 4524619; 
404233, 4524626; 404187, 4524622; 404153, 4524602; 404137, 4524567; 
404134, 4524524; 404114, 4524497; 404086, 4524451; 404086, 4524421; 
404113, 4524410; 404159, 4524406; 404188, 4524404; 404239, 4524406; 
404298, 4524397; 404339, 4524371; 404371, 4524338; 404389, 4524322; 
404426, 4524306; 404455, 4524291; 404464, 4524291; 404479, 4524303; 
404514, 4524330; 404558, 4524348; 404604, 4524344; 404646, 4524336; 
404698, 4524337; 404746, 4524364; 404770, 4524375; 404805, 4524378; 
404841, 4524369; 404875, 4524354; 404921, 4524354; 404955, 4524367; 
404965, 4524382; 404963, 4524392; 404954, 4524399; 404942, 4524406; 
404881, 4524439; 404862, 4524464; 404862, 4524510; 404865, 4524531; 
404858, 4524550; 404839, 4524570; 404831, 4524598; 404832, 4524614; 
404824, 4524618; 404808, 4524614; 404802, 4524627; 404818, 4524632; 
404843, 4524629; 404857, 4524632; 404877, 4524655; 404901, 4524663; 
404936, 4524664; 404945, 4524669; 404946, 4524688; 404959, 4524678; 
404953, 4524659; 404933, 4524653; 404907, 4524655; 404893, 4524649; 
404849, 4524610; 404850, 4524587; 404878, 4524551; 404884, 4524524; 
404881, 4524471; 404890, 4524452; 404963, 4524418; 404979, 4524410; 
404993, 4524403; 405008, 4524430; 405017, 4524454; 405013, 4524466; 
404989, 4524509; 404968, 4524546; 404968, 4524575; 404980, 4524588; 
404991, 4524577; 404986, 4524560; 404997, 4524535; 405014, 4524501; 
405031, 4524481; 405041, 4524464; 405040, 4524442; 405058, 4524433; 
405071, 4524428; 405084, 4524439; 405100, 4524465; 405115, 4524482; 
405136, 4524488; 405152, 4524500; 405169, 4524525; 405190, 4524538; 
405215, 4524544; 405230, 4524555; 405233, 4524571; 405238, 4524593; 
405245, 4524597; 405267, 4524597; 405280, 4524594; 405296, 4524601; 
405309, 4524598; 405319, 4524591; 405312, 4524570; 405310, 4524559; 
405304, 4524560; 405303, 4524573; 405301, 4524584; 405293, 4524589; 
405279, 4524584; 405254, 4524584; 405249, 4524577; 405246, 4524558; 
405237, 4524542; 405222, 4524531; 405202, 4524526; 405188, 4524522; 
405174, 4524505; 405155, 4524485; 405139, 4524477; 405121, 4524471; 
405110, 4524463; 405110, 4524459; 405102, 4524434; 405081, 4524418; 
405058, 4524415; 405034, 4524431; 405018, 4524421; 405006, 4524379; 
404979, 4524358; 404969, 4524347; 404940, 4524331; 404886, 4524327; 
404848, 4524340; 404827, 4524351; 404791, 4524355; 404768, 4524347; 
404692, 4524306; 404645, 4524303; 404601, 4524310; 404558, 4524306; 
404520, 4524289; 404495, 4524264; 404499, 4524247; 404511, 4524206; 
404511, 4524183; 404506, 4524140; 404517, 4524107; 404537, 4524060; 
404573, 4524020; 404604, 4524002; 404615, 4524013; 404645, 4524034; 
404664, 4524042; 404687, 4524042; 404704, 4524034; 404712, 4524025; 
404736, 4523999; 404735, 4523971; 404729, 4523945; 404723, 4523923; 
404729, 4523910; 404746, 4523900; 404781, 4523899; 404815, 4523913; 
404910, 4523952; 404993, 4523987; 405015, 4524006; 405013, 4524028; 
405001, 4524048; 405000, 4524051; 404990, 4524069; 404993, 4524095; 
405012, 4524110; 405042, 4524111; 405069, 4524120; 405087, 4524145; 
405121, 4524173; 405160, 4524231; 405194, 4524272; 405211, 4524279; 
405249, 4524290; 405304, 4524301; 405331, 4524318; 405340, 4524314; 
405307, 4524285; 405281, 4524281; 405225, 4524264; 405198, 4524249; 
405168, 4524199; 405142, 4524158; 405099, 4524129; 405082, 4524102; 
405051, 4524090; 405026, 4524089; 405014, 4524078; 405015, 4524066; 
405016, 4524060; 405017, 4524060; 405038, 4524045; 405041, 4523996; 
405025, 4523983; 404984, 4523964; 404843, 4523902; 404795, 4523884; 
404751, 4523877; 404718, 4523888; 404702, 4523910; 404699, 4523933; 
404709, 4523955; 404714, 4523982; 404701, 4524000; 404684, 4524010; 
404663, 4524010; 404638, 4524002; 404621, 4523976; 404634, 4523965; 
404642, 4523948; 404642, 4523938; 404631, 4523913; 404618, 4523881; 
404617, 4523851; 404624, 4523820; 404646, 4523781; 404680, 4523746; 
404669, 4523736; 404650, 4523746; 404614, 4523799; 404600, 4523847; 
404603, 4523886; 404622, 4523951; 404596, 4523978; 404541, 4524025; 
404518, 4524070; 404496, 4524114; 404492, 4524150; 404495, 4524199; 
404490, 4524232; 404431, 4524286; 404361, 4524319; 404347, 4524336; 
404306, 4524369; 404273, 4524378; 404215, 4524383; 404087, 4524388; 
403988, 4524403; 403896, 4524407; 403867, 4524388; 403825, 4524351; 
403773, 4524341; 403722, 4524350; 403647, 4524375; 403575, 4524386; 
403543, 4524375; 403495, 4524367; 403447, 4524371; 403378, 4524372; 
403334, 4524386; 403266, 4524414; returning to 403248, 4524430.
    (xii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tyee City and Eureka. 
Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 
403498, 4525062; 403498, 4525079; 403514, 4525102; 403531, 4525112; 
403552, 4525117; 403569, 4525115; 403688, 4525069; 403706, 4525077; 
403704, 4525089; 403602, 4525135; 403597, 4525155; 403612, 4525163; 
403633, 4525198; 403653, 4525213; 403683, 4525229; 403701, 4525262; 
403704, 4525297; 403693, 4525338; 403698, 4525363; 403780, 4525436; 
403881, 4525538; 403921, 4525619; 403929, 4525657; 403982, 4525672; 
404020, 4525647; 404101, 4525626; 404167, 4525609; 404147, 4525593; 
404127, 4525586; 404127, 4525571; 404137, 4525558; 404152, 4525530; 
404144, 4525495; 404124, 4525469; 404091, 4525452; 404045, 4525462; 
403992, 4525474; 403962, 4525474; 403926, 4525467; 403891, 4525444; 
403777, 4525310; 403772, 4525279; 403782, 4525241; 403792, 4525201; 
403800, 4525178; 403790, 4525125; 403780, 4525089; 403749, 4525056; 
403714, 4525034; 403681, 4525034; 403567, 4525072; 403544, 4525072; 
403536, 4525056; 403514, 4525041; returning to 403498, 4525062.
    (xiii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Eureka. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 403167, 4524519; 
403174, 4524547; 403189, 4524560; 403207, 4524568; 403265, 4524580; 
403301, 4524595; 403334, 4524631; 403357, 4524692; 403362, 4524742; 
403341, 4524811; 403336, 4524899; 403357, 4524993; 403367, 4525029; 
403402, 4525079; 403407, 4525059; 403415, 4525034; 403427, 4525011; 
403453, 4525001; 403476,

[[Page 563]]

4524996; 403486, 4525021; 403498, 4525031; 403519, 4525029; 403529, 
4525013; 403521, 4524988; 403503, 4524960; 403473, 4524950; 403445, 
4524955; 403420, 4524968; 403389, 4524988; 403379, 4524958; 403369, 
4524917; 403362, 4524861; 403367, 4524841; 403405, 4524839; 403430, 
4524846; 403458, 4524882; 403493, 4524920; 403544, 4524935; 403584, 
4524917; 403600, 4524872; 403572, 4524826; 403521, 4524798; 403511, 
4524818; 403559, 4524851; 403572, 4524874; 403564, 4524899; 403552, 
4524912; 403526, 4524904; 403508, 4524889; 403478, 4524869; 403453, 
4524826; 403430, 4524816; 403402, 4524808; 403369, 4524811; 403377, 
4524783; 403384, 4524735; 403382, 4524689; 403367, 4524644; 403336, 
4524590; 403306, 4524565; 403275, 4524557; 403222, 4524545; 403197, 
4524527; 403192, 4524509; 403197, 4524484; 403174, 4524487; returning to 
403167, 4524519.
    (xiv) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 405091, 4523686; 
405091, 4523709; 405111, 4523708; 405126, 4523698; 405147, 4523680; 
405150, 4523697; 405144, 4523708; 405138, 4523722; 405133, 4523735; 
405133, 4523753; 405151, 4523772; 405181, 4523791; 405207, 4523807; 
405232, 4523807; 405254, 4523814; 405263, 4523828; 405260, 4523853; 
405253, 4523885; 405241, 4523894; 405226, 4523911; 405217, 4523931; 
405217, 4523961; 405219, 4523992; 405220, 4524014; 405220, 4524028; 
405234, 4524029; 405235, 4524000; 405239, 4523951; 405241, 4523926; 
405260, 4523906; 405272, 4523886; 405281, 4523851; 405285, 4523831; 
405276, 4523807; 405256, 4523791; 405231, 4523782; 405209, 4523780; 
405164, 4523755; 405160, 4523735; 405167, 4523716; 405173, 4523691; 
405163, 4523666; 405195, 4523635; 405207, 4523605; 405232, 4523526; 
405242, 4523483; 405253, 4523471; 405273, 4523471; 405276, 4523486; 
405276, 4523510; 405287, 4523533; 405294, 4523563; 405295, 4523580; 
405301, 4523597; 405320, 4523610; 405348, 4523623; 405369, 4523641; 
405376, 4523663; 405381, 4523685; 405391, 4523700; 405416, 4523723; 
405423, 4523745; 405428, 4523785; 405428, 4523806; 405417, 4523823; 
405412, 4523847; 405412, 4523867; 405412, 4523886; 405419, 4523906; 
405432, 4523932; 405448, 4523944; 405451, 4523966; 405448, 4523985; 
405444, 4524004; 405451, 4524020; 405454, 4524037; 405470, 4524053; 
405488, 4524054; 405509, 4524054; 405523, 4524062; 405525, 4524076; 
405525, 4524092; 405516, 4524097; 405503, 4524085; 405487, 4524084; 
405472, 4524087; 405460, 4524092; 405457, 4524081; 405448, 4524060; 
405435, 4524042; 405426, 4524042; 405422, 4524060; 405438, 4524075; 
405444, 4524095; 405457, 4524116; 405472, 4524116; 405481, 4524106; 
405487, 4524107; 405504, 4524116; 405522, 4524116; 405538, 4524107; 
405551, 4524107; 405562, 4524117; 405581, 4524126; 405587, 4524137; 
405594, 4524135; 405594, 4524116; 405576, 4524098; 405548, 4524081; 
405544, 4524050; 405516, 4524035; 405488, 4524031; 405472, 4524019; 
405469, 4524000; 405473, 4523969; 405473, 4523947; 405459, 4523925; 
405438, 4523904; 405432, 4523878; 405432, 4523850; 405444, 4523823; 
405448, 4523788; 405440, 4523745; 405437, 4523716; 405410, 4523688; 
405397, 4523660; 405378, 4523623; 405385, 4523613; 405406, 4523595; 
405388, 4523583; 405369, 4523564; 405341, 4523549; 405329, 4523545; 
405307, 4523526; 405294, 4523501; 405292, 4523469; 405313, 4523466; 
405338, 4523446; 405366, 4523414; 405398, 4523386; 405442, 4523349; 
405469, 4523333; 405515, 4523367; 405543, 4523389; 405566, 4523396; 
405584, 4523411; 405601, 4523429; 405607, 4523452; 405593, 4523471; 
405581, 4523483; 405579, 4523492; 405591, 4523495; 405618, 4523505; 
405649, 4523513; 405672, 4523535; 405687, 4523545; 405683, 4523559; 
405682, 4523573; 405682, 4523588; 405685, 4523599; 405684, 4523616; 
405678, 4523640; 405678, 4523661; 405688, 4523672; 405703, 4523686; 
405707, 4523706; 405708, 4523716; 405717, 4523707; 405715, 4523685; 
405699, 4523660; 405695, 4523638; 405698, 4523610; 405702, 4523591; 
405700, 4523572; 405704, 4523560; 405706, 4523548; 405707, 4523546; 
405722, 4523535; 405741, 4523529; 405741, 4523508; 405754, 4523483; 
405763, 4523464; 405763, 4523442; 405752, 4523421; 405740, 4523407; 
405740, 4523383; 405740, 4523360; 405746, 4523339; 405753, 4523324; 
405744, 4523318; 405729, 4523338; 405719, 4523368; 405719, 4523395; 
405724, 4523427; 405728, 4523454; 405722, 4523483; 405721, 4523505; 
405699, 4523485; 405699, 4523469; 405687, 4523448; 405669, 4523433; 
405666, 4523420; 405654, 4523401; 405631, 4523396; 405609, 4523393; 
405578, 4523370; 405554, 4523367; 405537, 4523351; 405515, 4523336; 
405488, 4523318; 405525, 4523282; 405551, 4523246; 405587, 4523208; 
405632, 4523173; 405669, 4523120; 405704, 4523062; 405726, 4523043; 
405759, 4523043; 405790, 4523045; 405788, 4523065; 405782, 4523087; 
405779, 4523114; 405769, 4523129; 405771, 4523145; 405788, 4523139; 
405797, 4523118; 405797, 4523098; 405806, 4523076; 405827, 4523084; 
405841, 4523083; 405863, 4523071; 405877, 4523082; 405893, 4523093; 
405919, 4523101; 405943, 4523108; 405975, 4523165; 405996, 4523207; 
405987, 4523227; 405952, 4523282; 405928, 4523282; 405905, 4523282; 
405899, 4523276; 405890, 4523263; 405868, 4523252; 405846, 4523252; 
405846, 4523267; 405859, 4523276; 405872, 4523286; 405878, 4523311; 
405878, 4523333; 405891, 4523349; 405915, 4523342; 405952, 4523327; 
405978, 4523302; 406003, 4523260; 406027, 4523245; 406037, 4523232; 
406037, 4523214; 406022, 4523192; 406003, 4523168; 405952, 4523080; 
405930, 4523076; 405910, 4523076; 405902, 4523064; 405875, 4523049; 
405850, 4523052; 405834, 4523058; 405818, 4523059; 405810, 4523034; 
405872, 4523029; 405938, 4523029; 405994, 4523057; 406052, 4523115; 
406087, 4523161; 406156, 4523245; 406171, 4523263; 406178, 4523291; 
406186, 4523313; 406172, 4523324; 406156, 4523330; 406137, 4523317; 
406100, 4523302; 406069, 4523292; 406046, 4523292; 406027, 4523307; 
406010, 4523321; 405988, 4523327; 405983, 4523341; 405984, 4523361; 
405993, 4523383; 406013, 4523383; 406022, 4523396; 406036, 4523414; 
406074, 4523420; 406096, 4523433; 406124, 4523445; 406150, 4523433; 
406153, 4523404; 406153, 4523368; 406169, 4523354; 406193, 4523351; 
406217, 4523330; 406217, 4523302; 406219, 4523286; 406258, 4523317; 
406283, 4523349; 406296, 4523379; 406328, 4523421; 406367, 4523439; 
406415, 4523473; 406436, 4523520; 406417, 4523526; 406378, 4523534; 
406347, 4523558; 406334, 4523581; 406321, 4523599; 406307, 4523619; 
406302, 4523636; 406288, 4523648; 406264, 4523645; 406235, 4523637; 
406211, 4523638; 406177, 4523651; 406166, 4523660; 406162, 4523677; 
406144, 4523695; 406110, 4523711; 406079, 4523722; 406056, 4523728; 
406046, 4523726; 406043, 4523737; 406043, 4523748; 406057, 4523748; 
406084, 4523740; 406107, 4523737; 406144, 4523718; 406181, 4523695; 
406193, 4523675; 406217, 4523661; 406246, 4523666; 406269, 4523673; 
406294,

[[Page 564]]

4523670; 406318, 4523655; 406333, 4523630; 406334, 4523610; 406344, 
4523594; 406346, 4523592; 406350, 4523595; 406357, 4523608; 406376, 
4523635; 406382, 4523657; 406382, 4523684; 406364, 4523705; 406323, 
4523722; 406312, 4523728; 406304, 4523739; 406287, 4523761; 406280, 
4523772; 406274, 4523776; 406264, 4523773; 406255, 4523764; 406242, 
4523753; 406224, 4523755; 406219, 4523766; 406219, 4523780; 406220, 
4523794; 406213, 4523802; 406203, 4523804; 406184, 4523805; 406170, 
4523807; 406162, 4523816; 406157, 4523831; 406160, 4523852; 406166, 
4523867; 406166, 4523879; 406148, 4523892; 406110, 4523909; 406088, 
4523918; 406077, 4523938; 406067, 4523952; 406066, 4523963; 406070, 
4523971; 406079, 4523965; 406083, 4523950; 406092, 4523936; 406105, 
4523927; 406133, 4523913; 406155, 4523905; 406176, 4523889; 406180, 
4523873; 406175, 4523856; 406170, 4523835; 406176, 4523822; 406188, 
4523818; 406206, 4523816; 406226, 4523813; 406235, 4523802; 406236, 
4523789; 406237, 4523777; 406246, 4523779; 406257, 4523787; 406273, 
4523795; 406290, 4523783; 406309, 4523763; 406323, 4523751; 406324, 
4523750; 406324, 4523751; 406355, 4523742; 406383, 4523729; 406400, 
4523714; 406411, 4523685; 406403, 4523642; 406387, 4523613; 406384, 
4523589; 406403, 4523573; 406434, 4523579; 406445, 4523607; 406424, 
4523635; 406427, 4523669; 406440, 4523694; 406439, 4523708; 406431, 
4523732; 406431, 4523754; 406431, 4523770; 406445, 4523791; 406465, 
4523791; 406477, 4523772; 406458, 4523758; 406458, 4523732; 406477, 
4523705; 406478, 4523689; 406498, 4523679; 406526, 4523667; 406551, 
4523682; 406580, 4523682; 406601, 4523663; 406633, 4523670; 406626, 
4523698; 406586, 4523710; 406546, 4523728; 406533, 4523755; 406528, 
4523783; 406527, 4523813; 406517, 4523838; 406502, 4523853; 406462, 
4523869; 406440, 4523886; 406428, 4523920; 406428, 4523959; 406428, 
4523991; 406428, 4524010; 406428, 4524031; 406446, 4524045; 406464, 
4524045; 406467, 4524031; 406456, 4524012; 406470, 4524007; 406496, 
4524006; 406520, 4523989; 406545, 4523978; 406557, 4523993; 406558, 
4523999; 406564, 4524013; 406581, 4524021; 406598, 4524025; 406620, 
4524027; 406638, 4524039; 406679, 4524126; 406694, 4524154; 406710, 
4524198; 406722, 4524218; 406734, 4524261; 406736, 4524292; 406718, 
4524309; 406714, 4524325; 406729, 4524324; 406733, 4524317; 406751, 
4524302; 406755, 4524289; 406753, 4524253; 406742, 4524212; 406720, 
4524175; 406717, 4524153; 406703, 4524130; 406716, 4524128; 406721, 
4524120; 406711, 4524106; 406703, 4524101; 406689, 4524100; 406666, 
4524051; 406653, 4524022; 406637, 4524011; 406619, 4524009; 406600, 
4524008; 406585, 4524003; 406573, 4523983; 406559, 4523962; 406527, 
4523962; 406502, 4523970; 406480, 4523984; 406458, 4523982; 406453, 
4523966; 406456, 4523945; 406475, 4523919; 406500, 4523901; 406543, 
4523879; 406559, 4523867; 406584, 4523870; 406587, 4523854; 406564, 
4523823; 406571, 4523783; 406578, 4523754; 406608, 4523742; 406658, 
4523753; 406696, 4523748; 406734, 4523733; 406780, 4523775; 406854, 
4523829; 406949, 4523886; 407018, 4523898; 407135, 4523914; 407136, 
4523939; 407107, 4523979; 407085, 4524004; 407064, 4524038; 407018, 
4524047; 407005, 4524066; 406998, 4524106; 406998, 4524137; 407011, 
4524157; 407032, 4524173; 407046, 4524195; 407039, 4524228; 407026, 
4524251; 407026, 4524291; 407052, 4524322; 407083, 4524328; 407051, 
4524376; 407014, 4524379; 406995, 4524407; 406998, 4524438; 407026, 
4524465; 407033, 4524490; 407046, 4524502; 407102, 4524463; 407105, 
4524434; 407120, 4524404; 407138, 4524362; 407161, 4524347; 407191, 
4524326; 407201, 4524306; 407202, 4524279; 407195, 4524254; 407174, 
4524234; 407141, 4524209; 407132, 4524188; 407138, 4524175; 407164, 
4524168; 407204, 4524154; 407217, 4524132; 407227, 4524076; 407292, 
4523931; 407308, 4523926; 407339, 4523879; 407367, 4523825; 407428, 
4523817; 407531, 4523786; 407597, 4523778; 407597, 4523916; 407613, 
4523923; 407851, 4523920; 407854, 4523907; 407840, 4523903; 407616, 
4523901; 407616, 4523788; 407611, 4523757; 407538, 4523766; 407491, 
4523776; 407429, 4523795; 407375, 4523806; 407350, 4523814; 407333, 
4523850; 407297, 4523891; 407279, 4523884; 407241, 4523875; 407208, 
4523882; 407152, 4523885; 407079, 4523881; 406982, 4523856; 406908, 
4523819; 406832, 4523773; 406759, 4523704; 406712, 4523660; 406654, 
4523636; 406570, 4523626; 406524, 4523611; 406505, 4523592; 406490, 
4523567; 406467, 4523524; 406445, 4523469; 406415, 4523433; 406384, 
4523405; 406352, 4523376; 406318, 4523338; 406284, 4523304; 406252, 
4523276; 406218, 4523257; 406183, 4523227; 406141, 4523190; 406105, 
4523140; 406065, 4523092; 406034, 4523058; 405985, 4523032; 405947, 
4523009; 405924, 4523004; 405880, 4523008; 405818, 4523012; 405759, 
4523021; 405715, 4523027; 405690, 4523045; 405669, 4523076; 405635, 
4523132; 405598, 4523168; 405557, 4523211; 405531, 4523239; 405507, 
4523270; 405481, 4523296; 405453, 4523316; 405422, 4523338; 405388, 
4523361; 405366, 4523386; 405337, 4523417; 405313, 4523444; 405285, 
4523449; 405250, 4523452; 405226, 4523470; 405209, 4523519; 405194, 
4523558; 405185, 4523594; 405170, 4523617; 405133, 4523658; 405097, 
4523683; returning to 405091, 4523686.
    (xv) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 407456, 4523277; 
407456, 4523282; 407462, 4523297; 407483, 4523331; 407472, 4523341; 
407469, 4523345; 407465, 4523351; 407463, 4523357; 407468, 4523361; 
407475, 4523359; 407480, 4523354; 407484, 4523357; 407515, 4523395; 
407526, 4523407; 407540, 4523413; 407563, 4523419; 407577, 4523412; 
407587, 4523403; 407599, 4523398; 407614, 4523398; 407624, 4523392; 
407636, 4523390; 407643, 4523387; 407658, 4523381; 407669, 4523375; 
407677, 4523367; 407686, 4523368; 407702, 4523369; 407724, 4523369; 
407740, 4523370; 407751, 4523369; 407765, 4523368; 407777, 4523364; 
407790, 4523358; 407797, 4523348; 407796, 4523343; 407791, 4523337; 
407802, 4523332; 407810, 4523339; 407820, 4523340; 407832, 4523337; 
407838, 4523331; 407844, 4523326; 407848, 4523326; 407858, 4523326; 
407873, 4523320; 407927, 4523299; 407971, 4523284; 407973, 4523278; 
407971, 4523270; 407954, 4523252; 407927, 4523223; 407879, 4523151; 
407856, 4523115; 407830, 4523105; 407808, 4523105; 407776, 4523107; 
407756, 4523116; 407754, 4523121; 407746, 4523126; 407736, 4523125; 
407641, 4523175; 407640, 4523181; 407629, 4523190; 407609, 4523202; 
407602, 4523203; 407591, 4523200; 407582, 4523201; 407509, 4523240; 
407479, 4523254; 407465, 4523269; returning to 407456, 4523277.
    (xvi) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 408209, 4523323; 
408215, 4523326; 408243, 4523285; 408271, 4523261; 408326, 4523212; 
408327,

[[Page 565]]

4523400; 408335, 4523400; 408335, 4523243; 408349, 4523245; 408359, 
4523246; 408363, 4523249; 408367, 4523266; 408369, 4523282; 408376, 
4523297; 408387, 4523315; 408394, 4523328; 408393, 4523345; 408385, 
4523353; 408382, 4523361; 408386, 4523369; 408393, 4523381; 408397, 
4523389; 408405, 4523390; 408410, 4523396; 408411, 4523400; 408408, 
4523404; 408404, 4523411; 408401, 4523423; 408403, 4523432; 408396, 
4523441; 408359, 4523464; 408353, 4523470; 408353, 4523477; 408363, 
4523475; 408373, 4523466; 408410, 4523443; 408413, 4523435; 408412, 
4523428; 408417, 4523421; 408424, 4523421; 408428, 4523427; 408435, 
4523433; 408443, 4523434; 408455, 4523436; 408465, 4523431; 408474, 
4523421; 408481, 4523417; 408486, 4523421; 408488, 4523433; 408483, 
4523445; 408476, 4523452; 408467, 4523461; 408460, 4523463; 408456, 
4523469; 408456, 4523476; 408444, 4523491; 408435, 4523501; 408433, 
4523510; 408431, 4523521; 408444, 4523532; 408457, 4523537; 408464, 
4523547; 408468, 4523557; 408468, 4523567; 408470, 4523574; 408479, 
4523568; 408481, 4523558; 408474, 4523549; 408470, 4523541; 408470, 
4523531; 408463, 4523528; 408453, 4523523; 408446, 4523517; 408444, 
4523510; 408448, 4523505; 408459, 4523492; 408471, 4523476; 408482, 
4523467; 408497, 4523456; 408503, 4523443; 408503, 4523433; 408503, 
4523422; 408498, 4523415; 408491, 4523406; 408483, 4523402; 408483, 
4523396; 408489, 4523390; 408500, 4523389; 408507, 4523393; 408514, 
4523400; 408521, 4523407; 408532, 4523411; 408537, 4523410; 408549, 
4523411; 408556, 4523415; 408562, 4523421; 408564, 4523430; 408565, 
4523437; 408565, 4523443; 408565, 4523457; 408562, 4523465; 408570, 
4523468; 408579, 4523468; 408589, 4523468; 408597, 4523465; 408603, 
4523463; 408609, 4523463; 408609, 4523467; 408609, 4523475; 408613, 
4523478; 408616, 4523473; 408616, 4523465; 408613, 4523455; 408602, 
4523455; 408597, 4523458; 408584, 4523460; 408572, 4523457; 408572, 
4523450; 408572, 4523441; 408570, 4523430; 408568, 4523419; 408563, 
4523410; 408554, 4523404; 408542, 4523401; 408544, 4523395; 408549, 
4523368; 408547, 4523366; 408539, 4523366; 408534, 4523358; 408544, 
4523351; 408553, 4523338; 408549, 4523333; 408543, 4523336; 408532, 
4523345; 408525, 4523355; 408521, 4523359; 408511, 4523363; 408502, 
4523364; 408492, 4523363; 408474, 4523363; 408467, 4523366; 408462, 
4523372; 408459, 4523377; 408453, 4523380; 408444, 4523380; 408428, 
4523378; 408411, 4523376; 408408, 4523364; 408407, 4523346; 408407, 
4523332; 408408, 4523322; 408404, 4523311; 408396, 4523296; 408385, 
4523283; 408383, 4523267; 408384, 4523244; 408383, 4523219; 408383, 
4523207; 408393, 4523195; 408401, 4523194; 408413, 4523196; 408408, 
4523189; 408402, 4523180; 408385, 4523189; 408378, 4523175; 408367, 
4523172; 408494, 4523054; 408508, 4523063; 408520, 4523064; 408532, 
4523063; 408543, 4523056; 408548, 4523039; 408547, 4523026; 408537, 
4523018; 408526, 4523017; 408519, 4523024; 408473, 4523064; 408360, 
4523167; 408288, 4523233; 408250, 4523270; 408232, 4523289; 408216, 
4523311; returning to 408209, 4523323.
    (xvii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 408660, 
4523204; 408667, 4523217; 408668, 4523242; 408674, 4523231; 408673, 
4523202; 408676, 4523194; 408689, 4523183; 408689, 4523172; 408682, 
4523153; 408675, 4523137; 408676, 4523121; 408681, 4523107; 408687, 
4523095; 408694, 4523080; 408694, 4523067; 408701, 4523051; 408713, 
4523039; 408728, 4523031; 408712, 4523031; 408685, 4523046; 408676, 
4523063; 408681, 4523085; 408671, 4523106; 408664, 4523140; 408674, 
4523161; 408674, 4523180; 408662, 4523195; returning to 408660, 4523204.
    (xviii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 408793, 
4522282; 408793, 4522296; 408825, 4522296; 408833, 4522299; 408837, 
4522310; 408836, 4522332; 408837, 4522391; 408835, 4522418; 408840, 
4522429; 408844, 4522442; 408852, 4522450; 408863, 4522457; 408866, 
4522470; 408865, 4522485; 408865, 4522489; 408856, 4522499; 408848, 
4522510; 408848, 4522523; 408844, 4522556; 408840, 4522588; 408833, 
4522611; 408835, 4522635; 408833, 4522645; 408834, 4522681; 408842, 
4522682; 408844, 4522664; 408849, 4522639; 408875, 4522638; 408897, 
4522641; 408914, 4522643; 408919, 4522662; 408924, 4522681; 408935, 
4522701; 408951, 4522718; 408950, 4522738; 408940, 4522755; 408926, 
4522768; 408912, 4522791; 408910, 4522816; 408912, 4522838; 408923, 
4522862; 408938, 4522878; 408950, 4522895; 408967, 4522927; 408965, 
4522951; 408965, 4522982; 408968, 4522998; 408979, 4523015; 408980, 
4523030; 408969, 4523034; 408948, 4523039; 408931, 4523045; 408918, 
4523056; 408911, 4523066; 408911, 4523088; 408918, 4523111; 408918, 
4523134; 408916, 4523154; 408922, 4523173; 408933, 4523186; 408942, 
4523195; 408947, 4523213; 408939, 4523225; 408935, 4523238; 408933, 
4523254; 408936, 4523273; 408946, 4523297; 408946, 4523315; 408948, 
4523329; 408963, 4523352; 408962, 4523356; 408949, 4523354; 408920, 
4523357; 408907, 4523372; 408907, 4523396; 408918, 4523417; 408923, 
4523428; 408919, 4523434; 408905, 4523431; 408886, 4523431; 408866, 
4523447; 408862, 4523480; 408865, 4523500; 408862, 4523514; 408859, 
4523536; 408867, 4523548; 408872, 4523517; 408876, 4523505; 408877, 
4523483; 408877, 4523453; 408895, 4523446; 408921, 4523451; 408941, 
4523444; 408948, 4523432; 408943, 4523418; 408933, 4523396; 408926, 
4523383; 408931, 4523375; 408950, 4523375; 408960, 4523378; 408976, 
4523375; 408988, 4523365; 408988, 4523353; 408984, 4523343; 408973, 
4523331; 408965, 4523310; 408960, 4523286; 408956, 4523255; 408955, 
4523244; 408959, 4523233; 408966, 4523221; 408967, 4523207; 408965, 
4523192; 408959, 4523182; 408950, 4523172; 408941, 4523161; 408938, 
4523147; 408938, 4523133; 408939, 4523118; 408936, 4523097; 408938, 
4523075; 408945, 4523064; 408966, 4523064; 408988, 4523062; 409003, 
4523050; 409010, 4523037; 409011, 4523020; 409002, 4523004; 408992, 
4522992; 408988, 4522978; 408987, 4522960; 408991, 4522950; 409012, 
4522962; 409018, 4522973; 409015, 4522988; 409016, 4523007; 409029, 
4523016; 409037, 4523024; 409046, 4523024; 409053, 4523037; 409051, 
4523054; 409043, 4523075; 409030, 4523083; 409013, 4523089; 409002, 
4523098; 408994, 4523110; 408992, 4523125; 408998, 4523139; 409021, 
4523155; 409041, 4523166; 409043, 4523178; 409034, 4523189; 409035, 
4523198; 409043, 4523198; 409049, 4523191; 409056, 4523176; 409049, 
4523158; 409035, 4523147; 409018, 4523138; 409007, 4523124; 409007, 
4523115; 409020, 4523101; 409031, 4523096; 409047, 4523088; 409057, 
4523072; 409067, 4523046; 409064, 4523034; 409094, 4523071; 409208, 
4523215; 409257, 4523257; 409260, 4523264; 409271, 4523270; 409272, 
4523284; 409272,

[[Page 566]]

4523312; 409284, 4523305; 409284, 4523266; 409277, 4523258; 409269, 
4523250; 409216, 4523202; 409191, 4523170; 409111, 4523070; 409042, 
4522982; 409290, 4523125; 409523, 4523257; 409534, 4523249; 409430, 
4523189; 409262, 4523087; 409267, 4523076; 409267, 4523062; 409267, 
4523049; 409270, 4523031; 409278, 4523026; 409286, 4523022; 409299, 
4523016; 409305, 4523023; 409309, 4523035; 409310, 4523047; 409314, 
4523062; 409319, 4523062; 409325, 4523062; 409326, 4523068; 409324, 
4523074; 409326, 4523079; 409331, 4523070; 409331, 4523055; 409326, 
4523041; 409331, 4523025; 409341, 4523014; 409356, 4523005; 409366, 
4522997; 409375, 4522973; 409379, 4522960; 409379, 4522943; 409374, 
4522934; 409375, 4522929; 409383, 4522929; 409381, 4522921; 409376, 
4522914; 409381, 4522905; 409389, 4522905; 409396, 4522901; 409395, 
4522895; 409384, 4522891; 409375, 4522880; 409367, 4522874; 409359, 
4522878; 409353, 4522872; 409343, 4522872; 409333, 4522882; 409336, 
4522900; 409331, 4522916; 409318, 4522917; 409308, 4522930; 409288, 
4522927; 409281, 4522907; 409282, 4522874; 409278, 4522827; 409272, 
4522806; 409270, 4522792; 409267, 4522783; 409261, 4522773; 409312, 
4522791; 409388, 4522813; 409447, 4522839; 409449, 4522830; 409433, 
4522821; 409377, 4522797; 409326, 4522785; 409326, 4522778; 409325, 
4522764; 409318, 4522747; 409309, 4522736; 409298, 4522731; 409284, 
4522732; 409282, 4522740; 409275, 4522747; 409271, 4522747; 409263, 
4522748; 409261, 4522752; 409253, 4522757; 409247, 4522744; 409227, 
4522732; 409213, 4522730; 409208, 4522722; 409206, 4522699; 409203, 
4522689; 409175, 4522660; 409162, 4522658; 409141, 4522658; 409128, 
4522655; 409115, 4522647; 409102, 4522644; 409092, 4522645; 409084, 
4522652; 409081, 4522663; 409081, 4522672; 409083, 4522680; 409085, 
4522691; 409081, 4522698; 409077, 4522700; 409068, 4522698; 409058, 
4522692; 409041, 4522685; 409030, 4522687; 409023, 4522697; 409020, 
4522709; 409012, 4522717; 409001, 4522721; 408988, 4522718; 408970, 
4522704; 408959, 4522696; 408950, 4522696; 408939, 4522677; 408937, 
4522662; 408930, 4522636; 408931, 4522628; 408939, 4522622; 408945, 
4522613; 408944, 4522606; 408936, 4522607; 408924, 4522616; 408916, 
4522622; 408912, 4522615; 408920, 4522609; 408930, 4522597; 408925, 
4522587; 408916, 4522581; 408902, 4522571; 408891, 4522563; 408882, 
4522531; 408886, 4522522; 408888, 4522499; 408893, 4522473; 408893, 
4522450; 408882, 4522436; 408874, 4522429; 408859, 4522417; 408859, 
4522411; 408855, 4522403; 408853, 4522386; 408851, 4522340; 408852, 
4522302; 408850, 4522288; 408852, 4522282; 408851, 4522258; 408850, 
4522228; 408861, 4522228; 408868, 4522228; 408875, 4522225; 408876, 
4522219; 408881, 4522206; 408895, 4522209; 408901, 4522209; 408910, 
4522223; 408920, 4522239; 408935, 4522253; 408950, 4522264; 408965, 
4522271; 408986, 4522273; 408995, 4522273; 409002, 4522279; 409010, 
4522288; 409012, 4522309; 409017, 4522342; 409024, 4522357; 409035, 
4522364; 409051, 4522372; 409062, 4522384; 409073, 4522400; 409089, 
4522424; 409098, 4522436; 409115, 4522443; 409127, 4522439; 409137, 
4522426; 409138, 4522418; 409141, 4522409; 409144, 4522395; 409149, 
4522388; 409168, 4522386; 409179, 4522387; 409195, 4522391; 409217, 
4522400; 409234, 4522417; 409240, 4522433; 409250, 4522455; 409266, 
4522463; 409290, 4522467; 409320, 4522476; 409339, 4522493; 409350, 
4522514; 409362, 4522525; 409381, 4522526; 409396, 4522525; 409411, 
4522512; 409417, 4522499; 409417, 4522487; 409428, 4522476; 409441, 
4522476; 409457, 4522473; 409464, 4522471; 409470, 4522467; 409470, 
4522461; 409467, 4522462; 409461, 4522458; 409455, 4522432; 409464, 
4522418; 409496, 4522388; 409501, 4522381; 409499, 4522376; 409494, 
4522378; 409456, 4522418; 409449, 4522428; 409452, 4522446; 409457, 
4522458; 409450, 4522468; 409438, 4522470; 409424, 4522470; 409417, 
4522472; 409412, 4522489; 409406, 4522505; 409398, 4522515; 409386, 
4522519; 409374, 4522519; 409362, 4522515; 409351, 4522499; 409335, 
4522475; 409318, 4522464; 409295, 4522459; 409271, 4522456; 409259, 
4522446; 409255, 4522432; 409252, 4522419; 409235, 4522397; 409212, 
4522383; 409199, 4522379; 409170, 4522372; 409142, 4522377; 409135, 
4522388; 409127, 4522410; 409127, 4522424; 409119, 4522429; 409112, 
4522431; 409104, 4522428; 409098, 4522419; 409090, 4522403; 409081, 
4522387; 409070, 4522374; 409058, 4522363; 409049, 4522355; 409039, 
4522346; 409032, 4522336; 409029, 4522319; 409030, 4522301; 409028, 
4522281; 409034, 4522278; 409055, 4522276; 409062, 4522270; 409078, 
4522260; 409096, 4522248; 409111, 4522236; 409121, 4522233; 409126, 
4522237; 409137, 4522252; 409140, 4522259; 409142, 4522255; 409140, 
4522244; 409134, 4522233; 409121, 4522225; 409110, 4522227; 409096, 
4522239; 409075, 4522253; 409061, 4522263; 409051, 4522269; 409041, 
4522269; 409018, 4522269; 409008, 4522264; 408990, 4522258; 408971, 
4522255; 408956, 4522249; 408933, 4522237; 408922, 4522220; 408909, 
4522203; 408899, 4522190; 408886, 4522178; 408877, 4522178; 408874, 
4522193; 408871, 4522209; 408869, 4522210; 408869, 4522202; 408871, 
4522179; 408869, 4522171; 408868, 4522165; 408861, 4522160; 408848, 
4522160; 408846, 4522175; 408838, 4522180; 408838, 4522185; 408846, 
4522194; 408842, 4522201; 408835, 4522214; 408838, 4522224; 408841, 
4522233; 408841, 4522243; 408841, 4522269; 408840, 4522281; 408834, 
4522284; 408827, 4522283; 408812, 4522283; returning to 408793, 4522282.
    (xix) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 408827, 4521822; 
408829, 4521942; 408843, 4521954; 408843, 4521975; 408843, 4522009; 
408845, 4522060; 408845, 4522106; 408851, 4522108; 408854, 4522062; 
408853, 4522015; 408853, 4521970; 408853, 4521951; 408872, 4521939; 
408924, 4521913; 408962, 4521881; 409011, 4521849; 409066, 4521844; 
409121, 4521841; 409164, 4521843; 409207, 4521848; 409259, 4521862; 
409305, 4521866; 409322, 4521839; 409379, 4521833; 409431, 4521840; 
409461, 4521827; 409545, 4521805; 409543, 4521570; 409520, 4521641; 
409490, 4521729; 409460, 4521729; 409406, 4521743; 409376, 4521785; 
409317, 4521785; 409291, 4521799; 409279, 4521824; 409249, 4521818; 
409223, 4521781; 409178, 4521760; 409135, 4521759; 409101, 4521756; 
409063, 4521752; 409020, 4521786; 408982, 4521820; 408911, 4521823; 
408880, 4521831; returning to 408827, 4521822.
    (xx) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 408824, 4521590; 
408824, 4521640; 408825, 4521658; 408832, 4521672; 408843, 4521692; 
408856, 4521723; 408874, 4521738; 408899, 4521738; 408914, 4521726; 
408927, 4521705; 408940, 4521678; 408949, 4521649; 408959, 4521631; 
408969, 4521621; 408982,

[[Page 567]]

4521615; 409005, 4521615; 409027, 4521604; 409016, 4521599; 408839, 
4521613; 408835, 4521597; returning to 408824, 4521590.
    (xxi) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 405365, 4517762; 
405372, 4517778; 405520, 4517852; 405888, 4518096; 406038, 4518193; 
406162, 4518274; 406251, 4518332; 406342, 4518391; 406487, 4518485; 
406790, 4518682; 406988, 4518812; 407152, 4518919; 407287, 4519007; 
407490, 4519140; 407589, 4519191; 407724, 4519261; 407788, 4519302; 
407816, 4519302; 407839, 4519293; 407861, 4519261; 407859, 4519254; 
407846, 4519259; 407820, 4519286; 407805, 4519292; 407786, 4519287; 
407728, 4519246; 407596, 4519179; 407526, 4519144; 407446, 4519099; 
407284, 4518991; 407182, 4518928; 407085, 4518861; 406976, 4518791; 
406930, 4518760; 406804, 4518673; 406819, 4518664; 406839, 4518649; 
406862, 4518632; 406882, 4518617; 406906, 4518595; 406933, 4518577; 
406955, 4518580; 406974, 4518587; 406998, 4518591; 407032, 4518590; 
407062, 4518581; 407073, 4518570; 407089, 4518568; 407115, 4518574; 
407140, 4518584; 407153, 4518587; 407162, 4518582; 407176, 4518568; 
407193, 4518534; 407204, 4518516; 407223, 4518499; 407243, 4518482; 
407263, 4518464; 407273, 4518444; 407298, 4518423; 407312, 4518402; 
407317, 4518372; 407325, 4518329; 407331, 4518317; 407336, 4518304; 
407343, 4518293; 407357, 4518273; 407374, 4518266; 407404, 4518252; 
407421, 4518239; 407439, 4518209; 407447, 4518186; 407447, 4518177; 
407434, 4518179; 407422, 4518204; 407407, 4518230; 407387, 4518243; 
407364, 4518250; 407347, 4518259; 407331, 4518280; 407318, 4518308; 
407315, 4518325; 407315, 4518326; 407307, 4518361; 407297, 4518405; 
407291, 4518416; 407271, 4518434; 407255, 4518457; 407235, 4518479; 
407206, 4518502; 407190, 4518516; 407173, 4518546; 407166, 4518563; 
407160, 4518572; 407152, 4518574; 407139, 4518574; 407123, 4518566; 
407097, 4518558; 407077, 4518556; 407055, 4518566; 407043, 4518576; 
407033, 4518579; 407022, 4518580; 407005, 4518577; 406979, 4518570; 
406961, 4518559; 406935, 4518554; 406950, 4518530; 406956, 4518505; 
406957, 4518488; 406951, 4518476; 406942, 4518448; 406939, 4518411; 
406948, 4518390; 406974, 4518363; 406995, 4518331; 407002, 4518333; 
407012, 4518348; 407019, 4518360; 407027, 4518365; 407023, 4518349; 
407011, 4518328; 406997, 4518319; 406997, 4518309; 407009, 4518286; 
407032, 4518269; 407065, 4518260; 407085, 4518248; 407099, 4518223; 
407127, 4518197; 407148, 4518183; 407172, 4518173; 407199, 4518158; 
407213, 4518150; 407224, 4518129; 407224, 4518109; 407218, 4518079; 
407217, 4518055; 407231, 4518032; 407240, 4518018; 407253, 4518005; 
407275, 4517983; 407289, 4517972; 407303, 4517953; 407309, 4517939; 
407303, 4517939; 407287, 4517957; 407276, 4517974; 407257, 4517984; 
407239, 4518003; 407223, 4518026; 407217, 4518032; 407209, 4518051; 
407204, 4518076; 407210, 4518108; 407208, 4518134; 407194, 4518150; 
407170, 4518165; 407143, 4518173; 407105, 4518198; 407085, 4518223; 
407063, 4518244; 407040, 4518255; 407009, 4518263; 406994, 4518277; 
406980, 4518307; 406966, 4518336; 406937, 4518373; 406921, 4518398; 
406917, 4518433; 406922, 4518459; 406920, 4518497; 406912, 4518536; 
406879, 4518572; 406841, 4518609; 406786, 4518639; 406773, 4518656; 
406729, 4518626; 406710, 4518614; 406679, 4518595; 406634, 4518565; 
406634, 4518555; 406633, 4518533; 406630, 4518504; 406617, 4518472; 
406612, 4518442; 406611, 4518423; 406632, 4518403; 406660, 4518394; 
406673, 4518388; 406678, 4518380; 406661, 4518378; 406632, 4518388; 
406599, 4518414; 406604, 4518442; 406606, 4518480; 406617, 4518524; 
406622, 4518549; 406622, 4518560; 406568, 4518527; 406391, 4518410; 
406184, 4518272; 406069, 4518197; 406045, 4518180; 405987, 4518146; 
405924, 4518102; 405894, 4518085; 405652, 4517922; 405530, 4517839; 
405381, 4517766; 405379, 4517746; 405385, 4517689; 405476, 4517633; 
405482, 4517619; 405462, 4517594; 405463, 4517627; 405374, 4517679; 
405370, 4517729; returning to 405365, 4517762.
    (xxii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 406574, 
4517557; 406583, 4517571; 406601, 4517590; 406623, 4517598; 406653, 
4517604; 406676, 4517602; 406693, 4517598; 406706, 4517594; 406715, 
4517590; 406735, 4517588; 406757, 4517604; 406755, 4517624; 406734, 
4517661; 406722, 4517698; 406731, 4517723; 406751, 4517753; 406765, 
4517773; 406786, 4517793; 406795, 4517794; 406800, 4517782; 406800, 
4517768; 406790, 4517749; 406796, 4517748; 406807, 4517765; 406825, 
4517775; 406843, 4517776; 406861, 4517775; 406875, 4517775; 406897, 
4517765; 406883, 4517749; 406888, 4517737; 406909, 4517734; 406932, 
4517733; 406941, 4517726; 406917, 4517719; 406891, 4517714; 406873, 
4517728; 406852, 4517739; 406845, 4517716; 406861, 4517718; 406875, 
4517717; 406872, 4517707; 406862, 4517704; 406851, 4517693; 406862, 
4517689; 406883, 4517678; 406901, 4517666; 406909, 4517655; 406926, 
4517654; 406946, 4517644; 406960, 4517629; 406974, 4517625; 406986, 
4517617; 406983, 4517601; 406991, 4517593; 406994, 4517571; 406994, 
4517555; 407006, 4517562; 407007, 4517579; 407019, 4517593; 407044, 
4517603; 407049, 4517596; 407040, 4517581; 407040, 4517568; 407041, 
4517549; 407040, 4517530; 407028, 4517525; 407029, 4517498; 407014, 
4517484; 407018, 4517468; 407008, 4517462; 407007, 4517444; 407007, 
4517432; 407013, 4517414; 407011, 4517402; 407013, 4517396; 407030, 
4517396; 407052, 4517392; 407062, 4517389; 407067, 4517377; 407067, 
4517361; 407060, 4517343; 407035, 4517339; 407012, 4517338; 406986, 
4517338; 406971, 4517344; 406959, 4517357; 406962, 4517371; 406972, 
4517383; 406978, 4517403; 406978, 4517424; 406978, 4517444; 406978, 
4517462; 406983, 4517469; 406980, 4517483; 406966, 4517494; 406949, 
4517493; 406932, 4517500; 406924, 4517505; 406910, 4517499; 406889, 
4517499; 406867, 4517515; 406848, 4517523; 406840, 4517512; 406825, 
4517501; 406811, 4517518; 406810, 4517539; 406795, 4517555; 406784, 
4517551; 406763, 4517556; 406752, 4517556; 406765, 4517517; 406783, 
4517446; 406794, 4517410; 406817, 4517384; 406896, 4517344; 406983, 
4517309; 407020, 4517310; 407049, 4517333; 407053, 4517329; 407051, 
4517319; 407025, 4517299; 407010, 4517295; 406988, 4517297; 406944, 
4517309; 406861, 4517348; 406820, 4517367; 406799, 4517382; 406785, 
4517400; 406775, 4517428; 406763, 4517475; 406755, 4517511; 406735, 
4517560; 406708, 4517585; 406683, 4517591; 406652, 4517593; 406614, 
4517582; 406591, 4517558; 406581, 4517551; returning to 406574, 4517557.
    (xxiii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates

[[Page 568]]

(E, N): 406455, 4517395; 406458, 4517402; 406470, 4517401; 406477, 
4517392; 406493, 4517382; 406512, 4517379; 406525, 4517388; 406537, 
4517407; 406545, 4517421; 406551, 4517452; 406551, 4517470; 406552, 
4517498; 406558, 4517527; 406568, 4517544; 406574, 4517541; 406567, 
4517521; 406562, 4517477; 406563, 4517451; 406554, 4517421; 406547, 
4517391; 406533, 4517368; 406506, 4517361; 406483, 4517370; 406464, 
4517382; returning to 406455, 4517395.
    (xxiv) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 406478, 
4517065; 406493, 4517065; 406523, 4517064; 406555, 4517073; 406576, 
4517093; 406592, 4517123; 406597, 4517143; 406596, 4517164; 406584, 
4517198; 406558, 4517223; 406546, 4517240; 406543, 4517267; 406549, 
4517293; 406562, 4517308; 406581, 4517318; 406595, 4517335; 406612, 
4517374; 406622, 4517410; 406625, 4517451; 406627, 4517498; 406638, 
4517514; 406652, 4517518; 406669, 4517502; 406684, 4517464; 406699, 
4517394; 406709, 4517355; 406741, 4517320; 406802, 4517291; 406869, 
4517272; 406912, 4517261; 406937, 4517250; 406978, 4517233; 407002, 
4517232; 407048, 4517243; 407079, 4517253; 407111, 4517276; 407135, 
4517306; 407151, 4517349; 407154, 4517391; 407154, 4517429; 407155, 
4517456; 407176, 4517471; 407205, 4517471; 407229, 4517460; 407260, 
4517439; 407279, 4517399; 407288, 4517331; 407300, 4517248; 407313, 
4517232; 407335, 4517233; 407360, 4517241; 407377, 4517245; 407389, 
4517249; 407391, 4517242; 407370, 4517231; 407341, 4517222; 407320, 
4517206; 407322, 4517183; 407332, 4517164; 407334, 4517151; 407333, 
4517135; 407344, 4517115; 407361, 4517098; 407379, 4517089; 407394, 
4517089; 407425, 4517099; 407463, 4517107; 407540, 4517113; 407594, 
4517110; 407635, 4517099; 407671, 4517083; 407702, 4517056; 407724, 
4517032; 407744, 4516996; 407745, 4516952; 407743, 4516874; 407757, 
4516822; 407763, 4516772; 407761, 4516749; 407753, 4516735; 407729, 
4516726; 407682, 4516720; 407634, 4516720; 407585, 4516717; 407551, 
4516713; 407522, 4516703; 407494, 4516678; 407476, 4516634; 407471, 
4516597; 407469, 4516597; 407459, 4516598; 407458, 4516598; 407459, 
4516618; 407473, 4516664; 407489, 4516693; 407512, 4516715; 407551, 
4516727; 407614, 4516734; 407646, 4516737; 407705, 4516738; 407729, 
4516741; 407743, 4516745; 407749, 4516757; 407745, 4516787; 407729, 
4516865; 407725, 4516894; 407723, 4516934; 407725, 4516975; 407729, 
4516996; 407713, 4517029; 407681, 4517059; 407645, 4517083; 407601, 
4517094; 407531, 4517100; 407450, 4517092; 407441, 4517082; 407418, 
4517074; 407395, 4517071; 407363, 4517068; 407345, 4517078; 407336, 
4517095; 407328, 4517113; 407319, 4517147; 407317, 4517164; 407304, 
4517209; 407290, 4517244; 407283, 4517287; 407272, 4517352; 407264, 
4517401; 407241, 4517444; 407219, 4517456; 407197, 4517459; 407178, 
4517457; 407167, 4517442; 407164, 4517418; 407162, 4517370; 407152, 
4517322; 407135, 4517290; 407108, 4517260; 407069, 4517239; 407026, 
4517226; 406997, 4517222; 406971, 4517224; 406944, 4517236; 406919, 
4517245; 406886, 4517254; 406836, 4517271; 406788, 4517286; 406747, 
4517305; 406721, 4517321; 406709, 4517337; 406695, 4517358; 406685, 
4517388; 406677, 4517426; 406672, 4517460; 406666, 4517483; 406655, 
4517498; 406649, 4517503; 406643, 4517498; 406639, 4517485; 406637, 
4517461; 406637, 4517439; 406636, 4517409; 406627, 4517381; 406612, 
4517344; 406598, 4517321; 406580, 4517306; 406563, 4517294; 406556, 
4517278; 406557, 4517259; 406559, 4517246; 406577, 4517227; 406596, 
4517204; 406608, 4517174; 406611, 4517165; 406700, 4517169; 406731, 
4517156; 406762, 4517147; 406795, 4517118; 406789, 4517107; 406775, 
4517117; 406750, 4517138; 406695, 4517155; 406612, 4517154; 406610, 
4517149; 406605, 4517131; 406619, 4517116; 406645, 4517091; 406657, 
4517069; 406672, 4517055; 406693, 4517041; 406694, 4517034; 406675, 
4517036; 406659, 4517045; 406635, 4517046; 406629, 4517036; 406625, 
4517018; 406631, 4516990; 406648, 4516971; 406655, 4516958; 406676, 
4516951; 406713, 4516946; 406733, 4516939; 406755, 4516934; 406769, 
4516924; 406781, 4516910; 406793, 4516879; 406798, 4516835; 406795, 
4516791; 406800, 4516758; 406806, 4516740; 406806, 4516724; 406802, 
4516696; 406797, 4516654; 406799, 4516635; 406810, 4516612; 406836, 
4516567; 406845, 4516531; 406848, 4516509; 406840, 4516482; 406836, 
4516462; 406843, 4516463; 406855, 4516477; 406862, 4516495; 406877, 
4516495; 406893, 4516493; 406895, 4516488; 406884, 4516485; 406876, 
4516488; 406867, 4516484; 406857, 4516465; 406838, 4516449; 406841, 
4516437; 406839, 4516409; 406841, 4516371; 406850, 4516359; 406872, 
4516355; 406899, 4516342; 406914, 4516336; 406914, 4516326; 406904, 
4516328; 406891, 4516335; 406878, 4516342; 406860, 4516346; 406842, 
4516351; 406844, 4516330; 406853, 4516301; 406866, 4516282; 406883, 
4516266; 406888, 4516257; 406900, 4516231; 406906, 4516214; 406921, 
4516200; 406946, 4516179; 406970, 4516165; 407007, 4516160; 407016, 
4516156; 407013, 4516147; 407000, 4516150; 406978, 4516150; 406958, 
4516154; 406932, 4516177; 406921, 4516189; 406900, 4516203; 406891, 
4516202; 406884, 4516196; 406884, 4516183; 406899, 4516157; 406919, 
4516121; 406939, 4516087; 406941, 4516059; 406943, 4516019; 406952, 
4515994; 406970, 4515973; 406990, 4515953; 407006, 4515939; 407013, 
4515912; 407024, 4515896; 407042, 4515875; 407049, 4515854; 407044, 
4515852; 407034, 4515872; 407016, 4515890; 407003, 4515910; 406989, 
4515931; 406977, 4515953; 406959, 4515966; 406939, 4515990; 406928, 
4516027; 406927, 4516065; 406917, 4516102; 406891, 4516141; 406869, 
4516180; 406851, 4516194; 406830, 4516216; 406803, 4516263; 406782, 
4516304; 406770, 4516324; 406748, 4516344; 406732, 4516349; 406708, 
4516352; 406684, 4516345; 406660, 4516329; 406631, 4516318; 406613, 
4516318; 406602, 4516326; 406583, 4516348; 406577, 4516372; 406583, 
4516403; 406591, 4516423; 406615, 4516445; 406637, 4516461; 406666, 
4516468; 406686, 4516472; 406692, 4516481; 406689, 4516489; 406678, 
4516496; 406658, 4516500; 406649, 4516508; 406651, 4516515; 406664, 
4516513; 406678, 4516511; 406695, 4516511; 406714, 4516525; 406721, 
4516525; 406718, 4516517; 406710, 4516500; 406713, 4516485; 406707, 
4516468; 406690, 4516456; 406676, 4516451; 406658, 4516449; 406640, 
4516444; 406622, 4516430; 406604, 4516413; 406593, 4516380; 406593, 
4516355; 406613, 4516335; 406624, 4516331; 406645, 4516335; 406672, 
4516353; 406696, 4516366; 406740, 4516362; 406769, 4516344; 406798, 
4516315; 406818, 4516261; 406845, 4516218; 406867, 4516202; 406879, 
4516207; 406884, 4516221; 406876, 4516243; 406867, 4516256; 406849, 
4516270; 406835, 4516294; 406823, 4516326; 406818, 4516360; 406819, 
4516387; 406822, 4516413; 406817, 4516452; 406817, 4516483; 406824, 
4516511; 406824, 4516534; 406815, 4516559; 406804, 4516582; 406781, 
4516618; 406772,

[[Page 569]]

4516637; 406774, 4516674; 406784, 4516719; 406781, 4516743; 406771, 
4516779; 406771, 4516816; 406772, 4516865; 406757, 4516892; 406750, 
4516913; 406737, 4516914; 406689, 4516924; 406648, 4516940; 406625, 
4516968; 406609, 4516995; 406604, 4517015; 406614, 4517036; 406617, 
4517063; 406616, 4517093; 406596, 4517100; 406581, 4517078; 406541, 
4517057; 406503, 4517053; 406480, 4517058; returning to 406478, 4517065.
    (xxv) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 405813, 4517245; 
405816, 4517250; 405826, 4517237; 405837, 4517224; 405928, 4517186; 
405951, 4517171; 405959, 4517164; 405976, 4517143; 406004, 4517145; 
406019, 4517149; 406019, 4517135; 406010, 4517105; 406005, 4517086; 
405999, 4517070; 405992, 4517046; 405992, 4517030; 406004, 4517019; 
406022, 4517018; 406045, 4517021; 406064, 4517034; 406084, 4517044; 
406114, 4517049; 406132, 4517051; 406145, 4517046; 406162, 4517035; 
406188, 4517013; 406198, 4516996; 406210, 4516994; 406211, 4516980; 
406203, 4516973; 406200, 4516934; 406203, 4516879; 406201, 4516860; 
406223, 4516835; 406234, 4516805; 406230, 4516793; 406248, 4516768; 
406282, 4516711; 406319, 4516696; 406408, 4516682; 406449, 4516663; 
406518, 4516641; 406574, 4516627; 406599, 4516602; 406609, 4516562; 
406591, 4516501; 406570, 4516455; 406459, 4516384; 406401, 4516334; 
406356, 4516286; 406348, 4516251; 406353, 4516233; 406403, 4516214; 
406401, 4516206; 406350, 4516216; 406339, 4516232; 406334, 4516249; 
406335, 4516276; 406345, 4516297; 406359, 4516315; 406398, 4516354; 
406447, 4516400; 406522, 4516450; 406553, 4516470; 406586, 4516555; 
406587, 4516581; 406574, 4516603; 406538, 4516619; 406437, 4516647; 
406397, 4516665; 406322, 4516677; 406282, 4516687; 406257, 4516711; 
406225, 4516768; 406216, 4516782; 406211, 4516778; 406202, 4516774; 
406193, 4516776; 406191, 4516782; 406193, 4516790; 406178, 4516812; 
406168, 4516825; 406164, 4516834; 406144, 4516876; 406139, 4516879; 
406132, 4516879; 406130, 4516884; 406134, 4516888; 406137, 4516893; 
406134, 4516914; 406134, 4516927; 406142, 4516972; 406142, 4516990; 
406137, 4516996; 406131, 4516991; 406124, 4516995; 406126, 4517003; 
406116, 4517012; 406099, 4517013; 406084, 4517013; 406074, 4517010; 
406067, 4516999; 406050, 4516988; 406034, 4516986; 406012, 4516985; 
405990, 4516991; 405979, 4517003; 405968, 4517017; 405966, 4517031; 
405972, 4517062; 405979, 4517082; 405979, 4517087; 405986, 4517107; 
405986, 4517131; 405977, 4517133; 405969, 4517139; 405949, 4517164; 
405921, 4517183; 405885, 4517194; 405834, 4517218; 405824, 4517227; 
returning to 405813, 4517245.
    (xxvi) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 407085, 
4515505; 407087, 4515512; 407130, 4515530; 407145, 4515540; 407173, 
4515552; 407184, 4515539; 407203, 4515520; 407223, 4515509; 407236, 
4515491; 407238, 4515481; 407244, 4515471; 407268, 4515463; 407278, 
4515449; 407282, 4515436; 407272, 4515442; 407265, 4515454; 407245, 
4515461; 407231, 4515476; 407226, 4515491; 407211, 4515506; 407190, 
4515513; 407169, 4515516; 407155, 4515518; 407152, 4515510; 407139, 
4515507; 407127, 4515502; 407113, 4515499; 407106, 4515498; 407099, 
4515496; 407097, 4515490; 407098, 4515483; 407094, 4515481; 407088, 
4515485; 407088, 4515490; 407088, 4515498; returning to 407085, 4515505.
    (xxvii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Eureka and Fields 
Landing. Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, 
N): 399065, 4511443; 399073, 4511482; 399088, 4511516; 399110, 4511539; 
399153, 4511567; 399203, 4511583; 399264, 4511622; 399286, 4511651; 
399296, 4511673; 399356, 4511801; 399406, 4511839; 399422, 4511844; 
399444, 4511846; 399672, 4511791; 399693, 4511796; 399721, 4511806; 
399736, 4511816; 399738, 4511835; 399733, 4511864; 399717, 4511910; 
399781, 4511918; 399776, 4511662; 399738, 4511155; 399643, 4511079; 
399235, 4511068; 399406, 4511265; 399422, 4511318; 399429, 4511358; 
399388, 4511425; 399364, 4511436; 399325, 4511440; 399315, 4511444; 
399149, 4511407; 399109, 4511407; 399080, 4511422; returning to 399065, 
4511443.
    (xxviii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Fields Landing. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 396204, 
4504399; 396220, 4504485; 396333, 4504495; 396700, 4504525; 396964, 
4504736; 396961, 4504902; 396868, 4504978; 396753, 4505018; 396680, 
4505107; 396673, 4505269; 396855, 4505633; 396706, 4505904; 396637, 
4506093; 396657, 4506149; 396973, 4506376; 397092, 4506339; 397457, 
4506666; 397761, 4506800; 397765, 4506657; 397817, 4506487; 397978, 
4506317; 398219, 4506049; 398235, 4505961; 398020, 4506037; 397955, 
4505986; 397823, 4505633; 397955, 4505312; 398163, 4505180; 397980, 
4504676; 397910, 4504693; 397854, 4504693; 397547, 4504641; 398043, 
4503896; 398135, 4503602; 398020, 4503486; 397810, 4503449; 397646, 
4503052; 397527, 4503096; 397464, 4503316; 397212, 4503386; 397193, 
4503531; 396973, 4503537; 396872, 4503619; 396708, 4503606; 396425, 
4503934; 396513, 4504185; 396488, 4504244; 396369, 4504280; 396266, 
4504313; returning to 396204, 4504399.
    (xxix)
    Note: Map of Unit HUM-3 follows.

[[Page 570]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.004

    (10) Unit HUM-4; Humboldt County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles, Cannibal Island. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 393052, 
4504207; 393102, 4504275; 393146, 4504303; 393119, 4504226; 393143, 
4504186; 393184, 4504123; 393203, 4504065; 393203, 4504037; 393158,

[[Page 571]]

4503967; 393129, 4503919; 393122, 4503876; 393131, 4503835; 393167, 
4503811; 393283, 4503811; 393324, 4503806; 393374, 4503784; 393408, 
4503743; 393412, 4503698; 393412, 4503618; 393412, 4503570; 393441, 
4503549; 393583, 4503585; 393593, 4503570; 393403, 4503501; 393396, 
4503534; 393374, 4503575; 393369, 4503628; 393372, 4503678; 393360, 
4503719; 393324, 4503755; 393290, 4503772; 393158, 4503767; 393117, 
4503765; 393081, 4503782; 393062, 4503823; 393054, 4503864; 393062, 
4503909; 393090, 4503967; 393136, 4504008; 393167, 4504058; 393090, 
4504198; 393074, 4504198; returning to 393052, 4504207.
    (ii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles, Cannibal Island. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 392678, 
4504120; 392705, 4504134; 392705, 4504156; 392716, 4504160; 392724, 
4504145; 392751, 4504139; 392780, 4504123; 392788, 4504107; 392780, 
4504083; 392770, 4504058; 392772, 4504035; 392799, 4503999; 392824, 
4503999; 392850, 4504003; 392874, 4504002; 392882, 4503994; 392885, 
4503976; 392874, 4503937; 392859, 4503937; 392867, 4503967; 392859, 
4503981; 392839, 4503978; 392797, 4503978; 392767, 4503994; 392749, 
4504026; 392743, 4504048; 392746, 4504067; 392759, 4504091; 392761, 
4504105; 392727, 4504120; 392714, 4504107; 392684, 4504099; returning to 
392678, 4504120.
    (iii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles, Cannibal Island. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 392357, 
4503825; 392357, 4503890; 392427, 4503892; 392410, 4503830; 392408, 
4503789; 392432, 4503765; 392470, 4503770; 392492, 4503799; 392504, 
4503842; 392526, 4503890; 392562, 4503919; 392603, 4503933; 392631, 
4503928; 392720, 4503892; 392773, 4503890; 392819, 4503885; 392845, 
4503871; 392869, 4503844; 392879, 4503806; 392874, 4503765; 392860, 
4503715; 392862, 4503691; 392869, 4503664; 392884, 4503654; 392908, 
4503645; 392949, 4503659; 392982, 4503676; 393030, 4503683; 393066, 
4503674; 393102, 4503654; 393126, 4503621; 393131, 4503582; 393117, 
4503532; 393098, 4503498; 393090, 4503469; 393090, 4503433; 393074, 
4503407; 393030, 4503359; 393002, 4503368; 392970, 4503361; 392893, 
4503479; 392824, 4503481; 392790, 4503469; 392761, 4503462; 392742, 
4503424; 392768, 4503390; 392773, 4503373; 392773, 4503277; 392716, 
4503140; 392696, 4503143; 392696, 4503152; 392752, 4503275; 392756, 
4503306; 392747, 4503373; 392723, 4503414; 392737, 4503465; 392752, 
4503484; 392792, 4503496; 392807, 4503513; 392913, 4503486; 392934, 
4503457; 392961, 4503419; 392999, 4503402; 393045, 4503414; 393054, 
4503450; 393069, 4503501; 393093, 4503556; 393088, 4503594; 393062, 
4503626; 393011, 4503635; 392937, 4503614; 392869, 4503597; 392824, 
4503640; 392809, 4503681; 392824, 4503734; 392833, 4503789; 392814, 
4503823; 392788, 4503849; 392728, 4503859; 392636, 4503876; 392588, 
4503876; 392562, 4503847; 392528, 4503779; 392497, 4503734; 392451, 
4503722; 392410, 4503727; 392381, 4503743; 392360, 4503775; returning to 
392357, 4503825.
    (iv) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles, Cannibal Island. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 391919, 
4503618; 391946, 4503641; 391966, 4503662; 391975, 4503643; 391991, 
4503633; 392018, 4503619; 392046, 4503599; 392061, 4503604; 392084, 
4503608; 392108, 4503598; 392129, 4503596; 392146, 4503583; 392175, 
4503547; 392209, 4503507; 392263, 4503444; 392272, 4503416; 392267, 
4503402; 392246, 4503386; 392224, 4503371; 392207, 4503350; 392213, 
4503321; 392224, 4503286; 392232, 4503240; 392232, 4503208; 392243, 
4503184; 392252, 4503171; 392271, 4503171; 392296, 4503177; 392314, 
4503191; 392331, 4503204; 392355, 4503207; 392381, 4503201; 392404, 
4503193; 392432, 4503184; 392448, 4503173; 392467, 4503152; 392467, 
4503138; 392453, 4503144; 392434, 4503165; 392408, 4503175; 392380, 
4503185; 392361, 4503193; 392346, 4503193; 392331, 4503184; 392306, 
4503162; 392278, 4503153; 392243, 4503154; 392231, 4503171; 392212, 
4503205; 392209, 4503255; 392188, 4503311; 392185, 4503342; 392189, 
4503363; 392227, 4503398; 392246, 4503412; 392244, 4503432; 392134, 
4503560; 392112, 4503567; 392082, 4503584; 392042, 4503575; 392023, 
4503584; 391962, 4503625; 391942, 4503619; 391920, 4503608; returning to 
391919, 4503618.
    (v) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles, Cannibal Island. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 391651, 
4503288; 391674, 4503278; 391699, 4503243; 391720, 4503213; 391720, 
4503176; 391720, 4503121; 391768, 4503087; 391773, 4503064; 391763, 
4503029; 391780, 4502984; 391830, 4502950; 391850, 4502901; 391879, 
4502858; 391909, 4502870; 391954, 4502856; 391976, 4502860; 391981, 
4502893; 391991, 4502922; 392026, 4502928; 392053, 4502927; 392071, 
4502901; 392071, 4502868; 392080, 4502840; 392105, 4502829; 392121, 
4502843; 392141, 4502885; 392130, 4502901; 392106, 4502901; 392071, 
4502918; 392051, 4502942; 392036, 4502980; 392036, 4503020; 392049, 
4503032; 392059, 4503015; 392058, 4502987; 392069, 4502953; 392100, 
4502925; 392133, 4502920; 392155, 4502918; 392168, 4502890; 392150, 
4502846; 392118, 4502803; 392074, 4502803; 392044, 4502835; 392041, 
4502873; 392039, 4502896; 392019, 4502895; 392006, 4502870; 391991, 
4502821; 391961, 4502821; 391924, 4502835; 391885, 4502829; 391848, 
4502828; 391803, 4502920; 391788, 4502933; 391746, 4502963; 391726, 
4503019; 391730, 4503061; 391701, 4503084; 391676, 4503121; 391684, 
4503169; 391683, 4503211; 391654, 4503240; returning to 391651, 4503288.
    (vi) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles, Cannibal Island. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 392724, 
4502551; 392748, 4502590; 392799, 4502607; 392846, 4502615; 392877, 
4502593; 392901, 4502547; 392935, 4502527; 392974, 4502527; 393001, 
4502544; 393003, 4502602; 393028, 4502675; 393064, 4502717; 393118, 
4502770; 393193, 4502821; 393242, 4502836; 393356, 4502865; 393407, 
4502855; 393448, 4502814; 393436, 4502794; 393404, 4502804; 393392, 
4502826; 393365, 4502838; 393273, 4502821; 393178, 4502780; 393127, 
4502760; 393096, 4502704; 393052, 4502668; 393028, 4502576; 393025, 
4502530; 393016, 4502515; 392955, 4502498; 392921, 4502510; 392884, 
4502527; 392836, 4502593; 392807, 4502588; 392768, 4502571; 392756, 
4502544; 392758, 4502508; 392768, 4502474; 392787, 4502440; 392826, 
4502411; 392914, 4502386; 392940, 4502372; 392955, 4502338; 392955, 
4502306; 392943, 4502253; 392909, 4502192; 392877, 4502136; 392860, 
4502085; 392880, 4502051; 392875, 4502015; 392790, 4502019; 392785, 
4502053; 392826, 4502078; 392853, 4502160; 392880, 4502202; 392916,

[[Page 572]]

4502306; 392909, 4502350; 392833, 4502381; 392765, 4502403; 392741, 
4502454; returning to 392724, 4502551.
    (vii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles, Cannibal Island. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 393154, 
4501798; 393227, 4501791; 393249, 4501813; 393285, 4501830; 393312, 
4501808; 393317, 4501830; 393382, 4501791; 393548, 4501791; 393611, 
4501786; 393672, 4501755; 393701, 4501711; 393730, 4501568; 393749, 
4501521; 393761, 4501487; 393795, 4501456; 393832, 4501434; 393871, 
4501429; 393922, 4501451; 393968, 4501568; 393985, 4501633; 393980, 
4501665; 393970, 4501684; 393953, 4501704; 393744, 4501810; 393718, 
4501830; 393698, 4501878; 393693, 4501920; 393715, 4502002; 393825, 
4502187; 393861, 4502228; 393995, 4502311; 394048, 4502323; 394206, 
4502289; 394225, 4502250; 394245, 4502214; 394274, 4502189; 394289, 
4502153; 394289, 4502124; 394272, 4502112; 394240, 4502129; 394216, 
4502158; 394216, 4502192; 394213, 4502214; 394170, 4502238; 394106, 
4502262; 394046, 4502272; 394002, 4502248; 393929, 4502211; 393859, 
4502163; 393774, 4502002; 393759, 4501956; 393749, 4501915; 393764, 
4501871; 393934, 4501781; 394000, 4501738; 394034, 4501689; 394031, 
4501638; 393987, 4501439; 393961, 4501402; 393880, 4501380; 393793, 
4501393; 393727, 4501434; 393691, 4501478; 393664, 4501541; 393652, 
4501616; 393628, 4501701; 393572, 4501725; 393409, 4501721; 393305, 
4501716; 393161, 4501696; returning to 393154, 4501798.
    (viii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles, Cannibal Island. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 392754, 
4500850; 392754, 4500887; 392781, 4500908; 392815, 4500908; 392872, 
4500908; 392953, 4500871; 392987, 4500820; 392994, 4500793; 393011, 
4500756; 393034, 4500736; 393068, 4500702; 393068, 4500645; 393027, 
4500604; 393017, 4500581; 393041, 4500574; 393081, 4500614; 393149, 
4500689; 393196, 4500716; 393243, 4500716; 393287, 4500658; 393290, 
4500601; 393277, 4500537; 393284, 4500496; 393368, 4500507; 393381, 
4500446; 393324, 4500453; 393274, 4500453; 393250, 4500456; 393236, 
4500480; 393236, 4500540; 393250, 4500591; 393247, 4500631; 393230, 
4500648; 393182, 4500648; 393135, 4500594; 393081, 4500544; 393044, 
4500520; 393004, 4500520; 392967, 4500520; 392947, 4500557; 392947, 
4500598; 392960, 4500638; 393000, 4500648; 393017, 4500672; 393000, 
4500689; 392980, 4500695; 392960, 4500726; 392940, 4500773; 392923, 
4500813; 392879, 4500840; 392852, 4500864; 392829, 4500864; 392791, 
4500850; returning to 392754, 4500850.
    (ix) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles, Cannibal Island. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 390162, 
4501488; 390181, 4501544; 390239, 4501544; 390239, 4501568; 390250, 
4501613; 390277, 4501632; 390311, 4501632; 390346, 4501592; 390375, 
4501549; 390389, 4501514; 390423, 4501541; 390469, 4501533; 390437, 
4501429; 390421, 4501365; 390434, 4501333; 390477, 4501288; 390514, 
4501237; 390570, 4501240; 390607, 4501245; 390650, 4501245; 390677, 
4501216; 390709, 4501179; 390762, 4501109; 390802, 4501069; 390839, 
4501064; 390850, 4501117; 390863, 4501184; 390909, 4501219; 390964, 
4501227; 391021, 4501232; 391053, 4501240; 391053, 4501296; 391116, 
4501323; 391180, 4501315; 391191, 4501256; 391180, 4501208; 391223, 
4501179; 391284, 4501131; 391276, 4501067; 391258, 4501016; 391258, 
4500931; 391215, 4500877; 391146, 4500816; 391077, 4500768; 391002, 
4500717; 390994, 4500640; 391123, 4500560; 391196, 4500393; 391183, 
4500150; 391103, 4500023; 390997, 4500083; 390759, 4500488; 390701, 
4500616; 390656, 4500728; 390658, 4500824; 390610, 4500832; 390581, 
4500904; 390538, 4501008; 390511, 4501053; 390490, 4501008; 390450, 
4500997; 390410, 4501019; 390410, 4501059; 390389, 4501107; 390349, 
4501139; 390349, 4501165; 390346, 4501197; 390354, 4501251; 390314, 
4501285; 390301, 4501325; 390303, 4501363; 390319, 4501416; 390319, 
4501474; 390295, 4501485; 390277, 4501458; 390226, 4501458; returning to 
390162, 4501488.
    (x)
    Note: Map of Unit HUM-4 follows.

[[Page 573]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.005

    (11) Unit MEN-1; Mendocino County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Inglenook and Covelo. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 434019, 
4378674; 434159, 4378526; 434233, 4378461; 434247, 4378280; 434478, 
4378076; 434692, 4377937; 434979, 4377882; 435336, 4377548; 435424,

[[Page 574]]

4377344; 435480, 4377126; 435688, 4376927; 435897, 4376996; 435707, 
4377288; 435693, 4377376; 435721, 4377427; 435563, 4377645; 435549, 
4377742; 435633, 4377784; 435878, 4377831; 435915, 4378132; 435976, 
4378169; 436337, 4378053; 436458, 4378136; 436536, 4378048; 436921, 
4377849; 437014, 4377900; 437158, 4377844; 437408, 4377905; 437501, 
4378007; 437644, 4378085; 437667, 4378039; 437348, 4377793; 437144, 
4377798; 437009, 4377817; 436930, 4377784; 436731, 4377835; 436453, 
4378039; 436332, 4378007; 436235, 4378053; 436179, 4378007; 435999, 
4378104; 435925, 4377789; 435748, 4377742; 435619, 4377696; 435721, 
4377571; 435813, 4377423; 435813, 4377293; 436003, 4376968; 435985, 
4376913; 436031, 4376815; 435976, 4376774; 435855, 4376755; 435832, 
4376802; 435938, 4376839; 435887, 4376885; 435781, 4376866; 435605, 
4376857; 435424, 4376899; 435262, 4377015; 435169, 4377140; 435132, 
4377219; 435095, 4377376; 434979, 4377390; 434854, 4377455; 434594, 
4377687; 434427, 4377905; 434288, 4378016; 434159, 4378169; 434103, 
4378280; 434024, 4378489; returning to 434019, 4378674.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit MEN-1 follows.

[[Page 575]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.006

    (12) Unit MEN-2; Mendocino County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Fort Bragg. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 430656, 4369380; 
430767, 4369639; 430910, 4369479; 430972, 4369449; 430976, 4369468; 
431094, 4369506; 431096, 4369479; 431000, 4369454; 431000, 4369421;

[[Page 576]]

430989, 4369407; 430950, 4369412; 430899, 4369412; 430865, 4369388; 
returning to 430656, 4369380.
    (ii) Note: MEN-2 included on map with unit MEN-1.
    (13) Unit MEN-3; Mendocino County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Fort Bragg. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 430347, 4368031; 
430419, 4368232; 430587, 4367989;430582, 4367872; 430631, 4367632; 
430657, 4367494; 430697, 4367505; 430797, 4367598; 430912, 4367562; 
430873, 4367497; 430797, 4367486; 430664, 4367452; 430595, 4367459; 
430535, 4367532; 430524, 4367693; 430519, 4367942; returning to 430347, 
4368031.
    (ii) Note: MEN-3 included on map with unit MEN-1.
    (14) Unit MEN-4; Mendocino County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Point Arena. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 439145, 4316147; 
439192, 4316229; 439254, 4316165; 439256, 4316086; 439350, 4316041; 
439362, 4316012; 439390, 4316024; 439513, 4316022; 439550, 4316105; 
439639, 4316044; 439513, 4315901; 439409, 4315918; 439385, 4315866; 
439323, 4315822; 439232, 4315851; 439219, 4315807; 439348, 4315686; 
439345, 4315644; 439279, 4315654; 439168, 4315782; 439190, 4316105; 
returning to 439145, 4316147.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit MEN-4 follows.

[[Page 577]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.007

    (15) Unit SON-1; Sonoma County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Bodega Head. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 494029, 4245091; 
494029, 4245106; 494036, 4245131; 494041, 4245198; 494050, 4245233; 
494073, 4245274; 494080, 4245308; 494081, 4245316; 494073, 4245356;

[[Page 578]]

494213, 4245202; 494304, 4245147; 494330, 4245161; 494341, 4245148; 
494426, 4245084; 494451, 4245051; 494457, 4245031; 494458, 4245013; 
494444, 4244966; 494449, 4244941; 494461, 4244924; 494471, 4244920; 
494485, 4244921; 494549, 4244956; 494562, 4244956; 494569, 4244952; 
494592, 4244913; 494602, 4244907; 494608, 4244931; 494609, 4244954; 
494600, 4245040; 494601, 4245099; 494607, 4245125; 494623, 4245134; 
494628, 4245199; 494625, 4245218; 494629, 4245237; 494620, 4245265; 
494594, 4245320; 494593, 4245331; 494605, 4245344; 494628, 4245343; 
494677, 4245310; 494703, 4245301; 494715, 4245302; 494746, 4245315; 
494781, 4245340; 494815, 4245357; 494875, 4245365; 494881, 4245417; 
494889, 4245435; 494907, 4245440; 494925, 4245435; 494924, 4245474; 
494906, 4245525; 494897, 4245563; 494898, 4245597; 494905, 4245625; 
494916, 4245639; 494931, 4245646; 494959, 4245647; 494969, 4245645; 
494979, 4245653; 494988, 4245663; 495013, 4245674; 495036, 4245678; 
495061, 4245677; 495081, 4245671; 495164, 4245635; 495262, 4245628; 
495332, 4245612; 495382, 4245613; 495458, 4245624; 495476, 4245621; 
495496, 4245673; 495503, 4245680; 495533, 4245699; 495573, 4245702; 
495727, 4245656; 495813, 4245627; 495827, 4245616; 495853, 4245586; 
495900, 4245620; 495918, 4245629; 495989, 4245658; 496042, 4245675; 
496042, 4245667; 496033, 4245648; 495976, 4245573; 495937, 4245541; 
495896, 4245514; 495879, 4245508; 495861, 4245505; 495846, 4245507; 
495814, 4245522; 495787, 4245547; 495781, 4245562; 495759, 4245564; 
495748, 4245571; 495723, 4245577; 495679, 4245569; 495661, 4245569; 
495613, 4245587; 495591, 4245589; 495524, 4245584; 495468, 4245561; 
495408, 4245529; 495372, 4245517; 495333, 4245519; 495313, 4245525; 
495276, 4245527; 495243, 4245538; 495213, 4245553; 495155, 4245570; 
495099, 4245606; 495033, 4245614; 495010, 4245623; 494990, 4245635; 
494977, 4245628; 494961, 4245596; 494954, 4245561; 494956, 4245494; 
494973, 4245403; 494973, 4245381; 494964, 4245333; 494949, 4245307; 
494935, 4245291; 494922, 4245282; 494901, 4245243; 494864, 4245207; 
494847, 4245196; 494810, 4245178; 494803, 4245154; 494785, 4245119; 
494774, 4245104; 494779, 4245101; 494765, 4245074; 494755, 4245029; 
494729, 4245001; 494720, 4244984; 494721, 4244960; 494740, 4244928; 
494751, 4244917; 494797, 4244925; 494807, 4244920; 494817, 4244908; 
494831, 4244855; 494837, 4244846; 494851, 4244836; 494864, 4244832; 
494875, 4244821; 494871, 4244811; 494858, 4244803; 494856, 4244797; 
494858, 4244786; 494877, 4244749; 494885, 4244717; 494864, 4244697; 
494852, 4244674; 494830, 4244664; 494822, 4244665; 494811, 4244673; 
494800, 4244698; 494798, 4244738; 494783, 4244774; 494769, 4244837; 
494761, 4244845; 494743, 4244848; 494733, 4244860; 494722, 4244859; 
494697, 4244843; 494687, 4244843; 494676, 4244847; 494645, 4244892; 
494637, 4244898; 494613, 4244856; 494585, 4244822; 494556, 4244807; 
494537, 4244790; 494454, 4244761; 494407, 4244738; 494377, 4244733; 
494344, 4244733; 494300, 4244747; 494282, 4244762; 494224, 4244795; 
494181, 4244836; 494164, 4244901; 494122, 4244924; 494104, 4244921; 
494098, 4244912; 494092, 4244885; 494085, 4244825; 494042, 4244824; 
494037, 4244931; 494037, 4245018; returning to 494029, 4245091.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SON-1 follows.

[[Page 579]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.008

    (16) Unit MAR-1; Marin County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Bodega Head and Valley 
Ford. Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, 
N): 499504, 4238760; 499508, 4238800; 499544, 4238796; 499614, 4238765; 
499677, 4238749; 499701, 4238735; 499736, 4238762; 499804, 4238825; 
499878, 4238873; 499903, 4238902; 499936, 4238909;

[[Page 580]]

500005, 4238953; 500027, 4238964; 500062, 4238972; 500063, 4238985; 
500072, 4238994; 500100, 4239010; 500161, 4239021; 500178, 4239034; 
500184, 4239047; 500198, 4239059; 500220, 4239069; 500240, 4239071; 
500280, 4239066; 500327, 4239054; 500356, 4239032; 500372, 4239015; 
500401, 4239022; 500461, 4239056; 500481, 4239078; 500498, 4239106; 
500507, 4239129; 500505, 4239157; 500488, 4239281; 500455, 4239440; 
500447, 4239534; 500437, 4239556; 500385, 4239650; 500373, 4239685; 
500370, 4239722; 500370, 4239741; 500381, 4239770; 500400, 4239802; 
500413, 4239834; 500423, 4239848; 500435, 4239857; 500442, 4239859; 
500443, 4239878; 500452, 4239910; 500464, 4239937; 500475, 4239950; 
500488, 4239952; 500503, 4239946; 500514, 4239928; 500526, 4239920; 
500570, 4239933; 500596, 4239933; 500608, 4239929; 500623, 4239921; 
500628, 4239914; 500637, 4239890; 500673, 4239876; 500707, 4239844; 
500730, 4239829; 500749, 4239824; 500758, 4239816; 500773, 4239811; 
500798, 4239818; 500819, 4239834; 500849, 4239869; 500906, 4239912; 
500936, 4239957; 500954, 4239973; 500970, 4239994; 500983, 4240021; 
500996, 4240042; 501030, 4240066; 501062, 4240083; 501083, 4240087; 
501104, 4240080; 501184, 4240091; 501238, 4240117; 501251, 4240132; 
501253, 4240151; 501270, 4240163; 501277, 4240172; 501286, 4240190; 
501287, 4240205; 501325, 4240204; 501341, 4240219; 501359, 4240245; 
501384, 4240271; 501430, 4240315; 501465, 4240370; 501486, 4240380; 
501517, 4240388; 501575, 4240419; 501609, 4240427; 501636, 4240412; 
501655, 4240406; 501738, 4240407; 501777, 4240401; 501811, 4240400; 
501881, 4240411; 501960, 4240413; 502040, 4240423; 502095, 4240446; 
502106, 4240461; 502129, 4240476; 502144, 4240499; 502160, 4240550; 
502173, 4240630; 502180, 4240746; 502176, 4240765; 502158, 4240809; 
502119, 4240886; 502104, 4240923; 502098, 4240980; 502114, 4240991; 
502136, 4240976; 502169, 4240898; 502220, 4240806; 502244, 4240731; 
502265, 4240626; 502278, 4240594; 502293, 4240580; 502315, 4240584; 
502326, 4240599; 502327, 4240626; 502320, 4240691; 502322, 4240700; 
502338, 4240702; 502371, 4240621; 502400, 4240576; 502405, 4240557; 
502399, 4240509; 502399, 4240489; 502413, 4240468; 502434, 4240452; 
502450, 4240428; 502466, 4240397; 502495, 4240363; 502519, 4240346; 
502537, 4240338; 502557, 4240342; 502584, 4240363; 502595, 4240388; 
502602, 4240418; 502605, 4240470; 502611, 4240479; 502718, 4240572; 
502725, 4240593; 502723, 4240624; 502747, 4240642; 502754, 4240651; 
502758, 4240669; 502767, 4240688; 502777, 4240705; 502797, 4240718; 
502794, 4240800; 502795, 4240867; 502798, 4240896; 502808, 4240933; 
502821, 4240957; 502873, 4240992; 502884, 4241002; 502891, 4241014; 
502911, 4241029; 502933, 4241039; 502970, 4241050; 502985, 4241060; 
503052, 4241081; 503082, 4241096; 503092, 4241105; 503148, 4241109; 
503171, 4241106; 503196, 4241111; 503252, 4241107; 503260, 4241117; 
503306, 4241118; 503358, 4241139; 503404, 4241121; 503447, 4241049; 
503487, 4241012; 503527, 4240985; 503593, 4240965; 503689, 4240957; 
503712, 4240949; 503723, 4240932; 503726, 4240904; 503748, 4240861; 
503776, 4240796; 503793, 4240777; 503845, 4240733; 503901, 4240690; 
503854, 4240598; 503832, 4240606; 503760, 4240646; 503716, 4240677; 
503695, 4240688; 503642, 4240678; 503618, 4240683; 503600, 4240693; 
503594, 4240691; 503576, 4240744; 503558, 4240771; 503515, 4240790; 
503496, 4240806; 503469, 4240838; 503463, 4240852; 503463, 4240865; 
503405, 4240913; 503397, 4240906; 503384, 4240904; 503351, 4240912; 
503293, 4240922; 503255, 4240935; 503212, 4240946; 503163, 4240942; 
503094, 4240925; 503034, 4240899; 503007, 4240876; 502992, 4240860; 
502956, 4240784; 502952, 4240757; 502968, 4240700; 502981, 4240553; 
502979, 4240509; 502974, 4240477; 502975, 4240464; 502952, 4240418; 
502940, 4240408; 502929, 4240403; 502891, 4240364; 502871, 4240362; 
502855, 4240349; 502840, 4240302; 502819, 4240265; 502790, 4240237; 
502768, 4240229; 502751, 4240182; 502735, 4240168; 502708, 4240157; 
502680, 4240126; 502668, 4240105; 502656, 4240106; 502633, 4240099; 
502615, 4240079; 502587, 4240057; 502546, 4240046; 502506, 4240050; 
502469, 4240064; 502368, 4240139; 502323, 4240192; 502289, 4240214; 
502257, 4240244; 502227, 4240264; 502205, 4240291; 502195, 4240299; 
502180, 4240298; 502165, 4240287; 502136, 4240228; 502114, 4240207; 
502103, 4240203; 502083, 4240207; 502049, 4240229; 501943, 4240211; 
501923, 4240214; 501862, 4240241; 501805, 4240273; 501697, 4240287; 
501618, 4240289; 501585, 4240280; 501564, 4240264; 501552, 4240243; 
501547, 4240214; 501547, 4240185; 501553, 4240163; 501554, 4240137; 
501549, 4240107; 501528, 4240059; 501501, 4239941; 501502, 4239930; 
501510, 4239922; 501526, 4239886; 501540, 4239833; 501544, 4239784; 
501530, 4239776; 501472, 4239756; 501450, 4239758; 501427, 4239768; 
501398, 4239791; 501386, 4239793; 501365, 4239788; 501343, 4239779; 
501329, 4239789; 501320, 4239805; 501313, 4239853; 501323, 4239877; 
501301, 4239910; 501160, 4239932; 501112, 4239952; 501083, 4239959; 
501064, 4239952; 501020, 4239893; 500941, 4239832; 500923, 4239812; 
500907, 4239788; 500882, 4239732; 500853, 4239686; 500819, 4239653; 
500803, 4239642; 500779, 4239634; 500746, 4239629; 500732, 4239634; 
500695, 4239671; 500631, 4239724; 500592, 4239779; 500583, 4239790; 
500563, 4239803; 500548, 4239805; 500519, 4239790; 500512, 4239790; 
500512, 4239787; 500487, 4239769; 500481, 4239732; 500484, 4239711; 
500498, 4239665; 500510, 4239647; 500534, 4239627; 500555, 4239571; 
500568, 4239495; 500569, 4239439; 500588, 4239379; 500606, 4239340; 
500613, 4239309; 500628, 4239185; 500629, 4239095; 500623, 4239078; 
500620, 4239047; 500608, 4239036; 500519, 4239007; 500496, 4238993; 
500476, 4238973; 500456, 4238963; 500416, 4238961; 500331, 4238943; 
500280, 4238939; 500261, 4238934; 500243, 4238921; 500189, 4238905; 
500107, 4238872; 500056, 4238858; 500052, 4238862; 500051, 4238835; 
500054, 4238810; 500019, 4238752; 499983, 4238705; 499974, 4238679; 
499937, 4238635; 499925, 4238595; 499913, 4238583; 499903, 4238578; 
499888, 4238558; 499870, 4238552; 499844, 4238552; 499852, 4238518; 
499804, 4238427; 499803, 4238428; 499795, 4238445; 499785, 4238485; 
499775, 4238512; 499746, 4238551; 499704, 4238593; 499689, 4238612; 
499666, 4238642; 499664, 4238654; 499620, 4238686; 499608, 4238692; 
499558, 4238730; returning to 499504, 4238760.
    (ii) Note: MAR-1 included on map with unit SON-1.
    (17) Unit MAR-2; Marin County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Valley Ford. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 501844, 4235816; 
501869, 4235829; 501901, 4235841; 501952, 4235843; 501975, 4235847; 
502011, 4235864; 502034, 4235869; 502045, 4235867; 502058, 4235854; 
502094, 4235857; 502155, 4235838; 502166, 4235832;

[[Page 581]]

502185, 4235799; 502195, 4235787; 502209, 4235779; 502227, 4235790; 
502243, 4235803; 502264, 4235828; 502260, 4235848; 502249, 4235874; 
502238, 4235889; 502232, 4235915; 502237, 4235926; 502247, 4235933; 
502257, 4235980; 502256, 4236020; 502264, 4236059; 502279, 4236074; 
502285, 4236075; 502294, 4236087; 502311, 4236103; 502370, 4236146; 
502433, 4236217; 502476, 4236246; 502492, 4236265; 502505, 4236290; 
502517, 4236302; 502541, 4236310; 502566, 4236312; 502597, 4236307; 
502617, 4236298; 502639, 4236278; 502660, 4236266; 502678, 4236265; 
502726, 4236249; 502763, 4236251; 502786, 4236244; 502820, 4236221; 
502854, 4236206; 502885, 4236185; 502899, 4236169; 502916, 4236138; 
502922, 4236113; 502924, 4236033; 502954, 4235919; 502987, 4235904; 
503034, 4235892; 503094, 4235861; 503142, 4235831; 503162, 4235831; 
503169, 4235826; 503182, 4235792; 503185, 4235721; 503181, 4235680; 
503167, 4235654; 503148, 4235640; 503132, 4235639; 503121, 4235623; 
503090, 4235589; 503084, 4235575; 503083, 4235547; 503086, 4235533; 
503098, 4235529; 503114, 4235528; 503137, 4235533; 503147, 4235538; 
503150, 4235551; 503168, 4235574; 503201, 4235589; 503217, 4235593; 
503267, 4235588; 503320, 4235567; 503338, 4235553; 503363, 4235519; 
503369, 4235498; 503372, 4235469; 503382, 4235452; 503417, 4235436; 
503435, 4235434; 503450, 4235439; 503484, 4235464; 503498, 4235485; 
503517, 4235531; 503520, 4235579; 503457, 4235629; 503421, 4235649; 
503398, 4235676; 503391, 4235697; 503386, 4235757; 503391, 4235822; 
503401, 4235854; 503452, 4235951; 503458, 4235990; 503453, 4236015; 
503426, 4236053; 503411, 4236053; 503397, 4236064; 503392, 4236074; 
503390, 4236108; 503395, 4236119; 503407, 4236128; 503413, 4236128; 
503452, 4236228; 503469, 4236249; 503487, 4236266; 503520, 4236286; 
503557, 4236296; 503561, 4236310; 503582, 4236325; 503594, 4236340; 
503616, 4236424; 503645, 4236420; 503664, 4236395; 503682, 4236381; 
503722, 4236372; 503735, 4236366; 503742, 4236358; 503755, 4236305; 
503769, 4236280; 503754, 4236250; 503758, 4236236; 503780, 4236212; 
503809, 4236187; 503841, 4236174; 503847, 4236126; 503871, 4236121; 
503909, 4236129; 503925, 4236140; 503987, 4236215; 504003, 4236228; 
504043, 4236285; 504055, 4236311; 504077, 4236343; 504097, 4236363; 
504139, 4236392; 504153, 4236397; 504170, 4236395; 504184, 4236416; 
504201, 4236467; 504217, 4236496; 504254, 4236533; 504290, 4236560; 
504326, 4236578; 504330, 4236597; 504346, 4236625; 504363, 4236642; 
504432, 4236677; 504471, 4236682; 504504, 4236676; 504530, 4236696; 
504546, 4236721; 504555, 4236721; 504543, 4236680; 504532, 4236598; 
504554, 4236596; 504566, 4236592; 504567, 4236647; 504576, 4236685; 
504602, 4236760; 504618, 4236767; 504641, 4236767; 504678, 4236742; 
504735, 4236729; 504793, 4236721; 504804, 4236713; 504863, 4236692; 
504887, 4236680; 504910, 4236676; 504929, 4236666; 504957, 4236659; 
504991, 4236641; 505002, 4236627; 505042, 4236595; 505080, 4236573; 
505091, 4236558; 505100, 4236531; 505101, 4236511; 505091, 4236502; 
505080, 4236484; 505076, 4236463; 505083, 4236421; 505099, 4236388; 
505102, 4236369; 505100, 4236348; 505086, 4236314; 505064, 4236296; 
505030, 4236286; 505011, 4236268; 505015, 4236246; 505038, 4236204; 
505059, 4236193; 505078, 4236186; 505096, 4236190; 505122, 4236211; 
505142, 4236209; 505203, 4236170; 505228, 4236139; 505242, 4236138; 
505261, 4236028; 505202, 4236006; 505148, 4236000; 505092, 4236005; 
505048, 4236022; 505012, 4236055; 504974, 4236101; 504934, 4236137; 
504925, 4236150; 504915, 4236176; 504902, 4236219; 504899, 4236245; 
504886, 4236289; 504868, 4236337; 504863, 4236360; 504862, 4236421; 
504870, 4236478; 504870, 4236492; 504866, 4236505; 504856, 4236527; 
504833, 4236558; 504806, 4236588; 504779, 4236609; 504732, 4236630; 
504711, 4236629; 504639, 4236597; 504582, 4236580; 504502, 4236569; 
504448, 4236572; 504430, 4236570; 504411, 4236573; 504400, 4236571; 
504384, 4236563; 504385, 4236542; 504375, 4236517; 504337, 4236457; 
504298, 4236426; 504219, 4236346; 504201, 4236315; 504183, 4236293; 
504173, 4236272; 504167, 4236249; 504168, 4236222; 504173, 4236197; 
504205, 4236146; 504236, 4236076; 504315, 4235970; 504353, 4235929; 
504369, 4235918; 504395, 4235892; 504417, 4235851; 504409, 4235842; 
504360, 4235869; 504323, 4235875; 504306, 4235882; 504277, 4235922; 
504198, 4236053; 504159, 4236097; 504137, 4236114; 504091, 4236117; 
504064, 4236104; 504018, 4236049; 504006, 4236040; 503995, 4236025; 
503979, 4236011; 503938, 4236007; 503929, 4236000; 503921, 4235982; 
503903, 4235971; 503890, 4235970; 503870, 4235977; 503825, 4236018; 
503808, 4236039; 503778, 4236065; 503757, 4236078; 503658, 4236217; 
503631, 4236246; 503606, 4236256; 503573, 4236228; 503559, 4236211; 
503533, 4236121; 503531, 4236101; 503542, 4236018; 503539, 4236000; 
503530, 4235984; 503514, 4235972; 503498, 4235963; 503491, 4235963; 
503446, 4235819; 503443, 4235770; 503445, 4235736; 503467, 4235678; 
503485, 4235657; 503540, 4235615; 503572, 4235573; 503579, 4235542; 
503580, 4235509; 503574, 4235466; 503565, 4235442; 503551, 4235421; 
503532, 4235401; 503483, 4235367; 503454, 4235355; 503430, 4235353; 
503415, 4235346; 503401, 4235330; 503397, 4235312; 503382, 4235287; 
503371, 4235284; 503354, 4235364; 503342, 4235403; 503321, 4235425; 
503289, 4235476; 503277, 4235483; 503246, 4235490; 503158, 4235460; 
503131, 4235445; 503119, 4235445; 503109, 4235448; 503085, 4235473; 
503065, 4235505; 503050, 4235514; 503047, 4235537; 503083, 4235627; 
503099, 4235711; 503070, 4235762; 503058, 4235774; 503036, 4235782; 
502983, 4235785; 502924, 4235801; 502911, 4235812; 502896, 4235831; 
502880, 4235869; 502871, 4235883; 502860, 4235892; 502843, 4235896; 
502832, 4235910; 502823, 4235964; 502827, 4235986; 502815, 4236004; 
502772, 4236040; 502764, 4236044; 502734, 4236097; 502725, 4236106; 
502696, 4236096; 502678, 4236097; 502660, 4236103; 502612, 4236131; 
502589, 4236133; 502545, 4236128; 502484, 4236109; 502462, 4236112; 
502448, 4236101; 502411, 4236068; 502401, 4236052; 502383, 4235959; 
502374, 4235940; 502316, 4235858; 502293, 4235812; 502255, 4235765; 
502239, 4235754; 502200, 4235744; 502143, 4235737; 502105, 4235743; 
502095, 4235731; 502060, 4235723; 502055, 4235715; 502056, 4235698; 
502069, 4235647; 502067, 4235625; 502057, 4235578; 502048, 4235556; 
502013, 4235524; 501971, 4235525; 501983, 4235546; 501982, 4235568; 
501977, 4235587; 501953, 4235616; 501906, 4235700; 501885, 4235727; 
returning to 501844, 4235816.
    (ii) Note: MAR-2 included on map with unit SON-1.
    (18) Unit MAR-3; Marin County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Inverness. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 513514, 4216097; 
513604, 4216208; 513584, 4216239; 513583, 4216271; 513625, 4216303; 
513631, 4216312; 513619,

[[Page 582]]

4216354; 513565, 4216417; 513558, 4216445; 513563, 4216473; 513569, 
4216476; 513611, 4216470; 513644, 4216503; 513772, 4216500; 513830, 
4216473; 513917, 4216413; 513956, 4216410; 513973, 4216431; 513982, 
4216471; 513991, 4216493; 514025, 4216527; 514042, 4216554; 514108, 
4216683; 514150, 4216742; 514170, 4216757; 514220, 4216753; 514364, 
4216710; 514436, 4216662; 514458, 4216654; 514485, 4216622; 514695, 
4216634; 514738, 4216644; 514826, 4216626; 514851, 4216613; 514891, 
4216579; 514929, 4216557; 514938, 4216548; 514941, 4216524; 514889, 
4216463; 514891, 4216417; 514873, 4216385; 514953, 4216265; 514968, 
4216251; 514978, 4216230; 515061, 4216173; 515095, 4216115; 515134, 
4216070; 515170, 4216051; 515245, 4216023; 515278, 4216002; 515326, 
4215955; 515348, 4215915; 515357, 4215910; 515373, 4215919; 515394, 
4215921; 515420, 4215916; 515450, 4215900; 515490, 4215873; 515512, 
4215854; 515537, 4215818; 515553, 4215809; 515579, 4215809; 515596, 
4215817; 515627, 4215839; 515653, 4215869; 515678, 4215877; 515696, 
4215877; 515718, 4215866; 515731, 4215855; 515739, 4215838; 515738, 
4215757; 515677, 4215581; 515666, 4215529; 515667, 4215492; 515683, 
4215444; 515684, 4215427; 515677, 4215392; 515656, 4215367; 515622, 
4215340; 515612, 4215229; 515597, 4215195; 515552, 4215127; 515552, 
4215119; 515559, 4215114; 515623, 4215129; 515640, 4215129; 515656, 
4215117; 515666, 4215100; 515664, 4215074; 515658, 4215068; 515640, 
4215065; 515584, 4215079; 515501, 4215090; 515466, 4215081; 515409, 
4215031; 515388, 4215023; 515353, 4215016; 515283, 4215038; 515250, 
4215036; 515241, 4215024; 515236, 4214961; 515237, 4214923; 515228, 
4214865; 515219, 4214836; 515229, 4214794; 515261, 4214764; 515281, 
4214753; 515297, 4214737; 515368, 4214697; 515456, 4214653; 515538, 
4214613; 515597, 4214608; 515658, 4214608; 515698, 4214618; 515733, 
4214623; 515761, 4214626; 515839, 4214617; 515871, 4214614; 515928, 
4214605; 515990, 4214594; 516035, 4214580; 516084, 4214559; 516115, 
4214546; 516151, 4214529; 516178, 4214500; 516248, 4214402; 516261, 
4214304; 516251, 4214239; 516237, 4214171; 516220, 4214124; 516202, 
4214086; 516207, 4213985; 516216, 4213934; 516245, 4213826; 516255, 
4213737; 516284, 4213721; 516329, 4213708; 516419, 4213704; 516441, 
4213694; 516470, 4213674; 516509, 4213674; 516549, 4213676; 516587, 
4213676; 516625, 4213683; 516626, 4213696; 516616, 4213734; 516605, 
4213779; 516613, 4213820; 516638, 4213856; 516667, 4213844; 516668, 
4213799; 516667, 4213744; 516668, 4213721; 516661, 4213677; 516632, 
4213669; 516591, 4213664; 516521, 4213656; 516474, 4213655; 516446, 
4213669; 516428, 4213682; 516402, 4213685; 516366, 4213679; 516328, 
4213674; 516290, 4213681; 516259, 4213703; 516235, 4213723; 516227, 
4213780; 516212, 4213839; 516212, 4213862; 516201, 4213911; 516187, 
4213972; 516182, 4214029; 516185, 4214073; 516186, 4214098; 516201, 
4214132; 516216, 4214174; 516225, 4214210; 516236, 4214278; 516173, 
4214318; 516046, 4214400; 516005, 4214397; 515781, 4214163; 515747, 
4214145; 515698, 4214161; 515670, 4214206; 515660, 4214235; 515656, 
4214293; 515655, 4214361; 515655, 4214386; 515663, 4214423; 515689, 
4214459; 515699, 4214483; 515689, 4214504; 515631, 4214517; 515578, 
4214524; 515532, 4214541; 515493, 4214573; 515444, 4214589; 515398, 
4214612; 515362, 4214632; 515325, 4214648; 515293, 4214662; 515275, 
4214667; 515264, 4214666; 515262, 4214646; 515262, 4214614; 515273, 
4214568; 515279, 4214541; 515293, 4214508; 515404, 4214354; 515390, 
4214333; 515389, 4214323; 515399, 4214299; 515449, 4214256; 515561, 
4214120; 515604, 4214099; 515634, 4214095; 515641, 4214099; 515677, 
4214055; 515694, 4214014; 515718, 4213982; 515741, 4213926; 515743, 
4213895; 515731, 4213839; 515733, 4213786; 515742, 4213684; 515739, 
4213627; 515736, 4213538; 515733, 4213476; 515733, 4213327; 515735, 
4213209; 515737, 4213103; 515750, 4212984; 515751, 4212902; 515769, 
4212854; 515789, 4212837; 515824, 4212829; 515881, 4212834; 515998, 
4212859; 516059, 4212849; 516226, 4212838; 516244, 4212851; 516393, 
4212852; 516460, 4212877; 516519, 4212934; 516543, 4212968; 516626, 
4213020; 516655, 4213052; 516693, 4213077; 516759, 4213090; 516828, 
4213090; 516889, 4213077; 517008, 4213030; 517030, 4213025; 517082, 
4213024; 517131, 4213030; 517228, 4213069; 517236, 4213065; 517267, 
4213072; 517287, 4213086; 517322, 4213135; 517351, 4213143; 517365, 
4213108; 517316, 4213056; 517237, 4213017; 517120, 4212997; 517067, 
4212999; 517030, 4213000; 516972, 4213009; 516909, 4213047; 516846, 
4213069; 516808, 4213071; 516695, 4213054; 516642, 4213015; 516612, 
4212980; 516593, 4212954; 516603, 4212933; 516600, 4212930; 516526, 
4212877; 516486, 4212856; 516462, 4212851; 516423, 4212833; 516302, 
4212826; 516255, 4212827; 516159, 4212807; 516043, 4212816; 515868, 
4212806; 515827, 4212805; 515777, 4212820; 515745, 4212837; 515734, 
4212869; 515720, 4212959; 515700, 4213067; 515695, 4213091; 515651, 
4213155; 515634, 4213216; 515632, 4213261; 515602, 4213448; 515588, 
4213495; 515577, 4213506; 515564, 4213552; 515555, 4213566; 515545, 
4213621; 515513, 4213672; 515507, 4213692; 515511, 4213703; 515509, 
4213713; 515480, 4213765; 515438, 4213793; 515418, 4213785; 515398, 
4213786; 515294, 4213951; 515257, 4213989; 515218, 4214009; 515126, 
4214013; 515083, 4214053; 515032, 4214113; 514826, 4214370; 514792, 
4214415; 514768, 4214464; 514737, 4214497; 514724, 4214532; 514719, 
4214565; 514703, 4214575; 514694, 4214605; 514653, 4214687; 514544, 
4214841; 514516, 4214870; 514488, 4214908; 514454, 4214930; 514425, 
4215011; 514427, 4215025; 514438, 4215029; 514430, 4215069; 514375, 
4215180; 514361, 4215201; 514290, 4215270; 514261, 4215310; 514252, 
4215309; 514238, 4215299; 514228, 4215308; 514225, 4215328; 514231, 
4215413; 514221, 4215453; 514210, 4215469; 514194, 4215488; 514165, 
4215499; 514121, 4215508; 514017, 4215512; 513988, 4215551; 513970, 
4215628; 513965, 4215636; 513933, 4215641; 513870, 4215664; 513872, 
4215685; 513878, 4215691; 513920, 4215712; 513924, 4215719; 513922, 
4215741; 513903, 4215786; 513903, 4215802; 513905, 4215825; 513920, 
4215877; 513919, 4215910; 513904, 4215922; 513884, 4215922; 513765, 
4215908; 513738, 4215900; 513682, 4215900; 513653, 4215910; 513577, 
4215954; 513558, 4215989; 513534, 4216071; returning to 513514, 4216097.
    (ii) Note: MAR-3 included on map with unit SON-1.
    (19) Unit MAR-4; Marin County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Point Bonita. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 540461, 4187256; 
540478, 4187263; 540497, 4187265; 540522, 4187261; 540558, 4187249; 
540606, 4187242; 540637, 4187227; 540692, 4187224; 540716, 4187211; 
540738, 4187212; 540797, 4187198; 540841, 4187197; 540908, 4187177; 
540933, 4187165; 540960, 4187172;

[[Page 583]]

541012, 4187168; 541039, 4187176; 541116, 4187175; 541129, 4187180; 
541157, 4187206; 541177, 4187219; 541199, 4187225; 541320, 4187238; 
541372, 4187230; 541384, 4187231; 541435, 4187247; 541521, 4187268; 
541564, 4187257; 541591, 4187261; 541605, 4187268; 541649, 4187308; 
541658, 4187309; 541669, 4187303; 541677, 4187291; 541702, 4187235; 
541718, 4187190; 541716, 4187182; 541698, 4187171; 541614, 4187164; 
541520, 4187142; 541501, 4187142; 541483, 4187137; 541407, 4187061; 
541393, 4187058; 541379, 4187060; 541367, 4187056; 541315, 4187050; 
541277, 4187033; 541269, 4187022; 541254, 4187011; 541227, 4187001; 
541195, 4186993; 541106, 4186984; 541072, 4186990; 541049, 4186990; 
541017, 4186963; 540991, 4186948; 540940, 4186941; 540927, 4186948; 
540922, 4186958; 540907, 4187027; 540893, 4187060; 540879, 4187076; 
540838, 4187110; 540823, 4187139; 540776, 4187161; 540758, 4187164; 
540691, 4187189; 540644, 4187199; 540628, 4187211; 540619, 4187155; 
540594, 4187167; 540557, 4187191; 540546, 4187209; 540521, 4187230; 
540490, 4187247; returning to 540461, 4187256.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit MAR-4 follows.

[[Page 584]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.009

    (20) Unit SM-1; San Mateo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle San Gregorio. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 552769, 4130764; 
552784, 4130813; 552806, 4130800; 552837, 4130766; 552869, 4130686; 
552884, 4130681; 552903, 4130686; 552920, 4130694; 552922, 4130709;

[[Page 585]]

552911, 4130785; 552902, 4130822; 552922, 4130836; 552970, 4130825; 
553001, 4130812; 553002, 4130822; 553007, 4130831; 553023, 4130833; 
553044, 4130845; 553055, 4130845; 553062, 4130833; 553033, 4130773; 
553019, 4130747; 552990, 4130725; 552984, 4130712; 552986, 4130699; 
552996, 4130680; 552994, 4130669; 553045, 4130645; 553053, 4130658; 
553042, 4130666; 553031, 4130662; 553018, 4130666; 553014, 4130673; 
553014, 4130685; 553029, 4130715; 553082, 4130729; 553095, 4130737; 
553114, 4130758; 553104, 4130777; 553074, 4130796; 553064, 4130807; 
553070, 4130823; 553087, 4130854; 553098, 4130853; 553127, 4130841; 
553134, 4130834; 553164, 4130795; 553180, 4130782; 553192, 4130766; 
553191, 4130751; 553175, 4130728; 553151, 4130709; 553105, 4130698; 
553092, 4130688; 553065, 4130685; 553055, 4130679; 553064, 4130660; 
553067, 4130638; 553129, 4130636; 553186, 4130647; 553246, 4130652; 
553343, 4130671; 553365, 4130689; 553384, 4130713; 553395, 4130732; 
553402, 4130752; 553430, 4130800; 553435, 4130825; 553429, 4130884; 
553430, 4130910; 553441, 4130936; 553453, 4130944; 553467, 4130948; 
553502, 4130945; 553508, 4130973; 553528, 4130987; 553549, 4130991; 
553571, 4131006; 553586, 4131011; 553605, 4131002; 553659, 4130945; 
553667, 4130948; 553723, 4130945; 553737, 4130947; 553753, 4130942; 
553768, 4130928; 553780, 4130897; 553784, 4130877; 553777, 4130834; 
553779, 4130818; 553776, 4130791; 553818, 4130733; 553862, 4130714; 
553887, 4130720; 553893, 4130736; 553893, 4130747; 553919, 4130794; 
553919, 4130845; 553929, 4130866; 553957, 4130889; 553968, 4130919; 
553968, 4130976; 553972, 4131011; 553977, 4131026; 553974, 4131044; 
553980, 4131056; 553980, 4131066; 553976, 4131079; 553951, 4131094; 
553947, 4131102; 553959, 4131114; 553985, 4131130; 553993, 4131115; 
553993, 4131101; 553988, 4131093; 553990, 4131079; 554001, 4131070; 
554018, 4131066; 554040, 4131090; 554062, 4131105; 554119, 4131109; 
554269, 4131178; 554316, 4131182; 554333, 4131195; 554351, 4131198; 
554351, 4131196; 554335, 4131192; 554317, 4131179; 554288, 4131168; 
554267, 4131164; 554208, 4131138; 554147, 4131083; 554077, 4131038; 
554060, 4131018; 554043, 4130994; 554019, 4130938; 553999, 4130900; 
553966, 4130851; 553964, 4130761; 553940, 4130687; 553915, 4130651; 
553885, 4130640; 553858, 4130640; 553825, 4130650; 553796, 4130668; 
553782, 4130691; 553778, 4130741; 553774, 4130763; 553739, 4130802; 
553689, 4130875; 553674, 4130880; 553655, 4130880; 553595, 4130860; 
553571, 4130860; 553542, 4130867; 553528, 4130882; 553496, 4130890; 
553483, 4130887; 553469, 4130877; 553458, 4130860; 553466, 4130828; 
553466, 4130811; 553525, 4130783; 553526, 4130769; 553516, 4130741; 
553478, 4130715; 553457, 4130694; 553430, 4130682; 553407, 4130693; 
553406, 4130691; 553427, 4130681; 553393, 4130665; 553379, 4130655; 
553201, 4130593; 553153, 4130581; 553106, 4130582; 553063, 4130589; 
552978, 4130631; 552944, 4130637; 552870, 4130605; 552858, 4130583; 
552836, 4130558; 552806, 4130534; 552796, 4130562; 552814, 4130572; 
552831, 4130587; 552845, 4130628; 552848, 4130683; 552812, 4130742; 
552795, 4130760; 552781, 4130745; returning to 552769, 4130764.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SM-1 follows.

[[Page 586]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.010

    (21) Unit SM-2; San Mateo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle San Gregorio. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 552093, 4124660; 
552152, 4124706; 552208, 4124607; 552227, 4124591; 552243, 4124592; 
552325, 4124545; 552363, 4124496; 552398, 4124421; 552447, 4124421;

[[Page 587]]

552455, 4124442; 552467, 4124459; 552488, 4124471; 552450, 4124533; 
552377, 4124608; 552346, 4124657; 552335, 4124723; 552321, 4124759; 
552323, 4124841; 552354, 4124844; 552378, 4124827; 552397, 4124804; 
552407, 4124755; 552427, 4124731; 552597, 4124774; 552629, 4124773; 
552719, 4124759; 552869, 4124762; 552893, 4124753; 552993, 4124703; 
553029, 4124682; 553080, 4124628; 553127, 4124563; 553153, 4124520; 
553167, 4124484; 553187, 4124393; 553202, 4124352; 553210, 4124314; 
553217, 4124262; 553193, 4124183; 553219, 4124140; 553217, 4124107; 
553244, 4124048; 553299, 4123975; 553291, 4123974; 553283, 4123980; 
553247, 4124020; 553193, 4124079; 553160, 4124113; 553090, 4124253; 
553059, 4124264; 553043, 4124264; 553015, 4124246; 552988, 4124239; 
552956, 4124241; 552929, 4124251; 552910, 4124268; 552904, 4124290; 
552879, 4124333; 552822, 4124365; 552750, 4124346; 552794, 4124318; 
552923, 4124211; 552939, 4124187; 552949, 4124149; 553065, 4123962; 
553146, 4123962; 553167, 4123910; 553011, 4123777; 553011, 4123740; 
553008, 4123719; 552983, 4123672; 552957, 4123643; 552869, 4123570; 
552848, 4123540; 552830, 4123498; 552782, 4123479; 552779, 4123446; 
552755, 4123403; 552782, 4123375; 552764, 4123347; 552691, 4123276; 
552643, 4123214; 552613, 4123228; 552596, 4123246; 552575, 4123285; 
552556, 4123361; 552537, 4123392; 552532, 4123420; 552548, 4123460; 
552514, 4123531; 552519, 4123555; 552546, 4123582; 552538, 4123656; 
552519, 4123697; 552511, 4123732; 552439, 4123832; 552435, 4123848; 
552437, 4123872; 552479, 4123937; 552486, 4123961; 552533, 4124099; 
552484, 4124100; 552447, 4124107; 552422, 4124127; 552410, 4124150; 
552382, 4124180; 552343, 4124217; 552325, 4124244; 552294, 4124280; 
552279, 4124320; 552239, 4124387; 552218, 4124395; 552203, 4124420; 
552187, 4124528; 552156, 4124540; 552144, 4124553; 552149, 4124572; 
552134, 4124599; 552104, 4124618; returning to 552093, 4124660.
    (ii) Note: SM-2 included on map with unit SM-1.
    (22) Unit SM-3; San Mateo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Pigeon Point. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 552371, 4119927; 
552402, 4119965; 552411, 4119992; 552409, 4120039; 552436, 4120046; 
552446, 4120041; 552461, 4120039; 552483, 4120043; 552490, 4120040; 
552498, 4120036; 552507, 4120016; 552533, 4120028; 552537, 4120034; 
552560, 4120032; 552569, 4120040; 552589, 4120043; 552606, 4120035; 
552637, 4119992; 552655, 4119973; 552683, 4120024; 552688, 4120146; 
552701, 4120157; 552725, 4120160; 552741, 4120157; 552744, 4120134; 
552741, 4120114; 552729, 4120090; 552723, 4119997; 552717, 4119970; 
552724, 4119920; 552712, 4119843; 552702, 4119832; 552699, 4119819; 
552690, 4119819; 552665, 4119838; 552657, 4119853; 552653, 4119871; 
552624, 4119887; 552596, 4119949; 552581, 4119953; 552563, 4119975; 
552548, 4120000; 552519, 4119990; 552522, 4119981; 552529, 4119976; 
552532, 4119967; 552532, 4119958; 552529, 4119953; 552507, 4119957; 
552477, 4119953; 552450, 4119940; 552444, 4119914; 552440, 4119907; 
552423, 4119907; 552413, 4119910; 552398, 4119928; 552390, 4119932; 
returning to 552371, 4119927.
    (ii) Note: SM-3 included on map with unit SM-1.
    (23) Unit SC-1; Santa Cruz County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Santa Cruz. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 575050, 4093349; 
575122, 4093391; 575122, 4093392; 575142, 4093406; 575179, 4093428; 
575186, 4093431; 575194, 4093426; 575207, 4093421; 575221, 4093430; 
575228, 4093440; 575233, 4093453; 575226, 4093467; 575203, 4093491; 
575189, 4093516; 575180, 4093533; 575177, 4093546; 575175, 4093575; 
575172, 4093616; 575172, 4093657; 575174, 4093688; 575437, 4093542; 
575447, 4093510; 575461, 4093501; 575468, 4093490; 575471, 4093482; 
575471, 4093452; 575471, 4093430; 575469, 4093412; 575462, 4093384; 
575451, 4093363; 575429, 4093350; 575408, 4093342; 575379, 4093334; 
575356, 4093328; 575341, 4093320; 575330, 4093309; 575312, 4093295; 
575303, 4093272; 575287, 4093241; 575274, 4093224; 575264, 4093209; 
575251, 4093203; 575235, 4093206; 575231, 4093207; 575220, 4093204; 
575213, 4093197; 575207, 4093172; 575189, 4093186; 575186, 4093200; 
575167, 4093210; 575139, 4093240; 575068, 4093327; returning to 575050, 
4093349.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SC-1 follows.

[[Page 588]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.011

    (24) Unit SC-2; Santa Cruz County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Santa Cruz. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 577882, 4091692; 
577882, 4091713; 577882, 4091737; 577886, 4091758; 577894, 4091784; 
577904, 4091804; 577908, 4091830; 577906, 4091840; 577903, 4091858;

[[Page 589]]

577905, 4091866; 577913, 4091867; 577922, 4091862; 577922, 4091865; 
577927, 4091871; 577933, 4091876; 577958, 4091870; 577982, 4091859; 
577997, 4091852; 578011, 4091846; 578028, 4091831; 578063, 4091813; 
578083, 4091801; 578108, 4091775; 578122, 4091750; 578126, 4091742; 
578129, 4091738; 578130, 4091726; 578126, 4091708; 578116, 4091686; 
578103, 4091670; 578083, 4091655; 578068, 4091641; 578063, 4091620; 
578073, 4091597; 578080, 4091577; 578083, 4091568; 578084, 4091569; 
578087, 4091564; 578094, 4091561; 578105, 4091570; 578111, 4091578; 
578117, 4091583; 578126, 4091580; 578137, 4091574; 578147, 4091568; 
578143, 4091563; 578141, 4091553; 578141, 4091542; 578142, 4091530; 
578147, 4091513; 578151, 4091504; 578159, 4091444; 578158, 4091445; 
578076, 4091483; 577988, 4091509; 577974, 4091504; 577961, 4091520; 
577961, 4091536; 577966, 4091552; 577968, 4091571; 577965, 4091588; 
577956, 4091603; 577941, 4091617; 577923, 4091635; 577910, 4091641; 
577896, 4091659; 577885, 4091673; returning to 577882, 4091692.
    (ii) Note: SC-2 included on map with unit SC-1.
    (25) Unit SC-3; Santa Cruz County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Soquel. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 590179, 4090901; 590236, 
4090929; 590236, 4090930; 590282, 4090945; 590313, 4090956; 590335, 
4090952; 590350, 4090945; 590362, 4090937; 590375, 4090930; 590378, 
4090927; 590380, 4090934; 590391, 4090956; 590400, 4090976; 590411, 
4090978; 590412, 4090977; 590420, 4090993; 590424, 4091004; 590423, 
4091011; 590425, 4091018; 590424, 4091018; 590423, 4091049; 590423, 
4091065; 590425, 4091074; 590426, 4091079; 590429, 4091087; 590437, 
4091096; 590448, 4091112; 590464, 4091125; 590480, 4091138; 590489, 
4091143; 590497, 4091150; 590518, 4091158; 590549, 4091161; 590573, 
4091153; 590581, 4091147; 590587, 4091146; 590601, 4091147; 590611, 
4091146; 590620, 4091149; 590623, 4091152; 590629, 4091168; 590631, 
4091183; 590643, 4091197; 590660, 4091205; 590683, 4091207; 590701, 
4091194; 590718, 4091184; 590745, 4091164; 590763, 4091166; 590776, 
4091162; 590791, 4091175; 590795, 4091180; 590800, 4091192; 590809, 
4091208; 590817, 4091231; 590829, 4091245; 590855, 4091265; 590889, 
4091279; 590909, 4091283; 590935, 4091291; 590950, 4091295; 590968, 
4091298; 590984, 4091301; 591003, 4091304; 591012, 4091305; 591015, 
4091305; 591021, 4091304; 591025, 4091302; 591027, 4091299; 591028, 
4091294; 591027, 4091289; 591024, 4091284; 591018, 4091272; 591014, 
4091260; 591005, 4091248; 590999, 4091240; 590990, 4091234; 590973, 
4091227; 590957, 4091222; 590947, 4091218; 590938, 4091211; 590929, 
4091206; 590919, 4091196; 590912, 4091188; 590905, 4091177; 590890, 
4091164; 590878, 4091145; 590873, 4091136; 590865, 4091127; 590859, 
4091118; 590854, 4091110; 590842, 4091096; 590836, 4091087; 590827, 
4091080; 590819, 4091073; 590804, 4091062; 590794, 4091057; 590785, 
4091053; 590755, 4091042; 590739, 4091039; 590719, 4091037; 590699, 
4091033; 590672, 4091029; 590653, 4091024; 590636, 4091018; 590619, 
4091011; 590604, 4091005; 590582, 4090991; 590566, 4090982; 590554, 
4090977; 590542, 4090972; 590532, 4090972; 590524, 4090973; 590507, 
4090980; 590496, 4090986; 590477, 4090999; 590468, 4091002; 590457, 
4091003; 590446, 4091004; 590436, 4091010; 590428, 4091003; 590427, 
4090993; 590425, 4090970; 590427, 4090970; 590460, 4090956; 590495, 
4090941; 590530, 4090892; 590533, 4090873; 590502, 4090842; 590465, 
4090818; 590459, 4090810; 590474, 4090794; 590480, 4090791; 590477, 
4090718; 590430, 4090743; 590366, 4090776; 590323, 4090794; 590283, 
4090828; 590242, 4090855; 590204, 4090874; returning to 590179, 4090901.
    (ii) Note: SC-3 included on map with unit SC-1.
    (26) Unit SC-4; Santa Cruz County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Soquel. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 597246, 4092023; 597317, 
4092033; 597320, 4092041; 597331, 4092080; 597348, 4092134; 597363, 
4092174; 597373, 4092199; 597378, 4092211; 597386, 4092225; 597396, 
4092249; 597406, 4092262; 597412, 4092279; 597423, 4092294; 597429, 
4092282; 597416, 4092251; 597402, 4092211; 597389, 4092165; 597381, 
4092140; 597372, 4092109; 597361, 4092080; 597359, 4092059; 597359, 
4092049; 597358, 4092042; 597360, 4092040; 597373, 4091945; 597351, 
4091956; 597327, 4091965; 597310, 4091976; 597273, 4092007; returning to 
597246, 4092023.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SC-4 follows.

[[Page 590]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.012

    (27) Unit SC-5; Santa Cruz and Monterey Counties, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Watsonville West and Moss 
Landing. Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, 
N): 605911, 4079111; 606162, 4079236; 606226, 4079281; 606361, 4079366; 
606416, 4079419; 606517, 4079467; 606577, 4079500;

[[Page 591]]

606717, 4079591; 606758, 4079610; 606799, 4079640; 606872, 4079760; 
606899, 4079887; 606895, 4079983; 606875, 4080067; 606845, 4080174; 
606820, 4080259; 606672, 4080641; 606643, 4080737; 606629, 4080919; 
606631, 4080943; 606662, 4081020; 606737, 4081107; 606879, 4081225; 
607000, 4081337; 607128, 4081485; 607218, 4081624; 607254, 4081690; 
607346, 4081878; 607382, 4081974; 607445, 4082127; 607474, 4082175; 
607528, 4082251; 607556, 4082275; 607765, 4082472; 607861, 4082567; 
608079, 4082792; 608147, 4082847; 608282, 4082921; 608395, 4082922; 
608595, 4082775; 608783, 4082658; 608883, 4082624; 609077, 4082620; 
609255, 4082657; 609368, 4082708; 609375, 4082666; 609278, 4082633; 
609137, 4082597; 608957, 4082582; 608884, 4082583; 608799, 4082604; 
608730, 4082648; 608623, 4082704; 608418, 4082820; 608332, 4082826; 
608241, 4082819; 608098, 4082739; 608020, 4082648; 607992, 4082604; 
607858, 4082457; 607748, 4082360; 607606, 4082244; 607551, 4082207; 
607554, 4082147; 607512, 4082084; 607476, 4082012; 607382, 4081813; 
607334, 4081708; 607165, 4081477; 607075, 4081361; 607035, 4081316; 
606828, 4081128; 606753, 4081051; 606698, 4080981; 606661, 4080886; 
606657, 4080844; 606664, 4080807; 606743, 4080589; 606791, 4080489; 
606893, 4080276; 606950, 4080145; 606963, 4080070; 606955, 4079974; 
606947, 4079787; 606932, 4079740; 606900, 4079696; 606815, 4079589; 
606672, 4079474; 606516, 4079318; 606445, 4079230; 606343, 4079151; 
606304, 4079085; 606413, 4078742; 606426, 4078716; 606465, 4078622; 
606499, 4078532; 606527, 4078444; 606525, 4078404; 606510, 4078342; 
606420, 4078101; 606395, 4078140; 606354, 4078244; 606255, 4078416; 
606218, 4078509; 606137, 4078641; 606080, 4078773; 605983, 4078937; 
605936, 4079066; returning to 605911, 4079111.
    (ii) Note: SC-5 included on map with unit SC-4.
    (28) Unit MN-1; Monterey County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Moss Landing. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 607479, 4076078; 
607484, 4076090; 607498, 4076089; 607529, 4076051; 607548, 4076043; 
607563, 4076019; 607614, 4076009; 607664, 4075939; 607690, 4075882; 
607715, 4075845; 607729, 4075835; 607765, 4075780; 607782, 4075742; 
607812, 4075704; 607871, 4075651; 607909, 4075602; 607954, 4075586; 
607997, 4075559; 608003, 4075571; 608095, 4075612; 608137, 4075638; 
608191, 4075683; 608295, 4075738; 608324, 4075749; 608380, 4075742; 
608433, 4075743; 608480, 4075770; 608516, 4075767; 608595, 4075832; 
608670, 4075851; 608730, 4075908; 608780, 4075917; 608883, 4075966; 
608963, 4075985; 609014, 4076006; 609042, 4076037; 609037, 4076049; 
609013, 4076060; 609044, 4076094; 609091, 4076103; 609112, 4076082; 
609143, 4076090; 609157, 4076088; 609189, 4076107; 609209, 4076135; 
609217, 4076139; 609244, 4076120; 609275, 4076145; 609305, 4076143; 
609358, 4076120; 609383, 4076127; 609404, 4076121; 609432, 4076149; 
609503, 4076272; 609517, 4076283; 609538, 4076279; 609555, 4076242; 
609578, 4076223; 609706, 4076239; 609760, 4076224; 609779, 4076203; 
609772, 4076170; 609753, 4076155; 609723, 4076168; 609685, 4076167; 
609634, 4076122; 609612, 4076120; 609599, 4076111; 609506, 4076108; 
609466, 4076097; 609458, 4076097; 609442, 4076119; 609421, 4076115; 
609420, 4076100; 609370, 4076068; 609357, 4076066; 609330, 4076024; 
609311, 4076009; 609343, 4075983; 609352, 4075945; 609253, 4075939; 
609243, 4075925; 609243, 4075893; 609227, 4075876; 609161, 4075881; 
609129, 4075874; 609059, 4075870; 609031, 4075875; 608941, 4075867; 
608898, 4075846; 608822, 4075769; 608732, 4075714; 608647, 4075693; 
608547, 4075694; 608506, 4075687; 608402, 4075693; 608353, 4075656; 
608310, 4075612; 608290, 4075582; 608286, 4075529; 608272, 4075483; 
608276, 4075466; 608265, 4075456; 608242, 4075392; 608231, 4075376; 
608212, 4075371; 608190, 4075328; 608188, 4075271; 608202, 4075096; 
608174, 4074988; 608165, 4074913; 608166, 4074872; 608185, 4074802; 
608203, 4074780; 608226, 4074768; 608242, 4074744; 608258, 4074610; 
608252, 4074570; 608269, 4074527; 608281, 4074517; 608171, 4074429; 
608104, 4074419; 608100, 4074483; 608083, 4074522; 608056, 4074561; 
608053, 4074583; 608078, 4074657; 608074, 4074686; 608032, 4074719; 
607975, 4074748; 607977, 4074840; 607971, 4074920; 607954, 4075047; 
607939, 4075108; 607952, 4075166; 607977, 4075198; 608060, 4075233; 
608126, 4075235; 608142, 4075229; 608140, 4075250; 608116, 4075255; 
608060, 4075248; 607991, 4075229; 607968, 4075216; 607945, 4075190; 
607915, 4075141; 607899, 4075150; 607880, 4075203; 607852, 4075240; 
607821, 4075335; 607810, 4075348; 607763, 4075361; 607751, 4075370; 
607720, 4075398; 607707, 4075421; 607704, 4075490; 607715, 4075546; 
607696, 4075565; 607696, 4075616; 607674, 4075642; 607667, 4075662; 
607669, 4075707; 607619, 4075744; 607571, 4075762; 607582, 4075819; 
607578, 4075867; 607549, 4075918; 607530, 4075928; 607502, 4075961; 
607490, 4076020; 607493, 4076054; returning to 607479, 4076078.
    (ii) Note: MN-1 included on map with unit SC-4.
    (29) Unit SLO-1; San Luis Obispo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Piedras Blancas. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 654950, 
3950321; 654974, 3950315; 654982, 3950312; 654990, 3950310; 654996, 
3950309; 654997, 3950309; 654998, 3950309; 654998, 3950310; 654999, 
3950310; 655014, 3950305; 655018, 3950303; 655018, 3950310; 655014, 
3950319; 655017, 3950328; 655026, 3950331; 655031, 3950331; 655039, 
3950328; 655065, 3950249; 655066, 3950238; 655058, 3950233; 655048, 
3950227; 655043, 3950217; 655042, 3950199; 655044, 3950183; 655048, 
3950169; 655053, 3950162; 655057, 3950157; 655061, 3950151; 655065, 
3950138; 655068, 3950128; 655076, 3950120; 655081, 3950111; 655081, 
3950090; 655081, 3950083; 655068, 3950080; 655058, 3950077; 655052, 
3950072; 655047, 3950069; 655041, 3950056; 655036, 3950067; 655032, 
3950077; 655028, 3950090; 655025, 3950104; 655020, 3950111; 655020, 
3950118; 655018, 3950124; 655018, 3950131; 655007, 3950129; 655006, 
3950130; 655005, 3950130; 655004, 3950130; 655003, 3950130; 654997, 
3950121; 654996, 3950121; 654996, 3950120; 654996, 3950115; 654994, 
3950108; 654990, 3950103; 654990, 3950105; 654983, 3950122; 654985, 
3950133; 654987, 3950145; 654985, 3950156; 654982, 3950192; 654978, 
3950211; 654974, 3950231; 654973, 3950246; 654958, 3950299; returning to 
654950, 3950321.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SLO-1 follows.

[[Page 592]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.013

    (30) Unit SLO-2; San Luis Obispo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle San Simeon. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 661106, 3946736; 
661136, 3946762; 661138, 3946761; 661154, 3946765; 661163, 3946776; 
661162, 3946822; 661160, 3946859; 661160, 3946860; 661165, 3946889;

[[Page 593]]

661168, 3946920; 661171, 3946938; 661172, 3946939; 661172, 3946940; 
661173, 3946940; 661174, 3946940; 661175, 3946940; 661176, 3946940; 
661176, 3946939; 661177, 3946939; 661177, 3946938; 661178, 3946946; 
661187, 3946945; 661187, 3946940; 661190, 3946912; 661190, 3946884; 
661192, 3946849; 661193, 3946836; 661194, 3946826; 661195, 3946809; 
661200, 3946789; 661205, 3946777; 661207, 3946759; 661208, 3946746; 
661205, 3946734; 661200, 3946728; 661198, 3946727; 661194, 3946723; 
661191, 3946717; 661190, 3946711; 661193, 3946705; 661197, 3946699; 
661197, 3946695; 661194, 3946690; 661195, 3946685; 661196, 3946682; 
661182, 3946684; 661133, 3946718; returning to 661106, 3946736.
    (ii) Note: SLO-2 included on map with unit SLO-1.
    (31) Unit SLO-3; San Luis Obispo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle San Simeon. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 666127, 3944901; 
666136, 3944903; 666152, 3944900; 666193, 3944908; 666235, 3944880; 
666260, 3944893; 666263, 3944905; 666258, 3944930; 666258, 3944937; 
666297, 3944877; 666294, 3944848; 666275, 3944773; 666254, 3944801; 
666226, 3944828; 666172, 3944870; 666152, 3944892; returning to 666127, 
3944901.
    (ii) Note: SLO-3 included on map with unit SLO-1.
    (32) Unit SLO-4; San Luis Obispo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Pico Creek and Cambria. 
Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 
669487, 3940858; 669537, 3940865; 669549, 3940860; 669550, 3940860; 
669551, 3940861; 669551, 3940862; 669551, 3940863; 669558, 3940865; 
669574, 3940868; 669596, 3940871; 669606, 3940872; 669615, 3940872; 
669625, 3940869; 669635, 3940866; 669641, 3940863; 669648, 3940859; 
669655, 3940853; 669662, 3940850; 669669, 3940846; 669676, 3940839; 
669685, 3940832; 669694, 3940814; 669705, 3940798; 669720, 3940774; 
669737, 3940755; 669748, 3940744; 669753, 3940740; 669756, 3940738; 
669765, 3940735; 669776, 3940736; 669785, 3940735; 669801, 3940730; 
669815, 3940738; 669819, 3940742; 669823, 3940747; 669826, 3940754; 
669830, 3940758; 669836, 3940761; 669840, 3940764; 669847, 3940765; 
669851, 3940765; 669859, 3940765; 669864, 3940767; 669868, 3940768; 
669885, 3940776; 669895, 3940780; 669904, 3940778; 669916, 3940781; 
669926, 3940784; 669937, 3940786; 669948, 3940784; 669958, 3940779; 
669969, 3940773; 669980, 3940763; 669989, 3940756; 670000, 3940750; 
670012, 3940746; 670031, 3940741; 670041, 3940734; 670052, 3940727; 
670069, 3940719; 670090, 3940712; 670098, 3940704; 670107, 3940697; 
670113, 3940691; 670118, 3940683; 670126, 3940676; 670135, 3940668; 
670137, 3940659; 670136, 3940652; 670135, 3940646; 670140, 3940642; 
670144, 3940636; 670147, 3940629; 670154, 3940620; 670152, 3940618; 
670152, 3940616; 670151, 3940613; 670131, 3940620; 670120, 3940628; 
670120, 3940629; 670112, 3940625; 670102, 3940623; 670082, 3940627; 
670069, 3940637; 670060, 3940645; 670050, 3940648; 670042, 3940658; 
670040, 3940667; 670031, 3940666; 670022, 3940657; 670005, 3940658; 
669988, 3940665; 669979, 3940674; 669973, 3940681; 669965, 3940681; 
669943, 3940680; 669929, 3940684; 669913, 3940680; 669904, 3940670; 
669900, 3940657; 669894, 3940653; 669881, 3940659; 669872, 3940670; 
669861, 3940680; 669853, 3940680; 669860, 3940645; 669865, 3940630; 
669871, 3940615; 669882, 3940606; 669886, 3940598; 669885, 3940590; 
669886, 3940583; 669894, 3940570; 669914, 3940559; 669928, 3940548; 
669935, 3940540; 669933, 3940533; 669923, 3940536; 669916, 3940542; 
669908, 3940546; 669898, 3940551; 669889, 3940557; 669879, 3940562; 
669876, 3940568; 669871, 3940577; 669866, 3940594; 669865, 3940613; 
669860, 3940628; 669854, 3940643; 669850, 3940659; 669844, 3940675; 
669842, 3940680; 669842, 3940681; 669842, 3940682; 669842, 3940683; 
669843, 3940684; 669838, 3940694; 669828, 3940703; 669819, 3940707; 
669810, 3940703; 669809, 3940703; 669804, 3940697; 669800, 3940691; 
669796, 3940683; 669779, 3940659; 669769, 3940648; 669753, 3940628; 
669743, 3940614; 669743, 3940602; 669743, 3940595; 669745, 3940584; 
669744, 3940577; 669743, 3940570; 669731, 3940561; 669705, 3940611; 
669665, 3940672; 669651, 3940695; 669651, 3940696; 669640, 3940712; 
669586, 3940765; 669537, 3940814; 669504, 3940842; returning to 669487, 
3940858.
    (ii) Note: SLO-4 included on map with unit SLO-1.
    (33) Unit SLO-5; San Luis Obispo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Cayucos. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 683953, 3926198; 683960, 
3926205; 683980, 3926215; 683989, 3926218; 684058, 3926215; 684072, 
3926209; 684105, 3926205; 684129, 3926198; 684168, 3926177; 684195, 
3926145; 684206, 3926138; 684229, 3926116; 684237, 3926088; 684228, 
3926074; 684232, 3926054; 684232, 3926033; 684224, 3926020; 684280, 
3925950; 684232, 3925959; 684197, 3925958; 684178, 3925954; 684167, 
3925958; 684135, 3925976; 684115, 3925983; 684106, 3925983; 684109, 
3926014; 684123, 3926021; 684155, 3926025; 684180, 3926034; 684182, 
3926053; 684170, 3926109; 684162, 3926125; 684124, 3926123; 684108, 
3926128; 684097, 3926146; 684096, 3926185; 684062, 3926201; 684018, 
3926207; 683993, 3926207; 683962, 3926192; returning to 683953, 3926198.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SLO-5 follows.

[[Page 594]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.014

    (34) Unit SLO-6; San Luis Obispo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Cayucos. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 687453, 3924653; 687454, 
3924656; 687457, 3924661; 687465, 3924675; 687477, 3924685; 687487, 
3924688; 687483, 3924691; 687479, 3924691; 687482, 3924700;

[[Page 595]]

687481, 3924701; 687481, 3924702; 687480, 3924702; 687481, 3924703; 
687478, 3924708; 687475, 3924719; 687473, 3924731; 687473, 3924738; 
687474, 3924744; 687475, 3924745; 687476, 3924748; 687476, 3924749; 
687484, 3924762; 687485, 3924762; 687490, 3924765; 687504, 3924774; 
687517, 3924796; 687526, 3924818; 687527, 3924824; 687528, 3924826; 
687529, 3924827; 687530, 3924828; 687531, 3924828; 687532, 3924827; 
687533, 3924826; 687533, 3924825; 687533, 3924824; 687533, 3924823; 
687532, 3924817; 687532, 3924816; 687522, 3924793; 687526, 3924794; 
687530, 3924798; 687532, 3924805; 687534, 3924812; 687537, 3924813; 
687536, 3924802; 687535, 3924794; 687535, 3924789; 687535, 3924785; 
687532, 3924782; 687528, 3924784; 687525, 3924783; 687524, 3924778; 
687522, 3924774; 687521, 3924770; 687519, 3924766; 687514, 3924765; 
687509, 3924764; 687504, 3924761; 687500, 3924757; 687493, 3924753; 
687484, 3924744; 687481, 3924741; 687480, 3924732; 687482, 3924723; 
687485, 3924719; 687489, 3924715; 687494, 3924710; 687501, 3924707; 
687506, 3924703; 687510, 3924698; 687513, 3924691; 687508, 3924690; 
687503, 3924690; 687500, 3924689; 687510, 3924687; 687523, 3924678; 
687531, 3924666; 687532, 3924663; 687533, 3924657; 687534, 3924651; 
687534, 3924650; 687536, 3924646; 687536, 3924645; 687537, 3924643; 
687534, 3924643; 687519, 3924641; 687499, 3924649; 687475, 3924655; 
687456, 3924653; returning to 687453, 3924653.
    (ii) Note: SLO-6 included on map with unit SLO-5.
    (35) Unit SLO-7; San Luis Obispo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Pismo Beach. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 714995, 3890262; 
715095, 3890271; 715104, 3890261; 715109, 3890252; 715120, 3890240; 
715127, 3890233; 715138, 3890227; 715149, 3890213; 715148, 3890223; 
715145, 3890233; 715140, 3890238; 715136, 3890243; 715134, 3890254; 
715132, 3890272; 715129, 3890286; 715125, 3890297; 715119, 3890324; 
715116, 3890338; 715112, 3890351; 715108, 3890361; 715100, 3890375; 
715095, 3890385; 715088, 3890392; 715082, 3890396; 715076, 3890399; 
715069, 3890401; 715065, 3890405; 715061, 3890408; 715060, 3890415; 
715058, 3890429; 715056, 3890444; 715053, 3890455; 715051, 3890473; 
715048, 3890488; 715045, 3890504; 715042, 3890521; 715039, 3890539; 
715035, 3890553; 715033, 3890566; 715032, 3890574; 715031, 3890588; 
715031, 3890606; 715033, 3890623; 715033, 3890645; 715034, 3890667; 
715041, 3890681; 715046, 3890692; 715055, 3890706; 715062, 3890722; 
715067, 3890730; 715070, 3890736; 715074, 3890743; 715082, 3890752; 
715093, 3890762; 715101, 3890768; 715119, 3890786; 715130, 3890799; 
715145, 3890809; 715163, 3890821; 715178, 3890830; 715194, 3890837; 
715205, 3890845; 715221, 3890859; 715236, 3890869; 715252, 3890885; 
715262, 3890891; 715268, 3890896; 715276, 3890902; 715283, 3890912; 
715289, 3890922; 715296, 3890932; 715305, 3890943; 715310, 3890953; 
715317, 3890972; 715318, 3890984; 715319, 3891005; 715323, 3891027; 
715326, 3891034; 715335, 3891032; 715336, 3891031; 715342, 3891028; 
715347, 3891021; 715345, 3891004; 715340, 3890985; 715331, 3890962; 
715321, 3890938; 715310, 3890916; 715296, 3890885; 715287, 3890864; 
715277, 3890859; 715272, 3890854; 715258, 3890837; 715241, 3890825; 
715232, 3890816; 715226, 3890810; 715212, 3890802; 715200, 3890802; 
715186, 3890801; 715179, 3890795; 715169, 3890778; 715154, 3890761; 
715142, 3890751; 715133, 3890737; 715127, 3890720; 715122, 3890708; 
715117, 3890704; 715109, 3890684; 715103, 3890669; 715099, 3890654; 
715092, 3890642; 715084, 3890623; 715080, 3890608; 715077, 3890585; 
715075, 3890559; 715079, 3890539; 715083, 3890515; 715090, 3890484; 
715097, 3890454; 715105, 3890425; 715111, 3890398; 715118, 3890380; 
715129, 3890356; 715141, 3890327; 715153, 3890297; 715164, 3890254; 
715170, 3890229; 715174, 3890208; 715177, 3890185; 715178, 3890165; 
715176, 3890142; 715177, 3890130; 715176, 3890123; 715183, 3890106; 
715187, 3890085; 715189, 3890067; 715193, 3890044; 715200, 3890028; 
715137, 3889924; 715128, 3889946; 715121, 3889965; 715115, 3889981; 
715110, 3889994; 715106, 3890007; 715102, 3890018; 715095, 3890036; 
715090, 3890049; 715082, 3890067; 715076, 3890080; 715069, 3890095; 
715062, 3890111; 715052, 3890126; 715044, 3890146; 715034, 3890166; 
715029, 3890185; 715022, 3890203; 715013, 3890222; 715004, 3890241; 
returning to 714995, 3890262.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SLO-7 follows.

[[Page 596]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.015

    (36) Unit SB-1; Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Point Sal and Guadalupe. 
Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 
714486, 3872122; 714493, 3872165; 714530, 3872230; 714539, 3872329; 
714554, 3872389; 714594, 3872480; 714613, 3872646; 714626, 3872708;

[[Page 597]]

714651, 3872747; 714689, 3872903; 714703, 3873025; 714969, 3872560; 
714988, 3872467; 715039, 3872436; 715055, 3872488; 715175, 3872451; 
715237, 3872326; 715354, 3872192; 715434, 3872073; 715583, 3871865; 
715637, 3871734; 715713, 3871614; 715807, 3871544; 715939, 3871505; 
716019, 3871535; 716044, 3871566; 716102, 3871589; 716153, 3871603; 
716222, 3871602; 716268, 3871649; 716299, 3871655; 716334, 3871652; 
716452, 3871607; 716526, 3871594; 716558, 3871593; 716701, 3871615; 
716807, 3871341; 716785, 3871204; 716542, 3870984; 716348, 3870951; 
716245, 3870930; 716125, 3870887; 716029, 3870923; 715975, 3870952; 
715899, 3870968; 715803, 3871010; 715682, 3871109; 715600, 3871122; 
715455, 3871112; 715304, 3871140; 715197, 3871101; 715115, 3871098; 
715046, 3871108; 714985, 3871140; 714935, 3871180; 714908, 3871224; 
714839, 3871547; 714773, 3871548; 714762, 3871579; 714753, 3871608; 
714720, 3871626; 714713, 3871685; 714656, 3871775; 714650, 3871830; 
714624, 3871908; 714676, 3871989; 714646, 3872058; returning to 714486, 
3872122.
    (ii) Note: SB-1 included on map with unit SLO-7.
    (37) Unit SB-2; Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Point Conception. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 744289, 
3816310; 744302, 3816318; 744310, 3816324; 744314, 3816329; 744320, 
3816334; 744322, 3816336; 744326, 3816338; 744320, 3816343; 744314, 
3816346; 744311, 3816351; 744310, 3816356; 744308, 3816361; 744308, 
3816366; 744307, 3816371; 744306, 3816376; 744305, 3816383; 744304, 
3816387; 744307, 3816387; 744312, 3816379; 744313, 3816373; 744314, 
3816366; 744315, 3816359; 744315, 3816356; 744317, 3816352; 744320, 
3816347; 744325, 3816346; 744330, 3816344; 744336, 3816342; 744339, 
3816341; 744350, 3816340; 744358, 3816339; 744369, 3816340; 744373, 
3816338; 744377, 3816336; 744383, 3816336; 744391, 3816337; 744397, 
3816339; 744402, 3816338; 744407, 3816337; 744373, 3816328; 744350, 
3816322; 744343, 3816320; 744335, 3816318; 744308, 3816313; 744298, 
3816310; returning to 744289, 3816310.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SB-2 follows.

[[Page 598]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.016

    (38) Unit SB-3; Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Point Conception. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 747310, 
3817233; 747358, 3817279; 747376, 3817283; 747396, 3817298; 747384, 
3817307; 747357, 3817311; 747334, 3817326; 747324, 3817337; 747314,

[[Page 599]]

3817372; 747318, 3817391; 747323, 3817394; 747338, 3817375; 747376, 
3817348; 747386, 3817331; 747413, 3817305; 747435, 3817265; 747509, 
3817255; 747522, 3817247; 747556, 3817236; 747588, 3817216; 747550, 
3817228; 747506, 3817229; 747494, 3817235; 747346, 3817239; returning to 
747310, 3817233.
    (ii) Note: SB-3 included on map with unit SB-2.
    (39) Unit SB-4; Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Point Conception. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 750530, 
3817616; 750546, 3817669; 750554, 3817688; 750582, 3817711; 750595, 
3817736; 750602, 3817758; 750608, 3817758; 750598, 3817712; 750570, 
3817678; 750570, 3817666; 750559, 3817649; 750559, 3817614; 750565, 
3817606; 750567, 3817590; 750580, 3817583; 750585, 3817577; 750588, 
3817572; 750582, 3817557; 750602, 3817534; 750563, 3817537; 750547, 
3817533; 750553, 3817561; 750542, 3817580; 750540, 3817593; returning to 
750530, 3817616.
    (ii) Note: Unit SB-4 included on map with unit SB-2.
    (40) Unit SB-5; Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Point Conception. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 752340, 
3817567; 752343, 3817589; 752347, 3817598; 752351, 3817624; 752351, 
3817636; 752357, 3817675; 752353, 3817702; 752366, 3817705; 752370, 
3817675; 752364, 3817634; 752364, 3817623; 752360, 3817595; 752353, 
3817577; 752354, 3817544; 752362, 3817533; 752363, 3817528; 752366, 
3817524; 752380, 3817515; 752388, 3817512; 752427, 3817506; 752442, 
3817500; 752435, 3817500; 752388, 3817494; 752363, 3817498; 752345, 
3817533; 752341, 3817543; returning to 752340, 3817567.
    (ii) Note: SB-5 included on map with unit SB-2.
    (41) Unit SB-6; Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Gaviota. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 754473, 3818173; 754487, 
3818216; 754512, 3818201; 754519, 3818189; 754526, 3818145; 754537, 
3818130; 754567, 3818121; 754588, 3818106; 754643, 3818104; 754672, 
3818114; 754733, 3818115; 754752, 3818107; 754778, 3818058; 754782, 
3818039; 754797, 3818005; 754793, 3817977; 754787, 3817954; 754777, 
3817948; 754768, 3817931; 754759, 3817922; 754756, 3817901; 754735, 
3817880; 754733, 3817870; 754727, 3817868; 754718, 3817855; 754606, 
3817863; 754568, 3817859; 754534, 3817850; 754531, 3817853; 754571, 
3817881; 754575, 3817891; 754586, 3817901; 754597, 3817906; 754626, 
3817916; 754643, 3817913; 754654, 3817916; 754687, 3817910; 754709, 
3817914; 754707, 3817922; 754727, 3817941; 754703, 3817949; 754680, 
3817949; 754669, 3817954; 754665, 3817960; 754666, 3817978; 754657, 
3817995; 754655, 3818033; 754643, 3818075; 754629, 3818079; 754624, 
3818085; 754625, 3818089; 754618, 3818091; 754564, 3818094; 754541, 
3818104; 754479, 3818161; 754480, 3818169; returning to 754473, 3818173.
    (ii) Note: Unit SB-6 included on map with unit SB-2.
    (42) Unit SB-7; Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Dos Pueblos Canyon. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 11 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 232224, 
3813614; 232337, 3813596; 232345, 3813600; 232348, 3813614; 232342, 
3813631; 232314, 3813641; 232303, 3813652; 232297, 3813683; 232307, 
3813732; 232313, 3813743; 232321, 3813769; 232323, 3813789; 232318, 
3813850; 232320, 3813928; 232340, 3813983; 232370, 3813973; 232363, 
3813947; 232346, 3813948; 232329, 3813927; 232329, 3813905; 232339, 
3813898; 232350, 3813875; 232355, 3813835; 232366, 3813794; 232370, 
3813748; 232359, 3813698; 232353, 3813689; 232345, 3813688; 232363, 
3813651; 232357, 3813646; 232363, 3813625; 232373, 3813614; 232373, 
3813605; 232360, 3813572; 232383, 3813490; 232287, 3813570; returning to 
232224, 3813614.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SB-7 follows.

[[Page 600]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.017

    (43) Unit SB-8; Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Santa Barbara. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 11 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 247839, 3810209; 
247844, 3810255; 247848, 3810256; 247841, 3810295; 247851, 3810332; 
247867, 3810357; 247884, 3810364; 247967, 3810388; 247988,

[[Page 601]]

3810390; 248001, 3810387; 248032, 3810399; 248051, 3810400; 248079, 
3810406; 248097, 3810417; 248108, 3810428; 248117, 3810441; 248118, 
3810451; 248124, 3810453; 248122, 3810439; 248113, 3810425; 248100, 
3810412; 248082, 3810401; 248068, 3810396; 248033, 3810393; 248002, 
3810381; 247988, 3810384; 247969, 3810383; 247885, 3810357; 247877, 
3810347; 247868, 3810332; 247876, 3810282; 247893, 3810265; 247900, 
3810237; 247897, 3810226; 247933, 3810166; returning to 247839, 3810209.
    (ii) Note: SB-8 included on map with unit SB-7.
    (44) Unit SB-9; Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Santa Barbara. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 11 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 252846, 3811168; 
252864, 3811187; 252923, 3811193; 252975, 3811204; 253049, 3811235; 
253166, 3811297; 253182, 3811299; 253183, 3811277; 253187, 3811278; 
253202, 3811303; 253199, 3811317; 253207, 3811319; 253209, 3811311; 
253445, 3811254; 253412, 3811247; 253337, 3811217; 253311, 3811202; 
253275, 3811190; 253256, 3811174; 253236, 3811170; 253226, 3811163; 
253219, 3811147; 253195, 3811137; 253122, 3811115; 253088, 3811099; 
252918, 3811155; 252928, 3811169; 252923, 3811172; 252908, 3811174; 
returning to 252846, 3811168.
    (ii) Note: Unit SB-9 included on map with unit SB-7.
    (45) Unit VEN-1; Ventura County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Ventura. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 11 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 287223, 3795128; 287297, 
3795133; 287329, 3795156; 287356, 3795190; 287377, 3795209; 287407, 
3795228; 287424, 3795254; 287428, 3795275; 287423, 3795289; 287371, 
3795326; 287361, 3795337; 287356, 3795349; 287354, 3795362; 287365, 
3795411; 287383, 3795461; 287376, 3795489; 287364, 3795493; 287349, 
3795520; 287341, 3795563; 287347, 3795595; 287357, 3795620; 287385, 
3795609; 287392, 3795618; 287391, 3795629; 287398, 3795650; 287405, 
3795682; 287419, 3795720; 287424, 3795745; 287423, 3795766; 287442, 
3795795; 287436, 3795813; 287435, 3795806; 287423, 3795804; 287419, 
3795818; 287379, 3795831; 287372, 3795843; 287571, 3795810; 287572, 
3795798; 287586, 3795788; 287590, 3795779; 287581, 3795765; 287580, 
3795748; 287569, 3795726; 287556, 3795683; 287576, 3795664; 287578, 
3795617; 287588, 3795605; 287602, 3795595; 287634, 3795581; 287634, 
3795510; 287632, 3795455; 287626, 3795410; 287625, 3795362; 287618, 
3795309; 287632, 3795287; 287630, 3795263; 287632, 3795216; 287627, 
3795163; 287626, 3795106; 287622, 3795028; 287625, 3794917; 287577, 
3794954; 287470, 3795013; 287404, 3795023; 287293, 3795067; returning to 
287223, 3795128.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit VEN-1 follows.

[[Page 602]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.018

    (46) Unit VEN-2; Ventura County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Oxnard. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 11 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 291159, 3789957; 291223, 
3790506; 291369, 3790503; 291384, 3790685; 291387, 3790730; 291415, 
3790767; 291412, 3790821; 291419, 3790906; 291669, 3790758; 291809,

[[Page 603]]

3790713; 291890, 3790691; 291995, 3790673; 292105, 3790669; 292514, 
3790691; 292880, 3790694; 293336, 3790700; 293629, 3790695; 293448, 
3790404; 292910, 3790378; 292682, 3790364; 292456, 3790341; 292380, 
3790320; 292284, 3790262; 292160, 3790123; 292097, 3790078; 292034, 
3790039; 292005, 3789999; 291995, 3789923; 291937, 3789922; 291862, 
3789890; 291823, 3789847; 291809, 3789796; 291814, 3789722; 291781, 
3789705; 291689, 3789886; 291558, 3789684; 291564, 3789160; 291272, 
3789495; 291176, 3789721; returning to 291159, 3789957.
    (ii) Note: Unit VEN-2 included on map with unit VEN-1.
    (47) Unit VEN-3; Ventura County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Oxnard. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 11 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 298163, 3779838; 298231, 
3779920; 298245, 3779905; 298274, 3779893; 298310, 3779870; 298354, 
3779843; 298335, 3779822; 298379, 3779795; 298443, 3779754; 298494, 
3779730; 298528, 3779695; 298555, 3779675; 298592, 3779644; 298678, 
3779570; 298699, 3779579; 298578, 3779686; 298385, 3779845; 298325, 
3779874; 298289, 3779897; 298267, 3779918; 298269, 3779922; 298290, 
3779914; 298338, 3779882; 298379, 3779865; 298393, 3779856; 298562, 
3779713; 298614, 3779669; 298798, 3779514; 298880, 3779430; 299009, 
3779320; 299029, 3779318; 299028, 3779279; 299001, 3779300; 298958, 
3779309; 298863, 3779394; 298792, 3779416; 298790, 3779357; 299022, 
3779125; 299018, 3779003; 298939, 3779085; 298884, 3779132; 298659, 
3779308; 298603, 3779365; 298638, 3779430; 298164, 3779790; returning to 
298163, 3779838.
    (ii) Note: Unit VEN-3 included on map with unit VEN-1.
    (48) Unit LA-1; Los Angeles County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Malibu Beach. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 11 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 343854, 3769197; 
343855, 3769238; 343878, 3769230; 343927, 3769201; 343954, 3769178; 
343968, 3769157; 343970, 3769141; 343966, 3769111; 343979, 3769096; 
343980, 3769072; 344025, 3768898; 344034, 3768802; 344047, 3768729; 
344054, 3768697; 344071, 3768661; 344079, 3768650; 344134, 3768608; 
344162, 3768595; 344209, 3768580; 344224, 3768555; 344259, 3768529; 
344278, 3768520; 344300, 3768489; 344324, 3768469; 344335, 3768450; 
344393, 3768395; 344431, 3768343; 344499, 3768273; 344516, 3768245; 
344552, 3768200; 344595, 3768138; 344644, 3768041; 344671, 3767978; 
344710, 3767877; 344715, 3767848; 344735, 3767804; 344738, 3767775; 
344745, 3767750; 344727, 3767736; 344724, 3767686; 344715, 3767665; 
344675, 3767601; 344657, 3767564; 344613, 3767516; 344605, 3767490; 
344605, 3767470; 344606, 3767425; 344613, 3767401; 344663, 3767338; 
344688, 3767314; 344709, 3767297; 344732, 3767260; 344754, 3767249; 
344787, 3767242; 344795, 3767231; 344811, 3767219; 344835, 3767224; 
344861, 3767204; 344868, 3767186; 344886, 3767171; 344912, 3767158; 
345030, 3767154; 345032, 3767118; 345025, 3767101; 344993, 3767067; 
344983, 3767048; 344967, 3767027; 344926, 3766990; 344900, 3766951; 
344815, 3766930; 344784, 3766918; 344753, 3766885; 344670, 3766849; 
344660, 3766846; 344681, 3766899; 344724, 3766933; 344722, 3766964; 
344680, 3766974; 344629, 3767002; 344606, 3767012; 344589, 3767003; 
344548, 3767011; 344503, 3767018; 344449, 3767035; 344427, 3767050; 
344414, 3767071; 344417, 3767121; 344431, 3767168; 344492, 3767156; 
344536, 3767136; 344562, 3767136; 344597, 3767140; 344607, 3767146; 
344581, 3767201; 344587, 3767205; 344612, 3767184; 344640, 3767179; 
344650, 3767181; 344639, 3767234; 344617, 3767298; 344596, 3767334; 
344579, 3767376; 344563, 3767443; 344567, 3767500; 344565, 3767521; 
344556, 3767534; 344551, 3767568; 344554, 3767606; 344549, 3767633; 
344545, 3767683; 344557, 3767730; 344577, 3767833; 344594, 3767899; 
344599, 3767949; 344599, 3767985; 344592, 3768023; 344593, 3768082; 
344574, 3768100; 344545, 3768164; 344527, 3768194; 344497, 3768232; 
344481, 3768259; 344413, 3768328; 344375, 3768381; 344352, 3768405; 
344310, 3768439; 344301, 3768439; 344276, 3768447; 344250, 3768468; 
344220, 3768505; 344210, 3768511; 344198, 3768511; 344169, 3768497; 
344152, 3768492; 344122, 3768500; 344105, 3768509; 344062, 3768572; 
344040, 3768628; 344043, 3768668; 344032, 3768690; 344028, 3768708; 
344011, 3768799; 344002, 3768895; 343975, 3768996; 343956, 3769033; 
343941, 3769077; 343946, 3769149; 343936, 3769163; 343914, 3769182; 
343886, 3769197; 343863, 3769200; returning to 343854, 3769197.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit LA-1 follows.

[[Page 604]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.019

    (49) Unit LA-2; Los Angeles County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Topanga. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 11 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 353851, 3767575; 353859, 
3767610; 353860, 3767654; 353855, 3767659; 353856, 3767672; 353860, 
3767720; 353880, 3767768; 353908, 3767818; 353919, 3767829;

[[Page 605]]

353921, 3767837; 353942, 3767845; 354016, 3767844; 354041, 3767856; 
354080, 3767864; 354109, 3767861; 354127, 3767851; 354139, 3767850; 
354166, 3767854; 354179, 3767883; 354179, 3767917; 354187, 3767930; 
354186, 3767938; 354203, 3767945; 354205, 3767873; 354198, 3767851; 
354181, 3767831; 354156, 3767825; 354134, 3767824; 354088, 3767836; 
354071, 3767836; 354051, 3767831; 354024, 3767819; 353969, 3767820; 
353945, 3767792; 353933, 3767786; 353918, 3767769; 353904, 3767745; 
353894, 3767733; 353876, 3767699; 353873, 3767653; 353875, 3767609; 
353881, 3767598; 353879, 3767586; 353889, 3767512; 353906, 3767526; 
353936, 3767510; 353887, 3767481; 353856, 3767475; 353856, 3767503; 
353867, 3767505; 353862, 3767528; 353856, 3767538; 353857, 3767554; 
returning to 353851, 3767575.
    (ii) Note: Unit LA-2 included on map with unit LA-1.

                  Conasauga Logperch (Percina jenkinsi)

    Tennessee and Georgia: Conasauga River from the confluence of 
Halfway Branch with the Conasauga River in Polk County, Tennessee, 
downstream approximately 11 miles to the Georgia State Highway 2 Bridge, 
Murray County, Georgia.
    Constituent elements include high quality water, pool areas with 
flowing water and silt free riffles with gravel and rubble substrate, 
and fast riffle areas and deeper chutes with gravel and small rubble.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.110
    
                     Smoky Madtom (Noturus baileyi)

    Tennessee, Monroe County, Citico Creek, Cherokee National Forest. 
Citico Creek from the Cherokee National Forest boundary at upper Citico 
Bridge on Mountain Settlement Road (approximately creek mile 4.3) 
upstream to the confluence of Citico Creek with Barkcamp Branch 
(approximately creek mile 10.8).
    Constituent elements of the critical habitat include the present 
good water quality in Citico Creek and run/pool areas with relatively 
silt-free pea-size gravel substrate containing scattered large flat 
rocks for breeding habitat. The species utilizes palm-size slab rocks 
for cover and relatively silt-free riffle areas during other times of 
the year. The area designated as critical habitat provides the smoky 
madtom with all of the necessary constituent elements for completion of 
its life cycle.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 606]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.111

                 Yellowfin Madtom (Noturus flavipinnis)

    Tennessee. Claiborne and Hancock Counties. Powell River, main 
channel from backwaters of Norris Lake upstream to the Tennessee-
Virginia State line.
    Virginia. Lee, Scott, and Russell Counties. Powell River, main 
channel from the Virginia-Tennessee State line upstream through Lee 
County. Copper Creek, main channel from its junction with Clinch River 
upstream through Scott County and upstream in Russell County to 
Dickensonville.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 607]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.112

                  Devils River Minnow (Dionda diaboli)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Val Verde County and 
Kinney County, Texas, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Devils River minnow are the following habitat components:
    (i) Streams characterized by:
    (A) Areas with slow to moderate water velocities between 10 and 40 
cm/second (4 and 16 in/second) in shallow to moderate water depths 
between approximately 10 cm (4 in) and 1.5 m (4.9 ft), near vegetative 
structure, such as emergent or submerged vegetation or stream bank 
riparian vegetation that overhangs into the water column;
    (B) Gravel and cobble substrates ranging in diameter between 2 and 
10 cm (0.8 and 4 in) with low or moderate amounts of fine sediment (less 
than 65 percent stream bottom coverage) and low or moderate amounts of 
substrate embeddedness; and
    (C) Pool, riffle, run, and backwater components free of artificial 
instream structures that would prevent movement of fish upstream or 
downstream.
    (ii) High-quality water provided by permanent, natural flows from 
groundwater spring and seeps characterized by:
    (A) Temperature ranging between 17 [deg]C and 29 [deg]C (63 [deg]F 
and 84 [deg]F);
    (B) Dissolved oxygen levels greater than 5.0 mg/l;
    (C) Neutral pH ranging between 7.0 and 8.2;
    (D) Conductivity less than 0.7 mS/cm and salinity less than 1 ppt;
    (E) Ammonia levels less than 0.4 mg/l; and
    (F) No or minimal pollutant levels for copper, arsenic, mercury, and 
cadmium; human and animal waste products; pesticides; fertilizers; 
suspended sediments; and petroleum compounds and gasoline or diesel 
fuels.
    (iii) An abundant aquatic food base consisting of algae attached to 
stream substrates and other microorganisms associated with stream 
substrates.
    (iv) Aquatic stream habitat either devoid of nonnative aquatic 
species (including fish, plants, and invertebrates) or in which such 
nonnative aquatic species are at levels that allow for healthy 
populations of Devils River minnows.
    (v) Areas within stream courses that may be periodically dewatered 
for short time periods, during seasonal droughts, but otherwise serve as 
connective corridors between occupied or seasonally occupied areas 
through which the species moves when the area is wetted.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing on the effective date of this 
rule and not containing one or more of the primary constituent elements.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created in ArcGIS using the National Hydrography Dataset and 7.5' 
topographic quadrangle maps obtained from U.S. Geological Survey to 
approximate stream channels and calculate distances (stream km and 
stream mi). We made some minor adjustments to stream channels using the 
2004 National Agriculture Imagery Program digital orthophotos obtained 
from the Texas Natural Resources Information System. For each critical 
habitat unit, the upstream and downstream boundaries are described as 
paired geographic coordinates X, Y (meters E, meters N, UTM Zone 14, 
referenced to North American Horizontal Datum 1983). Additionally, 
critical habitat areas include the stream channels within the

[[Page 608]]

identified stream reaches and areas within these reaches up to the 
bankfull width.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for the Devils River 
minnow follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AU08.000

    (6) Unit 2: San Felipe Creek, Val Verde County, Texas.
    (i) Unit 2 consists of approximately 7.9 stream km (4.9 stream mi) 
on San Felipe

[[Page 609]]

Creek, 0.8 stream km (0.5 stream mi) of the outflow of San Felipe 
Springs West, and 0.3 stream km (0.2 stream mi) of the outflow of San 
Felipe Springs East. The upstream boundary on San Felipe Creek is the 
Head Springs (UTM 318813E, 3253702N) located about 1.1 stream km (0.7 
stream mi) upstream of the Jap Lowe Bridge crossing. The downstream 
boundary on San Felipe Creek is in the City of Del Rio 0.8 stream km 
(0.5 stream mi) downstream of the Academy Street Bridge crossing (UTM 
316317E, 3248147N). This unit includes the outflow channels from the 
origin of the two springs, San Felipe Springs West (UTM 317039E, 
3250850N) and San Felipe Springs East (UTM 317212E, 250825N), downstream 
to the confluence with San Felipe Creek. Including all three streams, 
the total distance in Unit 2 is approximately 9.0 stream km (5.6 stream 
mi).
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 2, San Felipe Creek Unit, follows:

[[Page 610]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AU08.001

    (7) Unit 3: Pinto Creek, Kinney County, Texas.
    (i) Unit 3 consists of approximately 17.5 stream km (10.9 stream mi) 
on Pinto Creek. The upstream boundary is Pinto Springs (UTM 359372E, 
3254422N). The downstream boundary is 100 m (330 ft) upstream of the 
Highway 90 Bridge crossing of Pinto Creek (UTM 351163E, 3246179N).
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 3, Pinto Creek Unit, follows:

[[Page 611]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AU08.002

                     Loach Minnow (Tiaroga cobitis)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Apache, Cochise, Gila, 
Graham, Greenlee, Pinal, and Yavapai Counties, Arizona, and for Catron, 
Grant, and Hidalgo Counties, New Mexico, on the maps below.
    (2) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements (PCE) of 
the physical or biological features essential to the conservation of 
loach minnow consist of six components:

[[Page 612]]

    (i) Habitat to support all egg, larval, juvenile, and adult loach 
minnow. This habitat includes perennial flows with a stream depth of 
generally less than 1 m (3.3 ft), and with slow to swift flow velocities 
between 0 and 80 cm per second (0.0 and 31.5 in. per second). 
Appropriate microhabitat types include pools, runs, riffles, and rapids 
over sand, gravel, cobble, and rubble substrates with low or moderate 
amounts of fine sediment and substrate embeddedness. Appropriate 
habitats have a low stream gradient of less than 2.5 percent and are at 
elevations below 2,500 m (8,202 ft). Water temperatures should be in the 
general range of 8.0 to 25.0 [deg]C (46.4 to 77 [deg]F).
    (ii) An abundant aquatic insect food base consisting of mayflies, 
true flies, black flies, caddis flies, stoneflies, and dragonflies.
    (iii) Streams with no or no more than low levels of pollutants.
    (iv) Perennial flows or interrupted stream courses that are 
periodically dewatered but that serve as connective corridors between 
occupied or seasonally occupied habitat and through which the species 
may move when the habitat is wetted.
    (v) No nonnative aquatic species, or levels of nonnative aquatic 
species that are sufficiently low to allow persistence of loach minnow.
    (vi) Streams with a natural, unregulated flow regime that allows for 
periodic flooding or, if flows are modified or regulated, a flow regime 
that allows for adequate river functions, such as flows capable of 
transporting sediments.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, runways, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule. We have determined that all designated 
areas contain at least one PCE for loach minnow.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles along with shapefiles 
generated by the Arizona Land Resource Information Service for land 
ownership, streams, counties, and the Public Land Survey System. 
Information on species locations was derived from databases developed by 
the Arizona Game and Fish Department, the New Mexico Department of Game 
and Fish, and Arizona State University.
    (5) Note: Index map follows:

[[Page 613]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23FE12.000

    (6) Unit 1: Verde River Subbasin, Yavapai County, Arizona.
    (i) Verde River for approximately 118.5 km (73.6 mi), extending from 
the confluence with Beaver and Wet Beaver Creek in Township 14 North, 
Range 5 East, southeast quarter of section 30 upstream to Sullivan Dam 
in Township 17 North, Range 2 West, northwest quarter of section 15. 
This mileage does not include the 1.2 km (0.8 mi) belonging to the 
Yavapai-Apache Nation, which is excluded from this designation.

[[Page 614]]

    (ii) Granite Creek for approximately 3.2 km (2.0 mi), extending from 
the confluence with the Verde River in Township 17 North, Range 2 West, 
northeast quarter of section 14 upstream to a spring in Township 17 
North, Range 2 West, southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of 
section 13.
    (iii) Oak Creek for approximately 54.3 km (33.7 mi), extending from 
the confluence with the Verde River in Township 15 North, Range 4 East, 
southeast quarter of section 20 upstream to the confluence with an 
unnamed tributary from the south in Township 17 North, Range 5 East, 
southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of section 24.
    (iv) Beaver Creek and Wet Beaver Creek for approximately 33.3 km 
(20.7 mi), extending from the confluence with the Verde River in 
Township 14 North, Range 5 East, southeast quarter of section 30 
upstream to the confluence with Casner Canyon in Township 15 North, 
Range 6 East, northwest quarter of section 23. This mileage does not 
include the 0.2 km (0.1 mi) belonging to the Yavapai-Apache Nation, 
which is excluded from this designation.
    (v) Fossil Creek for approximately 22.2 km (13.8 mi) from its 
confluence with the Verde River at Township 11 North, Range 6 East, 
northeast quarter of section 25 upstream to the old Fossil Diversion Dam 
site at Township 12 North, Range 7 East, southeast quarter of section 
14.
    (vi) Note: Map of Unit 1, Verde River Subbasin follows.

[[Page 615]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23FE12.001

    (7) Unit 2: Salt River Subbasin, Apache and Gila Counties, Arizona.
    (i) East Fork Black River for approximately 19.1 km (11.9 mi) from 
the confluence with the West Fork Black River at Township 4 North, Range 
28 East, southeast quarter of section 11 upstream to the confluence with 
an unnamed tributary approximately 0.82 km (0.51 mi) downstream of the 
Boneyard Creek confluence at Township 5 North, Range 29 East, northwest 
quarter of Section 5.
    (ii) North Fork East Fork Black River for approximately 7.1 km (4.4 
mi) of the North Fork East Fork Black River extending from the 
confluence with East Fork Black River

[[Page 616]]

at Township 5 North, Range 29 East, northwest quarter of section 5 
upstream to the confluence with an unnamed tributary at Township 6 
North, Range 29 East, center of Section 30.
    (iii) Boneyard Creek for approximately 2.3 km (1.4 mi) extending 
from the confluence with the East Fork Black River at Township 5 North, 
Range 29 East, SW quarter of section 5 upstream to the confluence with 
an unnamed tributary at Township 6 North, Range 29 East, southeast 
quarter of section 32.
    (iv) Coyote Creek for approximately 3.4 km (2.1 mi) from the 
confluence with East Fork Black River at Township 5 North, Range 29 
East, northeast quarter of section 8 upstream to an unnamed confluence 
at Township 5 North, Range 29 East, northwest quarter of section 10.
    (v) Note: Map of Unit 2, Salt River Subbasin follows.

[[Page 617]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23FE12.002

    (8) Unit 3: San Pedro River Subbasin, Cochise, Pinal, and Graham 
Counties, Arizona.
    (i) Aravaipa Creek for approximately 44.9 km (27.9 mi) extending 
from the confluence with the San Pedro River in Township 7 South, Range 
16 East, center of section 9 upstream to the confluence with Stowe Gulch 
in Township 6 South, Range 19 East, southeast quarter of the northeast 
quarter of section 35.
    (ii) Deer Creek--3.7 km (2.3 mi) of the creek extending from the 
confluence with Aravaipa Creek at Township 6 South, Range 18 East, 
section 14 upstream to the boundary

[[Page 618]]

of the Aravaipa Wilderness at Township 6 South, range 19 East, section 
18.
    (iii) Turkey Creek--4.3 km (2.7 mi) of the creek extending from the 
confluence with Aravaipa Creek at Township 6 South, Range 19 East, 
section 19 upstream to the confluence with Oak Grove Canyon at Township 
6 South, Range 19 east, section 32.
    (iv) Hot Springs Canyon for approximately 9.3 km (5.8 mi) extending 
from the confluence with Bass Canyon in Township 12 South, Range 20 
East, northeast quarter of section 36 downstream to Township 12 South, 
Range 20 East, southeast quarter of section 32.
    (v) Redfield Canyon for approximately 6.5 km (4.0 mi) extending from 
Township 11 South, Range 19 East, northeast quarter of section 36 
upstream to the confluence with Sycamore Canyon in Township 11 South, 
Range 20 East, northwest quarter of section 28.
    (vi) Bass Canyon for approximately 5.5 km (3.4 mi) from the 
confluence with Hot Springs Canyon in Township 12 South, Range 20 East, 
northeast quarter of section 36 upstream to the confluence with Pine 
Canyon in Township 12 South, Range 21 East, center of section 20.
    (vii) Note: Map of Unit 3, San Pedro River Subbasin follows.

[[Page 619]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23FE12.003

    (9) Unit 4: Bonita Creek Subbasin, Graham County, Arizona.
    (i) Bonita Creek for approximately 23.8 km (14.8 mi) from the 
confluence with the Gila River in Township 6 South, Range 28 East, 
southeast quarter of section 21 upstream to the confluence with Martinez 
Wash in Township 4 South, Range 27 East, southeast quarter of section 
27.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 4, Bonita Creek Subbasin follows.

[[Page 620]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23FE12.004

    (10) Unit 5: Eagle Creek Subbasin, Graham and Greenlee Counties, 
Arizona.
    (i) Eagle Creek for approximately 26.5 km (16.5 mi) from the 
Freeport-McMoRan diversion dam at Township 4 South, Range 28 East, 
southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of section 23 upstream to the 
confluence of East Eagle Creek in Township 2 North, Range 28 East, 
southwest quarter of section 20.
    This mileage does not include approximately 21.4 km (13.3 mi) of 
Eagle Creek on

[[Page 621]]

lands belonging to Freeport-McMoRan, which is excluded from this 
designation.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 5, Eagle Creek Subbasin follows.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23FE12.005
    

[[Page 622]]


    (11) Unit 6: San Francisco River Subbasin, Greenlee County, Arizona 
and Catron County, New Mexico.
    (i) San Francisco River for approximately 189.5 km (117.7 mi) of the 
San Francisco River extending from the confluence with the Gila River in 
Township 5 South, Range 29 East, southeast quarter of section 21 
upstream to the northern boundary of Township 6 South, Range 19 West, 
section 2. This mileage includes approximately 14.1 km (8.8 mi) of the 
San Francisco River on lands belonging to Freeport-McMoRan, which is 
excluded from this designation.
    (ii) Tularosa River for approximately 30.0 km (18.6 mi) from the 
confluence with the San Francisco River at Township 7 South, Range 19 
West, southwest quarter of section 23 upstream to the town of Cruzville 
at Township 6 South, Range 18 West, southern boundary of section 1.
    (iii) Negrito Creek for approximately 6.8 km (4.2 mi) extending from 
the confluence with the Tularosa River at Township 7 South, Range 18 
West, southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of section 19 upstream 
to the confluence with Cerco Canyon at Township 7 South, Range 18 West, 
west boundary of section 22.
    (iv) Whitewater Creek for approximately 1.9 km (1.2 mi) from the 
confluence with the San Francisco River at Township 11 South, Range 20 
West, Section 27 upstream to the confluence with Little Whitewater Creek 
at Township 11 South, Range 20 West, southeast quarter of section 23.
    (v) Note: Map of Unit 6, San Francisco River Subbasin follows.

[[Page 623]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23FE12.006

    (12) Unit 7: Blue River Subbasin, Greenlee County, Arizona, and 
Catron County, New Mexico.
    (i) Blue River for approximately 81.4 km (50.6 mi) from the 
confluence with the San Francisco River at Township 2 South, Range 31 
East, southeast quarter of section 31 upstream to the confluence of 
Campbell Blue and Dry Blue creeks at Township 7 South, Range 21 West, 
southeast quarter of section 6.

[[Page 624]]

    (ii) Campbell Blue Creek for approximately 12.4 km (7.7 mi) from the 
confluence of Dry Blue and Campbell Blue Creeks at Township 7 South, 
Range 21 West, southeast quarter of section 6 to the confluence with 
Coleman Canyon in Township 4.5 North, Range 31 East, southwest quarter 
of the northeast quarter of section 32.
    (iii) Little Blue Creek for approximately 5.1 km (3.1 mi) from the 
confluence with the Blue River at Township 1 South, Range 31 East, 
center of section 5 upstream to the mouth of a canyon at Township 1 
North, Range 31 East, northeast quarter of section 29.
    (iv) Pace Creek for approximately 1.2 km (0.8 mi) from the 
confluence with Dry Blue Creek at Township 6 South, Range 21 West, 
southwest quarter of section 28 upstream to a barrier falls at Township 
6 South, Range 21 West, northeast quarter of section 29.
    (v) Frieborn Creek for approximately 1.8 km (1.1 mi) from the 
confluence with Dry Blue Creek at Township 7 South, Range 21 West, 
southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of section 5 upstream to an 
unnamed tributary flowing from the south in Township 7 South, Range 21 
West, northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of section 8.
    (vi) Dry Blue Creek for approximately 4.7 km (3.0 mi) from the 
confluence with Campbell Blue Creek at Township 7 South, Range 21 West, 
southeast quarter of Section 6 upstream to the confluence with Pace 
Creek in Township 6 South, Range 21 West, southwest quarter of section 
28.
    (vii) Note: Map of Unit 7, Blue River Subbasin follows.

[[Page 625]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23FE12.007

    (13) Unit 8: Gila River Subbasin, Catron, Grant, and Hidalgo 
Counties, New Mexico.
    (i) Gila River for approximately 153.5 km (95.4 mi) from the 
confluence with Moore Canyon at Township 18 South, Range 21 West, 
southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of section 32 upstream to the 
confluence of the East and West Forks of the Gila River at Township 13 
South, Range 13 West, center of section 8. This mileage does not include 
approximately 11.5 km (7.2 mi) of the Gila River on lands owned by 
Freeport-

[[Page 626]]

McMoRan, which is excluded from this designation.
    (ii) West Fork Gila River for approximately 13.0 km (8.1 mi) from 
the confluence with the East Fork Gila River at Township 13 South, Range 
13 West, center of Section 8 upstream to the confluence with EE Canyon 
at Township 12 South, Range 14 West, east boundary of Section 21.
    (iii) Middle Fork Gila River for approximately 19.1 km (11.9 mi) of 
the Middle Fork Gila River extending from the confluence with West Fork 
Gila River at Township 12 South, Range 14 West, southwest quarter of 
section 25 upstream to the confluence of Brothers West Canyon in 
Township 11 South, Range 14 West, northeast quarter of section 33.
    (iv) East Fork Gila River for approximately 42.1 km (26.2 mi) 
extending from the confluence with West Fork Gila River at Township 13 
South, Range 13 West, center of section 8 upstream to the confluence of 
Beaver and Taylor Creeks in Township 11 South, Range 12 West, northeast 
quarter of section 17.
    (v) Mangas Creek for approximately 1.2 km (0.8 mi) extending from 
Township 17 South, Range 17 West, at the eastern boundary of section 3 
upstream to the confluence with Blacksmith Canyon at Township 17 South, 
Range 17 West, northwest quarter of section 3. This mileage does not 
include approximately 7.9 km (4.9 mi) of Mangas Creek on lands belonging 
to Freeport-McMoRan, which are excluded from the designation.
    (vi) Bear Creek for approximately 29.5 km (18.4 mi) extending from 
Township 15 South, Range 17 West, eastern boundary of section 33 
upstream to the confluence with Sycamore and North Fork Walnut Creek at 
Township 16 South, Range 15 West, eastern boundary of section 15. This 
designation does not include approximately 1.9 km (1.2 mi) of Bear Creek 
on lands belonging to Freeport-McMoRan, which are excluded from this 
designation.
    (vii) Note: Map of Unit 8, Gila River Subbasin follows.

[[Page 627]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23FE12.008

             Rio Grande Silvery Minnow (Hybognathus amarus)

    (1) Designated critical habitat is depicted for Socorro, Valencia, 
Bernalillo, and Sandoval Counties, New Mexico, on the map and as 
described below.
    (2) For each river reach, the upstream and downstream boundaries are 
described below. Critical habitat includes the stream channels within 
the identified river reaches and

[[Page 628]]

areas within these reaches included within the existing levees, or if no 
levees are present, then within a lateral distance of 300 ft (91.4 m) on 
each side of the river width at bankfull stage. Bankfull stage is the 
flow at which water begins to leave the channel and move into the 
floodplain. The bankfull stage is not defined by water, and can be 
determined by visual or physical indicators, including: The top of the 
highest depositional features (e.g., point bars), staining of rocks, 
exposed root hairs, and other features.
    (3) Within these areas the primary constituent elements include, but 
are not limited to, those habitat components that are essential for the 
primary biological needs of foraging, sheltering, and reproduction. 
These elements include the following:
    (i) A hydrologic regime that provides sufficient flowing water with 
low to moderate currents capable of forming and maintaining a diversity 
of aquatic habitats, such as, but not limited to the following: 
Backwaters (a body of water connected to the main channel, but with no 
appreciable flow), shallow side channels, pools (that portion of the 
river that is deep with relatively little velocity compared to the rest 
of the channel), eddies (a pool with water moving opposite to that in 
the river channel), and runs (flowing water in the river channel without 
obstructions) of varying depth and velocity--all of which are necessary 
for each of the particular silvery minnow life-history stages in 
appropriate seasons (e.g., the silvery minnow requires habitat with 
sufficient flows from early spring (March) to early summer (June) to 
trigger spawning, flows in the summer (June) and fall (October) that do 
not increase prolonged periods of low or no flow, and a relatively 
constant winter flow (November through February));
    (ii) The presence of eddies created by debris piles, pools, or 
backwaters, or other refuge habitat (e.g., connected oxbows or braided 
channels) within unimpounded stretches of flowing water of sufficient 
length (i.e., river miles) that provide a variation of habitats with a 
wide range of depth and velocities;
    (iii) Substrates of predominantly sand or silt; and
    (iv) Water of sufficient quality to maintain natural, daily, and 
seasonally variable water temperatures in the approximate range of 
greater than 1 [deg]C (35 [deg]F) and less than 30 [deg]C (85 [deg]F) 
and reduce degraded conditions (e.g., decreased dissolved oxygen, 
increased pH).
    (4) The Pueblo lands of Santo Domingo, Santa Ana, Sandia, and Isleta 
are not designated.
    (5) Designated critical habitat is depicted on the following map for 
the middle Rio Grande, which includes the area from Cochiti Reservoir 
downstream to the utility line crossing the Rio Grande just east of the 
Bosque Well as demarcated on USGS Paraje Well 7.5 minute quadrangle 
(1980), with the Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates of UTM 
Zone 13: 311474 E, 3719722 N (as referenced with the 1927 North American 
Datum (NAD27)), Sandoval, Bernalillo, Valencia, and Socorro Counties, 
New Mexico. The designation also includes the upper section of the 
tributary Jemez River from Jemez Canyon Dam to the upstream boundary of 
Santa Ana Pueblo, Sandoval County. The river reaches in the middle Rio 
Grande include:
    (i) Jemez Canyon Reach--1 mi (1.6 km) of the Jemez River immediately 
downstream of Jemez Canyon Dam to the upstream boundary Santa Ana 
Pueblo;
    (ii) Cochiti Diversion Dam to Angostura Diversion Dam (Cochiti 
Reach)--21 mi (34 km) of river immediately downstream of Cochiti 
Reservoir to the Angostura Diversion Dam;
    (iii) Angostura Diversion Dam to Isleta Diversion Dam (Angostura 
Reach)--38 mi (61 km) of river immediately downstream of the Angostura 
Diversion Dam to the Isleta Diversion Dam;
    (iv) Isleta Diversion Dam to San Acacia Diversion Dam (Isleta 
Reach)--56 mi (90 km) of river immediately downstream of the Isleta 
Diversion Dam to the San Acacia Diversion Dam; and
    (v) San Acacia Diversion Dam to the Elephant Butte Dam (San Acacia 
Reach)--92 mi (147 km) of river immediately downstream of the San Acacia 
Diversion Dam to the utility line crossing the Rio Grande just east of 
the Bosque Well demarcated on USGS Paraje Well 7.5 minute quadrangle 
(1980) with UTM coordinates of UTM Zone 13: 311474 E, 3719722 N.
    (vi) Map Follows:

[[Page 629]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19FE03.000

    (6) This designation does not include the ephemeral or perennial 
irrigation canals and ditches outside of natural stream channels, 
including the low flow conveyance channel that is adjacent to a portion 
of the river reach within the middle Rio Grande (i.e., downstream of the 
southern boundary of Bosque del Apache National Wildlife Refuge to the 
Elephant Butte Dam).

[[Page 630]]

    (7) Lands located within the exterior boundaries of the critical 
habitat designation (i.e., within the existing levees, or if no levees 
are present, then within a lateral distance of 300 ft (91.4 m) on each 
side of the stream width at bankfull discharge) that are not considered 
critical habitat and are therefore excluded by definition, include: 
Developed flood control facilities; existing paved roads; bridges; 
parking lots; dikes; levees; diversion structures; railroad tracks; 
railroad trestles; water diversion and irrigation canals outside of 
natural stream channels; the low flow conveyance channel; active gravel 
pits; cultivated agricultural land; and residential, commercial, and 
industrial developments.

     Ash Meadows Amargosa Pupfish (Cyprinodon nevadensis mionectes)

    Nevada, Nye County: Each of the following springs and outflows plus 
surrounding land areas for a distance of 50 meters (164 feet) from these 
springs and ouflows:
    Fairbanks Spring and its outflow to the boundary between Sections 9 
and 10, T17S, R50E.
    Rogers Spring and its outflows to the boundary between Sections 15 
and 16, T17S, R50E.
    Longstreet Spring and its outflow to the boundary between Sections 
15 and 22, T17S, R50E.
    Three unnamed springs in the northwest corner of Section 23, T17S, 
R50E, and each of their outflows for a distance of 75 meters (246 feet) 
from the spring.
    Crystal Pool and its outflow for a distance of 400 meters (1,312 
feet) from the pool.
    Bradford Springs in Section 11, T18S, R50E, and their outflows for a 
distance of 300 meters (984 feet) from the springs.
    Jack Rabbit Spring and its outflow flowing southwest to the boundary 
between Section 24, T18S, R50E and Section 19, T18S, R51E.
    Big Spring and its outflow to the boundary between Section 19, T18S, 
R51E and Section 24, T18S, R50E.
    Point of Rocks Springs and their entire outflows within Section 7, 
T18S, R51E.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.115
    
    Known constituent elements include warm-water springs and their 
outflows and surrounding land areas that provide vegetation for cover 
and habitat for insects and other invertebrates on which this species 
feeds.

                 Desert Pupfish (Cyprinodon macularius)

    Arizona: Pima County. 1. Quitobaquito Spring, approximately 25 miles 
WNW Lukeville, Arizona in Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument, in T17S 
R8N; and a 100-foot riparian buffer zone around the spring.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.116
    
California: Imperial County.
    1. San Felipe Creek. Approximately 8\1/2\ stream miles and 100 feet 
on either side of San Felipe Creek or the stream channel commencing at 
the State Highway 86 bridge crossing (approximately \1/4\ mile south of

[[Page 631]]

intersection of Hwy. 78 and Hwy. 86) upstream to the eastern boundary of 
Section 31, T12S; R10E; including those areas of the stream channel in: 
T12S; R11E; Section 17, 18, and 19; T12S; R10E; Section 22, 23, 24, 26, 
27, 28, 29, and 32.
    2. Carrizo Wash. Approximately 1\3/4\ stream miles and 100 feet on 
either side of or the stream channel commencing at the confluence of 
Carrizo Wash with San Felipe Creek upstream to the southern boundary of 
N\1/2\ Section 33; T12S; R10E; including those areas of the stream 
channel in T12S; R10E; Section 27, 28, and N\1/2\ Section 33.
    3. Fish Creek Wash. Approximately three-fourths of one stream mile 
and 100 feet on either side of the stream channel from the confluence of 
Fish Creek Wash with San Felipe Creek upstream to the southern boundary 
of N\1/2\ Section 32; T12S; R10E; including those areas of the stream 
channel in T12S; R10E; Section 29 and N\1/2\ Section 32.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.117
    
Constituent elements for all four areas designated as critical habitat 
include clean unpolluted water that is relatively free of exotic 
organisms, especially exotic fishes, in small slow-moving desert streams 
and spring pools with marshy backwater areas.

                Leon Springs Pupfish (Cyprindon bovinus)

    Texas, Pecos County. Diamond Y Spring and its outflow stream, Loen 
Creek; from the head of Diamond Y Spring downstream in Leon Creek to a 
point 1 mile northeast of the Texas Highway 18 crossing, approximately 
10 miles north of Fort Stockton.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.118
    
                Arkansas River Shiner (Notropis girardi)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Clark, Comanche, Meade, 
and Seward Counties, Kansas; and Beaver, Blaine, Caddo, Canadian, 
Cleveland, Custer, Grady, Harper, Hughes, Kingfisher, Logan, Major, 
McClain, McIntosh, Pittsburg, Pontotoc, Pottawatomie, Seminole, Woods 
and Woodward Counties, Oklahoma, on the maps and as described below.
    (2) Critical habitat includes the stream channels within the 
identified stream reaches indicated on the map below, and includes a 
lateral distance of 91.4 m (300 ft) on each side of the stream width at 
bankfull discharge. Bankfull discharge is the flow at which water begins 
to leave the channel and move into the floodplain and generally occurs 
with a frequency of every 1 to 2 years.
    (3) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements include, 
but are not limited to, those habitat components that are essential for 
the primary biological needs of foraging, sheltering, and reproduction. 
These elements include the following--(i) a natural, unregulated 
hydrologic regime complete with episodes of flood and drought or, if 
flows are modified or regulated, a hydrologic regime characterized by 
the duration, magnitude, and frequency of flow events capable of forming 
and maintaining channel and instream habitat necessary for particular 
Arkansas River shiner life-stages in appropriate seasons; (ii) a 
complex, braided channel with pool, riffle (shallow area in a streambed 
causing ripples), run, and backwater components that provide a suitable 
variety of depths and current velocities in appropriate seasons; (iii) a 
suitable

[[Page 632]]

unimpounded stretch of flowing water of sufficient length to allow 
hatching and development of the larvae; (iv) a river bed of 
predominantly sand, with some patches of gravel and cobble; (v) water 
quality characterized by low concentrations of contaminants and natural, 
daily and seasonally variable temperature, turbidity, conductivity, 
dissolved oxygen, and pH; (vi) suitable reaches of aquatic habitat, as 
defined by primary constituent elements (i) through (v) above, and 
adjacent riparian habitat sufficient to support an abundant terrestrial, 
semiaquatic, and aquatic invertebrate food base; and (vii) few or no 
predatory or competitive non-native fish species present.
    (4) Developed areas, such as buildings, roads, bridges, parking 
lots, railroad tracks, other paved areas, and the lands that support 
these features are excluded from this designation. They are not 
designated as critical habitat and Federal actions limited to these 
areas would not trigger a section 7 consultation, unless they affect 
protected or restricted habitat and one or more of the primary 
constituent elements in adjacent critical habitat.
    (5) Kansas (Sixth Principal Meridian (SPM)) and Oklahoma (Indian 
Meridian (IM)): Areas of land and water as follows (physical features 
were identified using USGS 7.5[min] quadrangle maps; river reach 
distances were derived from digital data obtained from USGS National 
Atlas data set for river reaches, roads, and county boundaries.
    (6) Critical habitat units for the Arkansas River shiner are 
described below.
    (i) Unit 1b. Canadian River--approximately 396 km (246 mi), 
extending from the State Highway 33 bridge near Thomas, Oklahoma (IM 
T.15 N., R. 14 W., SW\1/4\ SE\1/4\ Sec. 15) downstream to Indian Nation 
Turnpike bridge northwest of McAlester, Oklahoma (IM T.8N., R.13E., 
SE\1/4\ SW\1/4\ SE\1/4\ Sec. 23).
    (ii) Unit 3. Cimarron River--approximately 460 km (286 mi), 
extending from U.S. Highway 54 bridge in Seward County, Kansas (SPM, T. 
33 S., R. 32 W., Sec. 25) downstream to U.S. Highway 77 bridge in Logan 
County, Oklahoma (IM, T. 17 N., R. 2 W., Sec. 29).
    (iii) Note: Map of critical habitat units follows:

[[Page 633]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13OC05.000

                  Beautiful Shiner (Notropis formosus)

    Arizona, Cochise County. All aquatic habitats of San Bernardino NWR 
in S\1/2\ Sec. 11; Sec. 14; S\1/2\ and NE\1/4\ Sec. 15; T24S, R30E. 
Known constituent elements include small permanent streams with riffles, 
or intermittent creeks with pools and riffles in the Rio Yaqui drainage 
with clean unpolluted water. These waters should be free of introduced 
exotic fishes.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 634]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.119

                Cape Fear Shiner (Notropis mekistocholas)

    (1) North Carolina. Chatham County. Approximately 4.1 river miles of 
the Rocky River from North Carolina State Highway 902 Bridge downstream 
to Chatham County Road 1010 Bridge;
    (2) North Carolina. Chatham and Lee Counties. Approximately 0.5 
river mile of Bear Creek, from Chatham County Road 2156 Bridge 
downstream to the Rocky River, then downstream in the Rocky River 
(approximately 4.2 river miles) to the Deep River, then downstream in 
the Deep River (approximately 2.6 river miles) to a point 0.3 river mile 
below the Moncure, North Carolina, U.S. Geological Survey Gaging 
Station; and
    (3) North Carolina. Randolph and Moore Counties. Approximately 1.5 
river miles of Fork Creek, from a point 0.1 river mile upstream of 
Randolph County Road 2873 Bridge downstream to the Deep River then 
downstream approximately 4.1 river miles of the Deep River in Randolph 
and Moore Counties, North Carolina, to a point 2.5 river miles below 
Moore County Road 1456 Bridge.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.120
    

[[Page 635]]



           Pecos Bluntnose Shiner (Notropis simus pecosensis).

    1. New Mexico: De Baca and Chaves Counties. Pecos River from point 
at the north boundary of NE \1/4\ Sec. 2; T1N; R26E (approximately 10 
mi. (16 km.) south of Fort Sumner) extending downstream approximately 64 
mi. (103 km.) to a point at the south boundary SW \1/4\ Sec. 35; T5S; 
R25E.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.121
    
    2. New Mexico. Chaves and Eddy Counties. Pecos River from the west 
boundary NW \1/4\ Sec. 7; T14S; R27E, extending downstream approximately 
37 mi. (60 km.) to the NW \1/4\ Sec. 18; T17S; R27E (to the U.S. highway 
82 bridge near Artesia).
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.122
    
Constituent elements include clean, permanent water; a main river 
channel habitat with sandy substrate; and a low velocity flow.

                     Topeka Shiner (Notropis topeka)

    (1) Critical habitat is depicted for Calhoun, Carroll, Dallas, 
Greene, Hamilton, Lyon, Osceola, Sac, Webster, and Wright Counties, 
Iowa; Lincoln, Murray, Nobles, Pipestone, and Rock Counties, Minnesota; 
and Madison County, Nebraska, on the maps and as described below.
    (2) Critical habitat includes all stream channels up to the bankfull 
discharge elevation. Additionally, in Iowa and Minnesota, the off-
channel, side-channel, and oxbow pools at elevations at or below the 
bankfull discharge elevation. Bankfull discharge is the flow at which 
water begins to leave the channel and move into the floodplain and 
generally occurs with a frequency of every 1 to 2 years.
    (3) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Topeka shiner consist of:
    (i) Streams most often with permanent flow, but that can become 
intermittent during dry periods;

[[Page 636]]

    (ii) Side-channel pools and oxbows either seasonally connected to a 
stream or maintained by groundwater inputs, at a surface elevation equal 
to or lower than the bank-full discharge stream elevation. The bankfull 
discharge is the flow at which water begins leaving the channel and 
flowing into the floodplain; this level is generally attained every 1 to 
2 years. Bankfull discharge, while a function of the size of the stream, 
is a fairly constant feature related to the formation, maintenance, and 
dimensions of the stream channel;
    (iii) Streams and side-channel pools with water quality necessary 
for unimpaired behavior, growth, and viability of all life stages. (The 
water quality components include--temperature, turbidity, conductivity, 
salinity, dissolved oxygen, pH, chemical contaminants, and other 
chemical characteristics.);
    (iv) Living and spawning areas for adult Topeka shiner with pools or 
runs with water velocities less than 0.5 meters/second (approx. 20 
inches/second) and depths ranging from 0.1-2.0 meters (approx. 4-80 
inches);
    (v) Living areas for juvenile Topeka shiner with water velocities 
less than 0.5 meters/second (approx. 20 inches/second) with depths less 
than 0.25 meters (approx. 10 inches) and moderate amounts of instream 
aquatic cover, such as woody debris, overhanging terrestrial vegetation, 
and aquatic plants;
    (vi) Sand, gravel, cobble, and silt substrates with amounts of fine 
sediment and substrate embeddedness that allow for nest building and 
maintenance of nests and eggs by native Lepomis sunfishes (green 
sunfish, orangespotted sunfish, longear sunfish) and Topeka shiner as 
necessary for reproduction, unimpaired behavior, growth, and viability 
of all life stages;
    (vii) An adequate terrestrial, semiaquatic, and aquatic invertebrate 
food base that allows for unimpaired growth, reproduction, and survival 
of all life stages;
    (viii) A hydrologic regime capable of forming, maintaining, or 
restoring the flow periodicity, channel morphology, fish community 
composition, off-channel habitats, and habitat components described in 
the other primary constituent elements; and
    (ix) Few or no nonnative predatory or nonnative competitive species 
present.

                       Critical Habitat Map Units

    (4) Critical habitat was identified using the Fifth Principal 
Meridian in Iowa and Minnesota; the Sixth Principal Meridian in 
Nebraska; U.S. Geological Survey 30- x 60-minute (1:100,000) quadrangle 
maps; the National Hydrography Dataset (1:100,000) for hydrology; and 
Digital Line Graph (1:2,000,000) for county and State boundaries.
    (5) Unit 1: North Raccoon River Watershed--Calhoun, Carroll, Dallas, 
Greene, Sac and Webster Counties, Iowa.
    (i) Reach 1a. Indian Creek from its confluence with the North 
Raccoon River (T87N, R36W, Sec. 24), upstream through T87N, R36W, Sec. 
29.
    (ii) Reach 1b. Tributary to Indian Creek (Ditch 57), from their 
confluence (T87N, R36W, Sec. 23), upstream to the confluence with the 
outlet creek from Black Hawk Lake (T86N, R36W, Sec. 1).
    (iii) Reach 1c. Outlet Creek from Black Hawk Lake from its 
confluence with Ditch 57 (T86N, R36W, Sec. 1), upstream to lake outlet 
(T87N, R35W, Sec. 35).
    (iv) Reach 2a. Camp Creek from its confluence with the North Raccoon 
River (T86N, R34W, Sec. 7), upstream through T87N, R34W, Sec. 8.
    (v) Reach 2b. West Fork Camp Creek from its confluence with Camp 
Creek (T87N, R34W, Sec. 8), upstream through T88N, R34W, Sec. 32.
    (vi) Reach 3. Prairie Creek from its confluence with the North 
Raccoon River (T86N, R34W, Sec. 16), upstream through T87N, R34W, Sec. 
35.
    (vii) Reach 4. Lake Creek from its confluence with the North Raccoon 
River (T86N, R34W, Sec. 23), upstream through T87N, R33W, Sec. 25.
    (viii) Reach 5. Purgatory Creek from its confluence with the North 
Raccoon River (T84N, R33W, Sec. 11), upstream through T86N, R32W, Sec. 
17.
    (ix) Reach 6a. Cedar Creek from its confluence with the North 
Raccoon River (T85N, R32W, Sec. 33), upstream to the confluence of West 
Cedar Creek and East Cedar Creek (T87N, R31W, Sec. 31).
    (x) Reach 6b. West Cedar Creek from its confluence with East Cedar 
Creek (T87N, R31W, Sec. 31), upstream to a point 2,000 feet west of the 
east section line of T87N, R31W, Sec. 18.
    (xi) Reach 6c. East Cedar Creek from its confluence with West Cedar 
Creek (T87N, R31W, Sec. 31), upstream through T87N, R31W, Sec. 9.
    (xii) Reach 7. Short Creek from its confluence with the North 
Raccoon River (T84N, R31W, Sec. 33), upstream through T84N, R31W, Sec. 
28.
    (xiii) Reach 8. Hardin Creek from its confluence with the North 
Raccoon River (T83N, R30W, Sec. 23), upstream through T85N, R31W, Sec. 
27.
    (xiv) Reach 9a. Buttrick Creek from its confluence with the North 
Raccoon River (T83N, R30W, Sec. 26), upstream to the confluence of West 
Buttrick Creek and East Buttrick Creek (T84N, R30W, Sec. 25).
    (xv) Reach 9b. West Buttrick Creek, from its confluence with East 
Buttrick Creek (T84N, R30W, Sec. 25), upstream through T86N, R30W, Sec. 
3.
    (xvi) Reach 9c. East Buttrick Creek, from its confluence with West 
Buttrick Creek

[[Page 637]]

(T84N, R30W, Sec. 25), upstream through T85N, R29W, Sec. 20.
    (xvii) Reach 10a. Elm Branch from its confluence with the North 
Raccoon River (T81N, R28W, Sec. 28), upstream to its confluence with 
Swan Lake Branch T81N, R28W, Sec. 28.
    (xviii) Reach 10b. Swan Lake Branch from its confluence with Elm 
Branch (T81N, R28W, Sec. 28), upstream through T80N, R28W, Sec. 4.
    (xix) Reach 11. Off-channel and side-channel pools (that meet the 
previously described criteria) adjacent to the North Raccoon River from 
U.S. Highway 6 (T79N, R27W, Sec. 32), upstream to U.S. Highway 20 (T88N, 
R36W, Sec. 24).
    (6) Note: Unit 1 (Map 1) follows.

[[Page 638]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR25MR05.114

    (7) Unit 2: Boone River Watershed--Wright and Hamilton Counties, 
Iowa.
    (i) Reach 12. Eagle Creek from its confluence with the Boone River 
(T89N, R25W, Sec. 6), upstream through T91N, R25W, Sec. 30.

                      Ditch 3 and Ditch 19 Complex

    (ii) Reach 13a. Ditch 3 from its confluence with the Boone River 
(T91N, R26W, Sec. 32), upstream through T91N, R26W, Sec. 30.

[[Page 639]]

    (iii) Reach 13b. Ditch 19 from its confluence with Ditch 3 (T91N, 
R26W, Sec. 31), upstream through T91N, R26W, Sec. 31.
    (8) Note: Unit 2 (Map 2) follows.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR25MR05.115
    
    (9) Unit 3: Rock River Watershed--Lyon and Osceola Counties, Iowa.

                           Rock River Complex

    (i) Reach 14. Rock River from its confluence with Kanaranzi Creek 
(T100N, R45W,

[[Page 640]]

Sec. 28), upstream to the Iowa/Minnesota State border (T100N, R45W, Sec. 
8).
    (ii) Reach 15. Kanaranzi Creek from its confluence with the Rock 
River (T100N, R45W, Sec. 28), upstream to the Iowa/Minnesota State 
border (T100N, R45W, Sec. 11).

                        Little Rock River Complex

    (iii) Reach 16. Little Rock River from State Highway 9 (T100N, R43W, 
Sec. 34), upstream to the Iowa/Minnesota State border (T100N, R42W, Sec. 
7).
    (10) Note: Unit 3 (Map 3) follows.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR25MR05.116
    
    (11) Unit 4: Big Sioux River Watershed--Lincoln, Pipestone and Rock, 
Counties, Minnesota; and Rock River Watershed--Murray, Nobles, Pipestone 
and Rock Counties, Minnesota.

                          Medary Creek Complex

    (i) Reach 1a. Medary Creek from the Minnesota/South Dakota State 
border (T109N, R47W, Sec. 13), upstream through T110N, R46W, Sec. 21.
    (ii) Reach 1b. Unnamed tributary to Medary Creek, from their 
confluence (T109N,

[[Page 641]]

R46W, Sec. 18), upstream through T110N, R46W, Sec. 30.

                         Flandreau Creek Complex

    (iii) Reach 2a. Flandreau Creek from the Minnesota/South Dakota 
State border (T107N, R47W, Sec. 14), upstream through T109N, R45W, Sec. 
31.
    (iv) Reach 2b. Unnamed tributary to Flandreau Creek, from their 
confluence (T108N, R46W, Sec. 11), upstream through T108N, R45W, Sec. 6.
    (v) Reach 2c. East Branch Flandreau Creek from its confluence with 
Flandreau Creek (T108N, R46W, Sec. 14), upstream through T108N, R45W, 
Sec. 4.
    (vi) Reach 2d. Willow Creek from its confluence with Flandreau Creek 
(T107N, R46W, Sec. 6), upstream through T108N, R46W, Sec. 3.

                Split Rock/Pipestone/Beaver Creek Complex

    (vii) Reach 3a. Pipestone Creek from the Minnesota/South Dakota 
State border (T106N, R47W, Sec. 23), upstream through T106N, R46W, Sec. 
1.
    (viii) Reach 3b. Unnamed tributary to Pipestone Creek, from their 
confluence (T106N, R47W, Sec. 24), upstream through T106N, R46W, Sec. 
19.
    (ix) Reach 3c. Unnamed tributary to Pipestone Creek, from the 
Minnesota/South Dakota State border (T105N, R47W, Sec. 2), upstream 
through T105N, R46W, Sec. 1.
    (x) Reach 3d. North Branch Pipestone Creek from its confluence with 
Pipestone Creek (T106N, R46W, Sec. 5), upstream through T107N, R45W, 
Sec. 4.
    (xi) Reach 3e. Unnamed tributary to North Branch Pipestone Creek, 
from their confluence (T107N, R45W, Sec. 4), upstream through T108N, 
R45W, Sec. 23.
    (xii) Reach 3f. Split Rock Creek from the Minnesota/South Dakota 
State border (T103N, R47W, Sec. 2), upstream to Split Rock Lake Outlet 
(T105N, R46W, Sec. 22).
    (xiii) Reach 3g. Unnamed tributary to Split Rock Creek from the 
Minnesota/South Dakota State border (T103N, R47W, Sec. 23), upstream 
through T103N, R46W, Sec. 29.
    (xiv) Reach 3h. Unnamed tributary to Split Rock Creek, from their 
confluence (T103N, R47W, Sec. 2), upstream through T103N, R46W, Sec. 8.
    (xv) Reach 3i. Unnamed tributary to Split Rock Creek, from their 
confluence (T104N, R47W, Sec. 25), upstream through T104N, R46W, Sec. 
19.
    (xvi) Reach 3j. Pipestone Creek from its confluence with Split Rock 
Creek (T104N, R47W, Sec. 23), upstream to the Minnesota/South Dakota 
State border T104N, R47W, Sec. 22.
    (xvii) Reach 3k. Unnamed tributary to Split Rock Creek, from their 
confluence (T104N, R46W, Sec. 6), upstream through T105N, R46W, Sec. 36.
    (xviii) Reach 3l. Split Rock Creek from the headwater of Split Rock 
Lake (T105N, R46W, Sec. 15), upstream through T106N, R46W, Sec. 35.
    (xix) Reach 3m. Unnamed tributary to Split Rock Creek, from their 
confluence (T105N, R46W, Sec. 3), upstream through T105N, R46W, Sec. 2.
    (xx) Reach 3n. Beaver Creek from the Minnesota/South Dakota State 
border (T102N, R47W, Sec. 34), upstream through T104N, R45W, Sec. 20.
    (xxi) Reach 3o. Springwater Creek from the Minnesota/South Dakota 
border (T102N, R47W, Sec. 34), upstream through T102N, R46W, Sec. 6.
    (xxii) Reach 3p. Little Beaver Creek from its confluence with Beaver 
Creek (T102N, R46W, Sec. 12), upstream through T103N, R45W, Sec. 9.
    (xxiii) Reach 3q. Unnamed tributary to Beaver Creek, from their 
confluence (T102N, R46W, Sec. 1), upstream through T103N, R46W, Sec. 35.
    (xxiv) Reach 3r. Unnamed tributary to Beaver Creek, from their 
confluence (T103N, R45W, Sec. 18), upstream through T104N, R46W, Sec. 
36.

                           Rock River Complex

    (xxv) Reach 4a. Rock River from the Minnesota/Iowa State border 
(T101N, R45W, Sec. 36), upstream through T107N, R44W, Sec. 7.
    (xxvi) Reach 4b. Kanaranzi Creek from the Minnesota/Iowa State 
border (T101N, R44W, Sec. 33), upstream through T103N, R42W, Sec. 7).
    (xxvii) Reach 4c. Norwegian Creek from its confluence with Kanaranzi 
Creek (T101N, R44W, Sec. 25), upstream through T101N, R43W, Sec. 21.
    (xxviii) Reach 4d. Unnamed tributary to Norwegian Creek, from their 
confluence (T101N, R44W, Sec. 20), upstream through T101N, R44W, Sec. 
16.
    (xxix) Reach 4e. East Branch Kanaranzi Creek from its confluence 
with Kanaranzi Creek (T102N, R42W, Sec. 5), upstream through T102N, 
R41W, Sec. 5.
    (xxx) Reach 4f. Unnamed tributary to East Branch Kanaranzi Creek, 
from their confluence (T102N, R42W, Sec. 9), upstream through T102N, 
R42W, Sec. 22.
    (xxxi) Reach 4g. Unnamed tributary to East Branch Kanaranzi Creek, 
from their confluence (T102N, R42W, Sec. 5), upstream through T102N, 
R42W, Sec. 5.
    (xxxii) Reach 4h. Unnamed tributary to Kanaranzi Creek, from their 
confluence (T102N, R43W, Sec. 31), upstream through T102N, R43W, Sec. 
27.
    (xxxiii) Reach 4i. Ash Creek from its confluence with the Rock River 
(T101N, R45W, Sec. 24), upstream through T101N, R45W, Sec. 14.

[[Page 642]]

    (xxxiv) Reach 4j. Elk Creek from its confluence with the Rock River 
(T102N, R45W, Sec. 36), upstream through T103N, R43W, Sec. 22.
    (xxxv) Reach 4k. Unnamed tributary to Elk Creek, from their 
confluence (T102N, R44W, Sec. 16), upstream through T102N, R44W, Sec. 9.
    (xxxvi) Reach 4l. Champepadan Creek from its confluence with the 
Rock River (T103N, R44W, Sec. 29), upstream through T104N, R43W, Sec. 
14.
    (xxxvii) Reach 4m. Unnamed tributary to Champepadan Creek, from 
their confluence (T104N, R43W, Sec. 14), upstream through T104N, R43W, 
Sec. 13.
    (xxxviii) Reach 4n. Unnamed tributary to Champepadan Creek, from 
their confluence (T103N, R44W, Sec. 23), upstream through T103N, R44W, 
Sec. 24.
    (xxxix) Reach 4o. Unnamed tributary to Champepadan Creek, from their 
confluence (T103N, R44W, Sec. 23), upstream through T103N, R44W, Sec. 
12.
    (xl) Reach 4p. Unnamed tributary to the Rock River, from their 
confluence (T103N, R44W, Sec. 17), upstream through T104N, R44W, Sec. 
26.
    (xli) Reach 4q. Mound Creek from its confluence with the Rock River 
(T103N, R44W, Sec. 30), upstream through T104N, R45W, Sec. 35.
    (xlii) Reach 4r. Unnamed tributary to the Rock River, from their 
confluence (T103N, R44W, Sec. 8), upstream through T104N, R45W, Sec. 13.
    (xliii) Reach 4s. Unnamed tributary to the Rock River, from their 
confluence (T104N, R44W, Sec. 28), upstream through T104N, R44W, Sec. 
11.
    (xliv) Reach 4t. Unnamed tributary to the Rock River, from their 
confluence (T104N, R44W, Sec. 16), upstream through T104N, R44W, Sec. 
10.
    (xlv) Reach 4u. Poplar Creek from its confluence with the Rock River 
(T104N, R44W, Sec. 5), upstream through T105N, R45W, Sec. 32.
    (xlvi) Reach 4v. Unnamed tributary to Poplar Creek, from their 
confluence (T105N, R45W, Sec. 27), upstream through T105N, R45W, Sec. 9.
    (xlvii) Reach 4w. Chanarambie Creek from its confluence with the 
Rock River (T105N, R44W, Sec. 33), upstream through T105N, R43W, Sec. 8.
    (xlviii) Reach 4x. North Branch Chanarambie Creek from its 
confluence with Chanarambie Creek (T105N, R43W, Sec. 8), upstream 
through T106N, R43W, Sec. 18.
    (xlix) Reach 4y. Unnamed tributary to the Rock River, from their 
confluence (T105N, R44W, Sec. 8), upstream through T106N, R45W, Sec. 36.
    (l) Reach 4z. Unnamed tributary to the Rock River, from their 
confluence (T106N, R44W, Sec. 33), upstream through T106N, R44W, Sec. 
23.
    (li) Reach 4aa. East Branch Rock River from its confluence with the 
Rock River (T106N, R44W, Sec. 18), upstream through T107N, R44W, Sec. 
27.
    (lii) Reach 4bb. Unnamed tributary to East Branch Rock River, from 
their confluence (T107N, R44W, Sec. 34), upstream through T107N, R44W, 
Sec. 35.

                        Little Rock River Complex

    (liii) Reach 5a. Little Rock River from the Minnesota/Iowa State 
border (T101N, R42W, Sec. 35), upstream through T102N, R41W, Sec. 34.
    (liv) Reach 5b. Little Rock Creek from its confluence with the 
Little Rock River (T101N, R42W, Sec. 26), upstream through T102N, R42W, 
Sec. 34.

                            Mud Creek Complex

    (lv) Reach 6a. Mud Creek from the Minnesota/Iowa State border 
(T101N, R46W, Sec. 34), upstream thru T101N, R46W, Sec. 11.
    (lvi) Reach 6b. Unnamed tributary to Mud Creek, from their 
confluence (T101N, R46W, Sec. 22), upstream through T101N, R46W, Sec. 
24.
    (lvii) Reach 6c. Unnamed tributary to Mud Creek, from their 
confluence (T101N, R46W, Sec. 11), upstream through T101N, R46W, Sec. 1.
    (12) Note: Unit 4 (Map 4) follows.

[[Page 643]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR25MR05.117

    (13) Unit 5: Elkhorn River Watershed--Madison County, Nebraska.
    Taylor Creek from its confluence with Union Creek (T22N, R1W, Sec. 
32), upstream through T22N, R2W, Sec. 22.
    (14) Note: Unit 5 (Map 5) follows.

[[Page 644]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR25MR05.118


[[Page 645]]



                  Waccamaw Silverside (Menidia extensa)

    North Carolina, Columbus County. Lake Waccamaw in its entirety to 
mean high water level, and Big Creek from its mouth at Lake Waccamaw 
upstream approximately 0.6 kilometer (0.4 mile) to where the creek is 
crossed by County Road 1947.
    Constituent elements include high quality clear open water, with a 
neutral pH and clean substrate.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.123
    
                 Delta Smelt (Hypomesus transpacificus)

    California--Areas of all water and all submerged lands below 
ordinary high water and the entire water column bounded by and contained 
in Suisun Bay (including the contiguous Grizzly and Honker Bays); the 
length of Montezuma Slough; and the existing contiguous waters contained 
within the Delta, as defined by section 12220, of the State of 
California's Water Code of 1969 (a complex of bays, dead-end sloughs, 
channels typically less than 4 meters deep, marshlands, etc.) as 
follows:
    Bounded by a line beginning at the Carquinez Bridge which crosses 
the Carquinez Strait; thence, northeasterly along the western and 
northern shoreline of Suisun Bay, including Goodyear, Suisun, Cutoff, 
First Mallard (Spring Branch), and Montezuma Sloughs; thence, upstream 
to the intersection of Montezuma Slough with the western boundary of the 
Delta as delineated in section 12220 of the State of California's Water 
Code of 1969; thence, following the boundary and including all 
contiguous water bodies contained within the statutory definition of the 
Delta, to its intersection with the San Joaquin River at its confluence 
with Suisun Bay; thence, westerly along the south shore of Suisun Bay to 
the Carquinez Bridge.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 646]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.124

    Primary Constituent Elements--physical habitat, water, river flow, 
and salinity concentrations required to maintain delta smelt habitat for 
spawning, larval and juvenile transport, rearing, and adult migration.

                        Spikedace (Meda fulgida)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Cochise, Gila, Graham, 
Greenlee, Pinal, and Yavapai Counties, Arizona, and for Catron, Grant, 
and Hidalgo Counties, New Mexico, on the maps below.
    (2) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements (PCE) of 
the physical or

[[Page 647]]

biological features essential to the conservation of spikedace consist 
of six components:
    (i) Habitat to support all egg, larval, juvenile, and adult 
spikedace. This habitat includes perennial flows with a stream depth 
generally less than 1 m (3.3 ft), and with slow to swift flow velocities 
between 5 and 80 cm per second (1.9 and 31.5 in. per second). 
Appropriate stream microhabitat types include glides, runs, riffles, the 
margins of pools and eddies, and backwater components over sand, gravel, 
and cobble substrates with low or moderate amounts of fine sediment and 
substrate embeddedness. Appropriate habitat will have a low gradient of 
less than approximately 1.0 percent, at elevations below 2,100 m (6,890 
ft). Water temperatures should be in the general range of 8.0 to 28.0 
[deg]C (46.4 to 82.4 [deg]F).
    (ii) An abundant aquatic insect food base consisting of mayflies, 
true flies, black flies, caddis flies, stoneflies, and dragonflies.
    (iii) Streams with no or no more than low levels of pollutants.
    (iv) Perennial flows, or interrupted stream courses that are 
periodically dewatered but that serve as connective corridors between 
occupied or seasonally occupied habitat and through which the species 
may move when the habitat is wetted.
    (v) No nonnative aquatic species, or levels of nonnative aquatic 
species that are sufficiently low as to allow persistence of spikedace.
    (vi) Streams with a natural, unregulated flow regime that allows for 
periodic flooding or, if flows are modified or regulated, a flow regime 
that allows for adequate river functions, such as flows capable of 
transporting sediments.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, runways, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule. We have determined that all designated 
areas contain at least one PCE for spikedace.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles along with shapefiles 
generated by the Arizona Land Resource Information Service for land 
ownership, streams, counties, and the Public Land Survey System. 
Information on species locations was derived from databases developed by 
the Arizona Game and Fish Department, the New Mexico Department of Game 
and Fish, and Arizona State University.
    (5) Note: Index map follows:

[[Page 648]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23FE12.009

    (6) Unit 1: Verde River Subbasin, Yavapai County, Arizona.
    (i) Verde River for approximately 170.6 km (105.9 mi), extending 
from the confluence with Fossil Creek in Township 11 North, Range 6 
East, northeast quarter of section 25 upstream to Sullivan Dam in 
Township 17 North, Range 2 West, northwest quarter of section 15. This 
mileage does not include the 1.2 km (0.8 mi) belonging to the Yavapai-
Apache Nation, which is excluded from this

[[Page 649]]

designation. Granite Creek for approximately 3.2 km (2.0 mi), extending 
from the confluence with the Verde River in Township 17 North, Range 2 
West, northeast quarter section 14 upstream to a spring in Township 17 
North, Range 2 West, southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of 
section 13.
    (ii) Oak Creek for approximately 54.3 km (33.7 mi), extending from 
the confluence with the Verde River in Township 15 North, Range 4 East, 
southeast quarter section 20 upstream to the confluence with an unnamed 
tributary from the south in Township 17 North, Range 5 East, southeast 
quarter of the northeast quarter of section 24.
    (iii) Beaver Creek/Wet Beaver Creek for approximately 33.3 km (20.7 
mi), extending from the confluence with the Verde River in Township 14 
North, Range 5 East, southeast quarter of section 30 upstream to the 
confluence with Casner Canyon in Township 15 North, Range 6 East, 
northwest quarter of section 23. This mileage does not include the 0.2 
km (0.1 mi) belonging to the Yavapai-Apache Nation and excluded from 
these designations.
    (iv) West Clear Creek for approximately 10.9 km (6.8. mi), extending 
from the confluence with the Verde River in Township 13 North, Range 5 
East, center section 21, upstream to the confluence with Black Mountain 
Canyon in Township 13 North, Range 6 East, southeast quarter of section 
17.
    (v) Fossil Creek for approximately 22.2 km (13.8 mi) from its 
confluence with the Verde River at Township 11 North, Range 6 East, 
northeast quarter of section 25 upstream to the old Fossil Diversion Dam 
site at Township 12 North, Range 7 East, southeast quarter of section 
14.
    (vi) Note: Map of Unit 1, Verde River Subbasin follows.

[[Page 650]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23FE12.010

    (7) Unit 2: Salt River Subbasin, Gila County, Arizona.
    (i) Tonto Creek for approximately 47.8 km (29.7 mi) extending from 
the confluence with Greenback Creek in Township 5 North, Range 11 East, 
northwest quarter of section 8 upstream to the confluence with Houston 
Creek in Township 9 North, Range 11 East, northeast quarter of section 
18.
    (ii) Greenback Creek for approximately 15.1 km (9.4 mi) from the 
confluence with Tonto Creek in Township 5 North, Range 11

[[Page 651]]

East, northwest quarter of section 8 upstream to Lime Springs in 
Township 6 North, Range 12 East, southwest quarter of section 20.
    (iii) Rye Creek for approximately 2.8 km (1.8 mi) extending from the 
confluence with Tonto Creek in Township 8 North, Range 10 East, 
northeast quarter of section 24 upstream to the confluence with Brady 
Canyon in Township 8 North, Range 10 East, northwest quarter of section 
14.
    (iv) Spring Creek for approximately 27.2 km (16.9 mi) extending from 
the confluence with the Tonto River at Township 10 North, Range 11 East, 
southeast quarter of section 36 upstream to the confluence with 
Sevenmile Canyon at Township 8 North, Range 13 East, northern boundary 
of section 20.
    (v) Rock Creek for approximately 5.8 km (3.6 mi) extending from the 
confluence with Spring Creek at Township 8 North, Range 12 East, 
southeast quarter of section 1 upstream to the confluence with Buzzard 
Roost Canyon at Township 8 North, 12 East, center of section 24.
    (vi) Note: Map of Unit 2, Salt River Subbasin follows.

[[Page 652]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23FE12.011

    (8) Unit 3: San Pedro River Subbasin, Cochise, Graham, and Pinal 
Counties, Arizona.
    (i) Aravaipa Creek for approximately 44.9 km (27.9 mi) extending 
from the confluence with the San Pedro River in Township 7 South, Range 
16 East, center of section 9 upstream to the confluence with Stowe Gulch 
in Township 6 South, Range 19 East, southeast quarter of the northeast 
quarter of section 35. Deer Creek--3.7 km (2.3 mi) of the creek 
extending from the confluence with

[[Page 653]]

Aravaipa Creek at Township 6 South, Range 18 East, section 14 upstream 
to the boundary of the Aravaipa Wilderness at Township 6 South, Range 19 
East, section 18.
    (ii) Turkey Creek--4.3 km (2.7 mi) of the creek extending from the 
confluence with Aravaipa Creek at Township 6 South, Range 19 East, 
section 19 upstream to the confluence with Oak Grove Canyon at Township 
6 South, Range 19 east, section 32.
    (iii) Hot Springs Canyon for approximately 9.3 km (5.8 mi) extending 
from the confluence with Bass Canyon in Township 12 South, Range 20 
East, northeast quarter of section 36 downstream to Township 12 South, 
Range 20 East, southeast quarter of section 32.
    (iv) Redfield Canyon for approximately 6.5 km (4.0 mi) extending 
from Township 11 South, Range 19 East, northeast quarter of section 36 
upstream to the confluence with Sycamore Canyon in Township 11 South, 
Range 20 East, northwest quarter of section 28.
    (v) Bass Canyon for approximately 5.5 km (3.4 mi) from the 
confluence with Hot Springs Canyon in Township 12 South, Range 20 East, 
northeast quarter of section 36 upstream to the confluence with Pine 
Canyon in Township 12 South, Range 21 East, center of section 20.
    (vi) Note: Map of Unit 3, San Pedro River Subbasin follows.

[[Page 654]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23FE12.012

    (9) Unit 4: Bonita Creek Subbasin, Graham County, Arizona.
    (i) Bonita Creek for approximately 23.8 km (14.8 mi) from the 
confluence with the Gila River in Township 6 South, Range 28 East, 
southeast quarter of section 21 upstream to the confluence with Martinez 
Wash in Township 4 South, Range 27 East, southeast quarter of Section 
27.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 4, Bonita Creek Subbasin follows.

[[Page 655]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23FE12.013

    (10) Unit 5: Eagle Creek Subbasin, Graham and Greenlee Counties, 
Arizona.
    (i) Eagle Creek for approximately 26.5 km (16.5 mi) from the 
Freeport-McMoRan diversion dam at Township 4 South, Range 28 East, 
southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of section 23 upstream to the 
confluence of East Eagle Creek in Township 2 North, Range 28 East, 
southwest quarter of section 20. This mileage does not include 
approximately 21.4 km (13.3 mi) of Eagle Creek

[[Page 656]]

on lands belonging to Freeport-McMoRan, which is excluded from this 
designation.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 5, Eagle Creek Subbasin follows.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23FE12.014
    
    (11) Unit 6: San Francisco River Subbasin, Greenlee County, Arizona, 
and Catron County, New Mexico.
    (i) San Francisco River for approximately 166.7 km (103.5 mi) of the 
San Francisco River extending from the confluence with the Gila River in 
Arizona in Township 5

[[Page 657]]

South, Range 29 East, southeast quarter of section 21 upstream to 
Township 6 South, Range 19 West, section 2 in New Mexico. This mileage 
does include approximately 14.1 km (8.8 mi) of the San Francisco River 
on lands belonging to Freeport-McMoRan, which is excluded from this 
designation.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 6, San Francisco River Subbasin follows.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23FE12.015
    

[[Page 658]]


    (12) Unit 7: Blue River Subbasin, Greenlee County, Arizona, and 
Catron County, New Mexico.
    (i) Blue River for approximately 81.4 km (50.6 mi) from the 
confluence with the San Francisco River at Township 2S., Range 31 East, 
southeast quarter of section 31 upstream to the confluence of Campbell 
Blue and Dry Blue Creeks at Township 7 South, Range 21 West, southeast 
quarter of section 6.
    (ii) Campbell Blue Creek for approximately 12.4 km (7.7 mi) from the 
confluence of Dry Blue and Campbell Blue Creeks at Township 7 South, 
Range 21 West, southeast quarter of section 6 to the confluence with 
Coleman Canyon in Township 4.5 North, Range 31 East, southwest quarter 
of the northeast quarter of section 32.
    (iii) Little Blue Creek for approximately 5.1 km (3.1 mi) from the 
confluence with the Blue River at Township 1 South, Range 31 East, 
center Section 5 upstream to the mouth of a canyon at Township 1 North, 
Range 31 East, northeast quarter of section 29.
    (iv) Pace Creek for approximately 1.2 km (0.8 mi) from the 
confluence with Dry Blue Creek at Township 6 South, Range 21 West, 
southwest quarter of Section 28 upstream to a barrier falls at Township 
6 South, Range 21 West, northeast quarter of section 29.
    (v) Frieborn Creek for approximately 1.8 km (1.1 mi) from the 
confluence with Dry Blue Creek at Township 7 South, Range 21 West, 
southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of section 5 upstream to an 
unnamed tributary flowing from the south in Township 7 South, Range 21 
West, northeast quarter of southwest quarter of section 8.
    (vi) Dry Blue Creek for approximately 4.7 km (3.0 mi) from the 
confluence with Campbell Blue Creek at Township 7 South, Range 21 West, 
southeast quarter of Section 6 upstream to the confluence with Pace 
Creek in Township 6 South, Range 21 West, southwest quarter of section 
28.
    (vii) Note: Map of Unit 7, Blue River Subbasin follows.

[[Page 659]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23FE12.016

    (13) Unit 8: Gila River Subbasin, Catron, Grant, and Hidalgo 
Counties, New Mexico.
    (i) Gila River for approximately 153.5 km (95.4 mi) from the 
confluence with Moore Canyon at Township 18 South, Range 21 West, 
southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of section 32 upstream to the 
confluence of the East and West Forks of the Gila River at Township 13 
South, Range 13 West, center of section 8. This mileage does not include 
approximately 11.5 km (7.2 mi) of the Gila River on lands owned by 
Freeport-

[[Page 660]]

McMoRan, which is excluded from this designation.
    (ii) West Fork Gila River for approximately 13.0 km (8.1 mi) from 
the confluence with the East Fork Gila River at Township 13 South, Range 
13 West, center of section 8 upstream to the confluence with EE Canyon 
at Township 12 South, Range 14 West, east boundary of Section 21.
    (iii) Middle Fork Gila River for approximately 12.5 km (7.7 mi) of 
the Middle Fork Gila River extending from the confluence with West Fork 
Gila River at Township 12 South, Range 14 West, southwest quarter of 
section 25 upstream to the confluence of Big Bear Canyon in Township 12 
South, Range 14 West, southwest quarter of section 2.
    (iv) East Fork Gila River for approximately 42.1 km (26.2 mi) 
extending from the confluence with West Fork Gila River at Township 13 
South, Range 13 West, center of section 8 upstream to the confluence of 
Beaver and Taylor Creeks in Township 11 South, Range 12 West, northeast 
quarter of section 17.
    (v) Mangas Creek for approximately 1.2 km (0.8 mi) extending from 
Township 17 South, Range 17 West, at the eastern boundary of section 3 
upstream to the confluence with Blacksmith Canyon at Township 17 South, 
Range 17 West, northwest quarter of section 3. This mileage does not 
include approximately 7.9 km (4.9 mi) of Mangas Creek on lands belonging 
to Freeport-McMoRan, which are excluded from the designation.
    (vi) Note: Map of Unit 8, Gila River Subbasin follows.

[[Page 661]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23FE12.017

         Big Spring Spinedace (Lepidomeda mollispinis pratensis)

    Nevada. Condor Canyon, Lincoln County. Four stream miles of Meadow 
Valley Wash and 50 feet on either side of the stream as it flows through 
the following sections: T. 1 S., R. 68 E., Sections 13, 23, 24, 26, 27, 
and 28.
    Known constituent elements include clean permanent flowing spring-
fed stream with deep pool areas and shallow marshy areas

[[Page 662]]

along the shore and the absence of exotic fishes.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.128
    
             Little Colorado Spinedace (Lepidomeda vittata)

    Arizona:
    1. Coconino County. East Clear Creek; approximately 18 miles of 
stream extending from the confluence with Leonard Canyon (NE \1/4\ Sec. 
11 T14N R12E) upstream to the Blue Ridge Reservoir dam (SE \1/4\ Sec. 33 
T14N R11E), and approximately 13 miles of stream extending from the 
upper end of Blue Ridge Reservoir (east boundary SE \1/4\ Sec. 36 T14N 
R10E) upstream to Potato Lake (NE \1/4\ Sec. 1 T12N R9E).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.129

    2. Navajo County. Chevelon Creek; approximately 8 miles of stream 
extending from the confluence with the Little Colorado River (NW\1/4\ 
Sec. 23 T18N R17E) upstream to Bell Cow Canyon (SE\1/4\ of the SW\1/4\ 
Sec. 11 T17N R17E).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.131

    3. Apache County. Nutrioso Creek; approximately 5 miles of stream 
extending from the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest boundary (north 
boundary Sec. 5 T8N R30E) upstream

[[Page 663]]

to the Nelson Reservoir dam (NE\1/4\ Sec. 29 T8N R30E).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.130

    Constituent elements, for all areas of critical habitat, include 
clean, permanent flowing water, with pools and a fine gravel or silt-mud 
substrate.

              White River Spinedace (Lepidomeda albivallis)

    Nevada, White Pine County. Each of the following springs and 
outflows plus surrounding land areas for a distance of 50 feet from 
these springs and outflows:
    Preston Big Spring and associated outflows within T12N, R61E, NE \1/
4\ Sec. 2.
    Lund Spring and associated outflows within T11N, R62E, NE \1/4\ of 
NE \1/4\ of Sec. 4; T12N, R62E, S \1/2\ of SE \1/4\ Sec. 33.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.132
    
    Nevada, Nye County. Flag Springs and associated outflows plus 
surrounding land areas for a distance of 50 feet from the springs and 
outflows within the following areas: T7N, R62E, E \1/2\ of NE \1/4\ Sec. 
32, SW \1/4\ of NW \1/4\ Sec. 33.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.133
    
    Known constituent elements for all areas of critical habitat include 
consistently high quality and quantity of cool springs and their 
outflows, and surrounding land area that provide vegetation for cover 
and habitat for insects and other invertebrates on which the species 
feeds.

        Hiko White River Springfish (Crenichthys baileyi grandis)

    Nevada, Lincoln County. Each of the following springs and outflows 
plus surrounding land areas for a distance of 50 feet from these springs 
and outflows:
    Hiko Spring and associated outflows within T4S, R60E, SW\1/4\ of 
NE\1/4\ Sec. 14 and NW\1/4\ of SE\1/4\ Sec. 14.

[[Page 664]]

    Crystal Springs and associated outflows within T5S, R60E, all of 
NE\1/4\ of Sec. 10 and NE\1/4\ of SE\1/4\ Sec. 10, SW\1/4\ of NW\1/4\ 
Sec. 11 and NW\1/4\ of SW\1/4\ Sec. 11.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.134
    
    Known constituent elements include warmwater springs and their 
outflows and surrounding land areas that provide vegetation for cover 
and habitat for insects and other invertebrates on which the species 
feeds.

            Railroad Valley Springfish (Crenichthys nevadae)

    1. Nevada, Nye County, Duckwater area. Big Warm Spring and its 
outflow pools, streams, and marshes and a 50 foot riparian zone around 
the spring, outflow pools, streams, and marshes in T13N, R56E, NE\1/4\ 
Sec. 31, SE\1/4\ Sec. 31, NW\1/4\ Sec. 32. Little Warm Spring and its 
outflow pools, streams, and marshes, and a 50-foot riparian zone around 
the spring, outflow pools, streams, and marshes in T12N, R56E, Sec. 5.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.135
    
    1. Nevada, Nye County, Lockes Area. North, Hay Corral, Big, and 
Reynolds Springs and their outflow pools, streams, and marshes, and a 
50-foot riparian zone around the springs, outflow pools, streams, and 
marshes in T8N, R55E, SW\1/4\ Sec. 11, NW\1/4\ Sec. 14, SW\1/4\ Sec. 14, 
SE\1/4\ Sec. 15, NE\1/4\ Sec. 15, SW\1/4\ Sec. 15.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.136
    
    Known constituent elements for all areas of critical habitat of the 
Railroad Valley springfish include clear, unpolluted thermal spring 
waters ranging in temperature from 29[deg] to 36 [deg]C in pools; 
flowing channels; marshy areas with aquatic plants, insects, and 
mollusks.

          White River Springfish (Crenichthys baileyi baileyi)

    Nevada, Lincoln County. Ash Springs and associated outflows plus 
surrounding land areas for a distance of 50 feet from the springs and 
outflows within the following

[[Page 665]]

areas: T6S, R60E, E\1/2\ of E\1/2\ Sec. 1 and T6S, R61E, NW\1/4\ of 
NW\1/4\ Sec. 6.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.137
    
    Known constituent elements include warmwater springs and their 
outflows and surrounding land areas that provide vegetation for cover 
and habitat or insects and other invertebrates on which the species 
feeds.

                Colorado Squawfish (Ptychocheilus lucius)

    Description of areas taken from BLM 1:100,000 maps (available from 
BLM State Offices): Canyon of Lodore, CO 1990; La Sal, UT/CO 1985; 
Rangely, CO 1989; Delta, CO 1989; Grand Junction, CO 1990; Hite 
Crossing, UT 1982; Vernal, UT/CO 1990; Craig, CO 1990; Bluff, UT/CO 
1985; Moab, UT/CO 1985; Hanksville, UT 1982; San Rafael Desert, UT 1985; 
Huntington, UT 1982; Price, UT 1989; Farmington, NM 1991; Navajo 
Mountain, UT/AZ 1982. The 100-year flood plain for many areas is 
detailed in Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) published by and available 
through the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). In areas where a 
FIRM is not available, the presence of alluvium soils or known high 
water marks can be used to determine the extent of the flood plain. Only 
areas of flood plain containing constituent elements are considered 
critical habitat.
    Colorado: Moffat County. The Yampa River and its 100-year flood 
plain from the State Highway 394 bridge in T.6N., R.91W., sec. 1 (6th 
Principal Meridian) to the confluence with the Green River in T.7N., 
R.103W., sec. 28 (6th Principal Meridian).
    Utah: Uintah, Carbon, Grand, Emery, Wayne, and San Juan Counties; 
and Colorado: Moffat County. The Green River and its 100-year flood 
plain from the confluence with the Yampa River in T.7N., R.103W., sec. 
28 (6th Principal Meridian) to the confluence with the Colorado River in 
T.30S., R.19E., sec. 7 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Colorado: Rio Blanco County; and Utah: Uintah County. The White 
River and its 100-year flood plain from Rio Blanco Lake Dam in T.1N., 
R.96W., sec. 6 (6th Principal Meridian) to the confluence with the Green 
River in T.9S., R.20E., sec. 4 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Colorado: Delta and Mesa Counties. The Gunnison River and its 100-
year flood plain from the confluence with the Uncompahgre River in 
T.15S., R.96W., sec. 11 (6th Principal Meridian) to the confluence with 
the Colorado River in T.1S., R.1W., sec. 22 (Ute Meridian).
    Colorado: Mesa and Garfield Counties; and Utah: Grand, San Juan, 
Wayne, and Garfield Counties. The Colorado River and its 100-year flood 
plain from the Colorado River Bridge at exit 90 north off Interstate 70 
in T.6S., R.93W., sec. 16 (6th Principal Meridian) to North Wash 
including the Dirty Devil arm of Lake Powell up to the full pool 
elevation in T.33S., R.14E., sec. 29 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    New Mexico: San Juan County; and Utah: San Juan County. The San Juan 
River and its 100-year flood plain from the State Route 371 Bridge in 
T.29N., R.13W., sec. 17 (New Mexico Meridian) to Neskahai Canyon in the 
San Juan arm of Lake Powell in T.41S., R.11E., sec. 26 (Salt Lake 
Meridian) up to the full pool elevation.
    Known constituent elements include water, physical habitat, and 
biological environment as required for each particular life stage for 
each species.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.138

               Alabama sturgeon (Scaphirhynchus suttkusi)

    (1) Critical habitat unit is depicted for Baldwin, Monroe, Wilcox, 
Clarke, Dallas, Lowndes, Autauga, Bibb, and Perry Counties, Alabama, on 
the map below.

[[Page 666]]

    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Alabama sturgeon are:
    (i) A flow regime (i.e., the magnitude, frequency, duration, 
seasonality of discharge over time) necessary to maintain all life 
stages of the species in the riverine environment, including migration, 
breeding site selection, resting, larval development, and protection of 
cool water refuges (i.e., tributaries).
    (ii) River channel with stable sand and gravel river bottoms, and 
bedrock walls, including associated mussel beds.
    (iii) Limestone outcrops and cut limestone banks, large gravel or 
cobble such as that found around channel training devices, and bedrock 
channel walls that provide riverine spawning sites with substrates 
suitable for embryo deposition and development.
    (iv) Long sections of free-flowing water to allow spawning 
migrations and development of embryos and larvae.
    (v) Water temperature not exceeding 32 [deg]Celsius (90 
[deg]Fahrenheit); dissolved oxygen levels not less than 5 milligrams per 
liter (mg/L) (5 parts per million (ppm)), except under extreme 
conditions due to natural causes or downstream of existing hydroelectric 
impoundments, where it can range from 5 mg/L to 4 mg/L (5 ppm to 4 ppm); 
and pH within the range of 6.0 to 8.5.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, docks, dams, runways, roads, and other paved 
areas) and the land or waterway on which they are located existing 
within the legal boundaries on the effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map unit. Data layers defining the map unit 
were created on a base of USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles, and the critical 
habitat unit was then mapped using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) 
coordinates.
    (5) Unit: Alabama and Cahaba Rivers; Baldwin, Monroe, Wilcox, 
Clarke, Dallas, Lowndes, Autauga, Perry, and Bibb Counties, Alabama.
    (i) The unit encompasses 524 km (326 mi) of river channel. The 
portion of river channel in the Alabama River extends 394 km (245 mi) 
from its confluence with the Tombigbee River, Baldwin and Clarke 
Counties, Alabama, upstream to R.F. Henry Lock and Dam, Autauga and 
Lowndes Counties, Alabama; and the portion of river channel in the 
Cahaba River extends 130 km (81 mi) from its confluence with the Alabama 
River, Dallas County, Alabama, upstream to U.S. Highway 82, Bibb County, 
Alabama.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit, Critical Habitat for Alabama Sturgeon 
(Scaphirhynchus suttkusi): Alabama and Cahaba Rivers, follows:

[[Page 667]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02JN09.011

              Gulf Sturgeon (Acipenser oxyrinchus desotoi)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Louisiana, Mississippi, 
Alabama, and Florida on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements essential for the conservation 
of Gulf sturgeon are those habitat components that support feeding, 
resting, and sheltering, reproduction, migration, and physical features 
necessary for maintaining the natural processes

[[Page 668]]

that support these habitat components. The primary constituent elements 
include:
    (i) Abundant prey items within riverine habitats for larval and 
juvenile life stages, and within estuarine and marine habitats and 
substrates for juvenile, subadult, and adult life stages;
    (ii) Riverine spawning sites with substrates suitable for egg 
deposition and development, such as limestone outcrops and cut limestone 
banks, bedrock, large gravel or cobble beds, marl, soapstone or hard 
clay;
    (iii) Riverine aggregation areas, also referred to as resting, 
holding, and staging areas, used by adult, subadult, and/or juveniles, 
generally, but not always, located in holes below normal riverbed 
depths, believed necessary for minimizing energy expenditures during 
fresh water residency and possibly for osmoregulatory functions;
    (iv) A flow regime (i.e,. the magnitude, frequency, duration, 
seasonality, and rate-of-change of fresh water discharge over time) 
necessary for normal behavior, growth, and survival of all life stages 
in the riverine environment, including migration, breeding site 
selection, courtship, egg fertilization, resting, and staging; and 
necessary for maintaining spawning sites in suitable condition for egg 
attachment, egg sheltering, resting, and larvae staging;
    (v) Water quality, including temperature, salinity, pH, hardness, 
turbidity, oxygen content, and other chemical characteristics, necessary 
for normal behavior, growth, and viability of all life stages;
    (vi) Sediment quality, including texture and other chemical 
characteristics, necessary for normal behavior, growth, and viability of 
all life stages; and
    (vii) Safe and unobstructed migratory pathways necessary for passage 
within and between riverine, estuarine, and marine habitats (e.g., a 
river unobstructed by any permanent structure, or a dammed river that 
still allows for passage).
    (3) Gulf sturgeon is under the joint jurisdiction of the U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service (FWS) and National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS). 
The FWS will maintain primary responsibility for recovery actions and 
NMFS will assist in and continue to fund recovery actions pertaining to 
estuarine and marine habitats. In riverine units, the FWS will be 
responsible for all consultations regarding Gulf sturgeon and critical 
habitat. In estuarine units, we will divide responsibility based on the 
action agency involved. The FWS will consult with the Department of 
Transportation, the Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Coast 
Guard, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. NMFS will consult 
with the Department of Defense, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Minerals 
Management Service and any other Federal agencies not mentioned here 
explicitly. In marine units, NMFS will be responsible for all 
consultations regarding Gulf sturgeon and critical habitat. Any Federal 
projects that extend into the jurisdiction of both the Services will be 
consulted on by the FWS with internal coordination with NMFS. Each 
agency will conduct its own intra-agency consultations as necessary.
    (4) The textual unit descriptions below are the definitive source 
for determining the critical habitat boundaries. General location maps 
by unit are provided at the end of each unit description and are 
provided for general guidance purposes only, and not as a definitive 
source for determining critical habitat boundaries.
    (5) Unit 1: Pearl River System in St. Tammany and Washington 
Parishes in Louisiana and Walthall, Hancock, Pearl River, Marion, 
Lawrence, Simpson, Copiah, Hinds, Rankin, and Pike Counties in 
Mississippi.
    (i) Unit 1 includes the Pearl River main stem from the spillway of 
the Ross Barnett Dam, Hinds and Rankin Counties, Mississippi, downstream 
to where the main stem river drainage discharges at its mouth joining 
Lake Borgne, Little Lake, or The Rigolets in Hancock County, 
Mississippi, and St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana. It includes the main 
stems of the East Pearl River, West Pearl River, West Middle River, 
Holmes Bayou, Wilson Slough, downstream to where these main stem river 
drainages discharge at the mouths of Lake Borgne, Little Lake, or The 
Rigolets. Unit 1 also includes the Bogue Chitto River main stem, a 
tributary of the Pearl River, from Mississippi State Highway 570, Pike 
County, Mississippi, downstream to its confluence with the West Pearl 
River, St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana. The lateral extent of Unit 1 is 
the ordinary high water line on each bank of the associated rivers and 
shorelines.
    (ii) Maps of Unit 1 follow:

[[Page 669]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.000


[[Page 670]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.001


[[Page 671]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.002

    (6) Unit 2: Pascagoula River System in Forrest, Perry, Greene, 
George, Jackson, Clarke, Jones, and Wayne Counties, Mississippi.
    (i) Unit 2 includes all of the Pascagoula River main stem and its 
distributaries, portions of the Bouie, Leaf, and Chickasawhay 
tributaries, and all of the Big Black Creek tributary. It includes the 
Bouie River main stem beginning on the southern-most road crossing of 
Interstate 59, Forrest County, Mississippi, downstream to its confluence 
with the Leaf River, Forrest County, Mississippi. The Leaf River main 
stem beginning from Mississippi State Highway 588, Jones County, 
Mississippi, downstream to its confluence with the Chickasawhay River, 
George County, Mississippi is included. The main stem of the 
Chickasawhay River from the mouth of Oaky Creek, Clarke County, 
Mississippi, downstream to its confluence with the Leaf River, George 
County, Mississippi is included. Unit 2 also includes Big Black Creek 
main stem from its confluence with Black and Red Creeks, Jackson County, 
Mississippi, to its confluence with the Pascagoula River, Jackson 
County, Mississippi. All of the main stem of the Pascagoula River from 
its confluence with the Leaf and Chickasawhay Rivers, George County, 
Mississippi, to the discharge of the East and West Pascagoula Rivers 
into Pascagoula Bay, Jackson County, Mississippi, is included. The 
lateral extent of Unit 2 is the ordinary high water line on each bank of 
the associated rivers and shorelines.
    (ii) Major shipping channels in this unit are excluded under section 
4(b)(2) of the Act.
    (iii) Maps of Unit 2 follow:

[[Page 672]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.003


[[Page 673]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.004


[[Page 674]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.005


[[Page 675]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.006


[[Page 676]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.007


[[Page 677]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.008

    (7) Unit 3: Escambia River System in Santa Rosa and Escambia 
Counties, Florida and Escambia, Conecuh, and Covington Counties, 
Alabama.
    (i) Unit 3 includes the Conecuh River main stem beginning just 
downstream of the spillway of Point A Dam, Covington County, Alabama, 
downstream to the Florida State line, where its name changes to the 
Escambia River, Escambia County, Alabama, and Escambia and Santa Rosa 
Counties, Florida. It includes the entire main stem of the Escambia 
River downstream to its discharge into Escambia Bay and Macky Bay, 
Escambia and Santa Rosa Counties, Florida. All of the distributaries of 
the Escambia River including White River, Little White River, Simpson 
River, and Dead River, Santa Rosa County, Florida are included. The 
Sepulga River main stem from Alabama County Road 42, Conecuh and 
Escambia Counties, Alabama, downstream to its confluence with the 
Conecuh River, Escambia County, Alabama, is also included. The lateral 
extent of Unit 3 is the ordinary high water line on each bank of the 
associated lakes, rivers, and shorelines.
    (ii) Maps of Unit 3 follow:

[[Page 678]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.009


[[Page 679]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.010


[[Page 680]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.011

    (8) Unit 4: Yellow River System in Santa Rosa and Okaloosa Counties, 
Florida and Covington County, Alabama.
    (i) Unit 4 includes the Yellow River main stem from Alabama State 
Highway 55, Covington County, Alabama, downstream to its discharge at 
Blackwater Bay, Santa Rosa County, Florida. All Yellow River 
distributaries (including Weaver River and Skim Lake) discharging into 
Blackwater Bay are included. The Shoal River main stem, a Yellow River 
tributary, from Florida Highway 85, Okaloosa County, Florida, to its 
confluence with the Yellow River, is included. The Blackwater River from 
its confluence with Big Coldwater Creek, Santa Rosa County, Florida, 
downstream to its discharge into Blackwater Bay is included. Wright 
Basin and Cooper Basin, Santa Rosa County, on the Blackwater River are 
included. The lateral extent of Unit 4 is the ordinary high water line 
on each bank of the associated lakes, rivers, and shorelines.
    (ii) Maps of Unit 4 follow:

[[Page 681]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.012


[[Page 682]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.013


[[Page 683]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.014


[[Page 684]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.015


[[Page 685]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.016

    (9) Unit 5: Choctawhatchee River System in Holmes, Washington, and 
Walton Counties, Florida and Dale, Coffee, Geneva, and Houston Counties, 
Alabama.
    (i) Unit 5 includes the Choctawhatchee River main stem from its 
confluence with the west and east fork of the Choctawhatchee River, Dale 
County, Alabama, downstream to its discharge at Choctawhatchee Bay, 
Walton County, Florida. The distributaries discharging into 
Choctawhatchee Bay known as Mitchell River, Indian River, Cypress River, 
and Bells Leg are included. The Boynton Cutoff, Washington County, 
Florida, which joins the Choctawhatchee River main stem, and Holmes 
Creek, Washington County, Florida, are included. The section of Holmes 
Creek from Boynton Cutoff to the mouth of Holmes Creek, Washington 
County, Florida, is included. The Pea River main stem, a Choctawhatchee 
River tributary, from the Elba Dam, Coffee County, Alabama, to its 
confluence with the Choctawhatchee River, Geneva County, Alabama, is 
included. The lateral extent of Unit 5 is the ordinary high water line 
on each bank of the associated rivers and shorelines.
    (ii) Maps of Unit 5 follow:

[[Page 686]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.017


[[Page 687]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.018


[[Page 688]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.019


[[Page 689]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.020

    (10) Unit 6: Apalachicola River System in Franklin, Gulf, Liberty, 
Calhoun, Jackson, and Gadsen Counties, Florida.
    (i) Unit 6 includes the Apalachicola River mainstem, beginning from 
the Jim Woodruff Lock and Dam, Gadsden and Jackson Counties, Florida, 
downstream to its discharge at East Bay or Apalachicola Bay, Franklin 
County, Florida. All Apalachicola River distributaries, including the 
East River, Little St. Marks River, St. Marks River, Franklin County, 
Florida, to their discharge into East Bay and/or Apalachicola Bay are 
included. The entire main stem of the Brothers River, Franklin and Gulf 
Counties, Florida, a tributary of the Apalachicola River, is included. 
The lateral extent of Unit 6 is the ordinary high water line on each 
bank of the associated rivers and shorelines.
    (ii) Maps of Unit 6 follow:

[[Page 690]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.021


[[Page 691]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.022

    (11) Unit 7: Suwannee River System in Hamilton, Suwannee, Madison, 
Lafayette, Gilchrist, Levy, Dixie, and Columbia Counties, Florida.
    (i) Unit 7 includes the Suwannee River main stem, beginning from its 
confluence with Long Branch Creek, Hamilton County, Florida, downstream 
to the mouth of the Suwannee River. It includes all the Suwannee River 
distributaries, including the East Pass, West Pass, Wadley Pass, and 
Alligator Pass, Dixie and Levy Counties, Florida, to their discharge 
into the Suwannee Sound or the Gulf of Mexico. The Withlacoochee River 
main stem from Florida State Road 6, Madison and Hamilton Counties, 
Florida, to its confluence with the Suwannee River is included. The 
lateral extent of Unit 7 is the ordinary high water line on each bank of 
the associated rivers and shorelines.
    (ii) Maps of Unit 7 follow:

[[Page 692]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.023


[[Page 693]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.024


[[Page 694]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.025


[[Page 695]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.026

    (12) Unit 8: Lake Pontchartrain, Lake St. Catherine, The Rigolets, 
Little Lake, Lake Borgne, and Mississippi Sound in Jefferson, Orleans, 
St. Tammany, and St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana, Hancock, Jackson, and 
Harrison Counties in Mississippi, and in Mobile County, Alabama.
    (i) Unit 8 encompasses Lake Pontchartrain east of the Lake 
Pontchartrain Causeway, all of Little Lake, The Rigolets, Lake St. 
Catherine, Lake Borgne, including Heron Bay, and the Mississippi Sound. 
Critical habitat follows the shorelines around the perimeters of each 
included lake. The Mississippi Sound includes adjacent open bays 
including Pascagoula Bay, Point aux Chenes Bay, Grand Bay, Sandy Bay, 
and barrier island passes, including Ship Island Pass, Dog Keys Pass, 
Horn Island Pass, and Petit Bois Pass. The northern boundary of the 
Mississippi Sound is the shorelines of the mainland between Heron Bay 
Point, Mississippi and Point aux Pins, Alabama. Critical habitat 
excludes St. Louis Bay, north of the railroad bridge across its mouth; 
Biloxi Bay, north of the U.S. Highway 90 bridge; and Back Bay of Biloxi. 
The southern boundary follows along the broken shoreline of Lake Borgne 
created by low swampy islands from Malheureux Point to Isle au Pitre. 
From the northeast point of Isle au Pitre, the boundary continues in a 
straight north-northeast line to the point 1 nautical mile (nm) (1.9 
kilometers (km)) seaward of the western most extremity of Cat Island 
(30[deg]13[min] N, 89[deg]10[min] W). The southern boundary continues 1 
nm (1.9 km) offshore of the barrier islands and offshore of the 72 
COLREGS lines at barrier island passes (defined at 33 CFR 80.815 (c), 
(d) and (e)) to the eastern boundary. Between Cat Island and Ship Island 
there is no 72 COLREGS line. We therefore, have defined that section of 
the southern boundary as 1 nm (1.9 km) offshore of a straight line drawn 
from the southern tip of Cat Island to the western tip of Ship Island. 
The eastern boundary is the line of longitude 88[deg]18.8[min] W from 
its intersection with the shore (Point

[[Page 696]]

aux Pins) to its intersection with the southern boundary. The lateral 
extent of Unit 8 is the mean (average) high water (MHW) line on each 
shoreline of the included water bodies or the entrance to rivers, 
bayous, and creeks.
    (ii) Major shipping channels in this unit, as identified on standard 
navigation charts and marked by buoys, are excluded under section 
4(b)(2) of the Act.
    (iii) Maps of Unit 8 follow:

[[Page 697]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.027


[[Page 698]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.028


[[Page 699]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.029


[[Page 700]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.030

    (13) Unit 9: Pensacola Bay System in Escambia and Santa Rosa 
Counties, Florida.
    (i) Unit 9 includes Pensacola Bay and its adjacent main bays and 
coves. These include Big Lagoon, Escambia Bay, East Bay, Blackwater Bay, 
Bayou Grande, Macky Bay, Saultsmar Cove, Bass Hole Cove, and Catfish 
Basin. All other bays, bayous, creeks, and rivers are excluded at their 
mouths. The western boundary is the Florida State Highway 292 Bridge 
crossing Big Lagoon to Perdido Key. The southern boundary is the 72 
COLREGS line between Perdido Key and Santa Rosa Island (defined at 33 
CFR 80.810 (g)). The eastern boundary is the Florida State Highway 399 
Bridge at Gulf Breeze, Florida. The lateral extent of Unit 9 is the MHW 
line on each included bay's shoreline.
    (ii) Major shipping channels in this unit, as identified on standard 
navigation charts and marked by buoys, are excluded under section 
4(b)(2) of the Act.
    (iii) A Map of Unit 9 follows:

[[Page 701]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.031

    (14) Unit 10: Santa Rosa Sound in Escambia, Santa Rosa, and Okaloosa 
Counties, Florida.
    (i) Unit 10 includes the Santa Rosa Sound, bounded on the west by 
the Florida State Highway 399 bridge in Gulf Breeze, Florida. The 
eastern boundary is the U.S. Highway 98

[[Page 702]]

bridge in Fort Walton Beach, Florida. The northern and southern 
boundaries of Unit 10 are formed by the shorelines to the MHW line or by 
the entrance to rivers, bayous, and creeks.
    (ii) A Map of Unit 10 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.032
    

[[Page 703]]


    (15) Unit 11: Florida Nearshore Gulf of Mexico Unit in Escambia, 
Santa Rosa, Okaloosa, Walton, Bay, and Gulf Counties in Florida.
    (i) Unit 11 includes a portion of the Gulf of Mexico as defined by 
the following boundaries. The western boundary is the line of longitude 
87[deg]20.0[min]W (approximately 1 nm (1.9 km) west of Pensacola Pass) 
from its intersection with the shore to its intersection with the 
southern boundary. The northern boundary is the MHW of the mainland 
shoreline and the 72 COLREGS lines at passes as defined at 30 CFR 80.810 
(a-g). The southern boundary is 1 nm (1.9 km) offshore of the northern 
boundary. The eastern boundary is the line of longitude 
85[deg]17.0[min]W from its intersection with the shore (near Money Bayou 
between Cape San Blas and Indian Peninsula) to its intersection with the 
southern boundary.
    (ii) A Map of Unit 11 follows:

[[Page 704]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.033

    (16) Unit 12: Choctawhatchee Bay in Okaloosa and Walton Counties, 
Florida.
    (i) Unit 12 includes the main body of Choctawhatchee Bay, Hogtown 
Bayou, Jolly Bay, Bunker Cove, and Grassy Cove. All other bayous, 
creeks, rivers are excluded at their mouths/entrances. The western 
boundary is the U.S. Highway 98 bridge at Fort

[[Page 705]]

Walton Beach, Florida. The southern boundary is the 72 COLREGS line 
across East (Destin) Pass as defined at 33 CFR 80.810 (f). The lateral 
extent of Unit 12 is the MHW line on each shoreline of the included 
water bodies.
    (ii) A Map of Unit 12 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.034
    

[[Page 706]]


    (17) Unit 13: Apalachicola Bay in Gulf and Franklin County, Florida.
    (i) Unit 13 includes the main body of Apalachicola Bay and its 
adjacent sounds, bays, and the nearshore waters of the Gulf of Mexico. 
These consist of St. Vincent Sound, including Indian Lagoon; 
Apalachicola Bay including Horseshoe Cove and All Tides Cove; East Bay 
including Little Bay and Big Bay; and St George Sound, including 
Rattlesnake Cove and East Cove. Barrier Island passes (Indian Pass, West 
Pass, and East Pass) are also included. Sike's cut is excluded from the 
lighted buoys on the Gulf of Mexico side to the day boards on the bay 
side. The southern boundary includes water extending into the Gulf of 
Mexico 1 nm (1.9 km) from the MHW line of the barrier islands and from 
72 COLREGS lines between the barrier islands (defined at 33 CFR 80.805 
(e)-(h)). The western boundary is the line of longitude 85[deg]17.0[min] 
W from its intersection with the shore (near Money Bayou between Cape 
San Blas and Indian Peninsula) to its intersection with the southern 
boundary. The eastern boundary is formed by a straight line drawn from 
the shoreline of Lanark Village at 29[deg]53.1[min] N, 84[deg]35.0[min] 
W to a point that is 1 nm (1.9 km) offshore from the northeastern 
extremity of Dog Island at 29[deg]49.6[min] N, 84[deg]33.2[min] W. The 
lateral extent of Unit 13 is the MHW line on each shoreline of the 
included water bodies or the entrance of excluded rivers, bayous, and 
creeks.
    (ii) A Map of Unit 13 follows:

[[Page 707]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.035

    (18) Unit 14: Suwannee Sound in Dixie and Levy Counties, Florida.
    (i) Unit 14 includes Suwannee Sound and a portion of adjacent Gulf 
of Mexico waters extending 9 nm from shore (16.7 km) out to the State 
territorial water boundary. Its northern boundary is formed by a 
straight line from the northern tip of Big Pine Island (at

[[Page 708]]

approximately 29[deg]23[min] N, 83[deg]12[min] W) to the Federal-State 
boundary at 29[deg]17[min] N, 83[deg]21[min] W. The southern boundary is 
formed by a straight line from the southern tip of Richards Island (at 
approximately 83[deg]04[min] W, 29[deg]11[min] N) to the Federal-State 
boundary at 83[deg]15[min] W, 29[deg]04[min] N. The lateral extent of 
Unit 14 is the MHW line along the shorelines and the mouths of the 
Suwannee River (East and West Pass), its distributaries, and other 
rivers, creeks, or water bodies.
    (ii) A Map of Unit 14 follows:

[[Page 709]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.036

    (19)(i) The river reaches within Units 1 to 7 as critical habitat 
lie within the ordinary high water line. As defined in 33 CFR 32.911, 
the ordinary high water line on non-tidal rivers is the line on the 
shore established by the fluctuations of water and indicated by physical 
characteristics such as a clear, natural line impressed on the bank; 
shelving;

[[Page 710]]

changes in the character of soil; destruction of terrestrial vegetation; 
the presence of litter and debris; or other appropriate means that 
consider the characteristics of the surrounding areas.
    (ii) The downstream limit of the riverine units is the mouth of each 
river. The mouth is defined as rkm 0 (rmi 0). Although the interface of 
fresh and saltwater, referred to as the saltwater wedge, occurs within 
the lower-most reach of a river, for ease in delineating critical 
habitat units, we are defining the boundary between the riverine and 
estuarine units as rkm 0 (rmi 0).
    (iii) Regulatory jurisdiction in coastal areas extends to the line 
on the shore reached by the plane of the mean (average) high water (MHW) 
(33 CFR 329.12(a)(2)). All bays and estuaries within Units 8 to 14 
therefore, lie below the MHW lines. Where precise determination of the 
actual location becomes necessary, it must be established by survey with 
reference to the available tidal datum, preferably averaged over a 
period of 18.6 years. Less precise methods, such as observation of the 
``apparent shoreline'' which is determined by reference to physical 
markings, lines of vegetation, may be used only where an estimate is 
needed of the line reached by the mean high water.
    (iv) The term 72 COLREGS is defined as demarcation lines which 
delineate those waters upon which mariners shall comply with the 
International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea, 1972 and 
those waters upon which mariners shall comply with the Inland Navigation 
Rules (33 CFR 80.01). The waters inside of these lines are Inland Rules 
waters and the waters outside the lines are COLREGS waters. These lines 
are defined in 33 CFR 80, and have been used for identification purposes 
to delineate boundary lines of the estuarine and marine habitat Units 8, 
9, 11, and 12.
    (20) Critical habitat does not include existing developed sites such 
as dams, piers, marinas, bridges, boat ramps, exposed oil and gas 
pipelines, oil rigs, and similar structures or designated public 
swimming areas.

   White Sturgeon (Acipenser transmontanus); Kootenai River Population

    (1) Critical habitat is designated in Idaho, Boundary County, on the 
Kootenai River from river mile (RM) 141.4 (river kilometer (RKM) 228) to 
RM 159.7 (RKM 257), as indicated on the map in paragraph (3) of this 
entry, from ordinary high-water mark to opposite bank ordinary high-
water mark as defined in 33 CFR 329.11.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Kootenai River population of the white sturgeon are:
    (i) A flow regime, during the spawning season of May through June, 
that approximates natural variable conditions and is capable of 
producing depths of 23 feet (ft) (7 meters (m)) or greater when natural 
conditions (for example, weather patterns, water year) allow. The depths 
must occur at multiple sites throughout, but not uniformly within, the 
Kootenai River designated critical habitat.
    (ii) A flow regime, during the spawning season of May through June, 
that approximates natural variable conditions and is capable of 
producing mean water column velocities of 3.3 feet per second (ft/s) 
(1.0 meters per second (m/s)) or greater when natural conditions (for 
example, weather patterns, water year) allow. The velocities must occur 
at multiple sites throughout, but not uniformly within, the Kootenai 
River designated critical habitat.
    (iii) During the spawning season of May through June, water 
temperatures between 47.3 and 53.6 degrees Fahrenheit ([deg]F) (8.5 and 
12 degrees Celsius ([deg]C)), with no more than a 3.6 [deg]F (2.1 
[deg]C) fluctuation in temperature within a 24-hour period, as measured 
at Bonners Ferry.
    (iv) Submerged rocky substrates in approximately 5 continuous river 
miles (8 river kilometers) to provide for natural free embryo 
redistribution behavior and downstream movement.
    (v) A flow regime that limits sediment deposition and maintains 
appropriate rocky substrate and inter-gravel spaces for sturgeon egg 
adhesion, incubation, escape cover, and free embryo development.
    (3) Note: Map of critical habitat follows:

[[Page 711]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09JY08.005

                     June Sucker (Chasmistes liorus)

    Utah, Utah County. Provo River, Sec. 5, T7S, R2E; to Sec. 36, T6S, 
R2E, the lower 7.8 kilometers (4.9 miles) of the main channel of the 
river as measured from it confluence with Utah Lake, upstream to the 
Tanner Race diversion.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 712]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.139

    Known constituent elements of the critical habitat include one to 
three feet of high quality water constantly flowing over a clean, 
unsilted gravel substrate. Larval June suckers require shallow areas 
with low velocities connected to the main channel of the river.

                    Modoc Sucker (Catostomus microps)

California, Modoc County.
    1. Turner Creek. Approximately 4.5 stream miles and 50 feet on 
either side of the stream channel from the juncture of Turner Creek with 
the Pit River upstream to T42N, R8E, Section 20; including those areas 
of the stream channel in T41N, R8E, Sections 1 and 2; and in T42N, R8E, 
Sections 21, 27, 28, 34, and 35.
    2. Washington Creek. Approximately 4 stream miles and 50 feet on 
either side of the stream channel from the juncture of Washington Creek 
with Turner Creek to T42N, R8E, Section 11; including those areas of the 
stream channel in T42N, R8E, Sections 14, 23, 24, 25, 26, and 35. Also 
Coffee Mill Gulch, a tributary of Washington Creek, for approximately 
1.5 miles and 50 feet on either side of the stream channel from the 
juncture of this tributary with Washington Creek upstream to T42N, R8E, 
Section 22; including those areas of the stream channel in T42N, R8E, 
Sections 22, 23, and 26.
    3. Hulbert Creek. Approximately 3.5 stream miles and 50 feet on 
either side of the stream channel from the juncture of Hulbert Creek 
with Turner Creek upstream to T42N, R8E, Section 31; including those 
areas of the stream channel in T42N, R8E, Sections 29, 30, 32, 33, 34, 
and 35; and Cedar Creek, a tributary of Hulbert Creek, for approximately 
1.5 stream miles and 50 feet on either side of the stream channel from 
the juncture of Cedar Creek with Hulbert Creek upstream to Cedar Spring; 
including those areas of the stream channel in T41N, R8E, Section 4; and 
in T42N, R8E, Section 33.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.140
    
    4. Johnson Creek. Approximately 4 stream miles and 50 feet on either 
side of the stream channel from the juncture of Johnson Creek with Rush 
Creek upstream to T40N, R10E, Section 6; including those areas of the 
stream channel in T40N, R9E, Sections 1, 11, 12, 14, 23, and 24. Also in 
unnamed tributary of Johnson Creek in Rice Flat, for approximately 1 
stream mile and 50 feet on either side of the stream channel from the 
juncture of this tributary with Johnson Creek upstream to T40N, R9E, 
Section 10; including those areas of the stream channel in T40N, R9E, 
Sections 11 and 14. Also in unnamed tributary of Johnson Creek in 
Higgins Flat, for approximately 1 stream mile and 50 feet on either side 
of the stream channel from the juncture of this tributary with Johnson 
Creek upstream to T40N, R9E, Section 10; including those areas of the 
stream channel in T40N, R9E, Sections 14 and 15.
    5. Rush Creek. Approximately 5 stream miles and 50 feet on either 
side of the stream channel from the gauging station at the State Route 
299 crossing upstream to T40N, R10E, Section 16; including those areas 
of the stream channel in T40N, R9E, Sections 24, 25, 26, 35, and 36; and 
in T40N, R10E, Sections 17, 18, and 19.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 713]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.141

    Known constituent elements include intermittent and permanent-water 
creeks, and adjacent land areas that provide vegetation for cover and 
protection from soil erosion.

                  Razorback Sucker (Xyrauchen texanus)

    Description of areas taken from BLM 1:100,000 scale maps (available 
from BLM State Offices): Rangely, CO 1989; Canyon of Lodore, CO 1990; 
Seep Ridge, UT/CO 1982; La Sal, UT/CO 1985; Westwater, UT/CO 1981; Hite 
Crossing, UT 1982; Glenwood Springs, CO 1988; Grand Junction, CO 1990; 
Delta, CO 1989; Navajo Mountain, UT/AZ 1982; Vernal, UT/CO 1990; Craig, 
CO 1990; Bluff, UT/CO 1985; Moab, UT/CO 1985; Hanksville, UT 1982; San 
Rafael Desert, UT 1985; Huntington, UT 1982; Price, UT 1989; Tuba City, 
AZ 1983; Lake Mead, NV/AZ 1981; Davis Dam, AZ/NV/CA 1982; Parker, AZ/CA 
1980; Yuma, AZ/CA 1988; Safford, AZ 1991; Globe, AZ 1980; Clifton, AZ/NM 
1975; Prescott, AZ 1982; Theodore Roosevelt Lake, AZ 1982; Grand Canyon, 
AZ 1980; Mt. Trumbull, AZ 1979; Boulder City, NV/AZ 1978; Blythe, CA/AZ 
1976; Trigo Mountains, AZ/CA 1988; Sedona, AZ 1982; Payson, AZ 1988; and 
U.S. Forest Service map: Tonto National Forest, Phoenix, AZ. The 100-
year flood plain for many areas is detailed in Flood Insurance Rate Maps 
(FIRM) published by and available through the FEMA. In areas where a 
FIRM is not available, the presence of alluvium soils or known high 
water marks can be used to determine the extent of the flood plain. Only 
areas of flood plain containing constituent elements are considered 
critical habitat.
    Colorado: Moffat County. The Yampa River and its 100-year flood 
plain from the mouth of Cross Mountain Canyon in T.6N., R.98W., sec. 23 
(6th Principal Meridian) to the confluence with the Green River in 
T.7N., R.103W., sec. 28 (6th Principal Meridian).
    Utah: Uintah County; and Colorado: Moffat County. The Green River 
and its 100-year flood plain from the confluence with the Yampa River in 
T.7N., R.103W., sec. 28 (6th Principal Meridian) to Sand Wash in T.11S., 
R.18E., sec. 20 (6th Principal Meridian).
    Utah: Uintah, Carbon, Grand, Emery, Wayne, and San Juan Counties. 
The Green River and its 100-year flood plain from Sand Wash at T.11S., 
R.18E., sec. 20 (6th Principal Meridian) to the confluence with the 
Colorado River in T.30S., R.19E., sec. 7 (6th Principal Meridian).
    Utah: Uintah County. The White River and its 100-year flood plain 
from the boundary of the Uintah and Ouray Indian Reservation at river 
mile 18 in T.9S., R.22E., sec. 21 (Salt Lake Meridian) to the confluence 
with the Green River in T.9S., R.20E., sec. 4 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Utah: Uintah County. The Duchesne River and its 100-year flood plain 
from river mile 2.5 in T.4S., R.3E., sec. 30 (Salt Lake Meridian) to the 
confluence with the Green River in T.5S., R.3E., sec. 5 (Uintah 
Meridian).
    Colorado: Delta and Mesa Counties. The Gunnison River and its 100-
year flood plain from the confluence with the Uncompahgre River in 
T.15S., R.96W., sec. 11 (6th Principal Meridian) to Redlands Diversion 
Dam in T.1S., R.1W., sec. 27 (Ute Meridian).
    Colorado: Mesa and Garfield Counties. The Colorado River and its 
100-year flood plain from Colorado River Bridge at exit 90 north off 
Interstate 70 in T.6S., R.93W., sec. 16 (6th Principal Meridian) to 
Westwater Canyon in T.20S., R.25E., sec. 12 (Salt Lake Meridian) 
including the Gunnison River and its 100-year flood plain from the 
Redlands Diversion Dam in T.1S., R.1W., sec. 27 (Ute Meridian) to the 
confluence with the Colorado River in T.1S., R.1W., sec. 22 (Ute 
Meridian).
    Utah: Grand, San Juan, Wayne, and Garfield Counties. The Colorado 
River and its 100-year flood plain from Westwater Canyon in T.20S., 
R.25E., sec. 12 (Salt Lake Meridian) to full pool elevation, upstream of 
North Wash and including the Dirty Devil arm of Lake Powell in T.33S., 
R.14E., sec. 29 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    New Mexico: San Juan County; and Utah: San Juan County. The San Juan 
River and its 100-year flood plain from the Hogback Diversion in T.29N., 
R.16W., sec. 9 (New Mexico Meridian) to the full pool elevation at the 
mouth of Neskahai Canyon on the San Juan arm of Lake Powell in T.41S., 
R.11E., sec. 26 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Arizona: Coconino and Mohave Counties; and Nevada: Clark County. The 
Colorado River and its 100-year flood plain from the confluence with the 
Paria River in T.40N., R.7E., sec. 24 (Gila and Salt River Meridian) to 
Hoover Dam in T.30N., R.23W., sec. 3 (Gila and Salt River Meridian) 
including Lake Mead to the full pool elevation.
    Arizona: Mohave County; and Nevada: Clark County. The Colorado River 
and its 100-year flood plain from Hoover Dam in

[[Page 714]]

T.30N., R.23W., sec. 1 (Gila and Salt River Meridian) to Davis Dam in 
T.21N., R.21W., sec. 18 (Gila and Salt River Meridian) including Lake 
Mohave to the full pool elevation.
    Arizona: La Paz and Yuma Counties; and California: San Bernardino, 
Riverside, and Imperial Counties. The Colorado River and its 100-year 
flood plain from Parker Dam in T.11N., R.18W., sec. 16 (Gila and Salt 
River Meridian) to Imperial Dam in T.6S., R.22W., sec. 25 (Gila and Salt 
River Meridian) including Imperial Reservoir to the full pool elevation 
or 100-year flood plain, whichever is greater.
    Arizona: Graham, Greenlee, Gila, and Pinal Counties. The Gila River 
and its 100-year flood plain from the Arizona-New Mexico border in 
T.8S., R.32E., sec. 34 (Gila and Salt River Meridian) to Coolidge Dam in 
T.3S., R.18E., sec. 17 (Gila and Salt River Meridian), including San 
Carlos Reservoir to the full pool elevation.
    Arizona: Gila County. The Salt River and its 100-year flood plain 
from the old U.S. Highway 60/State Route 77 bridge (unsurveyed) to 
Roosevelt Diversion Dam in T.3N., R.14E., sec. 4 (Gila and Salt River 
Meridian).
    Arizona: Yavapai County. The Verde River and its 100-year flood 
plain from the U.S. Forest Service boundary (Prescott National Forest) 
in T.18N., R.2E., sec. 31 to Horseshoe Dam in T.7N., R.6E., sec. 2 (Gila 
and Salt River Meridian), including Horseshoe Lake to the full pool 
elevation.
    Known constituent elements include water, physical habitat, and 
biological environment as required for each particular life stage for 
each species.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.142

                 Santa Ana sucker (Catostomus santaanae)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Los Angeles, Orange, 
Riverside, and San Bernardino Counties, California, on the maps below.
    (2) Within these areas, the physical and biological features for the 
Santa Ana sucker are as follows:
    (i) A functioning hydrological system within the historical 
geographic range of Santa Ana sucker that experiences peaks and ebbs in 
the water volume (either naturally or regulated) that encompasses areas 
that provide or contain sources of water and coarse sediment necessary 
to maintain all life stages of the species, including adults, juveniles, 
larva, and eggs, in the riverine environment;
    (ii) Stream channel substrate consisting of a mosaic of loose sand, 
gravel, cobble, and boulder substrates in a series of riffles, runs, 
pools, and shallow sandy stream margins necessary to maintain various 
life stages of the species, including adults, juveniles, larva, and 
eggs, in the riverine environment;
    (iii) Water depths greater than 1.2 in (3 cm) and bottom water 
velocities greater than 0.01 ft per second (0.03 m per second);
    (iv) Clear or only occasionally turbid water;
    (v) Water temperatures less than 86 [deg]F (30 [deg]C);
    (vi) In-stream habitat that includes food sources (such as 
zooplankton, phytoplankton, and aquatic invertebrates), and associated 
vegetation such as aquatic emergent vegetation and adjacent riparian 
vegetation to provide: (a) Shading to reduce water temperature when 
ambient temperatures are high, (b) shelter during periods of high water 
velocity, and (c) protective cover from predators; and
    (vii) Areas within perennial stream courses that may be periodically 
dewatered, but that serve as connective corridors between occupied or 
seasonally occupied habitat and through which the species may move when 
the habitat is wetted.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures existing on 
the effective date of this rule and not containing one of more of the 
physical and biological features, such as buildings, aqueducts, 
airports, and roads, and the land on which such structures are located.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created using a base of U.S. Geological Survey 7.5[min] quadrangle maps. 
Critical habitat units were then mapped using Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) zone 11, North American Datum (NAD) 1983 coordinates.
    (5)
    Note:  Index map of critical habitat units for Santa Ana sucker 
(Catostomus santaanae) follows:

[[Page 715]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14DE10.000

    (6) Unit 1: Santa Ana River, Orange, Riverside, and San Bernardino 
Counties, California. Subunit 1A: Upper Santa Ana River and Wash, San 
Bernardino County.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Forest Falls, Yucaipa, Harrison 
Mountain, Redlands, and San Bernardino South. Land bounded by the 
following Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 11, North American 
Datum of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 476057, 3771160; 476057, 
3771361; 476067, 3771366; 476363, 3771455; 476483, 3771473; 477305,

[[Page 716]]

3771538; 477407, 3771560; 477571, 3771632; 477860, 3771855; 478333, 
3772242; 478402, 3772309; 478500, 3772377; 478520, 3772416; 478590, 
3772455; 478940, 3772592; 479868, 3772941; 480001, 3773012; 480336, 
3773247; 480371, 3773259; 480393, 3773293; 480485, 3773372; 480526, 
3773394; 480690, 3773515; 480864, 3773680; 480972, 3773746; 481132, 
3773944; 481165, 3774003; 481261, 3774091; 481297, 3774141; 481350, 
3774237; 481644, 3774591; 481673, 3774640; 481719, 3774747; 481827, 
3774915; 481925, 3775098; 481967, 3775198; 481974, 3775245; 481997, 
3775288; 482030, 3775393; 482069, 3775467; 482110, 3775501; 482122, 
3775547; 482158, 3775596; 482181, 3775692; 482245, 3775830; 482286, 
3775963; 482425, 3776255; 482435, 3776468; 482450, 3776518; 482433, 
3776544; 482427, 3776573; 482424, 3776650; 482387, 3776807; 482397, 
3776877; 482389, 3776935; 482399, 3776957; 482369, 3777033; 482395, 
3777122; 482438, 3777213; 482450, 3777269; 482505, 3777347; 482516, 
3777377; 482528, 3777444; 482530, 3777544; 482504, 3777583; 482502, 
3777600; 482517, 3777626; 482546, 3777645; 482578, 3777686; 482578, 
3777708; 482518, 3777736; 482490, 3777781; 482491, 3777805; 482505, 
3777822; 482561, 3777844; 482582, 3777861; 482586, 3777885; 482578, 
3777909; 482538, 3777969; 482534, 3778023; 482594, 3778098; 482606, 
3778168; 482628, 3778234; 482681, 3778274; 482688, 3778307; 482715, 
3778315; 482727, 3778330; 482710, 3778399; 482601, 3778481; 482601, 
3778529; 482629, 3778564; 482638, 3778571; 482697, 3778575; 482721, 
3778614; 482711, 3778651; 482660, 3778669; 482612, 3778705; 482600, 
3778765; 482629, 3778787; 482635, 3778826; 482622, 3778871; 482639, 
3778930; 482645, 3778938; 482677, 3778948; 482720, 3779005; 482731, 
3779074; 482772, 3779129; 482801, 3779129; 482844, 3779111; 482863, 
3779114; 482883, 3779136; 482942, 3779236; 482945, 3779290; 482936, 
3779312; 482966, 3779342; 483015, 3779323; 483085, 3779316; 483130, 
3779333; 483166, 3779388; 483157, 3779420; 483113, 3779483; 483107, 
3779505; 483114, 3779526; 483144, 3779553; 483032, 3779645; 483011, 
3779726; 483012, 3779758; 483024, 3779789; 483046, 3779810; 483128, 
3779819; 483202, 3779861; 483223, 3779893; 483168, 3779950; 483167, 
3779993; 483119, 3780055; 483102, 3780112; 483155, 3780249; 483187, 
3780266; 483246, 3780275; 483266, 3780289; 483251, 3780325; 483227, 
3780358; 483201, 3780361; 483213, 3780392; 483236, 3780417; 483332, 
3780470; 483323, 3780505; 483338, 3780567; 483325, 3780589; 483299, 
3780608; 483305, 3780650; 483255, 3780730; 483252, 3780772; 483256, 
3780792; 483291, 3780843; 483302, 3780998; 483313, 3781012; 483341, 
3781128; 483359, 3781159; 483395, 3781196; 483396, 3781210; 483380, 
3781240; 483348, 3781273; 483293, 3781310; 483272, 3781316; 483258, 
3781338; 483237, 3781359; 483202, 3781370; 483187, 3781389; 483201, 
3781395; 483259, 3781369; 483279, 3781340; 483299, 3781326; 483320, 
3781322; 483389, 3781252; 483416, 3781204; 483406, 3781170; 483361, 
3781135; 483346, 3781090; 483347, 3781065; 483311, 3780994; 483321, 
3780955; 483310, 3780895; 483314, 3780826; 483287, 3780805; 483260, 
3780759; 483311, 3780666; 483316, 3780613; 483352, 3780583; 483365, 
3780562; 483363, 3780550; 483340, 3780527; 483341, 3780454; 483304, 
3780446; 483226, 3780380; 483281, 3780285; 483248, 3780263; 483171, 
3780248; 483156, 3780229; 483157, 3780202; 483145, 3780172; 483114, 
3780130; 483116, 3780093; 483128, 3780060; 483176, 3780001; 483177, 
3779972; 483193, 3779939; 483224, 3779911; 483231, 3779895; 483226, 
3779873; 483193, 3779838; 483124, 3779794; 483093, 3779795; 483053, 
3779774; 483030, 3779720; 483032, 3779689; 483042, 3779669; 483158, 
3779560; 483142, 3779528; 483153, 3779479; 483151, 3779446; 483175, 
3779430; 483183, 3779404; 483155, 3779331; 483112, 3779292; 483079, 
3779286; 482981, 3779316; 482959, 3779309; 482953, 3779219; 482909, 
3779131; 482876, 3779102; 482834, 3779091; 482799, 3779102; 482777, 
3779090; 482746, 3779058; 482728, 3778976; 482698, 3778956; 482674, 
3778919; 482647, 3778903; 482653, 3778803; 482631, 3778766; 482629, 
3778746; 482634, 3778735; 482709, 3778712; 482730, 3778690; 482749, 
3778628; 482739, 3778591; 482718, 3778566; 482662, 3778535; 482646, 
3778494; 482677, 3778455; 482746, 3778421; 482766, 3778390; 482771, 
3778359; 482747, 3778334; 482746, 3778318; 482703, 3778293; 482695, 
3778261; 482647, 3778232; 482630, 3778194; 482629, 3778125; 482598, 
3778061; 482597, 3778041; 482618, 3777975; 482617, 3777948; 482601, 
3777929; 482608, 3777891; 482624, 3777865; 482623, 3777848; 482574, 
3777816; 482562, 3777764; 482570, 3777748; 482614, 3777709; 482617, 
3777698; 482598, 3777664; 482553, 3777632; 482539, 3777608; 482544, 
3777575; 482536, 3777545; 482542, 3777496; 482537, 3777413; 482502, 
3777282; 482421, 3777115; 482419, 3777060; 482433, 3777022; 482430, 
3776940; 482454, 3776816; 482510, 3776671; 482512, 3776651; 482495, 
3776628; 482502, 3776592; 482496, 3776521; 482508, 3776483; 482485, 
3776365; 482487, 3776234; 482407, 3776065; 482381, 3776026; 482369, 
3775883; 482376, 3775796; 482361, 3775616; 482349, 3775585; 482302, 
3775567; 482301, 3775517; 482264, 3775492; 482188, 3775365; 482138, 
3775326; 482118, 3775297; 482079, 3775126; 481893, 3774844; 481846, 
3774749; 481819, 3774713; 481769, 3774600; 481710, 3774511; 481675, 
3774473; 481666, 3774436; 481569, 3774317; 481580, 3774312; 481582, 
3774242; 481561, 3774178; 481552, 3774087; 481569, 3773987; 481516, 
3773938; 481262, 3773944; 481022, 3773709; 480977, 3773709; 480901, 
3773664; 480896, 3773650; 480844, 3773614; 480767, 3773517; 480728, 
3773424; 480689, 3773391; 480603, 3773361; 480578, 3773339; 480489, 
3773210; 480400, 3773158; 480339, 3773146; 480320, 3773134; 480257, 
3773030; 480175, 3772983; 480092, 3772948; 480026, 3772935; 479969, 
3772881; 479946, 3772751; 479927, 3772713; 479962, 3772675; 480038, 
3772687; 480096, 3772738; 480277, 3772741; 480470, 3772713; 480581, 
3772668; 480654, 3772659; 480845, 3772662; 480915, 3772725; 480991, 
3772751; 481086, 3772754; 481178, 3772770; 481277, 3772760; 481413, 
3772703; 481479, 3772664; 481532, 3772654; 481552, 3772669; 481594, 
3772656; 481732, 3772690; 481909, 3772604; 482065, 3772614; 482213, 
3772611; 482273, 3772597; 482437, 3772495; 482484, 3772448; 482500, 
3772396; 482537, 3772367; 482609, 3772339; 482659, 3772306; 482678, 
3772280; 482742, 3772240; 482849, 3772177; 482991, 3772157; 483035, 
3772163; 483075, 3772128; 483094, 3772087; 483137, 3772069; 483211, 
3772069; 483445, 3772013; 483489, 3772026; 483550, 3772022; 483645, 
3771973; 483690, 3771969; 483746, 3771988; 483788, 3771989; 483849, 
3771973; 483908, 3771939; 483940, 3771939; 484021, 3771911; 484116, 
3771899; 484183, 3771920; 484273, 3771898; 484348, 3771902; 484488, 
3771830; 484605, 3771877; 484664, 3771882; 484829, 3771937; 484892, 
3771966; 484983, 3771966; 485142, 3771947; 485332, 3771942; 485482, 
3771985; 485526, 3772014; 485619,

[[Page 717]]

3772037; 485679, 3772071; 485745, 3772075; 485829, 3772064; 485980, 
3772036; 486023, 3772006; 486110, 3772045; 486154, 3772047; 486196, 
3772070; 486243, 3772082; 486293, 3772080; 486342, 3772044; 486397, 
3772044; 486517, 3772085; 486545, 3772110; 486565, 3772144; 486650, 
3772143; 486688, 3772106; 486762, 3772100; 486823, 3772126; 486881, 
3772138; 486912, 3772159; 486960, 3772169; 487044, 3772172; 487095, 
3772149; 487140, 3772139; 487293, 3772139; 487351, 3772210; 487489, 
3772307; 487623, 3772324; 487815, 3772301; 487876, 3772321; 488012, 
3772426; 488315, 3772448; 488368, 3772461; 488508, 3772476; 488549, 
3772476; 488672, 3772420; 488789, 3772439; 488929, 3772451; 489002, 
3772535; 489020, 3772595; 489053, 3772663; 489092, 3772716; 489215, 
3772843; 489277, 3772883; 489321, 3772927; 489400, 3772940; 489468, 
3772973; 489499, 3772997; 489547, 3773019; 489670, 3773142; 489756, 
3773192; 489894, 3773239; 489958, 3773292; 490060, 3773263; 490077, 
3773264; 490181, 3773328; 490291, 3773360; 490319, 3773377; 490319, 
3773332; 490267, 3773290; 489940, 3773170; 489898, 3773168; 489764, 
3773131; 489725, 3773102; 489652, 3773003; 489593, 3772981; 489512, 
3772924; 489411, 3772916; 489365, 3772876; 489332, 3772819; 489301, 
3772788; 489239, 3772768; 489099, 3772606; 489088, 3772568; 489037, 
3772518; 489006, 3772465; 488989, 3772415; 488940, 3772373; 488934, 
3772346; 488976, 3772355; 489017, 3772353; 489044, 3772331; 489075, 
3772327; 489090, 3772305; 489083, 3772256; 489125, 3772217; 489165, 
3772208; 489184, 3772217; 489217, 3772206; 489296, 3772147; 489301, 
3772131; 489329, 3772133; 489395, 3772076; 489488, 3772021; 489505, 
3771905; 489494, 3771856; 489551, 3771815; 489586, 3771736; 489628, 
3771670; 489681, 3771643; 489751, 3771593; 489791, 3771531; 489857, 
3771507; 489912, 3771448; 490006, 3771371; 490059, 3771342; 490105, 
3771334; 490160, 3771287; 490199, 3771272; 490232, 3771216; 490224, 
3771171; 490259, 3771137; 490450, 3771016; 490482, 3771024; 490527, 
3771024; 490567, 3771009; 490672, 3770901; 490751, 3770854; 490825, 
3770828; 490850, 3770803; 490950, 3770739; 491063, 3770712; 491091, 
3770698; 491152, 3770690; 491161, 3770701; 491185, 3770706; 491218, 
3770698; 491296, 3770658; 491324, 3770656; 491413, 3770672; 491480, 
3770670; 491501, 3770660; 491593, 3770661; 491643, 3770683; 491784, 
3770665; 491814, 3770675; 491861, 3770670; 491912, 3770688; 491941, 
3770678; 491987, 3770637; 492029, 3770616; 492116, 3770620; 492147, 
3770635; 492215, 3770618; 492290, 3770623; 492356, 3770617; 492411, 
3770632; 492447, 3770611; 492490, 3770606; 492515, 3770620; 492570, 
3770617; 492598, 3770608; 492603, 3770598; 492695, 3770573; 492810, 
3770564; 492867, 3770552; 493173, 3770549; 493210, 3770543; 493280, 
3770580; 493383, 3770580; 493413, 3770572; 493469, 3770589; 493544, 
3770569; 493624, 3770575; 493647, 3770581; 493703, 3770632; 493728, 
3770640; 493754, 3770665; 493839, 3770695; 493902, 3770732; 494003, 
3770833; 494028, 3770843; 494044, 3770875; 494064, 3770894; 494085, 
3770899; 494117, 3770930; 494143, 3770997; 494208, 3771037; 494214, 
3771063; 494239, 3771079; 494270, 3771077; 494286, 3771142; 494324, 
3771172; 494342, 3771205; 494363, 3771215; 494440, 3771284; 494458, 
3771286; 494478, 3771303; 494518, 3771320; 494561, 3771322; 494653, 
3771405; 494706, 3771511; 494717, 3771511; 494781, 3771552; 494945, 
3771567; 495026, 3771631; 495073, 3771621; 495102, 3771645; 495222, 
3771692; 495224, 3771705; 495302, 3771802; 495391, 3771866; 495408, 
3771887; 495447, 3771888; 495531, 3771909; 495581, 3771906; 495607, 
3771894; 495666, 3771894; 495688, 3771902; 495727, 3771897; 495836, 
3771910; 495954, 3771965; 495987, 3771997; 496021, 3772011; 496083, 
3772012; 496133, 3772059; 496135, 3772074; 496179, 3772095; 496296, 
3772111; 496325, 3772126; 496359, 3772176; 496400, 3772212; 496477, 
3772230; 496542, 3772235; 496567, 3772245; 496600, 3772244; 496677, 
3772311; 496722, 3772334; 496793, 3772343; 496816, 3772373; 496827, 
3772410; 496855, 3772416; 496919, 3772524; 496930, 3772638; 496981, 
3772733; 497031, 3772775; 497090, 3772795; 497204, 3772810; 497265, 
3772785; 497285, 3772790; 497343, 3772845; 497405, 3772941; 497489, 
3772991; 497542, 3773042; 497551, 3773086; 497582, 3773144; 497652, 
3773195; 497701, 3773267; 497721, 3773279; 497766, 3773285; 497811, 
3773324; 497958, 3773424; 498086, 3773408; 498107, 3773418; 498148, 
3773478; 498213, 3773523; 498361, 3773579; 498402, 3773582; 498440, 
3773577; 498578, 3773531; 498594, 3773540; 498635, 3773542; 498670, 
3773535; 498708, 3773542; 498731, 3773532; 498763, 3773551; 498788, 
3773554; 498821, 3773543; 498854, 3773516; 498882, 3773472; 498915, 
3773442; 498951, 3773458; 498978, 3773460; 499089, 3773428; 499147, 
3773389; 499178, 3773397; 499232, 3773391; 499286, 3773357; 499313, 
3773356; 499377, 3773331; 499500, 3773270; 499550, 3773271; 499575, 
3773283; 499610, 3773276; 499615, 3773287; 499670, 3773292; 499764, 
3773257; 499824, 3773205; 499936, 3773203; 499980, 3773163; 500154, 
3773163; 500313, 3773173; 500442, 3773170; 500470, 3773163; 500495, 
3773141; 500566, 3773120; 500645, 3773115; 500771, 3773056; 500840, 
3773049; 500916, 3773009; 500954, 3773004; 500999, 3772979; 501046, 
3772979; 501096, 3772960; 501139, 3772953; 501336, 3772942; 501369, 
3772929; 501421, 3772891; 501455, 3772891; 501533, 3772810; 501583, 
3772770; 501629, 3772757; 501676, 3772771; 501779, 3772851; 501822, 
3772851; 501898, 3772874; 501974, 3772867; 502026, 3772851; 502072, 
3772856; 502101, 3772885; 502148, 3772909; 502192, 3772947; 502227, 
3772955; 502310, 3772955; 502378, 3772942; 502414, 3772924; 502575, 
3772930; 502690, 3772903; 502844, 3772898; 502909, 3772866; 502961, 
3772867; 503003, 3772853; 503079, 3772844; 503172, 3772815; 503207, 
3772815; 503288, 3772783; 503313, 3772783; 503405, 3772728; 503486, 
3772716; 503606, 3772716; 503801, 3772737; 503887, 3772755; 504014, 
3772765; 504077, 3772749; 504192, 3772682; 504236, 3772685; 504283, 
3772672; 504385, 3772622; 504440, 3772622; 504494, 3772635; 504562, 
3772674; 504606, 3772679; 504653, 3772679; 504750, 3772645; 504791, 
3772656; 504845, 3772645; 504927, 3772596; 505018, 3772595; 505046, 
3772582; 505086, 3772544; 505112, 3772502; 505145, 3772468; 505223, 
3772406; 505304, 3772358; 505323, 3772358; 505477, 3772272; 505485, 
3772255; 505472, 3772251; 505416, 3772268; 505338, 3772296; 505317, 
3772317; 505263, 3772330; 505182, 3772401; 505122, 3772413; 505028, 
3772414; 504908, 3772468; 504869, 3772471; 504820, 3772492; 504708, 
3772518; 504635, 3772557; 504543, 3772573; 504249, 3772565; 504161, 
3772588; 504122, 3772588; 504085, 3772609; 503832, 3772627; 503662, 
3772625; 503605, 3772638; 503238, 3772633; 503154, 3772650; 503094, 
3772627; 503042, 3772643; 502949, 3772638; 502923, 3772655; 502884, 
3772664; 502787, 3772642; 502674, 3772684; 502651, 3772708; 502584, 
3772718; 502506, 3772804; 502419,

[[Page 718]]

3772838; 502370, 3772830; 502282, 3772801; 502216, 3772802; 502166, 
3772776; 502128, 3772783; 502097, 3772768; 502067, 3772739; 502003, 
3772707; 501945, 3772695; 501724, 3772690; 501671, 3772713; 501643, 
3772711; 501627, 3772689; 501593, 3772702; 501494, 3772770; 501405, 
3772760; 501314, 3772763; 501263, 3772791; 501218, 3772831; 501179, 
3772849; 501137, 3772856; 501075, 3772908; 501033, 3772927; 500996, 
3772929; 500960, 3772957; 500838, 3772999; 500807, 3772999; 500769, 
3773014; 500723, 3773020; 500704, 3773036; 500627, 3773069; 500545, 
3773086; 500449, 3773125; 500338, 3773138; 500152, 3773112; 500107, 
3773095; 499993, 3773105; 499938, 3773089; 499888, 3773131; 499696, 
3773114; 499666, 3773131; 499656, 3773150; 499636, 3773161; 499593, 
3773166; 499548, 3773198; 499496, 3773210; 499440, 3773196; 499313, 
3773213; 499240, 3773272; 499181, 3773292; 499130, 3773334; 499079, 
3773357; 499056, 3773403; 499036, 3773421; 498968, 3773445; 498931, 
3773432; 498902, 3773434; 498831, 3773507; 498769, 3773516; 498683, 
3773493; 498635, 3773510; 498529, 3773503; 498437, 3773556; 498398, 
3773559; 498386, 3773559; 498362, 3773537; 498334, 3773542; 498256, 
3773475; 498227, 3773467; 498208, 3773483; 498181, 3773485; 498138, 
3773437; 498139, 3773414; 498118, 3773379; 498054, 3773357; 497992, 
3773354; 497922, 3773332; 497893, 3773303; 497832, 3773276; 497768, 
3773203; 497708, 3773181; 497660, 3773139; 497638, 3773136; 497626, 
3773121; 497609, 3773060; 497507, 3772979; 497481, 3772921; 497459, 
3772901; 497421, 3772834; 497374, 3772784; 497353, 3772789; 497310, 
3772765; 497266, 3772758; 497215, 3772761; 497173, 3772780; 497148, 
3772784; 497053, 3772760; 497024, 3772700; 497035, 3772643; 497026, 
3772615; 497003, 3772553; 496967, 3772522; 496963, 3772417; 496843, 
3772314; 496788, 3772297; 496779, 3772284; 496768, 3772291; 496723, 
3772287; 496683, 3772268; 496628, 3772219; 496551, 3772214; 496528, 
3772204; 496494, 3772171; 496467, 3772159; 496398, 3772099; 496354, 
3772038; 496305, 3772005; 496260, 3771938; 496223, 3771908; 496189, 
3771895; 496089, 3771896; 496023, 3771879; 495987, 3771880; 495963, 
3771873; 495890, 3771823; 495840, 3771807; 495703, 3771806; 495680, 
3771818; 495610, 3771821; 495504, 3771866; 495479, 3771855; 495433, 
3771815; 495382, 3771811; 495346, 3771787; 495328, 3771760; 495246, 
3771681; 495210, 3771582; 495183, 3771546; 495140, 3771527; 495103, 
3771526; 495080, 3771513; 495023, 3771370; 494998, 3771369; 494957, 
3771345; 494881, 3771360; 494855, 3771304; 494833, 3771303; 494806, 
3771284; 494767, 3771274; 494719, 3771227; 494643, 3771210; 494616, 
3771178; 494587, 3771159; 494552, 3771168; 494474, 3771116; 494454, 
3771086; 494451, 3771062; 494436, 3771039; 494418, 3771026; 494413, 
3771007; 494317, 3770945; 494274, 3770887; 494243, 3770864; 494193, 
3770855; 494164, 3770840; 494101, 3770778; 494024, 3770720; 493927, 
3770666; 493825, 3770585; 493680, 3770525; 493651, 3770502; 493603, 
3770487; 493572, 3770493; 493529, 3770469; 493504, 3770474; 493329, 
3770443; 493283, 3770447; 493196, 3770427; 493177, 3770427; 493147, 
3770445; 493081, 3770420; 493018, 3770437; 492984, 3770429; 492698, 
3770493; 492507, 3770499; 492479, 3770510; 492389, 3770504; 492200, 
3770517; 492185, 3770524; 491966, 3770533; 491879, 3770549; 491821, 
3770545; 491809, 3770547; 491805, 3770569; 491739, 3770590; 491700, 
3770579; 491582, 3770577; 491547, 3770565; 491404, 3770576; 491373, 
3770570; 491325, 3770597; 491283, 3770635; 491171, 3770613; 491061, 
3770659; 491008, 3770667; 490970, 3770682; 490950, 3770676; 490926, 
3770688; 490896, 3770728; 490846, 3770762; 490766, 3770763; 490731, 
3770774; 490612, 3770844; 490550, 3770900; 490417, 3770958; 490238, 
3771067; 490194, 3771066; 490129, 3771089; 490101, 3771124; 490045, 
3771147; 489996, 3771204; 489972, 3771219; 489929, 3771235; 489905, 
3771235; 489898, 3771208; 489784, 3771318; 489771, 3771358; 489672, 
3771448; 489580, 3771516; 489503, 3771632; 489501, 3771683; 489470, 
3771722; 489415, 3771896; 489419, 3771916; 489404, 3771938; 489340, 
3771986; 489200, 3772054; 489173, 3772054; 489123, 3772085; 489096, 
3772114; 489046, 3772116; 488998, 3772131; 488931, 3772174; 488883, 
3772186; 488806, 3772182; 488755, 3772171; 488719, 3772174; 488671, 
3772192; 488610, 3772189; 488575, 3772205; 488536, 3772210; 488457, 
3772176; 488255, 3772230; 488117, 3772278; 488035, 3772265; 487952, 
3772291; 487896, 3772268; 487867, 3772238; 487814, 3772204; 487662, 
3772186; 487623, 3772167; 487586, 3772164; 487567, 3772179; 487532, 
3772182; 487427, 3772111; 487295, 3772085; 487057, 3771953; 486960, 
3771925; 486843, 3771828; 486774, 3771826; 486708, 3771835; 486626, 
3771861; 486543, 3771861; 486489, 3771849; 486449, 3771828; 486354, 
3771744; 486253, 3771757; 486202, 3771780; 485784, 3771690; 485600, 
3771659; 485511, 3771611; 485351, 3771552; 485097, 3771511; 484846, 
3771520; 484805, 3771542; 484585, 3771538; 484485, 3771552; 484407, 
3771574; 484388, 3771571; 484288, 3771587; 484169, 3771634; 484083, 
3771652; 483973, 3771662; 483896, 3771684; 483757, 3771706; 483644, 
3771748; 483550, 3771761; 483314, 3771848; 483258, 3771877; 483250, 
3771892; 483212, 3771922; 483177, 3771932; 483134, 3771961; 483096, 
3771976; 483047, 3771985; 483026, 3771975; 482994, 3771935; 482872, 
3771995; 482844, 3771981; 482801, 3771989; 482726, 3772065; 482667, 
3772103; 482531, 3772165; 482463, 3772203; 482413, 3772246; 482336, 
3772277; 482301, 3772277; 482192, 3772343; 482139, 3772364; 482052, 
3772358; 481975, 3772362; 481930, 3772340; 481872, 3772339; 481824, 
3772348; 481788, 3772365; 481773, 3772398; 481744, 3772409; 481678, 
3772411; 481639, 3772420; 481572, 3772415; 481496, 3772449; 481474, 
3772442; 481293, 3772449; 480762, 3772424; 479991, 3772367; 479292, 
3772253; 479131, 3772220; 479081, 3772195; 478711, 3772063; 478444, 
3771941; 478245, 3771829; 477954, 3771642; 477927, 3771635; 477910, 
3771615; 477711, 3771479; 477614, 3771436; 477537, 3771427; 477349, 
3771366; 477304, 3771359; 476657, 3771309; 476456, 3771287; 476289, 
3771253; 476105, 3771192; thence returning to 476057, 3771160.
    (ii) Map of Subunit 1A (Upper Santa Ana River and Wash) follows:

[[Page 719]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14DE10.001

    (7) Unit 1: Santa Ana River, Orange, Riverside, and San Bernardino 
Counties, California. Subunit 1B: Santa Ana River, Riverside and San 
Bernardino Counties.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles San Bernardino South, Fontana, 
Riverside West and Corona North. Land bounded by the following UTM) 
NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 475287, 3770647; 475229, 3770631; 475159, 
3770634; 475029, 3770505; 475080, 3770458; 475001, 3770373; 474886, 
3770248; 474792, 3770167; 474561, 3770035; 474404, 3769989; 474266, 
3769962; 474155, 3769951;

[[Page 720]]

474074, 3769980; 474045, 3769929; 473999, 3769945; 473688, 3769905; 
473458, 3769854; 473253, 3769789; 473090, 3769708; 472936, 3769643; 
472759, 3769588; 472637, 3769564; 472418, 3769505; 472326, 3769464; 
472166, 3769356; 472083, 3769264; 471951, 3769161; 471855, 3769099; 
471802, 3769042; 471434, 3768721; 471194, 3768429; 471073, 3768237; 
470973, 3768073; 470781, 3767667; 470656, 3767503; 470554, 3767389; 
470432, 3767289; 470296, 3767200; 470161, 3767146; 470029, 3767110; 
469902, 3767092; 469859, 3767106; 469823, 3767098; 469385, 3767154; 
469306, 3767127; 469260, 3767137; 469083, 3767227; 468675, 3767473; 
468582, 3767509; 468391, 3767549; 468237, 3767546; 468067, 3767500; 
467929, 3767433; 467866, 3767380; 467752, 3767272; 467669, 3767157; 
467639, 3767098; 467567, 3766824; 467519, 3766710; 467464, 3766483; 
467292, 3765982; 467233, 3765927; 466613, 3765036; 466482, 3764885; 
465806, 3763873; 465375, 3763211; 465110, 3762923; 465002, 3762826; 
463832, 3761156; 463710, 3760987; 463618, 3760876; 463572, 3760800; 
463517, 3760737; 463465, 3760694; 463354, 3760545; 463282, 3760415; 
463207, 3760062; 463139, 3759799; 463064, 3759690; 462928, 3759606; 
462834, 3759571; 462722, 3759616; 462542, 3759615; 462360, 3759590; 
462110, 3759479; 461950, 3759392; 461683, 3759262; 461624, 3759271; 
461556, 3759259; 461475, 3759231; 461374, 3759142; 461261, 3759060; 
461216, 3758985; 461173, 3758850; 461145, 3758709; 461146, 3758554; 
461138, 3758439; 461093, 3758376; 461081, 3758384; 461054, 3758383; 
460880, 3758265; 460852, 3758235; 460700, 3758229; 460666, 3758211; 
460567, 3758200; 460518, 3758210; 460476, 3758245; 460456, 3758283; 
460451, 3758342; 460398, 3758423; 460279, 3758514; 460101, 3758617; 
460067, 3758624; 459988, 3758591; 459958, 3758601; 459894, 3758627; 
459833, 3758690; 459808, 3758699; 459782, 3758696; 459669, 3758598; 
459588, 3758579; 459551, 3758590; 459497, 3758621; 459471, 3758626; 
459363, 3758579; 459299, 3758606; 459239, 3758619; 458984, 3758582; 
458895, 3758582; 458803, 3758622; 458746, 3758679; 458673, 3758672; 
458591, 3758638; 458232, 3758425; 458192, 3758472; 458019, 3758477; 
457568, 3758310; 457103, 3758005; 457024, 3758094; 456958, 3758094; 
456803, 3758060; 456600, 3758039; 456457, 3758096; 456348, 3758091; 
456312, 3758066; 456199, 3758082; 456132, 3758119; 455955, 3758192; 
455847, 3758200; 455775, 3758200; 455710, 3758178; 455671, 3758176; 
455539, 3758137; 455393, 3758074; 455170, 3758055; 454941, 3758312; 
454636, 3758298; 454175, 3758335; 454138, 3758288; 454085, 3758244; 
453986, 3758236; 453611, 3758273; 453546, 3758375; 453470, 3758370; 
453446, 3758242; 453306, 3758233; 453216, 3758207; 453037, 3758252; 
452940, 3758256; 452821, 3758209; 452658, 3758130; 452436, 3758116; 
452322, 3758206; 452198, 3758169; 452090, 3758168; 451989, 3758091; 
451913, 3757984; 451861, 3757980; 451804, 3757955; 451762, 3757892; 
451676, 3757846; 451578, 3757740; 451485, 3757707; 451475, 3757685; 
451431, 3757641; 451359, 3757649; 451117, 3757558; 451068, 3757513; 
451056, 3757478; 451030, 3757461; 451004, 3757422; 450984, 3757371; 
450941, 3757322; 450899, 3757300; 450870, 3757301; 450835, 3757279; 
450736, 3757263; 450719, 3757204; 450687, 3757148; 450638, 3757081; 
450578, 3756970; 450533, 3756928; 450479, 3756905; 450390, 3756893; 
450362, 3756898; 450312, 3756957; 450262, 3756970; 450154, 3756949; 
450009, 3756837; 449983, 3756795; 449898, 3756728; 449784, 3756661; 
449686, 3756622; 449655, 3756619; 449613, 3756594; 449521, 3756575; 
449453, 3756504; 449244, 3756432; 449071, 3756412; 448931, 3756349; 
448844, 3756341; 448704, 3756297; 448634, 3756267; 448532, 3756197; 
448342, 3756216; 448221, 3756252; 448181, 3756284; 448113, 3756305; 
448018, 3756288; 447965, 3756235; 447882, 3756098; 447791, 3755977; 
447696, 3755886; 447620, 3755848; 447438, 3755677; 447334, 3755605; 
447241, 3755569; 447133, 3755545; 447057, 3755463; 446826, 3755321; 
446517, 3755207; 446471, 3755169; 446382, 3755063; 446306, 3754957; 
446274, 3754866; 446263, 3754754; 446282, 3754656; 446278, 3754529; 
446242, 3754415; 446189, 3754364; 446113, 3754388; 446047, 3754366; 
445702, 3754197; 445616, 3754108; 445584, 3754019; 445605, 3753949; 
445592, 3753924; 445495, 3753839; 445421, 3753806; 445340, 3753748; 
445215, 3753564; 445122, 3753511; 444917, 3753374; 444854, 3753369; 
444784, 3753397; 444714, 3753410; 444627, 3753338; 444422, 3753073; 
444132, 3752783; 443977, 3752639; 443831, 3752569; 443884, 3752428; 
443804, 3752229; 443588, 3751960; 443586, 3751843; 443321, 3751543; 
443048, 3751297; 442771, 3751272; 442612, 3751323; 442559, 3751524; 
442557, 3751676; 442627, 3751774; 442766, 3751901; 442944, 3752099; 
443080, 3752286; 443171, 3752388; 443254, 3752443; 443315, 3752458; 
443342, 3752433; 443435, 3752417; 443491, 3752538; 443494, 3752607; 
443617, 3752763; 443840, 3752921; 443942, 3753229; 443999, 3753291; 
444171, 3753421; 444308, 3753477; 444348, 3753522; 444448, 3753581; 
444485, 3753628; 444557, 3753655; 444638, 3753702; 444674, 3753736; 
444751, 3753866; 444635, 3754021; 444578, 3754124; 444563, 3754223; 
444606, 3754284; 444704, 3754296; 444770, 3754285; 444798, 3754299; 
444887, 3754412; 444926, 3754437; 444997, 3754598; 445074, 3754670; 
445138, 3754766; 445173, 3754802; 445240, 3754925; 445296, 3755049; 
445418, 3755223; 445422, 3755412; 445454, 3755509; 445568, 3755631; 
445647, 3755745; 445823, 3755796; 445931, 3755844; 446038, 3755871; 
446103, 3755916; 446215, 3755965; 446227, 3756187; 446315, 3756359; 
446434, 3756431; 446792, 3756428; 446781, 3756304; 446855, 3756294; 
446940, 3756322; 447152, 3756341; 447190, 3756286; 447397, 3756322; 
447470, 3756349; 447499, 3756330; 447573, 3756315; 447627, 3756493; 
447683, 3756519; 447769, 3756523; 448315, 3756434; 448392, 3756404; 
448507, 3756389; 448533, 3756408; 448632, 3756532; 448626, 3756740; 
448878, 3756743; 448923, 3756771; 449014, 3756770; 449088, 3756789; 
449137, 3756837; 449137, 3756875; 449120, 3756897; 449230, 3757095; 
449314, 3757359; 449327, 3757446; 449386, 3757495; 449409, 3757543; 
449462, 3757605; 449570, 3757664; 449678, 3757687; 449775, 3757679; 
449863, 3757658; 450158, 3757559; 450241, 3757574; 450420, 3757565; 
450434, 3757590; 450531, 3757597; 450662, 3757589; 450706, 3757622; 
450812, 3757644; 450857, 3757670; 451058, 3757892; 451071, 3757930; 
451069, 3757958; 451027, 3757969; 451055, 3758008; 451090, 3758083; 
451125, 3758114; 451167, 3758170; 451237, 3758222; 451258, 3758182; 
451322, 3758223; 451437, 3758362; 451502, 3758463; 451558, 3758596; 
451623, 3758660; 451644, 3758666; 451658, 3758720; 451674, 3758722; 
451694, 3758759; 451781, 3758825; 451826, 3758844; 451862, 3758845; 
451912, 3758891; 451926, 3758922; 452020, 3759032; 452031, 3759075; 
452121, 3759233; 452108, 3759279; 452205, 3759466; 452245, 3759497; 
452372, 3759489; 452470, 3759496; 452561, 3759524; 452739, 3759509; 
452837, 3759518; 452999, 3759517;

[[Page 721]]

453098, 3759437; 453168, 3759413; 453313, 3759396; 453518, 3759314; 
453520, 3759297; 453700, 3759223; 453713, 3759201; 453710, 3759162; 
453823, 3759160; 453838, 3759175; 453872, 3759162; 454000, 3759160; 
454079, 3759173; 454112, 3759164; 454189, 3759168; 454344, 3759143; 
454459, 3759146; 454478, 3759126; 454478, 3759075; 454497, 3759060; 
454662, 3759050; 454681, 3759035; 454676, 3758998; 454740, 3758985; 
454803, 3758981; 454874, 3758960; 454900, 3758984; 454969, 3758929; 
455040, 3758850; 455085, 3758813; 455179, 3758797; 455230, 3758776; 
455311, 3758776; 455348, 3758791; 455422, 3758773; 455542, 3758724; 
455640, 3758653; 455684, 3758630; 455894, 3758573; 455933, 3758536; 
455953, 3758542; 456017, 3758491; 456056, 3758506; 456151, 3758514; 
456247, 3758572; 456405, 3758489; 456442, 3758488; 456516, 3758467; 
456586, 3758422; 456615, 3758426; 456684, 3758405; 456722, 3758415; 
456839, 3758398; 456865, 3758403; 456939, 3758385; 457104, 3758438; 
457223, 3758448; 457304, 3758435; 457702, 3758492; 457770, 3758529; 
457905, 3758566; 457974, 3758605; 458022, 3758651; 458044, 3758649; 
458066, 3758660; 458148, 3758770; 458194, 3758778; 458288, 3758770; 
458325, 3758778; 458425, 3758810; 458475, 3758848; 458511, 3758847; 
458573, 3758828; 458606, 3758838; 458643, 3758837; 458807, 3758812; 
458879, 3758814; 458951, 3758835; 459084, 3758920; 459200, 3758945; 
459240, 3758985; 459310, 3759007; 459349, 3759001; 459379, 3758982; 
459397, 3758954; 459425, 3758954; 459467, 3758973; 459481, 3758959; 
459475, 3758942; 459480, 3758917; 459577, 3758863; 459673, 3758850; 
459711, 3758856; 459814, 3758900; 459909, 3758923; 459966, 3758965; 
460058, 3758999; 460082, 3758993; 460103, 3758999; 460127, 3759030; 
460135, 3759063; 460091, 3759130; 460071, 3759243; 460080, 3759299; 
460118, 3759338; 460170, 3759370; 460238, 3759384; 460478, 3759331; 
460520, 3759373; 460542, 3759425; 460534, 3759471; 460579, 3759566; 
460619, 3759622; 460645, 3759613; 460663, 3759535; 460651, 3759462; 
460613, 3759421; 460556, 3759332; 460549, 3759281; 460627, 3759285; 
460791, 3759250; 460819, 3759269; 460853, 3759391; 460911, 3759364; 
460930, 3759362; 460954, 3759376; 461010, 3759427; 461032, 3759431; 
461160, 3759524; 461327, 3759664; 461377, 3759636; 461527, 3759702; 
461557, 3759684; 461617, 3759720; 461673, 3759738; 461732, 3759747; 
461855, 3759730; 461889, 3759733; 461948, 3759746; 462053, 3759798; 
462485, 3760035; 462552, 3760058; 462779, 3760280; 463156, 3760759; 
463598, 3761341; 464430, 3762512; 464799, 3763080; 464826, 3763114; 
464859, 3763130; 464918, 3763222; 465105, 3763517; 465125, 3763584; 
465188, 3763643; 465209, 3763734; 465234, 3763796; 465283, 3763859; 
465311, 3763917; 465412, 3763986; 465446, 3764062; 465484, 3764115; 
465517, 3764142; 465574, 3764228; 465627, 3764279; 465649, 3764287; 
465752, 3764392; 466428, 3765270; 466937, 3765975; 467052, 3766181; 
467363, 3767127; 467077, 3767537; 467104, 3767561; 467377, 3767168; 
467433, 3767285; 467572, 3767479; 467690, 3767592; 467798, 3767670; 
467910, 3767731; 468021, 3767772; 468142, 3767804; 468351, 3767834; 
468471, 3767824; 468638, 3767789; 468822, 3767713; 469024, 3767573; 
469035, 3767425; 468990, 3767383; 469175, 3767288; 469224, 3767276; 
469306, 3767275; 469358, 3767299; 469404, 3767305; 469510, 3767297; 
469749, 3767338; 469811, 3767359; 469930, 3767356; 470051, 3767387; 
470196, 3767456; 470310, 3767524; 470417, 3767621; 470518, 3767745; 
470658, 3768013; 470778, 3768272; 470916, 3768459; 471212, 3768803; 
471529, 3769081; 471623, 3769057; 471821, 3769227; 472051, 3769453; 
472194, 3769572; 472239, 3769631; 472361, 3769681; 472563, 3769721; 
472751, 3769748; 472929, 3769832; 473093, 3769923; 473440, 3770175; 
473501, 3770110; 473436, 3770056; 473542, 3770075; 473967, 3770118; 
474147, 3770116; 474275, 3770091; 474407, 3770148; 474552, 3770242; 
474704, 3770351; 474836, 3770485; 474879, 3770530; 474893, 3770560; 
475055, 3770728; 475149, 3770814; 475296, 3770915; 475356, 3770980; 
475540, 3771112; 475687, 3771196; 475841, 3771271; 476057, 3771361; 
476057, 3771160; 475989, 3771114; 475708, 3770974; 475635, 3770951; 
475583, 3770925; 475605, 3770914; 475322, 3770688; thence returning to 
475287, 3770647.
    (ii) Map of Subunit 1B: (Santa Ana River) follows:

[[Page 722]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14DE10.002

    (8) Unit 1: Santa Ana River, Orange, Riverside, and San Bernardino 
Counties, California. Subunit 1C: Lower Santa Ana River, Orange and 
Riverside Counties.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Prado, Black Star Canyon and 
Orange. Land bounded by the following UTM) NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 
439123, 3749777; 439223, 3749735; 439317, 3749737; 439475, 3749686; 
439567, 3749560; 439645, 3749469; 439774, 3749500; 439943, 3749500; 
440112, 3749446; 440161, 3749312; 439660, 3749201; 439520, 3749378; 
439460, 3749399; 439399, 3749439; 439319,

[[Page 723]]

3749542; 439301, 3749594; 439265, 3749606; 438894, 3749562; 438796, 
3749584; 438742, 3749566; 438596, 3749491; 438516, 3749437; 438459, 
3749364; 438448, 3749294; 438464, 3749237; 438366, 3748852; 438340, 
3748760; 438283, 3748727; 438185, 3748276; 438122, 3748139; 438057, 
3748079; 437949, 3748001; 437654, 3747892; 437464, 3747866; 437373, 
3747865; 437292, 3747874; 437143, 3747915; 436895, 3748028; 436812, 
3748073; 436669, 3748199; 436625, 3748312; 436585, 3748391; 436572, 
3748468; 436552, 3748505; 436412, 3748579; 436342, 3748576; 436215, 
3748550; 436049, 3748462; 435917, 3748476; 435808, 3748471; 435704, 
3748457; 435613, 3748433; 435486, 3748378; 434802, 3748017; 434587, 
3748012; 434512, 3748021; 434282, 3747955; 434121, 3747940; 434051, 
3748000; 433979, 3747999; 433872, 3747880; 433731, 3747851; 433421, 
3747832; 433139, 3747793; 433063, 3747795; 432963, 3747813; 432893, 
3747763; 432803, 3747785; 432229, 3748058; 432204, 3748085; 432188, 
3748119; 432177, 3748181; 432152, 3748235; 432154, 3748312; 432121, 
3748473; 432121, 3748544; 432109, 3748577; 432073, 3748614; 431926, 
3748722; 431859, 3748810; 431778, 3748866; 431712, 3748889; 431641, 
3748901; 431491, 3748890; 431431, 3748872; 431353, 3748830; 431068, 
3748646; 430666, 3748361; 430432, 3748227; 430080, 3748058; 429848, 
3747970; 429591, 3747848; 429403, 3747735; 427822, 3746840; 427649, 
3746756; 427447, 3746689; 426581, 3746504; 426126, 3746415; 425941, 
3746399; 425853, 3746399; 425852, 3746506; 426009, 3746515; 426141, 
3746535; 426882, 3746670; 427227, 3746745; 427560, 3746829; 427676, 
3746876; 427804, 3746941; 429341, 3747823; 429709, 3748019; 430328, 
3748290; 430502, 3748391; 430618, 3748476; 430744, 3748552; 430779, 
3748589; 430805, 3748697; 430811, 3748761; 430803, 3748798; 430965, 
3748887; 431072, 3748985; 431224, 3748977; 431238, 3748986; 431242, 
3749070; 431317, 3749218; 431364, 3749269; 431432, 3749309; 431499, 
3749332; 431587, 3749338; 431684, 3749320; 431776, 3749271; 431969, 
3749136; 432292, 3748817; 432333, 3748763; 432550, 3748356; 432609, 
3748267; 432685, 3748186; 432851, 3748105; 432954, 3748084; 433122, 
3748085; 433261, 3748126; 433392, 3748186; 433613, 3748269; 433765, 
3748320; 433894, 3748351; 433999, 3748358; 434076, 3748343; 434133, 
3748371; 434288, 3748376; 434351, 3748281; 434404, 3748286; 434530, 
3748262; 434587, 3748282; 434673, 3748289; 434864, 3748352; 434926, 
3748398; 435009, 3748431; 435174, 3748416; 435499, 3748568; 435539, 
3748608; 435628, 3748636; 435712, 3748625; 435815, 3748647; 435867, 
3748648; 435893, 3748665; 435890, 3748729; 435980, 3748742; 436024, 
3748773; 436433, 3748700; 436638, 3748607; 436667, 3748461; 436746, 
3748352; 436783, 3748279; 436785, 3748204; 436804, 3748152; 436893, 
3748104; 437012, 3748021; 437085, 3747983; 437383, 3747900; 437493, 
3747898; 437586, 3747904; 437681, 3747928; 437884, 3748054; 438053, 
3748138; 438099, 3748182; 438134, 3748265; 438212, 3748574; 438227, 
3748689; 438252, 3748775; 438235, 3748844; 438250, 3748959; 438290, 
3749147; 438351, 3749356; 438405, 3749440; 438637, 3749625; 438734, 
3749688; 438816, 3749730; 438873, 3749735; 438903, 3749767; 438985, 
3749795; thence returning to 439123, 3749777.
    (i) Map of Subunit 1C (Lower Santa Ana River) follows:

[[Page 724]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14DE10.003

    (9) Unit 2: San Gabriel River, Los Angeles County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Mount Baldy, Mount San Antonia, 
Crystal Lake, Waterman Mountain, Azusa and Glendora. Land bounded by the 
following UTM NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 412207, 3789649; 412240, 
3789651; 412263, 3789642; 412291, 3789622; 412319, 3789588; 412362, 
3789390; 412369, 3789285; 412385, 3789277; 412401, 3789280; 412418, 
3789291; 412456, 3789343; 412507, 3789432; 412570, 3789514; 412622, 
3789548; 412647, 3789547; 412666, 3789539; 412678,

[[Page 725]]

3789496; 412694, 3789488; 412703, 3789493; 412747, 3789568; 412758, 
3789617; 412751, 3789642; 412770, 3789656; 412790, 3789696; 412843, 
3789762; 412866, 3789779; 412934, 3789799; 412952, 3789788; 412954, 
3789775; 412945, 3789723; 412951, 3789658; 413055, 3789562; 413156, 
3789439; 413169, 3789408; 413230, 3789343; 413269, 3789328; 413330, 
3789348; 413367, 3789370; 413398, 3789365; 413418, 3789326; 413387, 
3789291; 413389, 3789230; 413398, 3789203; 413415, 3789189; 413520, 
3789234; 413571, 3789248; 413614, 3789245; 413634, 3789236; 413754, 
3789237; 413924, 3789215; 413963, 3789231; 413980, 3789249; 413998, 
3789296; 413995, 3789357; 414044, 3789392; 414092, 3789400; 414188, 
3789383; 414255, 3789386; 414333, 3789359; 414360, 3789355; 414391, 
3789361; 414444, 3789400; 414473, 3789449; 414486, 3789499; 414471, 
3789593; 414481, 3789615; 414507, 3789619; 414524, 3789612; 414550, 
3789620; 414605, 3789596; 414719, 3789580; 414739, 3789589; 414779, 
3789633; 414817, 3789655; 414900, 3789683; 414953, 3789693; 414995, 
3789691; 415037, 3789685; 415066, 3789665; 415089, 3789635; 415107, 
3789587; 415120, 3789449; 415133, 3789414; 415159, 3789405; 415189, 
3789413; 415284, 3789464; 415323, 3789472; 415370, 3789452; 415384, 
3789422; 415448, 3789386; 415562, 3789290; 415637, 3789258; 415676, 
3789256; 415717, 3789267; 415742, 3789292; 415758, 3789317; 415766, 
3789367; 415808, 3789412; 415838, 3789430; 415883, 3789441; 415929, 
3789438; 416010, 3789414; 416081, 3789421; 416111, 3789439; 416182, 
3789523; 416245, 3789650; 416275, 3789668; 416403, 3789670; 416466, 
3789705; 416480, 3789725; 416482, 3789857; 416497, 3789880; 416565, 
3789892; 416634, 3789867; 416805, 3789827; 416846, 3789801; 416886, 
3789795; 417009, 3789821; 417030, 3789845; 417034, 3789864; 417036, 
3789973; 417025, 3790011; 417081, 3790064; 417106, 3790079; 417114, 
3790095; 417150, 3790127; 417148, 3790147; 417168, 3790180; 417176, 
3790202; 417173, 3790227; 417181, 3790234; 417203, 3790188; 417180, 
3790147; 417182, 3790129; 417174, 3790105; 417150, 3790064; 417058, 
3790000; 417071, 3789987; 417059, 3789899; 417077, 3789873; 417079, 
3789829; 417115, 3789801; 417208, 3789772; 417299, 3789726; 417375, 
3789658; 417394, 3789630; 417422, 3789560; 417428, 3789488; 417420, 
3789287; 417430, 3789265; 417481, 3789207; 417516, 3789184; 417606, 
3789192; 417737, 3789152; 417806, 3789209; 417832, 3789271; 417880, 
3789293; 417944, 3789274; 418087, 3789178; 418330, 3789112; 418543, 
3789101; 418557, 3789121; 418562, 3789151; 418521, 3789207; 418442, 
3789258; 418306, 3789300; 418282, 3789320; 418278, 3789365; 418344, 
3789470; 418360, 3789511; 418358, 3789541; 418345, 3789578; 418255, 
3789704; 418237, 3789752; 418252, 3789822; 418286, 3789840; 418423, 
3789874; 418447, 3789898; 418464, 3789925; 418460, 3789957; 418426, 
3790024; 418430, 3790062; 418461, 3790103; 418501, 3790121; 418623, 
3790101; 418602, 3790199; 418610, 3790286; 418625, 3790332; 418621, 
3790404; 418591, 3790473; 418608, 3790508; 418642, 3790541; 418758, 
3790583; 418763, 3790696; 418743, 3790732; 418683, 3790787; 418674, 
3790810; 418688, 3790849; 418711, 3790992; 418630, 3791137; 418556, 
3791189; 418527, 3791221; 418511, 3791292; 418488, 3791304; 418436, 
3791277; 418392, 3791216; 418336, 3791222; 418268, 3791252; 418222, 
3791285; 418173, 3791376; 418166, 3791413; 418142, 3791456; 418132, 
3791497; 418146, 3791542; 418138, 3791585; 418119, 3791615; 418076, 
3791634; 418033, 3791670; 417937, 3791698; 417860, 3791750; 417818, 
3791755; 417781, 3791772; 417755, 3791797; 417747, 3791826; 417753, 
3791848; 417829, 3791896; 417830, 3791918; 417787, 3791970; 417739, 
3792001; 417698, 3792018; 417653, 3792023; 417608, 3792045; 417566, 
3792083; 417555, 3792129; 417558, 3792167; 417586, 3792219; 417654, 
3792283; 417707, 3792297; 417807, 3792267; 417881, 3792278; 417907, 
3792297; 417930, 3792386; 417989, 3792426; 417999, 3792459; 417994, 
3792499; 417974, 3792530; 417964, 3792570; 417917, 3792615; 417881, 
3792671; 417868, 3792681; 417799, 3792653; 417788, 3792666; 417832, 
3792701; 417856, 3792705; 417890, 3792697; 417961, 3792624; 417998, 
3792613; 418080, 3792745; 418103, 3792752; 418102, 3792731; 418044, 
3792616; 418051, 3792586; 418077, 3792555; 418070, 3792454; 418039, 
3792404; 417969, 3792355; 417963, 3792313; 417950, 3792279; 417913, 
3792247; 417860, 3792233; 417797, 3792229; 417771, 3792251; 417715, 
3792260; 417697, 3792254; 417678, 3792229; 417658, 3792224; 417610, 
3792170; 417618, 3792127; 417679, 3792066; 417756, 3792035; 417809, 
3792003; 417850, 3791965; 417864, 3791920; 417861, 3791882; 417823, 
3791836; 417832, 3791817; 417927, 3791741; 417968, 3791717; 418019, 
3791712; 418128, 3791675; 418157, 3791645; 418196, 3791543; 418209, 
3791435; 418226, 3791391; 418261, 3791355; 418302, 3791325; 418341, 
3791311; 418414, 3791346; 418449, 3791354; 418527, 3791322; 418545, 
3791279; 418576, 3791246; 418606, 3791240; 418720, 3791129; 418749, 
3791089; 418758, 3791037; 418758, 3790905; 418795, 3790733; 418843, 
3790650; 418849, 3790613; 418841, 3790574; 418820, 3790547; 418779, 
3790520; 418696, 3790504; 418681, 3790484; 418760, 3790376; 418760, 
3790352; 418751, 3790338; 418721, 3790336; 418681, 3790346; 418666, 
3790332; 418659, 3790308; 418658, 3790273; 418757, 3790057; 418745, 
3790033; 418718, 3790024; 418679, 3790024; 418560, 3790057; 418525, 
3790050; 418507, 3790034; 418547, 3789923; 418527, 3789875; 418424, 
3789810; 418385, 3789802; 418357, 3789786; 418335, 3789756; 418328, 
3789709; 418404, 3789566; 418409, 3789518; 418389, 3789460; 418336, 
3789358; 418352, 3789336; 418387, 3789306; 418460, 3789287; 418529, 
3789251; 418599, 3789202; 418785, 3789206; 418836, 3789224; 418858, 
3789266; 418872, 3789341; 418889, 3789371; 418923, 3789389; 419098, 
3789384; 419165, 3789389; 419193, 3789409; 419246, 3789473; 419313, 
3789501; 419402, 3789478; 419460, 3789476; 419612, 3789447; 419698, 
3789441; 419741, 3789428; 419832, 3789334; 419876, 3789313; 419913, 
3789313; 419903, 3789408; 419915, 3789476; 419964, 3789615; 419984, 
3789648; 420024, 3789689; 420198, 3789822; 420319, 3790052; 420363, 
3790081; 420458, 3790067; 420489, 3790128; 420538, 3790166; 420600, 
3790208; 420650, 3790229; 420688, 3790267; 420787, 3790316; 420833, 
3790408; 420894, 3790494; 420967, 3790571; 420980, 3790727; 421021, 
3790900; 421053, 3790992; 421136, 3791056; 421230, 3791113; 421275, 
3791156; 421330, 3791235; 421407, 3791304; 421456, 3791342; 421583, 
3791415; 421835, 3791456; 422070, 3791428; 422217, 3791429; 422289, 
3791641; 422275, 3791683; 422279, 3791771; 422266, 3791855; 422077, 
3792392; 422043, 3792547; 422068, 3792606; 422057, 3792641; 422076, 
3792719; 422064, 3792757; 422069, 3792797; 422098, 3792814; 422107, 
3792998; 422117, 3793017; 422146, 3793040; 422178, 3793045; 422204, 
3793031; 422220, 3793013; 422225, 3792910; 422218, 3792868; 422236, 
3792808; 422241, 3792749; 422242,

[[Page 726]]

3792696; 422184, 3792571; 422191, 3792508; 422162, 3792399; 422176, 
3792356; 422226, 3792290; 422244, 3792250; 422245, 3792206; 422259, 
3792173; 422344, 3792083; 422359, 3792054; 422363, 3792014; 422353, 
3791901; 422413, 3791745; 422408, 3791694; 422415, 3791638; 422443, 
3791651; 422477, 3791681; 422509, 3791741; 422547, 3791767; 422691, 
3791807; 422702, 3791850; 422726, 3791876; 422752, 3791902; 422821, 
3791938; 422859, 3791979; 422987, 3792041; 423080, 3792040; 423103, 
3792053; 423116, 3792094; 423184, 3792130; 423237, 3792145; 423349, 
3792138; 423393, 3792123; 423447, 3792042; 423482, 3792008; 423515, 
3791992; 423704, 3791985; 423721, 3792013; 423727, 3792051; 423714, 
3792081; 423718, 3792134; 423742, 3792152; 423778, 3792152; 423866, 
3792128; 423897, 3792131; 423935, 3792180; 423969, 3792244; 423999, 
3792256; 424060, 3792255; 424142, 3792305; 424177, 3792298; 424232, 
3792256; 424223, 3792230; 424191, 3792232; 424158, 3792252; 424131, 
3792247; 424069, 3792211; 423999, 3792207; 423975, 3792192; 423932, 
3792125; 423924, 3792098; 423894, 3792083; 423857, 3792087; 423817, 
3792107; 423785, 3792107; 423775, 3792097; 423801, 3792058; 423804, 
3792010; 423774, 3791967; 423744, 3791942; 423697, 3791935; 423602, 
3791945; 423570, 3791934; 423479, 3791933; 423435, 3791946; 423400, 
3791977; 423367, 3792035; 423322, 3792065; 423181, 3792070; 423124, 
3792007; 423091, 3791944; 423057, 3791916; 423013, 3791937; 422969, 
3791947; 422934, 3791933; 422838, 3791883; 422730, 3791763; 422688, 
3791732; 422547, 3791684; 422510, 3791640; 422457, 3791507; 422397, 
3791437; 422322, 3791419; 422238, 3791338; 422122, 3791306; 422063, 
3791304; 422027, 3791313; 422009, 3791346; 421984, 3791363; 421947, 
3791344; 421909, 3791299; 421751, 3791247; 421647, 3791230; 421568, 
3791198; 421473, 3791147; 421386, 3791064; 421285, 3790999; 421202, 
3790968; 421148, 3790903; 421128, 3790845; 421084, 3790762; 421114, 
3790695; 421134, 3790587; 421127, 3790546; 421101, 3790526; 421063, 
3790467; 421042, 3790385; 421002, 3790341; 420919, 3790286; 420864, 
3790235; 420807, 3790204; 420726, 3790197; 420674, 3790183; 420613, 
3790078; 420539, 3790039; 420388, 3790008; 420349, 3789990; 420331, 
3789956; 420332, 3789891; 420315, 3789863; 420290, 3789847; 420276, 
3789825; 420251, 3789739; 420227, 3789713; 420193, 3789710; 420068, 
3789662; 420006, 3789618; 419991, 3789588; 420000, 3789519; 419945, 
3789398; 419955, 3789352; 419985, 3789321; 420035, 3789323; 420151, 
3789303; 420209, 3789312; 420248, 3789340; 420282, 3789378; 420341, 
3789498; 420400, 3789551; 420472, 3789580; 420532, 3789563; 420584, 
3789499; 420591, 3789426; 420583, 3789370; 420592, 3789224; 420629, 
3789168; 420674, 3789123; 420718, 3789117; 420765, 3789119; 420815, 
3789139; 420975, 3789222; 421019, 3789216; 421049, 3789224; 421075, 
3789251; 421151, 3789290; 421234, 3789348; 421337, 3789386; 421536, 
3789352; 421578, 3789334; 421623, 3789298; 421651, 3789213; 421723, 
3789149; 421832, 3788918; 421867, 3788866; 421895, 3788858; 422195, 
3788697; 422234, 3788645; 422282, 3788508; 422307, 3788465; 422340, 
3788464; 422391, 3788493; 422392, 3788515; 422436, 3788571; 422553, 
3788602; 422595, 3788692; 422611, 3788678; 422660, 3788678; 422687, 
3788715; 422770, 3788760; 422854, 3788834; 422963, 3788881; 423090, 
3788898; 423175, 3788875; 423211, 3788858; 423230, 3788839; 423427, 
3788793; 423452, 3788807; 423494, 3788784; 423527, 3788786; 423596, 
3788805; 423617, 3788818; 423792, 3788860; 423944, 3788862; 424060, 
3788939; 424168, 3789076; 424227, 3789101; 424258, 3789099; 424325, 
3789064; 424413, 3788986; 424467, 3788855; 424486, 3788840; 424507, 
3788835; 424517, 3788783; 424608, 3788722; 424703, 3788699; 424815, 
3788695; 425139, 3788730; 425294, 3788759; 425323, 3788773; 425346, 
3788766; 425374, 3788736; 425450, 3788693; 425556, 3788681; 425643, 
3788685; 425686, 3788656; 425782, 3788538; 425850, 3788537; 425882, 
3788516; 425909, 3788485; 425982, 3788436; 426048, 3788414; 426068, 
3788394; 426206, 3788364; 426319, 3788277; 426394, 3788191; 426461, 
3788164; 426534, 3788159; 426584, 3788182; 426626, 3788178; 426648, 
3788191; 426681, 3788232; 426707, 3788246; 426699, 3788309; 426703, 
3788336; 426728, 3788356; 426769, 3788369; 426823, 3788374; 426894, 
3788317; 426933, 3788261; 426984, 3788210; 427015, 3788206; 427080, 
3788221; 427142, 3788271; 427246, 3788317; 427290, 3788328; 427318, 
3788312; 427352, 3788309; 427392, 3788290; 427424, 3788208; 427428, 
3788146; 427492, 3788073; 427552, 3788024; 427675, 3788008; 427749, 
3788018; 427850, 3787987; 427962, 3787977; 428043, 3787993; 428111, 
3787996; 428180, 3787978; 428217, 3787943; 428245, 3787937; 428268, 
3787943; 428317, 3787976; 428507, 3788018; 428567, 3788044; 428602, 
3788050; 428680, 3788046; 428711, 3788036; 428733, 3788016; 428769, 
3788001; 428842, 3787977; 428913, 3787927; 428945, 3787916; 429050, 
3787853; 429124, 3787859; 429141, 3787875; 429154, 3787924; 429154, 
3787968; 429137, 3788014; 429131, 3788062; 429137, 3788115; 429161, 
3788237; 429192, 3788295; 429194, 3788352; 429211, 3788369; 429235, 
3788441; 429254, 3788466; 429279, 3788484; 429360, 3788487; 429364, 
3788500; 429338, 3788545; 429308, 3788569; 429279, 3788625; 429278, 
3788664; 429243, 3788753; 429251, 3788783; 429278, 3788805; 429354, 
3788831; 429396, 3788830; 429460, 3788807; 429531, 3788824; 429534, 
3788842; 429495, 3788906; 429484, 3788971; 429434, 3789023; 429426, 
3789091; 429448, 3789123; 429491, 3789146; 429530, 3789157; 429573, 
3789159; 429617, 3789151; 429657, 3789141; 429688, 3789120; 429719, 
3789110; 429773, 3789118; 429793, 3789133; 429817, 3789176; 429810, 
3789259; 429801, 3789280; 429822, 3789330; 429825, 3789371; 429867, 
3789431; 429892, 3789446; 429912, 3789470; 429943, 3789527; 429982, 
3789679; 429947, 3789792; 429940, 3789889; 429980, 3789926; 429986, 
3789948; 429977, 3789977; 429990, 3790060; 430002, 3790080; 430060, 
3790119; 430085, 3790147; 430085, 3790224; 430040, 3790368; 430035, 
3790417; 430044, 3790437; 430099, 3790486; 430113, 3790558; 430106, 
3790580; 430083, 3790601; 430013, 3790639; 430001, 3790708; 430030, 
3790739; 430157, 3790832; 430195, 3790844; 430214, 3790841; 430246, 
3790819; 430269, 3790821; 430324, 3790850; 430333, 3790868; 430320, 
3790914; 430325, 3791033; 430368, 3791056; 430409, 3791055; 430488, 
3791008; 430601, 3790989; 430672, 3791003; 430784, 3791083; 430821, 
3791097; 430847, 3791095; 430864, 3791081; 430887, 3791026; 430878, 
3791004; 430880, 3790982; 430917, 3790977; 430950, 3790992; 430982, 
3791026; 431013, 3791040; 431061, 3791020; 431136, 3791031; 431182, 
3791077; 431202, 3791138; 431225, 3791161; 431234, 3791189; 431221, 
3791241; 431135, 3791244; 431122, 3791278; 431059, 3791320; 431049, 
3791343; 431056, 3791367; 431124, 3791450; 431178, 3791492; 431244, 
3791522; 431253, 3791547; 431254, 3791573; 431242, 3791596; 431208, 
3791628; 431183, 3791669; 431173,

[[Page 727]]

3791704; 431178, 3791901; 431186, 3791923; 431166, 3791948; 431159, 
3791976; 431159, 3792018; 431234, 3792101; 431231, 3792147; 431208, 
3792174; 431114, 3792204; 431079, 3792250; 431068, 3792294; 431094, 
3792324; 431140, 3792342; 431141, 3792364; 431161, 3792397; 431219, 
3792443; 431224, 3792484; 431205, 3792536; 431098, 3792668; 431020, 
3792747; 430974, 3792783; 430858, 3792821; 430693, 3792937; 430668, 
3792996; 430659, 3793111; 430629, 3793215; 430572, 3793348; 430606, 
3793428; 430652, 3793454; 430691, 3793452; 430725, 3793440; 430753, 
3793445; 430765, 3793467; 430766, 3793487; 430728, 3793550; 430690, 
3793573; 430669, 3793600; 430662, 3793642; 430705, 3793664; 430745, 
3793649; 430766, 3793653; 430865, 3793718; 431001, 3793773; 431011, 
3793784; 431039, 3793789; 431084, 3793782; 431152, 3793830; 431162, 
3793818; 431185, 3793837; 431208, 3793843; 431261, 3793830; 431230, 
3793804; 431205, 3793815; 431177, 3793802; 431142, 3793812; 431096, 
3793769; 431075, 3793767; 431058, 3793750; 431040, 3793756; 431012, 
3793750; 430928, 3793705; 430871, 3793655; 430851, 3793649; 430815, 
3793612; 430740, 3793615; 430714, 3793606; 430780, 3793551; 430806, 
3793489; 430803, 3793452; 430787, 3793424; 430758, 3793407; 430664, 
3793418; 430639, 3793415; 430620, 3793359; 430653, 3793306; 430653, 
3793265; 430664, 3793244; 430775, 3793154; 430813, 3793091; 430839, 
3793026; 431182, 3792705; 431303, 3792547; 431315, 3792506; 431311, 
3792463; 431296, 3792409; 431271, 3792360; 431228, 3792329; 431162, 
3792315; 431145, 3792298; 431141, 3792276; 431144, 3792253; 431201, 
3792238; 431277, 3792207; 431309, 3792174; 431306, 3792143; 431281, 
3792068; 431217, 3791949; 431230, 3791894; 431215, 3791832; 431253, 
3791678; 431307, 3791582; 431315, 3791553; 431309, 3791519; 431284, 
3791509; 431238, 3791466; 431181, 3791442; 431128, 3791394; 431130, 
3791368; 431147, 3791344; 431169, 3791329; 431265, 3791300; 431287, 
3791282; 431308, 3791219; 431302, 3791191; 431200, 3791022; 431144, 
3790985; 431111, 3790982; 431057, 3790991; 431012, 3790984; 430890, 
3790932; 430867, 3790937; 430850, 3790953; 430820, 3791014; 430802, 
3791024; 430777, 3791024; 430734, 3790985; 430721, 3790961; 430590, 
3790915; 430507, 3790908; 430451, 3790938; 430418, 3790975; 430385, 
3790975; 430374, 3790953; 430385, 3790900; 430374, 3790826; 430270, 
3790792; 430207, 3790795; 430182, 3790788; 430073, 3790707; 430065, 
3790689; 430071, 3790665; 430100, 3790639; 430150, 3790564; 430156, 
3790536; 430156, 3790508; 430122, 3790452; 430120, 3790432; 430139, 
3790358; 430104, 3790273; 430110, 3790223; 430097, 3790085; 430079, 
3790063; 430034, 3790045; 430025, 3790030; 430027, 3789916; 430004, 
3789904; 429986, 3789867; 429983, 3789774; 430007, 3789698; 430011, 
3789647; 429974, 3789480; 429954, 3789442; 429902, 3789418; 429882, 
3789371; 429872, 3789293; 429888, 3789218; 429848, 3789043; 429828, 
3789014; 429737, 3789003; 429679, 3789011; 429597, 3789060; 429571, 
3789059; 429565, 3789008; 429597, 3788931; 429615, 3788862; 429609, 
3788792; 429588, 3788756; 429548, 3788738; 429486, 3788739; 429425, 
3788753; 429400, 3788747; 429390, 3788730; 429386, 3788615; 429427, 
3788559; 429434, 3788535; 429426, 3788476; 429404, 3788454; 429367, 
3788447; 429332, 3788420; 429257, 3788319; 429244, 3788284; 429167, 
3788015; 429196, 3787915; 429197, 3787865; 429241, 3787810; 429254, 
3787818; 429273, 3787862; 429267, 3787885; 429278, 3787895; 429338, 
3787897; 429391, 3787825; 429415, 3787749; 429438, 3787736; 429504, 
3787752; 429545, 3787750; 429559, 3787694; 429597, 3787662; 429613, 
3787678; 429644, 3787782; 429728, 3787916; 429725, 3787959; 429734, 
3788005; 429755, 3788028; 429787, 3788035; 429826, 3788008; 429869, 
3787953; 429885, 3787945; 429923, 3787955; 429966, 3787932; 429973, 
3787912; 430046, 3787873; 430090, 3787883; 430152, 3787932; 430187, 
3787987; 430218, 3787990; 430263, 3787969; 430315, 3787932; 430390, 
3787853; 430433, 3787846; 430451, 3787850; 430474, 3787879; 430497, 
3787894; 430504, 3787912; 430561, 3787935; 430564, 3787958; 430625, 
3787963; 430699, 3787948; 430890, 3787996; 430894, 3788024; 430985, 
3788045; 431012, 3788084; 431048, 3788104; 431071, 3788147; 431068, 
3788215; 431088, 3788256; 431125, 3788286; 431153, 3788333; 431186, 
3788361; 431204, 3788409; 431278, 3788466; 431314, 3788478; 431357, 
3788583; 431371, 3788682; 431381, 3788708; 431414, 3788722; 431468, 
3788718; 431502, 3788706; 431511, 3788686; 431538, 3788675; 431566, 
3788701; 431668, 3788675; 431689, 3788678; 431721, 3788706; 431750, 
3788764; 431833, 3788787; 431956, 3788847; 431980, 3788843; 432026, 
3788895; 432068, 3788921; 432093, 3788921; 432124, 3788889; 432123, 
3788846; 432142, 3788793; 432151, 3788737; 432221, 3788706; 432267, 
3788696; 432306, 3788603; 432339, 3788585; 432353, 3788551; 432404, 
3788575; 432461, 3788580; 432478, 3788563; 432496, 3788520; 432567, 
3788457; 432621, 3788427; 432651, 3788423; 432676, 3788452; 432691, 
3788458; 432729, 3788435; 432756, 3788430; 432806, 3788441; 432844, 
3788430; 432889, 3788437; 432917, 3788426; 432963, 3788399; 432961, 
3788378; 433039, 3788294; 433127, 3788269; 433241, 3788259; 433280, 
3788266; 433293, 3788225; 433290, 3788183; 433301, 3788146; 433351, 
3788052; 433372, 3788047; 433393, 3788019; 433416, 3788027; 433582, 
3788029; 433648, 3788067; 433750, 3788057; 433768, 3788046; 433794, 
3788025; 433797, 3788002; 433766, 3787965; 433688, 3787961; 433635, 
3787941; 433579, 3787954; 433494, 3787940; 433435, 3787952; 433416, 
3787950; 433414, 3787944; 433430, 3787931; 433505, 3787925; 433529, 
3787914; 433552, 3787881; 433575, 3787867; 433579, 3787841; 433588, 
3787837; 433670, 3787864; 433735, 3787848; 433752, 3787837; 433760, 
3787816; 433757, 3787762; 433768, 3787756; 433833, 3787765; 433858, 
3787744; 433931, 3787719; 433967, 3787738; 433985, 3787734; 434103, 
3787691; 434120, 3787671; 434100, 3787644; 434069, 3787658; 434035, 
3787660; 433975, 3787695; 433953, 3787697; 433930, 3787671; 433904, 
3787657; 433878, 3787657; 433863, 3787678; 433862, 3787700; 433848, 
3787712; 433823, 3787724; 433736, 3787739; 433720, 3787761; 433720, 
3787782; 433700, 3787835; 433600, 3787812; 433576, 3787813; 433564, 
3787822; 433534, 3787874; 433495, 3787891; 433376, 3787907; 433358, 
3787922; 433343, 3787924; 433285, 3787988; 433269, 3788024; 433249, 
3788084; 433257, 3788156; 433218, 3788183; 433195, 3788215; 433141, 
3788216; 433107, 3788208; 433084, 3788222; 433049, 3788223; 433005, 
3788249; 433004, 3788275; 432933, 3788311; 432925, 3788358; 432889, 
3788371; 432841, 3788384; 432772, 3788369; 432721, 3788372; 432687, 
3788351; 432579, 3788341; 432500, 3788387; 432485, 3788412; 432339, 
3788462; 432314, 3788518; 432276, 3788549; 432252, 3788599; 432222, 
3788627; 432187, 3788641; 432132, 3788702; 432103, 3788705; 432087, 
3788718; 432095, 3788756; 432078, 3788809; 432034, 3788814; 432013, 
3788802; 431986, 3788799; 431931,

[[Page 728]]

3788770; 431861, 3788758; 431805, 3788731; 431771, 3788678; 431736, 
3788640; 431707, 3788621; 431637, 3788615; 431611, 3788626; 431478, 
3788642; 431462, 3788632; 431430, 3788595; 431414, 3788525; 431378, 
3788451; 431339, 3788436; 431237, 3788358; 431211, 3788297; 431191, 
3788284; 431177, 3788258; 431166, 3788197; 431126, 3788134; 431121, 
3788096; 431094, 3788033; 431043, 3788003; 431012, 3787968; 430938, 
3787951; 430903, 3787950; 430880, 3787919; 430853, 3787905; 430614, 
3787885; 430593, 3787874; 430558, 3787835; 430491, 3787808; 430429, 
3787766; 430401, 3787761; 430383, 3787762; 430367, 3787778; 430356, 
3787801; 430229, 3787927; 430207, 3787931; 430190, 3787923; 430115, 
3787824; 430086, 3787799; 430065, 3787796; 430006, 3787823; 429970, 
3787857; 429859, 3787865; 429834, 3787878; 429810, 3787899; 429801, 
3787962; 429780, 3787966; 429766, 3787946; 429765, 3787890; 429715, 
3787816; 429669, 3787726; 429669, 3787679; 429647, 3787623; 429619, 
3787612; 429588, 3787618; 429545, 3787641; 429527, 3787691; 429439, 
3787700; 429390, 3787697; 429376, 3787704; 429342, 3787856; 429328, 
3787862; 429282, 3787789; 429251, 3787774; 429235, 3787778; 429225, 
3787794; 429196, 3787811; 429169, 3787821; 429134, 3787797; 429105, 
3787791; 429028, 3787792; 428994, 3787801; 428912, 3787840; 428736, 
3787948; 428650, 3787971; 428543, 3787969; 428416, 3787916; 428383, 
3787912; 428370, 3787919; 428270, 3787893; 428228, 3787890; 428180, 
3787902; 428161, 3787921; 428136, 3787928; 427995, 3787935; 427902, 
3787929; 427848, 3787944; 427759, 3787953; 427637, 3787944; 427547, 
3787956; 427455, 3787997; 427398, 3788051; 427312, 3788209; 427285, 
3788242; 427252, 3788261; 427190, 3788255; 427159, 3788239; 427107, 
3788192; 427075, 3788146; 427049, 3788130; 427026, 3788133; 426892, 
3788253; 426846, 3788272; 426754, 3788274; 426742, 3788267; 426759, 
3788219; 426761, 3788183; 426668, 3788115; 426579, 3788065; 426513, 
3788046; 426419, 3788037; 426378, 3788045; 426346, 3788067; 426359, 
3788097; 426361, 3788122; 426276, 3788196; 426208, 3788244; 426188, 
3788274; 426149, 3788300; 426044, 3788347; 425943, 3788330; 425927, 
3788337; 425916, 3788374; 425893, 3788385; 425818, 3788388; 425800, 
3788400; 425775, 3788470; 425675, 3788583; 425609, 3788618; 425527, 
3788634; 425462, 3788632; 425441, 3788621; 425393, 3788627; 425376, 
3788621; 425323, 3788636; 425037, 3788628; 424985, 3788618; 424674, 
3788622; 424542, 3788611; 424501, 3788626; 424470, 3788656; 424430, 
3788727; 424420, 3788757; 424414, 3788859; 424346, 3788874; 424309, 
3788917; 424283, 3788928; 424237, 3788915; 424141, 3788843; 424101, 
3788778; 424047, 3788758; 424024, 3788731; 423936, 3788694; 423889, 
3788675; 423855, 3788683; 423792, 3788666; 423715, 3788679; 423657, 
3788656; 423591, 3788642; 423558, 3788644; 423482, 3788709; 423429, 
3788709; 423398, 3788718; 423355, 3788715; 423257, 3788737; 423148, 
3788747; 423114, 3788737; 423006, 3788734; 422956, 3788724; 422842, 
3788621; 422777, 3788543; 422716, 3788407; 422645, 3788343; 422625, 
3788333; 422607, 3788342; 422572, 3788396; 422510, 3788396; 422480, 
3788384; 422459, 3788359; 422447, 3788200; 422187, 3788206; 422143, 
3788256; 422114, 3788323; 422106, 3788362; 422108, 3788442; 422099, 
3788475; 422059, 3788544; 422053, 3788569; 421993, 3788592; 421956, 
3788592; 421872, 3788625; 421825, 3788599; 421793, 3788599; 421769, 
3788606; 421738, 3788630; 421703, 3788707; 421683, 3788796; 421669, 
3788919; 421647, 3788967; 421644, 3789008; 421630, 3789058; 421590, 
3789110; 421533, 3789139; 421308, 3789146; 421173, 3789130; 421128, 
3789105; 420942, 3788933; 420906, 3788908; 420873, 3788890; 420814, 
3788867; 420779, 3788863; 420749, 3788846; 420710, 3788855; 420684, 
3788884; 420645, 3788946; 420615, 3788973; 420536, 3789089; 420510, 
3789186; 420509, 3789320; 420494, 3789396; 420491, 3789473; 420474, 
3789500; 420425, 3789474; 420374, 3789429; 420337, 3789365; 420340, 
3789316; 420326, 3789294; 420294, 3789272; 420250, 3789257; 420138, 
3789248; 420003, 3789258; 419923, 3789252; 419853, 3789285; 419786, 
3789332; 419741, 3789386; 419704, 3789404; 419461, 3789430; 419407, 
3789428; 419360, 3789420; 419219, 3789375; 419186, 3789339; 419161, 
3789326; 419055, 3789329; 419015, 3789324; 418968, 3789308; 418915, 
3789249; 418891, 3789195; 418855, 3789177; 418816, 3789163; 418650, 
3789149; 418607, 3789133; 418599, 3789113; 418612, 3789048; 418563, 
3789031; 418216, 3789060; 418148, 3789075; 418089, 3789070; 418021, 
3789109; 417980, 3789117; 417943, 3789184; 417920, 3789201; 417915, 
3789230; 417894, 3789239; 417855, 3789215; 417803, 3789148; 417777, 
3789132; 417712, 3789126; 417631, 3789143; 417501, 3789143; 417453, 
3789165; 417423, 3789196; 417406, 3789234; 417386, 3789326; 417378, 
3789492; 417331, 3789612; 417300, 3789649; 417221, 3789708; 417152, 
3789734; 417071, 3789778; 417019, 3789779; 416919, 3789755; 416813, 
3789767; 416725, 3789807; 416620, 3789820; 416554, 3789849; 416533, 
3789842; 416520, 3789817; 416518, 3789747; 416494, 3789674; 416462, 
3789651; 416414, 3789633; 416359, 3789627; 416300, 3789645; 416267, 
3789610; 416222, 3789513; 416188, 3789466; 416143, 3789425; 416088, 
3789394; 415979, 3789367; 415888, 3789377; 415850, 3789374; 415810, 
3789336; 415766, 3789254; 415735, 3789233; 415699, 3789223; 415581, 
3789239; 415534, 3789258; 415456, 3789306; 415416, 3789343; 415297, 
3789405; 415175, 3789354; 415131, 3789355; 415100, 3789369; 415080, 
3789394; 415076, 3789426; 415077, 3789558; 415042, 3789638; 414987, 
3789656; 414948, 3789655; 414839, 3789613; 414739, 3789544; 414651, 
3789552; 414538, 3789584; 414513, 3789540; 414526, 3789498; 414502, 
3789413; 414453, 3789342; 414382, 3789305; 414289, 3789316; 414097, 
3789361; 414057, 3789361; 414038, 3789352; 414018, 3789283; 414023, 
3789250; 414014, 3789228; 414000, 3789206; 413943, 3789184; 413908, 
3789183; 413861, 3789199; 413799, 3789207; 413726, 3789208; 413645, 
3789196; 413622, 3789209; 413584, 3789209; 413456, 3789168; 413389, 
3789164; 413366, 3789174; 413345, 3789219; 413358, 3789284; 413358, 
3789321; 413333, 3789320; 413273, 3789299; 413245, 3789301; 413182, 
3789331; 412981, 3789587; 412908, 3789636; 412902, 3789694; 412890, 
3789719; 412852, 3789707; 412778, 3789579; 412761, 3789526; 412697, 
3789461; 412673, 3789458; 412628, 3789483; 412600, 3789481; 412566, 
3789461; 412447, 3789267; 412375, 3789200; 412351, 3789198; 412321, 
3789211; 412310, 3789230; 412335, 3789305; 412330, 3789412; 412311, 
3789461; 412288, 3789572; 412272, 3789602; 412253, 3789619; 412218, 
3789627; 412187, 3789624; 412119, 3789583; 412048, 3789578; 411991, 
3789534; 411949, 3789489; 411905, 3789477; 411888, 3789489; 411847, 
3789550; 411801, 3789647; 411779, 3789671; 411746, 3789682; 411687, 
3789658; 411647, 3789615; 411600, 3789623; 411575, 3789637; 411555, 
3789657; 411528, 3789714; 411504, 3789734; 411471, 3789729; 411437, 
3789712; 411415, 3789688; 411341,

[[Page 729]]

3789653; 411292, 3789655; 411278, 3789678; 411340, 3789690; 411371, 
3789710; 411387, 3789732; 411429, 3789757; 411482, 3789778; 411516, 
3789776; 411571, 3789725; 411592, 3789680; 411627, 3789643; 411691, 
3789702; 411736, 3789722; 411800, 3789703; 411822, 3789676; 411872, 
3789565; 411893, 3789542; 411911, 3789534; 411966, 3789591; 412057, 
3789614; 412103, 3789601; 412178, 3789643; thence returning to 412207, 
3789649.
    (ii) Map of Unit 2 (San Gabriel River) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14DE10.004
    

[[Page 730]]


    (10) Unit 3: Big Tujunga Wash, Los Angeles County, California. 
Subunit 3A: Big Tujunga Wash.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Condor Peak and Sunland. Land 
bounded by the following UTM NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 382996, 3796285; 
383017, 3796285; 383034, 3796298; 383087, 3796289; 383191, 3796254; 
383559, 3796102; 383600, 3796082; 383635, 3796047; 383703, 3796082; 
383734, 3796136; 383755, 3796384; 383781, 3796466; 383777, 3796540; 
383809, 3796564; 383903, 3796576; 383967, 3796569; 384008, 3796534; 
384109, 3796490; 384156, 3796427; 384231, 3796397; 384262, 3796405; 
384403, 3796388; 384489, 3796352; 384606, 3796287; 384699, 3796218; 
384868, 3796044; 385054, 3795886; 385104, 3795866; 385315, 3795816; 
385436, 3795802; 385491, 3795772; 385531, 3795766; 385564, 3795742; 
385609, 3795652; 385779, 3795429; 385841, 3795414; 385904, 3795420; 
385979, 3795413; 386111, 3795381; 386172, 3795359; 386263, 3795368; 
386319, 3795353; 386360, 3795315; 386382, 3795260; 386389, 3795213; 
386382, 3795154; 386441, 3795088; 386507, 3794969; 386553, 3794916; 
386608, 3794869; 386734, 3794787; 386813, 3794666; 386896, 3794603; 
387031, 3794525; 387151, 3794475; 387441, 3794384; 387499, 3794354; 
387541, 3794313; 387568, 3794232; 387573, 3794124; 387601, 3793982; 
387598, 3793942; 387614, 3793799; 387625, 3793771; 387657, 3793760; 
387696, 3793761; 387716, 3793773; 387795, 3793910; 387847, 3793922; 
387871, 3793908; 387896, 3793847; 387907, 3793782; 387908, 3793722; 
387932, 3793650; 387975, 3793582; 388012, 3793541; 388073, 3793494; 
388129, 3793499; 388174, 3793520; 388209, 3793564; 388258, 3793688; 
388288, 3793714; 388338, 3793715; 388402, 3793659; 388428, 3793606; 
388494, 3793569; 388522, 3793565; 388552, 3793584; 388546, 3793683; 
388570, 3793714; 388659, 3793761; 388705, 3793802; 388824, 3793836; 
388903, 3793849; 388957, 3793845; 388990, 3793817; 388999, 3793761; 
389024, 3793700; 389049, 3793677; 389078, 3793689; 389122, 3793742; 
389177, 3793773; 389224, 3793766; 389264, 3793779; 389294, 3793815; 
389321, 3793868; 389355, 3793960; 389386, 3793991; 389446, 3794026; 
389640, 3794114; 389736, 3794178; 389803, 3794233; 389827, 3794283; 
389848, 3794307; 389875, 3794381; 389949, 3794476; 390060, 3794507; 
390077, 3794537; 390082, 3794569; 390076, 3794598; 390026, 3794669; 
390018, 3794703; 390021, 3794737; 390035, 3794765; 390048, 3794828; 
390076, 3794865; 390142, 3794993; 390227, 3795058; 390363, 3795093; 
390396, 3795130; 390441, 3795220; 390488, 3795280; 390536, 3795324; 
390570, 3795346; 390672, 3795372; 390677, 3795351; 390586, 3795295; 
390558, 3795246; 390534, 3795236; 390472, 3795165; 390426, 3795069; 
390367, 3795058; 390333, 3795027; 390254, 3794986; 390130, 3794868; 
390121, 3794835; 390129, 3794701; 390120, 3794550; 390103, 3794507; 
390078, 3794478; 389996, 3794431; 389971, 3794407; 389798, 3794149; 
389748, 3794041; 389697, 3793977; 389643, 3793945; 389596, 3793936; 
389502, 3793964; 389463, 3793961; 389416, 3793938; 389386, 3793905; 
389368, 3793802; 389353, 3793768; 389323, 3793725; 389280, 3793685; 
389244, 3793676; 389201, 3793692; 389154, 3793673; 389074, 3793625; 
389019, 3793607; 388987, 3793626; 388959, 3793666; 388947, 3793775; 
388908, 3793795; 388761, 3793751; 388652, 3793682; 388622, 3793644; 
388620, 3793556; 388601, 3793515; 388531, 3793476; 388475, 3793461; 
388415, 3793464; 388388, 3793477; 388389, 3793552; 388363, 3793584; 
388314, 3793598; 388275, 3793571; 388238, 3793469; 388196, 3793418; 
388067, 3793324; 388019, 3793339; 387938, 3793427; 387907, 3793494; 
387866, 3793735; 387838, 3793763; 387790, 3793762; 387751, 3793744; 
387712, 3793710; 387671, 3793704; 387622, 3793716; 387587, 3793757; 
387570, 3793834; 387534, 3794154; 387484, 3794246; 387443, 3794295; 
387345, 3794365; 387290, 3794383; 387262, 3794372; 387228, 3794371; 
387191, 3794382; 387110, 3794443; 386897, 3794551; 386834, 3794593; 
386742, 3794688; 386692, 3794732; 386658, 3794752; 386552, 3794748; 
386508, 3794753; 386478, 3794832; 386431, 3794900; 386383, 3794936; 
386339, 3794998; 386311, 3795019; 386279, 3795063; 386292, 3795143; 
386289, 3795174; 386275, 3795211; 386244, 3795253; 386198, 3795269; 
386166, 3795265; 386146, 3795243; 386091, 3795247; 386029, 3795291; 
386002, 3795300; 385985, 3795282; 385948, 3795276; 385906, 3795275; 
385831, 3795291; 385797, 3795322; 385753, 3795391; 385575, 3795554; 
385526, 3795612; 385396, 3795723; 385349, 3795734; 385256, 3795732; 
385215, 3795740; 385180, 3795733; 385150, 3795747; 385087, 3795741; 
385044, 3795770; 384915, 3795908; 384769, 3796039; 384629, 3796186; 
384490, 3796279; 384398, 3796291; 384356, 3796285; 384305, 3796265; 
384220, 3796275; 384168, 3796266; 384105, 3796298; 384017, 3796368; 
384001, 3796356; 384028, 3796247; 383996, 3796242; 383924, 3796252; 
383861, 3796248; 383838, 3796239; 383837, 3796096; 383827, 3796042; 
383803, 3795983; 383772, 3795945; 383736, 3795919; 383705, 3795913; 
383680, 3795916; 383659, 3795935; 383600, 3796011; 383426, 3796105; 
383134, 3796195; 382984, 3796221; 382943, 3796215; 382867, 3796183; 
382835, 3796188; 382750, 3796166; 382683, 3796176; 382573, 3796151; 
382462, 3796111; 382412, 3796075; 382309, 3796029; 382284, 3796008; 
382251, 3795948; 382168, 3795893; 382157, 3795851; 382012, 3795759; 
381976, 3795721; 381864, 3795561; 381781, 3795457; 381694, 3795366; 
381646, 3795321; 381414, 3795183; 381314, 3795074; 381274, 3795052; 
381246, 3795026; 381208, 3794947; 381199, 3794884; 381163, 3794792; 
381147, 3794701; 381104, 3794558; 381093, 3794481; 381028, 3794321; 
380899, 3794189; 380820, 3794148; 380727, 3794074; 380694, 3794031; 
380616, 3793882; 380566, 3793817; 380491, 3793790; 380385, 3793681; 
380291, 3793621; 380220, 3793590; 380148, 3793594; 379998, 3793658; 
379848, 3793662; 379523, 3793612; 379498, 3793576; 379365, 3793493; 
379342, 3793504; 379315, 3793502; 379257, 3793435; 379127, 3793335; 
379115, 3793308; 379070, 3793263; 378986, 3793210; 378737, 3793111; 
378595, 3793103; 378443, 3793108; 378425, 3793076; 378425, 3793055; 
378448, 3793039; 378467, 3793011; 378432, 3792965; 378442, 3792914; 
378426, 3792886; 378425, 3792854; 378373, 3792777; 378312, 3792740; 
378250, 3792727; 378216, 3792699; 378149, 3792682; 378007, 3792602; 
377942, 3792579; 377887, 3792509; 377833, 3792463; 377814, 3792429; 
377774, 3792416; 377723, 3792415; 377545, 3792323; 377354, 3792337; 
377313, 3792354; 377160, 3792462; 377109, 3792439; 377015, 3792423; 
376885, 3792437; 376807, 3792416; 376594, 3792435; 376586, 3792371; 
376449, 3792390; 376374, 3792362; 376354, 3792275; 376297, 3792277; 
376128, 3792311; 375855, 3792421; 375647, 3792452; 375156, 3792505; 
374378, 3792525; 374315, 3792514; 374205, 3792467; 374135, 3792495; 
374025, 3792494; 373930, 3792468; 373816, 3792464; 373507, 3792544; 
373439, 3792535; 373326, 3792502; 373329, 3792593;

[[Page 731]]

373347, 3792594; 373353, 3792617; 373351, 3792652; 373332, 3792703; 
373404, 3792794; 373453, 3792813; 373513, 3792804; 373568, 3792781; 
373631, 3792811; 373762, 3792815; 373911, 3792836; 374164, 3792841; 
374420, 3792866; 374485, 3792898; 374912, 3792882; 375040, 3792869; 
375194, 3792819; 375242, 3792831; 375323, 3792906; 375509, 3792982; 
375821, 3793046; 376047, 3793011; 376730, 3793170; 376797, 3793179; 
377225, 3793291; 377444, 3793267; 377491, 3793283; 377541, 3793286; 
377667, 3793268; 378031, 3793300; 378221, 3793252; 378372, 3793250; 
378472, 3793211; 378696, 3793234; 378920, 3793329; 378991, 3793432; 
379008, 3793477; 379046, 3793516; 379225, 3793628; 379249, 3793666; 
379286, 3793690; 379517, 3793761; 379539, 3793788; 379608, 3793833; 
379653, 3793836; 379721, 3793828; 379805, 3793839; 379974, 3793881; 
380092, 3793947; 380347, 3794052; 380449, 3794148; 380504, 3794223; 
380539, 3794236; 380564, 3794278; 380632, 3794323; 380705, 3794349; 
380774, 3794390; 380841, 3794416; 380868, 3794457; 380888, 3794510; 
380896, 3794615; 380913, 3794685; 381008, 3794772; 381074, 3794791; 
381097, 3794828; 381152, 3794971; 381170, 3795051; 381197, 3795094; 
381245, 3795134; 381300, 3795166; 381376, 3795241; 381565, 3795367; 
381622, 3795388; 381660, 3795433; 381757, 3795521; 381829, 3795624; 
381841, 3795654; 381848, 3795724; 381864, 3795781; 381906, 3795862; 
382000, 3795964; 382160, 3796097; 382278, 3796158; 382480, 3796237; 
382540, 3796250; 382728, 3796246; 382828, 3796272; 382959, 3796289; 
thence returning to 382996, 3796285.
    (ii) Map of Subunit 3A (Big Tujunga Wash) appears in paragraph 
(11)(ii) of this entry.
    (11) Subunit 3B: Gold Canyon, Delta Canyon, and Stone Canyon Creeks.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Condor Peak and Sunland. Land 
bounded by the following UTM NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 382996, 3796285; 
382995, 3796335; 382966, 3796453; 382967, 3796492; 382991, 3796511; 
383044, 3796521; 383084, 3796551; 383116, 3796586; 383138, 3796625; 
383140, 3796654; 383109, 3796684; 383094, 3796751; 383114, 3796789; 
383122, 3796836; 383123, 3796888; 383109, 3796916; 383110, 3796937; 
383155, 3796938; 383164, 3796946; 383173, 3796960; 383161, 3796988; 
383110, 3797042; 383024, 3797055; 383011, 3797064; 382964, 3797148; 
382915, 3797171; 382770, 3797275; 382747, 3797308; 382685, 3797339; 
382658, 3797361; 382614, 3797360; 382492, 3797417; 382469, 3797417; 
382417, 3797457; 382380, 3797460; 382348, 3797475; 382251, 3797482; 
382207, 3797503; 382152, 3797518; 382114, 3797575; 382068, 3797622; 
382036, 3797677; 381991, 3797700; 381967, 3797700; 381932, 3797717; 
381900, 3797746; 381888, 3797785; 381895, 3797804; 381890, 3797817; 
381855, 3797820; 381836, 3797841; 381822, 3797843; 381789, 3797814; 
381744, 3797806; 381721, 3797811; 381649, 3797865; 381599, 3797914; 
381494, 3797919; 381429, 3797938; 381414, 3797991; 381436, 3797991; 
381438, 3797961; 381486, 3797933; 381521, 3797952; 381586, 3797941; 
381754, 3797831; 381789, 3797833; 381815, 3797859; 381832, 3797863; 
381873, 3797828; 381910, 3797833; 381922, 3797777; 381947, 3797753; 
382057, 3797706; 382089, 3797666; 382094, 3797637; 382120, 3797603; 
382166, 3797583; 382186, 3797554; 382256, 3797515; 382308, 3797504; 
382389, 3797501; 382419, 3797491; 382532, 3797440; 382548, 3797416; 
382575, 3797407; 382697, 3797390; 382819, 3797292; 382875, 3797235; 
382962, 3797209; 383014, 3797136; 383011, 3797099; 383033, 3797068; 
383079, 3797083; 383113, 3797073; 383146, 3797048; 383190, 3796973; 
383194, 3796947; 383179, 3796925; 383132, 3796924; 383151, 3796897; 
383155, 3796867; 383132, 3796748; 383138, 3796707; 383209, 3796628; 
383199, 3796569; 383174, 3796556; 383167, 3796529; 383141, 3796518; 
383103, 3796524; 383000, 3796475; 382997, 3796450; 383034, 3796361; 
383087, 3796289; 383034, 3796298; 383017, 3796285; thence returning to 
382996, 3796285. Continue to 384028, 3796247; 384053, 3796202; 384051, 
3796176; 384059, 3796152; 384135, 3796001; 384194, 3795949; 384215, 
3795916; 384228, 3795890; 384237, 3795827; 384251, 3795804; 384279, 
3795790; 384301, 3795761; 384369, 3795715; 384391, 3795692; 384459, 
3795652; 384471, 3795614; 384461, 3795548; 384473, 3795517; 384447, 
3795462; 384454, 3795405; 384443, 3795388; 384469, 3795361; 384472, 
3795305; 384448, 3795308; 384410, 3795277; 384359, 3795186; 384340, 
3795182; 384392, 3795278; 384394, 3795298; 384418, 3795311; 384430, 
3795341; 384409, 3795448; 384430, 3795467; 384430, 3795516; 384442, 
3795542; 384443, 3795581; 384428, 3795628; 384412, 3795652; 384292, 
3795724; 384216, 3795793; 384187, 3795926; 384171, 3795946; 384150, 
3795950; 384131, 3795966; 384082, 3796037; 384023, 3796194; 383996, 
3796242; thence returning to 384028, 3796247. Continue to 386146, 
3795243; 386141, 3795218; 386119, 3795182; 386085, 3795059; 386058, 
3795006; 386064, 3794847; 386033, 3794669; 385965, 3794586; 385935, 
3794565; 385911, 3794564; 385829, 3794527; 385793, 3794521; 385648, 
3794422; 385617, 3794387; 385597, 3794392; 385646, 3794454; 385681, 
3794463; 385773, 3794538; 385932, 3794625; 386022, 3794719; 386025, 
3794798; 386004, 3794872; 386041, 3795101; 386079, 3795179; 386091, 
3795247; thence returning to 386146, 3795243.
    (ii) Map of Unit 3 (Big Tujunga Wash) follows:

[[Page 732]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14DE10.005

                 Warner Sucker (Catostomus warnerensis)

Oregon: Lake County.

    1. Twelvemile Creek--Approximately 4 stream miles and 50 feet on 
either side of the stream commencing at the confluence of Twelvemile 
Creek and Twentymile Creek and extending upstream, and including those 
portions of Twelvemile Creek in T40S, R23E, Section 35; and T41S, R23E, 
Sections 1, 2, 12, 13, 23, and 24.

[[Page 733]]

    2. Twentymile Creek--Approximately 18 stream miles and 50 feet on 
either side of the stream commencing about 9 miles upstream of the 
junction of Twelvemile and Twentymile Creeks and extending to a point 
about 9 miles downstream of the junction, and including those portions 
of Twentymile Creek in T40S, R22E, Sections 25, 35, and 36; T40S, R23E, 
Sections 19, 20, 24, 25, 28, 29, 30, 33, 34, 35 and 36; T40S, R24E, 
Sections 15, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22, 28, 29, 30; and T41S, R23E, Sections 2 
and 3.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.143
    
    3. Spillway Canal north of Hart Lake--Approximately 2 stream miles 
and 50 feet on either side of the waterway commencing at its confluence 
with Hart Lake and extending to a point about 2 miles downstream, and 
including those portions of the waterway in T36S, R24E, Sections 7, 18, 
and 19.
    4. Snyder Creek--Approximately 3 stream miles and 50 feet on either 
side of the stream commencing at the confluence of Snyder Creek and 
Honey Creek and extending to a point about 3 miles upstream on Snyder 
Creek, and including those portions of Snyder Creek in T36S, R22E, 
Sections 1 and 12; and T36S, R23E, Sections 7, 17, and 18.
    5. Honey Creek--Approximately 16 stream miles and 50 feet on either 
side of the stream commencing at the confluence of Honey Creek with Hart 
Lake and extending to a point about 16 miles upstream on Honey Creek, 
and including those portions of Honey Creek in T36S, R24E, Sections 19, 
20, 27, 28, 29, 30, 33, 34, and 35; T36S, R23E, Sections 17, 18, 20, 21, 
22, 23, 24, 26, 27, and 28; and T36S, R22E, Sections 13, 14, 22, and 23.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.144
    
    Constituent elements of all areas proposed as critical habitat 
include streams 15 feet to 60 feet wide with gravel-bottom shoal and 
riffle areas with intervening pools. Streams should have clean, 
unpolluted flowing water and a stable riparian zone. The streams should 
support a variety of aquatic insects, crustaceans, and other small 
invertebrates for food.

                   Bull Trout (Salvelinus confluentus)

    (1) Locations of critical habitat. Critical habitat units are 
depicted in the following States and counties on the maps and as 
described below:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                State                               Counties
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(i) Idaho                              Adams, Benewah, Blaine, Boise,
                                        Bonner, Boundary, Butte, Camas,
                                        Custer, Elmore, Gem, Idaho,
                                        Kootenai, Lemhi, Lewis, Nez
                                        Perce, Owyhee, Shoshone, Valley,
                                        Washington
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(ii) Montana                           Deer Lodge, Flathead, Glacier,
                                        Granite, Lake, Lewis and Clark,
                                        Lincoln, Mineral, Missoula,
                                        Powell, Ravalli, Sanders
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(iii) Nevada                           Elko
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(iv) Oregon                            Baker, Clatsop, Columbia,
                                        Deschutes, Gilliam, Grant,
                                        Harney, Hood River, Jefferson,
                                        Klamath, Lake, Lane, Linn,
                                        Malheur, Morrow, Multnomah,
                                        Sherman, Umatilla, Union,
                                        Wallowa, Wasco, Wheeler
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(v) Washington                         Asotin, Benton, Chelan, Clallam,
                                        Clark, Columbia, Cowlitz,
                                        Garfield, Grant, Grays Harbor,
                                        Island,
                                       Jefferson, King, Kittitas,
                                        Klickitat, Mason, Okanogan, Pend
                                        Oreille, Pierce, Skagit,
                                        Skamania, Snohomish, Stevens,
                                        Thurston, Wahkiakum, Walla
                                        Walla, Whatcom, Whitman, Yakima
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 734]]

    (2) Topographic features included in the critical habitat 
designation. Critical habitat includes the stream channels within the 
designated stream reaches; designated lakes and reservoirs; and inshore 
portions of marine nearshore areas, including tidally influenced 
freshwater heads of estuaries indicated on the maps beginning with 
paragraph (e)(7) of this entry.
    (i) Critical habitat includes the stream channels within the 
designated stream reaches and a lateral extent as defined by the 
bankfull elevation on one bank to the bankfull elevation on the opposite 
bank. Bankfull elevation is the level at which water begins to leave the 
channel and move into the floodplain and is reached at a discharge that 
generally has a recurrence interval of 1 to 2 years on the annual flood 
series. If bankfull elevation is not evident on either bank, the 
ordinary high-water line must be used to determine the lateral extent of 
critical habitat. The lateral extent of designated lakes is defined by 
the perimeter of the waterbody as mapped on standard 1:24,000 scale 
topographic maps.
    (ii) Critical habitat includes the inshore extent of critical 
habitat for marine nearshore areas (the mean higher high-water (MHHW) 
line), including the uppermost reach of the saltwater wedge within 
tidally influenced freshwater heads of estuaries. The MHHW line refers 
to the average of all the higher high-water heights of the two daily 
tidal levels. Adjacent shoreline riparian areas, bluffs, and uplands are 
not designated as critical habitat. However, it should be recognized 
that the quality of marine habitat along shorelines is intrinsically 
related to the character of these adjacent features, and human 
activities that occur outside of the MHHW line can have major effects on 
the physical and biological features of the marine environment. The 
offshore extent of critical habitat for marine nearshore areas is based 
on the extent of the photic zone, which is the layer of water in which 
organisms are exposed to light. Critical habitat extends offshore to the 
depth of 10 meters (m) (33 feet (ft)) relative to the mean low low-water 
(MLLW) line (average of all the lower low-water heights of the two daily 
tidal levels). This equates to the average depth of the photic zone and 
is consistent with the offshore extent of the nearshore habitat 
identified by the national Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in the 
National Tidal Datum 1983 through 2001. This area between the MHHW line 
and minus 10 m MLLW line is considered the habitat most consistently 
used by bull trout in marine waters based on known use, forage fish 
availability, and ongoing migration studies and captures geological and 
ecological processes important to maintaining these habitats. This area 
contains essential foraging habitat and migration corridors such as 
estuaries, bays, inlets, shallow subtidal areas, and intertidal flats.
    (3) The primary constituent elements (PCEs) of critical habitat. 
Within the critical habitat, the PCEs for bull trout are those habitat 
components that are essential for the primary biological needs of 
foraging, reproducing, rearing of young, dispersal, genetic exchange, or 
sheltering. The PCEs are as follows:
    (i) Springs, seeps, groundwater sources, and subsurface water 
connectivity (hyporheic flows) to contribute to water quality and 
quantity and provide thermal refugia.
    (ii) Migration habitats with minimal physical, biological, or water 
quality impediments between spawning, rearing, overwintering, and 
freshwater and marine foraging habitats, including but not limited to 
permanent, partial, intermittent, or seasonal barriers.
    (iii) An abundant food base, including terrestrial organisms of 
riparian origin, aquatic macroinvertebrates, and forage fish.
    (iv) Complex river, stream, lake, reservoir, and marine shoreline 
aquatic environments, and processes that establish and maintain these 
aquatic environments, with features such as large wood, side channels, 
pools, undercut banks and unembedded substrates, to provide a variety of 
depths, gradients, velocities, and structure.
    (v) Water temperatures ranging from 2 to 15 degrees Celsius ([deg]C) 
(36 to 59 degrees Fahrenheit ([deg]F)), with adequate thermal refugia 
available for temperatures that exceed the upper end of this range. 
Specific temperatures within this range will depend on bull trout life-
history stage and form; geography; elevation; diurnal and seasonal 
variation; shading, such as that provided by riparian habitat; 
streamflow; and local groundwater influence.
    (vi) In spawning and rearing areas, substrate of sufficient amount, 
size, and composition to ensure success of egg and embryo overwinter 
survival, fry emergence, and young-of-the-year and juvenile survival. A 
minimal amount of fine sediment, generally ranging in size from silt to 
coarse sand, embedded in larger substrates, is characteristic of these 
conditions. The size and amounts of fine sediment suitable to bull trout 
will likely vary from system to system.
    (vii) A natural hydrograph, including peak, high, low, and base 
flows within historic and seasonal ranges or, if flows are controlled, 
minimal flow departure from a natural hydrograph.
    (viii) Sufficient water quality and quantity such that normal 
reproduction, growth, and survival are not inhibited.
    (ix) Sufficiently low levels of occurrence of nonnative predatory 
(e.g., lake trout, walleye, northern pike, smallmouth bass); 
interbreeding (e.g., brook trout); or competing

[[Page 735]]

(e.g., brown trout) species that, if present, are adequately temporally 
and spatially isolated from bull trout.
    (4) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (including, 
but not limited to, buildings, aqueducts, docks, seawalls, pipelines, 
roads, runways, or other structures or paved areas) and the land or 
waterway on which they are located that exist within the legal 
boundaries on the effective date of this rule.
    (5) Exclusions. Each excluded area is identified in the relevant 
Critical Habitat Unit text below, as identified in paragraphs (e)(8) 
through (e)(41) of this entry. Critical habitat does not include:
    (i) Waters adjacent to non-Federal lands covered by the following 
legally operative incidental take permits for habitat conservation plans 
(HCPs) issued under section 10(a)(1)(B) of the Endangered Species Act of 
1973, as amended (Act), in which bull trout is a covered species on or 
before the publication of this final rule: Cedar River Watershed HCP, 
Green Diamond HCP, Washington Department of Natural Resources HCP, 
Washington Forest Practices HCP, Plum Creek Central Cascades HCP, Plum 
Creek Native Fish HCP, and Stimpson Native Fish HCP;
    (ii) Waters within or adjacent to lands subject to certain tribal 
management plans; or
    (iii) Waters where impacts to national security have been 
identified.
    (6) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created using U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) Hydrologic Unit Code map 
(HUCs) at a scale of 1:250,000 down to the 4th level cataloging unit. In 
some cases, 5th and 6th level HUCs were also used and some finer scale 
watersheds developed using USGS 10-meter Digital Elevation Model and 
1:24,000 scale hydrography layers. The marine boundaries for the Puget 
Sound and Olympic Peninsula critical habitat unit were based on 
Washington Department of Natural Resources 1:24,000 scale county 
boundaries and HUCs.
    (7) Note: Index map for critical habitat units for the bull trout 
follows:

[[Page 736]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.001

                      (8) Unit 1: Olympic Peninsula

    (i) This unit consists of 748.7 km (465.2 mi) of streams, 529.2 km 
(328.8 mi) of marine shoreline, and 3,064 ha (7,572 ac) of lakes and 
reservoirs. The unit is located in northwestern Washington.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 737]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alta Creek..................................................       47.685     -123.737       47.698     -123.756
Big Creek...................................................       47.566     -123.681       47.518     -123.774
Bob Creek...................................................       47.696     -123.853       47.689     -123.856
Boulder Creek...............................................       47.979     -123.613       47.983     -123.601
Brown Creek.................................................       47.455     -123.260       47.411     -123.319
Buckinghorse Creek..........................................       47.739     -123.485       47.746     -123.483
Cameron Creek...............................................       47.916     -123.243       47.912     -123.255
Canyon Creek................................................       47.954     -123.247       48.025     -123.137
Cat Creek...................................................       47.946     -123.644       47.973     -123.593
Cedar Creek.................................................       47.440     -123.405       47.443     -123.403
Cedar Creek.................................................       47.717     -124.336       47.712     -124.416
Chehalis River..............................................       46.819     -123.253       46.966     -123.547
Church Creek................................................       47.460     -123.457       47.461     -123.451
Clearwater River............................................       47.628     -124.276       47.628     -124.276
Clide Creek.................................................       47.888     -123.799       47.871     -123.798
Cook Creek..................................................    47.358ENT       47.368     -124.032
                                                              O='xl'<ls-t
                                                                h-123.997
Copalis River...............................................       47.137     -124.159       47.138     -124.154
Cougar Creek................................................       47.862     -123.860       47.867     -123.854
Delabarre Creek.............................................       47.726     -123.529       47.735     -123.527
Dungeness River.............................................       47.941     -123.093       48.152     -123.128
East Twin Creek.............................................       47.841     -123.988       47.833     -123.991
Elk Creek...................................................       47.510     -123.345       47.515     -123.331
Elwha River.................................................       47.771     -123.582       48.147     -123.566
Ennis Creek.................................................       48.053     -123.412       48.117     -123.405
Fire Creek..................................................       47.601     -123.523       47.598     -123.526
Fitzhenry Creek.............................................       47.964     -123.589       47.967     -123.589
Godkin Creek................................................       47.752     -123.452       47.760     -123.465
Gold Creek..................................................       47.941     -123.083       47.941     -123.093
Goldie River................................................       47.760     -123.522       47.840     -123.470
Goodman Creek...............................................       47.834     -124.339       47.825     -124.513
Graves Creek................................................       47.569     -123.563       47.574     -123.572
Gray Wolf River.............................................       47.916     -123.243       47.977     -123.112
Grays Harbor Marine.........................................       46.926     -124.180       46.906     -124.139
Griff Creek.................................................       48.016     -123.593       48.023     -123.595
Haggerty Creek..............................................       47.952     -123.575       47.956     -123.576
Harlow Creek................................................       47.700     -123.877       47.685     -123.889
Hayes River.................................................       47.803     -123.430       47.808     -123.454
Hee Haw Creek...............................................       47.701     -123.663       47.737     -123.691
Hee Hee Creek...............................................       47.709     -123.734       47.712     -123.739
Hoh Creek...................................................       47.883     -123.751       47.877     -123.754
Hoh River...................................................       47.737     -124.366       47.880     -123.729
Hood Canal Marine...........................................       47.434     -122.842       47.684     -122.802
Hughes Creek................................................       48.026     -123.599       48.025     -123.595
Humptulips River............................................       47.048     -124.046       47.231     -123.977
Hurd Creek..................................................       48.124     -123.144       48.118     -123.143
Hurricane Creek.............................................       47.976     -123.587       47.975     -123.594
Idaho Creek.................................................       47.947     -123.538       47.945     -123.544
Ignar Creek.................................................       47.637     -123.430       47.639     -123.433
Irely Creek.................................................       47.565     -123.677       47.565     -123.680
Irely Lake..................................................       47.565     -123.674               ...........
Joe Creek...................................................       47.217     -124.154       47.206     -124.204
Kalaloch Creek..............................................       47.637     -124.361       47.607     -124.375
Lake Cushman................................................       47.470     -123.255               ...........
Lebar Creek.................................................       47.427     -123.320       47.417     -123.330
Leitha Creek................................................       47.762     -123.452       47.769     -123.460
Lillian River...............................................       47.944     -123.500       47.931     -123.528
Little River................................................       48.061     -123.519       48.063     -123.578
Long Creek..................................................       47.926     -123.558       47.951     -123.561
Lost River..................................................       47.859     -123.458       47.862     -123.468
Madison Creek...............................................       48.044     -123.580       48.042     -123.591
Matheny Creek...............................................       47.543     -123.837       47.576     -124.115
Matriotti Creek.............................................       48.133     -123.161       48.136     -123.141
McCartney Creek.............................................       47.879     -123.466       47.878     -123.471
McTaggert Creek.............................................       47.409     -123.240       47.363     -123.235
Moclips River...............................................       47.260     -124.124       47.248     -124.220
Morse Creek.................................................       48.063     -123.347       48.117     -123.351
Mosquito Creek..............................................       47.786     -124.383       47.798     -124.482
Mount Tom Creek.............................................       47.819     -123.821       47.868     -123.888
Nalley Slough...............................................       47.334     -123.132       47.328     -123.131

[[Page 738]]

 
Nolan Creek.................................................       47.743     -124.202       47.751     -124.344
Noname Creek................................................       47.629     -123.456       47.626     -123.452
North Fork Quinault River...................................       47.582     -123.645       47.638     -123.646
North Fork Skokomish River..................................       47.355     -123.235       47.506     -123.318
OGS Creek...................................................       47.879     -123.768       47.878     -123.769
O'Neil Creek................................................       47.610     -123.464       47.616     -123.472
Owl Creek...................................................       47.780     -124.039       47.805     -124.079
Pacific Coast Marine........................................       48.003     -124.680       46.926     -124.180
Paradise Creek..............................................       47.699     -123.801       47.694     -123.813
Pine Creek..................................................       47.442     -123.430       47.446     -123.417
Prescott Creek..............................................       47.904     -123.487       47.903     -123.491
Purdy Creek.................................................       47.302     -123.182       47.307     -123.161
Pyrites Creek...............................................       47.644     -123.436       47.639     -123.433
Queets River................................................       47.541     -124.335       47.735     -123.696
Quinault Lake...............................................       47.475     -123.869               ...........
Quinault River..............................................       47.391     -124.045       47.533     -123.744
Raft River..................................................       47.449     -124.220       47.458     -124.326
Richert Spring..............................................       47.321     -123.219       47.320     -123.225
Rustler Creek...............................................       47.629     -123.569       47.617     -123.617
Salmon River................................................       47.524     -124.041       47.556     -124.220
Sams River..................................................       47.604     -123.853       47.624     -124.013
Satsop River................................................       47.015     -123.510       47.023     -123.509
Sege Creek..................................................       47.988     -123.597       47.987     -123.604
Siebert Creek...............................................       48.049     -123.293       48.121     -123.290
Skobob Creek................................................       47.327     -123.175       47.328     -123.132
Skokomish River.............................................       47.315     -123.238       47.315     -123.229
Slate Creek.................................................       47.529     -123.320       47.521     -123.336
Slate Creek.................................................       47.749     -123.498       47.744     -123.491
Slide Creek.................................................       47.883     -123.736       47.875     -123.748
Snider Creek................................................       47.846     -123.971       47.842     -123.968
South Fork Hoh River........................................       47.764     -123.786       47.777     -123.908
South Fork Skokomish River..................................       47.315     -123.247       47.425     -123.354
Steamboat Creek.............................................       47.688     -124.350       47.678     -124.404
Stony Creek.................................................       47.871     -123.464       47.871     -123.469
Strait of Juan de Fuca Marine...............................       48.103     -122.885       48.217     -124.102
Taft Creek..................................................       47.866     -123.967       47.858     -123.942
Tshletshy Creek.............................................       47.606     -123.741       47.666     -123.925
Twin Creek..................................................       47.832     -123.995       47.831     -123.988
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0100)...............................       47.340     -123.246       47.335     -123.242
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0509)...............................       47.844     -123.939       47.830     -123.982
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0527)...............................       47.874     -123.821       47.868     -123.817
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0542)...............................       47.887     -123.719       47.883     -123.719
Valley Creek................................................       48.123     -123.438       48.107     -123.452
Vance Creek.................................................       47.327     -123.299       47.327     -123.299
Vance Creek Remenant Channel................................       47.315     -123.257       47.315     -123.238
West Fork Satsop River......................................       47.360     -123.566       47.035     -123.526
Windfall Creek..............................................       47.914     -123.492       47.912     -123.495
Winfield Creek..............................................       47.783     -124.144       47.810     -124.233
Wishkah River...............................................       47.257     -123.715       47.257     -123.715
Wolf Creek..................................................       47.974     -123.586       47.974     -123.593
Wynoochee River.............................................       47.160     -123.650       47.360     -123.637
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Waterbodies associated with the following tribal lands, 
habitat conservation plans (HCPs), or U.S. Navy training areas totaling 
553.9 km (343.9 mi) of streams and 144.6 km (89.9 mi) of marine 
shoreline have been excluded from critical habitat designation under 
section 4(b)(2) of the Act in this unit:
    (A) Waterbodies within or adjacent to the open water training and 
testing areas of the Dabob Bay Military Operating Area and areas within 
the Connecting Waters of the Dabob Bay Range Complex, including marine 
habitats associated with the Hood Canal Critical Habitat Subunit (CHSU);
    (B) Waterbodies within the geographic area covered by the Washington 
State Forest Practices Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP), including 
portions of the Chehalis River/Grays Harbor, Dungeness River, Elwha 
River, Hoh River, Queets River, Quinualt River, Skokomish River Pacific 
Coast, Strait of Juan De Fuca, and Hood Canal Marine CHSUs;
    (C) Waterbodies within the geographic area covered by the Green 
Diamond HCP, including portions of the Chehalis River/Grays Harbor and 
Skokomish CHSUs;

[[Page 739]]

    (D) Waterbodies within the geographic area covered by the Washington 
Department of Natural Resources HCP, including portions of Chehalis 
River/Grays Harbor, Dungeness River, Elwha River, Hoh River, Queets 
River, Skokomish River, Pacific Coast, Strait of Juan De Fuca, and Hood 
Canal Marine CHSUs; and
    (E) Waterbodies within the areas under management by the Hoh Tribe, 
including portions of Hoh River and Pacific Coast CHSUs; Jamestown 
S'Klallam Tribe, including portions of Dungeness River CHSU; Lower Elwha 
Tribe, including portions of Elwha River and Strait of Juan de Fuca 
CHSUs; Quileute Tribe, including portions of Pacific Coast CHSU; 
Quinault Tribe, including portions of Quinault River, Queets River, and 
Pacific Coast CHSUs; and Skokomish Tribe, including portions of 
Skokomish River and Hood Canal Marine CHSUs, within reservation 
boundaries, and waterbodies that are adjacent to:
    (1) Lands held in trust by the United States for their benefit;
    (2) Lands held in trust by the United States for any Indian Tribe or 
individual subject to restrictions by the United States against 
alienation;
    (3) Fee lands, either within or outside the reservation boundaries, 
owned by the tribal government; and
    (4) Fee lands within the reservation boundaries owned by individual 
Indians.
    (iv) Map of Unit 1, Olympic Peninsula follows:

[[Page 740]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.002

                         (9) Unit 2: Puget Sound

    (i) This unit consists of 1,840.2 km (1,143.5 mi) of streams, 684.0 
km (425.0 mi) of marine shoreline, and 16,260.9 ha (40,181.5 ac) of 
lakes and reservoirs. The unit is located in northwestern Washington.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 741]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alder Creek.................................................       48.549     -121.955       48.519     -121.956
Aldrich Creek (<greek-i>0423)...............................       48.916     -122.042       48.921     -122.051
Alma Creek..................................................       48.590     -121.356       48.600     -121.363
Anderson Creek..............................................       48.797     -122.325       48.869     -122.318
Arrow Creek.................................................       48.407     -121.390       48.423     -121.396
Bacon Creek.................................................       48.681     -121.464       48.585     -121.395
Baker Lake..................................................       48.708     -121.642               ...........
Baker River.................................................       48.548     -121.741       48.741     -121.563
Bald Eagle Creek............................................       48.796     -121.449       48.800     -121.465
Bear Creek..................................................       48.966     -121.383       48.965     -121.388
Bear Creek..................................................       48.898     -122.105       48.893     -122.145
Bear Creek (<greek-i>0353)..................................       48.788     -122.123       48.783     -122.140
Bear Lake Outlet (<greek-i>0317)............................       48.610     -121.912       48.607     -121.912
Beaver Creek................................................       48.086     -121.516       48.077     -121.527
Beckler River...............................................       47.865     -121.311       47.715     -121.340
Bedal Creek.................................................       48.047     -121.351       48.080     -121.395
Bell Creek..................................................       48.684     -121.899       48.681     -121.900
Bender Creek................................................       48.063     -121.591       48.071     -121.590
Bertrand Creek..............................................       48.999     -122.521       48.912     -122.535
Big Beaver Creek............................................       48.841     -121.211       48.775     -121.066
Big Creek...................................................       48.343     -121.440       48.345     -121.451
Big Four Creek..............................................       48.071     -121.524       48.070     -121.512
Bitter Creek................................................       47.841     -121.503       47.840     -121.508
Black Creek.................................................       48.247     -121.414       48.259     -121.402
Black Oak Creek.............................................       48.185     -121.454       48.177     -121.450
Blackjack Creek.............................................       48.051     -121.626       48.062     -121.631
Boardman Creek..............................................       48.040     -121.675       48.070     -121.681
Boulder Creek...............................................       48.512     -121.364       48.518     -121.364
Boulder Creek...............................................       47.354     -121.707       47.371     -121.688
Boulder Creek...............................................       48.937     -122.021       48.925     -122.037
Boulder River...............................................       48.245     -121.828       48.282     -121.787
Boyd Creek..................................................       48.903     -121.863       48.897     -121.866
Brooks Creek................................................       48.289     -121.908       48.277     -121.911
Brush Creek.................................................       48.909     -121.423       48.913     -121.424
Buck Creek..................................................       48.353     -121.268       48.265     -121.340
Buck Creek..................................................       48.047     -121.472       48.045     -121.481
Buck Creek..................................................       47.023     -121.557       47.029     -121.555
Cabin Creek.................................................       47.363     -121.695       47.367     -121.684
Camp Creek..................................................       48.150     -121.280       48.159     -121.292
Canyon Creek................................................       48.775     -120.778       48.707     -120.918
Canyon Creek................................................       48.220     -121.081       48.211     -121.088
Canyon Creek................................................       48.158     -121.817       48.097     -121.970
Canyon Creek................................................       48.932     -121.951       48.906     -121.989
Canyon Creek (Canyon Lake Creek)............................       48.840     -122.111       48.832     -122.144
Carbon River................................................       46.960     -121.793       47.130     -122.233
Cascade Creek...............................................       48.903     -121.839       48.904     -121.839
Cascade River...............................................       48.463     -121.164       48.524     -121.430
Cavanaugh Creek.............................................       48.645     -122.110       48.647     -122.121
Cedar River.................................................       47.313     -121.521       47.409     -121.723
Chainup Creek...............................................       48.905     -121.843       48.908     -121.840
Chenuis Creek...............................................       46.994     -121.842       46.992     -121.843
Chester Morse Lake..........................................       47.389     -121.694               ...........
Chilliwack River............................................       48.878     -121.487       49.000     -121.411
Chocwick Creek..............................................       48.055     -121.384       48.074     -121.400
Cinnamon Creek..............................................       48.867     -120.887       48.891     -120.916
Clearwater Creek............................................       48.805     -121.989       48.771     -122.047
Clearwater River............................................       47.079     -121.782       47.146     -121.834
Coal Creek..................................................       48.096     -121.535       48.085     -121.541
Coal Creek..................................................       48.892     -122.164       48.881     -122.153
Coal Creek (Upper)..........................................       48.838     -121.903       48.838     -121.906
Cook Slough.................................................       48.198     -122.218       48.198     -122.234
Corkindale Creek............................................       48.518     -121.483       48.505     -121.486
Cornell Creek...............................................       48.886     -121.960       48.899     -121.969
Cripple Creek...............................................       47.048     -121.693       47.040     -121.701
Crystal Creek...............................................       48.183     -121.361       48.181     -121.364
Crystal Creek...............................................       48.791     -121.510       48.787     -121.503
Crystal Creek...............................................       46.925     -121.540       46.928     -121.538
Cumberland Creek............................................       48.505     -121.985       48.518     -121.994
Dan Creek...................................................       48.265     -121.540       48.298     -121.551
Davis Creek.................................................       48.879     -121.931       48.882     -121.931
Day Creek...................................................       48.444     -122.007       48.519     -122.067

[[Page 742]]

 
Deadhorse Creek.............................................       48.900     -121.836       48.904     -121.838
Deep Creek..................................................       48.868     -121.911       48.869     -121.908
Deer Creek..................................................       48.718     -121.116       48.721     -121.105
Deer Creek..................................................       48.096     -121.558       48.084     -121.556
Deer Creek..................................................       48.365     -121.795       48.268     -121.933
Deer Creek..................................................       46.836     -121.965       46.873     -121.974
Deer Creek..................................................       48.602     -122.093       48.610     -122.095
Deerhorn Creek..............................................       48.906     -121.857       48.903     -121.858
Depot Creek.................................................       48.986     -121.293       48.997     -121.324
Devils Creek................................................       48.819     -121.002       48.824     -121.032
Diablo Lake.................................................       48.708     -121.105               ...........
Diobsud Creek...............................................       48.576     -121.433       48.559     -121.412
Discovery Creek.............................................       46.900     -121.571       46.896     -121.580
Ditch Creek.................................................       48.903     -121.851       48.902     -121.849
Doe Creek...................................................       47.011     -121.547       47.028     -121.553
Downey Creek................................................       48.330     -121.149       48.258     -121.225
Dusty Creek.................................................       48.139     -121.040       48.177     -121.019
Duwamish River..............................................       47.474     -122.252       47.514     -122.304
Duwamish Waterway...........................................       47.514     -122.304       47.585     -122.360
East Duwamish Waterway......................................       47.590     -122.344       47.567     -122.347
East Fork Bacon Creek.......................................       48.713     -121.417       48.661     -121.434
East Fork Foss River........................................       47.649     -121.277       47.653     -121.294
Eastern Shoreline Guemes Island.............................       48.529     -122.573       48.589     -122.646
Eastern Shoreline Puget Sound (North).......................       48.511     -122.606       48.561     -122.493
Eastern Shoreline Puget Sound (South).......................       47.970     -122.232       48.449     -122.551
Eastern Shoreline Whidbey Island............................       47.905     -122.388       48.369     -122.666
Eastern Shorline Lummi Island...............................       48.717     -122.719       48.640     -122.609
Easy Creek..................................................       48.881     -121.456       48.889     -121.459
Ebey Slough.................................................       47.941     -122.170       48.042     -122.215
Edfro Creek.................................................       48.663     -122.117       48.661     -122.127
Elbow Creek / Lake Doreen Outlet (<greek-i>0331)............       48.707     -121.915       48.685     -121.911
Elliott Creek...............................................       48.027     -121.367       48.057     -121.416
Elwell Creek................................................       47.809     -121.849       47.838     -121.853
Excelsior Creek.............................................       47.870     -121.487       47.864     -121.492
Falls Creek.................................................       48.137     -121.432       48.148     -121.437
Falls Creek.................................................       46.992     -121.874       46.999     -121.889
Falls Creek.................................................       48.824     -121.906       48.834     -121.902
Finney Creek................................................       48.465     -121.688       48.524     -121.847
Fire Creek..................................................       48.154     -121.232       48.153     -121.245
Fisher Creek................................................       48.563     -120.912       48.603     -121.050
Fishtrap Creek..............................................       48.999     -122.411       48.912     -122.523
Fobes Creek.................................................       48.622     -122.119       48.622     -122.112
Foss River..................................................       47.653     -121.294       47.705     -121.307
Fossil Creek................................................       48.904     -121.850       48.908     -121.850
Fourteenmile Creek..........................................       48.126     -121.229       48.140     -121.222
Freezeout Creek.............................................       48.950     -120.932       48.956     -120.970
French Creek................................................       48.255     -121.783       48.282     -121.757
Fryingpan Creek.............................................       46.873     -121.623       46.895     -121.592
Galbraith Creek.............................................       48.755     -122.021       48.759     -122.019
Gallop Creek................................................       48.882     -121.947       48.894     -121.944
Gedney Island...............................................       48.005     -122.305       48.005     -122.305
Gilligan Creek..............................................       48.473     -122.126       48.488     -122.140
Glacier Creek...............................................       48.131     -121.168       48.130     -121.204
Glacier Creek...............................................       47.987     -121.369       47.986     -121.393
Glacier Creek...............................................       48.812     -121.890       48.892     -121.939
Goat Creek..................................................       48.334     -121.161       48.328     -121.157
Goat Island.................................................       48.360     -122.531       48.360     -122.531
Goblin Creek................................................       47.923     -121.312       47.919     -121.309
Goodell Creek...............................................       48.711     -121.291       48.726     -121.305
Gordon Creek................................................       48.088     -121.657       48.071     -121.673
Gorge Lake..................................................       48.706     -121.175               ...........
Grandy Creek................................................       48.562     -121.811       48.518     -121.881
Granite Creek...............................................       48.648     -120.857       48.707     -120.918
Green Creek.................................................       48.732     -121.936       48.738     -121.938
Green River.................................................       47.275     -122.108       47.474     -122.252
Greenwater River............................................       47.093     -121.458       47.158     -121.660
Hat Slough..................................................       48.197     -122.362       48.208     -122.323
Hazzard Creek...............................................       47.081     -121.690       47.078     -121.681
Hedrick Creek...............................................       48.890     -121.981       48.899     -121.971
Higgins Creek...............................................       48.318     -121.755       48.362     -121.807
Hope Island.................................................       48.399     -122.561       48.399     -122.561

[[Page 743]]

 
Horse Creek.................................................       48.322     -121.258       48.313     -121.286
Howard Creek................................................       48.619     -121.966       48.609     -121.966
Huckleberry Creek...........................................       46.989     -121.624       47.079     -121.586
Hutchinson Creek............................................       48.732     -122.103       48.707     -122.179
Ika Island..................................................       48.363     -122.499       48.363     -122.499
Illabot Creek...............................................       48.389     -121.319       48.496     -121.531
Index Creek.................................................       47.760     -121.497       47.766     -121.481
Indian Creek................................................       48.935     -121.395       48.947     -121.398
Ipsut Creek.................................................       46.972     -121.831       46.979     -121.833
Jackman Creek...............................................       48.529     -121.697       48.523     -121.722
Jim Creek...................................................       48.223     -121.950       48.185     -122.078
Jones Creek.................................................       48.542     -122.051       48.524     -122.053
Jordan Creek................................................       48.515     -121.419       48.522     -121.422
June Creek..................................................       46.995     -121.905       46.995     -121.917
Kapowsin Creek..............................................       46.991     -122.195       47.032     -122.205
Kendall Creek...............................................       48.922     -122.145       48.887     -122.149
Kindy Creek.................................................       48.432     -121.208       48.463     -121.208
Klickitat Creek.............................................       46.906     -121.551       46.908     -121.550
Lake Creek..................................................       48.769     -121.550       48.762     -121.546
Lake Shannon................................................       48.587     -121.723               ...........
Lake Union..................................................       47.642     -122.331               ...........
Lake Washington.............................................       47.619     -122.245               ...........
Lewis Creek.................................................       47.820     -121.509       47.824     -121.525
Lightning Creek.............................................       48.907     -120.983       48.933     -120.986
Lime Creek..................................................       48.218     -121.278       48.252     -121.293
Lindsay Creek...............................................       47.347     -121.660       47.351     -121.661
Little Beaver Creek.........................................       48.878     -121.323       48.914     -121.075
Little Chilliwack River.....................................       48.962     -121.478       48.992     -121.409
Little Creek................................................       48.876     -121.937       48.884     -121.934
Little Deer Creek...........................................       48.439     -121.950       48.387     -121.870
Little Fork Little Chilliwack River.........................       48.954     -121.442       48.980     -121.428
Lodi Creek..................................................       46.948     -121.699       46.960     -121.706
Long Creek..................................................       48.080     -121.686       48.074     -121.691
Loomis Creek................................................       48.670     -121.827       48.661     -121.814
Mallardy Creek..............................................       48.055     -121.656       48.070     -121.655
Maple Creek.................................................       48.926     -122.077       48.912     -122.079
Marble Creek................................................       48.542     -121.252       48.531     -121.282
Martin Creek................................................       48.092     -121.403       48.101     -121.396
Masonry Pool................................................       47.410     -121.737               ...........
McAllister Creek............................................       48.587     -121.156       48.623     -121.057
McCoy Creek.................................................       47.831     -121.827       47.848     -121.825
McDonald Creek (<greek-i>0435)..............................       48.911     -122.019       48.921     -122.016
McGinnis Creek..............................................       48.613     -121.961       48.610     -121.960
McMillan Creek..............................................       48.810     -121.212       48.815     -121.193
Merry Brook Creek...........................................       48.087     -121.388       48.089     -121.392
Middle Fork Nooksack River..................................       48.725     -121.899       48.834     -122.155
Milk Creek..................................................       48.178     -121.152       48.221     -121.163
Mill Creek..................................................       48.496     -121.870       48.512     -121.888
Miller River................................................       47.675     -121.389       47.719     -121.394
Miners Creek................................................       48.190     -121.023       48.187     -121.031
Money Creek.................................................       47.707     -121.443       47.729     -121.426
Monument Creek (<greek-i>0324)..............................       48.647     -121.828       48.652     -121.835
Moose Creek.................................................       48.255     -121.710       48.277     -121.700
Mowich River................................................       46.911     -121.996       46.925     -121.950
Newhalem Creek..............................................       48.663     -121.253       48.671     -121.255
Niesson Creek...............................................       46.884     -122.031       46.912     -122.046
Nisqually River.............................................       46.834     -122.324       47.101     -122.692
Nookachamps Creek...........................................       48.348     -122.203       48.471     -122.297
Nooksack River..............................................       48.778     -122.583       48.939     -122.420
Nooksack River (Slater Slough)..............................       48.784     -122.588       48.789     -122.604
North Fork Canyon Creek.....................................       48.774     -120.798       48.768     -120.793
North Fork Canyon Creek.....................................       48.165     -121.818       48.158     -121.817
North Fork Cedar River......................................       47.316     -121.507       47.313     -121.521
North Fork Nooksack River...................................       48.835     -122.154       48.920     -122.055
North Fork Sauk River.......................................       48.096     -121.370       48.097     -121.389
North Fork Skagit River.....................................       48.387     -122.367       48.364     -122.473
North Fork Skykomish River..................................       47.823     -121.530       47.887     -121.448
North Fork Stillaguamish River..............................       48.279     -121.817       48.283     -121.770
North Fork Tolt River.......................................       47.718     -121.779       47.696     -121.821
North Mowich River..........................................       46.916     -121.878       46.915     -121.895
North Puyallup River........................................       46.845     -121.878       46.864     -121.951

[[Page 744]]

 
O'Toole Creek...............................................       48.498     -121.915       48.514     -121.917
Otter Creek.................................................       48.424     -121.374       48.420     -121.374
Owl Creek...................................................       48.161     -121.288       48.163     -121.301
Palmer Creek................................................       48.043     -121.469       48.045     -121.483
Panther Creek...............................................       48.631     -120.978       48.708     -120.976
Parallel Creek..............................................       46.911     -121.549       46.909     -121.560
Park Creek..................................................       48.740     -121.682       48.727     -121.659
Pass Creek..................................................       48.815     -121.463       48.811     -121.458
Peat Bog Creek (<greek-i>0352)..............................       48.780     -122.118       48.790     -122.122
Perry Creek.................................................       48.075     -121.488       48.063     -121.515
Pierce Creek................................................       48.766     -121.073       48.772     -121.066
Pilchuck Creek..............................................       48.303     -122.158       48.208     -122.226
Pilchuck River..............................................       47.995     -121.746       47.904     -122.091
Plumbago Creek..............................................       48.606     -122.101       48.612     -122.097
Poch Creek..................................................       46.987     -121.955       46.991     -121.954
Portage Island..............................................       48.694     -122.614       48.694     -122.614
Porter Creek................................................       48.795     -122.115       48.799     -122.127
Powerhouse Creek............................................       48.908     -121.815       48.911     -121.818
Pressentin Creek............................................       48.504     -121.844       48.518     -121.852
Proctor Creek...............................................       47.821     -121.648       47.835     -121.646
Pugh Creek..................................................       48.165     -121.333       48.172     -121.339
Pumice Creek................................................       48.141     -121.150       48.148     -121.236
Puyallup River..............................................       46.864     -121.951       47.268     -122.426
Racehorse Creek.............................................       48.884     -122.130       48.888     -122.146
Rack Creek..................................................       47.388     -121.731       47.392     -121.722
Ranger Creek................................................       46.988     -121.849       46.995     -121.854
Rankin Creek................................................       48.733     -121.908       48.733     -121.920
Rapid River.................................................       47.821     -121.233       47.803     -121.293
Rex River...................................................       47.347     -121.645       47.371     -121.688
Ridley Creek................................................       48.720     -121.865       48.725     -121.899
Rocky Creek.................................................       48.510     -121.502       48.500     -121.495
Rocky Creek.................................................       48.819     -121.996       48.809     -121.997
Roland Creek................................................       48.770     -120.998       48.769     -121.024
Rollins Creek...............................................       48.293     -121.852       48.281     -121.836
Ross Lake...................................................       48.869     -121.054               ...........
Ruby Creek..................................................       48.718     -121.001       48.707     -120.918
Salmon Creek................................................       47.911     -121.482       47.888     -121.453
Samish River................................................       48.548     -122.457       48.548     -122.457
Sauk River..................................................       48.095     -121.390       48.482     -121.605
Saxson Creek................................................       48.689     -122.156       48.689     -122.163
Schweitzer Creek............................................       48.065     -121.688       48.074     -121.699
Segelsen Creek..............................................       48.299     -121.707       48.280     -121.715
Seventysix Gulch............................................       47.974     -121.384       47.986     -121.393
Seymour Creek...............................................       48.755     -122.009       48.758     -122.010
Shaw Creek..................................................       46.901     -121.568       46.893     -121.580
Ship Canal (Chittendon Locks)...............................       47.660     -122.379               ...........
Shotgun Creek...............................................       47.380     -121.708       47.384     -121.706
Sibley Creek................................................       48.511     -121.255       48.511     -121.262
Silesia Creek...............................................       48.910     -121.485       48.999     -121.613
Silver Creek................................................       48.981     -121.190       48.970     -121.104
Silver Creek................................................       47.938     -121.439       47.897     -121.436
Silver Creek................................................       47.000     -121.530       46.997     -121.524
Silver Gulch................................................       48.075     -121.564       48.078     -121.570
Silver Springs..............................................       46.994     -121.533       46.997     -121.533
Sister Creek................................................       48.746     -121.974       48.755     -121.988
Skagit River................................................       48.471     -121.608       48.712     -121.138
Skookum Creek...............................................       48.686     -122.106       48.670     -122.142
Skykomish River.............................................       47.813     -121.579       47.855     -121.954
Slate Creek.................................................       48.752     -120.786       48.756     -120.796
Small Creek.................................................       48.158     -120.978       48.162     -121.006
Smith Creek.................................................       48.841     -122.262       48.859     -122.309
Snohomish River.............................................       47.830     -122.046       48.016     -122.151
Snoqualmie River............................................       47.541     -121.837       47.830     -122.046
Snowslide Gulch.............................................       47.858     -121.509       47.858     -121.503
Son of Gallop...............................................       48.889     -121.943       48.884     -121.940
Sonny Boy Creek.............................................       48.427     -121.172       48.462     -121.197
South Fork Canyon Creek.....................................       48.154     -121.785       48.158     -121.817
South Fork Cascade River....................................       48.391     -121.109       48.463     -121.164
South Fork Cedar River......................................       47.305     -121.513       47.313     -121.521
South Fork Nooksack River...................................       48.616     -122.103       48.809     -122.203
South Fork Salmon Creek.....................................       47.903     -121.486       47.906     -121.476

[[Page 745]]

 
South Fork Sauk River.......................................       47.986     -121.393       48.097     -121.389
South Fork Skagit River.....................................       48.296     -122.364       48.367     -122.358
South Fork Skagit River (Brandstedt Slough).................       48.311     -122.357       48.311     -122.357
South Fork Skagit River (Crooked Slough)....................       48.306     -122.369       48.307     -122.373
South Fork Skagit River (Deepwater Slough)..................       48.327     -122.355       48.306     -122.383
South Fork Skagit River (Freshwater Slough).................       48.338     -122.349       48.321     -122.377
South Fork Skagit River (Old River).........................       48.308     -122.365       48.308     -122.365
South Fork Skagit River (Steamboat Slough)..................       48.324     -122.348       48.296     -122.364
South Fork Skagit River (Tom Moore Slough)..................       48.296     -122.364       48.324     -122.348
South Fork Skagit River (Unnamed off Deepwater Slough)......       48.317     -122.369       48.307     -122.389
South Fork Skykomish River..................................       47.705     -121.307       47.813     -121.579
South Fork Stillaguamish River..............................       48.030     -121.483       48.204     -122.127
South Fork Tolt River.......................................       47.693     -121.694       47.696     -121.821
South Mowich River..........................................       46.877     -121.855       46.915     -121.895
South Pass..................................................       48.225     -122.386       48.238     -122.378
South Prairie Creek.........................................       47.093     -121.952       47.098     -122.156
South Puyallup River........................................       46.808     -121.892       46.864     -121.951
South Slough................................................       48.193     -122.256       48.194     -122.254
Southeastern Shoreline Vashon Island........................       47.331     -122.493       47.348     -122.451
Squire Creek................................................       48.194     -121.638       48.279     -121.685
St.Andrews Creek............................................       46.834     -121.918       46.837     -121.921
Steamboat Slough............................................       47.984     -122.169       48.033     -122.204
Stetattle Creek.............................................       48.727     -121.155       48.717     -121.150
Stillaguamish River.........................................       48.193     -122.167       48.238     -122.378
Straight Creek..............................................       48.254     -121.398       48.272     -121.398
Suiattle River..............................................       48.162     -121.006       48.306     -121.428
Sulphide Creek..............................................       48.789     -121.553       48.777     -121.533
Sulphur Creek...............................................       48.279     -121.086       48.247     -121.193
Sulphur Creek...............................................       48.659     -121.711       48.648     -121.699
Sultan River................................................       47.870     -121.829       47.872     -121.826
Sunrise Creek...............................................       46.967     -121.540       46.971     -121.540
Swift Creek.................................................       48.747     -121.659       48.734     -121.659
Swift Creek.................................................       46.873     -121.954       46.870     -121.964
Swinomish Channel...........................................       48.440     -122.499       48.441     -122.504
Tenas Creek.................................................       48.335     -121.422       48.324     -121.440
Thompson Creek..............................................       48.891     -121.880       48.879     -121.915
Three Fools Creek...........................................       48.897     -120.849       48.890     -120.974
Three Lakes Outlet (<greek-i>0319)..........................       48.626     -121.888       48.625     -121.884
Thunder Creek...............................................       48.563     -121.027       48.678     -121.078
Tolmie Creek................................................       46.984     -121.944       46.990     -121.944
Tolt River..................................................       47.696     -121.821       47.640     -121.927
Troublesome Creek...........................................       47.925     -121.363       47.897     -121.404
Trout Creek.................................................       47.833     -121.434       47.864     -121.488
Tye River...................................................       47.717     -121.229       47.705     -121.307
Union Slough................................................       47.984     -122.167       48.034     -122.191
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0194)...............................       47.073     -121.693       47.072     -121.683
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0217)...............................       46.992     -121.705       46.992     -121.708
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0219)...............................       46.990     -121.706       46.987     -121.704
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0226)...............................       46.962     -121.711       46.961     -121.713
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0234)...............................       46.961     -121.711       46.965     -121.714
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0241)...............................       48.293     -121.785       48.284     -121.781
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0242)...............................       48.294     -121.772       48.286     -121.772
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0243)...............................       48.295     -121.759       48.286     -121.772
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0265)...............................       48.746     -122.094       48.743     -122.109
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0284)...............................       48.650     -122.116       48.649     -122.121
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0290)...............................       48.633     -122.121       48.635     -122.117
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0291)...............................       48.630     -122.121       48.636     -122.116
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0315)...............................       48.606     -121.953       48.608     -121.954
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0316)...............................       48.608     -121.930       48.605     -121.930
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0320)...............................       48.620     -121.861       48.625     -121.882
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0321)...............................       48.632     -121.872       48.629     -121.880
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0323)...............................       48.656     -121.862       48.655     -121.862
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0332)...............................       48.684     -121.921       48.690     -121.927
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0336)...............................       46.976     -121.547       46.976     -121.542
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0347)...............................       48.821     -122.121       48.828     -122.141
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0349)...............................       48.812     -122.125       48.815     -122.129
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0364)...............................       46.904     -121.567       46.904     -121.561
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0364)...............................       48.131     -121.909       48.123     -121.903
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0365)...............................       48.133     -121.884       48.124     -121.889
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0367)...............................       48.763     -122.040       48.765     -122.036
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0371)...............................       48.755     -122.017       48.757     -122.016

[[Page 746]]

 
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0374)...............................       48.761     -121.986       48.756     -121.994
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0425)...............................       48.934     -122.036       48.927     -122.031
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0439)...............................       47.325     -121.535       47.325     -121.532
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0476)...............................       48.845     -121.896       48.844     -121.902
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>0565)...............................       46.960     -121.793       46.959     -121.792
Unnamed trib. (<greek-i>1119)...............................       48.185     -121.433       48.181     -121.430
Unnamed trib. (LB1) upstream of Crystal Ck..................       46.925     -121.544       46.923     -121.546
Unnamed trib. (LB2) upstream of Crystal Ck..................       46.923     -121.543       46.921     -121.546
Unnamed trib. (RB) upstream of Crystal Creek................       46.920     -121.543       46.918     -121.542
Unnamed trib. downstream Boulder Ck.........................       48.929     -122.040       48.926     -122.046
Unnamed trib. downstream Wanlick Ck.........................       48.641     -121.878       48.640     -121.883
Unnamed trib. upstream Chenius Ck...........................       46.992     -121.843       46.990     -121.839
Unnamed trib. upstream of (<greek-i>0214)...................       46.997     -121.700       46.991     -121.704
Unnamed trib. upstream Wallace Ck...........................       48.742     -121.947       48.739     -121.936
Van Horn Creek..............................................       46.977     -121.718       46.976     -121.719
Viola Creek.................................................       47.043     -121.712       47.052     -121.695
Vista Creek.................................................       48.180     -121.057       48.194     -121.047
Wallace Creek...............................................       48.748     -121.943       48.745     -121.951
Wallace River...............................................       47.874     -121.649       47.859     -121.795
Wanlick Creek...............................................       48.644     -121.877       48.663     -121.799
Warm Creek..................................................       48.761     -121.972       48.755     -121.979
Weden Creek.................................................       47.986     -121.444       48.003     -121.439
Wells Creek.................................................       48.890     -121.791       48.905     -121.809
West Cady Creek.............................................       47.898     -121.307       47.899     -121.319
West Cornell Creek..........................................       48.878     -121.969       48.888     -121.961
West Fork Foss River........................................       47.627     -121.311       47.653     -121.294
West Fork White River.......................................       46.941     -121.708       47.125     -121.619
West Pass...................................................       48.238     -122.378       48.246     -122.394
West Slide Creek (<greek-i>0422)............................       48.912     -122.063       48.917     -122.067
White Chuck River...........................................       48.070     -121.151       48.181     -121.424
White Creek.................................................       48.403     -121.538       48.397     -121.553
White River.................................................       46.893     -121.601       47.274     -122.217
Wildcat Creek...............................................       48.895     -122.006       48.909     -122.001
Wiseman Creek...............................................       48.516     -122.130       48.506     -122.135
Wright Creek................................................       46.878     -121.615       46.877     -121.615
Wrong Creek.................................................       47.024     -121.710       47.049     -121.694
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Waterbodies associated with the following tribal lands or 
habitat conservation plans (HCPs) totaling 876.9 km (544.9 mi) of 
streams, 203.4 km (126.4 mi) of marine shoreline, and 1,629.5 ha 
(4,026.6 ac) of lakes and reservoirs have been excluded from critical 
habitat designation under section 4(b)(2) of the Act in this unit:
    (A) Waterbodies within the geographic area covered by the Washington 
State Forest Practices Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP) , including 
portions of Lower Green River, Lower Nisqually, Lower Skagit River, 
Nooksack River, Puyallup River, Samish River, Snohomish & Skykomish 
Rivers, Stillaguamish River, and Puget Sound Marine CHSUs;
    (B) Waterbodies within the geographic area covered by the Washington 
Department of Natural Resources HCP, including portions of Lower Green 
River, Lower Skagit River, Nooksack River, Puyallup River, Samish River, 
Snohomish and Skykomish Rivers, Stillaguamish River, and Puget Sound 
Marine CHSUs; and
    (C) Waterbodies within the areas under management by the Muckleshoot 
Tribe, including portions of the Puyallup River CHSU; Swinomish Tribe, 
including portions of the Puget Sound Marine CHSU; Lummi Nation, 
including portions of Nooksack River and Puget Sound Marine CHSUs; 
Nooksack Tribe, including portions of Nooksack River CHSU; Tulalip 
Tribes, including portions of Puget Sound Marine CHSU; Puyallup Tribe, 
including portions of Puyallup River and Puget Sound Marine CHSUs; and 
Stillaguamish Tribe, including portions of Stillaguamish River CHSU, 
within reservation boundaries, and waterbodies that are adjacent to:
    (1) Lands held in trust by the United States for their benefit;
    (2) Lands held in trust by the United States for any Indian Tribe or 
individual subject to restrictions by the United States against 
alienation;
    (3) Fee lands, either within or outside the reservation boundaries, 
owned by the tribal government; and
    (4) Fee lands within the reservation boundaries owned by individual 
Indians.
    (iv) Map of Unit 2, Puget Sound follows:

[[Page 747]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.003

                (10) Unit 3: Lower Columbia River Basins

    (i) This unit consists of 119.3 km (74.2 mi) of streams. The unit is 
located in southwestern Washington.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 748]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Buck Creek..................................................       45.865     -121.579       45.781     -121.515
Clearwater Creek............................................       46.278     -121.331       46.276     -121.328
Cougar Creek................................................       46.071     -122.268       46.055     -122.293
Drift Creek.................................................       46.023     -122.090       46.008     -122.078
Fish Lake Stream............................................       46.341     -121.370       46.275     -121.313
Klickitat River.............................................       46.255     -121.240       45.691     -121.295
Lake Merwin.................................................       45.977     -122.466               ...........
Lewis River.................................................       45.957     -122.556       46.066     -122.020
Little Muddy Creek..........................................       46.278     -121.353       46.276     -121.328
Muddy River.................................................       46.069     -122.007       46.168     -122.034
Phelps Creek................................................       45.892     -121.566       45.881     -121.518
Pine Creek..................................................       46.142     -122.096       46.071     -122.017
Rush Creek..................................................       46.055     -121.916       46.075     -121.938
Swift Creek.................................................       46.084     -122.200       46.086     -122.204
Swift Reservoir.............................................       46.056     -122.114               ...........
Trappers Creek..............................................       46.289     -121.363       46.276     -121.336
Two Lakes Stream............................................       46.340     -121.385       46.341     -121.370
Unnamed trib. - off Fish Lake Stream........................       46.323     -121.438       46.331     -121.360
Unnamed trib. ('P10').......................................       46.123     -122.088       46.120     -122.077
Unnamed trib. ('P7')........................................       46.099     -122.069       46.092     -122.059
Unnamed trib. ('P8')........................................       46.104     -122.064       46.140     -122.082
West Fork Klickitat River...................................       46.276     -121.328       46.242     -121.247
White Salmon River..........................................       45.897     -121.504       45.722     -121.523
Yale Lake...................................................       46.012     -122.312               ...........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Waterbodies associated with the following tribal lands and 
habitat conservation plans (HCPs) totaling 155.6 km (96.7 mi) of streams 
and 4,856.1 ha (11,999.7 ac) of lakes and reservoirs have been excluded 
from critical habitat designation under section 4(b)(2) of the Act in 
this unit:
    (A) Waterbodies within the geographic area covered by the Washington 
State Forest Practices Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP) , including 
portions of Klickitat River, Lewis River, and White Salmon River CHSUs;
    (B) Waterbodies within the geographic area covered by the Washington 
Department of Natural Resources HCP, including portions of Klickitat 
River, Lewis River, and White Salmon River CHSUs; and
    (C) Waterbodies within the geographic area covered by the PacifiCorp 
Lewis River Hydropower Project Conservation Easement, including portions 
of Lewis River CHSU.
    (D) Waterbodies within the areas under management by the Yakama 
Nation including the Klickitat River CHSU, within reservation 
boundaries, and waterbodies that are adjacent to:
    (1) Lands held in trust by the United States for their benefit;
    (2) Lands held in trust by the United States for any Indian Tribe or 
individual subject to restrictions by the United States against 
alienation;
    (3) Fee lands, either within or outside the reservation boundaries, 
owned by the tribal government; and
    (4) Fee lands within the reservation boundaries owned by individual 
Indians.
    (iv) Map of Unit 3, Lower Columbia River Basins follows:

[[Page 749]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.004

                   (11) Unit 4: Upper Willamette River

    (i) This unit consists of 312.4 km (194.1 mi) of streams and 3,601.5 
ha (8,899.5 ac) of lakes and reservoirs. The unit is located in 
northwestern Oregon.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 750]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Anderson Creek..............................................       44.258     -122.043       44.278     -122.022
Bear Creek..................................................       43.554     -122.209       43.544     -122.244
Blue River..................................................       44.172     -122.329       44.153     -122.344
Carmen-Smith Spawning Channel...............................       44.273     -122.051       44.271     -122.052
Cougar Reservoir............................................       44.100     -122.230               ...........
Deer Creek..................................................       44.259     -122.063       44.241     -122.058
Dexter Reservoir............................................       43.915     -122.789               ...........
East Fork Horse Creek.......................................       44.170     -122.175       44.176     -122.179
East Fork South Fork McKenzie River.........................       44.117     -122.204       44.116     -122.195
Hills Creek Lake............................................       43.671     -122.427               ...........
Horse Creek.................................................       44.125     -122.037       44.170     -122.175
Indigo Creek................................................       43.497     -122.262       43.495     -122.268
Lookout Point Lake..........................................       43.872     -122.682               ...........
Lost Creek..................................................       44.161     -122.018       44.189     -122.067
McKenzie River..............................................       44.190     -122.079       44.285     -122.042
Middle Fork Willamette River................................       43.481     -122.255       44.022     -123.018
Olallie Creek...............................................       44.257     -122.042       44.269     -122.025
Roaring River...............................................       43.928     -122.066       43.955     -122.092
Smith River.................................................       44.279     -122.051       44.287     -122.049
South Fork McKenzie River...................................       43.955     -122.092       44.159     -122.296
Sweetwater Creek............................................       44.283     -122.035       44.279     -122.046
Swift Creek.................................................       43.560     -122.163       43.502     -122.300
Trail Bridge Reservoir......................................       44.277     -122.048               ...........
West Fork Horse Creek.......................................       44.170     -122.175       44.172     -122.207
White Branch................................................       44.160     -122.019       44.167     -122.030
Willamette River............................................       44.022     -123.018       44.125     -123.107
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) No waterbodies are excluded from critical habitat designation 
in this unit.
    (iv) Map of Unit 4, Upper Willamette River follows:

[[Page 751]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.005

                      (12) Unit 5: Hood River Basin

    (i) This unit consists of 128.1 km (79.6 mi) of streams and 36.9 ha 
(91.1 ac) of lakes and reservoirs. The unit is located in northcentral 
Oregon.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 752]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bear Creek..................................................       45.499     -121.630       45.486     -121.668
Clear Branch................................................       45.444     -121.711       45.463     -121.646
Coe Branch..................................................       45.413     -121.685       45.463     -121.646
Compass Creek...............................................       45.401     -121.683       45.434     -121.668
East Fork Hood River........................................       45.575     -121.627       45.605     -121.633
Elk Creek...................................................       45.405     -121.773       45.456     -121.782
Elliot Branch...............................................       45.464     -121.640       45.453     -121.638
Hood River..................................................       45.605     -121.633       45.720     -121.507
Jones Creek.................................................       45.462     -121.782       45.468     -121.806
Lake Branch.................................................       45.539     -121.743       45.549     -121.700
Laurance Lake...............................................       45.460     -121.665               ...........
Laurel Creek................................................       45.513     -121.789       45.539     -121.743
McGee Creek.................................................       45.456     -121.782       45.411     -121.760
Middle Fork Hood River......................................       45.463     -121.646       45.575     -121.627
Pinnacle Creek..............................................       45.433     -121.687       45.458     -121.661
Red Hill Creek..............................................       45.453     -121.735       45.483     -121.770
Tony Creek..................................................       45.553     -121.639       45.472     -121.712
Unnamed - Off Clear Branch..................................       45.448     -121.701       45.447     -121.702
West Fork Hood River........................................       45.456     -121.782       45.605     -121.633
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) No waterbodies are excluded from critical habitat designation 
in this unit.
    (iv) Map of Unit 5, Hood River Basin follows:

[[Page 753]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.006

                (13) Unit 6: Lower Deschutes River Basin

    (i) This unit consists of 232.8 km (139.7 mi) of streams and 1,224.9 
ha (3,026.8 ac) of lakes and reservoirs. The unit is located in 
northcentral Oregon.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 754]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Abbot Creek.................................................       44.544     -121.671       44.570     -121.621
Blue Lake...................................................       44.413     -121.769               ...........
Brush Creek.................................................       44.543     -121.707       44.504     -121.659
Bunch Grass Creek...........................................       44.993     -121.647       44.987     -121.644
Candle Creek................................................       44.583     -121.678       44.576     -121.619
Canyon Creek................................................       44.502     -121.742       44.501     -121.643
Crooked River...............................................       44.393     -121.193       44.501     -121.286
Deschutes River.............................................       44.373     -121.292       45.639     -120.915
Heising Spring..............................................       44.491     -121.652       44.493     -121.649
Jack Creek..................................................       44.472     -121.727       44.493     -121.648
Jefferson Creek.............................................       44.625     -121.691       44.577     -121.620
Lake Billy Chinook..........................................       44.568     -121.308               ...........
Lake Billy Chinook..........................................       44.593     -121.370               ...........
Lake Creek..................................................       44.426     -121.727       44.436     -121.703
Link Creek..................................................       44.415     -121.766       44.419     -121.756
Metolius River..............................................       44.434     -121.638       44.619     -121.469
Middle Fork Lake Creek......................................       44.436     -121.703       44.453     -121.643
Roaring Creek...............................................       44.527     -121.709       44.508     -121.687
Shitike Creek...............................................       44.748     -121.682       44.762     -121.228
South Fork Lake Creek.......................................       44.435     -121.705       44.442     -121.662
Spring Creek................................................       44.457     -121.644       44.451     -121.651
Street Creek................................................       44.590     -121.506       44.599     -121.454
Suttle Lake.................................................       44.422     -121.741               ...........
Trout Creek.................................................       44.803     -121.069       44.821     -121.089
Unnamed - Off Canyon Creek..................................       44.527     -121.679       44.504     -121.658
Unnamed - Off Jack Creek....................................       44.476     -121.725       44.476     -121.723
Unnamed - Off Jack Creek....................................       44.477     -121.724       44.476     -121.723
Unnamed - Off Jack Creek....................................       44.477     -121.724       44.477     -121.724
Unnamed - Off Jefferson Creek...............................       44.634     -121.699       44.625     -121.691
Unnamed - Off Roaring Creek.................................       44.522     -121.700       44.516     -121.700
Unnamed - Off Roaring Creek.................................       44.522     -121.700       44.521     -121.700
Unnamed - Off Roaring Creek.................................       44.516     -121.712       44.516     -121.700
Warm Springs River 1........................................       44.941     -121.431       44.941     -121.431
Warm Springs River 2........................................       44.969     -121.585       44.969     -121.585
Whitewater River............................................       44.704     -121.728       44.670     -121.546
Whychus Creek...............................................       44.460     -121.336       44.417     -121.389
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Waterbodies associated with the following tribal lands 
totaling 230.4 km (143.2 mi) of streams and 445.3 ha (1,100.4 ac) of 
lakes and reservoirs have been excluded from critical habitat 
designation under section 4(b)(2) of the Act in this unit. These are 
waterbodies within the areas under management by the Confederated Tribes 
of the Warm Springs Reservation within reservation boundaries, and 
waterbodies that are adjacent to:
    (A) Lands held in trust by the United States for their benefit;
    (B) Lands held in trust by the United States for any Indian Tribe or 
individual subject to restrictions by the United States against 
alienation;
    (C) Fee lands, either within or outside the reservation boundaries, 
owned by the tribal government; and
    (D) Fee lands within the reservation boundaries owned by individual 
Indians.
    (iv) Map of Unit 6, Lower Deschutes River Basin follows:

[[Page 755]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.007

                         (14) Unit 7: Odell Lake

    (i) This unit consists of 27.4 km (17.0 mi) of streams and 1,387.1 
ha (3,427.6 ac) of lakes and reservoirs. The unit is located in 
northcentral Oregon.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 756]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Crystal Creek...............................................       43.566     -122.052       43.572     -122.022
Maklaks Creek...............................................       43.566     -121.945       43.564     -121.915
Odell Creek.................................................       43.550     -121.964       43.591     -121.855
Odell Lake..................................................       43.572     -122.001               ...........
Trapper Creek...............................................       43.548     -122.076       43.585     -122.048
Unnamed - Off Odell Creek...................................       43.557     -121.919       43.561     -121.943
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) No waterbodies are excluded from critical habitat designation 
in this unit.
    (iv) Map of Unit 7, Odell Lake follows:

[[Page 757]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.008

               (15) Unit 8: Mainstem Lower Columbia River

    (i) This unit consists of 340.4 km (211.5 mi) of streams. The unit 
is located along the border between Oregon and Washington.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 758]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Columbia River..............................................       45.645     -121.933       45.800     -122.787
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Waterbodies associated with the following habitat conservation 
plan (HCP) totaling 1.7 km (1.1 mi) of streams have been excluded from 
critical habitat designation under section 4(b)(2) of the Act in this 
unit. These are waterbodies within the geographic area covered by the 
Washington State Forest Practices Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP).
    (iv) Map of Unit 8, Mainstem Lower Columbia River follows:

[[Page 759]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.009

                    (16) Unit 9: Klamath River Basin

    (i) This unit consists of 445.2 km (276.6 mi) of streams and 3,775.5 
ha (9,329.4 ac) of lakes and reservoirs. The unit is located in 
southwestern Oregon.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 760]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Agency Lake.................................................       42.541     -121.964               ...........
Annie Creek.................................................       42.721     -121.990       42.817     -122.113
Boulder Creek...............................................       42.660     -120.784       42.673     -120.762
Boulder Creek...............................................       42.517     -120.952       42.494     -120.885
Brownsworth Creek...........................................       42.392     -120.914       42.469     -120.855
Calahan Creek...............................................       42.838     -121.267       42.924     -121.292
Camp Creek..................................................       42.445     -120.795       42.471     -120.838
Cherry Creek................................................       42.615     -122.201       42.631     -122.074
Corral Creek................................................       42.455     -120.783       42.480     -120.819
Coyote Creek................................................       42.862     -121.109       42.893     -121.247
Crane Creek.................................................       42.638     -122.052       42.642     -122.065
Crooked Creek...............................................       42.598     -121.946       42.686     -121.965
Dead Cow Creek..............................................       42.590     -120.837       42.562     -120.781
Deming Creek................................................       42.448     -120.954       42.486     -120.886
Dixon Creek.................................................       42.518     -120.938       42.532     -120.925
Fort Creek..................................................       42.695     -121.968       42.672     -121.980
Fourmile Creek..............................................       42.612     -122.051       42.633     -122.077
Gearhart Creek..............................................       42.566     -120.887       42.510     -120.872
Gold Creek..................................................       42.590     -120.819       42.606     -120.795
Hole Creek..................................................       42.567     -120.870       42.541     -120.861
Leonard Creek...............................................       42.413     -120.868       42.465     -120.865
Long Creek..................................................       42.726     -121.160       42.831     -121.200
North Fork Sprague River....................................       42.497     -121.009       42.557     -120.840
Nottin Creek................................................       42.570     -120.871       42.532     -120.851
Rifle Creek.................................................       42.694     -120.881       42.682     -120.846
School Creek................................................       42.604     -120.847       42.618     -120.808
Sevenmile Canal.............................................       42.582     -121.971       42.646     -122.052
Sevenmile Creek.............................................       42.646     -122.052       42.690     -122.151
South Fork Sprague River....................................       42.392     -120.914       42.481     -120.785
South Fork Sycan River......................................       42.663     -120.794       42.633     -120.796
Sun Creek...................................................       42.734     -122.009       42.876     -122.100
Sycan River.................................................       42.647     -120.735       42.784     -121.095
Threemile Creek.............................................       42.642     -122.065       42.640     -122.139
Unnamed - Off Dixon Creek...................................       42.523     -120.931       42.521     -120.922
Unnamed - Off Long Creek....................................       42.873     -121.299       42.870     -121.296
West Canal..................................................       42.646     -122.052       42.531     -122.005
Wood River..................................................       42.577     -121.941       42.747     -121.985
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) No waterbodies are excluded from critical habitat designation 
in this unit.
    (iv) Map of Unit 9, Klamath River Basin follows:

[[Page 761]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.010

                (17) Unit 10: Upper Columbia River Basins

    (i) This unit consists of 931.8 km (579.0 mi) of streams and 1,033.2 
ha (2,553.1 ac) of lakes and reservoirs. The unit is located in 
northcentral Washington.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 762]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alder Creek.................................................       47.845     -120.666       47.919     -120.647
Alpine Creek................................................       48.084     -120.864       48.083     -120.866
Andrews Creek...............................................       48.782     -120.108       48.787     -120.113
Beaver Creek................................................       48.327     -120.066       48.492     -119.993
Black Lake..................................................       48.829     -120.208               ...........
Blue Buck Creek.............................................       48.486     -120.005       48.553     -119.963
Buck Creek..................................................       48.104     -120.878       48.106     -120.886
Buttermilk Creek............................................       48.363     -120.339       48.340     -120.303
Canyon Creek................................................       47.907     -120.895       47.891     -120.965
Cedar Creek.................................................       48.589     -120.471       48.566     -120.475
Chelan River................................................       47.803     -119.980       47.812     -119.985
Chewuch River...............................................       48.476     -120.183       48.844     -120.023
Chikamin Creek..............................................       47.904     -120.731       47.985     -120.718
Chiwaukum Creek.............................................       47.679     -120.728       47.715     -120.839
Chiwawa River...............................................       47.788     -120.660       48.104     -120.878
Cougar Lake.................................................       48.881     -120.466               ...........
Crater Creek................................................       48.214     -120.209       48.215     -120.270
Diamond Creek...............................................       48.849     -120.422       48.855     -120.416
Drake Creek.................................................       48.781     -120.396       48.787     -120.389
Early Winters Creek.........................................       48.601     -120.438       48.503     -120.625
East Fork Buttermilk Creek..................................       48.340     -120.303       48.296     -120.308
Eightmile Creek.............................................       48.604     -120.163       48.804     -120.338
Entiat River................................................       47.660     -120.218       47.920     -120.507
Eureka Creek................................................       48.700     -120.492       48.709     -120.506
First Hidden Lake...........................................       48.899     -120.487               ...........
Foggy Dew Creek.............................................       48.204     -120.190       48.161     -120.297
French Creek................................................       47.628     -120.963       47.593     -121.042
Goat Creek..................................................       48.574     -120.379       48.730     -120.360
Gold Creek..................................................       48.188     -120.095       48.185     -120.116
Henry Creek.................................................       47.768     -120.991       47.754     -120.996
Huckleberry Creek...........................................       48.569     -120.473       48.511     -120.450
Icicle Creek................................................       47.550     -120.679       47.558     -120.672
Ingalls Creek...............................................       47.463     -120.661       47.448     -120.859
Jack Creek..................................................       47.608     -120.900       47.529     -120.952
James Creek.................................................       48.077     -120.858       48.075     -120.861
Lake Creek..................................................       48.750     -120.137       48.848     -120.239
Lake Wenatchee..............................................       47.823     -120.778               ...........
Leland Creek................................................       47.662     -121.041       47.612     -121.089
Lightning Creek.............................................       48.451     -119.999       48.453     -119.996
Little Bridge Creek.........................................       48.379     -120.286       48.449     -120.432
Little Wenatchee River......................................       47.827     -120.819       47.913     -121.094
Lost River..................................................       48.650     -120.512       48.896     -120.486
Mad River...................................................       47.736     -120.363       47.864     -120.608
Methow River................................................       48.050     -119.894       48.651     -120.513
Middle Hidden Lake..........................................       48.908     -120.489               ...........
Mill Creek..................................................       47.777     -121.011       47.772     -121.021
Monument Creek..............................................       48.732     -120.449       48.803     -120.495
Napeequa River..............................................       47.921     -120.897       47.931     -120.879
Nason Creek.................................................       47.809     -120.716       47.784     -121.028
Negro Creek.................................................       47.444     -120.662       47.418     -120.797
North Creek.................................................       48.454     -120.563       48.462     -120.559
North Fork Gold Creek.......................................       48.185     -120.116       48.238     -120.283
North Fork Wolf Creek.......................................       48.485     -120.347       48.530     -120.424
Panther Creek...............................................       47.941     -120.929       47.938     -120.943
Peshastin Creek.............................................       47.558     -120.574       47.444     -120.662
Phelps Creek................................................       48.070     -120.853       48.080     -120.839
Ptarmigan Creek.............................................       48.891     -120.482       48.885     -120.483
Rainy Creek.................................................       47.852     -120.955       47.816     -121.075
Rattlesnake Creek...........................................       48.648     -120.566       48.651     -120.571
Reynolds Creek..............................................       48.406     -120.479       48.404     -120.490
Robinson Creek..............................................       48.659     -120.538       48.673     -120.539
Rock Creek..................................................       47.963     -120.796       48.037     -120.763
South Creek.................................................       48.438     -120.529       48.428     -120.568
Stormy Creek................................................       47.822     -120.422       47.867     -120.360
Tillicum Creek..............................................       47.747     -120.394       47.723     -120.439
Trout Creek.................................................       48.640     -120.599       48.664     -120.711
Twisp River.................................................       48.369     -120.119       48.464     -120.606
Unnamed stream..............................................       47.592     -120.661       47.590     -120.663
Unnamed stream..............................................       47.578     -120.666       47.575     -120.670
Unnamed stream..............................................       47.834     -120.875       47.838     -120.900
Unnamed stream..............................................       47.837     -120.878       47.835     -120.885

[[Page 763]]

 
W. Fork Buttermilk Creek....................................       48.340     -120.303       48.259     -120.437
War Creek...................................................       48.361     -120.396       48.362     -120.411
Wenatchee River.............................................       47.456     -120.317       47.808     -120.728
West Fork Methow River......................................       48.648     -120.512       48.641     -120.609
White River.................................................       47.834     -120.816       47.953     -120.940
Wolf Creek..................................................       48.491     -120.232       48.476     -120.441
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Waterbodies associated with the following habitat conservation 
plan (HCP) totaling 119.7 km (74.4 mi) of streams have been excluded 
from critical habitat designation under section 4(b)(2) of the Act in 
this unit. These are waterbodies within the geographic area covered by 
the Washington State Forest Practices Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP) , 
including portions of Entiat River, Methow River, and Wenatchee River 
CHSUs.
    (iv) Map of Unit 10, Upper Columbia River Basins follows:

[[Page 764]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.011

                       (18) Unit 11: Yakima River

    (i) This unit consists of 896.9 km (557.3 mi) of streams and 6,285.2 
ha (15,530.9 ac) of lakes and reservoirs. The unit is located in central 
Washington.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 765]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ahtanum Creek...............................................       46.529     -120.473       46.523     -120.855
American River..............................................       46.976     -121.158       46.901     -121.416
Bear Creek..................................................       46.538     -121.261       46.540     -121.282
Box Canyon Creek............................................       47.360     -121.244       47.377     -121.259
Bumping Lake................................................       46.851     -121.328               ...........
Bumping River...............................................       46.831     -121.378       46.868     -121.300
Camp Creek..................................................       46.571     -121.243       46.579     -121.266
Cle Elum Lake...............................................       47.290     -121.103               ...........
Cle Elum River..............................................       47.177     -120.991       47.589     -121.162
Clear Lake..................................................       46.629     -121.281               ...........
Cold Creek..................................................       47.368     -121.394       47.352     -121.455
Cooper Lake.................................................       47.426     -121.176               ...........
Cooper River................................................       47.390     -121.099       47.455     -121.214
Cowiche Creek...............................................       46.628     -120.569       46.647     -120.682
Crow Creek..................................................       47.015     -121.134       47.017     -121.318
Deep Creek..................................................       46.844     -121.317       46.804     -121.322
DeRoux Creek................................................       47.419     -120.941       47.442     -120.980
Dog Creek...................................................       46.787     -121.169       46.793     -121.178
Easton Lake.................................................       47.248     -121.195               ...........
Fall Creek..................................................       46.586     -121.038       46.595     -121.060
Fortune Creek...............................................       47.477     -121.047       47.469     -120.965
Gold Creek..................................................       47.475     -121.318       47.390     -121.384
Grey Creek..................................................       46.591     -121.223       46.594     -121.226
Hindoo Creek................................................       46.785     -121.164       46.781     -121.183
Hyas Lake...................................................       47.567     -121.121               ...........
Indian Creek................................................       46.696     -121.301       46.641     -121.250
Jack Creek..................................................       47.319     -120.856       47.334     -120.744
Jungle Creek................................................       47.333     -120.856       47.333     -120.925
Kachess Lake................................................       47.316     -121.228               ...........
Kachess River...............................................       47.251     -121.201       47.429     -121.223
Keechelus Lake..............................................       47.349     -121.368               ...........
Kettle Creek................................................       46.941     -121.328       46.916     -121.342
Little Naches River.........................................       46.989     -121.095       47.089     -121.282
Little Rattlesnake Creek....................................       46.814     -120.949       46.801     -120.948
Little Wildcat Creek........................................       46.731     -121.236       46.687     -121.267
Middle Fork Ahtanum Creek...................................       46.518     -121.015       46.506     -121.180
Middle Fork Teanaway River..................................       47.257     -120.898       47.419     -120.994
Mineral Creek...............................................       47.420     -121.241       47.422     -121.246
Naches River................................................       46.630     -120.515       46.989     -121.095
North Fork Ahtanum Creek....................................       46.523     -120.855       46.538     -121.212
North Fork Little Naches River..............................       47.089     -121.282       47.094     -121.392
North Fork Rattlesnake Creek................................       46.810     -121.068       46.841     -121.170
North Fork Taneaum Creek....................................       47.112     -120.933       47.109     -121.145
North Fork Teanaway River...................................       47.251     -120.878       47.454     -120.966
North Fork Tieton River.....................................       46.508     -121.436       46.628     -121.271
Oak Creek...................................................       46.724     -120.813       46.735     -120.924
Pileup Creek................................................       47.045     -121.183       47.090     -121.124
Quartz Creek................................................       47.017     -121.135       47.082     -121.109
Rattlesnake Creek...........................................       46.820     -120.930       46.759     -121.316
Reynolds Creek..............................................       46.619     -120.882       46.601     -121.068
Rimrock Lake................................................       46.639     -121.180               ...........
Rock Creek..................................................       46.585     -121.025       46.588     -121.079
Shellneck Creek.............................................       46.531     -121.159       46.515     -121.188
Short And Dirty Creek.......................................       46.617     -121.150       46.616     -121.149
South Fork Ahtanum Creek....................................       46.523     -120.855       46.454     -121.119
South Fork Cowiche Creek....................................       46.647     -120.682       46.566     -121.124
South Fork Little Naches River..............................       47.066     -121.227       47.020     -121.392
South Fork Taneaum Creek....................................       47.112     -120.933       47.091     -121.030
South Fork Tieton River.....................................       46.627     -121.133       46.496     -121.315
Spruce Creek................................................       46.590     -121.219       46.586     -121.212
Stafford Creek..............................................       47.347     -120.849       47.398     -120.802
Swauk Creek.................................................       47.123     -120.738       47.158     -120.739
Taneaum Creek...............................................       47.092     -120.709       47.112     -120.933
Teanaway River..............................................       47.167     -120.835       47.257     -120.898
Tieton River................................................       46.746     -120.787       46.656     -121.130
Timber Creek................................................       46.913     -121.386       46.907     -121.382
Union Creek.................................................       46.932     -121.358       46.937     -121.362
Unnamed stream..............................................       46.545     -121.388       46.550     -121.403
Waptus Lake.................................................       47.503     -121.178               ...........
Waptus River................................................       47.419     -121.088       47.540     -121.241
Yakima River................................................       46.254     -119.228       47.322     -121.340
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 766]]

    (iii) Waterbodies associated with the following tribal lands or 
habitat conservation plans (HCPs) totaling 288.7 km (179.4 mi) of 
streams have been excluded from critical habitat designation under 
section 4(b)(2) of the Act in this unit:
    (A) Waterbodies within the geographic area covered by the Washington 
State Forest Practices Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP) , including 
portions of the Yakima River Critical Habitat Unit (CHU);
    (B) Waterbodies within the geographic area covered by the Plum Creek 
Central Cascades HCP, including portions of the Yakima River CHU; and
    (C) Waterbodies within the areas under management by the Yakama 
Tribe, including portions of Yakama River CHU and Klickitat River CHSU, 
within reservation boundaries, and waterbodies that are adjacent to:
    (1) Lands held in trust by the United States for their benefit;
    (2) Lands held in trust by the United States for any Indian Tribe or 
individual subject to restrictions by the United States against 
alienation;
    (3) Fee lands, either within or outside the reservation boundaries, 
owned by the tribal government; and
    (4) Fee lands within the reservation boundaries owned by individual 
Indians.
    (iv) Map of Unit 11, Yakima River follows:

[[Page 767]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.012

                   (19) Unit 12: John Day River Basin

    (i) This unit consists of 1,089.6 km (677.0 mi) of streams. The unit 
is located in northcentral Oregon.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 768]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Baldy Creek.................................................       44.850     -118.305       44.910     -118.318
Big Creek...................................................       44.976     -118.651       44.960     -118.683
Big Creek...................................................       44.765     -118.686       44.766     -118.874
Boulder Creek...............................................       44.840     -118.333       44.819     -118.415
Boundary Creek..............................................       44.811     -118.343       44.787     -118.375
Bull Run Creek..............................................       44.768     -118.291       44.808     -118.425
Butte Creek.................................................       44.585     -118.644       44.642     -118.652
Call Creek..................................................       44.286     -118.507       44.320     -118.557
Clear Creek.................................................       44.749     -118.546       44.821     -118.450
Clear Creek.................................................       44.447     -118.431       44.593     -118.508
Crane Creek.................................................       44.868     -118.330       44.894     -118.478
Crawfish Creek..............................................       44.931     -118.234       44.915     -118.298
Cunningham Creek............................................       44.911     -118.267       44.920     -118.235
Deadwood Creek..............................................       44.750     -118.719       44.768     -118.793
Deardorff Creek.............................................       44.383     -118.423       44.395     -118.577
Deep Creek..................................................       44.815     -118.306       44.780     -118.348
Desolation Creek............................................       44.820     -118.689       44.998     -118.936
Dry Creek...................................................       44.729     -118.531       44.750     -118.500
Granite Boulder Creek.......................................       44.726     -118.611       44.647     -118.665
Granite Creek...............................................       44.857     -118.343       44.866     -118.562
Indian Creek................................................       44.295     -118.736       44.443     -118.800
John Day River..............................................       44.250     -118.527       45.737     -120.652
Lightning Creek.............................................       44.718     -118.494       44.765     -118.497
Middle Fork John Day River..................................       44.593     -118.508       44.917     -119.301
North Fork John Day River...................................       44.866     -118.239       44.755     -119.639
North Reynolds Creek........................................       44.430     -118.425       44.423     -118.517
Onion Creek.................................................       44.889     -118.339       44.913     -118.401
Rail Creek..................................................       44.297     -118.490       44.349     -118.575
Reynolds Creek..............................................       44.405     -118.440       44.414     -118.596
Roberts Creek...............................................       44.276     -118.575       44.348     -118.575
Salmon Creek................................................       44.717     -118.542       44.725     -118.503
South Fork Desolation Creek.................................       44.719     -118.623       44.820     -118.689
South Trail Creek...........................................       44.953     -118.274       44.937     -118.390
Trail Creek.................................................       44.937     -118.390       44.915     -118.406
Vinegar Creek...............................................       44.707     -118.550       44.601     -118.536
West Fork Clear Creek.......................................       44.733     -118.584       44.749     -118.546
West Fork Meadow Brook......................................       44.969     -118.966       44.997     -118.945
Winom Creek.................................................       45.050     -118.611       44.976     -118.671
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Waterbodies associated with the following tribal lands 
totaling 28.5 km (17.7 mi) of streams have been excluded from critical 
habitat designation under section 4(b)(2) of the Act in this unit. These 
are waterbodies within the areas under management by the Confederated 
Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation, within reservation boundaries, 
and waterbodies that are adjacent to:
    (A) Lands held in trust by the United States for their benefit;
    (B) Lands held in trust by the United States for any Indian Tribe or 
individual subject to restrictions by the United States against 
alienation;
    (C) Fee lands, either within or outside the reservation boundaries, 
owned by the tribal government; and
    (D) Fee lands within the reservation boundaries owned by individual 
Indians.
    (iv) Map of Unit 12, John Day River Basin follows:

[[Page 769]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.013

                   (20) Unit 13: Umatilla River Basin

    (i) This unit consists of 163.0 km (101.3 mi) of streams. The unit 
is located in northeastern Oregon.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 770]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Coyote Creek................................................       45.745     -118.137       45.732     -118.139
Meacham Creek...............................................       45.486     -118.275       45.702     -118.360
North Fork Meacham Creek....................................       45.584     -118.164       45.527     -118.291
North Fork Umatilla River...................................       45.705     -118.034       45.726     -118.189
Pot Creek...................................................       45.523     -118.163       45.554     -118.201
Ryan Creek..................................................       45.694     -118.309       45.723     -118.315
Umatilla River..............................................       45.726     -118.189       45.923     -119.357
Woodward Creek..............................................       45.750     -118.076       45.736     -118.080
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Waterbodies associated with the following tribal lands 
totaling 48.7 km (30.3 mi) of streams have been excluded from critical 
habitat designation under section 4(b)(2) of the Act in this unit. These 
are waterbodies within the areas under management by the Confederated 
Tribes of the Umatilla, and waterbodies that are adjacent to:
    (A) Lands held in trust by the United States for their benefit;
    (B) Lands held in trust by the United States for any Indian Tribe or 
individual subject to restrictions by the United States against 
alienation;
    (C) Fee lands, either within or outside the reservation boundaries, 
owned by the tribal government; and
    (D) Fee lands within the reservation boundaries owned by individual 
Indians.
    (iv) Map of Unit 13, Umatilla River Basin follows:

[[Page 771]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.014

                  (21) Unit 14: Walla Walla River Basin

    (i) This unit consists of 383.7 km (238.4 mi) of streams. The unit 
is located in southwestern Washington and northeastern Oregon.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 772]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Blue Creek..................................................       46.061     -118.155       46.063     -118.108
Bull Creek..................................................       46.027     -117.939       46.028     -117.948
Burnt Fork..................................................       46.087     -117.942       46.105     -117.986
Burnt Fork Creek............................................       46.040     -117.946       46.032     -117.953
Corral Creek................................................       46.093     -117.847       46.090     -117.844
Couse Creek.................................................       45.910     -118.371       45.848     -118.327
Deadman Creek...............................................       46.032     -117.956       46.049     -117.951
Green Fly Canyon............................................       46.142     -117.876       46.142     -117.872
Green Fork Creek............................................       46.033     -117.940       46.029     -117.949
Griffin Fork................................................       46.117     -117.965       46.121     -117.975
Henry Canyon................................................       45.988     -118.091       45.931     -118.078
Husky Spring Creek..........................................       45.889     -117.952       45.884     -117.978
Lewis Creek.................................................       46.156     -117.772       46.191     -117.825
Low Creek...................................................       45.973     -118.010       45.993     -118.036
Mill Creek..................................................       46.021     -117.945       46.039     -118.479
North Fork Mill Creek.......................................       46.035     -117.994       46.021     -117.997
North Fork Touchet River....................................       46.093     -117.865       46.301     -117.960
North Fork Walla Walla River................................       45.889     -118.087       45.898     -118.308
Paradise Creek..............................................       46.000     -117.991       46.004     -118.018
Reser Creek.................................................       45.887     -118.001       45.876     -117.986
Skiphorton Creek............................................       45.874     -118.027       45.852     -118.025
South Fork Touchet River....................................       46.105     -117.986       46.301     -117.960
South Fork Walla Walla River................................       45.938     -117.969       45.898     -118.308
Spangler Creek..............................................       46.099     -117.803       46.149     -117.807
Touchet River...............................................       46.301     -117.960       46.034     -118.683
Walla Walla River...........................................       45.898     -118.308       46.062     -118.940
Wolf Fork Touchet River.....................................       46.075     -117.904       46.274     -117.896
Yellowhawk Creek............................................       46.076     -118.273       46.017     -118.401
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Waterbodies associated with the following tribal lands or 
habitat conservation plans (HCPs) totaling 69.0 km (42.0 mi) of streams 
have been excluded from critical habitat designation under section 
4(b)(2) of the Act in this unit:
    (A) Waterbodies within the geographic area covered by the Washington 
State Forest Practices Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP) , including 
portions of Touchet River and Walla Walla River CHSUs; and
    (B) Waterbodies within the areas under management by the 
Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla, including portions of the Touchet 
River CHSU, within reservation boundaries, and waterbodies that are 
adjacent to:
    (1) Lands held in trust by the United States for their benefit;
    (2) Lands held in trust by the United States for any Indian Tribe or 
individual subject to restrictions by the United States against 
alienation;
    (3) Fee lands, either within or outside the reservation boundaries, 
owned by the tribal government; and
    (4) Fee lands within the reservation boundaries owned by individual 
Indians.
    (iv) Map of Unit 14, Walla Walla River Basin follows:

[[Page 773]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.015

                 (22) Unit 15: Lower Snake River Basins

    (i) This unit consists of 270.8 km (168.3 mi) of streams. The unit 
is located in southeastern Washington.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 774]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Asotin Creek................................................       46.345     -117.054       46.272     -117.292
Bear Creek..................................................       46.168     -117.560       46.122     -117.546
Charley Creek...............................................       46.289     -117.279       46.279     -117.414
Cold Creek..................................................       46.191     -117.631       46.178     -117.647
Cougar Creek................................................       46.205     -117.509       46.180     -117.519
Cummings Creek..............................................       46.333     -117.675       46.234     -117.594
George Creek................................................       46.326     -117.106       46.117     -117.361
Hixon Creek.................................................       46.246     -117.684       46.239     -117.690
Little Tucannon River.......................................       46.228     -117.722       46.218     -117.759
Little Turkey Creek.........................................       46.155     -117.737       46.116     -117.750
Meadow Creek................................................       46.176     -117.719       46.102     -117.786
North Fork Asotin Creek.....................................       46.272     -117.292       46.196     -117.569
Panjab Creek................................................       46.205     -117.706       46.115     -117.683
Sheep Creek.................................................       46.188     -117.625       46.195     -117.624
South Fork Asotin Creek.....................................       46.272     -117.292       46.145     -117.431
Tucannon River..............................................       46.557     -118.175       46.139     -117.521
Turkey Creek................................................       46.161     -117.703       46.113     -117.739
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Waterbodies associated with the following habitat conservation 
plans (HCPs) totaling 13.4 km (8.3 mi) of streams have been excluded 
from critical habitat designation under section 4(b)(2) of the Act in 
this unit. These are waterbodies within the geographic area covered by 
the Washington State Forest Practices Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP), 
including portions of Asotin Creek and Tucannon River CHSUs.
    (iv) Map of Unit 15, Lower Snake River Basins follows:

[[Page 775]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.016

                 (23) Unit 16: Grande Ronde River Basin

    (i) This unit consists of 1,057.9 km (657.4 mi) of streams and 605.2 
ha (1,495.5 ac) of lakes and reservoirs. The unit is located in 
northeastern Oregon and southwestern Washington.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 776]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bear Creek..................................................       45.322     -117.481       45.584     -117.541
Beaver Creek................................................       45.968     -117.808       45.955     -117.786
Boulder Creek...............................................       45.310     -117.625       45.312     -117.633
Butte Creek.................................................       46.064     -117.723       45.982     -117.679
Camp Creek..................................................       45.387     -117.745       45.387     -117.758
Catherine Creek.............................................       45.120     -117.647       45.408     -117.931
Chicken Creek...............................................       45.024     -118.386       45.095     -118.395
Clear Creek.................................................       44.976     -118.327       45.063     -118.310
Collins Creek...............................................       45.097     -117.514       45.105     -117.543
Crooked Creek...............................................       46.046     -117.625       45.977     -117.552
Deer Creek..................................................       45.423     -117.588       45.620     -117.700
Dobbin Creek................................................       45.221     -117.640       45.259     -117.654
East Fork Butte Creek.......................................       46.064     -117.723       46.074     -117.710
East Fork Elk Creek.........................................       45.161     -117.469       45.166     -117.470
East Fork Indian Creek......................................       45.353     -117.725       45.368     -117.749
East Fork Wallowa River.....................................       45.265     -117.210       45.274     -117.212
East Sheep Creek............................................       45.003     -118.435       45.026     -118.475
Elk Creek...................................................       45.160     -117.476       45.178     -117.460
Fiddlers Hell Creek.........................................       45.431     -118.144       45.428     -118.160
First Creek.................................................       46.043     -117.547       46.035     -117.571
Five Points Creek...........................................       45.481     -118.144       45.346     -118.222
Fly Creek...................................................       45.121     -118.466       45.210     -118.395
Goat Creek..................................................       45.413     -117.518       45.418     -117.538
Grande Ronde River..........................................       44.967     -118.255       46.080     -116.979
Hurricane Creek.............................................       45.274     -117.312       45.420     -117.302
Indian Creek................................................       45.337     -117.722       45.534     -117.920
Indiana Creek...............................................       45.000     -118.362       45.024     -118.386
Lake Creek..................................................       45.331     -117.398       45.332     -117.410
Limber Jim Creek............................................       45.085     -118.230       45.089     -118.344
Little Bear Creek...........................................       45.428     -117.480       45.485     -117.555
Little Fly Creek............................................       45.109     -118.476       45.121     -118.466
Little Lookingglass Creek...................................       45.817     -117.902       45.750     -117.875
Little Minam River..........................................       45.246     -117.600       45.401     -117.672
Lookingglass Creek..........................................       45.779     -118.079       45.707     -117.842
Lookout Creek...............................................       45.078     -118.541       45.109     -118.476
Lostine River...............................................       45.245     -117.375       45.552     -117.490
Marion Creek................................................       45.097     -118.229       45.105     -118.267
Menatchee Creek.............................................       46.110     -117.439       46.007     -117.365
Middle Fork Catherine Creek.................................       45.154     -117.565       45.152     -117.617
Middle Fork Five Points Creek...............................       45.492     -118.116       45.481     -118.144
Milk Creek..................................................       45.948     -117.913       45.913     -117.883
Minam River.................................................       45.147     -117.372       45.621     -117.721
Mt Emily Creek..............................................       45.465     -118.125       45.473     -118.147
North Fork Catherine Creek..................................       45.225     -117.605       45.120     -117.647
North Fork Indian Creek.....................................       45.402     -117.769       45.433     -117.820
North Fork Wenaha River.....................................       46.066     -117.878       46.066     -117.878
North Minam River...........................................       45.276     -117.512       45.273     -117.537
Pole Creek..................................................       45.131     -117.531       45.107     -117.560
Sage Creek..................................................       45.481     -117.594       45.500     -117.607
Sand Pass Creek.............................................       45.120     -117.526       45.108     -117.552
Sheep Creek.................................................       45.019     -118.485       45.105     -118.382
Silver Creek................................................       45.394     -117.422       45.396     -117.428
South Fork Catherine Creek..................................       45.110     -117.533       45.120     -117.647
South Fork Wenaha River.....................................       45.890     -117.906       45.951     -117.795
Summer Creek................................................       45.771     -117.983       45.766     -117.983
Third Creek.................................................       46.089     -117.628       46.046     -117.625
Tie Creek...................................................       45.421     -118.149       45.423     -118.159
Trout Creek.................................................       46.089     -117.628       46.116     -117.641
Unnamed - Off Clear Creek...................................       44.977     -118.314       45.013     -118.330
Wallowa Lake................................................       45.310     -117.210               ...........
Wallowa River...............................................       45.274     -117.212       45.726     -117.785
Wenaha River................................................       45.951     -117.795       45.945     -117.451
West Fork Butte Creek.......................................       46.063     -117.772       46.063     -117.723
West Fork Wallowa River.....................................       45.267     -117.216       45.274     -117.212
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Waterbodies associated with the following habitat conservation 
plans (HCPs) totaling 1.0 km (0.6 mi) of streams have been excluded from 
critical habitat designation

[[Page 777]]

under section 4(b)(2) of the Act in this unit. These are waterbodies 
within the geographic area covered by the Washington State Forest 
Practices Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP), including portions of the 
Grand Ronde River CHSU.
    (iv) Map of Unit 16, Grand Ronde River Basin follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.017
    

[[Page 778]]



                    (24) Unit 17: Imnaha River Basin

    (i) This unit consists of 285.7 km (177.5 mi) of streams. The unit 
is located in northeastern Oregon.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bear Creek..................................................       45.100     -117.173       45.104     -117.172
Big Sheep Creek.............................................       45.178     -117.120       45.557     -116.835
Blue Creek..................................................       45.097     -117.194       45.101     -117.195
Cabin Creek.................................................       45.229     -117.090       45.232     -117.089
Cliff Creek.................................................       45.063     -117.269       45.102     -117.215
Imnaha River................................................       45.113     -117.126       45.817     -116.765
Lick Creek..................................................       45.147     -117.124       45.198     -117.025
Little Sheep Creek..........................................       45.232     -117.094       45.520     -116.860
McCully Creek...............................................       45.211     -117.141       45.293     -117.116
Middle Fork Big Sheep Creek.................................       45.181     -117.158       45.178     -117.120
Middle Fork Imnaha River....................................       45.139     -117.167       45.133     -117.152
North Fork Imnaha River.....................................       45.171     -117.201       45.113     -117.126
Redmont Creek...............................................       45.245     -117.104       45.256     -117.089
Salt Creek..................................................       45.202     -117.083       45.188     -117.044
Soldier Creek...............................................       45.107     -117.155       45.109     -117.152
South Fork Imnaha River.....................................       45.111     -117.231       45.113     -117.126
Unnamed - Off Lick Creek....................................       45.141     -117.065       45.133     -117.057
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) No waterbodies are excluded from critical habitat designation 
in this unit.
    (iv) Map of Unit 17, Imnaha River Basin follows:

[[Page 779]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.018

                  (25) Unit 18: Sheep / Granite Creeks

    (i) This unit consists of 47.9 km (29.7 mi) of streams. The unit is 
located in west-central Idaho.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 780]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Clarks Fork.................................................       45.458     -116.533       45.471     -116.447
Granite Creek...............................................       45.192     -116.580       45.349     -116.655
Sheep Creek.................................................       45.405     -116.524       45.468     -116.555
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) No waterbodies are excluded from critical habitat designation 
in this unit.
    (iv) Map of Unit 18, Sheep/Granite Creeks follows:

[[Page 781]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.019

                   (26) Unit 19: Hell's Canyon Complex

    (i) This unit consists of 377.5 km (234.6 mi) of streams. The unit 
is located in northeastern Oregon and west-central Idaho.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 782]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Aspen Creek.................................................       45.057     -117.012       45.049     -117.038
Bear Creek..................................................       44.959     -116.725       45.136     -116.525
Big Elk Creek...............................................       45.063     -117.024       45.061     -117.065
Cabin Creek.................................................       45.061     -117.021       45.077     -117.025
Camp Creek..................................................       45.132     -116.623       45.157     -116.621
Clear Creek.................................................       44.866     -117.030       45.043     -117.144
Crooked River...............................................       44.959     -116.725       44.817     -116.743
Duck Creek..................................................       45.069     -116.906       45.091     -117.004
East Fork Of East Pine Creek................................       45.021     -117.107       45.042     -117.104
East Fork Pine Creek........................................       45.022     -117.201       45.071     -117.177
East Pine Creek.............................................       44.872     -117.021       45.046     -117.120
Elk Creek...................................................       45.009     -116.910       45.074     -117.046
Fall Creek..................................................       44.970     -116.949       45.012     -116.986
Fish Creek..................................................       44.908     -116.953       45.036     -117.082
Indian Creek................................................       44.984     -116.829       45.150     -116.591
Lake Fork...................................................       45.020     -116.942       45.067     -117.105
Little Elk Creek............................................       44.954     -116.962       45.009     -117.029
Meadow Creek................................................       44.990     -117.143       45.017     -117.172
Mickey Creek................................................       45.109     -116.565       45.109     -116.535
Middle Fork Pine Creek......................................       45.039     -117.216       45.057     -117.238
North Pine Creek............................................       44.910     -116.949       45.079     -116.898
Okanogan Creek..............................................       44.987     -117.065       45.017     -117.063
Pine Creek..................................................       44.973     -116.854       45.039     -117.216
Trail Creek.................................................       44.991     -117.143       45.046     -117.163
Trinity Creek...............................................       44.988     -117.072       45.026     -117.084
Unnamed - Off East Pine Creek...............................       44.993     -117.102       45.006     -117.122
Unnamed - trib To Bear Creek................................       45.124     -116.545       45.137     -116.536
Unnamed - Trib To Bear Creek................................       45.124     -116.554       45.136     -116.569
Wesley Creek................................................       45.112     -116.562       45.116     -116.527
West Fork Pine Creek........................................       45.039     -117.216       45.025     -117.247
Wildhorse River.............................................       44.851     -116.897       44.959     -116.725
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) No waterbodies are excluded from critical habitat designation 
in this unit.
    (iv) Map of Unit 19, Hell's Canyon Complex follows:

[[Page 783]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.020

                    (27) Unit 20: Powder River Basin

    (i) This unit consists of 296.5 km (184.2 mi) of streams and 897.0 
ha (2,216.5 ac) of lakes and reservoirs. The unit is located in 
northeastern Oregon.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 784]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Anthony Creek...............................................       45.013     -118.060       44.953     -118.221
Cracker Creek...............................................       44.741     -118.206       44.846     -118.205
Deer Creek..................................................       44.684     -118.060       44.749     -118.108
Eagle Creek.................................................       44.746     -117.170       45.132     -117.339
East Fork Eagle Creek.......................................       44.983     -117.371       45.170     -117.325
Fruit Creek.................................................       44.809     -118.212       44.858     -118.248
Indian Creek................................................       45.019     -118.155       44.975     -118.205
Lake Creek..................................................       44.749     -118.108       44.810     -118.092
Little Cracker Creek........................................       44.826     -118.197       44.840     -118.167
North Fork Anthony Creek....................................       45.045     -118.131       45.042     -118.232
North Powder River..........................................       44.878     -118.204       45.038     -117.896
Phillips Reservoir..........................................       44.681     -118.052               ...........
Powder River (Lower)........................................       44.743     -117.047       44.746     -117.170
Powder River (Middle).......................................       45.044     -117.894       45.038     -117.896
Powder River (Upper)........................................       44.684     -118.060       44.741     -118.206
Silver Creek................................................       44.809     -118.208       44.857     -118.292
West Eagle Creek............................................       45.019     -117.454       45.121     -117.437
Wolf Creek..................................................       45.044     -117.894       45.067     -118.194
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) No waterbodies are excluded from critical habitat designation 
in this unit.
    (iv) Map of Unit 20, Powder River Basin follows:

[[Page 785]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.021

                     (28) Unit 21: Clearwater River

    (i) This unit consists of 2,702.1 km (1,679.0 mi) of streams and 
6,721.9 ha (16,610.1 ac) of lakes and reservoirs. The unit is located in 
northcentral Idaho.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 786]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Adair Creek.................................................       47.097     -115.853       47.083     -115.806
American River..............................................       45.808     -115.475       45.945     -115.450
Baldy Creek.................................................       45.908     -115.630       45.961     -115.721
Baston Creek................................................       45.760     -115.235       45.731     -115.223
Bear Creek..................................................       46.019     -114.845       46.108     -114.509
Bear Creek..................................................       46.711     -114.963       46.750     -114.922
Bear Creek..................................................       45.863     -115.618       45.878     -115.595
Beaver Creek................................................       46.506     -114.627       46.553     -114.504
Beaver Creek................................................       46.842     -115.621       46.758     -115.678
Beaver Creek................................................       45.896     -115.631       45.943     -115.569
Big Flat Creek..............................................       46.402     -114.494       46.313     -114.441
Bill Creek..................................................       46.631     -115.271       46.637     -115.187
Bostonian Creek.............................................       46.962     -115.114       46.996     -115.137
Boulder Creek...............................................       46.615     -114.671       46.678     -114.749
Boundary Creek..............................................       46.972     -115.108       46.981     -115.077
Breakfast Creek.............................................       46.883     -115.940       46.875     -115.995
Bridge Creek................................................       45.779     -115.210       45.814     -115.164
Brushy Fork.................................................       46.578     -114.612       46.616     -114.455
Brushy Fork Creek...........................................       46.002     -114.699       45.988     -114.583
Buck Creek..................................................       47.021     -115.555       47.049     -115.543
Burnt Knob Creek............................................       45.715     -114.899       45.697     -114.946
Burnt Strip Creek...........................................       45.826     -114.618       45.817     -114.626
Butte Creek (North Fork Clearwater).........................       47.045     -115.720       47.031     -115.751
Canyon Creek................................................       45.888     -114.614       45.882     -114.409
Canyon Creek................................................       47.000     -115.651       47.017     -115.499
Cayuse Creek................................................       45.705     -114.615       45.740     -114.608
Cayuse Creek................................................       46.712     -115.021       46.612     -114.793
Cedar Creek.................................................       46.249     -114.709       46.330     -114.706
Chamberlain Creek...........................................       46.929     -115.143       46.924     -115.171
Clearwater River............................................       46.428     -117.040       46.146     -115.981
Collins Creek...............................................       46.862     -115.434       46.982     -115.453
Colt Creek..................................................       46.433     -114.540       46.419     -114.636
Colt Killed Creek...........................................       46.508     -114.682       46.428     -114.415
Cooperation Creek...........................................       46.452     -114.870       46.440     -114.817
Corral Creek................................................       46.483     -115.241       46.534     -115.207
Crooked Fork................................................       46.508     -114.682       46.704     -114.709
Crooked River...............................................       45.824     -115.530       45.695     -115.549
Cub Creek...................................................       46.034     -114.757       46.031     -114.618
Dawson Creek................................................       45.730     -115.391       45.743     -115.426
Deep Creek..................................................       45.707     -114.719       45.708     -114.516
Ditch Creek.................................................       45.747     -115.298       45.794     -115.293
Doe Creek...................................................       46.499     -114.863       46.554     -114.921
Dworshak Reservoir..........................................       46.660     -116.120               ...........
Eagle Creek.................................................       45.908     -114.854       45.794     -114.891
East Fork American River....................................       45.864     -115.425       45.919     -115.363
East Fork Crooked River.....................................       45.695     -115.549       45.656     -115.564
East Fork Fishing Creek.....................................       46.556     -114.855       46.561     -114.837
East Fork Legendary Bear Creek..............................       46.562     -114.736       46.535     -114.766
East Fork Meadow Creek......................................       45.880     -115.104       45.829     -115.028
East Fork Moose Creek.......................................       46.165     -114.898       46.270     -114.680
East Fork O'Hara Creek......................................       45.998     -115.524       45.939     -115.541
Elk Creek...................................................       45.818     -115.459       45.841     -115.435
Fish Creek..................................................       46.333     -115.346       46.373     -115.597
Fish Lake...................................................       46.817     -114.912               ...........
Fish Lake (Lochsa)..........................................       46.333     -115.052               ...........
Fish Lake Creek.............................................       46.331     -115.057       46.407     -115.001
Fishing Creek...............................................       46.492     -114.858       46.571     -114.860
Flat Creek..................................................       45.722     -114.858       45.651     -114.848
Flint Creek.................................................       45.891     -115.428       45.913     -115.424
Floodwood Creek.............................................       46.888     -115.954       46.974     -115.913
Foehl Creek.................................................       46.970     -115.676       46.990     -115.743
Fourth of July Creek........................................       46.665     -115.377       46.564     -115.260
Fox Creek...................................................       46.605     -114.755       46.630     -114.696
French Creek................................................       45.597     -114.592       45.603     -114.572
Fro Creek...................................................       46.479     -115.222       46.467     -115.209
Frost Creek.................................................       46.918     -115.349       46.926     -115.380
Gabe Creek..................................................       45.697     -114.671       45.710     -114.666
Gedney Creek................................................       46.056     -115.314       46.135     -115.249
Glover Creek................................................       46.916     -116.013       46.980     -116.095
Gold Pan Creek..............................................       45.667     -114.722       45.665     -114.737
Goose Creek.................................................       46.852     -115.013       46.906     -114.953

[[Page 787]]

 
Gospel Creek................................................       45.703     -115.891       45.677     -115.891
Graves Creek................................................       46.986     -115.101       47.006     -115.079
Hagen Creek.................................................       45.649     -115.818       45.630     -115.809
Haskell Creek...............................................       46.596     -114.604       46.632     -114.583
Hells Half Acre Creek.......................................       45.692     -114.718       45.689     -114.705
Hopeful Creek...............................................       46.671     -114.681       46.724     -114.654
Hungery Creek...............................................       46.356     -115.398       46.400     -115.569
Indian Creek................................................       45.792     -114.765       45.792     -114.575
Indian Grave Creek..........................................       46.452     -115.077       46.490     -115.143
Isabella Creek..............................................       46.849     -115.631       46.913     -115.539
Jack Creek..................................................       45.778     -114.692       45.788     -114.683
Johnagan Creek..............................................       46.510     -115.367       46.543     -115.354
Johnny Creek................................................       46.613     -115.435       46.614     -115.372
Johns Creek.................................................       45.824     -115.890       45.683     -115.755
Jungle Creek................................................       47.076     -115.804       47.110     -115.796
Kelly Creek.................................................       46.716     -115.258       46.730     -114.861
Kid Lake Creek..............................................       46.747     -114.806       46.768     -114.805
Kim Creek...................................................       45.679     -114.720       45.682     -114.734
Kirks Fork American River...................................       45.822     -115.411       45.829     -115.390
Lake Creek..................................................       46.869     -115.079       46.819     -114.905
Lazy Creek..................................................       45.679     -114.546       45.668     -114.555
Legendary Bear Creek........................................       46.511     -114.762       46.535     -114.766
Lick Creek..................................................       45.923     -115.469       45.969     -115.487
Little Clearwater River.....................................       45.754     -114.776       45.738     -114.946
Little Elk Creek............................................       45.841     -115.435       45.868     -115.449
Little Lost Lake Creek......................................       47.089     -115.893       47.073     -115.936
Little Moose Creek..........................................       46.733     -115.078       46.783     -114.906
Little Moose Creek..........................................       45.716     -115.368       45.709     -115.400
Little North Fork Clearwater River..........................       46.887     -115.878       47.101     -115.963
Little Weitas Creek.........................................       46.506     -115.392       46.479     -115.389
Liz Creek...................................................       46.482     -115.290       46.436     -115.306
Lochsa River................................................       46.140     -115.600       46.508     -114.682
Long Creek..................................................       46.872     -115.076       46.950     -115.025
Lost Lake Creek.............................................       47.095     -115.901       47.087     -115.937
Lund Creek..................................................       47.068     -115.884       47.050     -115.913
Lynx Creek..................................................       45.849     -114.938       45.817     -114.952
Magruder Creek..............................................       45.745     -114.761       45.717     -114.780
Marten Creek................................................       46.099     -115.053       45.963     -115.046
Maud Creek..................................................       46.497     -114.515       46.474     -114.411
Meadow Creek................................................       46.910     -115.233       46.905     -115.117
Meadow Creek................................................       46.046     -115.296       45.698     -115.218
Melton Creek................................................       45.725     -115.996       45.724     -115.979
Middle Fork Clearwater River................................       46.146     -115.981       46.140     -115.600
Middle Fork Kelly Creek.....................................       46.730     -114.861       46.747     -114.806
Middle Fork Red River.......................................       45.659     -115.413       45.631     -115.472
Mill Creek..................................................       45.830     -115.932       45.725     -115.996
Mink Creek..................................................       46.601     -114.895       46.628     -114.894
Mist Creek..................................................       45.567     -114.629       45.555     -114.626
Montana Creek...............................................       47.045     -115.701       47.089     -115.676
Moores Creek................................................       45.676     -115.838       45.614     -115.880
Moores Lake Creek...........................................       45.677     -115.891       45.659     -115.870
Moose Butte Creek...........................................       45.710     -115.353       45.692     -115.417
Moose Creek.................................................       46.122     -114.935       46.165     -114.898
Moose Creek.................................................       46.721     -115.087       46.752     -115.185
Mule Creek..................................................       45.925     -115.635       45.932     -115.631
Newsome Creek...............................................       45.828     -115.616       46.004     -115.679
Niagra Gulch................................................       46.967     -115.137       46.973     -115.159
North Fork Clearwater River.................................       46.503     -116.332       46.999     -115.113
North Fork Kelly Creek......................................       46.730     -114.861       46.801     -114.874
North Fork Moose Creek......................................       46.165     -114.898       46.274     -114.924
North Fork Spruce Creek.....................................       46.606     -114.393       46.616     -114.352
O'Hara Creek................................................       46.086     -115.518       45.998     -115.524
Open Creek..................................................       45.676     -115.838       45.683     -115.823
Orogrande Creek.............................................       46.631     -115.507       46.564     -115.623
Osier Creek.................................................       46.744     -115.074       46.837     -115.065
Otterson Creek..............................................       45.776     -115.220       45.820     -115.234
Parachute Creek.............................................       46.528     -114.762       46.530     -114.757
Paradise Creek..............................................       46.022     -114.729       46.039     -114.527
Pete Creek..................................................       45.703     -114.580       45.715     -114.564
Pilot Creek.................................................       45.907     -115.630       45.944     -115.732
Placer Creek................................................       46.938     -115.168       46.959     -115.179

[[Page 788]]

 
Pollock Creek...............................................       46.780     -115.023       46.780     -114.990
Postoffice Creek............................................       46.466     -114.986       46.529     -114.950
Quartz Creek................................................       46.806     -115.456       46.846     -115.259
Rawhide Creek...............................................       46.898     -115.047       46.938     -115.056
Red Horse Creek.............................................       45.794     -115.401       45.827     -115.327
Red River...................................................       45.808     -115.475       45.803     -115.155
Relief Creek................................................       45.748     -115.520       45.754     -115.498
Rhoda Creek.................................................       46.234     -114.961       46.239     -115.009
Roaring Creek...............................................       46.886     -115.356       46.918     -115.349
Rock Creek..................................................       46.598     -114.609       46.612     -114.620
Rocky Run...................................................       47.069     -115.819       47.035     -115.848
Ruby Creek..................................................       46.733     -115.079       46.745     -115.105
Running Creek...............................................       45.919     -114.832       45.916     -115.033
Rutledge Creek..............................................       47.073     -115.755       47.108     -115.723
Saddle Gulch................................................       45.770     -114.654       45.766     -114.641
Salamander Creek............................................       45.711     -114.866       45.648     -114.879
Sawmill Creek...............................................       45.908     -115.635       45.904     -115.647
Schofield Creek.............................................       45.777     -114.646       45.819     -114.586
Schwar Creek................................................       45.882     -115.117       45.905     -115.109
Selway River................................................       46.140     -115.600       45.500     -114.698
Shoot Creek.................................................       46.606     -114.415       46.580     -114.426
Short Creek.................................................       46.886     -115.058       46.898     -115.014
Shot Creek..................................................       46.639     -115.281       46.666     -115.207
Shotgun Creek...............................................       46.601     -114.665       46.600     -114.738
Siegel Creek................................................       45.773     -115.388       45.787     -115.368
Silver Creek................................................       46.607     -114.831       46.653     -114.814
Silver Creek................................................       45.716     -115.540       45.703     -115.501
Sixmile Creek...............................................       45.764     -115.660       45.763     -115.646
Skull Creek.................................................       46.827     -115.486       46.888     -115.321
Slate Creek.................................................       46.928     -115.009       46.927     -115.019
Slow Gulch Creek............................................       45.694     -114.561       45.679     -114.546
Soda Creek..................................................       45.756     -115.257       45.746     -115.252
South Fork Clearwater River.................................       46.146     -115.981       45.808     -115.475
South Fork Kelly Creek......................................       46.712     -114.863       46.707     -114.818
South Fork Red River........................................       45.711     -115.345       45.623     -115.480
South Fork Running Creek....................................       45.845     -114.945       45.823     -114.966
South Fork Spruce Creek.....................................       46.606     -114.393       46.565     -114.353
South Fork Surprise Creek...................................       45.527     -114.680       45.503     -114.655
Spring Creek................................................       46.546     -114.886       46.552     -114.903
Spruce Creek................................................       46.616     -114.455       46.606     -114.393
Stoney Creek................................................       46.884     -115.970       46.915     -116.033
Storm Creek.................................................       46.463     -114.549       46.541     -114.403
Storm Creek.................................................       45.578     -114.641       45.611     -114.591
Stripe Creek................................................       45.523     -114.704       45.513     -114.736
Sugar Creek.................................................       46.771     -115.035       46.820     -115.006
Surprise Creek..............................................       45.521     -114.702       45.532     -114.667
Swamp Creek.................................................       46.745     -115.068       46.799     -115.002
Swet Creek..................................................       45.580     -114.720       45.537     -114.795
Taylor Creek................................................       45.659     -115.783       45.637     -115.774
Tenmile Creek...............................................       45.806     -115.684       45.639     -115.713
Three Lakes Creek...........................................       45.623     -114.709       45.618     -114.724
Tom Creek...................................................       45.862     -114.987       45.912     -114.985
Trapper Creek...............................................       45.674     -115.345       45.705     -115.248
Twin Creek..................................................       46.582     -114.528       46.570     -114.475
Twin Lakes Creek............................................       45.664     -115.828       45.649     -115.818
Unnamed - Off Hopeful Creek.................................       46.708     -114.625       46.699     -114.669
Unnamed - Off Long Creek....................................       46.947     -115.036       46.939     -115.024
Unnamed - Off West Fork Crooked River.......................       45.695     -115.574       45.690     -115.563
Unnamed 1 - Off Pilot Creek.................................       45.923     -115.688       45.930     -115.677
Unnamed 2 - Off Pilot Creek.................................       45.938     -115.717       45.927     -115.723
Vance Creek.................................................       45.703     -114.580       45.683     -114.593
Vanderbilt Gulch............................................       46.916     -115.120       46.940     -115.191
W.Fk. American River........................................       45.913     -115.466       45.935     -115.545
W.Fk. Fishing Creek.........................................       46.537     -114.868       46.567     -114.885
W.Fk. Gedney Creek..........................................       46.094     -115.294       46.110     -115.295
W.Fk. O'Hara Creek..........................................       45.998     -115.524       45.949     -115.570
Walton Creek................................................       46.508     -114.682       46.472     -114.681
Warm Springs Creek..........................................       46.473     -114.888       46.430     -114.864
Weasel Creek................................................       46.601     -114.905       46.623     -114.906
Weir Creek..................................................       46.457     -115.035       46.534     -115.018
Weitas Creek................................................       46.636     -115.434       46.508     -115.174

[[Page 789]]

 
West Fork Crooked River.....................................       45.695     -115.549       45.666     -115.597
West Fork Floodwood Creek...................................       46.957     -115.928       46.973     -115.964
West Fork Legendary Bear Creek..............................       46.535     -114.766       46.580     -114.752
West Fork Newsome Creek.....................................       45.865     -115.618       45.892     -115.695
West Fork Red River.........................................       45.653     -115.402       45.667     -115.453
White Cap Creek.............................................       45.860     -114.745       45.919     -114.431
Wilkerson Creek.............................................       45.612     -114.707       45.563     -114.615
Williams Creek..............................................       45.731     -115.656       45.667     -115.658
Williams Lake Creek.........................................       46.644     -114.717       46.647     -114.768
Windy Creek.................................................       46.494     -115.328       46.570     -115.236
Wiseboy Creek...............................................       45.642     -115.712       45.637     -115.704
Wounded Doe Creek...........................................       46.239     -115.009       46.300     -115.080
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) No waterbodies are excluded from critical habitat designation 
in this unit.
    (iv) Map of Unit 21, Clearwater River follows:

[[Page 790]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.022

               (29) Unit 22: Mainstem Upper Columbia River

    (i) This unit consists of 520.1 km (323.2 mi) of streams. The unit 
is located in central Washington.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 791]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Columbia River..............................................       45.715     -120.693       47.997     -119.633
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Waterbodies associated with the following habitat conservation 
plans (HCPs) totaling 2.5 km (1.6 mi) of streams have been excluded from 
critical habitat designation under section 4(b)(2) of the Act in this 
unit. These are waterbodies within the geographic area covered by the 
Washington State Forest Practices Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP).
    (iv) Map of Unit 22, Mainstem Upper Columbia River follows:

[[Page 792]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.023

                   (30) Unit 23: Mainstem Snake River

    (i) This unit consists of 451.7 km (280.6 mi) of streams. The unit 
is located in southeastern Washington, northeastern Oregon, and west-
central Idaho.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 793]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Snake River.................................................       46.188     -119.031       44.836     -116.901
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) No waterbodies are excluded from critical habitat designation 
in this unit.
    (iv) Map of Unit 23, Mainstem Snake River follows:

[[Page 794]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.024

                    (31) Unit 24: Malheur River Basin

    (i) This unit consists of 272.3 km (169.2 mi) of streams and 715.9 
ha (1,768.9 ac) of lakes and reservoirs. The unit is located in eastern 
Oregon.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 795]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Beulah Reservoir............................................       43.931     -118.154               ...........
Big Creek...................................................       44.259     -118.604       44.145     -118.625
Bosonberg Creek.............................................       44.224     -118.553       44.135     -118.619
Corral Basin Creek..........................................       44.236     -118.562       44.214     -118.618
Crane Creek.................................................       44.151     -118.387       44.162     -118.371
Crooked Creek...............................................       44.125     -118.666       44.151     -118.635
Elk Creek...................................................       44.245     -118.409       44.250     -118.392
Flat Creek..................................................       44.305     -118.390       44.304     -118.403
Horseshoe Creek.............................................       44.320     -118.448       44.323     -118.416
Lake Creek..................................................       44.265     -118.679       44.145     -118.625
Little Crane Creek..........................................       44.219     -118.423       44.151     -118.387
Malheur River...............................................       44.145     -118.625       43.797     -118.350
McCoy Creek.................................................       44.248     -118.674       44.169     -118.654
Meadow Fork Big Creek.......................................       44.268     -118.644       44.227     -118.622
North Fork Elk Creek........................................       44.266     -118.446       44.245     -118.409
North Fork Malheur River....................................       44.360     -118.425       43.945     -118.168
Sheep Creek.................................................       44.281     -118.476       44.281     -118.397
Snowshoe Creek..............................................       44.259     -118.581       44.242     -118.612
South Fork Elk Creek........................................       44.241     -118.423       44.245     -118.409
Summit Creek................................................       44.261     -118.502       44.099     -118.588
Swamp Creek.................................................       44.299     -118.471       44.291     -118.401
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) No waterbodies are excluded from critical habitat designation 
in this unit.
    (iv) Map of Unit 24, Malheur River Basin follows:

[[Page 796]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.025

                      (32) Unit 25: Jarbidge River

    (i) This unit consists of 245.2 km (152.4 mi) of streams. The unit 
is located in northeastern Nevada and southwestern Idaho.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 797]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bruneau River...............................................       42.780     -115.715       42.329     -115.652
Cougar Creek................................................       41.840     -115.320       41.818     -115.335
Dave Creek..................................................       41.882     -115.356       41.995     -115.353
Deer Creek..................................................       41.848     -115.455       41.933     -115.420
East Fork Jarbidge River....................................       41.778     -115.330       42.049     -115.391
Fall Creek..................................................       41.856     -115.315       41.835     -115.342
Fox Creek...................................................       41.827     -115.420       41.815     -115.422
Gods Pocket Creek...........................................       41.847     -115.293       41.838     -115.298
Jack Creek..................................................       41.887     -115.383       41.912     -115.425
Jarbidge River..............................................       42.049     -115.391       42.329     -115.652
Jenny Creek.................................................       41.901     -115.410       41.900     -115.410
Pine Creek..................................................       41.779     -115.464       41.833     -115.425
Sawmill Creek...............................................       41.794     -115.399       41.792     -115.404
Slide Creek.................................................       41.867     -115.312       41.850     -115.254
Unnamed E Trib Off Pine Creek...............................       41.779     -115.429       41.786     -115.455
Unnamed Headwater Trib Off E Fk Jarbidge River..............       41.767     -115.352       41.782     -115.330
Unnamed Lower Trib Off Fall Creek...........................       41.849     -115.327       41.850     -115.331
Unnamed Lower Trib Off Slide Creek..........................       41.839     -115.277       41.834     -115.278
Unnamed Upper Trib Off Fall Creek...........................       41.843     -115.335       41.840     -115.340
Unnamed Upper Trib Off Slide Creek..........................       41.838     -115.264       41.834     -115.263
Unnamed W Trib Off Pine Creek...............................       41.802     -115.465       41.803     -115.447
Unnamed W Trib Off West Fork Jarbidge River.................       41.781     -115.393       41.792     -115.397
West Fork Jarbidge River....................................       41.792     -115.395       42.049     -115.391
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) No waterbodies are excluded from critical habitat designation 
in this unit.
    (iv) Map of Unit 25, Jarbidge River follows:

[[Page 798]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.026

            (33) Unit 26: Southwest Idaho Basins - East Half

    (i) The entire Southwest Idaho Basins unit consists of 2,150 km 
(1,335.9 mi) of streams and 4,310.5 ha (10,651.5 ac) of lakes and 
reservoirs. The unit is located in southwestern Idaho.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 799]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alta Creek..................................................       43.701     -115.248       43.701     -115.243
Anderson Creek..............................................       44.605     -116.187       44.527     -116.243
Anderson Ranch Reservoir....................................       43.415     -115.348               ...........
Antelope Creek..............................................       44.400     -116.169       44.375     -116.198
Arrowrock Reservoir.........................................       43.599     -115.840               ...........
Bald Mountain Creek.........................................       43.756     -115.277       43.818     -115.267
Ballentyne Creek............................................       43.983     -115.143       44.011     -115.233
Banner Creek................................................       43.998     -115.543       44.037     -115.522
Baron Creek.................................................       44.093     -115.028       44.137     -115.149
Basin Creek.................................................       44.377     -115.702       44.341     -115.659
Bass Creek..................................................       43.741     -115.003       43.791     -114.975
Bear Creek..................................................       43.702     -115.007       43.727     -114.901
Bear Creek..................................................       44.017     -115.406       43.938     -115.457
Bear River..................................................       43.987     -115.341       43.892     -115.489
Beaver Creek................................................       44.318     -115.692       44.317     -115.685
Big Peak Creek..............................................       43.658     -114.795       43.628     -114.730
Big Silver Creek............................................       43.989     -115.328       43.989     -115.256
Big Smoky Creek.............................................       43.792     -114.756       43.604     -114.916
Big Water Gulch.............................................       43.665     -115.043       43.604     -115.108
Bitter Creek................................................       44.421     -115.678       44.406     -115.618
Black Warrior Creek.........................................       43.945     -115.190       43.818     -115.291
Blind Canyon................................................       43.768     -114.724       43.769     -114.720
Bluff Creek.................................................       43.697     -114.686       43.700     -114.755
Boardman Creek..............................................       43.525     -115.019       43.612     -114.940
Boiler Grade Creek..........................................       43.720     -115.262       43.730     -115.263
Boise River.................................................       43.713     -115.636       43.645     -115.749
Buck Creek..................................................       43.747     -115.326       43.803     -115.397
Bull Creek..................................................       44.491     -115.615       44.422     -115.813
Burnt Log Creek.............................................       43.646     -115.017       43.643     -114.970
Canyon Creek................................................       44.303     -115.231       44.172     -115.244
Carrie Creek................................................       43.590     -114.691       43.552     -114.759
Chapman Creek...............................................       44.097     -115.290       44.136     -115.314
Clear Creek.................................................       44.228     -115.409       44.248     -115.395
Corbus Creek................................................       43.737     -115.165       43.747     -115.190
Cow Creek...................................................       44.021     -115.296       43.991     -115.255
Crooked River...............................................       44.027     -115.338       43.853     -115.537
Cub Creek...................................................       43.979     -115.353       43.980     -115.402
Daisy Creek.................................................       44.269     -115.748       44.260     -115.694
Deadwood Creek..............................................       43.532     -115.015       43.585     -115.008
Deadwood Reservoir..........................................       44.309     -115.663               ...........
Deadwood River..............................................       44.547     -115.561       44.342     -115.658
Deadwood River..............................................       44.293     -115.646       44.079     -115.658
Decker Creek................................................       43.718     -115.047       43.769     -115.145
Deer Creek..................................................       44.347     -115.549       44.396     -115.616
Devils Creek................................................       43.642     -115.564       43.685     -115.592
Dewey Creek.................................................       44.772     -116.276       44.807     -116.278
Disappointment Creek........................................       44.830     -116.707       44.825     -116.658
Dog Creek...................................................       43.529     -115.302       43.529     -115.302
East Fork Big Peak Creek....................................       43.628     -114.730       43.630     -114.699
East Fork Deadwood River....................................       44.494     -115.571       44.492     -115.575
East Fork Eightmile Creek...................................       44.200     -115.355       44.133     -115.407
East Fork Elk Creek.........................................       43.742     -115.231       43.709     -115.254
East Fork Roaring River.....................................       43.687     -115.438       43.694     -115.465
East Fork Sheep Creek.......................................       43.674     -115.486       43.684     -115.548
East Fork Skeleton Creek....................................       43.685     -115.019       43.658     -114.999
East Fork Warm Springs Creek................................       44.317     -115.538       44.294     -115.622
East Fork Weiser River......................................       44.729     -116.279       44.846     -116.380
East Fork Yuba River........................................       43.747     -115.155       43.723     -115.153
Eightmile Creek.............................................       44.251     -115.400       44.118     -115.413
Elk Creek...................................................       43.751     -115.307       43.678     -115.265
Emma Creek..................................................       43.791     -114.835       43.735     -114.906
Feather River...............................................       43.678     -115.265       43.687     -115.286
Flytrip Creek...............................................       43.928     -115.019       43.939     -114.974
French Creek................................................       43.741     -115.627       43.741     -115.638
Garney Creek................................................       44.091     -115.609       44.094     -115.611
Gates Creek.................................................       44.348     -115.328       44.292     -115.306
Goat Creek..................................................       43.729     -115.007       43.715     -114.980
Goat Creek..................................................       44.393     -115.680       44.398     -115.619
Grouse Creek................................................       43.731     -115.079       43.710     -115.077
Grouse Creek................................................       44.835     -116.708       44.826     -116.657
Habit Creek.................................................       44.349     -115.713       44.330     -115.673

[[Page 800]]

 
Hornet Creek................................................       44.797     -116.733       44.838     -116.635
Horseshoe Creek.............................................       44.062     -115.317       44.053     -115.317
Hungarian Creek.............................................       43.818     -115.539       43.841     -115.603
Johnson Creek...............................................       43.844     -114.971       43.774     -114.929
Johnson Creek...............................................       43.947     -115.130       43.940     -115.285
Lightning Creek.............................................       44.233     -115.766       44.193     -115.937
Little Bear Creek...........................................       43.746     -114.975       43.779     -114.936
Little Queens River.........................................       43.930     -115.144       43.843     -115.185
Little Rattlesnake Creek....................................       43.589     -115.700       43.617     -115.607
Little Silver Creek.........................................       44.001     -115.326       43.997     -115.289
Little Smoky Creek..........................................       43.585     -114.680       43.608     -114.872
Little Weiser River.........................................       44.637     -116.175       44.506     -116.308
Lodgepole Creek.............................................       43.888     -115.295       43.930     -115.315
Loggy Creek.................................................       43.763     -114.788       43.800     -114.790
Long Creek..................................................       44.153     -115.533       44.129     -115.579
Long Fork Silver Creek......................................       44.411     -115.680       44.382     -115.761
Louise Creek................................................       43.964     -115.392       43.968     -115.425
Mattingly Creek.............................................       43.853     -115.036       43.846     -115.049
McLeod Creek................................................       44.022     -115.163       44.057     -115.208
McPhearson Creek............................................       44.038     -115.159       44.066     -115.199
Meadow Creek................................................       43.764     -115.617       43.765     -115.622
Middle Fork Boise River.....................................       43.946     -115.033       43.713     -115.636
Middle Fork Payette River...................................       44.551     -115.765       44.103     -116.000
Middle Fork Roaring River...................................       43.624     -115.466       43.688     -115.452
Middle Fork Warm Springs Creek..............................       44.351     -115.565       44.326     -115.599
No Man Creek................................................       44.247     -115.591       44.247     -115.630
North Creek.................................................       44.818     -116.721       44.814     -116.693
North Fork Baron Creek......................................       44.145     -115.078       44.131     -115.102
North Fork Big Smoky Creek..................................       43.723     -114.789       43.748     -114.802
North Fork Boise River......................................       44.094     -115.225       43.713     -115.636
North Fork Canyon Creek.....................................       44.260     -115.199       44.250     -115.215
North Fork Deer Creek.......................................       44.452     -115.545       44.408     -115.554
North Fork Gold Fork River..................................       44.756     -115.801       44.674     -115.897
North Fork Ross Fork........................................       43.852     -114.976       43.796     -114.989
North Fork Whitehawk Creek..................................       44.291     -115.539       44.277     -115.585
Olive Creek.................................................       44.787     -116.694       44.836     -116.628
Onion Creek.................................................       44.234     -115.776       44.214     -115.825
Oxtail Creek................................................       44.439     -115.639       44.459     -115.668
Packsaddle Creek............................................       44.223     -115.698       44.224     -115.744
Parks Creek.................................................       43.629     -115.337       43.582     -115.342
Peace Creek.................................................       44.356     -115.734       44.341     -115.792
Pikes Fork..................................................       44.048     -115.441       43.971     -115.562
Placer Creek................................................       44.806     -116.738       44.808     -116.680
Poison Creek................................................       44.491     -116.163       44.478     -116.186
Pole Creek..................................................       44.494     -116.203       44.471     -116.219
Queens River................................................       43.959     -115.119       43.821     -115.208
Rabbit Creek................................................       43.797     -115.613       43.821     -115.690
Rainbow Creek...............................................       43.630     -115.341       43.630     -115.361
Rattlesnake Creek...........................................       43.622     -115.526       43.561     -115.740
Renwick Creek...............................................       44.397     -116.140       44.367     -116.196
Right Creek.................................................       43.855     -115.187       43.867     -115.194
Roaring River...............................................       43.647     -115.480       43.790     -115.440
Rock Creek..................................................       43.894     -115.045       43.939     -115.081
Rockey Creek................................................       43.969     -115.424       44.011     -115.397
Ross Fork...................................................       43.796     -114.989       43.774     -114.929
Royal Gorge.................................................       43.751     -114.725       43.750     -114.723
Russel Gulch................................................       43.577     -115.559       43.591     -115.596
Salt Creek..................................................       43.607     -114.872       43.539     -114.860
Sawmill Creek...............................................       43.709     -115.095       43.761     -115.121
Scenic Creek................................................       43.901     -115.145       43.921     -115.179
Scotch Creek................................................       43.687     -115.438       43.690     -115.432
Scott Creek.................................................       43.891     -115.153       43.883     -115.181
Scott Creek.................................................       44.191     -115.762       44.223     -115.648
Second Fork Squaw Creek.....................................       44.404     -116.192       44.367     -116.196
Sheep Creek.................................................       43.617     -115.511       43.697     -115.662
Sheep Creek.................................................       44.504     -116.175       44.542     -116.222
Silver Creek................................................       44.408     -115.750       44.304     -115.865
Sixteen-to-one Creek........................................       44.467     -115.755       44.470     -115.718
Skeleton Creek..............................................       43.694     -114.987       43.589     -115.022
Smith Creek.................................................       44.200     -115.758       44.214     -115.710
Smokey Dome Canyon..........................................       43.503     -114.938       43.547     -114.956

[[Page 801]]

 
Snowslide Creek.............................................       43.738     -114.830       43.723     -114.789
South Fork Beaver Creek.....................................       44.297     -115.733       44.295     -115.686
South Fork Boise River......................................       43.358     -115.449       43.481     -115.307
South Fork Boise River......................................       43.335     -115.537       43.550     -115.722
South Fork Canyon Creek.....................................       44.226     -115.192       44.210     -115.170
South Fork Clear Creek......................................       44.183     -115.484       44.232     -115.440
South Fork Cub Creek........................................       43.968     -115.356       43.977     -115.389
South Fork Gold Fork River..................................       44.653     -115.840       44.674     -115.897
South Fork Payette River....................................       43.999     -115.040       44.103     -116.000
South Fork Ross Fork........................................       43.735     -115.022       43.796     -114.989
South Fork Scott Creek......................................       44.187     -115.703       44.222     -115.661
Squaw Creek.................................................       44.436     -116.153       44.437     -116.279
Stratton Creek..............................................       44.446     -115.631       44.470     -115.587
Tenmile Creek...............................................       44.086     -115.237       44.119     -115.386
Third Fork Squaw Creek......................................       44.453     -116.157       44.424     -116.211
Trail Creek.................................................       44.164     -115.093       44.158     -115.084
Trail Creek.................................................       43.912     -115.407       43.871     -115.409
Trail Creek.................................................       44.239     -115.759       44.279     -115.667
Trail Creek-Yuba............................................       43.707     -115.118       43.763     -115.146
Trinity Creek...............................................       43.600     -115.270       43.630     -115.341
Tripod Creek................................................       43.896     -115.155       43.895     -115.189
Ucon Creek..................................................       44.379     -115.721       44.371     -115.767
Unnamed.....................................................       43.867     -115.194       43.877     -115.194
Unnamed.....................................................       43.781     -115.252       43.766     -115.273
Unnamed.....................................................       43.861     -115.271       43.872     -115.295
Unnamed.....................................................       43.751     -115.361       43.722     -115.368
Unnamed.....................................................       43.987     -115.418       44.005     -115.416
Unnamed.....................................................       44.201     -115.717       44.182     -115.721
Unnamed.....................................................       43.625     -115.556       43.628     -115.556
Unnamed.....................................................       43.664     -115.527       43.657     -115.526
Unnamed.....................................................       43.657     -115.526       43.653     -115.528
Unnamed.....................................................       44.026     -115.275       44.035     -115.272
Unnamed.....................................................       44.029     -115.368       44.026     -115.365
Unnamed - Off Olive Creek...................................       44.801     -116.661       44.787     -116.666
Unnamed - Off Beaver Creek..................................       44.336     -115.718       44.318     -115.687
Unnamed - Off Black Warrior Creek...........................       43.896     -115.263       43.878     -115.245
Unnamed - Off East Fork Warm Springs Creek..................       44.324     -115.564       44.312     -115.578
Unnamed - Off Long Creek....................................       44.136     -115.535       44.148     -115.547
Unnamed - Off Middle Fork Warm Springs Creek................       44.324     -115.541       44.332     -115.580
Unnamed - Off North Fork Canyon Creek.......................       44.241     -115.166       44.260     -115.199
Unnamed - Off South Fork Beaver Creek.......................       44.283     -115.722       44.294     -115.687
Unnamed 1 - Off Deer Creek..................................       44.425     -115.587       44.407     -115.586
Unnamed 1 - Off Middle Fork Payette River...................       44.552     -115.835       44.524     -115.775
Unnamed 1 - Off Olive Creek.................................       44.812     -116.644       44.791     -116.649
Unnamed 1 - Off Third Fork Squaw Creek......................       44.420     -116.148       44.424     -116.211
Unnamed 1- Off Emma Creek...................................       43.772     -114.884       43.759     -114.872
Unnamed 2 - Off Deer Creek..................................       44.388     -115.554       44.401     -115.560
Unnamed 2 - Off Eightmile Creek.............................       44.198     -115.419       44.174     -115.398
Unnamed 2 - Off Of Unnamed 1 Off Of Third Fork Squaw Creek..       44.421     -116.172       44.415     -116.191
Unnamed 3 - Off Deer Creek..................................       44.422     -115.534       44.407     -115.542
Unnamed 3 - Off Middle Fork Payette River...................       44.540     -115.739       44.539     -115.771
Unnamed 3 - Off Of Unnamed 1 Off Of Third Fork Squaw Creek..       44.426     -116.161       44.416     -116.202
Unnamed 3 - Off Third Fork Squaw Creek......................       44.433     -116.168       44.434     -116.204
Unnamed 4 - Off Squaw Creek.................................       44.455     -116.200       44.470     -116.220
Unnamed 5 - Off Squaw Creek.................................       44.460     -116.166       44.479     -116.194
Unnamed 6 - Off Unamed 5 Off Of Squaw Creek.................       44.456     -116.175       44.476     -116.191
Unnamed Trib 3 - Off North Fork Gold Fork River.............       44.747     -115.812       44.708     -115.817
Unnamed Trib 4 - Off North Fork Gold Fork River.............       44.679     -115.812       44.706     -115.820
Valley Creek................................................       44.280     -115.743       44.333     -115.777
Vienna Creek................................................       43.802     -114.906       43.802     -114.910
Wagontown Creek.............................................       43.565     -115.277       43.607     -115.324
Wapiti Creek................................................       44.117     -115.202       44.094     -115.186
Warm Spring Creek...........................................       44.292     -115.306       44.144     -115.304
Warm Springs Creek..........................................       44.367     -115.580       44.279     -115.631
West Fork Big Peak Creek....................................       43.628     -114.730       43.646     -114.719
West Fork Big Smoky Creek...................................       43.788     -114.821       43.744     -114.727
West Fork Creek.............................................       44.048     -115.247       44.055     -115.210
West Fork Skeleton Creek....................................       43.672     -115.027       43.651     -114.974
West Parks Creek............................................       43.623     -115.341       43.612     -115.366
West Warrior Creek..........................................       43.882     -115.298       43.840     -115.257
Whitehawk Creek.............................................       44.261     -115.556       44.235     -115.524

[[Page 802]]

 
Wild Buck Creek.............................................       44.389     -115.650       44.342     -115.658
Willow Creek................................................       43.725     -115.023       43.605     -115.144
Willow Creek................................................       43.959     -115.531       43.944     -115.484
Wilson Creek................................................       44.366     -115.565       44.292     -115.641
Yuba River..................................................       43.707     -115.202       43.803     -115.160
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) No waterbodies are excluded from critical habitat designation 
in this unit.
    (iv) Map of Unit 26, Southwest Idaho Basins - East Half follows:

[[Page 803]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.027

            (34) Unit 26: Southwest Idaho Basins - West Half

    (i) The entire Southwest Idaho Basins unit consists of 2,150 km 
(1,335.9 mi) of streams and 4,310.5 ha (10,651.5 ac) of lakes and 
reservoirs. The unit is located in southwestern Idaho.
    (ii) See paragraph (e)(33)(ii) of this entry for a list of 
individual waterbodies in this unit.

[[Page 804]]

    (iii) No waterbodies are excluded from critical habitat designation 
in this unit.
    (iv) Map of Unit 26, Southwest Idaho Basins - West Half follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.028
    

[[Page 805]]



                 (35) Unit 27: Salmon River - East Half

    (i) The entire Salmon River unit consists of 7,376.5 km (4,583.5 mi) 
of streams and 1,683.8 ha (4,160.6 ac) of lakes and reservoirs. The unit 
is located in central Idaho.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(Mill Creek (Tributary to Big Creek)........................       44.467     -113.685       44.507     -113.619
Airplane Lake...............................................       45.156     -114.599               ...........
Alpine Creek................................................       45.032     -114.655       45.080     -114.619
Alpine Creek................................................       43.930     -114.970       43.896     -114.907
Alpine Creek Lake <greek-i>5................................       45.078     -114.617               ...........
Alturas Lake................................................       43.914     -114.861               ...........
Alturas Lake Creek..........................................       43.893     -114.919       44.004     -114.837
Arctic Creek................................................       45.498     -114.998       45.479     -115.031
Arnett Creek................................................       45.265     -114.201       45.205     -114.134
Arrastra Creek..............................................       44.841     -114.351       44.868     -114.426
Back Creek..................................................       44.511     -115.707       44.512     -115.739
Baldwin Creek...............................................       44.500     -115.106       44.541     -115.068
Banner Creek................................................       44.291     -115.188       44.356     -115.209
Bargamin Creek..............................................       45.770     -114.935       45.567     -115.192
Basin Creek.................................................       44.368     -114.943       44.263     -114.818
Basin Creek.................................................       45.657     -114.960       45.674     -114.991
Bayhorse Creek..............................................       44.378     -114.257       44.411     -114.402
Beagle Creek................................................       44.996     -114.480       44.991     -114.462
Bear Creek..................................................       44.597     -114.463       44.569     -114.362
Bear Creek..................................................       44.834     -115.514       44.826     -115.483
Bear Creek..................................................       45.106     -115.618       45.117     -115.638
Bear Creek..................................................       44.606     -115.601       44.623     -115.691
Bear Creek-Loon.............................................       44.735     -114.862       44.742     -114.818
Bear Creek-Marsh............................................       44.490     -115.099       44.439     -115.101
Bear Valley Creek...........................................       44.804     -113.867       44.772     -113.708
Bear Valley Creek...........................................       44.236     -115.500       44.449     -115.231
Bearskin Creek..............................................       44.330     -115.529       44.415     -115.467
Beaver Creek................................................       45.272     -114.186       45.274     -114.335
Beaver Creek................................................       43.836     -114.907       43.925     -114.810
Beaver Creek................................................       44.472     -114.954       44.406     -115.171
Beaver Creek................................................       45.242     -115.315       45.250     -115.340
Belvidere Creek.............................................       45.041     -115.387       45.069     -115.365
Bernard Creek...............................................       44.975     -114.735       44.982     -114.760
Big Bear Creek..............................................       45.472     -114.963       45.457     -115.093
Big Boulder Creek...........................................       44.113     -114.551       44.118     -114.429
Big Buck Creek..............................................       45.252     -115.540       45.263     -115.586
Big Chief Creek.............................................       44.817     -115.369       44.838     -115.298
Big Cottonwood Creek........................................       44.879     -115.207       44.912     -115.083
Big Creek...................................................       44.442     -113.601       44.495     -113.819
Big Creek...................................................       45.060     -115.452       45.094     -114.733
Big Creek Marsh.............................................       45.091     -115.333               ...........
Big Eightmile Creek.........................................       44.560     -113.563       44.739     -113.460
Big Flat Creek..............................................       45.227     -115.545       45.235     -115.590
Big Harrington Creek........................................       45.518     -114.824       45.473     -114.964
Big Mallard Creek...........................................       45.537     -115.270       45.544     -115.280
Big Ramey Creek.............................................       45.279     -115.244       45.177     -115.160
Big Timber Creek............................................       44.509     -113.539       44.699     -113.375
Birdseye Creek..............................................       44.938     -114.457       44.927     -114.385
Blackeagle Creek............................................       44.992     -114.568       45.006     -114.547
Blackmare Creek.............................................       44.809     -115.796       44.822     -115.704
Blue Fork Silver Creek......................................       44.854     -114.359       44.883     -114.355
Blue Lake Creek.............................................       45.132     -115.781       45.133     -115.717
Bohannon Creek..............................................       45.229     -113.668       45.112     -113.747
Boulder Creek...............................................       45.277     -115.341       45.242     -115.315
Boulder Creek...............................................       45.129     -116.476       45.204     -116.311
Bowery Creek................................................       44.011     -114.390       44.032     -114.461
Bray Creek..................................................       44.675     -113.814       44.706     -113.769
Browning Creek..............................................       44.759     -115.364       44.738     -115.407
Bruin Creek.................................................       45.517     -115.076       45.492     -115.113
Brush Creek.................................................       44.965     -114.860       44.955     -114.734
Buck Creek..................................................       44.929     -115.003       44.896     -115.065
Buck Creek..................................................       44.751     -115.480       44.792     -115.519
Buckhorn Creek..............................................       44.853     -115.887       44.922     -115.737
Bum Creek...................................................       45.036     -115.287       44.995     -115.319
Burgdorf Creek..............................................       45.268     -115.911       45.255     -115.963

[[Page 806]]

 
Burn Creek..................................................       45.500     -116.105       45.505     -116.125
Burnt Creek.................................................       44.149     -113.633       44.284     -113.653
Burntlog Creek..............................................       44.718     -115.420       44.803     -115.519
Cabin Creek.................................................       44.419     -114.902       44.397     -114.828
Cabin Creek.................................................       43.929     -114.880       43.928     -114.843
Cabin Creek.................................................       45.195     -114.838       45.126     -114.936
Cabin Creek.................................................       44.703     -115.648       44.666     -115.686
Cabin Creek-Loon............................................       44.760     -114.693       44.691     -114.754
Cache Creek.................................................       45.636     -115.118       45.691     -115.181
Cache Creek.................................................       44.262     -115.403       44.346     -115.420
Cache Creek-Loon............................................       44.776     -114.688       44.801     -114.806
California Creek............................................       45.341     -115.851       45.448     -115.760
Camas Creek.................................................       44.708     -114.388       44.892     -114.723
Camp Creek..................................................       45.222     -114.115       45.279     -114.159
Camp Creek..................................................       44.945     -114.595       44.955     -114.611
Camp Creek..................................................       45.643     -114.961       45.657     -115.001
Camp Creek..................................................       44.985     -115.414       44.990     -115.444
Camp Creek..................................................       44.607     -115.680       44.605     -115.634
Camp Creek..................................................       44.898     -115.717       44.891     -115.618
Cane Creek..................................................       44.978     -115.262       44.953     -115.292
Canyon Creek................................................       44.575     -114.914       44.568     -114.847
Cape Horn Creek.............................................       44.333     -115.288       44.395     -115.169
Carlson Creek...............................................       45.345     -115.517       45.339     -115.560
Casner Creek................................................       44.281     -115.452       44.295     -115.485
Castle Creek................................................       44.826     -114.313       44.801     -114.472
Cat Creek...................................................       44.619     -114.653       44.652     -114.628
Cave-Big Creek..............................................       45.240     -114.847       45.132     -114.956
Cayuse Creek................................................       45.500     -114.603       45.474     -114.569
Challis Creek...............................................       44.552     -114.512       44.570     -114.187
Chamberlain Creek...........................................       45.336     -115.330       45.454     -114.933
Champion Creek..............................................       44.026     -114.839       43.988     -114.691
Chicken Creek...............................................       45.287     -115.474       45.319     -115.412
Chip Creek..................................................       44.443     -115.359       44.429     -115.341
Cinnabar Creek..............................................       44.912     -115.267       44.952     -115.294
Clear Creek.................................................       45.146     -114.579       45.295     -114.352
Cliff Creek.................................................       44.790     -115.697       44.769     -115.744
Club Creek..................................................       45.291     -115.037       45.266     -115.084
Cold Creek..................................................       45.488     -115.071       45.465     -115.077
Cold Creek..................................................       44.371     -115.318       44.425     -115.311
Cold Spring Creek-Loon......................................       44.682     -114.841       44.718     -114.799
Colson Creek................................................       45.299     -114.532       45.379     -114.552
Cook Creek..................................................       44.373     -115.445       44.408     -115.378
Cooper Creek................................................       44.675     -113.703       44.726     -113.726
Corn Creek..................................................       45.368     -114.685       45.385     -114.559
Corral Creek................................................       45.545     -114.111       45.498     -114.147
Corral Creek................................................       44.876     -114.220       44.779     -114.248
Cottonwood Creek............................................       44.623     -114.761       44.593     -114.680
Cougar Creek................................................       44.810     -115.805       44.889     -115.717
Crooked Creek...............................................       45.195     -115.032       45.163     -115.129
Crooked Creek...............................................       45.612     -115.439       45.434     -115.667
Cub Creek...................................................       44.319     -115.518       44.324     -115.474
Cultus Creek................................................       44.781     -115.211       44.813     -115.176
Curtis Creek................................................       44.562     -115.760       44.652     -115.704
Dagger Creek................................................       44.456     -115.374       44.523     -115.282
Dahlonega Creek.............................................       45.524     -113.836       45.541     -113.929
Dairy Creek.................................................       44.620     -113.594       44.637     -113.553
Deadhorse Creek.............................................       45.574     -116.145       45.613     -116.067
Deadwood Creek..............................................       44.349     -114.836       44.376     -114.777
Deep Creek..................................................       45.018     -114.098       45.126     -114.216
Deep Creek..................................................       45.051     -115.754       45.071     -115.743
Deer Creek..................................................       44.776     -113.810       44.793     -113.778
Deer Creek..................................................       44.571     -114.907       44.548     -114.855
Deer Creek..................................................       45.382     -115.092       45.453     -115.130
Devils Toe Creek............................................       45.436     -114.893       45.419     -114.935
Dillinger Creek.............................................       45.530     -115.108       45.480     -115.215
Disappointment Creek........................................       45.422     -114.880       45.300     -114.945
Dismal Creek................................................       45.351     -114.950       45.306     -114.958
Ditch Creek.................................................       45.506     -114.004       45.597     -114.041
Dog Creek...................................................       45.380     -115.151       45.448     -115.163
Dollar Creek................................................       44.722     -115.696       44.759     -115.752
Duffield Creek..............................................       44.570     -114.931       44.551     -115.008

[[Page 807]]

 
Dump Creek..................................................       45.329     -114.041       45.318     -114.039
Dutch Creek.................................................       44.799     -115.520       44.798     -115.523
Dynamite Creek..............................................       44.871     -115.208       44.876     -115.058
East Basin Creek............................................       44.343     -114.791       44.277     -114.850
East Fork Big Ramey Creek...................................       45.245     -115.137       45.214     -115.188
East Fork Burntlog Creek....................................       44.730     -115.427       44.737     -115.502
East Fork Cache Creek.......................................       44.306     -115.390       44.314     -115.424
East Fork Elk Creek.........................................       44.481     -115.360       44.485     -115.453
East Fork Fall Creek........................................       45.360     -115.964       45.415     -115.976
East Fork Hayden Creek......................................       44.664     -113.684       44.760     -113.712
East Fork Herd Creek........................................       43.984     -114.204       44.058     -114.234
East Fork John Day Creek....................................       45.577     -116.154       45.573     -116.230
East Fork Mayfield Creek....................................       44.480     -114.714       44.539     -114.798
East Fork Morgan Creek......................................       44.670     -113.829       44.675     -113.900
East Fork Owl Creek.........................................       45.340     -114.463       45.345     -114.458
East Fork Pahsimeroi River..................................       44.081     -113.721       44.157     -113.704
East Fork Salmon River......................................       43.929     -114.555       44.268     -114.327
East Fork South Fork Salmon River...........................       44.886     -115.257       45.015     -115.714
East Fork Thomas Creek......................................       44.668     -115.043       44.705     -115.028
East Fork Valley Creek......................................       44.327     -114.988       44.357     -115.049
East Fork Whimstick Creek...................................       45.300     -115.029       45.288     -114.962
East Pass Creek.............................................       44.050     -114.277       44.076     -114.244
Eightmile Creek.............................................       44.471     -114.716       44.426     -114.620
Elevenmile Creek............................................       44.436     -114.545       44.467     -114.579
Elk Creek...................................................       44.196     -115.134       44.293     -115.024
Elk Creek...................................................       44.485     -115.453       44.410     -115.373
Elk Creek...................................................       45.157     -115.432       45.156     -115.585
Elkhorn Creek...............................................       44.582     -115.370       44.615     -115.257
Elkhorn Creek...............................................       45.270     -116.122       45.404     -116.095
Enos Creek..................................................       45.148     -115.795       45.102     -115.851
Fall Creek..................................................       45.331     -115.996       45.432     -115.984
Falls Creek.................................................       44.611     -113.685       44.565     -113.879
Falls Creek.................................................       44.881     -115.508       44.885     -115.536
Fernan Creek................................................       45.238     -115.813       45.235     -115.850
Fir Creek...................................................       44.618     -114.671       44.655     -114.698
Fir Creek...................................................       44.344     -115.299       44.428     -115.291
Fish Creek..................................................       45.352     -115.304       45.384     -115.335
Fishhook Creek..............................................       44.133     -114.982       44.143     -114.920
Fitsum Creek................................................       45.000     -115.763       44.999     -115.723
Fivemile Creek..............................................       44.355     -114.616       44.405     -114.655
Fivemile Creek..............................................       45.412     -115.470       45.392     -115.456
Flat Creek..................................................       45.302     -115.880       45.271     -115.837
Float Creek.................................................       44.523     -115.179       44.571     -115.072
Flossie Creek...............................................       45.372     -115.207       45.389     -115.295
Fly Creek...................................................       44.670     -114.551       44.705     -114.497
Forty-Five Creek............................................       44.665     -115.309       44.718     -115.233
Fourmile Creek..............................................       44.798     -115.622       44.857     -115.696
Fourth of July Creek........................................       45.427     -113.774       45.364     -113.944
Fourth of July Creek........................................       44.986     -114.347       44.991     -114.414
Fourth of July Creek........................................       44.044     -114.621       44.032     -114.837
French Creek................................................       45.370     -116.042       45.425     -116.031
Fritser Creek...............................................       45.091     -115.627       45.103     -115.684
Furnace Creek...............................................       44.789     -114.344       44.766     -114.487
Game Creek..................................................       45.404     -115.275       45.398     -115.193
Garden Creek................................................       45.314     -114.404       45.239     -114.517
Germania Creek..............................................       43.968     -114.704       44.039     -114.462
Goat Creek..................................................       44.179     -115.009       44.219     -114.942
Goodman Creek...............................................       45.636     -114.965       45.647     -115.017
Granite Fork Lake Fork Rapid River..........................       45.151     -116.553       45.187     -116.518
Green Creek.................................................       45.739     -115.023       45.771     -115.033
Greyhound Creek.............................................       44.588     -115.155       44.648     -115.168
Grimmet Creek...............................................       45.156     -115.800       45.184     -115.782
Grouse Creek................................................       45.226     -115.545       45.186     -115.482
Grouse Creek................................................       45.317     -115.817       45.265     -115.831
Guard Creek.................................................       45.308     -115.659       45.293     -115.696
Half Moon Creek.............................................       44.557     -115.412       44.558     -115.410
Hand Creek..................................................       45.287     -115.246       45.228     -115.301
Hanson Creek................................................       44.869     -115.508       44.865     -115.475
Hard Creek..................................................       45.125     -116.240       45.183     -116.284
Hartan Creek................................................       45.519     -115.258       45.477     -115.229
Hayden Creek................................................       44.722     -113.820       44.869     -113.627

[[Page 808]]

 
Hazard Creek................................................       45.201     -116.255       45.184     -116.301
Hell Roaring Creek..........................................       44.023     -114.842       44.027     -114.929
Hell Roaring Lake...........................................       44.024     -114.935               ...........
Herd Creek..................................................       44.058     -114.234       44.154     -114.301
Hida Creek..................................................       45.556     -115.167       45.515     -115.204
Holdover Creek..............................................       44.845     -115.698       44.840     -115.726
Honeymoon Creek.............................................       44.553     -115.414       44.560     -115.411
Hoodoo Creek................................................       45.060     -114.553       44.953     -114.582
Horse Creek.................................................       45.475     -114.402       45.395     -114.733
Hot Springs Creek...........................................       45.729     -115.032       45.721     -114.977
Hot Springs Creek...........................................       45.511     -115.042       45.468     -115.131
Hotzel Creek................................................       45.373     -115.188       45.349     -115.204
Hughes Creek................................................       45.582     -114.121       45.476     -113.989
Hull Creek..................................................       45.468     -113.993       45.491     -114.094
Hungry Creek................................................       45.392     -114.916       45.352     -114.870
Ibex Creek..................................................       43.908     -114.493       43.953     -114.526
Indian Creek................................................       45.552     -114.145       45.400     -114.168
Indian Creek................................................       44.799     -115.390       44.770     -115.090
Indian Creek................................................       44.970     -115.732       44.958     -115.691
Indian Creek-Loon...........................................       44.672     -114.840       44.692     -114.755
Inyo Creek..................................................       44.532     -113.628       44.535     -113.684
Iron Creek..................................................       44.189     -115.047       44.223     -114.948
J Fell Creek................................................       44.614     -114.462       44.684     -114.459
Jack Creek..................................................       44.678     -114.836       44.696     -114.761
Jeanette Creek..............................................       45.276     -115.919       45.294     -115.899
Jefferson Creek.............................................       45.220     -114.120       45.242     -114.149
Job Creek...................................................       44.243     -115.003       44.243     -115.002
John Day Creek..............................................       45.521     -116.196       45.586     -116.296
Johnson Creek...............................................       44.632     -115.526       44.962     -115.502
Jordan Creek................................................       44.469     -114.771       44.379     -114.721
Josephine Creek.............................................       45.225     -115.971       45.224     -115.930
Jungle Creek................................................       45.147     -115.799       45.108     -115.826
Kadletz Creek...............................................       44.740     -113.820       44.775     -113.743
Kenney Creek................................................       45.110     -113.514       45.032     -113.663
Kinnikinic Creek............................................       44.258     -114.402       44.260     -114.403
Knapp Creek.................................................       44.424     -114.916       44.365     -115.132
Knee Creek..................................................       44.676     -115.662       44.695     -115.624
Krassel Creek...............................................       44.979     -115.727       44.987     -115.704
Lake Creek..................................................       44.985     -114.081       45.017     -113.989
Lake Creek..................................................       44.981     -114.646       44.947     -114.592
Lake Creek..................................................       44.720     -115.142       44.714     -115.097
Lake Creek..................................................       44.643     -115.181       44.662     -115.231
Lake Creek..................................................       45.616     -115.687       45.514     -115.575
Lake Creek..................................................       45.374     -115.899       45.372     -115.895
Lake Creek..................................................       45.294     -116.220       45.400     -116.213
Lake Creek Lake.............................................       45.373     -115.897               ...........
Lake Fork Rapid River.......................................       45.190     -116.558       45.187     -116.483
Landmark Creek..............................................       44.657     -115.543       44.626     -115.583
Lee Creek...................................................       44.740     -113.482       44.659     -113.616
Lemhi River.................................................       44.682     -113.355       45.188     -113.890
Liberty Creek...............................................       44.783     -114.618       44.759     -114.650
Lick Creek..................................................       44.775     -114.348       44.722     -114.272
Lick Creek..................................................       45.049     -115.915       45.062     -115.762
Lightning Creek.............................................       44.466     -114.788       44.388     -114.796
Little Beaver Creek.........................................       44.445     -115.528       44.409     -115.492
Little Boulder Creek........................................       44.065     -114.543       44.099     -114.443
Little Buck Creek...........................................       45.252     -115.551       45.247     -115.588
Little Cottonwood Creek.....................................       44.942     -115.020       44.907     -115.074
Little Creek................................................       44.695     -114.981       44.724     -114.998
Little Deep Creek...........................................       45.001     -114.163       45.108     -114.180
Little East Fork Elk Creek..................................       44.480     -115.398       44.464     -115.446
Little Eightmile Creek......................................       44.823     -113.366       44.739     -113.460
Little Horse Creek..........................................       45.440     -114.585       45.477     -114.450
Little Indian Creek.........................................       44.871     -115.219       44.841     -115.257
Little Indian Creek.........................................       44.967     -115.727       44.951     -115.702
Little Jacket Creek.........................................       44.926     -114.479       44.953     -114.566
Little Lodgepole Creek......................................       45.351     -115.155       45.328     -115.218
Little Loon Creek...........................................       44.615     -114.964       44.731     -114.941
Little Mallard Creek........................................       45.530     -115.306       45.529     -115.304
Little Pistol Creek.........................................       44.721     -115.405       44.721     -115.204
Little Redfish Lake.........................................       44.161     -114.909               ...........

[[Page 809]]

 
Little Salmon River.........................................       45.181     -116.302       45.417     -116.314
Little Slate Creek..........................................       45.620     -116.067       45.463     -116.122
Little Timber Creek.........................................       44.605     -113.445       44.642     -113.384
Livingston Creek............................................       44.144     -114.609       44.194     -114.604
Lodgepole Creek.............................................       44.554     -114.475       44.540     -114.409
Lodgepole Creek.............................................       45.372     -115.126       45.305     -115.255
Lodgepole Creek.............................................       44.576     -115.611       44.593     -115.687
Logan Creek.................................................       45.072     -115.456       45.118     -115.320
Lola Creek..................................................       44.391     -115.240       44.408     -115.175
Long Tom Creek..............................................       43.978     -114.402       44.027     -114.430
Loon Creek..................................................       44.444     -114.941       44.553     -114.850
Loon Creek..................................................       45.167     -115.837       45.170     -115.809
Loon Lake...................................................       45.163     -115.840               ...........
Lucky Creek.................................................       44.625     -115.277       44.664     -115.299
Luger Creek.................................................       44.618     -115.396       44.686     -115.358
Magpie Creek................................................       45.548     -115.153       45.506     -115.201
Mahogany Creek..............................................       44.159     -113.768       44.208     -113.702
Marble Creek................................................       44.983     -115.080       44.743     -115.017
Marsh Creek.................................................       44.329     -115.092       44.449     -115.231
Martin Creek................................................       44.426     -114.564       44.387     -114.495
Martin Creek................................................       44.117     -114.798       44.137     -114.725
Martindale Creek............................................       44.813     -114.545       44.825     -114.577
Mayfield Creek..............................................       44.552     -114.850       44.539     -114.798
Mayflower Creek.............................................       45.259     -115.602       45.248     -115.654
McCalla Creek...............................................       45.255     -115.128       45.414     -114.982
McConn Creek................................................       45.527     -114.243       45.504     -114.153
McHoney Creek...............................................       44.638     -114.610       44.670     -114.555
McKay Creek.................................................       44.475     -114.492       44.489     -114.551
McKee Creek.................................................       44.567     -114.672       44.577     -114.649
Meadow Creek................................................       44.990     -114.487       44.977     -114.471
Meadow Creek................................................       44.863     -115.373       44.902     -115.328
Meadow Creek - mouth to Trap................................       44.316     -115.089       44.306     -115.053
Meridian Creek..............................................       43.988     -114.257       44.011     -114.252
Middle Fork Elkhorn Creek...................................       44.628     -115.369       44.620     -115.291
Middle Fork Indian Creek....................................       44.856     -115.104       44.796     -115.133
Middle Fork Salmon River....................................       44.449     -115.231       45.296     -114.594
Middle Fork Smith Creek.....................................       45.157     -115.413       45.170     -115.381
Mill Creek..................................................       44.656     -113.657       44.766     -113.519
Mill Creek..................................................       44.470     -114.492       44.561     -114.275
Mill Creek..................................................       45.356     -115.520       45.331     -115.581
Mink Creek..................................................       44.865     -114.298       44.842     -114.331
Missouri Creek..............................................       45.028     -115.352       45.007     -115.395
Moccasin Creek..............................................       45.088     -114.090       45.153     -114.172
Monumental Creek............................................       44.903     -115.263       45.160     -115.130
Moose Creek.................................................       45.691     -113.945       45.654     -113.971
Moose Creek.................................................       45.318     -114.039       45.328     -114.042
Moose Creek.................................................       45.283     -115.293       45.356     -115.250
Moose Creek.................................................       44.853     -115.510       44.838     -115.484
Moose Jaw Creek.............................................       45.312     -115.118       45.278     -115.172
Morgan Creek................................................       44.675     -113.900       44.618     -113.964
Morgan Creek................................................       44.846     -114.262       44.612     -114.169
Mormon Creek................................................       44.499     -115.655       44.524     -115.696
Morse Creek.................................................       44.653     -113.709       44.569     -113.886
Moyer Creek.................................................       45.024     -114.312       44.900     -114.223
Musgrove Creek..............................................       45.096     -114.471       45.022     -114.313
My Creek....................................................       45.357     -115.004       45.338     -114.982
Mystery Creek...............................................       44.519     -114.775       44.490     -114.793
Napias Creek................................................       45.244     -114.024       45.137     -114.218
Nasty Creek.................................................       44.877     -115.697       44.879     -115.630
Nelson Creek................................................       44.499     -114.805       44.540     -114.804
Nethker Creek...............................................       45.249     -115.972       45.265     -115.906
Nick Creek..................................................       44.927     -115.795       44.926     -115.855
Ninemile Creek..............................................       44.414     -114.583       44.445     -114.605
No Name Creek...............................................       45.361     -115.225       45.322     -115.234
North Fork Bear Creek.......................................       44.826     -115.483       44.824     -115.437
North Fork Big Creek........................................       44.552     -113.593       44.442     -113.601
North Fork Bowery Creek.....................................       44.049     -114.366       44.032     -114.401
North Fork Buckhorn Creek...................................       44.928     -115.775       44.941     -115.868
North Fork Camp Creek.......................................       44.888     -115.691       44.924     -115.629
North Fork Dollar Creek.....................................       44.715     -115.707       44.718     -115.710
North Fork Elk Creek........................................       44.527     -115.459       44.485     -115.453

[[Page 810]]

 
North Fork Elkhorn Creek....................................       44.638     -115.363       44.625     -115.277
North Fork Fitsum Creek.....................................       44.985     -115.884       44.999     -115.760
North Fork Lick Creek.......................................       45.072     -115.784       45.075     -115.885
North Fork Little Timber Creek..............................       44.605     -113.445       44.583     -113.513
North Fork Morgan Creek.....................................       44.710     -113.830       44.675     -113.900
North Fork Riordan Creek....................................       44.867     -115.447       44.862     -115.389
North Fork Salmon River.....................................       45.702     -113.990       45.405     -113.994
North Fork Sand Creek.......................................       44.642     -115.497       44.656     -115.451
North Fork Sheep Creek......................................       45.483     -113.774       45.482     -113.837
North Fork Sheep Creek......................................       44.648     -114.964       44.649     -115.018
North Fork Sheep Creek......................................       45.039     -115.584       45.059     -115.557
North Fork Six-bit Creek....................................       44.670     -115.763       44.711     -115.782
North Fork Smith Creek......................................       45.188     -115.346       45.197     -115.352
North Fork Sulphur Creek....................................       44.597     -115.466       44.554     -115.440
North Fork Wolf Fang Creek..................................       45.216     -115.444       45.212     -115.393
Norton Creek................................................       44.890     -114.902       44.827     -114.794
Oompaul Creek...............................................       45.034     -115.736       45.054     -115.717
Opal Creek..................................................       44.898     -114.278       44.896     -114.315
Opal Lake...................................................       44.899     -114.281               ...........
Otter Creek.................................................       44.869     -114.249       44.860     -114.291
Our Creek...................................................       45.364     -115.000       45.354     -114.976
Owl Creek...................................................       45.474     -114.383       45.318     -114.448
Pahsimeroi River............................................       44.157     -113.704       44.692     -114.049
Panther Creek...............................................       44.829     -114.295       45.316     -114.406
Papoose Creek...............................................       45.174     -114.721       45.273     -114.821
Papoose Creek...............................................       44.796     -115.278       44.837     -115.246
Paradise Creek..............................................       45.121     -115.765       45.123     -115.727
Park Creek..................................................       44.734     -115.551       44.724     -115.593
Parker Creek................................................       44.622     -114.597       44.608     -114.540
Parks Creek.................................................       44.955     -115.536       44.970     -115.531
Partridge Creek.............................................       45.287     -116.218       45.408     -116.127
Patterson Creek.............................................       44.635     -113.653       44.614     -113.966
Peanut Creek................................................       44.688     -115.486       44.663     -115.454
Pepper Creek................................................       44.949     -115.351       44.916     -115.384
Perkins Lake................................................       43.929     -114.841               ...........
Pete Creek..................................................       45.298     -115.926       45.285     -115.979
Petit Lake..................................................       43.980     -114.879               ...........
Pettit Lake Creek...........................................       43.976     -114.902       43.988     -114.841
Phelan Creek................................................       45.146     -114.042       45.167     -114.161
Pierce Creek................................................       45.670     -113.933       45.621     -113.964
Pigtail Creek...............................................       44.122     -114.736       44.129     -114.727
Pine Creek..................................................       45.282     -114.168       45.364     -114.300
Pioneer Creek - Loon........................................       44.521     -114.865       44.441     -114.895
Pistol Creek................................................       44.644     -115.443       44.724     -115.150
Poet Creek..................................................       45.722     -115.034       45.754     -115.073
Poker Creek.................................................       44.445     -115.367       44.429     -115.335
Pole Creek..................................................       43.964     -114.691       43.926     -114.810
Pole Creek..................................................       45.335     -115.160       45.308     -115.182
Pole Creek..................................................       44.361     -115.367       44.386     -115.380
Pole Creek-Camas............................................       44.763     -114.675       44.794     -114.595
Pony Creek..................................................       45.194     -114.138       45.187     -114.059
Pony Creek..................................................       45.179     -115.704       45.187     -115.563
Porcupine Creek.............................................       44.890     -115.499       44.902     -115.538
Porphyry Creek..............................................       45.069     -114.434       45.004     -114.334
Porter Creek................................................       44.470     -115.540       44.457     -115.451
Profile Creek...............................................       45.053     -115.417       44.957     -115.429
Prospect Creek..............................................       44.357     -114.985       44.394     -114.986
Pruvan Creek................................................       45.498     -113.821       45.467     -113.790
Pup Creek...................................................       45.378     -115.147       45.413     -115.139
Quartz Creek................................................       45.048     -115.497       44.970     -115.478
Queen Creek.................................................       45.400     -115.049       45.458     -115.110
Raines Creek................................................       45.332     -115.501       45.308     -115.591
Rams Creek..................................................       44.861     -114.453       44.871     -114.456
Ranch Creek.................................................       45.374     -115.186       45.404     -115.234
Rapid River.................................................       44.551     -115.008       44.680     -115.153
Rapid River.................................................       45.114     -116.507       45.374     -116.356
Rapps Creek.................................................       45.268     -114.172       45.213     -114.164
Rat Creek...................................................       44.566     -114.785       44.588     -114.826
Rattlesnake Creek...........................................       45.249     -115.518       45.221     -115.492
Raven Creek.................................................       45.550     -115.161       45.517     -115.195
Red Top Creek...............................................       45.362     -115.266       45.384     -115.292

[[Page 811]]

 
Redfish Lake................................................       44.117     -114.932               ...........
Redfish Lake Creek..........................................       44.099     -114.954       44.169     -114.899
Reeves Creek................................................       44.686     -115.619       44.667     -115.667
Rhett Creek.................................................       45.476     -115.408       45.472     -115.394
Rice Creek..................................................       44.510     -115.645       44.575     -115.686
Richardson Creek............................................       45.539     -115.261       45.474     -115.240
Rim Creek...................................................       45.281     -115.383       45.336     -115.330
Riordan Creek...............................................       44.808     -115.392       44.907     -115.486
Riordan Lake................................................       44.850     -115.439               ...........
Roaring Creek...............................................       45.259     -114.646       45.241     -114.615
Rock Creek..................................................       44.639     -115.543       44.600     -115.593
Rock Creek-Loon.............................................       44.754     -114.671       44.674     -114.741
Rocky Creek.................................................       44.521     -113.434       44.535     -113.505
Rooster Creek...............................................       45.309     -115.490       45.328     -115.437
Root Creek..................................................       45.382     -114.993       45.362     -114.964
Royal Creek.................................................       45.525     -116.098       45.525     -116.134
Rubie Creek.................................................       45.546     -116.079       45.543     -116.026
Ruby Creek..................................................       45.190     -115.915       45.258     -115.879
Rush Creek..................................................       44.536     -114.652       44.578     -114.614
Rush Creek..................................................       44.933     -114.991       45.105     -114.861
Ryan Creek..................................................       45.019     -115.395       45.033     -115.380
Sabe Creek..................................................       45.681     -114.949       45.507     -115.025
Sack Creek..................................................       44.320     -115.352       44.359     -115.408
Salmon River................................................       43.797     -114.775       45.856     -116.795
Salt Creek..................................................       44.984     -114.297       44.979     -114.223
Salt Creek..................................................       44.973     -115.325       44.949     -115.353
Sand Creek..................................................       44.632     -115.526       44.609     -115.414
Sand Creek..................................................       45.327     -115.863       45.307     -115.821
Schissler Creek.............................................       45.320     -115.780       45.328     -115.708
Seafoam Creek...............................................       44.518     -115.119       44.542     -115.065
Secesh River................................................       45.256     -115.897       45.025     -115.707
Sharkey Creek...............................................       45.222     -114.109       45.212     -114.048
Sheep Creek.................................................       45.482     -113.837       45.504     -113.954
Sheep Creek.................................................       44.770     -114.483       44.769     -114.516
Sheep Creek.................................................       44.649     -115.018       44.647     -115.058
Sheep Creek.................................................       44.708     -115.561       44.698     -115.613
Sheep Creek.................................................       45.049     -115.637       45.049     -115.515
Sheep Creek.................................................       45.614     -115.697       45.468     -115.811
Sheep Creek-Lmf.............................................       44.915     -114.904       44.943     -114.727
Sheep Trail Creek...........................................       44.360     -115.452       44.337     -115.448
Shell Creek.................................................       44.632     -114.834       44.613     -114.789
Ship Island Creek...........................................       45.152     -114.603       45.174     -114.633
Ship Island Lake <greek-i>1.................................       45.166     -114.625               ...........
Shoban Lake.................................................       45.153     -114.602               ...........
Short Creek.................................................       44.773     -113.797       44.788     -113.768
Short Creek.................................................       44.313     -114.856       44.291     -114.872
Shovel Creek................................................       45.034     -114.444       45.000     -114.479
Silge Creek.................................................       45.545     -115.248       45.517     -115.225
Silver Creek................................................       44.852     -114.344       44.830     -114.502
Silver Rule Creek...........................................       44.146     -114.582       44.207     -114.597
Six-Bit Creek...............................................       44.645     -115.809       44.686     -115.707
Sixmile Creek...............................................       44.385     -114.596       44.413     -114.638
Slate Creek.................................................       44.154     -114.630       44.256     -114.564
Slate Creek.................................................       45.625     -116.055       45.626     -116.046
Slaughter Creek.............................................       45.297     -115.610       45.261     -115.673
Smith Creek.................................................       45.170     -115.381       45.152     -115.298
Smith Creek.................................................       45.241     -115.528       45.280     -115.583
Snowslide Creek.............................................       45.045     -115.282       45.098     -115.157
Soldier Creek...............................................       45.007     -114.882       45.029     -114.727
Soldier Creek...............................................       44.528     -115.202       44.626     -115.213
South Fork Bear Creek.......................................       44.826     -115.483       44.817     -115.458
South Fork Big Creek........................................       44.385     -113.476       44.442     -113.601
South Fork Blackmare Creek..................................       44.770     -115.804       44.809     -115.748
South Fork Buckhorn Creek...................................       44.840     -115.824       44.890     -115.824
South Fork Camas Creek......................................       44.730     -114.641       44.721     -114.499
South Fork Chamberlain Creek................................       45.336     -115.330       45.278     -115.353
South Fork Cottonwood Creek.................................       44.563     -114.781       44.621     -114.760
South Fork Dillinger Creek..................................       45.495     -115.156       45.455     -115.169
South Fork East Fork Salmon River...........................       43.848     -114.567       43.929     -114.555
South Fork Elk Creek........................................       45.136     -115.509       45.079     -115.467
South Fork Fitsum Creek.....................................       45.000     -115.763       44.970     -115.775

[[Page 812]]

 
South Fork Fourmile Creek...................................       44.860     -115.680       44.814     -115.665
South Fork John Day Creek...................................       45.571     -116.229       45.555     -116.226
South Fork Moyer Creek......................................       44.958     -114.294       44.879     -114.227
South Fork Rush Creek.......................................       44.965     -114.929       45.014     -114.979
South Fork Salmon River.....................................       44.493     -115.714       45.378     -115.513
South Fork Sheep Creek......................................       45.449     -113.801       45.482     -113.837
South Fork Sheep Creek......................................       44.603     -115.007       44.649     -115.018
South Fork Sheep Creek......................................       45.036     -115.623       44.984     -115.604
South Fork Smith Creek......................................       45.149     -115.420       45.170     -115.381
South Fork Threemile Creek..................................       45.307     -115.929       45.315     -115.886
South Fork Warm Spring Creek................................       44.568     -114.543       44.578     -114.552
South Fork Whimstick Creek..................................       45.284     -115.031       45.243     -115.045
Spider Creek................................................       44.697     -114.484       44.676     -114.512
Springfield Creek...........................................       44.789     -115.298       44.764     -115.313
Squaw Creek.................................................       45.504     -114.258       45.399     -114.169
Squaw Creek.................................................       44.249     -114.455       44.456     -114.504
Starvation Creek............................................       45.358     -114.934       45.323     -114.980
Station Creek...............................................       45.352     -115.521       45.355     -115.473
Stoddard Creek..............................................       45.235     -114.668       45.243     -114.687
Sugar Creek.................................................       44.936     -115.337       44.975     -115.246
Sulphur Creek...............................................       44.510     -115.519       44.555     -115.298
Sulphur Creek-Rapid.........................................       44.562     -115.162       44.586     -115.073
Summit Creek................................................       45.172     -115.916       45.256     -115.897
Sunday Creek................................................       44.341     -114.970       44.349     -114.906
Tamarack Creek..............................................       44.984     -115.270       44.959     -115.390
Tater Creek.................................................       44.661     -113.840       44.632     -113.903
Tenmile Creek...............................................       44.484     -114.647       44.465     -114.582
Thirty-Eight Creek..........................................       44.713     -115.413       44.673     -115.396
Thomas Creek................................................       44.705     -115.028       44.715     -115.012
Thompson Creek..............................................       44.284     -114.523       44.284     -114.523
Threemile Creek.............................................       45.334     -115.891       45.299     -115.930
Tie Creek...................................................       45.017     -115.770       45.037     -115.762
Trail Creek.................................................       45.215     -114.234       45.250     -114.320
Trail Creek.................................................       44.976     -114.532       44.964     -114.490
Trail Creek.................................................       44.628     -115.791       44.635     -115.718
Trail Creek-Loon............................................       44.506     -114.960       44.543     -114.859
Trail Creek-Marble..........................................       44.952     -114.935       44.841     -115.009
Trapper Creek...............................................       44.504     -114.618       44.597     -114.603
Trapper Creek...............................................       44.774     -115.405       44.831     -115.514
Tumbull Creek...............................................       45.523     -116.093       45.533     -116.136
Twelvemile Creek............................................       44.497     -114.615       44.478     -114.565
Twin Creek..................................................       45.591     -114.082       45.608     -113.965
Twist Creek.................................................       45.633     -114.961       45.628     -114.926
Tyndall Creek...............................................       44.562     -115.749       44.580     -115.685
Unnamed.....................................................       44.618     -113.964       44.670     -114.018
Unnamed.....................................................       44.670     -114.018       44.667     -114.025
Unnamed.....................................................       44.632     -113.903       44.618     -113.964
Unnamed.....................................................       44.565     -113.881       44.562     -113.877
Unnamed.....................................................       44.565     -113.881       44.569     -113.886
Unnamed - didgitized........................................       44.766     -113.519       44.769     -113.515
Unnamed - digitized.........................................       44.562     -113.877       44.557     -113.881
Unnamed - digitized.........................................       44.565     -113.879       44.565     -113.881
Unnamed - digitized.........................................       44.667     -114.025       44.665     -114.030
Unnamed - Diversion between Geertson Creek and Kirtley Creek       45.175     -113.816       45.132     -113.770
Unnamed - North Fork Lake Creek.............................       45.015     -114.068       45.009     -114.017
Unnamed - North Fork Mayflower Creek........................       45.245     -115.647       45.254     -115.635
Unnamed - Off Buck Creek....................................       44.767     -115.485       44.761     -115.477
Unnamed - Off Burntlog Creek................................       44.686     -115.468       44.680     -115.455
Unnamed - Off Corral Creek..................................       44.840     -114.199       44.804     -114.225
Unnamed - Off Deep Creek....................................       45.080     -114.092       45.064     -114.122
Unnamed - Off Mckay Creek...................................       44.445     -114.526       44.477     -114.526
Unnamed - Off Mormon Creek..................................       44.509     -115.676       44.498     -115.674
Unnamed - Off Rice Creek....................................       44.561     -115.644       44.551     -115.656
Unnamed - Off South Fork Salmon River.......................       44.556     -115.683       44.552     -115.707
Unnamed - Off Trail Creek...................................       44.599     -115.803       44.626     -115.746
Unnamed - Off Unnamed to Buck Creek.........................       44.767     -115.484       44.769     -115.479
Unnamed - Off Unnamed to Burntlog Creek.....................       44.730     -115.482       44.720     -115.463
Unnamed - to Knapp Creek....................................       44.421     -115.036       44.433     -115.004
Unnamed 1 - Off Curtis Creek................................       44.586     -115.804       44.609     -115.746
Unnamed 2 - Off Curtis Creek................................       44.568     -115.794       44.594     -115.753
Unnamed Lake on Meadow Creek................................       44.890     -115.351               ...........

[[Page 813]]

 
Unnamed to Bearskin Creek...................................       44.374     -115.500       44.358     -115.523
Unnamed Trib 1-Off Trapper Creek............................       44.794     -115.462       44.800     -115.452
Unnamed Trib 2-Off Trapper Creek............................       44.795     -115.441       44.781     -115.427
Unnamed Trib 3- Off Trapper Creek...........................       44.772     -115.434       44.793     -115.465
Unnamed Tributary to Pete Creek.............................       45.281     -115.955       45.272     -115.967
Unnamed Tributary to Threemile Creek........................       45.323     -115.912       45.317     -115.894
Unnamed Tributary to West Fork Elk Creek....................       45.069     -115.483       45.095     -115.514
Valley Creek................................................       44.377     -114.961       44.225     -114.928
Van Buren Creek.............................................       45.536     -116.169       45.532     -116.083
Van Horn Creek..............................................       44.785     -114.338       44.757     -114.257
Vanity Creek................................................       44.481     -115.077       44.553     -115.062
Vein Creek..................................................       45.008     -115.472       45.056     -115.455
Victor Creek................................................       45.147     -115.937       45.182     -115.822
Victor Creek................................................       45.510     -116.101       45.515     -116.127
Vine Creek..................................................       45.638     -114.001       45.611     -113.967
Wapiti Creek................................................       45.335     -115.022       45.309     -115.074
Wardenhoff Creek............................................       44.822     -115.518       44.832     -115.568
Warm Lake...................................................       44.645     -115.670               ...........
Warm Lake Creek.............................................       44.653     -115.662       44.666     -115.699
Warm Spring Creek...........................................       44.609     -114.482       44.653     -114.737
Warm Springs Creek..........................................       44.059     -114.614       44.254     -114.676
Warren Creek................................................       45.237     -115.676       45.397     -115.593
Weasel Creek................................................       44.888     -114.273       44.887     -114.306
Webfoot Creek...............................................       45.217     -115.696       45.237     -115.676
West Fork Buckhorn Creek....................................       44.917     -115.743       44.900     -115.858
West Fork Camas Creek.......................................       44.819     -114.655       44.831     -114.504
West Fork Chamberlain Creek.................................       45.463     -115.185       45.383     -115.167
West Fork East Fork Salmon River............................       43.918     -114.656       43.929     -114.555
West Fork Elk Creek.........................................       44.480     -115.521       44.479     -115.458
West Fork Elk Creek.........................................       45.061     -115.520       45.147     -115.512
West Fork Enos Creek........................................       45.148     -115.804       45.143     -115.837
West Fork Hayden Creek......................................       44.697     -113.823       44.705     -113.757
West Fork Herd Creek........................................       43.990     -114.225       44.058     -114.234
West Fork Indian Creek......................................       45.489     -114.199       45.475     -114.139
West Fork Little Loon Creek.................................       44.666     -114.977       44.710     -114.935
West Fork Mayfield Creek....................................       44.539     -114.798       44.465     -114.732
West Fork Monumental Creek..................................       45.034     -115.276       45.005     -115.140
West Fork Morgan Creek......................................       44.734     -114.394       44.681     -114.244
West Fork North Fork Salmon River...........................       45.667     -114.003       45.654     -113.971
West Fork Pahsimeroi River..................................       44.092     -113.750       44.157     -113.704
West Fork Rapid River.......................................       45.230     -116.538       45.307     -116.420
West Fork Springfield Creek.................................       44.780     -115.383       44.786     -115.321
West Fork Thomas Creek......................................       44.682     -115.055       44.705     -115.028
West Fork Whimstick Creek...................................       45.294     -115.031       45.291     -115.037
West Fork Yankee Fork.......................................       44.388     -114.933       44.351     -114.727
West Pass Creek.............................................       43.893     -114.419       43.988     -114.491
Whangdoodle Creek...........................................       45.150     -115.797       45.181     -115.738
Whimstick Creek.............................................       45.241     -115.054       45.378     -115.000
White Goat Creek............................................       44.726     -114.416       44.741     -114.489
Wickiup Creek-Loon..........................................       44.598     -114.659       44.606     -114.597
Willey Creek................................................       45.043     -115.628       45.061     -115.604
Williams Lake...............................................       45.016     -113.976               ...........
Willow Basket Creek.........................................       45.192     -115.895       45.186     -115.832
Willow Creek................................................       44.447     -114.446       44.428     -114.490
Willow Creek................................................       45.356     -115.858       45.331     -115.950
Wilson Creek................................................       45.143     -114.589       45.033     -114.724
Wimpey Creek................................................       45.098     -113.721       45.176     -113.598
Wind River..................................................       45.605     -115.918       45.455     -115.942
Winnemucca Creek............................................       44.485     -114.963       44.436     -115.059
Woods Creek.................................................       45.535     -114.443       45.505     -114.460
Woodtick Creek..............................................       44.973     -114.192       45.046     -114.283
Woodtick Creek..............................................       44.808     -114.680       44.884     -114.626
Wright Creek................................................       44.746     -113.836       44.783     -113.755
Wyoming Creek...............................................       44.355     -115.342       44.425     -115.321
Yankee Fork.................................................       44.510     -114.589       44.270     -114.735
Yellow Jacket Creek.........................................       45.145     -116.445       45.137     -116.413
Yellowbelly Creek...........................................       43.981     -114.928       44.000     -114.869
Yellowbelly Lake............................................       44.001     -114.876               ...........
Yellowjacket Creek..........................................       45.103     -114.536       44.892     -114.645
Zena Creek..................................................       45.041     -115.748       45.057     -115.732
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 814]]

    (iii) No waterbodies are excluded from critical habitat designation 
in this unit.
    (iv) Map of Unit 27, Salmon River - East Half follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.029
    

[[Page 815]]



                 (36) Unit 27: Salmon River - West Half

    (i) The entire Salmon River unit consists of 7,376.5 km (4,583.5 mi) 
of streams and 1,683.8 ha (4,160.6 ac) of lakes and reservoirs. The unit 
is located in central Idaho.
    (ii) See paragraph (e)(35)(ii) of this entry for a complete list of 
individual waterbodies in this unit.
    (iii) No waterbodies are excluded from critical habitat designation 
in this unit.
    (iv) Map of Unit 27, Salmon River - West Half follows:

[[Page 816]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.030

                     (37) Unit 28: Little Lost River

    (i) This unit consists of 89.2 km (55.4 mi) of streams. The unit is 
located in eastern Idaho.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 817]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camp Creek..................................................       44.408     -113.433       44.411     -113.418
Firebox Creek...............................................       44.434     -113.363       44.443     -113.380
Hawley Creek................................................       44.361     -113.430       44.379     -113.404
Iron Creek..................................................       44.387     -113.435       44.390     -113.461
Iron Creek..................................................       44.389     -113.437       44.387     -113.435
Jackson Creek...............................................       44.372     -113.454       44.380     -113.413
Left Fork Iron Creek........................................       44.384     -113.447       44.387     -113.435
Mill Creek..................................................       44.387     -113.345       44.357     -113.375
North Fork Squaw Creek......................................       44.379     -113.330       44.356     -113.330
Redrock Creek...............................................       44.417     -113.433       44.414     -113.419
Right Fork Little Lost River................................       44.449     -113.370       44.446     -113.378
Sawmill Creek...............................................       44.452     -113.376       44.204     -113.299
Slide Creek.................................................       44.433     -113.442       44.432     -113.437
Smithie Fork................................................       44.430     -113.394       44.467     -113.385
Squaw Creek.................................................       44.375     -113.306       44.375     -113.306
Timber Creek................................................       44.394     -113.409       44.453     -113.450
Unnamed - Off Squaw Creek...................................       44.360     -113.315       44.359     -113.326
Warm Creek..................................................       44.310     -113.302       44.306     -113.338
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) No waterbodies are excluded from critical habitat designation 
in this unit.
    (iv) Map of Unit 28, Little Lost River follows:

[[Page 818]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.031

                 (38) Unit 29: Coeur d'Alene River Basin

    (i) This unit consists of 821.5 km (510.5 mi) of streams and 
12,606.9 ha (31,152.1 ac) of lakes and reservoirs. The unit is located 
in northern Idaho.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 819]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bad Bear Creek..............................................       47.045     -115.460       47.045     -115.460
Bean Creek..................................................       47.005     -115.271       46.993     -115.193
Beaver Creek................................................       47.083     -115.356       47.064     -115.481
Big Elk Creek...............................................       47.804     -116.276       47.775     -116.374
Bluebells Creek.............................................       47.041     -115.157       47.050     -115.149
Boulder Creek...............................................       47.227     -116.020       47.149     -115.963
Buckskin Creek..............................................       47.987     -116.226       48.034     -116.200
California Creek............................................       47.041     -115.160       47.004     -115.178
Cascade Creek (St. Joe trib)................................       47.044     -115.171       47.057     -115.162
Coeur d'Alene Lake..........................................       47.525     -116.794               ...........
Coeur d'Alene River.........................................       47.460     -116.799       47.557     -116.258
Cougar Creek................................................       47.640     -116.192       47.732     -116.306
Delaney Creek...............................................       47.062     -115.998       47.059     -115.987
Dolly Creek.................................................       47.126     -115.255       47.140     -115.223
Downey Creek................................................       47.778     -116.037       47.746     -116.075
Eagle Creek.................................................       47.644     -115.922       47.652     -115.904
East Fork Downey Creek......................................       47.746     -116.075       47.723     -116.079
East Fork Steamboat Creek...................................       47.716     -116.200       47.787     -116.205
Entente Creek...............................................       47.231     -115.494       47.271     -115.478
Falls Creek.................................................       47.787     -115.955       47.811     -115.878
Fly Creek...................................................       47.113     -115.386       47.081     -115.490
Freezeout Creek.............................................       47.071     -116.009       47.027     -116.036
Gold Creek..................................................       47.151     -115.409       47.224     -115.354
Heller Creek................................................       47.061     -115.221       47.091     -115.177
Homestead Creek.............................................       47.109     -116.058       47.123     -116.038
Independence Creek..........................................       47.877     -116.209       47.862     -116.428
Little Lost Fork............................................       47.862     -116.002       47.862     -116.046
Marble Creek................................................       47.251     -116.022       47.021     -116.026
Medicine Creek..............................................       47.028     -115.150       47.060     -115.132
Mill Creek..................................................       46.997     -115.227       46.971     -115.214
Mosquito Creek..............................................       48.018     -116.245       48.055     -116.229
My Creek....................................................       46.971     -115.377       46.946     -115.375
North Fork Bean Creek.......................................       47.005     -115.235       47.014     -115.199
North Fork Coeur d'Alene River..............................       47.557     -116.258       48.005     -116.322
North Grizzly Creek.........................................       47.753     -116.054       47.717     -116.061
Prichard Creek..............................................       47.658     -115.977       47.644     -115.922
Quartz Creek................................................       47.201     -115.517       47.231     -115.494
Red Ives Creek..............................................       47.056     -115.352       47.043     -115.279
Ruby Creek..................................................       46.983     -115.368       46.961     -115.431
Sentinel Creek..............................................       47.861     -116.001       47.842     -116.032
Sherlock Creek..............................................       47.064     -115.219       47.064     -115.138
Shoshone Creek..............................................       47.703     -115.972       47.922     -115.995
Simmons Creek...............................................       47.137     -115.401       47.090     -115.232
Spruce Creek................................................       47.982     -116.226       47.993     -116.333
St. Joe River...............................................       47.354     -116.726       47.005     -115.119
Steamboat Creek.............................................       47.662     -116.155       47.716     -116.200
Tepee Creek.................................................       47.881     -116.133       47.739     -116.300
Timber Creek................................................       47.018     -115.369       46.991     -115.463
Tinear Creek................................................       47.002     -115.231       46.961     -115.256
Ulm Creek...................................................       47.861     -116.001       47.886     -115.974
West Fork Downey Creek......................................       47.746     -116.075       47.727     -116.107
West Fork Eagle Creek.......................................       47.652     -115.904       47.750     -115.804
West Fork Steamboat Creek...................................       47.716     -116.200       47.736     -116.278
Wisdom Creek................................................       47.009     -115.134       47.027     -115.088
Yankee Bar Creek............................................       47.049     -115.192       47.021     -115.195
Yellow Dog Creek............................................       47.776     -116.050       47.736     -116.114
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) No waterbodies are excluded from critical habitat designation 
in this unit.
    (iv) Map of Unit 29, Coeur d'Alene River Basin follows:

[[Page 820]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.032

                   (39) Unit 30: Kootenai River Basin

    (i) This unit consists of 522.5 km (324.7 mi) of streams and 
12,089.2 ha (29,873.0 ac) of lakes and reservoirs. The unit is located 
in northern Idaho and northwestern Montana.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 821]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ball Creek..................................................       48.787     -116.410       48.794     -116.420
Bear Creek..................................................       48.162     -115.654       48.184     -115.508
Blue Sky Creek..............................................       48.895     -114.776       48.887     -114.752
Boulder Creek...............................................       48.625     -116.052       48.613     -116.070
Bull Lake...................................................       48.247     -115.852               ...........
Callahan Creek..............................................       48.457     -115.882       48.435     -116.013
Caribou Creek...............................................       48.664     -116.400       48.659     -116.402
Clarence Creek..............................................       48.889     -114.799       48.930     -114.825
Deep Creek..................................................       48.708     -116.384       48.664     -116.400
East Fork Pipe Creek........................................       48.616     -115.619       48.692     -115.594
Fisher River................................................       48.069     -115.375       48.366     -115.324
Grave Creek.................................................       48.798     -114.953       48.927     -114.751
Keeler Creek................................................       48.360     -115.852       48.335     -115.961
Kootenai River..............................................       48.617     -116.048       48.617     -116.048
Lake Creek..................................................       48.360     -115.852       48.282     -115.859
Lake Koocanusa..............................................       48.727     -115.244               ...........
Libby Creek.................................................       48.121     -115.544       48.121     -115.544
Long Canyon Creek...........................................       48.961     -116.527       48.784     -116.652
Moyie River.................................................       48.715     -116.186       48.732     -116.176
Myrtle Creek................................................       48.739     -116.412       48.707     -116.430
North Callahan Creek........................................       48.435     -116.013       48.506     -116.192
North Fork Keeler Creek.....................................       48.342     -115.897       48.362     -115.934
O'Brien Creek...............................................       48.448     -115.867       48.531     -115.763
Pipe Creek..................................................       48.424     -115.607       48.616     -115.619
Quartz Creek................................................       48.438     -115.639       48.573     -115.690
Snow Creek..................................................       48.664     -116.403       48.665     -116.409
South Callahan Creek........................................       48.414     -116.049       48.435     -116.013
South Fork Keeler Creek.....................................       48.320     -115.927       48.333     -115.919
Tobacco River...............................................       48.897     -115.127       48.798     -114.953
Trout Creek.................................................       48.840     -116.411       48.835     -116.420
West Fisher Creek...........................................       48.069     -115.375       48.052     -115.555
West Fork Quartz Creek......................................       48.479     -115.654       48.523     -115.750
Wigwam River................................................       49.000     -114.801       48.965     -114.856
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Waterbodies associated with the following habitat conservation 
plan (HCP) totaling 66.2 km (41.1 mi) of streams have been excluded from 
critical habitat designation under section 4(b)(2) of the Act in this 
unit. These are waterbodies within the geographic area covered by the 
Plum Creek Native Fish Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP), including 
portions of the Kootenai River and Lake Koocanusa CHSUs.
    (iv) Map of Unit 30, Kootenai River Basin follows:

[[Page 822]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.033

                  (40) Unit 31: Clark Fork River Basin

    (i) This unit consists of 5,356.0 km (3,328.1 mi) of streams and 
119,620.1 ha (295,586.6 ac) of lakes and reservoirs. The unit is located 
in northwestern Montana and northern Idaho.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 823]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Akokala Creek...............................................       48.881     -114.199       48.920     -114.167
Akokala Lake................................................       48.879     -114.199               ...........
Albert Creek................................................       46.972     -114.311       46.972     -114.311
Alder Creek.................................................       46.442     -113.826       46.471     -113.777
Arrow Lake..................................................       48.706     -113.885               ...........
Babcock Creek...............................................       47.366     -113.270       47.359     -113.353
Barker Creek................................................       46.100     -113.116       46.163     -113.116
Basin Creek.................................................       47.966     -112.996       47.935     -113.075
Bear Creek..................................................       48.234     -113.567       48.296     -113.384
Beatrice Creek..............................................       47.794     -115.103       47.775     -115.153
Belmont Creek...............................................       46.954     -113.570       47.054     -113.642
Bench Creek.................................................       48.869     -117.003       48.876     -117.014
Big Creek...................................................       48.604     -114.164       48.515     -114.327
Big Salmon Creek............................................       47.586     -113.420       47.567     -113.495
Big Salmon Lake.............................................       47.602     -113.387               ...........
Bitterroot River............................................       46.861     -114.118       45.944     -114.129
Blackfoot River.............................................       46.870     -113.891       47.043     -112.409
Blodgett Creek..............................................       46.304     -114.154       46.304     -114.154
Blue Joint Creek............................................       45.695     -114.314       45.600     -114.519
Boles Creek.................................................       47.119     -113.547       47.099     -113.731
Boulder Creek...............................................       46.343     -113.077       46.478     -113.238
Boulder Creek...............................................       45.817     -114.239       45.842     -114.272
Bowl Creek..................................................       47.996     -113.058       47.966     -112.996
Bowles Creek................................................       46.192     -113.748       46.207     -113.813
Bowman Creek................................................       48.906     -114.118       48.974     -114.064
Bowman Lake.................................................       48.864     -114.161               ...........
Bull River..................................................       48.024     -115.845       48.193     -115.816
Bunker Creek................................................       47.830     -113.416       47.829     -113.582
Burnt Fork Bitterroot River.................................       46.542     -114.100       46.304     -113.838
Butte Cabin Creek...........................................       46.482     -113.684       46.520     -113.768
Cabinet Gorge Reservoir.....................................       48.036     -115.873               ...........
Cache Creek.................................................       46.813     -114.640       46.725     -114.759
Calispell Creek.............................................       48.321     -117.308       48.321     -117.308
Calispell Lake..............................................       48.274     -117.333               ...........
Camas Creek.................................................       48.664     -113.935       48.737     -113.883
Caribou Creek...............................................       48.748     -116.865       48.798     -116.815
Carpp Creek.................................................       46.025     -113.428       46.032     -113.525
Cedar Creek.................................................       47.048     -115.044       47.178     -114.863
Cedar Creek.................................................       48.893     -116.916       48.880     -116.960
Cedar Creek.................................................       48.742     -117.412       48.845     -117.522
Cerulean Lake...............................................       48.872     -114.057               ...........
Char Creek..................................................       48.291     -116.074       48.262     -116.068
Clack Creek.................................................       48.012     -113.090       47.988     -113.106
Clark Fork River............................................       46.601     -113.037       47.961     -115.734
Clearwater Lake.............................................       47.385     -113.560               ...........
Clearwater River............................................       47.067     -113.391       47.395     -113.531
Clearwater River, E Fk......................................       47.342     -113.496       47.352     -113.581
Coal Creek..................................................       48.690     -114.194       48.698     -114.540
Cold Creek..................................................       47.547     -113.920       47.584     -113.757
Cooper Gulch................................................       47.544     -115.592       47.513     -115.648
Copper Creek................................................       47.009     -112.558       47.060     -112.753
Copper Creek................................................       46.068     -113.539       45.948     -113.570
Cottonwood Creek............................................       47.025     -113.282       47.161     -113.346
Crow Creek..................................................       47.539     -115.547       47.525     -115.558
Crow Creek..................................................       47.525     -115.558       47.539     -115.547
Cyclone Creek...............................................       48.665     -114.239       48.712     -114.392
Cyclone Lake................................................       48.705     -114.301               ...........
Daly Creek..................................................       46.168     -113.911       46.250     -113.807
Danaher Creek...............................................       47.445     -113.183       47.275     -113.014
Dead Horse Creek............................................       48.663     -114.279       48.659     -114.296
Deer Creek..................................................       45.595     -114.322       45.570     -114.510
Divide Creek................................................       46.043     -113.819       46.064     -113.968
Doctor Creek................................................       47.402     -113.485       47.407     -113.480
Doctor Lake.................................................       47.404     -113.481               ...........
Dolly Varden Creek..........................................       48.066     -113.245       47.995     -113.185
Dry Lake Creek..............................................       47.259     -113.904       47.308     -113.894
Dunham Creek................................................       47.103     -113.156       47.238     -113.317
East Branch LeClerc Creek...................................       48.534     -117.283       48.673     -117.189
East Fork Bitterroot River..................................       45.944     -114.129       45.911     -113.596
East Fork Bull River........................................       48.109     -115.783       48.091     -115.645
East Fork Creek.............................................       48.241     -116.113       48.262     -116.040

[[Page 824]]

 
East Fork Crow Creek........................................       47.525     -115.558       47.519     -115.556
East Fork Reservoir.........................................       46.118     -113.375               ...........
East Fork Rock Creek........................................       46.103     -113.369       46.200     -113.500
East Fork Small Creek.......................................       48.328     -117.355       48.371     -117.399
East Fork Strawberry Creek..................................       48.064     -113.031       48.092     -112.992
East Fork Swift Creek.......................................       48.687     -114.583       48.757     -114.585
East River..................................................       48.371     -116.820       48.353     -116.853
Elk Creek...................................................       47.544     -113.742       47.480     -113.857
Fish Creek..................................................       47.003     -114.699       46.927     -114.697
Fishtrap Creek..............................................       47.713     -115.059       47.817     -115.152
Fitzsimmons Creek...........................................       48.735     -114.734       48.751     -114.618
Flathead Lake...............................................       47.885     -114.134               ...........
Flathead River..............................................       47.365     -114.777       48.467     -114.070
Flint Creek.................................................       46.528     -113.227       46.528     -113.227
Foster Creek................................................       46.164     -113.120       46.284     -113.110
Fourth of July Creek........................................       48.556     -117.273       48.557     -117.264
Fred Burr Creek.............................................       46.348     -114.152       46.357     -114.316
Frozen Creek................................................       49.000     -114.678       48.990     -114.738
Frozen Lake.................................................       48.999     -114.681               ...........
Gateway Creek...............................................       48.030     -113.022       48.046     -112.959
Goat Creek..................................................       47.749     -113.829       47.760     -113.657
Gold Creek..................................................       46.919     -113.677       47.058     -113.745
Gold Creek..................................................       46.398     -113.904       46.363     -113.931
Gold Creek..................................................       47.971     -116.455       47.953     -116.452
Gold Creek..................................................       48.811     -117.032       48.821     -116.974
Gordon Creek................................................       47.423     -113.439       47.434     -113.474
Granite Creek...............................................       48.145     -113.377       48.227     -113.333
Granite Creek...............................................       48.087     -116.428       48.060     -116.330
Granite Creek...............................................       48.639     -116.864       48.700     -117.030
Grant Creek.................................................       46.868     -114.104       47.036     -113.955
Graves Creek................................................       47.682     -115.410       47.718     -115.381
Grouse Creek................................................       48.403     -116.478       48.483     -116.229
Hallowat Creek..............................................       48.574     -114.317       48.625     -114.425
Harrison Creek..............................................       48.529     -113.751       48.574     -113.702
Harrison Lake...............................................       48.516     -113.771               ...........
Harvey Creek................................................       46.581     -113.574       46.707     -113.373
Hogback Creek...............................................       46.410     -113.703       46.440     -113.626
Holland Creek...............................................       47.451     -113.582       47.451     -113.572
Holland Lake................................................       47.448     -113.598               ...........
Hughes Creek................................................       45.621     -114.304       45.657     -114.044
Hughes Fork.................................................       48.805     -116.924       48.893     -117.001
Hungry Horse Reservoir......................................       48.201     -113.798               ...........
Indian Creek................................................       48.610     -116.837       48.634     -116.790
Indian Creek................................................       48.242     -117.153       48.299     -117.152
Jackson Creek...............................................       48.856     -117.002       48.854     -117.024
Jim Creek...................................................       47.648     -113.793       47.587     -113.898
Jocko River.................................................       47.195     -113.853       47.201     -113.924
Johnson Creek...............................................       48.131     -116.226       48.139     -116.230
Keokee Creek................................................       48.389     -116.698       48.407     -116.685
Kintla Creek................................................       48.975     -114.250       48.986     -114.064
Kintla Lake.................................................       48.959     -114.307               ...........
Kishenehn Creek.............................................       48.950     -114.412       49.000     -114.365
Lake Alva...................................................       47.313     -113.582               ...........
Lake Inez...................................................       47.282     -113.567               ...........
Lake Isabel.................................................       48.422     -113.494               ...........
Lake Marshall...............................................       47.288     -113.650               ...........
Lake McDonald...............................................       48.583     -113.926               ...........
Lake Pend Oreille...........................................       48.152     -116.410               ...........
Landers Fork................................................       46.965     -112.563       47.099     -112.569
LeClerc Creek...............................................       48.518     -117.284       48.534     -117.283
Lick Creek..................................................       45.939     -113.679       45.938     -113.718
Lightning Creek.............................................       48.140     -116.192       48.353     -116.176
Lime Creek..................................................       48.907     -116.957       48.894     -116.965
Lincoln Creek...............................................       48.592     -113.767       48.596     -113.759
Lincoln Lake................................................       48.591     -113.771               ...........
Lindbergh Lake..............................................       47.381     -113.734               ...........
Lion Creek..................................................       47.681     -113.816       47.670     -113.711
Lion Creek..................................................       48.736     -116.832       48.725     -116.673
Little Boulder Creek........................................       45.716     -114.278       45.726     -114.228
Little Joe Creek............................................       47.269     -115.141       47.297     -115.121
Little Salmon Creek.........................................       47.587     -113.611       47.654     -113.361

[[Page 825]]

 
Little Stony Creek..........................................       46.293     -113.683       46.286     -113.775
Lodgepole Creek.............................................       47.182     -113.203       47.229     -113.271
Lodgepole Creek.............................................       48.115     -113.264       48.141     -113.133
Logging Creek...............................................       48.776     -114.020       48.784     -114.002
Logging Lake................................................       48.758     -114.075               ...........
Lolo Creek..................................................       46.712     -114.533       46.743     -114.061
Long Creek..................................................       48.157     -113.530       48.094     -113.497
Lost Creek..................................................       47.870     -113.849       47.873     -113.825
Lost Creek..................................................       47.118     -115.109       47.118     -115.109
Lost Horse Creek............................................       46.120     -114.306       46.120     -114.306
Lower Quartz Lake...........................................       48.807     -114.172               ...........
Lunch Creek.................................................       48.825     -117.399       48.820     -117.389
Malcom Creek................................................       48.982     -116.940       48.980     -116.931
Marshall Creek..............................................       47.279     -113.598       47.276     -113.727
Martin Creek................................................       45.930     -113.724       46.009     -113.812
Mathias Creek...............................................       48.669     -114.423       48.647     -114.472
McDonald Creek..............................................       48.506     -114.006       48.646     -113.848
McDonald Lake...............................................       47.421     -113.977               ...........
Meadow Creek................................................       46.128     -113.429       46.097     -113.441
Meadow Creek................................................       45.908     -113.781       45.813     -113.791
Middle Branch Le Clerc Creek................................       48.585     -117.262       48.654     -117.218
Middle Fork East River......................................       48.371     -116.820       48.386     -116.678
Middle Fork Flathead River..................................       48.468     -114.070       47.996     -113.058
Middle Fork Rock Creek......................................       46.001     -113.526       46.223     -113.522
Middle Quartz Lake..........................................       48.822     -114.142               ...........
Mill Creek..................................................       48.489     -117.266       48.447     -117.139
Mission Creek...............................................       47.320     -113.990       47.324     -113.974
Mission Reservoir...........................................       47.319     -114.008               ...........
Monture Creek...............................................       47.020     -113.236       47.268     -113.181
Moose Creek.................................................       45.922     -113.728       46.009     -113.708
Mormon Creek................................................       46.756     -114.115       46.697     -114.205
Morrell Creek...............................................       47.141     -113.461       47.342     -113.472
Morris Creek................................................       48.208     -116.081       48.224     -116.118
Morrison Creek..............................................       48.110     -113.311       48.237     -113.261
Nez Perce Fork..............................................       45.802     -114.268       45.734     -114.473
North Fork Blackfoot River..................................       46.985     -113.130       47.196     -112.887
North Fork Cold Creek.......................................       47.562     -113.812       47.555     -113.906
North Fork East River.......................................       48.371     -116.820       48.449     -116.735
North Fork Fish Creek.......................................       46.907     -114.806       46.932     -114.924
North Fork Flathead River...................................       48.469     -114.073       49.000     -114.475
North Fork Granite Creek....................................       48.700     -117.030       48.771     -117.067
North Fork Indian Creek.....................................       48.658     -116.719       48.634     -116.790
North Fork Jocko River......................................       47.201     -113.924       47.226     -113.816
North Fork Little Joe Creek.................................       47.203     -115.275       47.269     -115.141
North Fork Lost Creek.......................................       47.873     -113.825       47.896     -113.738
North Fork Of South Fork Tacoma Creek.......................       48.399     -117.362       48.435     -117.483
North Fork Rock Creek.......................................       46.212     -113.697       46.232     -113.756
North Gold Creek............................................       47.973     -116.453       47.975     -116.427
Noxon Rapids Reservoir......................................       47.892     -115.675               ...........
Nyack Creek.................................................       48.452     -113.797       48.490     -113.701
O'Brien Creek...............................................       46.837     -114.299       46.850     -114.103
Ole Creek...................................................       48.283     -113.599       48.316     -113.464
Oregon Gulch................................................       47.143     -114.968       47.122     -115.021
Overwhich Creek.............................................       45.674     -114.308       45.717     -114.081
Pack River..................................................       48.320     -116.383       48.603     -116.637
Painted Rocks Reservoir.....................................       45.701     -114.294               ...........
Park Creek..................................................       48.310     -113.614       48.420     -113.509
Pend Oreille River..........................................       48.989     -117.349       48.251     -116.538
Petty Creek.................................................       46.992     -114.447       46.849     -114.439
Piper Creek.................................................       47.675     -113.816       47.622     -113.956
Placid Creek................................................       47.116     -113.542       47.178     -113.675
Placid Lake.................................................       47.119     -113.525               ...........
Pocket Creek................................................       48.934     -114.079       48.955     -114.104
Poorman Creek...............................................       46.897     -112.653       46.897     -112.653
Porcupine Creek.............................................       48.267     -116.124       48.253     -116.157
Post Creek..................................................       47.416     -113.961       47.399     -113.893
Priest Lake.................................................       48.588     -116.865               ...........
Priest River................................................       48.173     -116.893       48.490     -116.905
Prospect Creek..............................................       47.592     -115.358       47.568     -115.677
Quartz Creek................................................       48.815     -114.166       48.839     -114.004
Quartz Lake.................................................       48.829     -114.102               ...........

[[Page 826]]

 
Quintonkon Creek............................................       48.013     -113.768       48.026     -113.708
Railroad Creek..............................................       46.158     -113.886       46.167     -113.816
Rainbow Creek...............................................       48.855     -114.054       48.869     -114.054
Rainy Lake..................................................       47.339     -113.595               ...........
Ranch Creek.................................................       46.468     -113.578       46.583     -113.679
Rapid Creek.................................................       47.372     -113.055       47.382     -113.026
Rattle Creek................................................       48.326     -116.173       48.314     -116.101
Rattlesnake Creek...........................................       46.867     -113.986       47.098     -113.910
Red Meadow Creek............................................       48.805     -114.325       48.773     -114.543
Reynolds Creek..............................................       45.947     -113.718       45.957     -113.682
Rock Creek..................................................       46.725     -113.683       46.223     -113.522
Rock Creek..................................................       47.975     -115.744       48.044     -115.654
Rock Creek..................................................       48.923     -116.966       48.906     -116.971
Ross Fork...................................................       46.184     -113.526       46.184     -113.526
Ruby Creek..................................................       48.556     -117.343       48.568     -117.510
Saint Mary's Lake...........................................       47.261     -113.923               ...........
Saint Regis River...........................................       47.297     -115.090       47.349     -115.292
Salmon Lake.................................................       47.093     -113.404               ...........
Sand Basin Creek............................................       46.197     -113.704       46.153     -113.688
Savage Creek................................................       48.226     -116.029       48.248     -116.097
Scalp Creek.................................................       47.982     -113.042       47.957     -113.082
Schafer Creek...............................................       48.038     -113.270       48.071     -113.251
Seeley Lake.................................................       47.194     -113.510               ...........
Shorty Creek................................................       48.851     -114.594       48.818     -114.614
Skalkaho Creek..............................................       46.220     -114.163       46.071     -113.818
Slate Creek.................................................       45.698     -114.287       45.712     -114.166
Slate Creek.................................................       48.923     -117.333       48.927     -117.318
Sleeping Child Creek........................................       46.161     -114.160       46.033     -113.815
Small Creek.................................................       48.321     -117.308       48.337     -117.410
Soup Creek..................................................       47.837     -113.844       47.812     -113.751
South Boulder Creek.........................................       46.415     -113.201       46.415     -113.201
South Fork Bull River.......................................       48.170     -115.789       48.193     -115.816
South Fork Coal Creek.......................................       48.680     -114.346       48.674     -114.472
South Fork Fish Creek.......................................       46.927     -114.697       46.813     -114.640
South Fork Flathead River...................................       47.830     -113.416       47.833     -113.417
South Fork Granite Creek....................................       48.700     -117.030       48.691     -117.134
South Fork Indian Creek.....................................       48.624     -116.717       48.634     -116.790
South Fork Jocko River......................................       47.103     -113.768       47.195     -113.853
South Fork Little Joe Creek.................................       47.172     -115.224       47.269     -115.141
South Fork Lolo Creek.......................................       46.762     -114.266       46.605     -114.309
South Fork Lost Creek.......................................       47.868     -113.738       47.873     -113.825
South Fork Tacoma Creek.....................................       48.394     -117.324       48.432     -117.507
South Woodward Creek........................................       47.754     -113.858       47.717     -113.858
Spotted Bear River..........................................       47.924     -113.526       47.877     -113.212
Squeezer Creek..............................................       47.750     -113.816       47.717     -113.729
Stillwater River............................................       48.604     -114.657       48.789     -114.686
Stony Creek.................................................       46.274     -113.731       46.274     -113.731
Storm Lake Creek............................................       46.169     -113.154       46.075     -113.268
Strawberry Creek............................................       47.996     -113.058       48.111     -113.028
Strong Creek................................................       48.243     -116.303       48.264     -116.279
Sullivan Creek..............................................       48.050     -113.689       47.879     -113.657
Sullivan Creek..............................................       48.865     -117.371       48.955     -117.069
Sullivan Springs............................................       48.088     -116.412       48.084     -116.388
Swamp Creek.................................................       47.920     -115.689       47.994     -115.565
Swan Lake...................................................       47.955     -113.895               ...........
Swan River..................................................       47.346     -113.742       47.404     -113.718
Swift Creek.................................................       48.481     -114.425       48.654     -114.551
Tacoma Creek................................................       48.391     -117.289       48.445     -117.508
The Thorofare...............................................       48.740     -116.843       48.766     -116.865
Thompson River..............................................       47.576     -115.241       47.713     -115.059
Tillicum Creek..............................................       48.725     -117.071       48.729     -117.083
Tin Cup Creek...............................................       45.973     -114.349       46.016     -114.168
Tolan Creek.................................................       45.777     -113.827       45.856     -113.913
Trail Creek.................................................       48.013     -113.020       48.012     -112.946
Trail Creek.................................................       48.924     -114.386       48.933     -114.536
Trapper Creek...............................................       48.796     -116.897       48.851     -116.879
Trestle Creek...............................................       48.351     -116.235       48.283     -116.353
Trout Creek.................................................       47.030     -114.966       47.106     -114.897
Trout Lake..................................................       48.680     -113.910               ...........
Twelvemile Creek............................................       47.349     -115.292       47.465     -115.325
Twin Lakes Creek............................................       46.070     -113.221       46.169     -113.153

[[Page 827]]

 
Two Bear Creek..............................................       46.111     -114.010       46.094     -113.897
Two Mouth Creek.............................................       48.674     -116.677       48.687     -116.837
Uleda Creek.................................................       48.388     -116.708       48.362     -116.696
Upper Kintla Lake...........................................       48.976     -114.176               ...........
Upper Priest Lake...........................................       48.785     -116.889               ...........
Upper Priest River..........................................       48.799     -116.912       48.995     -116.942
Upper Stillwater Lake.......................................       48.588     -114.637               ...........
Upper Whitefish Lake........................................       48.687     -114.579               ...........
Vermilion River.............................................       47.832     -115.535       47.879     -115.355
Ward Creek..................................................       47.274     -115.355       47.312     -115.234
Warm Springs Creek..........................................       46.210     -112.768       46.261     -113.137
Warm Springs Creek..........................................       45.860     -114.026       45.742     -114.070
Welcome Creek...............................................       46.566     -113.701       46.603     -113.768
Wellington Creek............................................       48.295     -116.174       48.290     -116.163
West Branch LeClerc Creek...................................       48.534     -117.283       48.701     -117.212
West Fork Bitterroot River..................................       45.621     -114.304       45.718     -114.281
West Fork Clearwater River..................................       47.256     -113.551       47.287     -113.745
West Fork Fish Creek........................................       46.927     -114.697       46.812     -114.891
West Fork Fishtrap Creek....................................       47.793     -115.224       47.816     -115.145
West Fork Gold Creek........................................       46.996     -113.686       47.032     -113.828
West Fork Rock Creek........................................       46.170     -113.762       46.171     -113.762
West Fork Swift Creek.......................................       48.654     -114.551       48.726     -114.653
West Fork Thompson River....................................       47.650     -115.174       47.714     -115.207
West Gold Creek.............................................       47.953     -116.452       47.930     -116.504
Whale Creek.................................................       48.849     -114.353       48.851     -114.594
Wheeler Creek...............................................       48.097     -113.730       48.066     -113.776
White River.................................................       47.588     -113.299       47.611     -113.204
Whitefish Lake..............................................       48.451     -114.381               ...........
Winchester Creek............................................       48.271     -117.343       48.329     -117.476
Woodward Creek..............................................       47.767     -113.880       47.777     -113.846
Wounded Buck Creek..........................................       48.280     -113.936       48.234     -113.963
Youngs Creek................................................       47.445     -113.183       47.282     -113.314
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Waterbodies associated with the following habitat conservation 
plan (HCP) totaling 209.0 km (129.9 mi) of streams and 32.2 ha (79.7 ac) 
of lakes and reservoirs have been excluded from critical habitat 
designation under section 4(b)(2) of the Act in this unit. These are 
waterbodies within the geographic area covered by the Plum Creek Native 
Fish Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP), including portions of Lower Clark 
Fork River, Middle Clark Fork River, Upper Clark Fork River, Bitterroot 
River, Rock Creek, Blackfoot, Clearwater, Flathead, Swan, and South Fork 
CHSUs.
    (iv) Map of Unit 31, Clark Fork River Basin follows:

[[Page 828]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.034

                   (41) Unit 32: St. Mary River Basin

    (i) This unit consists of 34.7 km (21.6 mi) of streams and 1,669.3 
ha (4,125.0 ac) of lakes and reservoirs. The unit is located in 
northwestern Montana.
    (ii) Individual waterbodies in the unit are bounded by the following 
coordinates:

[[Page 829]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Stream       Stream
                                                              Begin Point  Begin Point   Stream End   Stream End
                       Waterbody Name                           or Lake      or Lake       Point        Point
                                                                 Center       Center      Latitude    Longitude
                                                                Latitude    Longitude
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boulder Creek...............................................       48.776     -113.550       48.839     -113.460
Canyon Creek................................................       48.740     -113.647       48.730     -113.657
Cracker Lake................................................       48.744     -113.644               ...........
Divide Creek................................................       48.694     -113.421       48.751     -113.438
Kennedy Creek...............................................       48.851     -113.604       48.905     -113.409
Lee Creek...................................................       48.998     -113.601       48.919     -113.638
Lower St. Mary Lake.........................................       48.796     -113.423               ...........
Middle Fork Lee Creek.......................................       48.998     -113.550       48.978     -113.585
Otatso Creek................................................       48.894     -113.638       48.904     -113.621
Otatso Lake.................................................       48.892     -113.677               ...........
Red Eagle Creek.............................................       48.648     -113.510       48.630     -113.541
Red Eagle Lake..............................................       48.652     -113.507               ...........
Saint Mary River............................................       48.756     -113.425       48.844     -113.418
Slide Lakes - lower pool....................................       48.905     -113.616               ...........
Slide Lakes - upper pool....................................       48.902     -113.625               ...........
St. Mary Lake...............................................       48.699     -113.509               ...........
Swiftcurrent Creek..........................................       48.836     -113.429       48.839     -113.460
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Waterbodies associated with the following tribal lands 
totaling 82.1 km (51.0 mi) of streams and 886.1 ha (2,189.5 ac) of lakes 
and reservoirs have been excluded from critical habitat designation 
under section 4(b)(2) of the Act in this unit. These are waterbodies 
within the areas under management by the Blackfeet Tribe, within 
reservation boundaries, and waterbodies that are adjacent to:
    (A) Lands held in trust by the United States for their benefit;
    (B) Lands held in trust by the United States for any Indian Tribe or 
individual subject to restrictions by the United States against 
alienation;
    (C) Fee lands, either within or outside the reservation boundaries, 
owned by the tribal government; and
    (D) Fee lands within the reservation boundaries owned by individual 
Indians.
    (iv) Map of Unit 32, St. Mary River Basin follows:

[[Page 830]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18OC10.035

           Little Kern Golden Trout (Salmo aguabonita whitei)

    California, Tulare County. Little Kern River, main channel and all 
streams tributary to the Little Kern River above barrier falls located 
on the Little Kern River one mile below the mouth of Trout Meadows 
Creek.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 831]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.145

                  Woundfin (Plagopterus argentissimus)

    Legal descriptions for St. George (Utah-Arizona) and Littlefield 
(Arizona) were obtained from the 1987 BLM maps (Surface Management 
Status 30x60 Minute Quadrangles). Legal descriptions for Overton 
(Nevada-Arizona) were obtained from the 1989 BLM maps (Surface 
Management Status 30x60 Minute Quadrangles). The 100-year floodplain for 
many areas is detailed in Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) published by 
and available through the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). In 
areas where a FIRM is not available, the presence of alluvium soils or 
known high water marks can be used to determine the extent of the 
floodplain. Only areas of floodplain containing at least one of the 
constituent elements are considered critical habitat. Critical habitat 
designated for the woundfin is as follows:
    Utah, Washington County; Arizona, Mohave County; Nevada, Clark 
County. The Virgin River and its 100-year floodplain from its confluence 
with La Verkin Creek, Utah in T.41S., R.13W., sec.23 (Salt Lake Base and 
Meridian) to Halfway Wash, Nevada T.15S., R.69E., sec.6 (Salt Lake Base 
and Meridian).
    The primary constituent elements of critical habitat determined 
necessary for the survival and recovery of these Virgin River fishes are 
water, physical habitat, and biological environment. The desired 
conditions for each of these elements are further discussed below.
    Water--A sufficient quantity and quality of water (i.e., 
temperature, dissolved oxygen, contaminants, nutrients, turbidity, etc.) 
that is delivered to a specific location in accordance with a hydrologic 
regime that is identified for the particular life stage for each 
species. This includes the following:
    1. Water quality characterized by natural seasonally variable 
temperature, turbidity, and conductivity;
    2. Hydrologic regime characterized by the duration, magnitude, and 
frequency of flow events capable of forming and maintaining channel and 
instream habitat necessary for particular life stages at certain times 
of the year; and
    3. Flood events inundating the floodplain necessary to provide the 
organic matter that provides or supports the nutrient and food sources 
for the listed fishes.
    Physical Habitat--Areas of the Virgin River that are inhabited or 
potentially habitable by a particular life stage for each species, for 
use in spawning, nursing, feeding, and rearing, or corridors between 
such areas:
    1. River channels, side channels, secondary channels, backwaters, 
and springs, and other areas which provide access to these habitats;
    2. Areas inhabited by adult and juvenile woundfin include runs and 
pools adjacent to riffles that have sand and sand/gravel substrates;
    3. Areas inhabited by juvenile woundfin are generally deeper and 
slower. When turbidity is low, adults also tend to occupy deeper and 
slower habitats;
    4. Areas inhabited by woundfin larvae include shoreline margins and 
backwater habitats associated with growths of filamentous algae.
    Biological Environment--Food supply, predation, and competition are 
important elements of the biological environment and are considered 
components of this constituent element. Food supply is a function of 
nutrient supply, productivity, and availability to each life stage of 
the species. Predation and competition, although considered normal 
components of this environment, are out of balance due to nonnative fish 
species in many areas. Fourteen introduced species, including red shiner 
(Cyprinella lutrensis), black bullhead (Ameiurus melas), channel catfish 
(Ictalurus punctatus), and largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides), 
compete with or prey upon the listed fishes. Of these, the red shiner is 
the most numerous and has been the most problematic for the listed 
fishes. Red shiners compete for food and available habitats and are 
known to prey on the eggs and early life stages of the listed fishes. 
Components of this constituent element include the following:
    1. Seasonally flooded areas that contribute to the biological 
productivity of the river system by producing allochthonous (humus, 
silt, organic detritus, colloidal matter, and plants and animals 
produced outside the river and brought into the river) organic matter 
which provides and supports much of the food base of the listed fishes; 
and
    2. Few or no predatory or competitive nonnative species in occupied 
Virgin River

[[Page 832]]

fishes' habitats or potential reestablishment sites.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26JA00.001


[[Page 833]]


    [42 FR 47840, Sept. 22, 1977]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
17.95, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and at www.fdsys.gov.

    Editorial Note: The remainder of Sec. 17.95 appears in 50 Part 17, 
Sec. 17.95(f) to end of Sec. 17.95.

[[Page 835]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  List of CFR Sections Affected

[[Page 837]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters


<R04>

                     (Revised as of October 1, 2012)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
       III  Administrative Conference of the United States (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                    Title 2--Grants and Agreements

            Subtitle A--Office of Management and Budget Guidance 
                for Grants and Agreements
         I  Office of Management and Budget Governmentwide 
                Guidance for Grants and Agreements (Parts 2--199)
        II  Office of Management and Budget Circulars and Guidance 
                (200--299)
            Subtitle B--Federal Agency Regulations for Grants and 
                Agreements
       III  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300-- 
                399)
        IV  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Agency for International Development (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Department of Defense (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
     XVIII  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        XX  United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 
                2000--2099)
      XXII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2200--2299)
     XXIII  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
      XXIV  Housing and Urban Development (Parts 2400--2499)
       XXV  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
      XXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                2600--2699)
     XXVII  Small Business Administration (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)

[[Page 838]]

       XXX  Department of Homeland Security (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Institute of Museum and Library Services (Parts 3100--
                3199)
     XXXII  National Endowment for the Arts (Parts 3200--3299)
    XXXIII  National Endowment for the Humanities (Parts 3300--
                3399)
     XXXIV  Department of Education (Parts 3400--3499)
      XXXV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 3500--
                3599)
    XXXVII  Peace Corps (Parts 3700--3799)
     LVIII  Election Assistance Commission (Parts 5800--5899)

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  Government Accountability Office (Parts 1--199)
        II  Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board (Parts 
                200--299)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Parts 2100--2199)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)
      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 3200--
                3299)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Parts 3300--3399)
      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Parts 3400--
                3499)
       XXV  Department of the Interior (Parts 3500--3599)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Parts 3600-- 3699)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Parts 3800--3899)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)

[[Page 839]]

    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 4300--
                4399)
     XXXIV  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 4400--4499)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 4500--4599)
    XXXVII  Federal Election Commission (Parts 4700--4799)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Parts 5000--5099)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 5100--
                5199)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Parts 5200--5299)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Parts 5300--5399)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 5500--
                5599)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 5600--5699)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 5700--5799)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 5800--5899)
      XLIX  Federal Labor Relations Authority (Parts 5900--5999)
         L  Department of Transportation (Parts 6000--6099)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 6200--
                6299)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 6400--6499)
        LV  National Endowment for the Arts (Parts 6500--6599)
       LVI  National Endowment for the Humanities (Parts 6600--
                6699)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Parts 6700--6799)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
                (Parts 6800--6899)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                6900--6999)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Parts 7000--7099)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 7100--7199)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 7200--
                7299)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 7300--7399)
      LXIV  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 7400--7499)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                7500--7599)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                7600--7699)
     LXVII  Institute of Museum and Library Services (Parts 7700--
                7799)
    LXVIII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 7800--7899)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 7900--7999)
       LXX  Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the 
                District of Columbia (Parts 8000--8099)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 8100--8199)
    LXXIII  Department of Agriculture (Parts 8300--8399)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 8400--8499)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                8600--8699)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 8700--8799)
      LXXX  Federal Housing Finance Agency (Parts 9000--9099)
    LXXXII  Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction 
                (Parts 9200--9299)

[[Page 840]]

   LXXXIII  Special Inspector General for Afghanistan 
                Reconstruction (Parts 9300--9399)
    LXXXIV  Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection (Parts 9400--
                9499)
     XCVII  Department of Homeland Security Human Resources 
                Management System (Department of Homeland 
                Security--Office of Personnel Management) (Parts 
                9700--9799)

                      Title 6--Domestic Security

         I  Department of Homeland Security, Office of the 
                Secretary (Parts 1--99)

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture
         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Nutrition Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)
       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)

[[Page 841]]

     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
        XX  Local Television Loan Guarantee Board (Parts 2200--
                2299)
       XXV  Office of Advocacy and Outreach, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 2500--2599)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy Policy and New Uses, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  Office of Procurement and Property Management, 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 3200--3299)
    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  National Institute of Food and Agriculture (Parts 
                3400--3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)
     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)
    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Department of Homeland Security (Immigration and 
                Naturalization) (Parts 1--499)
         V  Executive Office for Immigration Review, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1000--1399)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)

[[Page 842]]

       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 300--599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
      XIII  Nuclear Waste Technical Review Board (Parts 1300--
                1399)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)
     XVIII  Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste 
                Commission (Parts 1800--1899)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)
        II  Election Assistance Commission (Parts 9400--9499)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
         X  Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection (Parts 1000--
                1099)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Federal Housing Finance Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Financial Stability Oversight Council (Parts 1300--
                1399)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Office of Financial Research (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700--1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

[[Page 843]]

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board (Parts 400--499)
         V  Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board (Parts 
                500--599)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)
       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--1199)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        VI  Air Transportation System Stabilization (Parts 1300--
                1399)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Industry and Security, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

[[Page 844]]

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Department of 
                Homeland Security; Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Department 
                of Homeland Security (Parts 400--599)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)
        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training Service, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1000--1099)

[[Page 845]]

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)
        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 700--
                799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board (Parts 900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Millennium Challenge Corporation (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)

[[Page 846]]

        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Housing and Office of Multifamily Housing 
                Assistance Restructuring, Department of Housing 
                and Urban Development (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs, Section 202 Direct Loan Program, Section 
                202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly Program and 
                Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons With 
                Disabilities Program) (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--1699)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XV  Emergency Mortgage Insurance and Loan Programs, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2700--2799)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
      XXIV  Board of Directors of the HOPE for Homeowners Program 
                (Parts 4000--4099)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)

[[Page 847]]

        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 1000--1199)
       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 1200--1299)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--End)

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, Department 
                of the Treasury (Parts 1--399)
        II  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, 
                Department of Justice (Parts 400--699)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--299)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the 
                District of Columbia (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact Council 
                (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Department of Justice and Department of State (Parts 
                1100--1199)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)

[[Page 848]]

      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Employee Benefits Security Administration, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 200--299)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)
       XII  Office of Natural Resources Revenue, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 1200--1299)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Claims Collection Standards (Department of the 
                Treasury--Department of Justice) (Parts 900--999)
         X  Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)

[[Page 849]]

         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  Office of the Director of National Intelligence (Parts 
                1700--1799)
     XVIII  National Counterintelligence Center (Parts 1800--1899)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                1--199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 
                Department of Education [Reserved]
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100--1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

[[Page 850]]

                          Title 35 [Reserved]

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
        VI  [Reserved]
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Presidio Trust (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        XV  Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust (Parts 1500--
                1599)
       XVI  Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National 
                Environmental Policy Foundation (Parts 1600--1699)

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  United States Patent and Trademark Office, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)
       III  Copyright Royalty Board, Library of Congress (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--199)
        II  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Parts 200--299)

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Regulatory Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--1099)
        IV  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)

[[Page 851]]

        VI  Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Defense; Uniform National Discharge Standards for 
                Vessels of the Armed Forces (Parts 1700--1799)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle A--Federal Procurement Regulations System 
                [Note]
            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training Service, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 61-1--61-999)
   62--100  [Reserved]
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       102  Federal Management Regulation (Parts 102-1--102-299)
  103--104  [Reserved]
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
  129--200  [Reserved]
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       300  General (Parts 300-1--300-99)
       301  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--
                301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)
       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Part 303-1--303-99)
       304  Payment of Travel Expenses from a Non-Federal Source 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)

[[Page 852]]

        IV  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department 
                of Health and Human Services (Parts 400--599)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 400--999)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)
       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10099)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899) 
                [Reserved]
         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                1200--1299)

[[Page 853]]

      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)
       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                1--199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
       III  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage), Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce, and 
                National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Defense Acquisition Regulations System, Department of 
                Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Health and Human Services (Parts 300--399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  Agency for International Development (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)

[[Page 854]]

        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        19  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)
        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        30  Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security 
                Acquisition Regulation (HSAR) (Parts 3000--3099)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)
        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement [Reserved]
        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Parts 
                5400--5499)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  Civilian Board of Contract Appeals, General Services 
                Administration (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)

[[Page 855]]

       III  Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)
         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)
        XI  Research and Innovative Technology Administration, 
                Department of Transportation [Reserved]
       XII  Transportation Security Administration, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 1500--1699)

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)
        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)
         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR

[[Page 857]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR


<R04>

                     (Revised as of October 1, 2012)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or 
                     Agency                               Chapter

Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Administrative Conference of the United States    1, III
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
Advocacy and Outreach, Office of                  7, XXV
Afghanistan Reconstruction, Special Inspector     22, LXXXIII
     General for
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development              2, VII; 22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department                            2, IV; 5, LXXIII
  Advocacy and Outreach, Office of                7, XXV
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Chief Financial Officer, Office of              7, XXX
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy Policy and New Uses, Office of           2, IX; 7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Food and Nutrition Service                      7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  National Institute of Food and Agriculture      7, XXXIV
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Procurement and Property Management, Office of  7, XXXII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII, L
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV, L
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII, L
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Air Transportation Stabilization Board            14, VI
Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau          27, I
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,       27, II
     Bureau of
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee   25, VII

[[Page 858]]

Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I
Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX
Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
     Compliance Board
Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Armed Forces Retirement Home                      5, XI
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase from People Who Are
Broadcasting Board of Governors                   22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation,    30, II
     and Enforcement
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services          42, IV
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Chemical Safety and Hazardous Investigation       40, VI
     Board
Chief Financial Officer, Office of                7, XXX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Civil Rights, Commission on                       5, LXVIII; 45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency    5, LXX
     for the District of Columbia
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)                46, III
Commerce Department                               2, XIII; 44, IV; 50, VI
  Census Bureau                                   15, I
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  Industry and Security, Bureau of                15, VII
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III, IV
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office, United States      37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau              5, LXXXIV; 12, X
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Copyright Royalty Board                           37, III
Corporation for National and Community Service    2, XXII; 45, XII, XXV
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency    5, LXX; 28, VIII
   for the District of Columbia
[[Page 859]]

Customs and Border Protection                     19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                2, XI; 5, XXVI; 32, 
                                                  Subtitle A; 40, VII
  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII
  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51
  Defense Acquisition Regulations System          48, 2
  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I
  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  National Imagery and Mapping Agency             32, I
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 2, XI; 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
District of Columbia, Court Services and          5, LXX; 28, VIII
     Offender Supervision Agency for the
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          2, XXXIV; 5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Election Assistance Commission                    2, LVIII; 11, II
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board       13, V
Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board              13, IV
Employee Benefits Security Administration         29, XXV
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             2, IX; 5, XXIII; 10, II, 
                                                  III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Environmental Protection Agency                   2, XV; 5, LIV; 40, I, IV, 
                                                  VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV

[[Page 860]]

  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                2, Subtitle A; 5, III, 
                                                  LXXVII; 14, VI; 48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2
  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II
  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export-Import Bank of the United States           2, XXXV; 5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII
Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1
Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
Federal Claims Collection Standards               31, IX
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       5, XXXVII; 11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Agency                    5, LXXX; 12, XII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Labor Relations Authority                 5, XIV, XLIX; 22, XIV
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Management Regulation                     41, 102
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration       49, III
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network              31, X
Financial Research Office                         12, XVI
Financial Stability Oversight Council             12, XIII
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Nutrition Service                        7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX

[[Page 861]]

Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Services Administration                   5, LVII; 41, 105
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5
  Federal Management Regulation                   41, 102
  Federal Property Management Regulations         41, 101
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  General                                         41, 300
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
       of Certain Employees
  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302
  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances          41, 301
Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Accountability Office                  4, I
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          2, III; 5, XLV; 45, 
                                                  Subtitle A,
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services        42, IV
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Homeland Security, Department of                  2, XXX; 6, I; 8, I
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)              46, III
  Customs and Border Protection                   19, I
  Federal Emergency Management Agency             44, I
  Human Resources Management and Labor Relations  5, XCVII
       Systems
  Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau      19, IV
  Transportation Security Administration          49, XII
HOPE for Homeowners Program, Board of Directors   24, XXIV
     of
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      2, XXIV; 5, LXV; 24, 
                                                  Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing     24, IV
       Assistance Restructuring, Office of
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing       24, IV
     Assistance Restructuring, Office of
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau        19, IV

[[Page 862]]

Immigration Review, Executive Office for          8, V
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
     Secretary
Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V
Industry and Security, Bureau of                  15, VII
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General
  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII, XV
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Interior Department                               2, XIV
  American Indians, Office of the Special         25, VII
       Trustee
  Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation,  30, II
       and Enforcement
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III
  National Park Service                           36, I
  Natural Resource Revenue, Office of             30, XII
  Ocean Energy Management, Bureau of              30, V
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I
  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            2, XIV; 43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, United States Agency   22, II
     for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
Investment Security, Office of                    31, VIII
Iraq Reconstruction, Special Inspector General    5, LXXXVII
     for
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                2, XXVIII; 5, XXVIII; 28, 
                                                  I, XI; 40, IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,     27, II
       Bureau of
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             31, IX
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration Review, Executive Office for        8, V
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII

[[Page 863]]

  Employee Benefits Security Administration       29, XXV
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29
  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Standards, Office of           29, II, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs        20, VII
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A
  Veterans' Employment and Training Service,      41, 61; 20, IX
       Office of the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Standards, Office of             29, II, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
  Copyright Royalty Board                         37, III
Local Television Loan Guarantee Board             7, XX
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 
                                                  48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II, LXIV
Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Millennium Challenge Corporation                  22, XIII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV
Monetary Offices                                  31, I
Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in     36, XVI
     National Environmental Policy Foundation
Museum and Library Services, Institute of         2, XXXI
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     2, XVIII; 5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National and Community Service, Corporation for   2, XXII; 45, XII, XXV
National Archives and Records Administration      2, XXVI; 5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Counterintelligence Center               32, XVIII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact     28, IX
     Council
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Endowment for the Arts                   2, XXXII
National Endowment for the Humanities             2, XXXIII
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 47, VI; 49, V
National Imagery and Mapping Agency               32, I
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Food and Agriculture        7, XXXIV
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Intelligence, Office of Director of      32, XVII
National Labor Relations Board                    5, LXI; 29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV
National Mediation Board                          29, X

[[Page 864]]

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       2, XXV; 5, XLIII; 45, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III, IV
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Natural Resource Revenue, Office of               30, XII
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste  10, XVIII
     Commission
Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     2, XX; 5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Ocean Energy Management, Bureau of                30, V
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Office of Workers' Compensation Programs          20, VII
Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust             36, XV
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Patent and Trademark Office, United States        37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       2, XXXVII; 22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Human Resources Management and Labor Relations  5, XCVII
       Systems, Department of Homeland Security
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
       Acquisition Regulation
  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety           49, I
     Administration
Postal Regulatory Commission                      5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI
President's Commission on White House             1, IV
     Fellowships
Presidential Documents                            3
Presidio Trust                                    36, X
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Procurement and Property Management, Office of    7, XXXII
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board    4, II
Refugee Resettlement, Office of                   45, IV
Relocation Allowances                             41, 302
Research and Innovative Technology                49, XI
     Administration
Rural Business-Cooperative Service                7, XVIII, XLII, L
Rural Development Administration                  7, XLII
Rural Housing Service                             7, XVIII, XXXV, L

[[Page 865]]

Rural Telephone Bank                              7, XVI
Rural Utilities Service                           7, XVII, XVIII, XLII, L
Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation     33, IV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of          32, XXIV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and     47, II
     National Security Council
Secret Service                                    31, IV
Securities and Exchange Commission                5, XXXIV; 17, II
Selective Service System                          32, XVI
Small Business Administration                     2, XXVII; 13, I
Smithsonian Institution                           36, V
Social Security Administration                    2, XXIII; 20, III; 48, 23
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States        5, XI
Special Counsel, Office of                        5, VIII
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,    34, III
     Office of
State Department                                  2, VI; 22, I; 28, XI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 6
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,       30, VII
     Office of
Surface Transportation Board                      49, X
Susquehanna River Basin Commission                18, VIII
Technology Administration                         15, XI
Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for        37, IV
Technology, Under Secretary for                   37, V
Tennessee Valley Authority                        5, LXIX; 18, XIII
Thrift Supervision Office, Department of the      12, V
     Treasury
Trade Representative, United States, Office of    15, XX
Transportation, Department of                     2, XII; 5, L
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 63
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 12
  Federal Aviation Administration                 14, I
  Federal Highway Administration                  23, I, II
  Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration     49, III
  Federal Railroad Administration                 49, II
  Federal Transit Administration                  49, VI
  Maritime Administration                         46, II
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  23, II, III; 47, IV; 49, V
  Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety         49, I
       Administration
  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation   33, IV
  Secretary of Transportation, Office of          14, II; 49, Subtitle A
  Surface Transportation Board                    49, X
  Transportation Statistics Bureau                49, XI
Transportation, Office of                         7, XXXIII
Transportation Security Administration            49, XII
Transportation Statistics Bureau                  49, XI
Travel Allowances, Temporary Duty (TDY)           41, 301
Treasury Department                               5, XXI; 12, XV; 17, IV; 
                                                  31, IX
  Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau        27, I
  Community Development Financial Institutions    12, XVIII
       Fund
  Comptroller of the Currency                     12, I
  Customs and Border Protection                   19, I
  Engraving and Printing, Bureau of               31, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 10
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             31, IX
  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center         31, VII
  Financial Crimes Enforcement Network            31, X
  Fiscal Service                                  31, II
  Foreign Assets Control, Office of               31, V
  Internal Revenue Service                        26, I
  Investment Security, Office of                  31, VIII
  Monetary Offices                                31, I
  Secret Service                                  31, IV
  Secretary of the Treasury, Office of            31, Subtitle A
  Thrift Supervision, Office of                   12, V
Truman, Harry S. Scholarship Foundation           45, XVIII

[[Page 866]]

United States and Canada, International Joint     22, IV
     Commission
United States and Mexico, International Boundary  22, XI
     and Water Commission, United States Section
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation      43, III
     Commission
Veterans Affairs Department                       2, VIII; 38, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 8
Veterans' Employment and Training Service,        41, 61; 20, IX
     Office of the Assistant Secretary for
Vice President of the United States, Office of    32, XXVIII
Vocational and Adult Education, Office of         34, IV
Wage and Hour Division                            29, V
Water Resources Council                           18, VI
Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of         20, I
World Agricultural Outlook Board                  7, XXXVIII

[[Page 867]]


<R03>
List of CFR Sections Affected

<R04>

All changes in this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations that were 
made by documents published in the Federal Register since January 1, 
2001, are enumerated in the following list. Entries indicate the nature 
of the changes effected. Page numbers refer to Federal Register pages. 
The user should consult the entries for chapters and parts as well as 
sections for revisions.
For the period before January 1, 2001, see the ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected, 1949-1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, and 1986-2000'' published in 
11 separate volumes.

                                  2001

50 CFR
                                                                   66 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (d) amended............................................9450, 14659
        (d) corrected............................................13657--
                                                                   13671
    (e) amended....................................................18031
    (e) amended; eff. 10-9-01......................................46560

                                  2002

                       (No regulations published)

                                  2003

50 CFR
                                                                   68 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (e) amended............................................8132, 13406

                                  2004

50 CFR
                                                                   69 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (d) amended..................................................68597
    (e) amended.......................................8851, 44761, 60046

                                  2005

50 CFR
                                                                   70 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (d) amended....................................19616, 49417, 74163
    Regulation at 69 FR 60046 comment period opened.........29998, 32732
    (e) amended....................448, 15240-15244, 17927, 59844, 66706
    (e) amended; eff. 10-26-05.....................................56265
    (e) corrected...................................................8037

                                  2006

50 CFR
                                                                   71 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (c) amended..................................................58206
    (d) amended....................................................19294
    (d) amended; eff. 10-16-06.....................................54371
    (e) amended; interim............................................6394

                                  2007

50 CFR
                                                                   72 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (d) amended..................................................60081
    (e) amended....................................................13404

                                  2008

50 CFR
                                                                   73 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (e) amended.....................................5953, 39521, 47020

                                  2009

50 CFR
                                                                   74 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (d) amended...................................................6742
    (e) amended....................................................26509

                                  2010

50 CFR
                                                                   75 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (d) amended..................................................12873
    (e) amended...............................11032, 63972, 75927, 78009
    (e) correctly amended..........................................18109

[[Page 868]]

                                  2011

50 CFR
                                                                   76 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (d) amended............................................7321, 54366
    (c) amended....................................................66804

                                  2012

  (Regulations published from January 1, 2012, through October 1, 2012)

50 CFR
                                                                   77 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (e) amended..................................................10909
    (d) amended.............................................16375, 35145


                                  [all]
</pre></body></html>
