<html><body><pre>
[Title 1 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - January 1, 1998 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]


          1


<R02>
          General Provisions

<R03>

[[Page i]]

          Revised as of February 1, 1997
                              2
          (Reserved)
          CONTAINING
          A CODIFICATION OF DOCUMENTS
          OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY
          AND FUTURE EFFECT

          AS OF FEBRUARY 1, 1997
          With Ancillaries
          Published by
          the Office of the Federal Register
          National Archives and Records
          Administration

          as a Special Edition of
          the Federal Register



[[Page ii]]

                                      




                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                            WASHINGTON : 1997



               For sale by U.S. Government Printing Office
 Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328



[[Page iii]]



<R02>
                            Table of Contents

<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................       v

  Title 1:
    Chapter I--Administrative Committee of the Federal 
        Register..............................................       3
    Chapter II--Office of the Federal Register................      33
    Chapter IV--Miscellaneous Agencies........................      37
  Title 2  [Reserved]
  Finding Aids:
    Chapter I--Index..........................................      65
    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters..........................      69
    Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR........      85
    Redesignation Table.......................................      95
    List of CFR Sections Affected.............................      97

[[Page iv]]



      



                                                                                                                
                                  ----------------------------------------------------------                    

   Cite this Code:  CFR                                                         
                                                                                                                
   To cite the regulations in this volume use title, part                       
   and section number. Thus, 1 CFR 1.1 refers to title 1,                      
   part 1, section 1.                                                          
                                  ----------------------------------------------------------                    
                                                                                                                


[[Page v]]

                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1
    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, February 1, 1997), consult the ``List of 
CFR Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the 
``Cumulative List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids 
section of the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the 
Federal Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 1986, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, or 1973-1985, published in seven separate volumes. For 
the period beginning January 1, 1986, a ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Statutory 
Authorities and Agency Rules (Table I), and Acts Requiring Publication 
in the Federal Register (Table II). A list of CFR titles, chapters, and 
parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are 
also included in this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.
    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.
    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-523-5227 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC 20408.
SALES
    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call 202-512-1800, 
M-F 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or fax your order to 202-512-2233, 24 hours 
a day. For payment by check, write to the Superintendent of Documents, 
Attn: New Orders, P.O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. For GPO 
Customer Service call 202-512-1803.

                              Richard L. Claypoole,
                                    Director,
                          Office of the Federal Register.

January 1, 1997.



[[Page vii]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 1--General Provisions is composed of one volume. This volume 
is comprised of Chapter I--Administrative Committee of the Federal 
Register, Chapter II--Office of the Federal Register, and Chapter IV--
Miscellaneous Agencies. The contents of this volume represents all 
current regulations codified under this title of the CFR as of February 
1, 1997.

    Chapter IV contains the current Privacy Act, Freedom of Information 
Act, and Rehabilitation Act regulations issued by miscellaneous 
agencies.

    An Index to chapter I appears in the Finding Aids section of this 
volume.

    A redesignation table for chapter I appears in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.

     For this volume, Ruth Reedy Green was Chief Editor. The Code of 
Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of 
Frances D. McDonald, assisted by Alomha S. Morris.

[[Page viii]]

<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>

 
[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                       TITLE 1--GENERAL PROVISIONS


<R02>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

                                                                   Part 
chapter i--Administrative Committee of the Federal Register.           1

chapter ii--Office of the Federal Register..................          51

chapter iv--Miscellaneous Agencies..........................         425

[[Page 3]]


<R02>
    CHAPTER I--ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITTEE OF THE FEDERAL REGISTER


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  Editorial Note: An Index to chapter I appears in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.

                          SUBCHAPTER A--GENERAL
Part                                                               Page 
1               Definitions.................................           5
2               General information.........................           5
3               Services to the public......................           6
                   SUBCHAPTER B--THE FEDERAL REGISTER

5               General.....................................           8
6               Indexes and ancillaries.....................           9
         SUBCHAPTER C--SPECIAL EDITIONS OF THE FEDERAL REGISTER

8               Code of Federal Regulations.................          11
9               The United States Government Manual.........          12
10              Presidential Papers.........................          13
      SUBCHAPTER D--AVAILABILITY OF OFFICE OF THE FEDERAL REGISTER 
                              PUBLICATIONS

11              Subscriptions...............................          14
12              Official distribution within Federal 
                    Government..............................          15
   SUBCHAPTER E--PREPARATION, TRANSMITTAL, AND PROCESSING OF DOCUMENTS

15              Services to Federal agencies................          18
16              Agency representatives......................          18
17              Filing for public inspection and publication 
                    schedules...............................          19
18              Preparation and transmittal of documents 
                    generally...............................          21
19              Executive orders and Presidential 
                    proclamations...........................          24

[[Page 4]]

20              Handling of The United States Government 
                    Manual statements.......................          25
21              Preparation of documents subject to 
                    codification............................          27
22              Preparation of notices and proposed rules...          31

[[Page 5]]


<R03>
                          SUBCHAPTER A--GENERAL

<R05>


<R03>
PART 1--DEFINITIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 1506; sec. 6, E.O. 10530, 19 FR 2709; 3 CFR, 
1954-1958 Comp., p.189.


<R05>
Sec. 1.1  Definitions.

    As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise--
    Administrative Committee means the Administrative Committee of the 
Federal Register established under section 1506 of title 44, United 
States Code;
    Agency means each authority, whether or not within or subject to 
review by another agency, of the United States, other than the Congress, 
the courts, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, 
and the territories and possessions of the United States;
    Document includes any Presidential proclamation or Executive order, 
and any rule, regulation, order, certificate, code of fair competition, 
license, notice, or similar instrument issued, prescribed, or 
promulgated by an agency;
    Document having general applicability and legal effect means any 
document issued under proper authority prescribing a penalty or course 
of conduct, conferring a right, privilege, authority, or immunity, or 
imposing an obligation, and relevant or applicable to the general 
public, members of a class, or persons in a locality, as distinguished 
from named individuals or organizations; and
    Filing means making a document available for public inspection at 
the Office of the Federal Register during official business hours. A 
document is filed only after it has been received, processed and 
assigned a publication date according to the schedule in part 17 of this 
chapter.
    Regulation and rule have the same meaning.

[37 FR 23603, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 50 FR 12466, Mar. 28, 1985]


<R03>
PART 2--GENERAL INFORMATION--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
2.1  Scope and purpose.
2.2  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register.
2.3  Office of the Federal Register; location; office hours.
2.4  General authority of Director.
2.5  Publication of statutes, regulations, and related documents.
2.6  Unrestricted use.

    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 1506; sec. 6, E.O. 10530, 19 FR 2709; 3 CFR, 
1954-1958 Comp., p. 189; 1 U.S.C. 112; 1 U.S.C. 113.
    Source: 37 FR 23603, Nov. 4, 1972, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 2.1  Scope and purpose.

    (a) This chapter sets forth the policies, procedures, and 
delegations under which the Administrative Committee of the Federal 
Register carries out its general responsibilities under chapter 15 of 
title 44, United States Code.
    (b) A primary purpose of this chapter is to inform the public of the 
nature and uses of Federal Register publications.


<R05>
Sec. 2.2  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register.

    (a) The Administrative Committee of the Federal Register is 
established by section 1506 of title 44, United States Code.
    (b) The Committee consists of--
    (1) The Archivist, or Acting Archivist, of the United States, who is 
the Chairman;
    (2) An officer of the Department of Justice designated by the 
Attorney General; and
    (3) The Public Printer or Acting Public Printer.
    (c) The Director of the Federal Register is the Secretary of the 
Committee.
    (d) Any material required by law to be filed with the Committee, and 
any correspondence, inquiries, or other material intended for the 
Committee or which relate to Federal Register publications shall be sent 
to the Director of the Federal Register.


<R05>
Sec. 2.3  Office of the Federal Register; location; office hours.

    (a) The Office of the Federal Register is a component of the 
National Archives and Records Administration.

[[Page 6]]

    (b) The Office is located at 800 North Capitol, NW., suite 700, 
Washington, DC.
    (c) The mailing address is: Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC 20408.
    (d) Office hours are 8:45 a.m. to 5:15 p.m., Monday through Friday, 
except for official Federal holidays.

[37 FR 23603, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9676, Mar. 7, 1989; 57 
FR 40024, Sept. 1, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 2.4  General authority of Director.

    (a) The Director of the Federal Register is delegated authority to 
administer generally this chapter, the related provisions of chapter 15 
of title 44, United States Code, and the pertinent provisions of 
statutes and regulations contemplated by section 1505 of title 44, 
United States Code.
    (b) The Director may return to the issuing agency any document 
submitted for publication in the Federal Register,  or a special edition 
thereof, if in the Director's judgment the document does not meet the 
minimum requirements of this chapter.

[37 FR 23603, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9676, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 2.5  Publication of statutes, regulations, and related documents.

    (a) The Director of the Federal Register is responsible for the 
central filing of the original acts enacted by Congress and the original 
documents containing Executive orders and proclamations of the 
President, other Presidential documents, regulations, and notices of 
proposed rulemaking and other notices, submitted to the Director by 
officials of the executive branch of the Federal Government.
    (b) Based on the acts and documents filed under paragraph (a) of 
this section, the Office of the Federal Register publishes the ``slip 
laws,'' the ``United States Statutes at Large,'' the daily Federal 
Register and the ``Code of Federal Regulations.''
    (c) Based on source materials that are officially related to the 
acts and documents filed under paragraph (a) of this section, the Office 
also publishes ``The United States Government Manual,'' the ``Public 
Papers of the Presidents of the United States,'' the ``Weekly 
Compilation of Presidential Documents,'' the ``Federal Register Index,'' 
and the ``LSA (List of CFR Sections Affected)''.

[37 FR 23603, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9676, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 2.6  Unrestricted use.

    Any person may reproduce or republish, without restriction, any 
material appearing in any regular or special edition of the Federal 
Register. 


<R03>
PART 3--SERVICES TO THE PUBLIC--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
3.1  Information services.
3.2  Public inspection of documents.
3.3  Reproduction and certification of copies of acts and documents.

    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 1506; sec. 6, E.O. 10530, 19 FR 2709; 3 CFR, 
1954-1958 Comp., p. 189.

    Source: 37 FR 23604, Nov. 4, 1972, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 3.1  Information services.

    Except in cases where the time required would be excessive, 
information concerning the publications described in Sec. 2.5 of this 
chapter and the original acts and documents filed with the Office of the 
Federal Register is provided by the staff of that Office. However, the 
staff may not summarize or interpret substantive text of any act or 
document.


<R05>
Sec. 3.2  Public inspection of documents.

    (a) Documents filed with the Office of the Federal Register pursuant 
to law are available for public inspection at 800 North Capitol Street, 
NW., suite 700, Washington, DC, during the Office of the Federal 
Register office hours. There are no formal inspection procedures or 
requirements.
    (b) The Director of the Federal Register shall cause each document 
received by the office to be filed for public inspection not later than 
the working day preceding the publication day for that document.
    (c) The Director shall cause to be placed on the original and 
certified copies of each document a notation of the day and hour when it 
was filed and made available for public inspection.

[[Page 7]]

    (d) Photocopies of documents or excerpts may be made at the 
inspection desk.

[37 FR 23604, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9676, Mar. 7, 1989; 57 
FR 40025, Sept. 1, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 3.3  Reproduction and certification of copies of acts and documents.

    The regulations for the public use of records in the National 
Archives (36 CFR parts 1252-1258) govern the furnishing of reproductions 
of acts and documents and certificates of authentication for them. 
Section 1258.14 of those regulations provides for the advance payment of 
appropriate fees for reproduction services and for certifying 
reproductions.

[51 FR 27017, July 29, 1986, as amended at 54 FR 9676, Mar. 7, 1989]

[[Page 8]]


<R03>
                   SUBCHAPTER B--THE FEDERAL REGISTER

<R05>


<R03>
PART 5--GENERAL--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
5.1  Publication policy.
5.2  Documents required to be filed for public inspection and published.
5.3  Publication of other documents.
5.4  Publication not authorized.
5.5  Supplement to the Code of Federal Regulations.
5.6  Daily publication.
5.7  Delivery and mailing.
5.8  Form of citation.
5.9  Categories of documents.
5.10  Forms of publication.

    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 1506; sec. 6, E.O. 10530, 19 FR 2709; 3 CFR, 
1954-1958 Comp., p. 189.

    Source: 37 FR 23604, Nov. 4, 1972, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 5.1  Publication policy.

    (a) Pursuant to chapter 15 of title 44, United States Code, and this 
chapter, the Director of the Federal Register shall publish a serial 
publication called the Federal Register to contain the following:
    (1) Executive orders, proclamations, and other Presidential 
documents.
    (2) Documents required to be published therein by law.
    (3) Documents accepted for publication under Sec. 5.3.
    (b) Each document required or authorized to be filed for publication 
shall be published in the Federal Register  as promptly as possible, 
within limitations imposed by considerations of accuracy, usability, and 
reasonable costs.
    (c) In prescribing regulations governing headings, preambles, 
effective dates, authority citations, and similar matters of form, the 
Administrative Committee does not intend to affect the validity of any 
document that is filed and published under law.


<R05>
Sec. 5.2  Documents required to be filed for public inspection and published.

    The following documents are required to be filed for public 
inspection with the Office of the Federal Register and published in the 
Federal Register:
    (a) Presidential proclamations and Executive orders in the numbered 
series, and each other document that the President submits for 
publication or orders to be published.
    (b) Each document or class of documents required to be published by 
act of Congress.
    (c) Each document having general applicability and legal effect.

[37 FR 23604, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9676, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 5.3  Publication of other documents.

    Whenever the Director of the Federal Register considers that 
publication of a document not covered by Sec. 5.2 would be in the public 
interest, the Director may allow that document to be filed for public 
inspection with the Office of the Federal Register and published in the 
Federal Register.

[54 FR 9676, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 5.4  Publication not authorized.

    (a) Chapter 15 of title 44, United States Code, does not apply to 
treaties, conventions, protocols, or other international agreements, or 
proclamations thereof by the President.
    (b) Chapter 15 of title 44, United States Code, prohibits the 
publication in the Federal Register of comments or news items.
    (c) The Director of the Federal Register may not accept any document 
for filing and publication unless it is the official action of the 
agency concerned. Chapter 15 of title 44, United States Code, does not 
authorize or require the filing and publication of other papers from an 
agency.


<R05>
Sec. 5.5  Supplement to the Code of Federal Regulations.

    The Federal Register serves as a daily supplement to the Code of 
Federal Regulations. Each document that is subject to codification and 
published in a daily issue shall be keyed to the Code of Federal 
Regulations.

[[Page 9]]


<R05>
Sec. 5.6  Daily publication.

    There shall be an edition of the Federal Register published for each 
official Federal working day.

[54 FR 9676, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 5.7  Delivery and mailing.

    The Government Printing Office shall distribute the Federal Register 
by delivery or by deposit at a post office at or before 9 a.m. on the 
publication day, except that each Federal Register dated for a Monday 
shall be deposited at a post office at or before 9 a.m. on the preceding 
Saturday.


<R05>
Sec. 5.8  Form of citation.

    Without prejudice to any other form of citation, Federal Register 
material may be cited by volume and page number, and the short form 
``FR'' may be used for ``Federal Register''. For example, ``37 FR 6803'' 
refers to material beginning on page 6803 of volume 37 of the daily 
issues.


<R05>
Sec. 5.9  Categories of documents.

    Each document published in the Federal Register shall be placed 
under one of the following categories, as indicated:
    (a) The President. This category contains each Executive order or 
Presidential proclamation and each other Presidential document that the 
President submits for publication or orders to be published.
    (b) Rules and regulations. This category contains each document 
having general applicability and legal effect, except those covered by 
paragraph (a) of this section. This category includes documents subject 
to codification, general policy statements concerning regulations, 
interpretations of agency regulations, statements of organization and 
function, and documents that affect other documents previously published 
in the rules and regulations section.
    (c) Proposed rules. This category contains each notice of proposed 
rulemaking submitted pursuant to section 553 of title 5, United States 
Code, or any other law, which if promulgated as a rule, would have 
general applicability and legal effect. This category includes documents 
that suggest changes to regulations in the Code of Federal Regulations, 
begin a rulemaking proceeding, and affect or relate to other documents 
previously published in the proposed rules section.
    (d) Notices. This category contains miscellaneous documents 
applicable to the public and not covered by paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) 
of this section. This category includes announcements of meetings and 
other information of public interest.

[37 FR 23604, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9676, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 5.10  Forms of publication.

    Pursuant to section 1506 of title 44, United States Code, the 
Administrative Committee publishes the Federal Register in the following 
formats: paper; microfiche; and online on GPO Access (44 U.S.C. 4101).

[61 FR 68118, Dec. 27, 1996]


<R03>
PART 6--INDEXES AND ANCILLARIES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
6.1  Index to daily issues.
6.2  Analytical subject indexes.
6.3  Daily lists of parts affected.
6.4  Monthly list of sections affected.
6.5  Indexes, digests, and guides.

    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 1506; sec. 6, E.O. 10530, 19 FR 2709; 3 CFR, 
1954-1958 Comp., p. 189.

    Source: 37 FR 23605, Nov. 4, 1972, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 6.1  Index to daily issues.

    Each daily issue of the Federal Register  shall be appropriately 
indexed.


<R05>
Sec. 6.2  Analytical subject indexes.

    Analytical subject indexes covering the contents of the Federal 
Register shall be published as currently as practicable and shall be 
cumulated and separately published at least once each calendar year.


<R05>
Sec. 6.3  Daily lists of parts affected.

    (a) Each daily issue of the Federal Register shall carry a numerical 
list of the parts of the Code of Federal Regulations specifically 
affected by documents published in that issue.
    (b) Beginning with the second issue of each month, each daily issue 
shall

[[Page 10]]

also carry a cumulated list of the parts affected by documents published 
during that month.


<R05>
Sec. 6.4  Monthly list of sections affected.

    A monthly list of sections of the Code of Federal Regulations 
affected shall be separately published on a cumulative basis during each 
calendar year. The list shall identify the sections of the Code 
specifically affected by documents published in the Federal Register 
during the period it covers.


<R05>
Sec. 6.5  Indexes, digests, and guides.

    (a) The Director of the Federal Register may order the preparation 
and publication of indexes, digests, and similar guides, based on laws, 
Presidential documents, regulatory documents, and notice materials 
published by the Office, which will serve users of the Federal Register. 
Indexes, digests, and similar guides will be published yearly or at 
other intervals as necessary to keep them current and useful.
    (b) Each index, digest, and guide is considered to be a special 
edition of the Federal Register whenever the public need requires 
special printing or special binding in substantial numbers.

[54 FR 9676, Mar. 7, 1989]

[[Page 11]]


<R03>
         SUBCHAPTER C--SPECIAL EDITIONS OF THE FEDERAL REGISTER

<R05>


<R03>
PART 8--CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
8.1  Policy.
8.2  Orderly development.
8.3  Periodic updating.
8.4  Indexes.
8.5  Ancillaries.
8.6  General format and binding.
8.7  Agency cooperation.
8.9  Form of citation.

    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 1506, 1510; sec. 6, E.O. 10530, 19 FR 2709; 3 
CFR, 1954-1958 Comp., p. 189.

    Source: 37 FR 23605, Nov. 4, 1972, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 8.1  Policy.

    (a) Pursuant to chapter 15 of title 44, United States Code, the 
Director of the Federal Register shall publish periodically a special 
edition of the Federal Register to present a compact and practical code 
called the ``Code of Federal Regulations'', to contain each Federal 
regulation of general applicability and legal effect.
    (b) The Administrative Committee intends that every practical means 
be used to keep the Code as current and readily usable as possible, 
within limitations imposed by dependability and reasonable costs.

[37 FR 23605, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9677, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 8.2  Orderly development.

    To assure orderly development of the Code of Federal Regulations 
along practical lines, the Director of the Federal Register may 
establish new titles in the Code and rearrange existing titles and 
subordinate assignments. However, before taking an action under this 
section, the Director shall consult with each agency directly affected 
by the proposed change.


<R05>
Sec. 8.3  Periodic updating.

    (a) Criteria. Each book of the Code shall be updated at least once 
each calendar year. If no change in its contents has occurred during the 
year, a simple notation to that effect may serve as the supplement for 
that year. More frequent updating of any unit of the Code may be made 
whenever the Director of the Federal Register determines that the 
content of the unit has been substantially superseded or otherwise 
determines that such action would be consistent with the intent and 
purpose of the Administrative Committee as stated in Sec. 8.1.
    (b) Staggered publication. The Code will be produced over a 12-month 
period under a staggered publication system to be determined by the 
Director of the Federal Register.
    (c) Cutoff dates. Each updated title of the Code will reflect each 
amendment to that title published as a codified regulation in the 
Federal Register on or before the ``As of'' date. Thus, each title 
updated as of July 1 each year will reflect all amendatory documents 
appearing in the daily Federal Register on or before July 1.

[37 FR 23605, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9677, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 8.4  Indexes.

    A subject index to the entire Code shall be annually revised and 
separately published. An agency-prepared index for any individual book 
may be published with the approval of the Director of the Federal 
Register.


<R05>
Sec. 8.5  Ancillaries.

    The Code shall provide, among others, the following-described 
finding aids:
    (a) Parallel tables of statutory authorities and rules. In the Code 
of Federal Regulations Index or at such other place as the Director of 
the Federal Register considers appropriate, numerical lists of all 
sections of the current edition of the United States Code (except 
section 301 of title 5) which are cited by issuing agencies as 
rulemaking authority for currently effective regulations in the Code of 
Federal Regulations. The lists shall be arranged in the order of the 
titles and sections of the United States Code with

[[Page 12]]

parallel citations to the pertinent titles and parts of the Code of 
Federal Regulations.
    (b) Parallel tables of Presidential documents and agency rules. In 
the Code of Federal Regulations Index, or at such other place as the 
Director of the Federal Register considers appropriate, tables of 
proclamations, Executive orders, and similar Presidential documents 
which are cited as rulemaking authority in currently effective 
regulations in the Code of Federal Regulations.
    (c) List of CFR sections affected. Following the text of each Code 
of Federal Regulations volume, a numerical list of sections which are 
affected by documents published in the Federal Register. (Separate 
volumes, ``List of Sections Affected, 1949-1963'' and ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected, 1964-1972'', list all sections of the Code which have 
been affected by documents published during the period January 1, 1949, 
to December 31, 1963, and January 1, 1964, to December 31, 1972, 
respectively.)\1\ Listings shall refer to Federal Register pages and 
shall be designed to enable the user of the Code to find the precise 
text that was in effect on a given date in the period covered.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ A three volume set, ``List of CFR Sections Affected, 1973-
1985'', lists all sections of the Code which have been affected during 
the period January 1, 1973 to December 31, 1985.

[37 FR 23605, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9677, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 8.6  General format and binding.

    The Director of the Federal Register shall provide for the binding 
of the Code into as many separate books as are indicated by the needs of 
users and compatible with the facilities of the Government Printing 
Office.


<R05>
Sec. 8.7  Agency cooperation.

    Each agency shall cooperate in keeping publication of the Code 
current by complying promptly with deadlines set by the Director of the 
Federal Register and the Public Printer.


<R05>
Sec. 8.9  Form of citation.

    The Code of Federal Regulations may be cited by title and section, 
and the short form ``CFR'' may be used for ``Code of Federal 
Regulations.'' For example, ``1 CFR 10.2'' refers to title 1, Code of 
Federal Regulations, part 10, section 2.


<R03>
PART 9--THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT MANUAL--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
9.1  Publication required.
9.2  Scope.

    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 1506; sec. 6, E.O. 10530, 19 FR 2709; 3 CFR, 
1954-1958 Comp., p. 189.

    Source: 37 FR 23606, Nov. 4, 1972, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 9.1  Publication required.

    The Director of the Federal Register shall separately publish 
annually or at times designated by the Administrative Committee of the 
Federal Register a special edition of the Federal Register called ``The 
United States Government Manual'' or any other title that the 
Administrative Committee of the Federal Register considers appropriate. 
The Director of the Federal Register may issue special supplements to 
the Manual when such supplementation is considered to be in the public 
interest.

[54 FR 9677, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 9.2  Scope.

    (a) The Manual shall contain appropriate information about the 
Executive, Legislative, and Judicial branches of the Federal Government, 
which for the major Executive agencies shall include--
    (1) Descriptions of the agency's public purposes, programs and 
functions;
    (2) Established places and methods whereby the public may obtain 
information and make submittals or requests; and
    (3) Lists of officials heading major operating units.
    (b) Brief information about quasiofficial agencies and supplemental 
information that in the opinion of the Director of the Federal Register 
is of enough public interest to warrant inclusion shall also be 
published in the Manual.

[[Page 13]]


<R03>
PART 10--PRESIDENTIAL PAPERS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                      Subpart A--Weekly Publication

Sec.
10.1  Publication required.
10.2  Scope and sources.
10.3  Format, indexes, and ancillaries.

                      Subpart B--Annual Publication

10.10  Publication required.
10.11  Scope and sources.
10.12  Format, indexes, and ancillaries.
10.13  Coverage of prior years.

    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 1506; sec. 6, E.O. 10530, 19 FR 2709; 3 CFR, 
1954-1958 Comp., p. 189.

    Source: 50 FR 12467, Mar. 28, 1985, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                      Subpart A--Weekly Publication


<R05>
Sec. 10.1  Publication required.

    The Director of the Federal Register shall publish a special edition 
of the Federal Register called the ``Weekly Compilation of Presidential 
Documents''.


<R05>
Sec. 10.2  Scope and sources.

    (a) The basic text of each publication consists of oral statements 
by the President or of writing subscribed by the President, and selected 
from transcripts or text issued by the Office of the White House Press 
Secretary, including--
    (1) Communications to Congress;
    (2) Public addresses and remarks;
    (3) News conferences and interviews;
    (4) Public messages and letters;
    (5) Statements released on miscellaneous subjects; and
    (6) Formal executive documents promulgated in accordance with law.
    (b) In addition, each publication includes selections, either in 
full text or ancillary form, from the following groups of documents, 
when issued by the Press Office.
    (1) Announcements of Presidential appointments and nominations;
    (2) White House statements and announcements on miscellaneous 
subjects;
    (3) Statements by the Press Secretary or Deputy Press Secretary;
    (4) Statements and news conferences by senior administration 
officials; and
    (5) Fact sheets.


<R05>
Sec. 10.3  Format, indexes, and ancillaries.

    (a) The ``Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents'' is 
published in the binding and style that the Administrative Committee of 
the Federal Register considers suitable for public and official use.
    (b) Each publication is appropriately indexed and contains ancillary 
information respecting Presidential activities and documents not printed 
in full text. In general, ancillary texts, notes, and tables are derived 
from official sources.


<R04>
                      Subpart B--Annual Publication


<R05>
Sec. 10.10  Publication required.

    The Director of the Federal Register shall publish annually a 
special edition of the Federal Register called the ``Public Papers of 
the Presidents of the United States''.


<R05>
Sec. 10.11  Scope and sources.

    The basic text of the Public Papers consists of the documents 
printed in the ``Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents''.


<R05>
Sec. 10.12  Format, indexes, and ancillaries.

    (a) Each publication covers one calendar year, unless procedures 
require otherwise, and is divided into books according to the amount of 
material to be included. The publication is published in the binding and 
style that the Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
considers suitable to the dignity of the Office of the President of the 
United States.
    (b) Each publication is appropriately indexed and contains 
additional ancillary information and illustrative material respecting 
significant Presidential documents and activities.


<R05>
Sec. 10.13  Coverage of prior years.

    The Administrative Committee may authorize the publication of 
volumes of papers of the Presidents covering specified years before 1945 
after consulting with the National Historical Publications and Records 
Commission.

[[Page 14]]


<R03>
  SUBCHAPTER D--AVAILABILITY OF OFFICE OF THE FEDERAL REGISTER PUBLICATIONS

<R05>


<R03>
PART 11--SUBSCRIPTIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
11.1  Subscription by the public.
11.2  Federal Register.
11.3  Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).
11.4  The United States Government Manual.
11.5  Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States.
11.6  Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents.
11.7  Federal Register Index.
11.8  LSA (List of CFR Sections Affected).

    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 1506; sec. 6, E.O. 10530, 19 FR 2709; 3 CFR, 
1954-1958 Comp., p. 189.

    Source: 54 FR 9677, Mar. 7, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 11.1  Subscription by the public.

    The Government Printing Office produces the paper and microfiche 
editions of the publications described in Sec. 2.5 of this chapter, and 
the Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington, 
DC 20402, makes them available for sale to the public. All fees are 
payable in advance to the Superintendent of Documents, Government 
Printing Office. They are not available for free distribution to the 
public.

[54 FR 9677, Mar. 7, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 68118, Dec. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 11.2  Federal Register.

    (a) Daily issues are provided to subscribers by mail for $555 per 
year in paper form. A combined subscription consisting of the daily 
issues, the monthly Federal Register Index, and the monthly LSA (List of 
CFR Sections Affected) is provided to subscribers by mail for $607 per 
year in paper form or $220 per year in microfiche form. Six month 
subscriptions to the paper and microfiche editions are also available at 
one-half the annual rate. Limited quantities of current or recent issues 
may be obtained for $8 per copy in paper form or $1 per copy in 
microfiche form.
    (b) The online edition of the Federal Register, issued under the 
authority of the Administrative Committee, is available on GPO Access, a 
service of the Government Printing Office (44 U.S.C. 4101).

[61 FR 68119, Dec. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 11.3  Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).

    A complete set is provided to subscribers by mail for $951 per year 
for the bound, paper edition or $247 per year for the microfiche 
edition. Individual volumes of the bound, paper edition of the Code are 
sold at prices determined by the Superintendent of Documents under the 
general direction of the Administrative Committee. The price of an 
individual volume in microfiche form is $1 per copy.

[61 FR 68119, Dec. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 11.4  The United States Government Manual.

    Copies of the bound, paper edition of the Manual are sold at a price 
determined by the Superintendent of Documents under the general 
direction of the Administrative Committee. The online edition of the 
Manual, issued under the authority of the Administrative Committee, is 
available on GPO Access, a service of the Government Printing Office (44 
U.S.C. 4101).

[54 FR 9677, Mar. 7, 1989, as amended at 58 FR 64872, Dec. 10, 1993; 61 
FR 68119, Dec. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 11.5  Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States.

    Copies of annual clothbound volumes are sold at a price determined 
by the Superintendent of Documents under the general direction of the 
Administrative Committee.


<R05>
Sec. 11.6  Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents.

    Copies in paper form are provided to subscribers for $80 per year by 
non-priority mail or $137 per year by first-class mail. The price of an 
individual copy in paper form is $3.

[61 FR 68119, Dec. 27, 1996

[[Page 15]]


<R05>
Sec. 11.7  Federal Register Index.

    The annual subscription price for the monthly Federal Register 
Index, purchased separately, in paper form, is $25.

[61 FR 68119, Dec. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 11.8  LSA (List of CFR Sections Affected).

    The annual subscription price for the monthly LSA (List of CFR 
Sections Affected), purchased separately, in paper form, is $27.

[61 FR 68119, Dec. 27, 1996]


<R03>
PART 12--OFFICIAL DISTRIBUTION WITHIN FEDERAL GOVERNMENT--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
12.1  Federal Register.
12.2  Code of Federal Regulations.
12.3  The United States Government Manual.
12.4  Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents.
12.5  Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States.

    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 1506; sec. 6, E.O. 10530, 19 FR 2709; 3 CFR, 
1954-1958 Comp., p. 189.

    Source: 54 FR 9678, Mar. 7, 1989.


<R05>
Sec. 12.1  Federal Register.

    (a) Copies of the daily Federal Register in paper or microfiche form 
shall be made available to the following without charge:
    (1) Members of Congress. Each Senator and each Member of the House 
of Representatives will be provided with not more than five copies of 
each daily issue based on a written request to the Director of the 
Federal Register.
    (2) Congressional committees. Each committee of the Senate and the 
House of Representatives will be provided with the number of copies 
needed for official use based on a written request from the chairperson, 
or authorized delegate, to the Director of the Federal Register.
    (3) Supreme Court. The Supreme Court will be provided with the 
number of copies needed for official use based on a written request to 
the Director of the Federal Register.
    (4) Other courts. Other constitutional or legislative courts of the 
United States will be provided with the number of copies needed for 
official use based on a written request from the Director of the 
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, or authorized delegate, to the 
Director of the Federal Register.
    (5) Executive agencies. Each Federal executive agency will be 
provided with the number of copies needed for official use based on a 
written request from the agency Federal Register authorizing officer, or 
the alternate, designated under Sec. 16.1 of this chapter, to the 
Director of the Federal Register.
    (b) Requisitions for quantity overruns of specific issues to be paid 
for by the agency are available as follows:
    (1) To meet its needs for special distribution of the Federal 
Register in substantial quantity, any agency may request an overrun of a 
specific issue.
    (2) An advance printing and binding requisition on Standard Form 1 
must be submitted by the agency directly to the Government Printing 
Office, to be received not later than 12 noon on the working day before 
publication.
    (c) Requisitions for quantity overruns of separate part issues to be 
paid for by the agency are available as follows:
    (1) Whenever it is determined by the Director of the Federal 
Register to be in the public interest, one or more documents may be 
published as a separate part (e.g., part II, part III) of the Federal 
Register.
    (2) Advance arrangements for this service must be made with the 
Office of the Federal Register.
    (3) Any agency may request an overrun of such a separate part by 
submitting an advance printing and binding requisition on Standard Form 
1 directly to the Government Printing Office, to be received not later 
than 12 noon on the working day before the publication date.
    (d) An agency may order limited quantities of extra copies of a 
specific issue of the Federal Register for official use, from the 
Superintendent of Documents, to be paid for by that agency.
    (e) Copies of the Federal Register Index and LSA (List of CFR 
Sections Affected) are included with each Federal Register official 
distribution.


<R05>
Sec. 12.2  Code of Federal Regulations.

    (a) Copies of the Code of Federal Regulations in paper or microfiche 
form

[[Page 16]]

shall be made available to the following without charge:
    (1) Congressional committees. Each committee of the Senate and House 
of Representatives will be provided with the number of copies needed for 
official use based on a written request from the chairperson, or 
authorized delegate, to the Director of the Federal Register.
    (2) Supreme Court. The Supreme Court will be provided with the 
number of copies needed for official use based on a written request to 
the Director of the Federal Register.
    (3) Other courts. Other constitutional and legislative courts of the 
United States will be provided with the number of copies needed for 
official use based on a written request from the Director of the 
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, or authorized delegate, to the 
Director of the Federal Register.
    (4) Executive agencies. Each Federal executive agency will be 
provided with the number of copies needed for official use, not to 
exceed 300 copies of individual titles per agency, based on a written 
request from the agency Federal Register authorizing officer, or the 
alternate, designated under Sec. 16.1 of this chapter, to the Director 
of the Federal Register.
    (b) Legislative, judicial, and executive agencies of the Federal 
Government may obtain additional copies of selected units of the Code, 
at cost, for official use, by submission, before the press run, of a 
printing and binding requisition to the Government Printing Office on 
Standard Form 1.
    (c) After the press run, each request for extra copies of selected 
units of the Code must be addressed to the Superintendent of Documents, 
to be paid for by the agency making the request.


<R05>
Sec. 12.3  The United States Government Manual.

    (a) Copies of The United States Government Manual shall be made 
available to the following without charge:
    (1) Members of Congress. Each Senator and each Member of the House 
of Representatives will be provided with twelve copies.
    (2) Congressional committees. Each committee of the Senate and House 
of Representatives will be provided with the number of copies needed for 
official use based on a written request from the chairperson, or 
authorized delegate, to the Director of the Federal Register.
    (3) Supreme Court. The Supreme Court will be provided with not more 
than 18 copies based on a written request to the Director of the Federal 
Register.
    (4) Other courts. Other constitutional and legislative courts of the 
United States will be provided with one copy based on a written request 
from the Director of the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, or 
authorized delegate, to the Director of the Federal Register.
    (5) Executive agencies. Each head of a Federal executive agency and 
each liaison officer designated under Sec. 16.1 or 20.1 of this chapter 
will be provided with one copy.
    (b) Legislative, judicial, and executive agencies of the Federal 
Government may obtain additional copies of the Manual, at cost, for 
official use, by submission, before the press run, of a printing and 
binding requisition to the Government Printing Office on Standard Form 
1.
    (c) After the press run, each request for extra copies of the Manual 
must be addressed to the Superintendent of Documents, to be paid for by 
the agency making the request.


<R05>
Sec. 12.4  Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents.

    (a) Copies of the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents shall 
be made available to the following without charge:
    (1) Members of Congress. Each Senator and each Member of the House 
of Representatives will be provided with the number of copies needed for 
official use based on a written request to the Director of the Federal 
Register.
    (2) Congressional committees. Each committee of the Senate and the 
House of Representatives will be provided with the number of copies 
needed for official use based on a written request from the chairperson, 
or authorized delegate, to the Director of the Federal Register.
    (3) Supreme Court. The Supreme Court will be provided with the 
number of copies needed for official use based on a written request to 
the Director of the Federal Register.

[[Page 17]]

    (4) Other courts. Other constitutional and legislative courts of the 
United States will be provided with the number of copies needed for 
official use based on a written request from the Director of the 
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, or authorized delegate, to the 
Director of the Federal Register.
    (5) Executive agencies. Each Federal executive agency will be 
provided with the number of copies needed for official use based on a 
written request from the agency Federal Register authorizing officer, or 
the alternate designated under Sec. 16.1 of this chapter, to the 
Director of the Federal Register.
    (b) Legislative, judicial, and executive agencies of the Federal 
Government may obtain additional copies of selected issues of the Weekly 
Compilation of Presidential Documents, at cost, for official use, by 
submission, before the press run, of a printing and binding requisition 
to the Government Printing Office on a Standard Form 1.
    (c) After the press run, each request for extra copies of selected 
issues must be addressed to the Superintendent of Documents, to be paid 
for by the agency making the request.


<R05>
Sec. 12.5  Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States.

    (a) Copies of the Public Papers of the Presidents of the United 
States shall be made available to the following without charge:
    (1) Members of Congress. Each Senator and each Member of the House 
of Representatives will be provided with one copy of each annual 
publication published during the Member's term in office based on a 
written request to the Director of the Federal Register.
    (2) Supreme Court. The Supreme Court will be provided with not more 
than 12 copies of each publication based on a written request to the 
Director of the Federal Register.
    (3) Executive agencies. Each head of a Federal executive agency will 
be provided with one copy of each annual publication based on a written 
request from the agency Federal Register authorizing officer, or the 
alternate, designated under Sec. 16.1 of this chapter, to the Director 
of the Federal Register.
    (b) Legislative, judicial, and executive agencies of the Federal 
Government may obtain additional copies, at cost, for official use, by 
submission before the press run, of a printing and binding requisition 
to the Government Printing Office on Standard Form 1.
    (c) After the press run, each request for extra copies must be 
addressed to the Superintendent of Documents, to be paid for by the 
agency making the request.

[[Page 18]]


<R03>
   SUBCHAPTER E--PREPARATION, TRANSMITTAL, AND PROCESSING OF DOCUMENTS

<R05>


<R03>
PART 15--SERVICES TO FEDERAL AGENCIES--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
15.1  Cooperation.
15.2  Information services.
15.3  Staff assistance.
15.4  Reproduction and certification of copies of acts and documents.

                      Subpart B--Special Assistance

15.10  Information on drafting and publication.

    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 1506; sec. 6, E.O. 10530, 19 FR 2709; 3 CFR, 
1954-1958 Comp., p. 189.

    Source: 37 FR 23607, Nov. 4, 1972, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 15.1  Cooperation.

    The Director of the Federal Register shall assist each agency in 
complying with the pertinent publication laws to assure efficient public 
service in promulgating administrative documents having the effect of 
legal notice or of law.


<R05>
Sec. 15.2  Information services.

    The Director of the Federal Register shall provide for the answering 
of each appropriate inquiry presented in person, by telephone, or in 
writing. Each written communication and each matter involving the 
Administrative Committee shall be sent to the Director, Office of the 
Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration, 
Washington, DC 20408.

[50 FR 12468, Mar. 28, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 15.3  Staff assistance.

    The staff of the Office of the Federal Register shall provide 
informal assistance and advice to officials of the various agencies with 
respect to general or specific programs of regulatory drafting, 
procedures, and promulgation practices.


<R05>
Sec. 15.4  Reproduction and certification of copies of acts and documents.

    The Director of the Federal Register shall furnish to requesting 
agencies, at cost, reproductions or certified copies of original acts 
and documents filed with that Office that are needed for official use 
unless funds are appropriated for that purpose.

[50 FR 12468, Mar. 28, 1985, as amended at 54 FR 9679, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R04>
                      Subpart B--Special Assistance


<R05>
Sec. 15.10  Information on drafting and publication.

    The Director of the Federal Register may prepare, and distribute to 
agencies, information and instructions designed to promote effective 
compliance with the purposes of chapter 15 of title 44, United States 
Code, sections 552-553 of title 5, United States Code, related statutes, 
and this chapter. The Director may also develop and conduct programs of 
technical instruction.


<R03>
PART 16--AGENCY REPRESENTATIVES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
16.1  Designation.
16.2  Liaison duties.
16.3  Certifying duties.
16.4  Authorizing duties.

    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 1506; sec. 6, E.O. 10530, 19 FR 2709; 3 CFR, 
1954-1958 Comp., p. 189.

    Source: 37 FR 23608, Nov. 4, 1972, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 16.1  Designation.

    (a) Each agency shall designate, from its officers or employees, 
persons to serve in the following capacities with relation to the Office 
of the Federal Register:
    (1) A liaison officer and an alternate.
    (2) A certifying officer and an alternate.
    (3) An authorizing officer and an alternate.

The same person may be designated to serve in one or more of these 
positions.

[[Page 19]]

    (b) In choosing its liaison officer, each agency should consider 
that this officer will be the main contact between that agency and the 
Office of the Federal Register and that the liaison officer will be 
charged with the duties set forth in Sec. 16.2. Therefore, the agency 
should choose a person who is directly involved in the agency's 
regulatory program.
    (c) Each agency shall notify the Director of the name, title, 
address, and telephone number of each person it designates under this 
section and shall promptly notify the Director of any changes.


<R05>
Sec. 16.2  Liaison duties.

    Each agency liaison officer shall--
    (a) Represent the agency in all matters relating to the submission 
of documents to the Office of the Federal Register, and respecting 
general compliance with this chapter;
    (b) Be responsible for the effective distribution and use within the 
agency of Federal Register information on document drafting and 
publication assistance authorized by Sec. 15.10 of this chapter;
    (c) Promote the agency's participation in the technical instruction 
authorized by Sec. 15.10 of this chapter; and
    (d) Be available to discuss documents submitted for publication with 
the editors of the Federal Register.

[54 FR 9679, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 16.3  Certifying duties.

    The agency certifying officer is responsible for attaching the 
required number of true copies of each original document submitted by 
the agency to the Office of the Federal Register and for making the 
certification required by Secs. 18.5 and 18.6 of this chapter.

[54 FR 9679, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 16.4  Authorizing duties.

    The agency authorizing officer is responsible for furnishing, to the 
Director of the Federal Register, a current mailing list of officers or 
employees of the agency who are authorized to receive the Federal 
Register, the Code of Federal Regulations, and the Weekly Compilation of 
Presidential Documents for official use.

[54 FR 9679, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R03>
PART 17--FILING FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION AND PUBLICATION SCHEDULES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.

                    Subpart A--Receipt and Processing

17.1  Receipt and processing.

                       Subpart B--Regular Schedule

17.2  Procedure and timing for regular schedule.

                      Subpart C--Emergency Schedule

17.3  Criteria for emergency publication.
17.4  Procedure and timing for emergency publication.
17.5  Criteria for emergency filing for public inspection.
17.6  Procedure and timing for emergency filing for public inspection.

                      Subpart D--Deferred Schedule

17.7  Criteria for deferred schedule.

    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 1506; sec. 6, E.O. 10530, 19 FR 2709; 3 CFR, 
1954-1958 Comp., p. 189.

    Source: 37 FR 23608, Nov. 4, 1972, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                    Subpart A--Receipt and Processing


<R05>
Sec. 17.1  Receipt and processing.

    Unless special arrangements are made with the Director of the 
Federal Register, the Office of the Federal Register receives documents 
only during official working hours. Upon receipt, each document shall be 
held for confidential processing until it is filed for public 
inspection.


<R04>
                       Subpart B--Regular Schedule


<R05>
Sec. 17.2  Procedure and timing for regular schedule.

    (a) Each document received shall be filed for public inspection only 
after it has been received, processed and assigned a publication date.

[[Page 20]]

    (b) Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, each 
document received by 2:00 p.m. which meets the requirements of this 
chapter shall be assigned to the regular schedule. Unless the issuing 
agency makes special arrangements otherwise, or the Office determines 
that the document requires a deferred schedule (see 1 CFR 17.7), receipt 
of a document by 2:00 p.m. is considered to be a request for filing for 
public inspection and publication on the regular schedule. Documents 
received after 2:00 p.m. which meet the requirements of this chapter 
shall be assigned to the next working day's regular schedule.
    (c) The regular schedule for filing for public inspection and 
publication is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Filed for public                     
    Received before 2:00 p.m.         inspection           Published    
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monday..........................  Wednesday.........  Thursday          
Tuesday.........................  Thursday..........  Friday            
Wednesday.......................  Friday............  Monday            
Thursday........................  Monday............  Tuesday           
Friday..........................  Tuesday...........  Wednesday         
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Where a legal Federal holiday intervenes, one additional work day is 
added.
    (d) Each notice of meeting issued under the ``Government in the 
Sunshine Act'' (5 U.S.C. 552b(e)(3)) is placed on immediate public 
inspection after it has been received, processed, and assigned a 
publication date.
    (1) Each notice received before 4:00 p.m. is scheduled to be 
published 2 working days later.
    (2) Each notice received after 4:00 p.m. is scheduled to be 
published 3 working days later.

[54 FR 9680, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R04>
                      Subpart C--Emergency Schedule


<R05>
Sec. 17.3  Criteria for emergency publication.

    The emergency schedule is designed to provide the fastest possible 
publication of a document involving the prevention, alleviation, 
control, or relief of an emergency situation.

[37 FR 23608, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9680, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 17.4  Procedure and timing for emergency publication.

    (a) Each agency requesting publication on the emergency schedule 
shall briefly describe the emergency and the benefits to be attributed 
to immediate publication in the Federal Register. The request must be 
made by letter.
    (b) The Director of the Federal Register shall assign a document to 
the emergency schedule whenever the Director concurs with a request for 
that action and it is feasible.
    (c) Each document assigned to the emergency schedule shall be 
published as soon as possible.
    (d) Each document assigned to the emergency schedule for publication 
will be filed for public inspection on the working day before 
publication unless emergency filing for public inspection is also 
requested.

[37 FR 23608, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9680, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 17.5  Criteria for emergency filing for public inspection.

    An agency may request emergency filing for public inspection for 
documents to be published under the regular, emergency or deferred 
publication schedules. Emergency filing for public inspection provides 
for the fastest possible public access to a document after it has been 
received, processed and assigned a publication date. Emergency filing 
for public inspection is considered a special arrangement under 
Sec. 17.2 of this part that results in deviation from the regular 
schedule for filing for public inspection. A document receiving 
emergency filing for public inspection remains on public inspection 
until it is published according to the schedule for publication.

[54 FR 9680, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 17.6  Procedure and timing for emergency filing for public inspection.

    (a) Each agency requesting emergency filing for public inspection 
shall briefly describe the emergency and the benefits to be attributed 
to immediate public access. The request must be made by letter.
    (b) The Director of the Federal Register shall approve an emergency 
filing for public inspection request whenever

[[Page 21]]

the Director concurs with a request for that action and it is feasible.
    (c) Each document approved for emergency filing for public 
inspection shall be filed as soon as possible following processing and 
scheduling.

[54 FR 9680, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R04>
                      Subpart D--Deferred Schedule


<R05>
Sec. 17.7  Criteria for deferred schedule.

    (a) A document may be assigned to the deferred schedule under the 
following conditions:
    (1) There are technical problems, unusual or lengthy tables, or 
illustrations, or the document is of such size as to require 
extraordinary processing time.
    (2) The agency concerned requests a deferred publication date.
    (b) The Office of the Federal Register staff will notify the agency 
if its documents must be assigned to a deferred schedule.

[37 FR 23608, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9680, Mar. 7, 1989; 54 
FR 23343, May 31, 1989]


<R03>
PART 18--PREPARATION AND TRANSMITTAL OF DOCUMENTS GENERALLY--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
18.1  Original and copies required.
18.2  Prohibition on combined category documents.
18.3  Submission of documents and letters of transmittal.
18.4  Form of document.
18.5  Certified copies.
18.6  Form of certification.
18.7  Signature.
18.8  Seal.
18.9  Style.
18.10  Illustrations, tabular material, and forms.
18.12  Preamble requirements.
18.13  Withdrawal or correction of filed documents.
18.15  Correction of errors in printing.
18.16  Reinstatement of expired regulations.
18.17  Effective dates and time periods.
18.20  Identification of subjects in agency regulations.

    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 1506; sec. 6, E.O. 10530, 19 FR 2709; 3 CFR, 
1954-1958 Comp., p. 189.

    Source: 37 FR 23609, Nov. 4, 1972, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 18.1  Original and copies required.

    Except as provided in Sec. 19.2 of this subchapter for Executive 
orders and proclamations, each agency submitting a document to be filed 
and published in the Federal Register shall send an original and two 
duplicate originals or certified copies.\1\ However, if the document is 
printed or processed on both sides, one of the copies sent by the agency 
must be a collated, single-sided copy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Agencies with computer processed data are urged to consult with 
the Office of the Federal Register staff about possible use of the data 
in the publication process.

[54 FR 9680, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 18.2  Prohibition on combined category documents.

    (a) The Director of the Federal Register will not accept a document 
for filing and publication if it combines material that must appear 
under more than one category in the Federal Register. For example, a 
document may not contain both rulemaking and notice of proposed 
rulemaking material.
    (b) Where two related documents are to be published in the same 
Federal Register issue, the agency may insert a cross-reference in each 
document.

[54 FR 9680, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 18.3  Submission of documents and letters of transmittal.

    (a) Each document authorized or required by law to be filed for 
public inspection with the Office of the Federal Register and published 
in the Federal Register shall be sent to the Director of the Federal 
Register.
    (b) Except for cases involving special handling or treatment, there 
is no need for a letter of transmittal for a document submitted for 
filing and Federal Register  publication.
    (c) Receipt dates are determined at the time a signed original and 
clear and legible copies are received.

[37 FR 23609, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9680, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 18.4  Form of document.

    (a) A printed or processed document may be accepted for filing for 
public inspection and publication if it is on

[[Page 22]]

bond or similar quality paper, legible, and free of adhesive or 
correction tape.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ Agencies with computer processed data are urged to consult with 
the Office of the Federal Register staff about possible use of the data 
in the publication process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) A document in the form of a letter or press release may not be 
accepted for filing for public inspection or publication in the rules 
and regulations, proposed rules, or notices categories of the Federal 
Register.
    (c) Original documents submitted by telecommunication and 
authenticated by digital signatures consistent with applicable Federal 
standards and Office of the Federal Register technical specifications 
may be accepted for publication.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \3\ At present, submission of documents by telecommunication is 
limited to selected pilot projects.

[54 FR 9681, Mar. 7, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 68119, Dec. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 18.5  Certified copies.

    The certified copies or duplicate originals of each document must be 
submitted with the original. Each copy or duplicate must be entirely 
clear and legible.

[54 FR 9681, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 18.6  Form of certification.

    Each copy of each document submitted for filing and publication, 
except a Presidential document or a duplicate original, must be 
certified as follows:

(Certified to be a true copy of the original)

The certification must be signed by a certifying officer designated 
under Sec. 16.1 of this chapter.

[54 FR 9681, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 18.7  Signature.

    The original and each duplicate original document must be signed in 
ink, with the name and title of the official signing the document typed 
or stamped beneath the signature. Initialed or impressed signatures will 
not be accepted. Documents submitted under Sec. 18.4(c) may be 
authenticated as original documents by digital signatures.

[37 FR 23609, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9681, Mar. 7, 1989; 61 
FR 68119, Dec. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 18.8  Seal.

    Use of a seal on an original document or certified copy is optional 
with the issuing agency.


<R05>
Sec. 18.9  Style.

    Each document submitted by an agency for filing and publication 
shall conform to the current edition of the U.S. Government Printing 
Office Style Manual in punctuation, capitalization, spelling, and other 
matters of style.

[54 FR 9681, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 18.10  Illustrations, tabular material, and forms.

    (a) If it is necessary to publish a form or illustration, a clear 
and legible original form or illustration, or a clear and completely 
legible reproduction approximately 8 \1/2\ by 11 inches, shall be 
included in the original document and each certified copy.
    (b) A document that includes tabular material may be assigned to the 
deferred publication schedule. See Sec. 17.7.

[54 FR 9681, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 18.12  Preamble requirements.

    (a) Each agency submitting a proposed or final rule document for 
publication shall prepare a preamble which will inform the reader, who 
is not an expert in the subject area, of the basis and purpose for the 
rule or proposal.
    (b) The preamble shall be in the following format and contain the 
following information:

AGENCY:------------------...............................................
                                                (Name of issuing agency)

ACTION:------------------...............................................
(Notice of Intent), (Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking), (Proposed 
Rule), (Final Rule), (Other).

SUMMARY: ------------------.............................................
(Brief statements, in simple language, of: (i) the action being taken; 
(ii) the circumstances which created the need for the action; and (iii) 
the intended effect of the action.)


[[Page 23]]


DATES: ---------------------............................................
(Comments must be received on or before: ----------.) (Proposed 
effective date: ----------.) (Effective date: ----------.) (Hearing: --
--------.) (Other: ----------.)

ADDRESSES: ----------------.............................................
    (Any relevant addresses.)

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:________________________________________
........................................................................
(For Executive departments and agencies, the name and telephone number 
of a person in the agency to contact for additional information about 
the document [Presidential Memorandum, 41 FR 42764, September 28, 
1976].)

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:______________________________________________
........................................................................
(See paragraph (c) of this section.)

    (c) The agency may include the following information in the 
preamble, as applicable:
    (1) A discussion of the background and major issues involved;
    (2) In the case of a final rule, any significant differences between 
it and the proposed rule;
    (3) A response to substantive public comments received; and
    (4) Any other information the agency considers appropriate.

[41 FR 56624, Dec. 29, 1976, as amended at 54 FR 9681, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 18.13  Withdrawal or correction of filed documents.

    (a) A document that has been filed for public inspection with the 
Office of the Federal Register but not yet published, may be withdrawn 
from publication or corrected by the submitting agency. Withdrawals or 
minor corrections may be made with a timely letter, signed by a duly 
authorized representative of the agency. Extensive corrections may 
require agency withdrawal of the document from publication.
    (b) Both the originally filed document and the withdrawing or 
correcting letter shall remain on file. The original document and the 
withdrawing or correcting letter will be retained by the Office of the 
Federal Register after the public inspection period expires.

[54 FR 9681, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 18.15  Correction of errors in printing.

    (a) Typographical or clerical errors made in the printing of the 
Federal Register shall be corrected by insertion of an appropriate 
notation or a reprinting in the Federal Register published without 
further agency documentation, if the Director of the Federal Register 
determines that--
    (1) The error would tend to confuse or mislead the reader; or
    (2) The error would affect text subject to codification.
    (b) The issuing agency shall review published documents and notify 
the Office of the Federal Register of printing errors found in published 
documents.
    (c) If the error was in the document as submitted by the agency, the 
issuing agency must prepare and submit for publication a correction 
document.

[50 FR 12468, Mar. 28, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 18.16  Reinstatement of expired regulations.

    Agencies may reinstate regulations removed from the Code of Federal 
Regulations data base which have expired by their own terms only by 
republishing the regulations in full text in the Federal Register.

[54 FR 9681, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 18.17  Effective dates and time periods.

    (a) Each document submitted for publication in the Federal Register 
that includes an effective date or time period should either set forth a 
date certain or a time period measured by a certain number of days after 
publication in the Federal Register. When a document sets forth a time 
period measured by a certain number of days after publication, Office of 
the Federal Register staff will compute the date to be inserted in the 
document as set forth in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) Dates certain will be computed by counting the day after the 
publication day as one, and by counting each succeeding day, including 
Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. However, where the final count would 
fall on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the date certain will be the 
next succeeding Federal business day.

[[Page 24]]

    (c) In the event an effective date is dependent upon Congressional 
action, or an act of Congress or a dispositive Federal court decision 
establishes or changes the effective date of an agency's regulation, the 
issuing agency shall promptly publish a document in the Federal Register 
announcing the effective date.

[37 FR 23609, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9681, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 18.20  Identification of subjects in agency regulations.

    (a) Federal Register documents. Each agency that submits a document 
that is published in the Rules and Regulations section or the Proposed 
Rules section of the Federal Register shall--
    (1) Include a list of index terms for each Code of Federal 
Regulations part affected by the document; and
    (2) Place the list of index terms as the last item in the 
Supplementary Information portion of the preamble for the document.
    (b) Federal Register Thesaurus. To prepare its list of index terms, 
each agency shall use terms contained in the Federal Register Thesaurus 
of Indexing Terms. Agencies may include additional terms not contained 
in the Thesaurus as long as the appropriate Thesaurus terms are also 
used. Copies of the Federal Register Thesaurus of Indexing Terms are 
available from the Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and 
Records Administration, Washington, D.C. 20408.

[46 FR 7163, Jan. 22, 1981, as amended at 54 FR 9681, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R03>
PART 19--EXECUTIVE ORDERS AND PRESIDENTIAL PROCLAMATIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
19.1  Form.
19.2  Routing and approval of drafts.
19.3  Routing and certification of originals and copies.
19.4  Proclamations calling for the observance of special days or 
          events.
19.5  Proclamations of treaties excluded.
19.6  Definition.

    Authority: Secs. 1 to 6 of E.O. 11030, 27 FR 5847, 3 CFR, 1959-1963 
Comp., p. 610; E.O. 11354, 32 FR 7695, 3 CFR, 1966-1970 Comp., p. 652; 
and E.O. 12080, 43 FR 42235, 3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 224.

    Source: 37 FR 23610, Nov. 4, 1972, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 19.1  Form.

    Proposed Executive orders and proclamations shall be prepared in 
accordance with the following requirements:
    (a) The order or proclamation shall be given a suitable title.
    (b) The order or proclamation shall contain a citation of the 
authority under which it is issued.
    (c) Punctuation, capitalization, spelling, and other matters of 
style shall, in general, conform to the most recent edition of the U.S. 
Government Printing Office Style Manual.
    (d) The spelling of geographic names shall conform to the decisions 
of the Board on Geographic Names, established by section 2 of the Act of 
July 25, 1947, 61 Stat. 456 (43 U.S.C. 364a).
    (e) Descriptions of tracts of land shall conform, so far as 
practicable, to the most recent edition of the ``Specifications for 
Descriptions of Tracts of Land for Use in Executive Orders and 
Proclamations,''\1\ prepared by the Bureau of Land Management, 
Department of the Interior.

    \1\ Agencies with computer processed data are urged to consult with 
the Office of the Federal Register staff about possible use of the data 
in the publication process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (f) Proposed Executive orders and proclamations shall be typewritten 
on paper approximately 8 x 13 inches, shall have a left-hand margin of 
approximately 1\1/2\ inches and a right-hand margin of approximately 1 
inch, and shall be double-spaced except that quotations, tabulations, 
and descriptions of land may be single-spaced.
    (g) Proclamations issued by the President shall conclude with the 
following-described recitation:

    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand this ---- day of --
--------, in the year of our Lord --------------, and of the 
Independence of the United States of America the --------------.

[37 FR 23610, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9681, Mar. 7, 1989]

[[Page 25]]


<R05>
Sec. 19.2  Routing and approval of drafts.

    (a) A proposed Executive order or proclamation shall first be 
submitted, with seven copies thereof, to the Director of the Office of 
Management and Budget, together with a letter, signed by the head or 
other properly authorized officer of the originating Federal agency, 
explaining the nature, purpose, background, and effect of the proposed 
Executive order or proclamation and its relationship, if any, to 
pertinent laws and other Executive orders or proclamations.
    (b) If the Director of the Office of Management and Budget approves 
the proposed Executive order or proclamation, he shall transmit it to 
the Attorney General for his consideration as to both form and legality.
    (c) If the Attorney General approves the proposed Executive order or 
proclamation, he shall transmit it to the Director of the Office of the 
Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration: 
Provided, That in cases involving sufficient urgency the Attorney 
General may transmit it directly to the President: And provided further, 
That the authority vested in the Attorney General by this section may be 
delegated by him, in whole or in part, to the Deputy Attorney General, 
Solicitor General, or to such Assistant Attorney General as he may 
designate.
    (d) After determining that the proposed Executive order or 
proclamation conforms to the requirements of Sec. 19.1 and is free from 
typographical or clerical error, the Director of the Office of the 
Federal Register shall transmit it and three copies thereof to the 
President.
    (e) If the proposed Executive order or proclamation is disapproved 
by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget or by the 
Attorney General, it shall not thereafter be presented to the President 
unless it is accompanied by a statement of the reasons for such 
disapproval.


<R05>
Sec. 19.3  Routing and certification of originals and copies.

    (a) If the order or proclamation is signed by the President, the 
original and two copies shall be forwarded to the Director of the 
Federal Register for publication in the Federal Register. 
    (b) The Office of the Federal Register shall cause to be placed upon 
the copies of all Executive orders and proclamations forwarded as 
provided in paragraph (a) of this section the following notation, to be 
signed by the Director or by some person authorized by him to sign such 
notation: ``Certified to be a true copy of the original.''


<R05>
Sec. 19.4  Proclamations calling for the observance of special days or events.

    Except as may be otherwise provided by law, responsibility for the 
preparation and presentation of proposed proclamations calling for the 
observance of special days, or other periods of time, or events, shall 
be assigned by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget to 
such agencies as he may consider appropriate. Such proposed 
proclamations shall be submitted to the Director at least 60 days before 
the date of the specified observance. Notwithstanding the provisions of 
Sec. 19.2, the Director shall transmit any approved commemorative 
proclamations to the President.

[37 FR 23610, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9681, Mar. 7, 1989]

<R05>
Sec. 19.5  Proclamations of treaties excluded.

    Consonant with the provisions of chapter 15 of title 44 of the 
United States Code (44 U.S.C. 1511), nothing in these regulations shall 
be construed to apply to treaties, conventions, protocols, or other 
international agreements, or proclamations thereof by the President.

<R05>
Sec. 19.6  Definition.

    The term ``Presidential proclamations and Executive orders,'' as 
used in chapter 15 of title 44 of the United States Code (44 U.S.C. 
1505(a)), shall, except as the President or his representative may 
hereafter otherwise direct, be deemed to include such attachments 
thereto as are referred to in the respective proclamations or orders.


<R03>
PART 20--HANDLING OF THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT MANUAL STATEMENTS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
20.1  Liaison officers.

[[Page 26]]

20.2  Preparation of agency statements.
20.3  Organization.
20.4  Description of program activities.
20.5  Sources of information.
20.6  Form, style, arrangement and apportionment of space.
20.7  Deadline dates.

    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 1506; sec. 6, E.O. 10530, 19 FR 2709; 3 CFR, 
1954-1958 Comp., p. 189.

    Source: 37 FR 23611, Nov. 4, 1972, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 20.1  Liaison officers.

    (a) Each of the following shall appoint an officer to maintain 
liaison with the Office on matters relating to The United States 
Government Manual:
    (1) Agencies of the legislative and judicial branches.
    (2) Executive agencies that do not have a liaison officer designated 
under Sec. 16.1 of this chapter or who wish to appoint a liaison officer 
for Manual matters other than the one designated under such Sec. 16.1.
    (3) Quasi-official agencies represented in the Manual.
    (4) Any other agency that the Director believes should be included 
in the Manual.
    (b) Each liaison officer will insure agency compliance with part 9 
of this chapter and this part 20.

[37 FR 23611, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 50 FR 12468, Mar. 28, 1985; 54 
FR 9682, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 20.2  Preparation of agency statements.

    In accordance with schedules established under Sec. 20.7 each agency 
shall submit for publication in the Manual an official draft of the 
information required by Sec. 9.2 of this chapter and this part 20.


<R05>
Sec. 20.3  Organization.

    (a) Information about lines of authority and organization may be 
reflected in a chart if the chart clearly delineates the agency's 
organizational structure. Charts must be prepared so as to be perfectly 
legible when reduced to the size of a Manual page. Charts that do not 
meet this requirement will not be included in the Manual.
    (b) Listings of heads of operating units should be arranged whenever 
possible to reflect relationships between units.
    (c) Narrative descriptions of organizational structure or hierarchy 
that duplicate information conveyed by charts or by lists of officials 
will not be published in the Manual.

[37 FR 23611, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9682, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 20.4  Description of program activities.

    (a) Descriptions should clearly state the public purposes that the 
agency serves, and the programs that carry out those purposes.
    (b) Descriptions of the responsibilities of individuals or of 
administrative units common to most agencies will not be accepted for 
publication in the Manual.

[54 FR 9682, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 20.5  Sources of information.

    Pertinent sources of information useful to the public, in areas of 
public interest such as employment, consumer activities, contracts, 
services to small business, and other topics of public interest should 
be provided with each agency statement. These sources of information 
shall plainly identify the places at which the public may obtain 
information or make submittals or requests.


<R05>
Sec. 20.6  Form, style, arrangement and apportionment of space.

    The form, style, and arrangement of agency statements and other 
materials included in the Manual and the apportionment of space therein 
shall be determined by the Director of the Federal Register. The U.S. 
Government Printing Office Style Manual is the applicable reference work 
in determining style.


<R05>
Sec. 20.7  Deadline dates.

    The Manual is published on a schedule designed to provide the public 
with information about their Government on a timely basis. Therefore, 
agencies must comply with the deadline dates

[[Page 27]]

established by the Director of the Federal Register for transmittal of 
statements and charts and for the verification of proofs. Failure to do 
so may result in publication of an outdated statement or the omission of 
important material, thus depriving members of the public of information 
they have a right to expect in a particular edition of the Manual.


<R03>
PART 21--PREPARATION OF DOCUMENTS SUBJECT TO CODIFICATION--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
21.1  Drafting.
21.6  Notice of expiration of codified material.

                             Code Structure 

21.7  Titles and subtitles.
21.8  Chapters and subchapters.
21.9  Parts, subparts, and undesignated center heads.
21.10  Sections.

                               Numbering 

21.11  Standard organization of the Code of Federal Regulations.
21.12  Reservation of numbers.
21.14  Deviations from standard organization of the Code of Federal 
          Regulations.

                                Headings 

21.16  Required document headings.
21.18  Tables of contents.
21.19  Composition of part headings.

                               Amendments 

21.20  General requirements.

                               References 

21.21  General requirements: References.
21.23  Parallel citations of Code and Federal Register. 
21.24  References to 1938 edition of Code.

                        Effective Date Statement 

21.30  General.

                           OMB Control Numbers

21.35  OMB control numbers.

                    Subpart B--Citations of Authority

21.40  General requirements: Authority citations.
21.41  Agency responsibility.
21.42  Exceptions.

                               Placement 

21.43  Placing and amending authority citations.
21.45  Nonstatutory authority.

                                  Form 

21.51  General.
21.52  Statutory material.
21.53  Nonstatutory materials.

    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 1506; sec. 6, E.O. 10530, 19 FR 2709; 3 CFR, 
1954-1958 Comp., p. 189.

    Source: 37 FR 23611, Nov. 4, 1972, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 21.1  Drafting.

    (a) Each agency that prepares a document that is subject to 
codification shall draft it as an amendment to the Code of Federal 
Regulations, in accordance with this subchapter, before submitting it to 
the Office of the Federal Register.
    (b) Each agency that prepares a document that is subject to 
codification shall include words of issuance and amendatory language 
that precisely describes the relationship of the new provisions to the 
Code.

[37 FR 23611, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9682, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 21.6  Notice of expiration of codified material.

    Whenever a codified regulation expires after a specified period by 
its own terms or by law, the issuing agency shall submit a notification 
by document for publication in the Federal Register.

[54 FR 9682, Mar. 7, 1989]

                             Code Structure 


<R05>
Sec. 21.7  Titles and subtitles.

    (a) The major divisions of the Code are titles, each of which brings 
together broadly related Government functions.
    (b) Subtitles may be used to distinguish between materials emanating 
from an overall agency and the material issued by its various 
components. Subtitles may also be used to group chapters within a title.

[[Page 28]]


<R05>
Sec. 21.8  Chapters and subchapters.

    (a) The normal divisions of a title are chapters, assigned to the 
various agencies within a title descriptive of the subject matter 
covered by the agencies' regulations.
    (b) Subchapters may be used to group related parts within a chapter.
    (c) Chapter and subchapter assignments are made by the Office of the 
Federal Register after agency consultation.

[37 FR 23611, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9682, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 21.9  Parts, subparts, and undesignated center heads.

    (a) The normal divisions of a chapter are parts, consisting of a 
unified body of regulations applying to a specific function of an 
issuing agency or devoted to specific subject matter under the control 
of that agency.
    (b) Subparts or undesignated center heads may be used to group 
related sections within a part. Undesignated center heads may also be 
used to group sections within a subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 21.10  Sections.

    (a) The normal divisions of a part are sections. Sections are the 
basic units of the Code.
    (b) When internal division is necessary, a section may be divided 
into paragraphs, and paragraphs may be further subdivided using the 
lettering indicated in Sec. 21.11.

                               Numbering 


<R05>
Sec. 21.11  Standard organization of the Code of Federal Regulations.

    The standard organization consists of the following structural 
units:
    (a) Titles, which are numbered consecutively in Arabic throughout 
the Code;
    (b) Subtitles, which are lettered consecutively in capitals 
throughout the title;
    (c) Chapters, which are numbered consecutively in Roman capitals 
throughout each title;
    (d) Subchapters, which are lettered consecutively in capitals 
throughout the chapter;
    (e) Parts, which are numbered in Arabic throughout each title;
    (f) Subparts, which are lettered in capitals;
    (g) Sections, which are numbered in Arabic throughout each part. A 
section number includes the number of the part followed by a period and 
the number of the section. For example, the section number for section 
15 of part 21 is ``Sec. 21.15''; and
    (h) Paragraphs, which are designated as follows:

level 1  (a), (b), (c), etc.
level 2  (1), (2), (3), etc.
level 3  (i), (ii), (iii), etc.
level 4  (A), (B), (C), etc.
level 5  (1), (2), (3), etc.
level 6  (i), (ii), (iii), etc.

[54 FR 9682, Mar. 7, 1989; 54 FR 23343, May 31, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 21.12  Reservation of numbers.

    In a case where related parts or related sections are grouped under 
a heading, numbers may be reserved at the end of each group to allow for 
expansion.

[37 FR 23611, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9682, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 21.14  Deviations from standard organization of the Code of Federal Regulations.

    (a) Any deviation from standard Code of Federal Regulations 
designations must be approved in advance by the Office of the Federal 
Register. Requests for approval must be submitted in writing at least 
five working days before the agency intends to submit the final rule 
document for publication and include a copy of the final rule document.
    (b) The Director of the Federal Register may allow the keying of 
section numbers to correspond to a particular numbering system used by 
an agency only when the keying will benefit both that agency and the 
public.

[54 FR 9682, Mar. 7, 1989]

                                Headings 


<R05>
Sec. 21.16  Required document headings.

    (a) Each rule and proposed rule document submitted to the Office of 
the Federal Register shall contain the following headings, when 
appropriate, on separate lines in the following order:
    (1) Agency name;

[[Page 29]]

    (2) Subagency name;
    (3) Numerical references to the CFR title and parts affected;
    (4) Agency numbers of identifying symbol in brackets, if used;
    (5) Brief subject heading describing the document.
    (b) Each CFR section in the regulatory text of the document shall 
have a brief descriptive heading, preceding the text, on a separate 
line.

[50 FR 12468, Mar. 28, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 21.18  Tables of contents.

    A table of contents shall be used at the beginning of the part 
whenever a new part is introduced, an existing part is completely 
revised, or a group of sections is revised or added and set forth as a 
subpart or otherwise separately grouped under a center head. The table 
shall follow the part heading and precede the text of the regulations in 
that part. It shall also list the headings for the subparts, 
undesignated center headings, sections in the part, and appendix 
headings to the part or subpart.

[37 FR 23611, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9682, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 21.19  Composition of part headings.

    Each part heading shall indicate briefly the general subject matter 
of the part. Phrases such as ``Regulations under the Act of July 28, 
1955'' or other expressions that are not descriptive of the subject 
matter may not be used. Introductory expressions such as ``Regulations 
governing'' and ``Rules applicable to'' may not be used.

                               Amendments 


<R05>
Sec. 21.20  General requirements.

    (a) Each amendatory document shall identify in specific terms the 
unit amended, and the extent of the changes made.
    (b) The number and heading of each section amended shall be set 
forth in full on a separate line.

                               References 


<R05>
Sec. 21.21  General requirements: References.

    (a) Each reference to the Code of Federal Regulations shall be in 
terms of the specific titles, chapters, parts, sections, and paragraphs 
involved. Ambiguous references such as ``herein'', ``above'', ``below'', 
and similar expressions may not be used.
    (b) Each document that contains a reference to material published in 
the Code shall include the Code citation as a part of the reference.
    (c) Each agency shall publish its own regulations in full text. 
Cross-references to the regulations of another agency may not be used as 
a substitute for publication in full text, unless the Office of the 
Federal Register finds that the regulation meets any of the following 
exceptions:
    (1) The reference is required by court order, statute, Executive 
order or reorganization plan.
    (2) The reference is to regulations promulgated by an agency with 
the exclusive legal authority to regulate in a subject matter area, but 
the referencing agency needs to apply those regulations in its own 
programs.
    (3) The reference is informational or improves clarity rather than 
being regulatory.
    (4) The reference is to test methods or consensus standards produced 
by a Federal agency that have replaced or preempted private or voluntary 
test methods or consensus standards in a subject matter area.
    (5) The reference is to the Department level from a subagency.

[37 FR 23611, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 50 FR 12468, Mar. 28, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 21.23  Parallel citations of Code and Federal Register.

    For parallel reference, the Code of Federal Regulations and the 
Federal Register may be cited in the following forms, as appropriate:
    ------ CFR ------ (------ FR ------). Sec. ------ of this chapter 
(------ FR ------).


<R05>
Sec. 21.24  References to 1938 edition of Code.

    When reference is made to material codified in the 1938 edition of 
the Code of Federal Regulations, or a supplement thereto, the following 
forms may be used, as appropriate:

    ------ CFR, 1938 Ed., ------.
    ------ CFR, 1943, Cum. Supp., ------.
    ------ CFR, 1946 Supp., ------.

[[Page 30]]

                        Effective Date Statement 


<R05>
Sec. 21.30  General.

    Each document subject to codification shall include a clear 
statement as to the date or dates upon which its contents become 
effective.

                           OMB Control Numbers


<R05>
Sec. 21.35  OMB control numbers.

    To display OMB control numbers in agency regulations, those numbers 
shall be placed parenthetically at the end of the section or displayed 
in a table or codified section.

[50 FR 12468, Mar. 28, 1985]


<R04>
                    Subpart B--Citations of Authority


<R05>
Sec. 21.40  General requirements: Authority citations.

    Each section in a document subject to codification must include, or 
be covered by, a complete citation of the authority under which the 
section is issued, including--
    (a) General or specific authority delegated by statute; and
    (b) Executive delegations, if any, necessary to link the statutory 
authority to the issuing agency.

[50 FR 12468, Mar. 28, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 21.41  Agency responsibility.

    (a) Each issuing agency is responsible for the accuracy and 
integrity of the citations of authority in the documents it issues.
    (b) Each issuing agency shall formally amend the citations of 
authority in its codified material to reflect any changes therein.


<R05>
Sec. 21.42  Exceptions.

    The Director of the Federal Register may make exceptions to the 
requirements of this subpart relating to placement and form of citations 
of authority whenever the Director determines that strict application 
would impair the practical use of the citations.

[37 FR 23611, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9682, Mar. 7, 1989]

                                Placement


<R05>
Sec. 21.43  Placing and amending authority citations.

    (a) The requirements for placing authority citations vary with the 
type of amendment the agency is making in a document. The agency shall 
set out the full text of the authority citation for each part affected 
by the document.
    (1) If a document sets out an entire CFR part, the agency shall 
place the complete authority citation directly after the table of 
contents and before the regulatory text.
    (2) If a document amends only certain sections within a CFR part, 
the agency shall present the complete authority citation to this part as 
the first item in the list of amendments.
    (i) If the authority for issuing an amendment is the same as the 
authority listed for the whole CFR part, the agency shall simply restate 
the authority.
    (ii) If the authority for issuing an amendment changes the authority 
citation for the whole CFR part, the agency shall revise the authority 
citation in its entirety. The agency may specify the particular 
authority under which certain sections are amended in the revised 
authority citation.
    (b) The agency shall present a centralized authority citation. The 
authority citation shall appear at the end of the table of contents for 
a part or after each subpart heading within the text of a part. 
Citations of authority for particular sections may be specified within 
the centralized authority citation.

[50 FR 12469, Mar. 28, 1985, as amended at 54 FR 9682, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 21.45  Nonstatutory authority.

    Citation to a nonstatutory document as authority shall be placed 
after the statutory citations. For example:

    Authority: Sec. 9, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 Stat. 944 (49 U.S.C. 1657). 
E.O. 11222, 30 FR 6469, 3 CFR, 1965 Comp., p. 10.

[37 FR 23611, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9682, Mar. 7, 1989]

[[Page 31]]

                                  Form 

<R05>
Sec. 21.51  General.

    (a) Formal citations of authority shall be in the shortest form 
compatible with positive identification and ready reference.
    (b) The Office of the Federal Register shall assist agencies in 
developing model citations.

<R05>
Sec. 21.52  Statutory material.

    (a) United States Code. All citations to statutory authority shall 
include a United States Code citation, where available. Citations to 
titles of the United States Code, whether or not enacted into positive 
law, may be cited without Public Law or U.S. Statutes at Large citation. 
For example:

    Authority: 10 U.S.C. 501.

    (b) Public Laws and U.S. Statutes at Large. Citations to Public Laws 
and U.S. Statutes at Large are optional when the United States Code is 
cited. Citations to current public laws and to the U.S. Statutes at 
Large shall refer to the section of the public law and the volume and 
page of the U.S. Statutes at Large to which they have been assigned. The 
page number shall refer to the page on which the section cited begins. 
For example:

    Authority: Sec. 5, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 Stat. 935 (49 U.S.C. 1654); 
sec. 313, Pub. L. 85-726, 72 Stat. 752 (49 U.S.C. 1354).

[54 FR 9682, Mar. 7, 1989]

<R05>
Sec. 21.53  Nonstatutory materials.

    Nonstatutory documents shall be cited by document designation and by 
Federal Register volume and page, followed, if possible, by the parallel 
citation to the Code of Federal Regulations. For example:

    Authority: Special Civil Air Reg. SR-422A, 28 FR 6703, 14 CFR part 
4b. E.O. 11130, 28 FR 12789; 3 CFR 1959-1963 Comp.

[37 FR 23611, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9683, Mar. 7, 1989]

<R03>
PART 22--PREPARATION OF NOTICES AND PROPOSED RULES--Table of Contents

<R05>

                           Subpart A--Notices
Sec.
22.1  Name of issuing agency and subdivision.
22.2  Authority citation.

                        Subpart B--Proposed Rules

22.5  General requirements.
22.6  Code designation.
22.7  Codification.

    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 1506; sec. 6, E.O. 10530, 19 FR 2709; 3 CFR, 
1954-1958 Comp., p. 189.

    Source: 37 FR 23614, Nov. 4, 1972, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--Notices


<R05>
Sec. 22.1  Name of issuing agency and subdivision.

    (a) The name of the agency issuing a notice shall be placed at the 
beginning of the document.
    (b) Whenever a specific bureau, service, or similar unit within an 
agency issues a notice, the name of that bureau, service, or unit shall 
be placed on a separate line below the name of the agency.
    (c) An agency that uses file numbers, docket numbers, or similar 
identifying symbols shall place them in brackets immediately below the 
other headings required by this section.
    (d) A suitable short title identifying the subject shall be provided 
beginning on a separate line immediately after the other required 
caption or captions. Whenever appropriate, an additional brief caption 
indicating the nature of the document shall be used.


<R05>
Sec. 22.2  Authority citation.

    The authority under which an agency issues a notice shall be cited 
in narrative form within text or in parentheses on a separate line 
following text.


<R04>
                        Subpart B--Proposed Rules


<R05>
Sec. 22.5  General requirements.

    Each proposed rule required by section 553 of title 5, United States 
Code, or any other statute, and any similar document voluntarily issued 
by an agency shall include a statement of--
    (a) The time, place, and nature of public rulemaking proceedings; 
and

[[Page 32]]

    (b) Reference to the authority under which the regulatory action is 
proposed.

[37 FR 23614, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9683, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 22.6  Code designation.

    The area of the Code of Federal Regulations directly affected by a 
proposed regulatory action shall be identified by placing the 
appropriate CFR citation immediately below the name of the issuing 
agency. For example:

    1 CFR part 22

[37 FR 23614, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9683, Mar. 7, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 22.7  Codification.

    Any part of a proposed rule document that contains the full text of 
a proposed regulation shall also conform to the pertinent provisions of 
part 21 of this chapter.

[37 FR 23614, Nov. 4, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 9683, Mar. 7, 1989]

[[Page 33]]


<R02>
               CHAPTER II--OFFICE OF THE FEDERAL REGISTER


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

Part                                                                Page
51    Incorporation by reference............................          34

[[Page 34]]


<R03>
PART 51--INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
51.1  Policy.
51.3  When will the Director approve a publication?
51.5  How does an agency request approval?
51.7  What publications are eligible?
51.9  What is the proper language of incorporation?
51.11  How does an agency change or remove an approved incorporation?

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 552(a).

    Source: 47 FR 34108, Aug. 6, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 51.1  Policy.

    (a) Section 552(a) of title 5, United States Code, provides, in 
part, that ``matter reasonably available to the class of persons 
affected thereby is deemed published in the Federal Register when 
incorporated by reference therein with the approval of the Director of 
the Federal Register.''
    (b) The Director will interpret and apply the language of section 
552(a) together with other requirements which govern publication in the 
Federal Register and the Code of Federal Regulations. Those requirements 
which govern publication include--
    (1) The Federal Register Act (44 U.S.C. 1501 et seq.)
    (2) The Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. 551 et seq.);
    (3) The regulations of the Administrative Committee of the Federal 
Register under the Federal Register Act (1 CFR Ch. I); and
    (4) The acts which require publication in the Federal Register (See 
CFR volume entitled ``CFR Index and Finding Aids.'')
    (c) The Director will assume in carrying out the responsibilities 
for incorporation by reference that incorporation by reference--
    (1) Is intended to benefit both the Federal Government and the 
members of the class affected; and
    (2) Is not intended to detract from the legal or practical 
attributes of the system established by the Federal Register Act, the 
Administrative Procedure Act, the regulations of the Administrative 
Committee of the Federal Register, and the acts which require 
publication in the Federal Register.
    (d) The Director will carry out the responsibilities by applying the 
standards of part 51 fairly and uniformly.
    (e) Publication in the Federal Register of a document containing an 
incorporation by reference does not of itself constitute an approval of 
the incorporation by reference by the Director.
    (f) Incorporation by reference of a publication is limited to the 
edition of the publication that is approved. Future amendments or 
revisions of the publication are not included.


<R05>
Sec. 51.3  When will the Director approve a publication?

    (a) The Director will approve the incorporation by reference of a 
publication when the following requirements are met:
    (1) The publication is eligible for incorporation by reference (See 
Sec. 51.7).
    (2) The language of incorporation meets the requirements of this 
part (See Sec. 51.9).
    (3) The publication is on file with the Office of the Federal 
Register.
    (4) The Director has received a written request from the agency to 
approve the incorporation by reference of the publication.
    (b) The Director will notify the agency of the approval or 
disapproval of an incorporation by reference within 20 working days 
after the agency has met all the requirements for requesting approvals 
(See Sec. 51.5).


<R05>
Sec. 51.5  How does an agency request approval?

    (a) Formal approval of a publication for incorporation by reference 
applies to a final rule document. For timely approval by the Director of 
the Federal Register, the agency must--
    (1) Make a written request for approval at least 20 working days 
before the agency intends to submit the final rule document for 
publication;
    (2) Send with the written request a copy of the final rule document 
that uses the proper language of incorporation; and
    (3) Ensure that a copy of the publication is on file at the Office 
of the Federal Register.
    (b) Agencies may consult with the Office of the Federal Register at 
any time

[[Page 35]]

with respect to the requirements of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 51.7  What publications are eligible?

    (a) A publication is eligible for incorporation by reference under 5 
U.S.C. 552(a) if it--
    (1) Conforms to the policy stated in Sec. 51.1;
    (2) Is published data, criteria, standards, specifications, 
techniques, illustrations, or similar material;
    (3) Substantially reduces the volume of material published in the 
Federal Register; and
    (4) Is reasonably available to and usable by the class of persons 
affected by the publication. In determining whether a publication is 
usable, the Director will consider--
    (i) The completeness and ease of handling of the publication; and
    (ii) Whether it is bound, numbered, and organized.
    (b) The Director will assume that a publication produced by the same 
agency that is seeking its approval is inappropriate for incorporation 
by reference. A publication produced by the agency may be approved, if, 
in the judgment of the Director, it meets the requirements of paragraph 
(a) and possesses other unique or highly unusual qualities. A 
publication may be approved if it cannot be printed using the Federal 
Register/Code of Federal Regulations printing system.
    (c) The following materials are not appropriate for incorporation by 
reference:
    (1) Material published previously in the Federal Register.
    (2) Material published in the United States Code.


<R05>
Sec. 51.9  What is the proper language of incorporation?

    (a) The language incorporating a publication by reference shall be 
as precise and complete as possible and shall make it clear that the 
incorporation by reference is intended and completed by the final rule 
document in which it appears.
    (b) The language incorporating a publication by reference is precise 
and complete if it--
    (1) Uses the words ``incorporated by reference;''
    (2) States the title, date, edition, author, publisher, and 
identification number of the publication;
    (3) Informs the user that the incorporated publication is a 
requirement;
    (4) Makes an official showing that the publication is in fact 
available by stating where and how copies may be examined and readily 
obtained with maximum convenience to the user; and
    (5) Refers to 5 U.S.C. 552(a).
    (c) If the Director approves a publication for incorporation by 
reference, the agency must--
    (1) Include the following under the DATES caption of the preamble to 
the final rule document (See 1 CFR 18.12 Preamble requirements):

    The incorporation by reference of certain publications listed in the 
regulations is approved by the Director of the Federal Register as of --
----.

    (2) Includes the term ``incorporation by reference'' in the list of 
index terms (See 1 CFR 18.20  Identification of subjects in agency 
regulations).


<R05>
Sec. 51.11  How does an agency change or remove an approved incorporation?

    (a) An agency that seeks approval for a change to a publication that 
is approved for incorporation by reference must--
    (1) Publish notice of the change in the Federal Register and amend 
the Code of Federal Regulations;
    (2) Ensure that a copy of the amendment or revision is on file at 
the Office of the Federal Register; and
    (3) Notify the Director of the Federal Register in writing that the 
change is being made.
    (b) If a regulation containing an incorporation by reference fails 
to become effective or is removed from the Code of Federal Regulations, 
the agency must notify the Director of the Federal Register in writing 
of that fact within 5 working days of the occurrence.

[[Page 37]]


<R02>
                   CHAPTER IV--MISCELLANEOUS AGENCIES


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  Editorial Note: Federal agencies are required to publish regulations 
implementing the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 
552(a)), the Privacy Act of 1974 (Pub. L. 93-579, 5 U.S.C. 552a), the 
Government in the Sunshine Act (Pub. L. 94-409, 5 U.S.C. 552b), and 
section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended by section 119 
of the Rehabilitation, Comprehensive Services, and Developmental 
Disabilities Amendments of 1978 (29 U.S.C. 794). While most agencies 
have existing chapter assignments in the Code of Federal Regulations, a 
few agencies do not. Since certain of these agencies are unlikely to be 
issuing regulations other than those relating to the acts mentioned 
above, the Director of the Office of the Federal Register has grouped 
these miscellaneous agencies into this chapter as an efficient means of 
administering the CFR system.
  --------------------------------------------------------------------
Part                                                               Page 
425             President's Commission on White House 
                    Fellowships.............................          38
455             National Capital Planning Commission 
                    (Privacy Act regulations)...............          40
456             National Capital Planning Commission 
                    (Freedom of Information Act regulations)          42
457             Enforcement of nondiscrimination on the 
                    basis of handicap in programs or 
                    activities conducted by the National 
                    Capital Planning Commission.............          47
500             Enforcement of nondiscrimination on the 
                    basis of handicap in programs or 
                    activities conducted by the National 
                    Commission for Employment Policy........          53

[[Page 38]]


<R03>
PART 425--PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION ON WHITE HOUSE FELLOWSHIPS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
425.1  Purpose and scope.
425.2  Procedures for notification of existence of records pertaining to 
          individuals.
425.3  Procedure for requests for access to or disclosure of records 
          pertaining to individuals.
425.4  Correction of records.
425.5  Disclosure of records to agencies or persons other than the 
          individual to whom the record pertains.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 552a(f).

    Source: 40 FR 52416, Nov. 10, 1975; 40 FR 56651, Dec. 4, 1975, 
unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 425.1  Purpose and scope.

    This part sets forth the President's Commission on White House 
Fellowships procedures under the Privacy Act of 1974 as required by 5 
U.S.C. 552a(f). Information to applicants regarding the implementation 
of this Act is contained in the White House Fellowships Application 
Instructions.


<R05>
Sec. 425.2  Procedures for notification of existence of records pertaining to individuals.

    (a) The system of records, as defined in the Privacy Act of 1974, 
maintained by the President's Commission on White House Fellowships is 
listed annually in the Federal Register as required by that Act. Any 
person who wishes to know whether a system of records contains a record 
pertaining to him or her may either appear in person at Room 1308, 1900 
E Street, NW., on work days between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5 p.m. or 
may write to the President's Commission on White House Fellowships 
Administrative Officer, Washington, DC 20415 (Phone 202-382-4661). It is 
recommended that requests be made in writing.
    (b) Requests for notification of the existence of a record should 
state, if the requester is other than the individual to whom the record 
pertains, the relationship of the requester to that individual. (Note 
that requests will not be honored by the Commission pursuant to the 
Privacy Act unless made: (1) By the individual to whom the record 
pertains or (2) by such individual's legal guardian if the individual 
has been declared to be incompetent due to physical or mental incapacity 
or age by a court of competent jurisdiction.)
    (c) The Commission will acknowledge requests for the existence of 
records within 10 working days from the time it receives the request and 
will normally notify the requester of the existence or non-existence of 
records within 30 working days from receipt of request.
    (d) No special identity verification is required for individuals who 
wish to know whether a specific system of records pertains to them.

[40 FR 52416, Nov. 10, 1975; 40 FR 56651, Dec. 4, 1975, as amended at 40 
FR 59187, Dec. 22, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 425.3  Procedure for requests for access to or disclosure of records pertaining to individuals.

    (a) Any person may request review of records pertaining to him by 
appearing at Room 1308, 1900 E Street, NW., Washington, DC on work days 
between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5 p.m. or by writing to the 
Commission on White House Fellowships Administrative Officer, 
Washington, DC 20415. (See paragraph (b) of this section for 
identification requirements.) The Commission will strive either to make 
the record available within 15 working days of the request or to inform 
the requester of the need for additional identification.
    (b) In the case of persons making requests by appearing at the 
Commission, reasonable identification such as employment identification 
cards, drivers licenses, or credit cards will normally be accepted as 
sufficient evidence of identity in the absence of any indications to the 
contrary.
    (c) Charges for copies of records will be at the rate of $0.10 per 
photocopy of each page. No charge will be made unless the charge as 
computed above would exceed $3 for each request or related series of 
requests. If a fee in excess of $25 would be required, the requester 
shall be notified and the fee must be tendered before the records will 
be copied. Remittances shall be in the form either of a personal check 
or bank draft drawn on a bank in the United States, or a money order. 
Remittances shall be made payable to the

[[Page 39]]

order of the Treasury of the United States and mailed or delivered to 
the Administrative Officer, President's Commission on White House 
Fellowships, 1900 E Street, NW., Washington, DC 20415.
    (d) Individuals will not be denied access to records pertaining to 
them.

[40 FR 52416, Nov. 10, 1975; 40 FR 56651, Dec. 4, 1975, as amended at 40 
FR 59187, Dec. 22, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 425.4  Correction of records.

    (a) An individual may request that a record or records pertaining to 
him or her be amended or corrected. Such requests shall be submitted in 
writing to the Administrative Officer at the Commission's business 
address.
    (b) The signature of the requester will be sufficient identification 
for requesting correction of records.
    (c) A request for amendment shall contain an exact description of 
the item or items sought to be amended and specific reasons for the 
requested amendment, as well as the individual's birthdate for purposes 
of verification of records.
    (d) Within 10 working days after receipt of a request to amend a 
record, the Administrative Officer shall transmit to the requester a 
written acknowledgement of receipt of request. No acknowledgement is 
required if the request can be reviewed and processed with notification 
to the individual of compliance or denial within the ten-day period. 
Requester will be notified within 30 days whether or not his or her 
request has been granted.
    (e) If the Administrative Officer determines that the requested 
amendment is appropriate to insure that the record is:
    (1) Relevant and necessary to accomplish the purposes for which the 
records were collected; and
    (2) As accurate, timely, and complete as are reasonably necessary to 
assure fairness to the requester, the Administrative Officer shall:
    (i) Change the record accordingly;
    (ii) Advise the requester that the change has been made, thirty days 
from receipt of written request;
    (iii) After an accounting of disclosures has been kept pursuant to 5 
U.S.C. 552a(c), advise all previous recipients of the record, who, the 
Commission believes, still retain a copy thereof, of the fact that the 
amendment was made and the substance of the amendment.
    (f) If, after review of the record, the Administrative Officer 
determines that the requested amendment is not in conformity with the 
requirements of the Act, he shall:
    (1) Advise the requester in writing within thirty days of written 
request of such determination together with specific reasons therefor; 
and
    (2) Inform the requester that further review of the request by the 
Director of the Commission is available if a written request therefor is 
made within 30 days after date of denial.
    (g) Within 30 working days of receipt of a written request for 
review pursuant to Sec. 425.4(f)(2) the Director shall make an 
independent review of the record, using the criteria of Sec. 425.4(e) 
(1) and (2).
    (1) If the Director determines that the record should be amended in 
accordance with the request, the Administrative Officer shall take the 
actions listed in Sec. 425.4(e)(2) (i), (ii), and (iii).
    (2) If the Director, after independent review, determines that the 
record should not be amended in accordance with the request, the 
Administrative Officer shall advise the requester:
    (i) Of the determination and the reasons therefor;
    (ii) Of his or her right to file with the Administrative Officer a 
concise statement of his or her reasons for disagreeing with the refusal 
to amend the record;
    (iii) That the record will be annotated to indicate to anyone 
subsequently having access to it that a statement of disagreement has 
been filed, and that the statement will be made available to anyone to 
whom the record is disclosed;
    (iv) That the Director and the Administrative Officer may, in their 
discretion, include a brief summary of their reasons for refusing to 
amend the record whenever such disclosure is made;
    (v) That any prior recipients of this disputed record, who, the 
Commission believes, still retain a copy thereof, will be sent a copy of 
the statement of

[[Page 40]]

disagreement, after an accounting of disclosures has been kept pursuant 
to 5 U.S.C. 552a(c);
    (vi) Of his or her right to seek judicial review of the refusal to 
amend the record, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 552a(g)(1)(A).

[40 FR 59187, Dec. 22, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 425.5  Disclosure of records to agencies or persons other than the individual to whom the record pertains.

    Records subject to the Privacy Act that are requested by any person 
other than the individual to whom they pertain will not be made 
available except under the following circumstances:
    (a) Records may be circulated to appropriate officials incident to 
placing Fellows in work assignments for the Fellowship year.
    (b) An accounting of the date, nature, and purpose of each 
disclosure of a record as well as the name and address of the person and 
agency to whom the disclosure was made will be indicated on the record. 
This accounting is available to the individual to whom the records 
pertain on written request to the Commission.

[40 FR 52416, Nov. 10, 1975; 40 FR 56651, Dec. 4, 1975, as amended at 40 
FR 59187, Dec. 22, 1975]


<R03>
PART 455--NATIONAL CAPITAL PLANNING COMMISSION (PRIVACY ACT REGULATIONS)--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
455.1  Purpose and scope.
455.2  Definitions.
455.3  Procedures for requests pertaining to individual records in a 
          record system.
455.4  Times, places, and requirements for identification of individuals 
          making requests.
455.5  Disclosure of requested information to individuals.
455.6  Request for correction or amendment to the record.
455.7  Agency review of request for correction or amendment of the 
          record.
455.8  Appeal of an initial adverse agency determination on correction 
          or amendment of the record.
455.9  Disclosure of record to a person other than the individual to 
          whom the record pertains.
455.10  Fees.
455.11  Penalties.
455.12  Exemptions.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 552a.

    Source: 42 FR 7921, Feb. 8, 1977, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 455.1  Purpose and scope.

    These procedures provide the means by which individuals may 
safeguard their privacy by obtaining access to, and requesting 
amendments or corrections in, information, if any, about these 
individuals which is under the control of the National Capital Planning 
Commission (hereafter, the ``Commission'').


<R05>
Sec. 455.2  Definitions.

    For the purpose of these procedures:
    (a) The term individual means a citizen of the United States or an 
alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence;
    (b) The term maintain includes maintain, collect, use, or 
disseminate;
    (c) The term record means any item, collection or grouping of 
information about an individual that is maintained by the Commission, 
including, but not limited to, his or her payroll information and 
mailing address and that contains his or her name, or the identifying 
number, symbol, or other identifying particular assigned to the 
individual, such as social security number;
    (d) The term system of records means a group of any records under 
the control of the Commission from which information is retrieved by the 
name of the individual or by some identifying number, symbol, or other 
identifying particular assigned to the individual; and
    (e) The term routine use means, with respect to the disclosure of a 
record, the use of such record for a purpose which is compatible with 
the purpose for which it was collected.


<R05>
Sec. 455.3  Procedures for requests pertaining to individual records in a record system.

    (a) An individual who wishes to know whether a system of records 
maintained by the Commission contains a record pertaining to him or her 
shall submit a written request to that effect to the appropriate System 
Manager at the Commission. The System Manager shall, within 10 days of 
the receipt of such submission, inform the individual

[[Page 41]]

whether a system of records maintained by the Commission contains such a 
record.
    (b) An individual who desires access to any identified record shall 
file a request therefor, addressed to the System Manager indicating 
whether such individual intends to appear in person at the Commission's 
offices or whether he or she desires to receive a copy of any identified 
record through the mail.


<R05>
Sec. 455.4  Times, places, and requirements for identification of individuals making requests.

    (a) An individual who, in accord with Sec. 455.3(b) of this part 
indicated that he or she would appear personally shall do so at the 
Commission's offices, 1325 G Street NW., Washington, DC, between the 
hours of 8:30 A.M. and 5:00 P.M., Monday through Friday (legal holidays 
excluded) and present a form of identification, such as a valid driver's 
license or employee identification card, which will permit the System 
Manager to verify that the individual is the same individual as 
contained in the record requested.
    (b) An individual who, in accord with Sec. 455.3(b) of this part 
indicated that he or she desired mail delivery of a copy of the record 
shall include in the request the date and location of birth of the 
individual as suitable proof of identity.
    (c) Where the above mentioned forms of identification are not 
feasible or appropriate, the Commission shall request a signed statement 
from the individual asserting his or her identity and stipulating that 
the individual understands that knowingly or willfully seeking or 
obtaining access to records about another individual under false 
pretenses is punishable by a fine of up to $5,000.


<R05>
Sec. 455.5  Disclosure of requested information to individuals.

    Upon verification of identity, the System Manager shall disclose to 
the individual: (a) The information contained in the record which 
pertains to that individual; and (b) the accounting of disclosures of 
the record, if any, required by 5 U.S.C. 552a(c).


<R05>
Sec. 455.6  Request for correction or amendment to the record.

    An individual may request that a record pertaining to him or her be 
amended or corrected. The individual shall submit any such request in 
accord with Sec. 455.3 of this part and shall state therein the item 
sought to be amended and specific reasons therefor.


<R05>
Sec. 455.7  Agency review of request for correction or amendment of the record.

    Within ten days of the receipt of the request to correct or to amend 
the record, the System Manager will acknowledge in writing such receipt 
and promptly either: (a) Make any correction or amendment of any portion 
thereof which the individual believes is not accurate, relevant, timely, 
or complete and inform the individual of same; or (b) inform the 
individual of his or her refusal to correct or to amend the record in 
accordance with the request, the reason for the refusal, and the 
procedures established by the Commission for the individual to request a 
review of that refusal.


<R05>
Sec. 455.8  Appeal of an initial adverse agency determination on correction or amendment of the record.

    An individual who disagrees with the refusal of the System Manager 
to correct or to amend his or her record may submit a request for a 
review of such refusal to the Chairman of the Commission, 1325 G Street 
NW., Washington, DC 20576. The Chairman will, not later than thirty days 
from the date on which the individual requests such review, complete 
such review and make a final determination unless, for good cause shown, 
the Chairman extends such thirty day period. If, after his or her 
review, the Chairman also refuses to correct or to amend the record in 
accordance with the request, the individual may file with the Commission 
a concise statement setting forth the reasons for his or her 
disagreement with the refusal of the Commission and may seek judicial 
review of the Chairman's determination under 5 U.S.C. 552a(g)(1)(A).

[[Page 42]]


<R05>
Sec. 455.9  Disclosure of record to a person other than the individual to whom the record pertains.

    An individual to whom a record is to be disclosed in person may have 
a person of his or her own choosing accompany the individual when the 
record is disclosed.


<R05>
Sec. 455.10  Fees.

    (a) The Commission will not charge an individual for the costs of 
making a search for a record or the costs of reviewing the record. When 
the Commission makes a copy of a record as a necessary part of the 
process of disclosing the record to an individual, the Commission will 
not charge the individual for the cost of making that copy.
    (b) If an individual requests the Commission to furnish him or her 
with a copy of the record (when a copy has not otherwise been made as a 
necessary part of the process of disclosing the record to the 
individual), the Commission will charge a fee of $0.25 per page (maximum 
per page dimension of 8\1/2\ x 13 inches) to the extent that the request 
exceeds $5.00 in cost to the Commission. Requests not exceeding $5.00 in 
cost to the Commission will be met without cost to the requester.


<R05>
Sec. 455.11  Penalties.

    Title 18 U.S.C. 1001, Crimes and Criminal Procedures, makes it a 
criminal offense, subject to a maximum fine of $10,000 or imprisonment 
for not more than five years or both, to knowingly and willfully make or 
cause to be made any false or fraudulent statements or representations 
in any matter within the jurisdiction of any agency of the United 
States. Section 552a(i)(3) of the Privacy Act (5 U.S.C. 552a(i)(3)), 
makes it a misdemeanor, subject to a maximum fine of $5,000, to 
knowingly and willfully request or obtain any record concerning an 
individual under false pretenses. Section 552a(i) (1) and (2) of the 
Privacy Act (5 U.S.C. 552a(i) (1) and (2)) provide penalties for 
violations by agency employees of the Privacy Act or regulations 
established thereunder.


<R05>
Sec. 455.12  Exemptions.

    No Commission records system is exempted from the provisions of 5 
U.S.C. 552a as permitted under certain conditions by 5 U.S.C. 552a (j) 
and (k).


<R03>
PART 456--NATIONAL CAPITAL PLANNING COMMISSION (FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT REGULATIONS)--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
456.1  Introduction.
456.2  Organization.
456.3  Definitions.
456.4  Public access to information.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 552, as amended.

    Source: 47 FR 44229, Oct. 7, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 456.1  Introduction.

    The following regulations implement the Freedom of Information Act, 
as amended, 5 U.S.C. 552 (hereinafter the ``Act''), and provide 
procedures by which information may be obtained from the National 
Capital Planning Commission (hereinafter the ``Commission''). Official 
records made available pursuant to the Act shall be furnished to members 
of the public as prescribed herein.


<R05>
Sec. 456.2  Organization.

    The Commission is the central planning agency for the Federal 
Government in the National Capital. The Commission is composed of ex-
officio, the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of Defense, the 
Administrator of the General Services Administration, the Mayor of the 
District of Columbia, the Chairman of the Council of the District of 
Columbia, and the Chairman of the Committees on the District of Columbia 
of the Senate and the House of Representatives, or their alternates; and 
five citizens, three of whom are appointed by the President, and two of 
whom are appointed by the Mayor of the District of Columbia. The 
Commission is assisted by a staff headed by an Executive Director. The 
staff is organized functionally as follows:
    (a) Office of the Executive Director;
    (b) Legal Section;
    (c) Secretariat Section;
    (d) Management Services Section;
    (e) Planning and Programming Division;
    (f) Review and Implementation Division;

[[Page 43]]

    (g) Planning Services Division;
    (h) Carto/Graphics Division; and,
    (i) Public Affairs Division.

[47 FR 44229, Oct. 7, 1982, as amended at 52 FR 34373, Sept. 11, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 456.3  Definitions.

    For the purposes of this part, the following definitions shall 
apply:
    (a) Direct costs. This term means those expenditures which the 
Commission actually incurs in searching for, duplicating and reviewing 
records.
    (b) Search. This term includes all time spent looking for material 
that is responsive to a request, including page-by-page or line-by-line 
identification of material within documents.
    (c) Duplication. This term refers to the process of making a copy of 
a document necessary to respond to a Freedom of Information Act request.
    (d) Review. This term refers to the process of examining documents 
located in response to a request that is for commercial use to determine 
whether any portion of any document located is permitted to be withheld, 
and includes processing any documents for disclosure.
    (e) Commercial use request. This term refers to a request from or on 
behalf of one who seeks information for a use or purpose that furthers 
the commercial, trade or profit interests of the requester or the person 
on whose behalf the request is made.
    (f) Educational institution. This term refers to a preschool, a 
public or private elementary or secondary school, an institution of 
graduate higher education, an institution of undergraduate higher 
education, an institution of professional education, and an institution 
of vocational education, which operates a program or programs of 
scholarly research.
    (g) Non-commercial scientific institution. This term refers to a 
non-profit institution which is operated solely for the purpose of 
conducting scientific research the results of which are not intended to 
promote any particular product or industry.
    (h) Representative of the news media. This term refers to any person 
actively gathering news for an entity that is organized and operated to 
publish or broadcast news to the public. The term ``news'' means 
information that is about current events or that would be of current 
interest to the public. Examples of news media entities include 
television or radio stations broadcasting to the public at large, and 
publishers of periodicals (but only in those instances when they can 
qualify as disseminators of ``news'') who make their products available 
for purchase or subscription by the general public. In the case of 
``freelance'' journalists, they may be regarded as working for a news 
organization if they can demonstrate a solid basis for expecting 
publication through that organization, even though not actually employed 
by it. A request for records supporting the news dissemination function 
of the requester shall not be considered to be a request that is for a 
commercial use.

[52 FR 34373, Sept. 11, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 456.4  Public access to information.

    (a) General policy. It is the Commission's general policy to 
facilitate the broadest possible availability and dissemination of 
information to the public. The Commission's staff is available to assist 
the public in obtaining information formally by using the procedures 
herein or informally by discussions with the staff. The Commission's 
staff may, therefore, continue to furnish informally to the public 
information, which, prior to the amendments to the Act contained in 
Public Law 93-502, enacted November 21, 1974, was customarily furnished 
in the regular performance of their duties, provided the staff do so in 
a manner not inconsistent with these regulations. In addition, to the 
extent permitted by other laws, the Commission will make available 
records which it is authorized to withhold under the Act when it 
determines that such disclosure is in the public interest.
    (b) Established place of obtaining information. Information may be 
obtained only from the Commission's offices, which are located at 1325 G 
Street, NW., Washington, DC 20576. Its official hours are 8:00 a.m. to 
6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding legal holidays.
    (c) Information sources within the Commission. Requests for 
Commission publications, offered for sale or informal

[[Page 44]]

requests for general information on the Commission should be directed to 
the Public Affairs Officer. All formal requests for agency records 
pursuant to the Act must be directed to the Freedom of Information 
Officer.

Any request directed initially to the wrong information source will be 
correctly routed by the Commission's staff and the requesting party will 
be so notified. The ten-day time period within which the Commission is 
required to determine whether to comply with a request shall not begin 
to run until the request reaches, or with the exercise of due diligence 
should have reached, the appropriate information source.
    (d) Information routinely available. The following types of 
information shall be routinely available (subject to the fee schedule, 
infra) for public dissemination without recourse to the Commission's 
formal information request procedures unless such information falls 
within one of the exemptions to agency disclosure listed in 5 U.S.C. 
552(b):
    (1) Correspondence between the Commission and the public;
    (2) Executive Director's Recommendations;
    (3) Committee Reports;
    (4) Commission Memorandums of Actions; and
    (5) Maps.

Requests for information, other than maps, shall be directed to the 
Freedom of Information Officer; map requests shall be directed to the 
Public Affairs Officer.
    (e) Formal requests for information. All formal requests for 
information pursuant to the Act shall be made in writing to the Freedom 
of Information Officer. To expedite internal handling of such requests, 
the words ``Freedom of Information Request'' shall appear on the face of 
the envelope bearing such request. The request shall state that the 
request is made pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act; shall 
reasonably describe the information sought, including the date the 
Commission received or produced the requested information, if known; 
shall state, pursuant to the fee schedule set forth infra, the maximum 
fee the party making the request would be willing to pay for the 
duplication of the requested records without further approval; and 
shall, if possible, provide a telephone number at which the requesting 
party can be contacted to facilitate handling of the request.
    (f) Commission response to formal requests. The Freedom of 
Information Officer, upon request for information made in compliance 
with these regulations, shall determine within ten days (excepting 
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays) after the receipt of any such 
request whether to comply with such request and shall immediately notify 
the person making such request of such determination and the reasons 
therefor and of the right of such person to appeal to the head of the 
agency any adverse determination. In unusual circumstances as specified 
infra, the ten-day time limit may be extended by written notice to the 
person making the request setting forth the reasons for such extension 
and the date on which a determination is expected to be dispatched. No 
such notice shall specify a date that would result in an extension for 
more than ten working days. As used in this paragraph, ``unusual 
circumstances'' means, but only to the extent reasonably necessary to 
the proper processing of the particular request:
    (1) The need to search for and collect the requested records from 
establishments that are separate from the Commission's offices;
    (2) The need to search for, collect, and appropriately examine a 
voluminous amount of separate and distinct records which are demanded in 
a single request; or
    (3) The need for consultation, which shall be conducted with all 
practicable speed, with another agency having a substantial interest in 
the determination of the request or among two or more components of the 
agency having substantial subject matter interest therein.
    (g) Determination to grant request. If the Freedom of Information 
Officer makes a determination to grant a request in whole or in part, 
the person making such request will be so notified in writing. The 
notice shall also include a description of the information to be made 
available, a statement of the time when and the place where such 
information may be inspected or

[[Page 45]]

alternatively, the procedure for duplication and delivery (by mail or 
other means) of the information to the requesting party and a statement 
of the total fees chargeable to the requesting person pursuant to the 
fee schedule infra.
    (h) Determination to deny request-appeal procedure. If the Freedom 
of Information Officer makes a determination to deny, in whole or in 
part, a request for information, he shall so notify the party making the 
request in writing. Any appeal of such determination shall be made in 
writing to the Chairman of the Commission and shall include a brief 
statement of the legal, factual, or other basis for the party's 
objection to the initial decision. The Chairman shall, within twenty 
days (excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays) of the receipt 
of any such appeal determine whether to grant or deny the appeal and 
shall, immediately upon making his decision, give written notice of the 
decision to the party, including a brief statement of the reasons 
therefor.
    (i) Waiver. Whenever a waiver of any of the procedures set forth 
herein would further the purpose of the Act by causing the public 
disclosure of non-confidential information within the time period 
required by the Act, the Freedom of Information Officer may, in the 
context of individual requests for information, waive any of the 
procedural requirements herein.
    (j) Schedule of fees. (1) The Commission may charge the following 
fees for the production of information pursuant to the Act:
    (i) Publications offered for sale--as marked.
    (ii) Commission reports--$0.25/page.
    (iii) Committee reports--$0.25/page.
    (iv) Commission Memorandums of Actions--$0.25/page.
    (v) Transcripts of Commission meetings and Committee meetings--
$0.25/page.
    (vi) Other records--$0.25/page.
    (vii) Map publications--microfilm printout--$1.00/each; ozalid 
maps--$0.30/linear foot.
    (viii) Manual record research: $2.25 per quarter hour if conducted 
by a clerical employee; $5.00 per quarter hour if conducted by a 
professional or managerial employee. The Commission may charge for 
search costs, where applicable, even if there is ultimately no 
disclosure of records.
    (ix) Review charges: $5.00 per quarter hour. The Commission may 
charge for review costs, where applicable, even if there is ultimately 
no disclosure of records.
    (2) The Commission may charge the above-stated fees for the 
production of information pursuant to the Act, based upon the following 
requester classifications:
    (i) Commercial use requester. The Commission may charge requesters 
in this category for all the direct costs of searching for, reviewing 
for release, and duplicating the records sought. In determining whether 
a request is for commercial use, the Commission will look to the use to 
which a requester will put the documents requested. Where a requester 
does not explain the use or where the explanation is insufficient, the 
Commission may draw reasonable inferences from the requester's identity.
    (ii) Educational and non-commercial scientific institution 
requesters. The Commission shall provide documents to requesters in this 
category for the cost of reproduction alone, excluding charges for the 
first 100 pages. Requesters must show that the request is being made as 
authorized by or under the auspices of a qualifying institution and that 
the records sought are not for a commercial use, but are sought in 
furtherance of scholarly (if the request is from an educational 
institution) or non-commercial scientific research (if the request is 
from a non-commercial scientific institution).
    (iii) Representatives of the news media. The Commission shall 
provide documents to requesters in this category for the cost of 
reproduction alone, excluding charges for the first 100 pages.
    (iv) All other requesters. The Commission may charge requesters who 
do not fit into any of the categories above fees which recover the full 
reasonable direct costs of searching for and reproducing records that 
are responsive to the request, excluding the first 100 pages and first 
two hours of search time. Requests from record subjects for records 
about themselves filed in the

[[Page 46]]

Commission's system of records will continue to be treated under the fee 
provisions of the Privacy Act of 1974 which permit fees only for 
reproduction.
    (3) The Commission keeps on file a limited quantity of back copies 
of Executive Director's Recommendations, Committee Reports, and 
Commission Memorandums of Actions. The Commission will first attempt to 
fill specific requests for these documents from its supply of back 
copies and until the supply is exhausted, the Commission will provide 
the documents at no charge. Once the supply is exhausted, the requested 
documents will be provided in accord with the fee schedule.
    (4) The Commission may not charge fees to any requester if the cost 
of collecting the fee would be equal to or greater than the fee itself. 
The minimum fee for the production of information will be $2.00 (over 
and above the first free 100 pages and 2 hours search time, where 
applicable). The Commission's Freedom of Information Officer shall 
provide documents furnished under the Act without any charge or at a 
charge reduced below the fees established under Sec. 456.3(j)(1) if 
disclosure of the information is in the public interest because it is 
likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of the 
operations or activities of the government and it is not primarily in 
the commercial interest of the requester.
    (5) In deciding whether a fee waiver or reduction under 
Sec. 456.4(j)(4) is justified, the Commission will consider the 
following factors:
    (i) The subject of the request: Whether the subject of the requested 
records concerns ``the operations or activities of the Government'';
    (ii) The informative value of the information to be disclosed: 
Whether the disclosure is ``likely to contribute'' to an understanding 
of government operations or activities;
    (iii) The contribution to an understanding of the subject by the 
general public likely to result from disclosure: Whether disclosure of 
the requested information will contribute to ``public understanding''; 
and
    (iv) The significance of the contribution to public understanding: 
Whether the disclosure is likely to contribute ``significantly'' to 
public understanding of government operations or activities.
    (v) The existence and magnitude of a commercial interest: Whether 
the requester has a commercial interest that would be furthered by the 
requested disclosure; and, if so
    (vi) The primary interest in disclosure: Whether the magnitude of 
the identified commercial interest of the requester is sufficiently 
large, in comparison with the public interest disclosure, that 
disclosure is ``primarily in the commercial interest of the requester.''
    (k) Prior approval or advance deposit of fees. (1) Where the agency 
estimates that duplication, review or search charges are likely to 
exceed $25.00, it shall notify the requester of the estimated amount of 
fees, unless the requester has indicated in advance his or her 
willingness to pay fees as high as those estimated. Where the fees 
anticipated to result from a request are substantially greater than the 
amount estimated in the written request, the persons requesting the 
information shall be immediately notified of the estimated fees and his 
approval of such fees requested. Such person shall also be afforded the 
opportunity to revise his or her request to reduce the fees but satisfy 
his or her needs for information.
    (2) Where the Freedom of Information Officer determines that fees 
are likely to exceed $250.00, the Commission may require advance payment 
of the fee in whole or in part. Where a requester has previously failed 
to pay a fee charged in a timely manner or is presently in arrears, the 
Commission may require the requester to pay the full amount owed and to 
make an advance payment of the full amount of the estimated fees before 
the agency begins to process a new request or completes a pending 
request.
    (3) The dispatch of any such request for an estimated fee approval 
or advance deposit shall suspend, until a reply is received by the 
Freedom of Information Officer, the period pursuant to 5 U.S.C., 552 and 
paragraph (f) supra

[[Page 47]]

within which the Freedom of Information Officer must respond to a 
written request for information.
    (4) A requester may not file multiple requests at the same time, 
each seeking portions of a document(s), solely in order to avoid payment 
of fees. When the Commission reasonably believes a requester(s) is 
attempting to break a request down into a series of requests for the 
purpose of evading the assessment of fees, the Commission may aggregate 
any such requests and charge accordingly.
    (l) Payment of fees. Fees charged a person for the production of 
information must be paid in full prior to release of the information. 
Payment of fees shall be made by a personal check, postal money order or 
bank draft on a bank in the United States, made payable to the order of 
the Treasurer of the United States.

[47 FR 44229, Oct. 7, 1982. Redesignated and amended at 52 FR 34373-
34374, Sept. 11, 1987]


<R03>
PART 457--ENFORCEMENT OF NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF HANDICAP IN PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED BY THE NATIONAL CAPITAL PLANNING COMMISSION--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
457.101  Purpose.
457.102  Application.
457.103  Definitions.
457.104--457.109  [Reserved]
457.110  Self-evaluation.
457.111  Notice.
457.112--457.129  [Reserved]
457.130  General prohibitions against discrimination.
457.131--457.139  [Reserved]
457.140  Employment.
457.141--457.148  [Reserved]
457.149  Program accessibility: Discrimination prohibited.
457.150  Program accessibility: Existing facilities.
457.151  Program accessibility: New construction and alterations.
457.152--457.159  [Reserved]
457.160  Communications.
457.161--457.169  [Reserved]
457.170  Compliance procedures.
457.171--457.999  [Reserved]

    Authority: 29 U.S.C. 794.

    Source: 51 FR 22887 and 22896, June 23, 1986, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R05>
Sec. 457.101  Purpose.

    This part effectuates section 119 of the Rehabilitation, 
Comprehensive Services, and Developmental Disabilities Amendments of 
1978, which amended section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 to 
prohibit discrimination on the basis of handicap in programs or 
activities conducted by Executive agencies or the United States Postal 
Service.


<R05>
Sec. 457.102  Application.

    This part applies to all programs or activities conducted by the 
agency.


<R05>
Sec. 457.103  Definitions.

    For purposes of this part, the term--
    Assistant Attorney General means the Assistant Attorney General, 
Civil Rights Division, United States Department of Justice.
    Auxiliary aids means services or devices that enable persons with 
impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills to have an equal 
opportunity to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, programs or 
activities conducted by the agency. For example, auxiliary aids useful 
for persons with impaired vision include readers, brailled materials, 
audio recordings, telecommunications devices and other similar services 
and devices. Auxiliary aids useful for persons with impaired hearing 
include telephone handset amplifiers, telephones compatible with hearing 
aids, telecommunication devices for deaf persons (TDD's), interpreters, 
notetakers, written materials, and other similar services and devices.
    Complete complaint means a written statement that contains the 
complainant's name and address and describes the agency's alleged 
discriminatory action in sufficient detail to inform the agency of the 
nature and date of the alleged violation of section 504. It shall be 
signed by the complainant or by someone authorized to do so on his or 
her behalf. Complaints filed on behalf of classes or third parties shall 
describe or identify (by name, if possible) the alleged victims of 
discrimination.
    Facility means all or any portion of buildings, structures, 
equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, rolling stock or other 
conveyances, or other real or personal property.

[[Page 48]]

    Handicapped person means any person who has a physical or mental 
impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, 
has a record of such an impairment, or is regarded as having such an 
impairment.
    As used in this definition, the phrase:
    (1) Physical or mental impairment includes--
    (i) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, 
or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: 
Neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, 
including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; 
genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
    (ii) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental 
retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and 
specific learning disabilities. The term ``physical or mental 
impairment'' includes, but is not limited to, such diseases and 
conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech, and hearing impairments, 
cerebral palsy, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, 
cancer, heart disease, diabetes, mental retardation, emotional illness, 
and drug addiction and alocoholism.
    (2) Major life activities includes functions such as caring for 
one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, 
breathing, learning, and working.
    (3) Has a record of such an impairment means has a history of, or 
has been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that 
substantially limits one or more major life activities.
    (4) Is regarded as having an impairment means--
    (i) Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially 
limit major life activities but is treated by the agency as constituting 
such a limitation;
    (ii) Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits 
major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of others toward 
such impairment; or
    (iii) Has none of the impairments defined in subparagraph (1) of 
this definition but is treated by the agency as having such an 
impairment.
    Historic preservation programs means programs conducted by the 
agency that have preservation of historic properties as a primary 
purpose.
    Historic properties means those properties that are listed or 
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places or 
properties designated as historic under a statute of the appropriate 
State or local government body.
    Qualified handicapped person means--
    (1) With respect to preschool, elementary, or secondary education 
services provided by the agency, a handicapped person who is a member of 
a class of persons otherwise entitled by statute, regulation, or agency 
policy to receive education services from the agency.
    (2) With respect to any other agency program or activity under which 
a person is required to perform services or to achieve a level of 
accomplishment, a handicapped person who meets the essential eligibility 
requirements and who can achieve the purpose of the program or activity 
without modifications in the program or activity that the agency can 
demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in its nature;
    (3) With respect to any other program or activity, a handicapped 
person who meets the essential eligibility requirements for 
participation in, or receipt of benefits from, that program or activity; 
and
    (4) Qualified handicapped person is defined for purposes of 
employment in 29 CFR 1613.702(f), which is made applicable to this part 
by Sec. 457.140.
    Section 504 means section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 
(Pub. L. 93-112, 87 Stat. 394 (29 U.S.C. 794)), as amended by the 
Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1974 (Pub. L. 93-516, 88 Stat. 1617), 
and the Rehabilitation, Comprehensive Services, and Developmental 
Disabilities Amendments of 1978 (Pub. L. 95-602, 92 Stat. 2955). As used 
in this part, section 504 applies only to programs or activities 
conducted by Executive agencies and not to federally assisted programs.
    Substantial impairment means a significant loss of the integrity of 
finished materials, design quality, or special character resulting from 
a permanent alteration.

[[Page 49]]

Secs. 457.104--457.109  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 457.110  Self-evaluation.

    (a) The agency shall, by August 24, 1987, evaluate its current 
policies and practices, and the effects thereof, that do not or may not 
meet the requirements of this part, and, to the extent modification of 
any such policies and practices is required, the agency shall proceed to 
make the necessary modifications.
    (b) The agency shall provide an opportunity to interested persons, 
including handicapped persons or organizations representing handicapped 
persons, to participate in the self-evaluation process by submitting 
comments (both oral and written).
    (c) The agency shall, until three years following the completion of 
the self-evaluation, maintain on file and make available for public 
inspection:
    (1) A description of areas examined and any problems identified, and
    (2) A description of any modifications made.


<R05>
Sec. 457.111  Notice.

    The agency shall make available to employees, applicants, 
participants, beneficiaries, and other interested persons such 
information regarding the provisions of this part and its applicability 
to the programs or activities conducted by the agency, and make such 
information available to them in such manner as the head of the agency 
finds necessary to apprise such persons of the protections against 
discrimination assured them by section 504 and this regulation.
Secs. 457.112--457.129  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 457.130  General prohibitions against discrimination.

    (a) No qualified handicapped person shall, on the basis of handicap, 
be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or 
otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity 
conducted by the agency.
    (b)(1) The agency, in providing any aid, benefit, or service, may 
not, directly or through contractual, licensing, or other arrangements, 
on the basis of handicap--
    (i) Deny a qualified handicapped person the opportunity to 
participate in or benefit from the aid, benefit, or service;
    (ii) Afford a qualified handicapped person an opportunity to 
participate in or benefit from the aid, benefit, or service that is not 
equal to that afforded others;
    (iii) Provide a qualified handicapped person with an aid, benefit, 
or service that is not as effective in affording equal opportunity to 
obtain the same result, to gain the same benefit, or to reach the same 
level of achievement as that provided to others;
    (iv) Provide different or separate aid, benefits, or services to 
handicapped persons or to any class of handicapped persons than is 
provided to others unless such action is necessary to provide qualified 
handicapped persons with aid, benefits, or services that are as 
effective as those provided to others;
    (v) Deny a qualified handicapped person the opportunity to 
participate as a member of planning or advisory boards; or
    (vi) Otherwise limit a qualified handicapped person in the enjoyment 
of any right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity enjoyed by others 
receiving the aid, benefit, or service.
    (2) The agency may not deny a qualified handicapped person the 
opportunity to participate in programs or activities that are not 
separate or different, despite the existence of permissibly separate or 
different programs or activities.
    (3) The agency may not, directly or through contractual or other 
arrangments, utilize criteria or methods of administration the purpose 
or effect of which would--
    (i) Subject qualified handicapped persons to discrimination on the 
basis of handicap; or
    (ii) Defeat or substantially impair accomplishment of the objectives 
of a program or activity with respect to handicapped persons.
    (4) The agency may not, in determining the site or location of a 
facility, make selections the purpose or effect of which would--
    (i) Exclude handicapped persons from, deny them the benefits of, or 
otherwise subject them to discrimination

[[Page 50]]

under any program or activity conducted by the agency; or
    (ii) Defeat or substantially impair the accomplishment of the 
objectives of a program or activity with respect to handicapped persons.
    (5) The agency, in the selection of procurement contractors, may not 
use criteria that subject qualified handicapped persons to 
discrimination on the basis of handicap.
    (6) The agency may not administer a licensing or certification 
program in a manner that subjects qualified handicapped persons to 
discrimination on the basis of handicap, nor may the agency establish 
requirements for the programs or activities of licensees or certified 
entities that subject qualified handicapped persons to discrimination on 
the basis of handicap. However, the programs or activities of entities 
that are licensed or certified by the agency are not, themselves, 
covered by this part.
    (c) The exclusion of nonhandicapped persons from the benefits of a 
program limited by Federal statute or Executive order to handicapped 
persons or the exclusion of a specific class of handicapped persons from 
a program limited by Federal statute or Executive order to a different 
class of handicapped persons is not prohibited by this part.
    (d) The agency shall administer programs and activities in the most 
integrated setting appropriate to the needs of qualified handicapped 
persons.
Secs. 457.131--457.139  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 457.140  Employment.

    No qualified handicapped person shall, on the basis of handicap, be 
subjected to discrimination in employment under any program or activity 
conducted by the agency. The definitions, requirements, and procedures 
of section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 791), as 
established by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 29 CFR 
part 1613, shall apply to employment in federally conducted programs or 
activities.
Secs. 457.141--457.148  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 457.149  Program accessibility: Discrimination prohibited.

    Except as otherwise provided in Sec. 457.150, no qualified 
handicapped person shall, because the agency's facilities are 
inaccessible to or unusable by handicapped persons, be denied the 
benefits of, be excluded from participation in, or otherwise be 
subjected to discrimination under any program or activity conducted by 
the agency.


<R05>
Sec. 457.150  Program accessibility: Existing facilities.

    (a) General. The agency shall operate each program or activity so 
that the program or activity, when viewed in its entirety, is readily 
accessible to and usable by handicapped persons. This paragraph does 
not--
    (1) Necessarily require the agency to make each of its existing 
facilities accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
    (2) In the case of historic preservation programs, require the 
agency to take any action that would result in a substantial impairment 
of significant historic features of an historic property; or
    (3) Require the agency to take any action that it can demonstrate 
would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of a program or 
activity or in undue financial and administrative burdens. In those 
circumstances where agency personnel believe that the proposed action 
would fundamentally alter the program or activity or would result in 
undue financial and administrative burdens, the agency has the burden of 
proving that compliance with Sec. 457.150(a) would result in such 
alteration or burdens. The decision that compliance would result in such 
alteration or burdens must be made by the agency head or his or her 
designee after considering all agency resources available for use in the 
funding and operation of the conducted program or activity, and must be 
accompanied by a written statement of the reasons for reaching that 
conclusion. If an action would result in such an alteration or such 
burdens, the agency shall take any other action that would not result

[[Page 51]]

in such an alteration or such burdens but would nevertheless ensure that 
handicapped persons receive the benefits and services of the program or 
activity.
    (b) Methods--(1) General. The agency may comply with the 
requirements of this section through such means as redesign of 
equipment, reassignment of services to accessible buildings, assignment 
of aides to beneficiaries, home visits, delivery of services at 
alternate accessible sites, alteration of existing facilities and 
construction of new facilities, use of accessible rolling stock, or any 
other methods that result in making its programs or activities readily 
accessible to and usable by handicapped persons. The agency is not 
required to make structural changes in existing facilities where other 
methods are effective in achieving compliance with this section. The 
agency, in making alterations to existing buildings, shall meet 
accessibility requirements to the extent compelled by the Architectural 
Barriers Act of 1968, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4151-4157), and any 
regulations implementing it. In choosing among available methods for 
meeting the requirements of this section, the agency shall give priority 
to those methods that offer programs and activities to qualified 
handicapped persons in the most integrated setting appropriate.
    (2) Historic preservation programs. In meeting the requirements of 
Sec. 457.150(a) in historic preservation programs, the agency shall give 
priority to methods that provide physical access to handicapped persons. 
In cases where a physical alteration to an historic property is not 
required because of Sec. 457.150(a)(2) or (a)(3), alternative methods of 
achieving program accessibility include--
    (i) Using audio-visual materials and devices to depict those 
portions of an historic property that cannot otherwise be made 
accessible;
    (ii) Assigning persons to guide handicapped persons into or through 
portions of historic properties that cannot otherwise be made 
accessible; or
    (iii) Adopting other innovative methods.
    (c) Time period for compliance. The agency shall comply with the 
obligations established under this section by October 21, 1986, except 
that where structural changes in facilities are undertaken, such changes 
shall be made by August 22, 1989, but in any event as expeditiously as 
possible.
    (d) Transition plan. In the event that structural changes to 
facilities will be undertaken to achieve program accessibility, the 
agency shall develop, by February 23, 1987 a transition plan setting 
forth the steps necessary to complete such changes. The agency shall 
provide an opportunity to interested persons, including handicapped 
persons or organizations representing handicapped persons, to 
participate in the development of the transition plan by submitting 
comments (both oral and written). A copy of the transition plan shall be 
made available for public inspection. The plan shall, at a minimum--
    (1) Identify physical obstacles in the agency's facilities that 
limit the accessibility of its programs or activities to handicapped 
persons;
    (2) Describe in detail the methods that will be used to make the 
facilities accessible;
    (3) Specify the schedule for taking the steps necessary to achieve 
compliance with this section and, if the time period of the transition 
plan is longer than one year, identify steps that will be taken during 
each year of the transition period; and
    (4) Indicate the official responsible for implementation of the 
plan.


<R05>
Sec. 457.151  Program accessibility: New construction and alterations.

    Each building or part of a building that is constructed or altered 
by, on behalf of, or for the use of the agency shall be designed, 
constructed, or altered so as to be readily accessible to and usable by 
handicapped persons. The definitions, requirements, and standards of the 
Architectural Barriers Act (42 U.S.C. 4151-4157), as established in 41 
CFR 101-19.600 to 101-19.607, apply to buildings covered by this 
section.

[[Page 52]]

Secs. 457.152--457.159  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 457.160  Communications.

    (a) The agency shall take appropriate steps to ensure effective 
communication with applicants, participants, personnel of other Federal 
entities, and members of the public.
    (1) The agency shall furnish appropriate auxiliary aids where 
necessary to afford a handicapped person an equal opportunity to 
participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, a program or activity 
conducted by the agency.
    (i) In determining what type of auxiliary aid is necessary, the 
agency shall give primary consideration to the requests of the 
handicapped person.
    (ii) The agency need not provide individually prescribed devices, 
readers for personal use or study, or other devices of a personal 
nature.
    (2) Where the agency communicates with applicants and beneficiaries 
by telephone, telecommunication devices for deaf person (TDD's) or 
equally effective telecommunication systems shall be used.
    (b) The agency shall ensure that interested persons, including 
persons with impaired vision or hearing, can obtain information as to 
the existence and location of accessible services, activities, and 
facilities.
    (c) The agency shall provide signage at a primary entrance to each 
of its inaccessible facilities, directing users to a location at which 
they can obtain information about accessible facilities. The 
international symbol for accessibility shall be used at each primary 
entrance of an accessible facility.
    (d) This section does not require the agency to take any action that 
it can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in the 
nature of a program or activity or in undue financial and adminstrative 
burdens. In those circumstances where agency personnel believe that the 
proposed action would fundamentally alter the program or activity or 
would result in undue financial and administrative burdens, the agency 
has the burden of proving that compliance with Sec. 457.160 would result 
in such alteration or burdens. The decision that compliance would result 
in such alteration or burdens must be made by the agency head or his or 
her designee after considering all agency resources available for use in 
the funding and operation of the conducted program or activity, and must 
be accompanied by a written statement of the reasons for reaching that 
conclusion. If an action required to comply with this section would 
result in such an alteration or such burdens, the agency shall take any 
other action that would not result in such an alteration or such burdens 
but would nevertheless ensure that, to the maximum extent possible, 
handicapped persons receive the benefits and services of the program or 
activity.
Secs. 457.161--457.169  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 457.170  Compliance procedures.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, this 
section applies to all allegations of discrimination on the basis of 
handicap in programs or activities conducted by the agency.
    (b) The agency shall process complaints alleging violations of 
section 504 with respect to employment according to the procedures 
established by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 29 CFR 
part 1613 pursuant to section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 
U.S.C. 791).
    (c) The Executive Director shall be responsible for coordinating 
implementation of this section. Complaints may be sent to Equal 
Employment Opportunity Director, National Capital Planning Commission, 
1325 G Street NW., Washington, DC 20576.
    (d) The agency shall accept and investigate all complete complaints 
for which it has jurisdiction. All complete complaints must be filed 
within 180 days of the alleged act of discrimination. The agency may 
extend this time period for good cause.
    (e) If the agency receives a complaint over which it does not have 
jurisdiction, it shall promptly notify the complainant and shall make 
reasonable efforts to refer the complaint to the appropriate government 
entity.
    (f) The agency shall notify the Architectural and Transportation 
Barriers Compliance Board upon receipt of any complaint alleging that a 
building or facility that is subject to the Architectural Barriers Act 
of 1968, as amended

[[Page 53]]

(42 U.S.C. 4151-4157), or section 502 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 
as amended (29 U.S.C. 792), is not readily accessible to and usable by 
handicapped persons.
    (g) Within 180 days of the receipt of a complete complaint for which 
it has jurisdiction, the agency shall notify the complainant of the 
results of the investigation in a letter containing--
    (1) Findings of fact and conclusions of law;
    (2) A description of a remedy for each violation found; and
    (3) A notice of the right to appeal.
    (h) Appeals of the findings of fact and conclusions of law or 
remedies must be filed by the complainant within 90 days of receipt from 
the agency of the letter required by Sec. 457.170(g). The agency may 
extend this time for good cause.
    (i) Timely appeals shall be accepted and processed by the head of 
the agency.
    (j) The head of the agency shall notify the complainant of the 
results of the appeal within 60 days of the receipt of the request. If 
the head of the agency determines that additional information is needed 
from the complainant, he or she shall have 60 days from the date of 
receipt of the additional information to make his or her determination 
on the appeal.
    (k) The time limits cited in paragraphs (g) and (j) of this section 
may be extended with the permission of the Assistant Attorney General.
    (l) The agency may delegate its authority for conducting complaint 
investigations to other Federal agencies, except that the authority for 
making the final determination may not be delegated to another agency.

[51 FR 22887 and 22896, June 23, 1986, as amended at 5l FR 22888, June 
23, 1986]
Secs. 457.171--457.999  [Reserved]

<R03>
PART 500--ENFORCEMENT OF NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF HANDICAP IN PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED BY THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR EMPLOYMENT POLICY--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
500.101  Purpose.
500.102  Application.
500.103  Definitions.
500.104--500.109  [Reserved]
500.110  Self-evaluation.
500.111  Notice.
500.112--500.129  [Reserved]
500.130  General prohibitions against discrimination.
500.131--500.139  [Reserved]
500.140  Employment.
500.141--500.148  [Reserved]
500.149  Program accessibility: Discrimination prohibited.
500.150  Program accessibility: Existing facilities.
500.151  Program accessibility: New construction and alterations.
500.152--500.159  [Reserved]
500.160  Communications.
500.161--500.169  [Reserved]
500.170  Compliance procedures.
500.171--500.999  [Reserved]

    Authority: 29 U.S.C. 794.

    Source: 51 FR 22888 and 22896, June 23, 1986, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R05>
Sec. 500.101  Purpose.

    This part effectuates section 119 of the Rehabilitation, 
Comprehensive Services, and Developmental Disabilities Amendments of 
1978, which amended section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 to 
prohibit discrimination on the basis of handicap in programs or 
activities conducted by Executive agencies or the United States Postal 
Service.


<R05>
Sec. 500.102  Application.

    This part applies to all programs or activities conducted by the 
agency.


<R05>
Sec. 500.103  Definitions.

    For purposes of this part, the term--

    Assistant Attorney General means the Assistant Attorney General, 
Civil Rights Division, United States Department of Justice.

    Auxiliary aids means services or devices that enable persons with 
impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills to have an equal 
opportunity to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, programs or 
activities conducted by the agency. For example, auxiliary aids useful 
for persons with impaired vision include readers, brailled materials, 
audio recordings, telecommunications devices and other similar services 
and

[[Page 54]]

devices. Auxiliary aids useful for persons with impaired hearing include 
telephone handset amplifiers, telephones compatible with hearing aids, 
telecommunication devices for deaf persons (TDD's), interpreters, 
notetakers, written materials, and other similar services and devices.
    Complete complaint means a written statement that contains the 
complainant's name and address and describes the agency's alleged 
discriminatory action in sufficient detail to inform the agency of the 
nature and date of the alleged violation of section 504. It shall be 
signed by the complainant or by someone authorized to do so on his or 
her behalf. Complaints filed on behalf of classes or third parties shall 
describe or identify (by name, if possible) the alleged victims of 
discrimination.
    Facility means all or any portion of buildings, structures, 
equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, rolling stock or other 
conveyances, or other real or personal property.
    Handicapped person means any person who has a physical or mental 
impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, 
has a record of such an impairment, or is regarded as having such an 
impairment.
    As used in this definition, the phrase:
    (1) Physical or mental impairment includes--
    (i) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, 
or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: 
Neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, 
including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; 
genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
    (ii) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental 
retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and 
specific learning disabilities. The term physical or mental impairment 
includes, but is not limited to, such diseases and conditions as 
orthopedic, visual, speech, and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, 
epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, 
diabetes, mental retardation, emotional illness, and drug addiction and 
alocoholism.
    (2) Major life activities includes functions such as caring for 
one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, 
breathing, learning, and working.
    (3) Has a record of such an impairment means has a history of, or 
has been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that 
substantially limits one or more major life activities.
    (4) Is regarded as having an impairment means--
    (i) Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially 
limit major life activities but is treated by the agency as constituting 
such a limitation;
    (ii) Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits 
major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of others toward 
such impairment; or
    (iii) Has none of the impairments defined in subparagraph (1) of 
this definition but is treated by the agency as having such an 
impairment.
    Historic preservation programs means programs conducted by the 
agency that have preservation of historic properties as a primary 
purpose.
    Historic properties means those properties that are listed or 
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places or 
properties designated as historic under a statute of the appropriate 
State or local government body.
    Qualified handicapped person means--
    (1) With respect to preschool, elementary, or secondary education 
services provided by the agency, a handicapped person who is a member of 
a class of persons otherwise entitled by statute, regulation, or agency 
policy to receive education services from the agency.
    (2) With respect to any other agency program or activity under which 
a person is required to perform services or to achieve a level of 
accomplishment, a handicapped person who meets the essential eligibility 
requirements and who can achieve the purpose of the program or activity 
without modifications in the program or activity that the agency can 
demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in its nature;
    (3) With respect to any other program or activity, a handicapped 
person

[[Page 55]]

who meets the essential eligibility requirements for participation in, 
or receipt of benefits from, that program or activity; and
    (4) Qualified handicapped person is defined for purposes of 
employment in 29 CFR 1613.702(f), which is made applicable to this part 
by Sec. 500.140.
    Section 504 means section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 
(Pub. L. 93-112, 87 Stat. 394 (29 U.S.C. 794)), as amended by the 
Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1974 (Pub. L. 93-516, 88 Stat. 1617), 
and the Rehabilitation, Comprehensive Services, and Developmental 
Disabilities Amendments of 1978 (Pub. L. 95-602, 92 Stat. 2955). As used 
in this part, section 504 applies only to programs or activities 
conducted by Executive agencies and not to federally assisted programs.
    Substantial impairment means a significant loss of the integrity of 
finished materials, design quality, or special character resulting from 
a permanent alteration.
Secs. 500.104--500.109  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 500.110  Self-evaluation.

    (a) The agency shall, by August 24, 1987, evaluate its current 
policies and practices, and the effects thereof, that do not or may not 
meet the requirements of this part, and, to the extent modification of 
any such policies and practices is required, the agency shall proceed to 
make the necessary modifications.
    (b) The agency shall provide an opportunity to interested persons, 
including handicapped persons or organizations representing handicapped 
persons, to participate in the self-evaluation process by submitting 
comments (both oral and written).
    (c) The agency shall, until three years following the completion of 
the self-evaluation, maintain on file and make available for public 
inspection:
    (1) a description of areas examined and any problems identified, and
    (2) a description of any modifications made.


<R05>
Sec. 500.111  Notice.

    The agency shall make available to employees, applicants, 
participants, beneficiaries, and other interested persons such 
information regarding the provisions of this part and its applicability 
to the programs or activities conducted by the agency, and make such 
information available to them in such manner as the head of the agency 
finds necessary to apprise such persons of the protections against 
discrimination assured them by section 504 and this regulation.
Secs. 500.112--500.129  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 500.130  General prohibitions against discrimination.

    (a) No qualified handicapped person shall, on the basis of handicap, 
be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or 
otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity 
conducted by the agency.
    (b)(1) The agency, in providing any aid, benefit, or service, may 
not, directly or through contractual, licensing, or other arrangements, 
on the basis of handicap--
    (i) Deny a qualified handicapped person the opportunity to 
participate in or benefit from the aid, benefit, or service;
    (ii) Afford a qualified handicapped person an opportunity to 
participate in or benefit from the aid, benefit, or service that is not 
equal to that afforded others;
    (iii) Provide a qualified handicapped person with an aid, benefit, 
or service that is not as effective in affording equal opportunity to 
obtain the same result, to gain the same benefit, or to reach the same 
level of achievement as that provided to others;
    (iv) Provide different or separate aid, benefits, or services to 
handicapped persons or to any class of handicapped persons than is 
provided to others unless such action is necessary to provide qualified 
handicapped persons with aid, benefits, or services that are as 
effective as those provided to others;
    (v) Deny a qualified handicapped person the opportunity to 
participate as a member of planning or advisory boards; or
    (vi) Otherwise limit a qualified handicapped person in the enjoyment 
of any right, privilege, advantage, or

[[Page 56]]

opportunity enjoyed by others receiving the aid, benefit, or service.
    (2) The agency may not deny a qualified handicapped person the 
opportunity to participate in programs or activities that are not 
separate or different, despite the existence of permissibly separate or 
different programs or activities.
    (3) The agency may not, directly or through contractual or other 
arrangments, utilize criteria or methods of administration the purpose 
or effect of which would--
    (i) Subject qualified handicapped persons to discrimination on the 
basis of handicap; or
    (ii) Defeat or substantially impair accomplishment of the objectives 
of a program or activity with respect to handicapped persons.
    (4) The agency may not, in determining the site or location of a 
facility, make selections the purpose or effect of which would--
    (i) Exclude handicapped persons from, deny them the benefits of, or 
otherwise subject them to discrimination under any program or activity 
conducted by the agency; or
    (ii) Defeat or substantially impair the accomplishment of the 
objectives of a program or activity with respect to handicapped persons.
    (5) The agency, in the selection of procurement contractors, may not 
use criteria that subject qualified handicapped persons to 
discrimination on the basis of handicap.
    (6) The agency may not administer a licensing or certification 
program in a manner that subjects qualified handicapped persons to 
discrimination on the basis of handicap, nor may the agency establish 
requirements for the programs or activities of licensees or certified 
entities that subject qualified handicapped persons to discrimination on 
the basis of handicap. However, the programs or activities of entities 
that are licensed or certified by the agency are not, themselves, 
covered by this part.
    (c) The exclusion of nonhandicapped persons from the benefits of a 
program limited by Federal statute or Executive order to handicapped 
persons or the exclusion of a specific class of handicapped persons from 
a program limited by Federal statute or Executive order to a different 
class of handicapped persons is not prohibited by this part.
    (d) The agency shall administer programs and activities in the most 
integrated setting appropriate to the needs of qualified handicapped 
persons.
Secs. 500.131--500.139  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 500.140  Employment.

    No qualified handicapped person shall, on the basis of handicap, be 
subjected to discrimination in employment under any program or activity 
conducted by the agency. The definitions, requirements, and procedures 
of section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 791), as 
established by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 29 CFR 
part 1613, shall apply to employment in federally conducted programs or 
activities.
Secs. 500.141--500.148  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 500.149  Program accessibility: Discrimination prohibited.

    Except as otherwise provided in Sec. 500.150, no qualified 
handicapped person shall, because the agency's facilities are 
inaccessible to or unusable by handicapped persons, be denied the 
benefits of, be excluded from participation in, or otherwise be 
subjected to discrimination under any program or activity conducted by 
the agency.


<R05>
Sec. 500.150  Program accessibility: Existing facilities.

    (a) General. The agency shall operate each program or activity so 
that the program or activity, when viewed in its entirety, is readily 
accessible to and usable by handicapped persons. This paragraph does 
not--
    (1) Necessarily require the agency to make each of its existing 
facilities accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
    (2) In the case of historic preservation programs, require the 
agency to take any action that would result in a substantial impairment 
of significant historic features of an historic property; or
    (3) Require the agency to take any action that it can demonstrate 
would result in a fundamental alteration in

[[Page 57]]

the nature of a program or activity or in undue financial and 
administrative burdens. In those circumstances where agency personnel 
believe that the proposed action would fundamentally alter the program 
or activity or would result in undue financial and administrative 
burdens, the agency has the burden of proving that compliance with 
Sec. 500.150(a) would result in such alteration or burdens. The decision 
that compliance would result in such alteration or burdens must be made 
by the agency head or his or her designee after considering all agency 
resources available for use in the funding and operation of the 
conducted program or activity, and must be accompanied by a written 
statement of the reasons for reaching that conclusion. If an action 
would result in such an alteration or such burdens, the agency shall 
take any other action that would not result in such an alteration or 
such burdens but would nevertheless ensure that handicapped persons 
receive the benefits and services of the program or activity.
    (b) Methods--(1) General. The agency may comply with the 
requirements of this section through such means as redesign of 
equipment, reassignment of services to accessible buildings, assignment 
of aides to beneficiaries, home visits, delivery of services at 
alternate accessible sites, alteration of existing facilities and 
construction of new facilities, use of accessible rolling stock, or any 
other methods that result in making its programs or activities readily 
accessible to and usable by handicapped persons. The agency is not 
required to make structural changes in existing facilities where other 
methods are effective in achieving compliance with this section. The 
agency, in making alterations to existing buildings, shall meet 
accessibility requirements to the extent compelled by the Architectural 
Barriers Act of 1968, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4151-4157), and any 
regulations implementing it. In choosing among available methods for 
meeting the requirements of this section, the agency shall give priority 
to those methods that offer programs and activities to qualified 
handicapped persons in the most integrated setting appropriate.
    (2) Historic preservation programs. In meeting the requirements of 
Sec. 500.150(a) in historic preservation programs, the agency shall give 
priority to methods that provide physical access to handicapped persons. 
In cases where a physical alteration to an historic property is not 
required because of Sec. 500.150(a)(2) or (a)(3), alternative methods of 
achieving program accessibility include--
    (i) Using audio-visual materials and devices to depict those 
portions of an historic property that cannot otherwise be made 
accessible;
    (ii) Assigning persons to guide handicapped persons into or through 
portions of historic properties that cannot otherwise be made 
accessible; or
    (iii) Adopting other innovative methods.
    (c) Time period for compliance. The agency shall comply with the 
obligations established under this section by October 21, 1986, except 
that where structural changes in facilities are undertaken, such changes 
shall be made by August 22, 1989, but in any event as expeditiously as 
possible.
    (d) Transition plan. In the event that structural changes to 
facilities will be undertaken to achieve program accessibility, the 
agency shall develop, by February 23, 1987 a transition plan setting 
forth the steps necessary to complete such changes. The agency shall 
provide an opportunity to interested persons, including handicapped 
persons or organizations representing handicapped persons, to 
participate in the development of the transition plan by submitting 
comments (both oral and written). A copy of the transition plan shall be 
made available for public inspection. The plan shall, at a minimum--
    (1) Identify physical obstacles in the agency's facilities that 
limit the accessibility of its programs or activities to handicapped 
persons;
    (2) Describe in detail the methods that will be used to make the 
facilities accessible;
    (3) Specify the schedule for taking the steps necessary to achieve 
compliance with this section and, if the time period of the transition 
plan is longer than one year, identify steps that will

[[Page 58]]

be taken during each year of the transition period; and
    (4) Indicate the official responsible for implementation of the 
plan.


<R05>
Sec. 500.151  Program accessibility: New construction and alterations.

    Each building or part of a building that is constructed or altered 
by, on behalf of, or for the use of the agency shall be designed, 
constructed, or altered so as to be readily accessible to and usable by 
handicapped persons. The definitions, requirements, and standards of the 
Architectural Barriers Act (42 U.S.C. 4151-4157), as established in 41 
CFR 101-19.600 to 101-19.607, apply to buildings covered by this 
section.
Secs. 500.152--500.159  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 500.160  Communications.

    (a) The agency shall take appropriate steps to ensure effective 
communication with applicants, participants, personnel of other Federal 
entities, and members of the public.
    (1) The agency shall furnish appropriate auxiliary aids where 
necessary to afford a handicapped person an equal opportunity to 
participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, a program or activity 
conducted by the agency.
    (i) In determining what type of auxiliary aid is necessary, the 
agency shall give primary consideration to the requests of the 
handicapped person.
    (ii) The agency need not provide individually prescribed devices, 
readers for personal use or study, or other devices of a personal 
nature.
    (2) Where the agency communicates with applicants and beneficiaries 
by telephone, telecommunication devices for deaf person (TDD's) or 
equally effective telecommunication systems shall be used.
    (b) The agency shall ensure that interested persons, including 
persons with impaired vision or hearing, can obtain information as to 
the existence and location of accessible services, activities, and 
facilities.
    (c) The agency shall provide signage at a primary entrance to each 
of its inaccessible facilities, directing users to a location at which 
they can obtain information about accessible facilities. The 
international symbol for accessibility shall be used at each primary 
entrance of an accessible facility.
    (d) This section does not require the agency to take any action that 
it can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in the 
nature of a program or activity or in undue financial and adminstrative 
burdens. In those circumstances where agency personnel believe that the 
proposed action would fundamentally alter the program or activity or 
would result in undue financial and administrative burdens, the agency 
has the burden of proving that compliance with Sec. 500.160 would result 
in such alteration or burdens. The decision that compliance would result 
in such alteration or burdens must be made by the agency head or his or 
her designee after considering all agency resources available for use in 
the funding and operation of the conducted program or activity, and must 
be accompanied by a written statement of the reasons for reaching that 
conclusion. If an action required to comply with this section would 
result in such an alteration or such burdens, the agency shall take any 
other action that would not result in such an alteration or such burdens 
but would nevertheless ensure that, to the maximum extent possible, 
handicapped persons receive the benefits and services of the program or 
activity.
Secs. 500.161--500.169  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 500.170  Compliance procedures.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, this 
section applies to all allegations of discrimination on the basis of 
handicap in programs or activities conducted by the agency.
    (b) The agency shall process complaints alleging violations of 
section 504 with respect to employment according to the procedures 
established by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 29 CFR 
part 1613 pursuant to section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 
U.S.C. 791).
    (c) The Director shall be responsible for coordinating 
implementation of this section. Complaints may be sent to Director, 
National Commission for Employment Policy, Suite 300, 1522 K Street NW., 
Washington, DC 20005.

[[Page 59]]

    (d) The agency shall accept and investigate all complete complaints 
for which it has jurisdiction. All complete complaints must be filed 
within 180 days of the alleged act of discrimination. The agency may 
extend this time period for good cause.
    (e) If the agency receives a complaint over which it does not have 
jurisdiction, it shall promptly notify the complainant and shall make 
reasonable efforts to refer the complaint to the appropriate government 
entity.
    (f) The agency shall notify the Architectural and Transportation 
Barriers Compliance Board upon receipt of any complaint alleging that a 
building or facility that is subject to the Architectural Barriers Act 
of 1968, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4151-4157), or section 502 of the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended (29 U.S.C. 792), is not readily 
accessible to and usable by handicapped persons.
    (g) Within 180 days of the receipt of a complete complaint for which 
it has jurisdiction, the agency shall notify the complainant of the 
results of the investigation in a letter containing--
    (1) Findings of fact and conclusions of law;
    (2) A description of a remedy for each violation found; and
    (3) A notice of the right to appeal.
    (h) Appeals of the findings of fact and conclusions of law or 
remedies must be filed by the complainant within 90 days of receipt from 
the agency of the letter required by Sec. 500.170(g). The agency may 
extend this time for good cause.
    (i) Timely appeals shall be accepted and processed by the head of 
the agency.
    (j) The head of the agency shall notify the complainant of the 
results of the appeal within 60 days of the receipt of the request. If 
the head of the agency determines that additional information is needed 
from the complainant, he or she shall have 60 days from the date of 
receipt of the additional information to make his or her determination 
on the appeal.
    (k) The time limits cited in paragraphs (g) and (j) of this section 
may be extended with the permission of the Assistant Attorney General.
    (l) The agency may delegate its authority for conducting complaint 
investigations to other Federal agencies, except that the authority for 
making the final determination may not be delegated to another agency.

[51 FR 22888 and 22896, June 23, 1986, as amended at 51 FR 22888, June 
23, 1986]
Secs. 500.171--500.999  [Reserved]

[[Page 61]]





<R01>
                           TITLE 2--[RESERVED]


<R02>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
[[Page 63]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Chapter I--Index
  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  Redesignation Table
  List of CFR Sections Affected

[[Page 65]]

                            CHAPTER I--INDEX


Action, preamble caption, Sec. 18.12

Addresses, preamble caption, Sec. 18.12

Administrative Committee of the Federal Register, Secs. 1.1, 2.2

Agency
  Definition, Sec. 1.1
  Preamble caption, Sec. 18.12

Agency representatives
  Code of Federal Regulations, Sec. 16.4
  Federal Register, Part 16
  United States Government Manual, Sec. 20.1
  Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, Sec. 16.4

Agency services, Part 15

Amendatory language, Secs. 21.1, 21.20

Authority citations, Secs. 21.40--21.53, 22.2, 22.5
  Parallel table of authorities and rules, Sec. 8.5

Authorizing officers
  See Agency representatives.

Capitalization, Secs. 18.9, 19.1

Categories of documents, Sec. 5.9

Certification of reproductions of acts and documents, Secs. 3.3, 15.4

Certified copies of agency documents, Secs. 18.1, 18.5, 18.6

Certifying officers
  See Agency representatives.

Citation format
  Code of Federal Regulations, Secs. 8.9, 21.23, 21.24
  Federal Register, Sec. 5.8

Classification of documents, Sec. 5.9

Code of Federal Regulations
  Authority citations, Secs. 21.40--21.53
  Citation format, Secs. 8.9, 21.23, 21.24
  Codification system, Sec. 8.2, Part 21, Sec. 22.7
  Cutoff dates for amendments, Sec. 8.3
  Distribution, Sec. 12.2
  Editorial assistance, Part 15
  Expired material, reinstatement, Sec. 18.16
  Expired material, removal, Sec. 21.6
  Incorporation by reference. See Part 51, Ch. II.
  Indexes, Secs. 8.4, 8.5
  OMB control numbers, Sec. 21.35
  Part headings, Secs. 21.18, 21.19
  Publication policy, Part 8
  References, Secs. 21.21, 21.23, 21.24
  Subscriptions, Sec. 11.3
  Updating of volumes, Sec. 8.3

Codification system, Sec. 8.2, Part 21, Sec. 22.7

Combined documents, prohibition, Sec. 18.2

Congressional laws
  See Public Laws.

Consultation services
  See Agency services.

Corrections, Secs.  18.13, 18.15

Cross references
  See References in documents subject to codification.

Dates, preamble caption, Sec. 18.12
  See also Effective dates

Deadlines
  Code of Federal Regulations amendments, Sec. 8.3
  United States Government Manual, Sec. 20.7

Definitions, Sec. 1.1

Distribution
  See also Subscriptions
  Agency representatives, responsibility, Sec. 16.4
  Code of Federal Regulations, Sec. 12.2
  Federal Register, Secs. 5.7, 12.1
  Presidential papers, Secs. 12.4, 12.5
  United States Government Manual, Sec. 12.3

Documents
  Authority citations, Secs. 21.40--21.53, 22.2, 22.5

[[Page 66]]

  Categories, Sec. 5.9
  Certified copies, Secs. 18.1, 18.5, 18.6
  Code of Federal Regulations references, Secs. 21.21, 21.23, 21.24
  Codification system, Sec. 8.2, Part 21, Sec. 22.7
  Combined documents, prohibition, Sec. 18.2
  Corrections, Secs. 18.13, 18.15
  Definition, Sec. 1.1
  Editorial assistance, Part 15
  Effective dates, Secs. 18.12, 18.17, 21.30
  Filing for public inspection, Secs. 1.1, 3.2, 5.2, Part 17, Part 18
  Format, Part 18
  Headings, Secs. 21.16--21.19
  Illustrations, tables, and forms, Sec. 18.10
  Legibility, Secs. 18.4, 18.5, 18.10
  Notices, format, Part 22
  OMB control numbers, Sec. 21.35
  Preamble requirements, Sec. 18.12
  Preparation and transmittal, Part 18
  Proposed rules, format, Part 22
  Public inspection, Sec. 3.2
  Publication not authorized, Sec. 5.4
  Publication policy, Part 5
  Reproduction and certication of copies, Secs. 3.3, 15.4
  Rules and regulations, format, Part 21
  Scheduling, Part 17
  Signatures, Sec. 18.7
  Style, Sec. 18.9
  Thesaurus terms, identification, Sec. 18.20
  Withdrawal or correction of material filed with Federal Register 
    Office, Sec. 18.13

Editorial assistance, Part 15

Effective dates, Secs. 18.12, 18.17, 21.30

Emergency requests
  Filing for public inspection, Secs. 17.5, 17.6
  Publication, Secs. 17.3, 17.4

Errors
  See Corrections.

Executive Orders
  See Presidential documents.

Expiration of regulations, Secs. 18.16, 21.6

Extra copies, Part 12
  See also Overruns

Federal Register
  Agency representatives, Part 16
  Categories of documents, Sec. 5.9
  Citation format, Sec. 5.8
  Codification system, Part 21
  Corrections, Secs. 18.13, 18.15
  Distribution, Secs. 5.7, 12.1
  Documents, publication not authorized, Sec. 5.4
  Documents, publication policy, Part 5
  Editorial assistance, Part 15
  Emergency filing requests, Secs. 17.5, 17.6
  Emergency publication requests, Secs. 17.3, 17.4
  Incorporation by reference. See Part 51, Ch. II.
  Indexes, Part 6
  Overruns and extra copies, Sec. 12.1
  Preparation and transmittal of documents, Part 18
  Public inspection of documents, Sec. 3.2
  Publication policy, Part 5
  Publication schedules, Part 17
  Subscriptions, Secs. 11.1, 11.2
  Thesaurus terms, identification, Sec. 18.20
  Unrestricted use of materials, Sec. 2.6
  Withdrawal or correction of documents on file, Sec. 18.13

Federal Register Office
  Agency services, Part 15
  Authority of Director, Secs. 2.4, 5.3
  Certification of reproductions of acts and documents, Secs. 3.3, 15.4
  Information services, Part 3
  Location and office hours, Sec. 2.3

Filing of documents for public inspection, Secs. 1.1, 3.2, 5.2, Part 17, 
    Part 18

Final rules
  See Rules and regulations.

Finding aids
  See Indexes.

For Further Information Contact, preamble caption, Sec. 18.12

Forms, publication, Sec. 18.10

Government Manual

[[Page 67]]

  See United States Government Manual.

Government Printing Office
  See also Distribution; Subscriptions.
  Style manual, Secs. 18.9, 19.1, 20.6

Headings, Secs. 21.16--21.19

Illustrations, tables, and forms, Sec. 18.10

Incorporation by reference. See Part 51, Ch. II.

Indexes
  Code of Federal Regulations, Secs. 8.4, 8.5
  Federal Register, Part 6, Secs. 11.2, 11.7
  List of CFR Sections Affected, Secs. 6.4, 8.5, 11.2, 11.8, 12.1
  Parallel table of authorities and rules, Sec. 8.5
  Public Papers of the Presidents, Sec. 10.12
  Subscriptions, Secs. 11.2, 11.7, 11.8
  Thesaurus terms, identification, Sec. 18.20
  Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, Sec. 10.3

Information services, Part 3
  See also Agency services

Inspection of documents
  See Public inspection of documents.

Internal references
  See References in documents subject to codification.

Land descriptions, format, Sec. 19.1

Laws
  See Public Laws.

Legibility, Secs. 18.4, 18.5, 18.10

Letters of transmittal, Secs. 18.3, 18.4, 18.13

Liaison officers
  See Agency representatives.

List of CFR Sections Affected, Secs. 6.4, 8.5, 11.2, 11.8, 12.1

Mailing
  See Distribution; Subscriptions.

Notices
  See also Documents.
  Authority of Federal Register Office Director, Sec. 5.3
  Format, Part 22
  Publication category, Sec. 5.9
  Sunshine Act meetings notices, Sec. 17.2

Numbering in Code of Federal Regulations
  See Codification system.
Official distribution within Federal Government
  See Distribution.

OMB control numbers, Sec. 21.35
Overruns, Sec. 12.1

Parallel table of authorities and rules, Sec. 8.5

Preamble requirements, Sec. 18.12

Presidential documents, Part 19
  See also Presidential papers
  Definitions, Sec. 19.6
  Format, Sec. 19.1
  Parallel table of authorities and rules, Sec. 8.5
  Publication in Federal Register, Secs. 5.1, 5.2, 5.9
  Publication responsibility, Sec. 2.5
  Routing and approval, Secs. 19.2, 19.3

Presidential papers
  Distribution, Secs. 12.4, 12.5
  Public Papers of the Presidents, Secs. 2.5, 10.10--10.13, 12.5
  Subscriptions, Secs. 11.5, 11.6
  Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, Secs. 2.5, 10.1--10.3, 
    12.4

Proclamations
  See Presidential documents

Proposed rules
  See also Documents.
  Format, Part 22
  Publication category, Sec. 5.9
Public inspection of documents, Sec. 3.2

  See also Filing of documents for public inspection.

Public Laws
  Publication responsibility, Sec. 2.5
  Reproductions and certification of copies, Secs. 3.3, 15.4
  Subscriptions, Sec. 11.1


[[Page 68]]


Public Papers of the Presidents
  See Presidential papers.

Publication schedules of the Federal Register, Part 17

Punctuation, Secs. 18.9, 19.1

References in documents subject to codification, Secs. 21.21, 21.23, 
    21.24

Reprints
  See Overruns.

Reproductions and certification of copies of acts and documents, 
    Secs. 3.3, 15.4

Rules and regulations
  See also Documents.
  Expiration, Secs. 18.16, 21.6
  Format, Part 21
  Publication category, Sec. 5.9

Scheduling of documents, Part 17

Seals on original documents or certified copies, Sec. 18.8

Separate parts, requests for overruns, Sec. 12.1

Signatures, Sec. 18.7

Slip Laws
  See Public Laws.

Spelling, Secs. 18.9, 19.1

Statutes
  See United States Statutes at Large.

Statutory authorities
  See Parallel table of authorities and rules; Authority citations.

Style, Secs. 18.9, 19.1, 20.6

Subject indexes
  See Indexes.

Subscriptions, Part 11
  See also Distribution.

Summary, preamble caption, Sec. 18.12

Sunshine Act meetings notices, Sec. 17.2

Supplementary Information, preamble caption, Sec. 18.12

Tables, Sec. 18.10

Thesaurus terms, identification, Sec. 18.20

Training programs
  See Agency services.

Transmittal of documents, Part 18

United States Government Manual, Part 20
  Distribution, Sec. 12.3
  Publication policy, Part 9
  Publication responsibility, Sec. 2.5
  Subscriptions, Sec. 11.4

United States Statutes at Large
  Publication responsibility, Sec. 2.5
  Subscriptions, Sec. 11.1

Unrestricted use of materials, Sec. 2.6

Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents
  See Presidential papers.

Withdrawal of documents filed with Federal Register Office, Sec. 18.13


                                                                    Chap.

[[Page 69]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters

<R04>

                     (Revised as of January 1, 1997)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                          Title 2--[Reserved]

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  General Accounting Office (Parts 1--99)
        II  Federal Claims Collection Standards (General 
                Accounting Office--Department of Justice) (Parts 
                100--299)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
        IV  Advisory Committee on Federal Pay (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Part 2100)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)
      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Part 3202)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Part 3301)

[[Page 70]]

      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Part 3401)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Part 3601)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Part 3801)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Part 4301)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Part 4501)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Part 5001)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Part 5101)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Part 5201)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Part 5301)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Part 5501)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Part 5601)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Part 5701)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Part 5801)
         L  Department of Transportation (Part 6001)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Part 6201)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Part 6401)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Part 6701)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Part 
                6801)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Part 
                6901)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Part 7001)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Part 7201)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Part 7301)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Part 
                7501)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Part 
                7601)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Part 7901)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Part 8101)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Part 
                8401)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Part 8601)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Part 8701)

                          Title 6--[Reserved]

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture
         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Consumer Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)
       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)

[[Page 71]]

        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of Finance and Management, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  [Reserved]
    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3400--
                3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)
     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)

[[Page 72]]

    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Immigration and Naturalization Service, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1--499)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)
       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Meat and Poultry 
                Inspection, Department of Agriculture (Parts 300--
                599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
        XI  United States Enrichment Corporation (Parts 1100--
                1199)
        XV  Office of the Federal Inspector for the Alaska Natural 
                Gas Transportation System (Parts 1500--1599)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)

[[Page 73]]

        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board (Parts 
                1500--1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700-1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)
       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Export Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements

[[Page 74]]

        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  United States Customs Service, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Employment Standards Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)

[[Page 75]]

        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 1000--1099)

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)
        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  United States Information Agency (Parts 500--599)
        VI  United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 700--799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board Regulations (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Board for International Broadcasting (Parts 1300--
                1399)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

[[Page 76]]

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)
        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs and Section 202 Direct Loan Program) 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--999)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)
        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1001)

[[Page 77]]

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--799)

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 1--299)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--199)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Programs, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)
      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Minerals Management Service, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 200--299)

[[Page 78]]

       III  Board of Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
        VI  Bureau of Mines, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                600--699)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)
      XXIX  Presidential Commission on the Assignment of Women in 
                the Armed Forces (Part 2900)

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)

[[Page 79]]

        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 
                Department of Education (Parts 700--799)
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100-1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

                        Title 35--Panama Canal

         I  Panama Canal Regulations (Parts 1--299)

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
       XIV  Assassination Records Review Board (Parts 1400-1499)

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  Patent and Trademark Office, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)

[[Page 80]]

        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--99)

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--799)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 61-1--61-999)
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System
       201  Federal Information Resources Management Regulation 
                (Parts 201-1--201-99) [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       301  Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)
       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Parts 303-1--303-2)
       304  Payment from a Non-Federal Source for Travel Expenses 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

[[Page 81]]

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)
        IV  Health Care Financing Administration, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200--499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)
       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10005)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services, 
                General Administration (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899)
         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  ACTION (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)

[[Page 82]]

       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXII  Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2299)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Department of Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300--
                399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  Agency for International Development (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)

[[Page 83]]

        19  United States Information Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)
        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        35  Panama Canal Commission (Parts 3500--3599)
        44  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 4400--4499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)
        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement (Parts 5300--5399)
        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Part 
                5452)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  General Services Administration Board of Contract 
                Appeals (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Research and Special Programs Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)

[[Page 84]]

         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)
        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)
         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            Acts Requiring Publication in the Federal Register
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR



[[Page 85]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR

<R04>

                     (Revised as of January 1, 1997)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or
                     Agency                               Chapter

ACTION                                            45, XII
Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Advanced Research Projects Agency                 32, I
Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental          5, VII
     Relations
Advisory Committee on Federal Pay                 5, IV
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development              22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Cooperative State Research, Education, and      7, XXXIV
       Extension Service
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy, Office of                               7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Finance and Management, Office of               7, XXX
  Food and Consumer Service                       7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Alaska Natural Gas Transportation System, Office  10, XV
     of the Federal Inspector
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of          27, I
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I

[[Page 86]]

Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX
Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
     Compliance Board
Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, United       22, VI
     States
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Assassination Records Review Board                36, XIV
Benefits Review Board                             20, VII
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase From People Who Are
Board for International Broadcasting              22, XIII
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee        45, XXII
     Commission
Civil Rights, Commission on                       45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Commerce Department                               44, IV
  Census Bureau                                   15, I`
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Export Administration, Bureau of                15, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Fishery Conservation and Management             50, VI
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office                     37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Cooperative State Research, Education, and        7, XXXIV
     Extension Service
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Customs Service, United States                    19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A
  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII
  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51
  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I

[[Page 87]]

  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Defense Mapping Agency                          32, I
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 2
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Mapping Agency                            32, I
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Enrichment Corporation, United States             10, XI
Environmental Protection Agency                   5, LIV; 40, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV
  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                25, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2
  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II
  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export Administration, Bureau of                  15, VII
Export-Import Bank of the United States           5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII
Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1
Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I

[[Page 88]]

  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
Federal Claims Collection Standards               4, II
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 44
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II; 49, III
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Inspector for the Alaska Natural Gas      10, XV
     Transportation System, Office of
Federal Labor Relations Authority, and General    5, XIV; 22, XIV
     Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations 
     Authority
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Pay, Advisory Committee on                5, IV
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Property Management Regulations System    41, Subtitle C
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Finance and Management, Office of                 7, XXX
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Fishery Conservation and Management               50, VI
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Consumer Service                         7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX
Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Accounting Office                         4, I, II
General Services Administration                   5, LVII
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 101, 105
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
     of Certain Employees
[[Page 89]]

  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302
  Travel Allowances                               41, 301
Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Great Lakes Pilotage                              46, III
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          5, XLV; 45, Subtitle A
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Health Care Financing Administration            42, IV
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Health Care Financing Administration              42, IV
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      5, LXV; 24, Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Naturalization Service            8, I
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
     Secretary
Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V
Information Agency, United States                 22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General
  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Intergovernmental Relations, Advisory Commission  5, VII
     on
Interior Department
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  Minerals Management Service                     30, II
  Mines, Bureau of                                30, VI

[[Page 90]]

  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III
  National Park Service                           36, I
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I
  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board   30, III
       of
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, Agency for             22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
  International Development, Agency for           22, II; 48, 7
  Overseas Private Investment Corporation         5, XXXIII; 22, VII
International Fishing and Related Activities      50, III
International Investment, Office of               31, VIII
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                5, XXVIII; 28, I
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             4, II
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration and Naturalization Service          8, I
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII
  Benefits Review Board                           20, VII
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29
  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Relations and Cooperative      29, II
       Programs, Bureau of
  Labor-Management Programs, Office of            29, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration     29, XXV
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A
  Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of    41, 61; 20, IX
       the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Relations and Cooperative        29, II
     Programs, Bureau of
Labor-Management Programs, Office of              29, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II

[[Page 91]]

Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minerals Management Service                       30, II
Mines, Bureau of                                  30, VI
Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV
Monetary Offices                                  31, I
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National Archives and Records Administration      5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Bureau of Standards                      15, II
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National and Community Service, Corporation for   45, XXV
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 49, V
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Labor Relations Board                    29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV
National Mediation Board                          29, X
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       5, XLIII; 45, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
National Weather Service                          15, IX
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Panama Canal Commission                           48, 35
Panama Canal Regulations                          35, I
Patent and Trademark Office                       37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration       29, XXV
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
[[Page 92]]

  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Postal Rate Commission                            5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI
President's Commission on White House             1, IV
     Fellowships
Presidential Commission on the Assignment of      32, XXIX
     Women in the Armed Forces
Presidential Documents                            3
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Refugee Resettlement, Office of                   45, IV
Regional Action Planning Commissions              13, V
Relocation Allowances                             41, 302
Research and Special Programs Administration      49, I
Rural Business-Cooperative Service                7, XVIII, XLII
Rural Development Administration                  7, XLII
Rural Housing Service                             7, XVIII, XXXV
Rural Telephone Bank                              7, XVI
Rural Utilities Service                           7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation     33, IV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of          32, XXIV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and     47, II
     National Security Council
Secret Service                                    31, IV
Securities and Exchange Commission                17, II
Selective Service System                          32, XVI
Small Business Administration                     13, I
Smithsonian Institution                           36, V
Social Security Administration                    20, III; 48, 23
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States        5, XI
Special Counsel, Office of                        5, VIII
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,    34, III
     Office of
State Department                                  22, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 6
Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board of  30, III
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,       30, VII
     Office of
Surface Transportation Board                      49, X
Susquehanna River Basin Commission                18, VIII
Technology Administration                         15, XI
Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for        37, IV
Technology, Under Secretary for                   37, V
Tennessee Valley Authority                        5, LXIX; 18, XIII
Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board       12, XV
Thrift Supervision Office, Department of the      12, V
     Treasury
Trade Representative, United States, Office of    15, XX
Transportation, Department of                     5, L
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 63
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 12
  Federal Aviation Administration                 14, I
  Federal Highway Administration                  23, I, II; 49, III
  Federal Railroad Administration                 49, II
  Federal Transit Administration                  49, VI
  Maritime Administration                         46, II
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  23, II, III; 49, V
  Research and Special Programs Administration    49, I
  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation   33, IV
  Secretary of Transportation, Office of          14, II; 49, Subtitle A
  Surface Transportation Board                    49, X

[[Page 93]]

Transportation, Office of                         7, XXXIII
Travel Allowances                                 41, 301
Treasury Department                               5, XXI; 17, IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of        27, I
  Community Development Financial Institutions    12, XVIII
       Fund
  Comptroller of the Currency                     12, I
  Customs Service, United States                  19, I
  Engraving and Printing, Bureau of               31, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 10
  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center         31, VII
  Fiscal Service                                  31, II
  Foreign Assets Control, Office of               31, V
  Internal Revenue Service                        26, I
  International Investment, Office of             31, VIII
  Monetary Offices                                31, I
  Secret Service                                  31, IV
  Secretary of the Treasury, Office of            31, Subtitle A
  Thrift Supervision, Office of                   12, V
Truman, Harry S. Scholarship Foundation           45, XVIII
United States and Canada, International Joint     22, IV
     Commission
United States and Mexico, International Boundary  22, XI
     and Water Commission, United States Section
United States Enrichment Corporation              10, XI
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation      43, III
     Commission
Veterans Affairs Department                       38, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 8
Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of the  41, 61; 20, IX
     Assistant Secretary for
Vice President of the United States, Office of    32, XXVIII
Vocational and Adult Education, Office of         34, IV
Wage and Hour Division                            29, V
Water Resources Council                           18, VI
Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of         20, I
World Agricultural Outlook Board                  7, XXXVIII

[[Page 95]]

                                     

                                     


<R03>
                           Redesignation Table

<R04>


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                Old section                          New section        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            Parts 11-12 (Subchapter D)  
3.4(a)....................................  11.1                        
3.4(b) introductory text..................  Removed                     
3.4(b)(1).................................  Removed                     
3.4(b)(2).................................  Removed                     
3.4(b)(3).................................  11.2                        
3.4(b)(4).................................  11.3                        
3.4(b)(5).................................  11.4                        
3.4(b)(6).................................  11.5                        
3.4(b)(7).................................  11.6                        
3.4(b)(8).................................  11.7                        
7.1.......................................  12.1(a)                     
7.4.......................................  12.1(b)                     
7.5.......................................  12.1(c)                     
7.6.......................................  12.1(d)                     
8.8.......................................  12.2                        
9.3(a)....................................  12.3(a)                     
9.3(b)....................................  12.3 (b) and (c)            
10.4......................................  12.4                        
10.14.....................................  12.5                        
Parts 15-22 (Subchapter D)................  Parts 15-22 (Subchapter E)  
15.5......................................  Removed                     
17.6......................................  17.7                        
18.1(a)...................................  18.1                        
18.1(b)...................................  Removed                     
18.5(a)...................................  18.5                        
18.5(b)...................................  Removed                     
18.5(c)...................................  18.3(c)                     
18.9 introductory text and (a)............  18.9                        
18.9(b)...................................  Removed                     
18.9(c)...................................  Removed                     
18.10(a)..................................  Removed                     
18.10(b)..................................  18.10(a)                    
18.10(c)..................................  Removed                     
18.11.....................................  Removed                     
18.14.....................................  Removed                     
18.20(a)..................................  Removed                     
18.20(b)..................................  18.20(a)                    
18.20(c)..................................  18.20(b)                    
20.1 introductory text....................  20.1(a)                     
20.1(a)...................................  20.1(a)(1)                  
20.1(b)...................................  20.1(a)(2)                  
20.1(c)...................................  20.1(a)(3)                  
20.1(d)...................................  20.1(a)(4)                  
20.1 final undesignated paragraph.........  20.1(b)                     
20.4......................................  20.4 (a) and (b)            
21.4......................................  Removed                     
21.5......................................  Removed                     
21.13.....................................  Removed                     
21.15.....................................  Removed                     
21.22.....................................  Removed                     
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 97]]


<R03>
List of CFR Sections Affected

<R04>
All changes in this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations which were 
made by documents published in the Federal Register since January 1, 
1986, are enumerated in the following list. 

Entries indicate the nature 
of the changes effected. Page numbers refer to Federal Register pages. 
The user should consult the entries for chapters and parts as well as 
sections for revisions.
For the period before January 1, 1986, see the ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected, 1949-1963, 1964-1972, and 1973-1985'' published in seven 
separate volumes.

                                  1986

1 CFR
                                                                   51 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
3.3  Revised.......................................................27017
    Technical correction...........................................28509
3.4  (b)(3) revised................................................27017
    Technical correction...........................................28509
Chapter III
302.2  (b) revised.................................................46986
305.86-1  Added....................................................25641
305.86-2  Added....................................................25642
305.86-3  Added....................................................25643
305.86-4  Added....................................................46986
305.86-5  Added....................................................46987
305.86-6  Added....................................................46988
305.86-7  Added....................................................46989
305.86-8  Added....................................................46990
315  Added.........................................................16665
326  Added....................................................4573, 4579
326.103  Corrected..................................................7543
326.150  (c) corrected..............................................7543
326.170  (c) revised................................................4573
Chapter IV
457  Added..................................................22887, 22896
457.170  (c) revised...............................................22888
500  Added..................................................22888, 22896
500.170  (c) revised...............................................22888

                                  1987

1 CFR
                                                                   52 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter III
304.1--304.6 (Subpart A)  Authority citation revised...............22753
304.3  (a) revised; (b) and (c) amended; (d) removed; (e) 
        redesignated as (d) and revised; interim...................22753
    (c) correctly designated.......................................23627
    (a) revision, (b) and (c) amendment, (d) removal, (e) 
redesignation as (d)confirmed; (d) revised.........................29498
304.6  Revised; interim............................................22753
    Revision confirmed; (h) introductory text added; (i)(1) and 
(2) amended........................................................29498
305.87-1  Added....................................................23629
305.87-2  Added....................................................23631
305.87-3  Added....................................................23632
305.87-4  Added....................................................23634
305.87-5  Added....................................................23635
305.87-6  Added....................................................49142
305.87-7  Added....................................................49143
305.87-8  Added....................................................49144
305.87-9  Added....................................................49146
305.87-10  Added...................................................49147
305.87-11  Added...................................................49148
305.87-12  Added...................................................49151
310.12  Added......................................................23636
Chapter IV
456  Authority citation revised; nomenclature changes..............34373
456.2  (a) through (f) revised; (g), (h), and (i) added............34373
456.3  Redesignated as 456.4; new 456.3 added......................34373
456.4  Redesignated from 456.3.....................................34373

[[Page 98]]

    (j)(1)(vii) and (k)(2) revised; (j)(1)(viii), (k)(1) and (l) 
amended; (j)(1)(ix) and (5) and (k)(4) added; (j)(2) and (3) 
redesignated as (j)(3) and (4); new (j)(2) added; new (j)(4) 
revised............................................................34374

                                  1988

1 CFR
                                                                   53 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
3.4  (b)(3), (4), (7), and (8) revised; (b)(9) added...............28627
Chapter III
305.88-1  Added....................................................26026
305.88-2  Added....................................................26027
    Section and footnote corrected.................................39588
305.88-3  Added....................................................26028
305.88-4  Added....................................................26029
305.88-5  Added....................................................26030
305.88-6  Added....................................................39585
305.88-7  Added....................................................39586
305.88-8  Added....................................................39587
310.13  Added......................................................26032

                                  1989

1 CFR
                                                                   54 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
2.3  (a) and (c) amended; eff. 4-6-89...............................9676
2.4  (b) amended; eff. 4-6-89.......................................9676
2.5  (c) revised; eff. 4-6-89.......................................9676
3.2  (a) and (d) amended; eff. 4-6-89...............................9676
3.3  Heading revised; eff. 4-6-89...................................9676
3.4  Removed; eff. 4-6-89...........................................9676
5.2  Heading and introductory text revised; eff. 4-6-89.............9676
5.3  Revised; eff. 4-6-89...........................................9676
5.6  Revised; eff. 4-6-89...........................................9676
5.9  (a) through (d) revised; eff. 4-6-89...........................9676
6.5  Revised; eff. 4-6-89...........................................9676
7  Removed; eff. 4-6-89.............................................9677
8.1  (a) amended; eff. 4-6-89.......................................9677
8.3  (c) amended; eff. 4-6-89.......................................9677
8.5  (a), (b), and (c) revised; eff. 4-6-89.........................9677
8.8  Removed; eff. 4-6-89...........................................9677
9  Heading revised; eff. 4-6-89.....................................9677
9.1  Revised; eff. 4-6-89...........................................9677
9.3  Removed; eff. 4-6-89...........................................9677
10  Authority citation revised; eff. 4-6-89.........................9677
10.4  Removed; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9677
10.14  Removed; eff. 4-6-89.........................................9677
11--12 (Subchapter D)  Added; eff. 4-6-89...........................9677
11  Added; eff. 4-6-89..............................................9677
12  Added; eff. 4-6-89..............................................9678
15--22 (Subchapter D)  Redesignated as Subchapter E; eff. 4-6-89 
                                                                    9677
15--22 (Subchapter E)  Redesignated from Subchapter D; eff. 4-6-89
                                                                    9677
15.4  Heading revised; eff. 4-6-89..................................9679
15.5  Removed; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9679
16.2  Revised; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9679
16.3  Revised; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9679
16.4  Revised; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9679
17  Heading revised; eff. 4-6-89....................................9679
17.1 (Subpart A)  Heading added; eff. 4-6-89........................9679
17.2  Undesignated center heading designated as Subpart B; eff. 4-
        6-89........................................................9679
    Revised; eff. 4-6-89............................................9680
17.3--17.6  Undesignated center heading designated as Subpart C; 
        eff. 4-6-89.................................................9679
17.3  Heading revised; eff. 4-6-89..................................9680
17.4  Heading, (a) and (b) revised; (d) added; eff. 4-6-89..........9680
17.5  Revised; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9680
17.6  Redesignated as 17.7; new 17.6 added; eff. 4-6-89.............9680
17.7  Undesignated center heading designated as Subpart D; eff. 4-
        6-89........................................................9679
    Redesignated from 17.6; heading revised; (a) amended; (c) 
added; eff. 4-6-89..................................................9680
    Introductory text, (a), and (b) correctly redesignated as (a), 
(1), and (2); new (a)(1) corrected; new (b) correctly added; eff. 
4-6-89.............................................................23343
18.1  Revised; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9680
18.2  Revised; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9680
18.3  (a) revised; (c) added; eff. 4-6-89...........................9680

[[Page 99]]

18.4  Revised; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9681
18.5  Revised; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9681
18.6  Revised; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9681
18.7  Amended; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9681
18.9  Revised; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9681
18.10  Revised; eff. 4-6-89.........................................9681
18.11  Removed; eff. 4-6-89.........................................9681
18.12  (b) amended; (c) introductory text revised; eff. 4-6-89......9681
18.13  Revised; eff. 4-6-89.........................................9681
18.14  Removed; eff. 4-6-89.........................................9681
18.16  Added; eff. 4-6-89...........................................9681
18.17  (a) revised; (c) added; eff. 4-6-89..........................9681
18.20  (a) removed; (b) and (c) redesignated as (a) and (b); new 
        (a) introductory text amended; eff. 4-6-89..................9681
19  Authority citation revised; eff. 4-6-89.........................9681
19.1  (e) amended; footnote 1 added; eff. 4-6-89....................9681
19.4  Amended; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9681
20  Heading revised; eff. 4-6-89....................................9681
20.1  Introductory text and (a) through (d) redesignated as (a) 
        introductory text and (1) through (4); final undesignated 
        text designated as (b); new (a) introductory text and (b) 
        amended; eff. 4-6-89........................................9682
20.3  (a) and (c) revised; eff. 4-6-89..............................9682
20.4  Revised; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9682
21.1  (b) revised; eff. 4-6-89......................................9682
21.4  Removed; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9682
21.5  Removed; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9682
21.6  Revised; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9682
21.8  (c) added; eff. 4-6-89........................................9682
21.11  Revised; eff. 4-6-89.........................................9682
    (a) introductory text, and (1) through (8) correctly 
designated as introductory text and (a) through (h); eff. 4-6-89 
                                                                   23343
21.12  Amended; eff. 4-6-89.........................................9682
21.13  Removed; eff. 4-6-89.........................................9682
21.14  Revised; eff. 4-6-89.........................................9682
21.15  Removed; eff. 4-6-89.........................................9682
21.18  Amended; eff. 4-6-89.........................................9682
21.22  Removed; eff. 4-6-89.........................................9682
21.42  Amended; eff. 4-6-89.........................................9682
21.43  (b) amended; eff. 4-6-89.....................................9682
21.45  Amended; eff. 4-6-89.........................................9682
21.52  Revised; eff. 4-6-89.........................................9682
21.53  Amended; eff. 4-6-89.........................................9683
22  Heading revised; eff. 4-6-89....................................9683
22.1--22.2  Undesignated center heading designated as Subpart A 
        and revised; eff. 4-6-89....................................9683
22.5--22.7  Undesignated center heading designated as Subpart B 
        and revised; eff. 4-6-89....................................9683
22.5  Introductory text and (a) amended; eff. 4-6-89................9683
22.6  Amended; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9683
22.7  Amended; eff. 4-6-89..........................................9683
Chapter III
302.2  (e) revised and (f) added...................................28965
302.4  Revised.....................................................28965
305.68-1  Text removed; eff. 4-6-89.................................6861
305.69-9  Text removed; eff. 4-6-89.................................6861
305.70-4  Text removed; eff. 4-6-89.................................6861
305.71-4  Text removed; eff. 4-6-89.................................6861
305.71-9  Text removed; eff. 4-6-89.................................6861
305.73-3  Text removed; eff. 4-6-89.................................6861
305.73-6  Text removed; eff. 4-6-89.................................6861
305.74-3  Text removed; eff. 4-6-89.................................6861
305.75-1  Text removed; eff. 4-6-89.................................6861
305.75-2  Text removed; eff. 4-6-89.................................6861
305.76-4  Text removed; eff. 4-6-89.................................6861
305.77-1  Text removed; note added; eff. 4-6-89.....................6861
305.78-1  Text removed; eff. 4-6-89.................................6861
305.79-1  Text removed; eff. 4-6-89.................................6861
305.79-5  Text removed; eff. 4-6-89.................................6861
305.79-6  Text removed; note added; eff. 4-6-89.....................6861
305.80-1  Text removed; eff. 4-6-89.................................6861
305.80-5  Text removed; note added; eff. 4-6-89.....................6861

[[Page 100]]

305.81-1  Text removed; note added; eff. 4-6-89.....................6861
305.81-2  Text removed; note added; eff. 4-6-89.....................6861
305.82-1  Text removed; note added; eff. 4-6-89.....................6862
305.82-3  Text removed; note added; eff. 4-6-89.....................6862
305.88-9  Added; eff. 4-6-89........................................5207
305.88-10  Added; eff. 4-6-89.......................................5209
305.88-11  Added; eff. 4-6-89.......................................5212
305.89-1  Added....................................................28965
305.89-2  Added....................................................28967
305.89-3  Added....................................................28969
305.89-4  Added....................................................28970
305.89-5  Added....................................................28972
305.89-6  Added....................................................28973
305.89-7  Added....................................................53494
305.89-8  Added....................................................53495
305.89-9  Added....................................................53496
305.89-10  Added...................................................53496
310.4  Text removed; eff. 4-6-89....................................6862
310.10  Text removed; eff. 4-6-89...................................6862
310.14  Added......................................................28975
310.15  Added......................................................53498
316  Added.........................................................39724

                                  1990

1 CFR
                                                                   55 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter III
305.89-10  Heading corrected........................................1665
305.90-1  Added....................................................34209
305.90-2  Added....................................................34211
305.90-3  Added....................................................34212
305.90-4  Added....................................................34213
305.90-5  Added....................................................53270
305.90-6  Added....................................................53271
305.90-7  Added....................................................53272
305.90-8  Added....................................................53273
Chapter IV
460  Removed.......................................................27633
461  Removed.......................................................27633

                                  1991

1 CFR
                                                                   56 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter III
305.91-1  Added....................................................33842
305.91-2  Added....................................................33844
305.91-3  Added....................................................33847
305.91-4  Added....................................................33850
305.91-5  Added....................................................33851
305.91-6  Added....................................................33852
305.91-7  Added....................................................67140
305.91-8  Added....................................................67141
305.91-9  Added....................................................67143
305.91-10  Added...................................................67144

                                  1992

1 CFR
                                                                   57 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
2.3  (b) amended...................................................40024
3.2  (a) amended...................................................40025
11.2  Revised......................................................40025
11.3  Revised......................................................40025
11.6  Revised......................................................40025
Chapter II
51  Technical amendment; incorporation by reference................31947
Chapter III
305  Authority citation revised....................................61760
    Editorial note revised.........................................61768
305.79-7  Text removed; note added.................................61768
305.83-1  Text removed; note added.................................61768
305.84-4  Text removed; note added.................................61769
305.84-6  Text removed.............................................61769
305.87-1  Text removed; note amended...............................61769
305.87-12  Text removed; note added................................61769
305.88-4  Text removed; note added.................................61769
305.88-8  Text removed; note added.................................61769
305.89-6  Text removed; note added.................................61769
305.92--1  Added...................................................30102
305.92--2  Added...................................................30103
305.92--3  Added...................................................30104
305.92--4  Added...................................................30106
305.92--5  Added...................................................30108
    Corrected......................................................32881
305.92--6  Added...................................................30110
    Corrected......................................................44791
305.92-7  Added....................................................61760
305.92-8  Added....................................................61765
305.92-9  Added....................................................61766
310  Authority citation revised....................................61769
310.14  Text removed...............................................61769

[[Page 101]]

                                  1993

1 CFR
                                                                   58 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
11.2  Revised; eff. 1-10-94........................................64872
11.3  Revised......................................................64872
11.4  Amended; eff. 1-10-94........................................64872
11.6  Revised; eff. 1-10-94........................................64872
11.7  Revised; eff. 1-10-94........................................64872
11.8  Revised; eff. 1-10-94........................................64872
Chapter III
303  Authority citation revised....................................58935
303.101  Revised...................................................58935
303.102  Revised...................................................58935
303.103  Removed...................................................58935
303.104  Removed...................................................58935
303.105  Removed...................................................58935
303.106  Removed...................................................58935
303.107  Removed...................................................58935
303.108  Removed...................................................58935
303.109  Removed...................................................58935
305  Removed in part; note added...................................54271
305.79-7  Correctly designated......................................4295
305.93-1  Added....................................................45409
305.93-2  Added....................................................45410
305.93-3  Added....................................................45412
310  Removed in part; note added...................................54271

                                  1994

1 CFR
                                                                   59 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
11.2  Revised......................................................48990
</pre></body></html>
